
Introduction to Logic
Irving M. Copi      Carl Cohen  
Kenneth McMahon
Fourteenth Edition

Pearson Education Limited
Edinburgh Gate
Harlow
Essex CM20 2JE
England and Associated Companies throughout the world
Visit us on the World Wide Web at: www.pearsoned.co.uk
© Pearson Education Limited 2014 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without either the 
prior written permission of the publisher or a licence permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom 
issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
All trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. The use of any trademark 
in this text does not vest in the author or publisher any trademark ownership rights in such 
trademarks, nor does the use of such trademarks imply any afﬁ liation with or endorsement of this 
book by such owners. 
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
 Printed in the United States of America
ISBN 10: 1-292-02482-8
ISBN 13: 978-1-292-02482-0

Table of Contents
P
E
A
R
S
O
N
 
C
U
S
T
O
M
 
L
I
B
R
A
R
Y
 
I
1. Basic Logical Concepts
1
Irving M. Copi/Carl Cohen/Kenneth McMahon
2. Analyzing Arguments
35
Irving M. Copi/Carl Cohen/Kenneth McMahon
3. Language and Definitions
67
Irving M. Copi/Carl Cohen/Kenneth McMahon
4. Fallacies
109
Irving M. Copi/Carl Cohen/Kenneth McMahon
5. Categorical Propositions
167
Irving M. Copi/Carl Cohen/Kenneth McMahon
6. Categorical Syllogisms
211
Irving M. Copi/Carl Cohen/Kenneth McMahon
7. Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
255
Irving M. Copi/Carl Cohen/Kenneth McMahon
8. Symbolic Logic
305
Irving M. Copi/Carl Cohen/Kenneth McMahon
9. Methods of Deduction
365
Irving M. Copi/Carl Cohen/Kenneth McMahon
10. Quantification Theory
433
Irving M. Copi/Carl Cohen/Kenneth McMahon
11. Analogical Reasoning
485
Irving M. Copi/Carl Cohen/Kenneth McMahon
12. Causal Reasoning
513
Irving M. Copi/Carl Cohen/Kenneth McMahon
13. Science and Hypothesis
559
Irving M. Copi/Carl Cohen/Kenneth McMahon

II
14. Probability
587
Irving M. Copi/Carl Cohen/Kenneth McMahon
A Very Brief History of Logic
615
Irving M. Copi/Carl Cohen/Kenneth McMahon
Glossary
617
Irving M. Copi/Carl Cohen/Kenneth McMahon
631
Index

Basic Logical Concepts
From Chapter 1 of Introduction to Logic, Fourteenth Edition. Irving M. Copi, Carl Cohen, Kenneth McMahon. 
Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Prentice Hall. All rights reserved.

Basic Logical Concepts
1
What Logic Is
2
Propositions and Arguments
3
Recognizing Arguments
4
Arguments and Explanations
5
Deductive and Inductive Arguments
6
Validity and Truth
1
What Logic Is
Logic is the study of the methods and principles used to distinguish correct from
incorrect reasoning.
When we reason about any matter, we produce arguments to support our
conclusions. Our arguments include reasons that we think justify our beliefs.
However, not all reasons are good reasons. Therefore we may always ask, when
we confront an argument: Does the conclusion reached follow from the premises
assumed? To answer this question there are objective criteria; in the study of
logic we seek to discover and apply those criteria.
Reasoning is not the only way in which people support assertions they
make or accept. They may appeal to authority or to emotion, which can be very
persuasive, or they may rely, without reflection, simply on habits. However,
when someone wants to make judgments that can be completely relied upon,
their only solid foundation will be correct reasoning. Using the methods and
techniques of logic—one can distinguish reliably between sound and faulty
reasoning.
Logic
The study of the
methods and principles
used to distinguish
correct from incorrect
reasoning.
Proposition
A statement; what is
typically asserted using
a declarative sentence,
and hence always either
true or false—although
its truth or falsity may be
unknown.
2
Propositions and Arguments
We begin by examining more closely the most fundamental concepts in the study
of logic, concepts presupposed in the paragraphs just above. In reasoning we
construct and evaluate arguments; arguments are built with propositions. Al-
though these concepts are apparently simple, they require careful analysis.
A. Propositions
Propositions are the building blocks of our reasoning. A proposition asserts that
something is the case or it asserts that something is not. We may affirm a propo-
sition, or deny it—but every proposition either asserts what really is the case, or
it asserts something that is not. Therefore every proposition is either true or false.
This asset is
intentionally omitted
from this text. It may
be accessed at
www.mcescher.com.
(Waterfall by 
M.C. Escher)
2

Basic Logical Concepts
Biography
Aristotle
O
f all the great philosophers and logicians, ancient and modern, none is
greater than Aristotle (384–322 BCE), whose works and influence large-
ly ruled the world of intellect for two millennia. He was often referred
to as “The Philosopher”; his authority (even when he was mistaken!) was
rarely questioned.
Born in Macedonia, in the city of Stagira, where his father was physi-
cian to the king, he was viewed from birth as a member of the aristocracy,
and was a friend of the king’s son, Philip. When Philip
became king of Macedonia, he summoned Aristotle, who
had for many years been studying in Athens at Plato’s
school, The Academy, to return to Macedonia as tutor to
his son Alexander (who later would be known as Alexan-
der the Great). As he advanced on his subsequent con-
quests in Asia, Alexander remained in contact with his
respected teacher, sending back, at Aristotle’s request,
specimens and artifacts that contributed to the early
growth of the sciences.
Aristotle—one of the trio, with Plato and Socrates,
who largely founded Western philosophy—had a truly
encyclopedic mind. He investigated, contributed to,
wrote about, and taught virtually all subjects on which
some knowledge had been accumulated at his time: the
natural sciences (biology, zoology, embryology, anatomy,
astronomy, meteorology, physics, and optics); the arts
(poetry, music, theater, and rhetoric); government and
politics; psychology and education; economics; ethics;
metaphysics—and of course logic, of which he alone was the systematic
founder. His treatises on logic, later combined into one great work entitled
The Organon (“The Instrument”), constitute the earliest formal study of our
subject. The penetration and coherence of his logical analyses, and the com-
prehensiveness and general accuracy of his scientific studies, justify his ac-
knowledged status as one of the finest thinkers ever to have graced our
planet.
At the age of 49 Aristotle returned to Athens and established his own
highly influential school, the Lyceum, where he taught for twelve years. He
died of natural causes in 322 BCE. In his will, he asked to be buried next to his
wife, Pythias.
In logic Aristotle grasped the overriding necessity of determining the rules
of correct reasoning. He explained validity and characterized the four funda-
mental types of categorical propositions and their relations. In the Prior
© Bettmann/CORBIS
All Rights Reserved
3

Analytics, one of the six books of The Organon, he developed a sophisticated
theoretical account of categorical syllogisms, an account that long dominated
the realm of deductive logic and that remains today an effective tool of sound
reasoning.
It is said of Aristotle that he was probably the last person to know every-
thing there was to be known in his own time. 
Basic Logical Concepts
There are many propositions about whose truth we are uncertain. “There is
life on some other planet in our galaxy,” for example, is a proposition that, so far
as we now know, may be true or may be false. Its “truth value” is unknown, but
this proposition, like every proposition, must be either true or false.
A question asserts nothing, and therefore it is not a proposition. “Do you
know how to play chess?” is indeed a sentence, but that sentence makes no claim
about the world. Neither is a command a proposition (“Come quickly!”), nor is
an exclamation a proposition (“Oh my gosh!”). Questions, commands, and excla-
mations—unlike propositions—are neither true nor false.
When we assert some proposition, we do so using a sentence in some lan-
guage. However, the proposition we assert is not identical to that sentence.
This is evident because two different sentences, consisting of different words
differently arranged, may have the same meaning and may be used to assert
the very same proposition. For example, “Leslie won the election” and “The
election was won by Leslie” are plainly two different sentences that make the
same assertion.
Sentences are always parts of some language, but propositions are not tied to
English or to any given language. The four sentences
are in different languages, but they have a single meaning: all four, using different
words, may be uttered to assert the very same proposition. Proposition is the term
we use to refer to what it is that declarative sentences are typically used to assert.
The term statement is not an exact synonym of proposition, but it is often used
in logic in much the same sense. Some logicians prefer statement to proposition,
although the latter has been more commonly used in the history of logic. Other
logicians eschew both terms as metaphysical, using only the term sentence.
Statement
A proposition; what is
typically asserted by a
declarative sentence,
but not the sentence
itself. Every statement
must be either true or
false, although the truth
or falsity of a given
statement may be
unknown.
It is raining.
(English)
Está lloviendo.
(Spanish)
Il pleut.
(French)
Es regnet.
(German)
4

Inference
A process by which one
proposition is arrived at
and affirmed on the
basis of some other
proposition or
propositions.
However, the concept of a proposition is seen by many as making a useful dis-
tinction between a sentence and what the sentence asserts..
The very same sentence can be used to make very different statements (or to
assert very different propositions), depending on the context in which it is ex-
pressed. For example, the sentence, “The largest state in the United States was
once an independent republic,” once expressed a true statement or proposition
(about Texas), but if asserted today would express a false statement or proposition
(about Alaska). The same words assert different propositions at different times.
Propositions may be simple, like those used in the preceding illustrations, but
they may also be compound, containing other propositions within themselves.
Consider the following proposition, from a recent account of the exploitation of
the Amazon Basin in Brazil:
The Amazon Basin produces roughly 20 percent of the Earth’s oxygen, creates much
of its own rainfall, and harbors many unknown species.1
This sentence simultaneously asserts three propositions, concerning what
the Amazon Basin produces and what it creates and what it harbors. The passage
thus constitutes a conjunctive proposition. Asserting a conjunctive proposition is
equivalent to asserting each of its component propositions separately.
Some compound propositions do not assert the truth of their components. In
disjunctive (or alternative) propositions, no one of the components is asserted.
Abraham Lincoln (in a message to Congress in December 1861) said, “Circuit
courts are useful, or they are not useful.” This disjunctive proposition is plainly
true, but either one of its components might be false.
Other compound propositions that do not assert their components are
hypothetical (or conditional) propositions. The eighteenth-century freethinker,
Voltaire, said, “If God did not exist, it would be necessary to invent him.” Here,
again, neither of the two components is asserted. The proposition “God does not
exist,” is not asserted, nor is the proposition, “it is necessary to invent him.” Only
the “if–then” proposition is asserted by the hypothetical or conditional state-
ment, and that compound statement might be true even if both of its components
were false.
In logic, the internal structure of propositions is important. To evaluate an ar-
gument we need a full understanding of the propositions that appear in that ar-
gument. Propositions of many different kinds will be analyzed in this chapter.
B. Arguments
With propositions as building blocks, we construct arguments. In any argument
we affirm one proposition on the basis of some other propositions. In doing this,
an inference is drawn. Inference is a process that may tie together a cluster of
propositions. Some inferences are warranted (or correct); others are not. The logi-
cian analyzes these clusters, examining the propositions with which the process
begins and with which it ends, as well as the relations among these propositions.
Basic Logical Concepts
5

Such a cluster of propositions constitutes an argument. Arguments are the chief
concern of logic.
Argument is a technical term in logic. It need not involve disagreement, or
controversy. In logic, argument refers strictly to any group of propositions of
which one is claimed to follow from the others, which are regarded as providing
support for the truth of that one. For every possible inference there is a corre-
sponding argument.
In writing or in speech, a passage will often contain several related proposi-
tions and yet contain no argument. An argument is not merely a collection of
propositions; it is a cluster with a structure that captures or exhibits some infer-
ence. We describe this structure with the terms conclusion and premise. The
conclusion of an argument is the proposition that is affirmed on the basis of the
other propositions of the argument. Those other propositions, which are af-
firmed (or assumed) as providing support for the conclusion, are the premises of
the argument.
We will encounter a vast range of arguments in this text—arguments of
many different kinds, on many different topics. We will analyze arguments in
politics, in ethics, in sports, in religion, in science, in law, and in everyday life.
Those who defend these arguments, or who attack them, are usually aiming to
establish the truth (or the falsehood) of the conclusions drawn. As logicians,
however, our interest is in the arguments as such. As agents or as citizens we
may be deeply concerned about the truth or falsity of the conclusions drawn.
However, as logicians we put those interests aside. Our concerns will be chiefly
two. First, we will be concerned about the form of an argument under considera-
tion, to determine if that argument is of a kind that is likely to yield a warranted
conclusion. Second, we will be concerned about the quality of the argument, to
determine whether it does in fact yield a warranted conclusion.
Arguments vary greatly in the degree of their complexity. Some are very sim-
ple. Other arguments, as we will see, are quite intricate, sometimes because of
the structure or formulation of the propositions they contain, sometimes because
of the relations among the premises, and sometimes because of the relations be-
tween premises and conclusion.
The simplest kind of argument consists of one premise and a conclusion that
is claimed to follow from it. Each may be stated in a separate sentence, as in the
following argument that appears on a sticker affixed to biology textbooks in the
state of Alabama:
No one was present when life first appeared on earth. Therefore any statement about
life’s origins should be considered as theory, not fact.
Both premise and conclusion may be stated within the same sentence, as in
this argument arising out of recent advances in the science of human genetics:
Since it turns out that all humans are descended from a small number of African an-
cestors in our recent evolutionary past, believing in profound differences between the
races is as ridiculous as believing in a flat earth.2
Basic Logical Concepts
Argument
Any group of
propositions of which
one is claimed to follow
from the others, which
are regarded as
providing support or
grounds for the truth of
that one.
Conclusion
In any argument, the
proposition to which the
other propositions in the
argument are claimed to
give support, or for
which they are given as
reasons.
Premises
In an argument, the
propositions upon which
inference is based; the
propositions that are
claimed to provide
grounds or reasons for
the conclusion.
6

Basic Logical Concepts
Biography
Chrysippus
O
f all the logicians of ancient times, Aristotle and Chrysippus stand
out as the two greatest. The enormous influence of Aristotle, who
first systematized logic and was its principal authority for two
thousand years, has already been recognized. Born a century later,
Chrysippus (c. 279–c. 206 BCE) developed a conceptual scheme
whose influence has only more recently been appreciated.
The logic of Aristotle was one of classes. In the Aristotelian
argument “All men are mortal; Greeks are men; therefore Greeks
are mortal,” the fundamental elements are the categories, or
terms (“men,” “mortal things,” and “Greeks”). In contrast, the
logic of Chrysippus was one built of propositions and the connec-
tions between them (e.g., “If it is now day, it is now light. It is
now day. Therefore it is now light.”). This simple argument form
(now called modus ponens) and many other fundamental argu-
ment forms, Chrysippus analyzed and classified. His logical in-
sights were creative and profound.
Born in Asia Minor, in Soli, Chrysippus studied the philoso-
phy of the Stoics —most famous among them Zeno and Clean-
thes—and eventually became head of the Stoic school in Athens.
In that capacity he taught the need to control one’s emotions, which he
thought to be disorders or diseases. He urged the patient acceptance of the
outcomes of a fate one cannot control, and the recognition that the one God
(of which the traditional Greek gods are but aspects) is the universe itself.
But it is as a logician that his influence has been greatest. He grasped, as
Aristotle did not, the central role of the proposition—“that which is, in itself, ca-
pable of being denied or affirmed.” From this base he developed the first coherent
system of propositional logic. 
The order in which premises and conclusion appear can also vary, but it is
not critical in determining the quality of the argument. It is common for the con-
clusion of an argument to precede the statement of its premise or premises. On the
day Babe Ruth hit his 700th home run (13 July 1934), the following argument ap-
peared in The New York Times:
A record that promises to endure for all time was attained on Navin Field today when
Babe Ruth smashed his seven-hundredth home run in a lifetime career. It promises to
live, first because few players in history have enjoyed the longevity on the diamond of
the immortal Bambino, and, second, because only two other players in the history of
baseball have hit more than 300 home runs.
Classic Image/
Alamy Images
7

This is an example of an argument whose two premises, each numbered, ap-
pear after the conclusion is stated. It is also an example of a very plausible argu-
ment whose conclusion is false, given that Hank Aaron hit his 700th home run on
21 July 1973, thirty-nine years later.
Even when premise and conclusion are united in one sentence, the conclu-
sion of the argument may come first. The English utilitarian philosopher, Jeremy
Bentham, presented this crisp argument in his Principles of Legislation (1802):
Every law is an evil, for every law is an infraction of liberty.
Although this is only one short sentence, it is an argument because it con-
tains two propositions, of which the first (every law is an evil) is the conclu-
sion and the second (every law is an infraction of liberty) is the premise.
However, no single proposition can be an argument, because an argument is
made up of a group of propositions. Yet some propositions, because they are
compound, do sound like arguments, and care must be taken to distinguish
them from the arguments they resemble. Consider the following hypothetical
proposition: 
If a state aims to be a society composed of equals, then a state that is based on the
middle class is bound to be the best constituted.
Neither the first nor the second component of this proposition is asserted. All
that is asserted is that the former implies the latter, and both might well be false.
No inference is drawn, no conclusion is claimed to be true. Aristotle, who stud-
ied the constitution and quality of actual states in Greece more than two thou-
sand years ago, wrote confidently in Politics, Book IV, Chapter 11:
A state aims at being a society composed of equals, and therefore a state that is
based on the middle class is bound to be the best constituted.
In this case we do have an argument. This argument of Aristotle is short
and simple; most arguments are longer and more complicated. Every argu-
ment, however—short or long, simple or complex—consists of a group of
propositions of which one is the conclusion and the other(s) are the premises
offered to support it.
Although every argument is a structured cluster of propositions, not every
structured cluster of propositions is an argument. Consider this very recent ac-
count of global inequality:
In the same world in which more than a billion people live at a level of affluence never
previously known, roughly a billion other people struggle to survive on the purchasing
power equivalent of less than one U.S. dollar per day. Most of the world’s poorest peo-
ple are undernourished—lack access to safe drinking water or even the most basic
health services and cannot send their children to school. According to UNICEF, more
than 10 million children die every year—about 30,000 per day—from avoidable, pover-
ty-related causes.3
This report is deeply troubling—but there is no argument here.
Reasoning is an art, as well as a science. It is something we do, as well as
something we understand. Giving reasons for our beliefs comes naturally, but
skill in the art of building arguments, and testing them, requires practice. One
Basic Logical Concepts
8

who has practiced and strengthened these skills is more likely to reason correct-
ly than one who has never thought about the principles involved. Therefore we
provide in this chapter very many opportunities for practice in the analysis of
arguments.
EXERCISES
Identify the premises and conclusions in the following passages. Some premises
do support the conclusion, others do not. Note that premises may support con-
clusions directly or indirectly and that even simple passages may contain more
than one argument.
EXAMPLE
1. A well-regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free state,
the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed.
—The Constitution of the United States, Amendment 2
SOLUTION
Premise: A well-regulated militia is necessary for the security of a free state.
Conclusion: The right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed.
2. What stops many people from photocopying a book and giving it to a
pal is not integrity but logistics; it’s easier and inexpensive to buy your
friend a paperback copy.
—Randy Cohen, The New York Times Magazine, 26 March 2000
3. Thomas Aquinas argued that human intelligence is a gift from God and
therefore “to apply human intelligence to understand the world is not
an affront to God, but is pleasing to him.”
—Recounted by Charles Murray in Human Accomplishment
(New York: HarperCollins, 2003)
4. Sir Edmund Hillary is a hero, not because he was the first to climb
Mount Everest, but because he never forgot the Sherpas who helped
him achieve this impossible feat. He dedicated his life to helping build
schools and hospitals for them.
—Patre S. Rajashekhar, “Mount Everest,” National Geographic, September 2003
5. Standardized tests have a disparate racial and ethnic impact; white and
Asian students score, on average, markedly higher than their black and
Hispanic peers. This is true for fourth-grade tests, college entrance
exams, and every other assessment on the books. If a racial gap is evi-
dence of discrimination, then all tests discriminate.
—Abigail Thernstrom, “Testing, the Easy Target,” The New York Times, 
15 January 2000
6. Good sense is, of all things in the world, the most equally distributed,
for everybody thinks himself so abundantly provided with it that even
Basic Logical Concepts
9

those most difficult to please in all other matters do not commonly de-
sire more of it than they already possess.
—René Descartes, A Discourse on Method, 1637
7. When Noah Webster proposed a Dictionary of the American Language, his
early 19th-century critics presented the following argument against it:
“Because any words new to the United States are either stupid or for-
eign, there is no such thing as the American language; there’s just bad
English.”
—Jill Lepore, “Noah’s Mark,” The New Yorker, 6 November 2006
8. The death penalty is too costly. In New York State alone taxpayers spent
more than $200 million in our state’s failed death penalty experiment,
with no one executed.
In addition to being too costly, capital punishment is unfair in its ap-
plication. The strongest reason remains the epidemic of exonerations of
death row inmates upon post-conviction investigation, including ten
New York inmates freed in the last 18 months from long sentences being
served for murders or rapes they did not commit.
—L. Porter, “Costly, Flawed Justice,” The New York Times, 26 March 2007
9. Houses are built to live in, not to look on; therefore, let use be preferred
before uniformity.
—Francis Bacon, “Of Building,” in Essays, 1597
10. To boycott a business or a city [as a protest] is not an act of violence, but
it can cause economic harm to many people. The greater the economic
impact of a boycott, the more impressive the statement it makes. At the
same time, the economic consequences are likely to be shared by people
who are innocent of any wrongdoing, and who can ill afford the loss of
income: hotel workers, cab drivers, restaurateurs, and merchants. The
boycott weapon ought to be used sparingly, if for no other reason than
the harm it can cause such bystanders.
—Alan Wolfe, “The Risky Power of the Academic Boycott,” 
The Chronicle of Higher Education, 17 March 2000
11. Ethnic cleansing was viewed not so long ago as a legitimate tool of for-
eign policy. In the early part of the 20th century forced population shifts
were not uncommon; multicultural empires crumbled and nationalism
drove the formation of new, ethnically homogenous countries.
—Belinda Cooper, “Trading Places,” The New York Times Book Review, 
17 September 2006
12. If a jury is sufficiently unhappy with the government’s case or the gov-
ernment’s conduct, it can simply refuse to convict. This possibility puts
powerful pressure on the state to behave properly. For this reason a jury
is one of the most important protections of a democracy.
—Robert Precht, “Japan, the Jury,” The New York Times, 1 December 2006
13. Without forests, orangutans cannot survive. They spend more than 95
percent of their time in the trees, which, along with vines and termites,
Basic Logical Concepts
10

provide more than 99 percent of their food. Their only habitat is formed
by the tropical rain forests of Borneo and Sumatra.
—Birute Galdikas, “The Vanishing Man of the Forest,” The New York Times, 
6 January 2007
14. Omniscience and omnipotence are mutually incompatible. If God is om-
niscient, he must already know how he is going to intervene to change
the course of history using his omnipotence. But that means he can’t
change his mind about his intervention, which means he is not
omnipotent.
—Richard Dawkins, The God Delusion (New York: Houghton Mifflin, 2006)
15. Reason is the greatest enemy that faith has; it never comes to the aid of
spiritual things, but more frequently than not struggles against the di-
vine Word, treating with contempt all that emanates from God.
—Martin Luther, Last Sermon in Wittenberg, 17 January 1546
3
Recognizing Arguments
Before we can evaluate an argument, we must recognize it. We must be able to dis-
tinguish argumentative passages in writing or speech. Doing this assumes, of
course, an understanding of the language of the passage. However, even with a
thorough comprehension of the language, the identification of an argument can
be problematic because of the peculiarities of its formulation. Even when we are
confident that an argument is intended in some context, we may be unsure about
which propositions are serving as its premises and which as its conclusion. As
we have seen, that judgment cannot be made on the basis of the order in which
the propositions appear. How then shall we proceed?
A. Conclusion Indicators and Premise Indicators
One useful method depends on the appearance of certain common indicators,
certain words or phrases that typically serve to signal the appearance of an argu-
ment’s conclusion or of its premises. Here is a partial list of conclusion
indicators:
Basic Logical Concepts
Conclusion indicator
A word or phrase (such
as “therefore” or “thus”)
appearing in an
argument and usually
indicating that what
follows it is the
conclusion of that
argument.
therefore
for these reasons
hence
it follows that
so
I conclude that
accordingly
which shows that
in consequence
which means that
consequently
which entails that
proves that
which implies that
as a result
which allows us to infer that
for this reason
which points to the conclusion that
thus
we may infer
11

since
as indicated by
because
the reason is that
for
for the reason that
as
may be inferred from
follows from
may be derived from
as shown by
may be deduced from
inasmuch as
in view of the fact that
Other words or phrases typically serve to mark the premises of an argument
and hence are called premise indicators. Usually, but not always, what follows
any one of these will be the premise of some argument. Here is a partial list of
premise indicators:
B. Arguments in Context
The words and phrases we have listed may help to indicate the presence of an ar-
gument or identify its premises or conclusion, but such indicators do not
necessarily appear. Sometimes it is just the meaning of the passage, or its setting,
that indicates the presence of an argument. For example, during the intense
controversy over the deployment of additional U.S. troops to Iraq in 2007, one
critic of that deployment wrote:
As we send our young men and women abroad to bring order to Iraq, many of its so-
called leaders have abandoned their posts. We have given the Iraqis an opportunity to
iron out their differences and they throw it back in our faces. Iraq does not deserve 
our help.4
No premise indicators or conclusion indicators are used here, yet the
argument is clear. Indicators are also absent in the following argument in
Sam Harris’s Letter to a Christian Nation, whose premises and conclusions are un-
mistakable:
Half the American population believes that the universe is 6,000 years old. They are
wrong about this. Declaring them so is not “irreligious intolerance.” It is intellectual
honesty.5
Often, however, the force of an argument can be appreciated only when one
understands the context in which that argument is presented. For example, the
undergraduate admission system of the University of Michigan that gave a fixed
number of extra points to all members of certain minority groups was held un-
constitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court in Gratz v. Bollinger in 2003. Justice
Ruth Bader Ginsburg dissented, defending the Michigan system with the follow-
ing argument:
Universities will seek to maintain their minority enrollment . . . whether or not they can
do so in full candor. . . . [They] may resort to camouflage. If honesty is the best policy,
surely Michigan’s accurately described, fully disclosed College affirmative action pro-
gram is preferable to achieving similar numbers through winks, nods, and disguises.6
This argument derives its force from the realization that universities had in
fact long disguised their preferential admission programs to avoid attacks based
Premise indicator
In an argument, a word
or phrase (like
“because” and “since”)
that normally signals that
what follows it are
statements serving as
premises.
Basic Logical Concepts
12

on the equal protection clause of the 14th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
Chief Justice William Rehnquist’s response to Justice Ginsburg’s argument is
also intelligible only in the context of her defense of the preferential admission
system. Rehnquist wrote the following:
These observations are remarkable for two reasons. First, they suggest that
universities—to whose academic judgment we are told we should defer—will pursue
their affirmative action programs whether or not they violate the United States
Constitution. Second, they recommend that these violations should be dealt with,
not by requiring the Universities to obey the Constitution, but by changing the Consti-
tution so that it conforms to the conduct of the universities.7
Rehnquist’s reference to “changing the Constitution” must be understood in
light of the fact that the Michigan undergraduate admission system had been
held unconstitutional. His reference to the pursuit of affirmative action programs
“whether or not they violate the United States Constitution” can best be under-
stood in light of Ginsburg’s earlier reference to the possible use of “winks, nods,
and disguises.”
The full force of argument and counterargument can be grasped, in most cir-
cumstances, only with an understanding of the context in which those arguments
are presented. In real life, context is critical. For example, if you are told that I am
bringing a lobster home for dinner, you will have little doubt that I intend to eat
it, not feed it.
C. Premises or Conclusions Not in Declarative Form
It is not uncommon for the premises of an argument to be presented in the form
of questions. However, if questions assert nothing, and do not express proposi-
tions, how is this possible? On the surface they make no assertions; beneath the
surface an interrogative sentence can serve as a premise when its question is
rhetorical—that is, when it suggests or assumes an answer that is made to serve
as the premise of an argument. The sentence may be interrogative even though
its meaning is declarative.
This use of questions is sometimes obvious, as in a letter dated 7 January
2007 to The New York Times, objecting to a new series of U.S. coins that will honor
former presidential wives. Irit R. Rasooly wrote:
I am irked by the new set of coins being issued. While some first ladies have influenced
our country, should we bestow this honor on people who are unelected, whose only
credential is having a prominent spouse?
Plainly, the critic means to affirm the proposition that we should not bestow
this honor on such people. He continues:
Wouldn’t honoring women who have served as governors, Supreme Court justices or
legislators be a more fitting tribute to this nation’s women than coins featuring “First
Spouses”?
This critic obviously believes that honoring such achievements would be a
more fitting tribute, but he again expresses that proposition with a question. His
Basic Logical Concepts
Rhetorical question
An utterance used to
make a statement, but
which, because it is in
interrogative form and is
therefore neither true nor
false, does not literally
assert anything.
13

letter also provides an illustration of the need to rely on context to interpret de-
clarative statements that are actually made. The writer’s report that he is “irked”
by the new set of coins is no doubt true, but this statement is more than a mere
description of his state of mind; he means to express the judgment that such a set
of coins ought not be issued.
Using questions to express a premise is sometimes counterproductive, how-
ever, because it may invite answers (by the listener, or silently by the reader) that
threaten the conclusion at which the argument aims. For example, the archbish-
op of the Anglican Church in Nigeria, who is an ardent opponent of homosexu-
ality and views it as deeply sinful, argues thus:
Why didn’t God make a lion to be a man’s companion? Why didn’t He make a tree to
be a man’s companion? Or better still, why didn’t He make another man to be a man’s
companion? So even from the creation story you can see that the mind of God, God’s
intention, is for man and woman to be together.8
Conclusions drawn about God’s intentions, using as premises questions 
that invite a myriad of different responses, may be undermined by the answers
they elicit.
Questions can serve most effectively as premises when the answers assumed
really do seem to be clear and inescapable. In such cases the readers (or hearers)
are led to provide the apparently evident answers for themselves, thus augment-
ing the persuasiveness of the argument. Here is an example: Some who find eu-
thanasia morally unacceptable reject the defense of that practice as grounded in
the right to self-determination possessed by the terminally ill patient. They argue
as follows:
If a right to euthanasia is grounded in self-determination, it cannot reasonably be limit-
ed to the terminally ill. If people have a right to die, why must they wait until they are
actually dying before they are permitted to exercise that right?9
The question is forceful because its answer appears to be undeniable. It
seems obvious that there is no good reason why, if people have a right to die
grounded in self-determination, they must wait until they are dying to exercise
that right. Hence (this critique concludes) the right to euthanasia, if there is
one, cannot be limited to the terminally ill. The argument has much merit, 
but from the perspective of its religious advocates, it may prove to be a two-
edged sword.
Arguments that depend on rhetorical questions are always suspect. Because
the question is neither true nor false, it may be serving as a device to suggest the
truth of some proposition while avoiding responsibility for asserting it. That
proposition is likely to be dubious, and it may in fact be false. To illustrate: In
2007 Arab leaders in Jerusalem expressed great anxiety about the safety of the Al-
Aqsa mosque when the Israeli government began construction of a ramp leading
to the platform (also sacred to the Jews) on which that very holy mosque is
Basic Logical Concepts
14

situated. In reviewing the situation, David Gelernter, an Israeli partisan asked:
“Is it possible that Arab leaders are more interested in attacking Israel than pro-
tecting religious and cultural monuments?”10 Well, yes, that is possible, of
course—but it may not be true, and the question framed in this way is plainly in-
tended to cause the reader to believe that Arab leaders were being duplicitous in
voicing their concerns. Did the author assert that such duplicity lay behind the
Arab objections? No, he didn’t say that!
Gossip columnists thrive on suggestive questions. Celebrity tidbits common-
ly appear in the form, “Does Paris Hilton have any talent as an actress?” Similar-
ly, in discussing social issues, rhetorical questions can be an effective method of
covert assertion. When riots in France spread through Islamic neighborhoods,
many wondered what motivated those rioters. Journalist Christopher Caldwell
wrote:
Were they admirers of France’s majority culture, frustrated at not being able to join it on
equal terms? Or did they simply aspire to burn to the ground a society they
despised?11
Accusers who protect themselves by framing their accusations in interroga-
tive sentences may shield themselves from the indignant complaints of their tar-
get. “No,” they may insist, “that is not what I said!”
It is wise policy to refrain from arguing with questions.
In some arguments the conclusion appears in the form of an imperative. The
reason, or reasons, we ought to perform a given act are set forth as premises, and
we are then directed to act in that way. Thus in Proverbs 4:7 we read:
Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom.
Here the second clause is a command, and a command, like a question, is
neither true nor false and cannot express a proposition. Therefore, strictly speak-
ing, it cannot be the conclusion of an argument. Nonetheless, it surely is meant to
be the conclusion of an argument in this passage from Proverbs. How can we ex-
plain this apparent inconsistency? It is useful in many contexts to regard a com-
mand as no different from a proposition in which hearers (or readers) are told
that they would be wise to act, or ought to act, in the manner specified in the
command. Thus the conclusion of the argument in Proverbs may be rephrased as
“Getting wisdom is what you should do.” Assertions of this kind may be true or
false, as most will agree. What difference there is between a command to do
something and a statement that it should be done is an issue that need not be ex-
plored here. By ignoring that difference (if there really is one), we are able to deal
uniformly with arguments whose conclusions are expressed in this form.
Reformulations of this kind can clarify the roles of an argument’s constituent
propositions. It is necessary to grasp the substance of what is being asserted, to
understand which claims are serving to support which inferences, whatever
their external forms. Some needed reformulations are merely grammatical. A
Basic Logical Concepts
15

proposition that functions as a premise may take the form of a phrase rather than
a declarative sentence. This is well illustrated in the following argumentative
passage, whose conclusion is a very sharp criticism of the United States:
What is a failed state? It is one that fails to provide security for the population, to guar-
antee rights at home or abroad, or to maintain functioning democratic institutions. On
this definition the United States is the world’s biggest failed state.12
The second and third premises of this argument are compressed into phras-
es, but the propositions for which these phrases are shorthand are clear enough,
and their critical role in the author’s reasoning is evident.
D. Unstated Propositions
Arguments are sometimes obscure because one (or more) of their constituent
propositions is not stated but is assumed to be understood. An illustration will
be helpful here. The chair of the Department of Sociology at City College, CUNY,
presented two strong but controversial arguments, in parallel, regarding the jus-
tifiability of the death penalty. The first premise of each argument is the hypoth-
esis that the factual belief (of the proponent, or of the opponent, of the penalty)
about what does in fact deter homicide is mistaken. The second premise of each
argument, although entirely plausible, is not stated, leaving the reader the task of
reconstructing it.
The first argument went like this:
If the proponent of the death penalty is incorrect in his belief that the [death] penalty
deters homicide, then he is responsible for the execution of murderers who should not
be executed.13
This argument relies on the unstated second premise: “No one should be ex-
ecuted to advance an objective that is not promoted by execution.” Hence one
who mistakenly believes that the objective (deterring murders) is achieved by ex-
ecuting those convicted is responsible for the execution of murderers who
should not be executed.
The second argument went like this:
If the opponent of the death penalty is incorrect in his belief that the death penalty
doesn’t deter, he is responsible for the murder of innocent individuals who would not
have been murdered if the death penalty had been invoked.14
This argument relies on the unstated second premise: “Protecting the lives of
innocent individuals from murder justifies the execution of murderers if other
murderers are then deterred by the fear of execution.” Hence one who mistakenly
believes that the death penalty does not deter murderers is responsible for the
lives of innocents who are subsequently murdered.
In each of these arguments the assumed but unstated second premise is plau-
sible. One might find both arguments persuasive—leaving open for empirical in-
vestigation the question of whether, in fact, the death penalty does deter murder.
Basic Logical Concepts
16

However, the force of each of the arguments depends on the truth of the unstat-
ed premise on which it relies.
A premise may be left unstated because the arguer supposes that it is un-
questioned common knowledge. In the controversy over the cloning of human
beings, one angry critic wrote:
Human cloning—like abortion, contraception, pornography and euthanasia—is intrinsi-
cally evil and thus should never be allowed.15
This is plainly an argument, but part of it is missing. The argument relies on
the very plausible but unstated premise that “what is intrinsically evil should
never be allowed.” Arguments in everyday discourse very often rely on some
proposition that is understood but not stated. Such arguments are called
enthymemes.
The unstated premise on which an enthymeme relies may not be universally
accepted; it may be uncertain or controversial. An arguer may deliberately re-
frain from formulating that critical premise, believing that by allowing it to re-
main tacit, the premise is shielded from attack. For example, medical research
using embryonic stem cells (cells found in the human embryo that can develop
into other types of cells and into most types of tissue) is highly controversial.
One U.S. senator used the following enthymeme in attacking legislation that
would permit government financing of such research:
This research [involving the use of embryonic stem cells] is illegal, for this reason: The
deliberate killing of a human embryo is an essential component of the contemplated
research.16
The stated premise is true: Research of this kind is not possible without de-
stroying the embryo. However, the conclusion that such research is illegal de-
pends on the unstated premise that the killing of a human embryo is illegal—and
that claim is very much in dispute.
The effectiveness of an enthymeme may depend on the hearer’s knowledge
that some proposition is false. To emphasize the falsity of some proposition, a
speaker may construct an argument in which the first premise is a hypothetical
proposition of which the antecedent (the “if” component), is the proposition whose
falsity the speaker wishes to show, and the consequent (the “then” component) is a
proposition known by everyone to be false. The unstated falsehood of this second
component is the second premise of the enthymematic argument. The unstated
falsehood of the first component is the conclusion of the argument. To illustrate: The
distinguished political philosopher John Rawls admired Abraham Lincoln as the
president who most appreciated the moral equality of human beings. Rawls fre-
quently quoted Lincoln’s enthymematic argument, “If slavery is not wrong, noth-
ing is wrong.”17 It is of course wildly false to say that nothing is wrong—from
which it follows that it is equally false to say that slavery is not wrong. Similarly,
distinguished psychiatrist Bruno Bettelheim, survivor of both Dachau and Buchen-
wald, wrote: “If all men are good, then there never was an Auschwitz.”
Basic Logical Concepts
Enthymeme
An argument that is
stated incompletely, the
unstated part of it being
taken for granted.
17

4
Arguments and Explanations
Passages that appear to be arguments are sometimes not arguments but
explanations. The appearance of words that are common indicators—such as
“because,” “for,” “since,” and “therefore”—cannot settle the matter, because
those words are used both in explanations and in arguments (although “since”
can sometimes refer to temporal succession). We need to know the intention of
the author. Compare the following two passages:
1. Lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust
consumes and where thieves do not break in and steal. For where your
treasure is, there will your heart be also.
—Matt. 7:19
2. Therefore is the name of it [the tower] called Babel; because the Lord
did there confound the language of all the earth.
—Gen. 11:19
The first passage is clearly an argument. Its conclusion, that one ought to lay
up treasures in heaven, is supported by the premise (here marked by the word
“for”) that one’s heart will be where one’s treasure is laid up. The second pas-
sage, which uses the word “therefore” quite appropriately, is not an argument. It
explains why the tower (whose construction is recounted in Genesis) is called
Babel. The tower was given this name, we are told, because it was the place
where humankind, formerly speaking one language, became confounded by
many languages—the name is derived from a Hebrew word meaning “to con-
found.” The passage assumes that the reader knows that the tower had that
name; the intention is to explain why that name was given to it. The phrase,
“Therefore is the name of it called Babel,” is not a conclusion but a completion of
the explanation of the naming. In addition, the clause, “because the Lord did
there confound the language of all the earth,” is not a premise; it could not serve
as a reason for believing that Babel was the name of the tower, because the fact
that that was the name is known by those to whom the passage is addressed. In
this context, “because” indicates that what follows will explain the giving of that
name, Babel, to that tower.
These two passages illustrate the fact that superficially similar passages may
have very different functions. Whether some passage is an argument or an expla-
nation depends on the purpose to be served by it. If our aim is to establish the
truth of some proposition, Q, and we offer some evidence, P, in support of Q, we
may appropriately say “Q because P.” In this case we are giving an argument for
Q, and P is our premise. Alternatively, suppose that Q is known to be true. In that
case we don’t have to give any reasons to support its truth, but we may wish to
give an account of why it is true. Here also we may say “Q because P”—but in
this case we are giving not an argument for Q, but an explanation of Q.
In responding to a query about the apparent color of quasars (celestial ob-
jects lying far beyond our galaxy), one scientist wrote:
Basic Logical Concepts
18

The most distant quasars look like intense points of infrared radiation. This is because
space is scattered with hydrogen atoms (about two per cubic meter) that absorb blue
light, and if you filter the blue from visible white light, red is what’s left. On its multibil-
lion-light-year journey to earth quasar light loses so much blue that only infrared
remains.18
The author is not seeking to convince his reader that quasars have the appar-
ent color they do, but rather giving the causes of this fact; he is explaining, not
arguing.
However, it may be difficult at times to determine whether an author intends
to be explaining some state of affairs, or to be arguing for some conclusion that is
critical in that explanation. Here, for example, is a passage that may be interpret-
ed in either way.
I would like to highlight another property of water, unique but also vital to making life on
Earth possible. As water cools, approaching its freezing point, its density suddenly de-
creases, reversing the usual “natural convection” patterns in which colder fluids sink.
This reversal causes the coldest strata of water to rise to the top of an ocean or lake.
These large bodies of water now freeze from the top down. Were it not for this unique
property of water, the oceans and lakes would have long and completely frozen over
from the bottom up with dire consequences for any life-sustaining liquid water on
Earth.19
More than one conclusion may be inferred from the same premise, thus pre-
senting two arguments. Similarly, more than one thing may be accounted for by
the same fact, thus presenting two explanations. Here is an illustration:
The Oxford English Dictionary is a historical dictionary, providing citations meant to
show the evolution of every word, beginning with the earliest known usage. Therefore,
a key task, and a popular sport for thousands of volunteer word aficionados, is ante-
dating: finding earlier citations than those already known.20
That antedating is a key task for the makers of that dictionary is accounted
for by the fact that the Oxford English Dictionary is a historical dictionary. This fact
about the dictionary also explains why, for word aficionados, antedating is a
popular sport.
If an author writes “Q because P,” how can we tell whether he intends to ex-
plain or to persuade? We can ask: What is the status of Q in that context? Is Q a
proposition whose truth needs to be established or confirmed? In that case,
“because P” is probably offering a premise in its support; “Q because P” is in that
instance an argument. Or is Q a proposition whose truth is known, or at least not
in doubt in that context? In that case, “because P” is probably offering some
account of why Q has come to be true; “Q because P” is in that instance an
explanation.
In an explanation, one must distinguish what is being explained from what
the explanation is. In the explanation from Genesis given at the beginning of this
section, what is being explained is how the tower of Babel came to have that
name; the explanation is that it was there that the Lord did confound the lan-
guage of all the Earth. In the astronomical example given subsequently, what is
Basic Logical Concepts
19

being explained is the fact that quasars appear to be red; the explanation is that
as light travels from the very distant quasar to Earth all the blue in that light is fil-
tered out.
If we are sensitive to the context, we will usually be able to distinguish an ex-
planation from an argument. However, there will always be some passages
whose purpose is uncertain, and such passages may deserve to be given alterna-
tive, equally plausible “readings”—viewed as arguments when interpreted in
one way and as explanations when interpreted in another.
EXERCISES
Some of the following passages contain explanations, some contain arguments,
and some may be interpreted as either an argument or an explanation. What is
your judgment about the chief function of each passage? What would have to
be the case for the passage in question to be an argument? To be an explanation?
Where you find an argument, identify its premises and conclusion. Where 
you find an explanation, indicate what is being explained and what the expla-
nation is.
EXAMPLE
1. Humans have varying skin colors as a consequence of the distance our
ancestors lived from the Equator. It’s all about sun. Skin color is what
regulates our body’s reaction to the sun and its rays. Dark skin evolved
to protect the body from excessive sun rays. Light skin evolved when
people migrated away from the Equator and needed to make vitamin D
in their skin. To do that they had to lose pigment. Repeatedly over histo-
ry, many people moved dark to light and light to dark. That shows that
color is not a permanent trait.
—Nina Jablonski, “The Story of Skin,” The New York Times, 9 January 2007
SOLUTION
This is essentially an explanation. What is being explained is the fact that hu-
mans have varying skin colors. The explanation is that different skin colors
evolved as humans came to live at different distances from the Equator and
hence needed different degrees of protection from the rays of the sun. One
might interpret the passage as an argument whose conclusion is that skin
color is not a permanent trait of all humans. Under this interpretation, all the
propositions preceding the final sentence of the passage serve as premises.
2. David Bernstein [in Only One Place of Redress: African Americans, Labor
Regulations, and the Courts from Reconstruction to the New Deal, 2001] places
labor laws at the center of the contemporary plight of black Americans.
Basic Logical Concepts
20

Many of these ostensibly neutral laws (e.g., licensing laws, minimum-
wage laws, and collective bargaining laws) were either directly aimed at
stymieing black economic and social advancement or, if not so aimed,
were quickly turned to that use. A huge swath of the American labor mar-
ket was handed over to labor unions from which blacks, with few excep-
tions, were totally excluded. The now longstanding gap between black
and white unemployment rates dates precisely from the moment of gov-
ernment intervention on labor’s behalf. In short (Bernstein argues) the
victories of American labor were the undoing of American blacks.
—Ken I. Kirsch, “Blacks and Labor—the Untold Story,” The Public Interest, 
Summer 2002
3. Animals born without traits that led to reproduction died out, whereas
the ones that reproduced the most succeeded in conveying their genes
to posterity. Crudely speaking, sex feels good because over evolutionary
time the animals that liked having sex created more offspring than the
animals that didn’t.
—R. Thornhill and C. T. Palmer, “Why Men Rape,” The Sciences, February 2000
4. Changes are real. Now, changes are only possible in time, and therefore
time must be something real.
—Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason (1781), 
“Transcendental Aesthetic,” section II
5. The nursing shortage in the United States has turned into a full-blown
crisis. Because fewer young people go into nursing, one-third of regis-
tered nurses in the United States are now over 50 years of age, and that
proportion is expected to rise to 40 percent over the next decade. Nurses
currently practicing report high rates of job dissatisfaction, with one in
five seriously considering leaving the profession within the next five
years. . . . Hospitals routinely cancel or delay surgical cases because of a
lack of nursing staff.
—Ronald Dworkin, “Where Have All the Nurses Gone?,” 
The Public Interest, Summer 2002
6. To name causes for a state of affairs is not to excuse it. Things are justi-
fied or condemned by their consequences, not by their antecedents.
—John Dewey, “The Liberal College and Its Enemies,” The Independent, 1924
7. One may be subject to laws made by another, but it is impossible to bind
oneself in any matter which is the subject of one’s own free exercise of
will. . . . It follows of necessity that the king cannot be subject to his own
laws. For this reason [royal] edicts and ordinances conclude with the
formula, “for such is our good pleasure.”
—Jean Bodin, Six Books of the Commonwealth, 1576
8. I like Wagner’s music better than anybody’s. It is so loud that one can
talk the whole time without people hearing what one says.
—Oscar Wilde, The Picture of Dorian Gray, 1891
Basic Logical Concepts
21

9. Three aspects of American society in recent decades make cheating
more likely.
First, there is the rise of a market-drenched society, where monetary
success is lauded above all else. Second, there is the decline of religious,
communal, and family bonds and norms that encourage honesty. Final-
ly, there is the absence of shame by those public figures who are caught
in dishonest or immoral activities. No wonder so many young people
see nothing wrong with cutting corners or worse.
—Howard Gardner, “More Likely to Cheat,” The New York Times, 9 October 2003
10. Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind; 
And therefore is wing’d Cupid painted blind.
—William Shakespeare, A Midsummer Night’s Dream, act 1, scene 1
11. An article in The New York Times, “Why Humans and Their Fur Parted
Ways,” suggested that the fact that women have less body hair than
men is somehow related to greater sexual selection pressure on women.
A reader responded with the following letter:
Here is an elaboration for which I have no evidence but it is consistent with
what we think we know: sexual selection has probably strongly influenced nu-
merous traits of both sexes.
Youthful appearance is more important to men when selecting a mate than it is
to women. The longer a woman can look young, the longer she will be sexually
attractive and the more opportunities she will have to bear offspring with desir-
able men. Hairlessness advertises youth.
Hence a greater sexual selection pressure on women to lose body hair.
—T. Doyle, “Less Is More,” The New York Times, 26 August 2003
12. MAD, mutually assured destruction, was effective in deterring nuclear
attack right through the cold war. Both sides had nuclear weapons. Nei-
ther side used them, because both sides knew the other would retaliate
in kind. This will not work with a religious fanatic [like Mahmoud Ah-
madinejad, President of the Islamic Republic of Iran]. For him, mutual
assured destruction is not a deterrent, it is an inducement. We know al-
ready that Iran’s leaders do not give a damn about killing their own
people in great numbers. We have seen it again and again. In the final
scenario, and this applies all the more strongly if they kill large numbers
of their own people, they are doing them a favor. They are giving them
a quick free pass to heaven and all its delights.
—Bernard Lewis, quoted in Commentary, June 2007
13. About a century ago, we discovered that planetary orbits are not stable
in four or more dimensions, so if there were more than three space di-
mensions, planets would not orbit a sun long enough for life to origi-
nate. And in one or two space dimensions, neither blood flow nor large
numbers of neuron connections can exist. Thus, interesting life can exist
only in three dimensions.
—Gordon Kane, “Anthropic Questions,” Phi Kappa Phi Journal, Fall 2002
Basic Logical Concepts
22

14. Translators and interpreters who have helped United States troops and
diplomats now want to resettle in the United States. They speak many
strategically important languages of their region. The United States does
not have an adequate number of interpreters and translators who are
proficient in these languages. Therefore, we need them. Q.E.D.
—Oswald Werner, “Welcome the Translators,” The New York Times, 
3 November 2007
15. The Treasury Department’s failure to design and issue paper currency
that is readily distinguishable to blind and visually impaired individu-
als violates Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, which provides that no
disabled person shall be “subjected to discrimination under any pro-
gram or activity conducted by any Executive agency.”
—Judge James Robertson, Federal District Court for the District of Columbia,
American Council of the Blind v. Sec. of the Treasury, No. 02-0864 (2006)
16. Rightness [that is, acting so as to fulfill one’s duty] never guarantees
moral goodness. For an act may be the act which the agent thinks to be
his duty, and yet be done from an indifferent or bad motive, and there-
fore be morally indifferent or bad.
—Sir W. David Ross, Foundations of Ethics
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1939)
17. Man did not invent the circle or the square or mathematics or the laws
of physics. He discovered them. They are immutable and eternal laws
that could only have been created by a supreme mind: God. And since
we have the ability to make such discoveries, man’s mind must possess
an innate particle of the mind of God. To believe in God is not “beyond
reason.”
—J. Lenzi, “Darwin’s God,” The New York Times Magazine, 18 March 2007
18. Many of the celebratory rituals [of Christmas], as well as the timing of
the holiday, have their origins outside of, and may predate, the Christ-
ian commemoration of the birth of Jesus. Those traditions, at their best,
have much to do with celebrating human relationships and the enjoy-
ment of the goods that this life has to offer. As an atheist I have no hesi-
tation in embracing the holiday and joining with believers and
nonbelievers alike to celebrate what we have in common.
—John Teehan, “A Holiday Season for Atheists, Too,” The New York Times, 
24 December 2006
19. All ethnic movements are two-edged swords. Beginning benignly, and
sometimes necessary to repair injured collective psyches, they often end
in tragedy, especially when they turn political, as illustrated by German
history.
—Orlando Patterson, “A Meeting with Gerald Ford,” 
The New York Times, 6 January 2007
Basic Logical Concepts
23

20. That all who are happy, are equally happy, is not true. A peasant and a
philosopher may be equally satisfied, but not equally happy. Happiness
consists in the multiplicity of agreeable consciousness. A peasant has
not the capacity for having equal happiness with a philosopher.
—Samuel Johnson, in Boswell’s Life of Johnson, 1766
5
Deductive and Inductive Arguments
Every argument makes the claim that its premises provide grounds for the truth
of its conclusion; that claim is the mark of an argument. However, there are two
very different ways in which a conclusion may be supported by its premises, and
thus there are two great classes of arguments: the deductive and the inductive. Un-
derstanding this distinction is essential in the study of logic.
A deductive argument makes the claim that its conclusion is supported by its
premises conclusively. An inductive argument, in contrast, does not make such a
claim. Therefore, if we judge that in some passage a claim for conclusiveness is
being made, we treat the argument as deductive; if we judge that such a claim is
not being made, we treat it as inductive. Because every argument either makes
this claim of conclusiveness (explicitly or implicitly) or does not make it, every
argument is either deductive or inductive.
When the claim is made that the premises of an argument (if true) provide in-
controvertible grounds for the truth of its conclusion, that claim will be either
correct or not correct. If it is correct, that argument is valid. If it is not correct (that
is, if the premises when true fail to establish the conclusion irrefutably although
claiming to do so), that argument is invalid.
For logicians the term validity is applicable only to deductive arguments. To
say that a deductive argument is valid is to say that it is not possible for its con-
clusion to be false if its premises are true. Thus we define validity as follows: A
deductive argument is valid when, if its premises are true, its conclusion must be
true. In everyday speech, of course, the term valid is used much more loosely.
Although every deductive argument makes the claim that its premises guar-
antee the truth of its conclusion, not all deductive arguments live up to that
claim. Deductive arguments that fail to do so are invalid.
Because every deductive argument either succeeds or does not succeed in
achieving its objective, every deductive argument is either valid or invalid. This
point is important: If a deductive argument is not valid, it must be invalid; if it is
not invalid, it must be valid.
The central task of deductive logic is to discriminate valid arguments from
invalid ones. Over centuries, logicians have devised powerful techniques to do
this—but the traditional techniques for determining validity differ from those
used by most modern logicians. The former, collectively known as classical logic,
is rooted in the analytical works of Aristotle. Logicians of the two schools differ
Basic Logical Concepts
Validity
A characteristic of any
deductive argument
whose premises, if they
were all true, would
provide conclusive
grounds for the truth of
its conclusion. Such an
argument is said to be
valid. Validity is a formal
characteristic; it applies
only to arguments, as
distinguished from truth,
which applies to
propositions.
24

in their methods and in their interpretations of some arguments, but ancients
and moderns agree that the fundamental task of deductive logic is to develop the
tools that enable us to distinguish arguments that are valid from those that are
not.
In contrast, the central task of inductive arguments is to ascertain the facts by
which conduct may be guided directly, or on which other arguments may be
built. Empirical investigations are undertaken—as in medicine, or social science,
or astronomy—leading, when inductive techniques are applied appropriately, to
factual conclusions, most often concerning cause-and-effect relationships of
some importance.
An illustration of the inductive process will be helpful at this point to con-
trast induction with deduction. Medical investigators, using inductive methods,
are eager to learn the causes of disease, or the causes of the transmission of infec-
tious diseases. Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), such as acquired immune
deficiency syndrome (AIDS), are of special concern because of their great seri-
ousness and worldwide spread. Can we learn inductively how to reduce the
spread of STDs? Yes, we can.
In 2006 the National Institutes of Health announced that large-scale studies
of the spread of STDs in Kenya and Uganda (African countries in which the risk
of HIV infection, commonly resulting in AIDS, is very high) was sharply lower
among circumcised men than among those who were not circumcised. Circumci-
sion is not a “magic bullet” for the treatment of disease, of course. However, we
did learn, by examining the experience of very many voluntary subjects (3,000 in
Uganda, 5,000 in Kenya, divided into circumcised and uncircumcised groups)
that a man’s risk of contracting HIV from heterosexual sex is reduced by half as a
result of circumcision. The risk to women is also reduced by about 30 percent.*
These are discoveries (using the inductive method called concomitant varia-
tion) of very great importance. The causal connection between the absence of cir-
cumcision and the spread of HIV is not known with certainty, the way the
conclusion of a deductive argument is known, but it is now known with a very
high degree of probability.
Inductive arguments make weaker claims than those made by deductive ar-
guments. Because their conclusions are never certain, the terms validity and
invalidity do not apply to inductive arguments. We can evaluate inductive argu-
ments, of course; appraising such arguments is a central task of scientists in every
sphere. The higher the level of probability conferred on its conclusion by the
premises of an inductive argument, the greater is the merit of that argument. We
can say that inductive arguments may be “better” or “worse,” “weaker” or
“stronger,” and so on. The argument constituted by the circumcision study is very
strong, the probability of its conclusion very high. Even when the premises are all
true, however, and provide strong support for the conclusion, that conclusion is
not established with certainty. 
Basic Logical Concepts
*So great is the advantage of circumcision shown by these studies that they were stopped, on 13 December
2006, by the Data Safety and Monitoring Board of the National Institutes of Health, to be fair to all partic-
ipants by announcing the probable risks of the two patterns of conduct.
25

Because an inductive argument can yield no more than some degree of prob-
ability for its conclusion, it is always possible that additional information will
strengthen or weaken it. Newly discovered facts may cause us to change our es-
timate of the probabilities, and thus may lead us to judge the argument to be bet-
ter (or worse) than we had previously thought. In the world of inductive
argument—even when the conclusion is judged to be very highly probable—all
the evidence is never in. New discoveries may eventually disconfirm what was
earlier believed, and therefore we never assert that the conclusion of an inductive
argument is absolutely certain.
Deductive arguments, on the other hand, cannot become better or worse.
They either succeed or they do not succeed in exhibiting a compelling relation
between premises and conclusion. If a deductive argument is valid, no addition-
al premises can possibly add to the strength of that argument. For example, if all
humans are mortal and Socrates is human, we may conclude without reservation
that Socrates is mortal—and that conclusion will follow from those premises no matter
what else may be true in the world, and no matter what other information may be discov-
ered or added. If we come to learn that Socrates is ugly, or that immortality is a bur-
den, or that cows give milk, none of those findings nor any other findings can
have any bearing on the validity of the original argument. The conclusion that
follows with certainty from the premises of a deductive argument follows from
any enlarged set of premises with the same certainty, regardless of the nature of
the premises added. If an argument is valid, nothing in the world can make it
more valid; if a conclusion is validly inferred from some set of premises, nothing
can be added to that set to make that conclusion follow more strictly, or more
validly.
This is not true of inductive arguments, however, for which the relationship
claimed between premises and conclusion is much less strict and very different
in kind. Consider the following inductive argument:
Most corporation lawyers are conservatives.
Miriam Graf is a corporation lawyer.
Therefore Miriam Graf is probably a conservative.
This is a fairly good inductive argument; its first premise is true, and if its
second premise also is true, its conclusion is more likely to be true than false. But
in this case (in contrast to the argument about Socrates’ mortality), new premises
added to the original pair might weaken or (depending on the content of those
new premises) strengthen the original argument. Suppose we also learn that
Miriam Graf is an officer of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU).
and suppose we add the (true) premise that
Most officers of the ACLU are not conservatives.
Now the conclusion (that Miriam Graf is a conservative) no longer seems
very probable; the original inductive argument has been greatly weakened by
Basic Logical Concepts
26

the presence of this additional information about Miriam Graf. Indeed, if the
final premise were to be transformed into the universal proposition
No officers of the ACLU are conservatives.
the opposite of the original conclusion would then follow deductively—and
validly—from the full set of premises affirmed.
On the other hand, suppose we enlarge the original set of premises by
adding the following additional premise:
Miriam Graf has long been an officer of the National Rifle Association (NRA).
The original conclusion (that she is a conservative) would be supported by
this enlarged set of premises with even greater likelihood than it was by the orig-
inal set.
Inductive arguments do not always acknowledge explicitly that their conclu-
sions are supported only with some degree of probability. On the other hand, the
mere presence of the word “probability” in an argument gives no assurance that
the argument is inductive. There are some strictly deductive arguments about
probabilities themselves, in which the probability of a certain combination of
events is deduced from the probabilities of other events. For example, if the
probability of three successive heads in three tosses of a coin is 
, one may infer
deductively that the probability of getting at least one tail in three tosses of a coin
is 
. 
In sum, the distinction between induction and deduction rests on the nature
of the claims made by the two types of arguments about the relations between
their premises and their conclusions. Thus we characterize the two types of argu-
ments as follows: A deductive argument is one whose conclusion is claimed to
follow from its premises with absolute necessity, this necessity not being a matter
of degree and not depending in any way on whatever else may be the case. In
sharp contrast, an inductive argument is one whose conclusion is claimed to fol-
low from its premises only with probability, this probability being a matter of de-
gree and dependent on what else may be the case.
6
Validity and Truth
A deductive argument is valid when it succeeds in linking, with logical necessity,
the conclusion to its premises. Its validity refers to the relation between its
propositions—between the set of propositions that serve as the premises and the
one proposition that serves as the conclusion of that argument. If the conclusion
follows with logical necessity from the premises, we say that the argument is
valid. Therefore validity can never apply to any single proposition by itself, because
the needed relation cannot possibly be found within any one proposition.
Truth and falsehood, on the other hand, are attributes of individual proposi-
tions. A single statement that serves as a premise in an argument may be true; the
statement that serves as its conclusion may be false. This conclusion might have
been validly inferred, but to say that any conclusion (or any single premise) is it-
self valid or invalid makes no sense.
7>8
1>8
Basic Logical Concepts
Deductive argument
One of the two major
types of argument
traditionally
distinguished, the other
being the inductive
argument. A deductive
argument claims to
provide conclusive
grounds for its
conclusion. If it does
provide such grounds, it
is valid; if it does not, it
is invalid.
Inductive argument
One of the two major
types of argument
traditionally
distinguished, the other
being the deductive
argument. An inductive
argument claims that its
premises give only some
degree of probability, but
not certainty, to its
conclusion.
27

Basic Logical Concepts
Truth is the attribute of those propositions that assert what really is the case.
When I assert that Lake Superior is the largest of the five Great Lakes, I assert
what really is the case, what is true. If I had claimed that Lake Michigan is the
largest of the Great Lakes my assertion would not be in accord with the real
world; therefore it would be false. This contrast between validity and truth is im-
portant: Truth and falsity are attributes of individual propositions or statements; validi-
ty and invalidity are attributes of arguments.
Just as the concept of validity cannot apply to single propositions, the con-
cept of truth cannot apply to arguments. Of the several propositions in an argu-
ment, some (or all) may be true and some (or all) may be false. However, the
argument as a whole is neither true nor false. Propositions, which are statements
about the world, may be true or false; deductive arguments, which consist of
inferences from one set of propositions to other propositions, may be valid or
invalid.
The relations between true (or false) propositions and valid (or invalid) argu-
ments are critical and complicated. Those relations lie at the heart of deductive
logic. It devoted largely to the examination of those complex relations, but a
preliminary discussion of the relation between validity and truth is in order here.
We begin by emphasizing that an argument may be valid even if one or more
of its premises is not true. Every argument makes a claim about the relation be-
tween its premises and the conclusion drawn from them; that relation may hold
even if the premises turn out to be false or the truth of the premises is in dispute.
This point was made dramatically by Abraham Lincoln in 1858 in one of his de-
bates with Stephen Douglas. Lincoln was attacking the Dred Scott decision of the
Supreme Court, which had held that slaves who had escaped into Northern
states must be returned to their owners in the South. Lincoln said:
I think it follows [from the Dred Scott decision], and I submit to the consideration of
men capable of arguing, whether as I state it, in syllogistic form, the argument has any
fault in it:
Nothing in the Constitution or laws of any State can destroy a right distinctly and
expressly affirmed in the Constitution of the United States.
The right of property in a slave is distinctly and expressly affirmed in the Constitution
of the United States.
Therefore, nothing in the Constitution or laws of any State can destroy the right of
property in a slave.
I believe that no fault can be pointed out in that argument; assuming the truth of the
premises, the conclusion, so far as I have capacity at all to understand it, follows in-
evitably. There is a fault in it as I think, but the fault is not in the reasoning; the false-
hood in fact is a fault of the premises. I believe that the right of property in a slave is
not distinctly and expressly affirmed in the Constitution, and Judge Douglas thinks it is.
I believe that the Supreme Court and the advocates of that decision [the Dred Scott
decision] may search in vain for the place in the Constitution where the right of proper-
ty in a slave is distinctly and expressly affirmed. I say, therefore, that I think one of the
premises is not true in fact.21
28

Basic Logical Concepts
The reasoning in the argument that Lincoln recapitulates and attacks is not
faulty—but its second premise (that “the right of property in a slave is . . . af-
firmed in the Constitution”) is plainly false. The conclusion has therefore not
been established. Lincoln’s logical point is correct and important: An argument
may be valid even when its conclusion and one or more of its premises are false. The va-
lidity of an argument, we emphasize once again, depends only on the relation of
the premises to the conclusion.
There are many possible combinations of true and false premises and conclu-
sions in both valid and invalid arguments. Here follow seven illustrative argu-
ments, each prefaced by the statement of the combination (of truth and validity)
that it represents. With these illustrations (whose content is deliberately trivial)
before us, we will be in a position to formulate some important principles con-
cerning the relations between truth and validity.
I. Some valid arguments contain only true propositions—true premises and a
true conclusion:
All mammals have lungs.
All whales are mammals.
Therefore all whales have lungs.
II. Some valid arguments contain only false propositions—false premises and
a false conclusion:
All four-legged creatures have wings.
All spiders have exactly four legs.
Therefore all spiders have wings.
This argument is valid because, if its premises were true, its conclu-
sion would have to be true also—even though we know that in fact both
the premises and the conclusion of this argument are false.
III. Some invalid arguments contain only true propositions—all their premises
are true, and their conclusions are true as well:
If I owned all the gold in Fort Knox, then I would be wealthy.
I do not own all the gold in Fort Knox.
Therefore I am not wealthy.
The true conclusion of this argument does not follow from its true
premises. This will be seen more clearly when the immediately follow-
ing illustration is considered.
IV. Some invalid arguments contain only true premises and have a false con-
clusion. This is illustrated by an argument exactly like the previous one
(III) in form, changed only enough to make the conclusion false.
If Bill Gates owned all the gold in Fort Knox, then Bill Gates would be wealthy.
Bill Gates does not own all the gold in Fort Knox.
Therefore Bill Gates is not wealthy.
29

Basic Logical Concepts
The premises of this argument are true, but its conclusion is false.
Such an argument cannot be valid because it is impossible for the prem-
ises of a valid argument to be true and its conclusion to be false.
V. Some valid arguments have false premises and a true conclusion:
All fishes are mammals.
All whales are fishes.
Therefore all whales are mammals.
The conclusion of this argument is true, as we know; moreover, it
may be validly inferred from these two premises, both of which are
wildly false.
VI. Some invalid arguments also have false premises and a true conclusion:
All mammals have wings.
All whales have wings.
Therefore all whales are mammals.
From Examples V and VI taken together, it is clear that we cannot
tell from the fact that an argument has false premises and a true conclu-
sion whether it is valid or invalid.
VII. Some invalid arguments, of course, contain all false propositions—false
premises and a false conclusion:
All mammals have wings.
All whales have wings.
Therefore all mammals are whales.
These seven examples make it clear that there are valid arguments with false
conclusions (Example II), as well as invalid arguments with true conclusions (Ex-
amples III and VI). Hence it is clear that the truth or falsity of an argument’s conclu-
sion does not by itself determine the validity or invalidity of that argument. Moreover,
the fact that an argument is valid does not guarantee the truth of its conclusion (Exam-
ple II).
Two tables (referring to the seven preceding examples) will make very
clear the variety of possible combinations. The first table shows that invalid ar-
guments can have every possible combination of true and false premises and
conclusions:
Invalid Arguments
True Conclusion
False Conclusion
True Premises
Example III
Example IV
False Premises
Example VI
Example VII
30

Many of these ostensibly neutral laws (e.g., licensing laws, minimum-
wage laws, and collective bargaining laws) were either directly aimed at
stymieing black economic and social advancement or, if not so aimed,
were quickly turned to that use. A huge swath of the American labor mar-
ket was handed over to labor unions from which blacks, with few excep-
tions, were totally excluded. The now longstanding gap between black
and white unemployment rates dates precisely from the moment of gov-
ernment intervention on labor’s behalf. In short (Bernstein argues) the
victories of American labor were the undoing of American blacks.
—Ken I. Kirsch, “Blacks and Labor—the Untold Story,” The Public Interest, 
Summer 2002
3. Animals born without traits that led to reproduction died out, whereas
the ones that reproduced the most succeeded in conveying their genes
to posterity. Crudely speaking, sex feels good because over evolutionary
time the animals that liked having sex created more offspring than the
animals that didn’t.
—R. Thornhill and C. T. Palmer, “Why Men Rape,” The Sciences, February 2000
4. Changes are real. Now, changes are only possible in time, and therefore
time must be something real.
—Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason (1781), 
“Transcendental Aesthetic,” section II
5. The nursing shortage in the United States has turned into a full-blown
crisis. Because fewer young people go into nursing, one-third of regis-
tered nurses in the United States are now over 50 years of age, and that
proportion is expected to rise to 40 percent over the next decade. Nurses
currently practicing report high rates of job dissatisfaction, with one in
five seriously considering leaving the profession within the next five
years. . . . Hospitals routinely cancel or delay surgical cases because of a
lack of nursing staff.
—Ronald Dworkin, “Where Have All the Nurses Gone?,” 
The Public Interest, Summer 2002
6. To name causes for a state of affairs is not to excuse it. Things are justi-
fied or condemned by their consequences, not by their antecedents.
—John Dewey, “The Liberal College and Its Enemies,” The Independent, 1924
7. One may be subject to laws made by another, but it is impossible to bind
oneself in any matter which is the subject of one’s own free exercise of
will. . . . It follows of necessity that the king cannot be subject to his own
laws. For this reason [royal] edicts and ordinances conclude with the
formula, “for such is our good pleasure.”
—Jean Bodin, Six Books of the Commonwealth, 1576
8. I like Wagner’s music better than anybody’s. It is so loud that one can
talk the whole time without people hearing what one says.
—Oscar Wilde, The Picture of Dorian Gray, 1891
Basic Logical Concepts
21

9. Three aspects of American society in recent decades make cheating
more likely.
First, there is the rise of a market-drenched society, where monetary
success is lauded above all else. Second, there is the decline of religious,
communal, and family bonds and norms that encourage honesty. Final-
ly, there is the absence of shame by those public figures who are caught
in dishonest or immoral activities. No wonder so many young people
see nothing wrong with cutting corners or worse.
—Howard Gardner, “More Likely to Cheat,” The New York Times, 9 October 2003
10. Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind; 
And therefore is wing’d Cupid painted blind.
—William Shakespeare, A Midsummer Night’s Dream, act 1, scene 1
11. An article in The New York Times, “Why Humans and Their Fur Parted
Ways,” suggested that the fact that women have less body hair than
men is somehow related to greater sexual selection pressure on women.
A reader responded with the following letter:
Here is an elaboration for which I have no evidence but it is consistent with
what we think we know: sexual selection has probably strongly influenced nu-
merous traits of both sexes.
Youthful appearance is more important to men when selecting a mate than it is
to women. The longer a woman can look young, the longer she will be sexually
attractive and the more opportunities she will have to bear offspring with desir-
able men. Hairlessness advertises youth.
Hence a greater sexual selection pressure on women to lose body hair.
—T. Doyle, “Less Is More,” The New York Times, 26 August 2003
12. MAD, mutually assured destruction, was effective in deterring nuclear
attack right through the cold war. Both sides had nuclear weapons. Nei-
ther side used them, because both sides knew the other would retaliate
in kind. This will not work with a religious fanatic [like Mahmoud Ah-
madinejad, President of the Islamic Republic of Iran]. For him, mutual
assured destruction is not a deterrent, it is an inducement. We know al-
ready that Iran’s leaders do not give a damn about killing their own
people in great numbers. We have seen it again and again. In the final
scenario, and this applies all the more strongly if they kill large numbers
of their own people, they are doing them a favor. They are giving them
a quick free pass to heaven and all its delights.
—Bernard Lewis, quoted in Commentary, June 2007
13. About a century ago, we discovered that planetary orbits are not stable
in four or more dimensions, so if there were more than three space di-
mensions, planets would not orbit a sun long enough for life to origi-
nate. And in one or two space dimensions, neither blood flow nor large
numbers of neuron connections can exist. Thus, interesting life can exist
only in three dimensions.
—Gordon Kane, “Anthropic Questions,” Phi Kappa Phi Journal, Fall 2002
Basic Logical Concepts
22

14. Translators and interpreters who have helped United States troops and
diplomats now want to resettle in the United States. They speak many
strategically important languages of their region. The United States does
not have an adequate number of interpreters and translators who are
proficient in these languages. Therefore, we need them. Q.E.D.
—Oswald Werner, “Welcome the Translators,” The New York Times, 
3 November 2007
15. The Treasury Department’s failure to design and issue paper currency
that is readily distinguishable to blind and visually impaired individu-
als violates Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, which provides that no
disabled person shall be “subjected to discrimination under any pro-
gram or activity conducted by any Executive agency.”
—Judge James Robertson, Federal District Court for the District of Columbia,
American Council of the Blind v. Sec. of the Treasury, No. 02-0864 (2006)
16. Rightness [that is, acting so as to fulfill one’s duty] never guarantees
moral goodness. For an act may be the act which the agent thinks to be
his duty, and yet be done from an indifferent or bad motive, and there-
fore be morally indifferent or bad.
—Sir W. David Ross, Foundations of Ethics
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1939)
17. Man did not invent the circle or the square or mathematics or the laws
of physics. He discovered them. They are immutable and eternal laws
that could only have been created by a supreme mind: God. And since
we have the ability to make such discoveries, man’s mind must possess
an innate particle of the mind of God. To believe in God is not “beyond
reason.”
—J. Lenzi, “Darwin’s God,” The New York Times Magazine, 18 March 2007
18. Many of the celebratory rituals [of Christmas], as well as the timing of
the holiday, have their origins outside of, and may predate, the Christ-
ian commemoration of the birth of Jesus. Those traditions, at their best,
have much to do with celebrating human relationships and the enjoy-
ment of the goods that this life has to offer. As an atheist I have no hesi-
tation in embracing the holiday and joining with believers and
nonbelievers alike to celebrate what we have in common.
—John Teehan, “A Holiday Season for Atheists, Too,” The New York Times, 
24 December 2006
19. All ethnic movements are two-edged swords. Beginning benignly, and
sometimes necessary to repair injured collective psyches, they often end
in tragedy, especially when they turn political, as illustrated by German
history.
—Orlando Patterson, “A Meeting with Gerald Ford,” 
The New York Times, 6 January 2007
Basic Logical Concepts
23

20. That all who are happy, are equally happy, is not true. A peasant and a
philosopher may be equally satisfied, but not equally happy. Happiness
consists in the multiplicity of agreeable consciousness. A peasant has
not the capacity for having equal happiness with a philosopher.
—Samuel Johnson, in Boswell’s Life of Johnson, 1766
5
Deductive and Inductive Arguments
Every argument makes the claim that its premises provide grounds for the truth
of its conclusion; that claim is the mark of an argument. However, there are two
very different ways in which a conclusion may be supported by its premises, and
thus there are two great classes of arguments: the deductive and the inductive. Un-
derstanding this distinction is essential in the study of logic.
A deductive argument makes the claim that its conclusion is supported by its
premises conclusively. An inductive argument, in contrast, does not make such a
claim. Therefore, if we judge that in some passage a claim for conclusiveness is
being made, we treat the argument as deductive; if we judge that such a claim is
not being made, we treat it as inductive. Because every argument either makes
this claim of conclusiveness (explicitly or implicitly) or does not make it, every
argument is either deductive or inductive.
When the claim is made that the premises of an argument (if true) provide in-
controvertible grounds for the truth of its conclusion, that claim will be either
correct or not correct. If it is correct, that argument is valid. If it is not correct (that
is, if the premises when true fail to establish the conclusion irrefutably although
claiming to do so), that argument is invalid.
For logicians the term validity is applicable only to deductive arguments. To
say that a deductive argument is valid is to say that it is not possible for its con-
clusion to be false if its premises are true. Thus we define validity as follows: A
deductive argument is valid when, if its premises are true, its conclusion must be
true. In everyday speech, of course, the term valid is used much more loosely.
Although every deductive argument makes the claim that its premises guar-
antee the truth of its conclusion, not all deductive arguments live up to that
claim. Deductive arguments that fail to do so are invalid.
Because every deductive argument either succeeds or does not succeed in
achieving its objective, every deductive argument is either valid or invalid. This
point is important: If a deductive argument is not valid, it must be invalid; if it is
not invalid, it must be valid.
The central task of deductive logic is to discriminate valid arguments from
invalid ones. Over centuries, logicians have devised powerful techniques to do
this—but the traditional techniques for determining validity differ from those
used by most modern logicians. The former, collectively known as classical logic,
is rooted in the analytical works of Aristotle. Logicians of the two schools differ
Basic Logical Concepts
Validity
A characteristic of any
deductive argument
whose premises, if they
were all true, would
provide conclusive
grounds for the truth of
its conclusion. Such an
argument is said to be
valid. Validity is a formal
characteristic; it applies
only to arguments, as
distinguished from truth,
which applies to
propositions.
24

in their methods and in their interpretations of some arguments, but ancients
and moderns agree that the fundamental task of deductive logic is to develop the
tools that enable us to distinguish arguments that are valid from those that are
not.
In contrast, the central task of inductive arguments is to ascertain the facts by
which conduct may be guided directly, or on which other arguments may be
built. Empirical investigations are undertaken—as in medicine, or social science,
or astronomy—leading, when inductive techniques are applied appropriately, to
factual conclusions, most often concerning cause-and-effect relationships of
some importance.
An illustration of the inductive process will be helpful at this point to con-
trast induction with deduction. Medical investigators, using inductive methods,
are eager to learn the causes of disease, or the causes of the transmission of infec-
tious diseases. Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), such as acquired immune
deficiency syndrome (AIDS), are of special concern because of their great seri-
ousness and worldwide spread. Can we learn inductively how to reduce the
spread of STDs? Yes, we can.
In 2006 the National Institutes of Health announced that large-scale studies
of the spread of STDs in Kenya and Uganda (African countries in which the risk
of HIV infection, commonly resulting in AIDS, is very high) was sharply lower
among circumcised men than among those who were not circumcised. Circumci-
sion is not a “magic bullet” for the treatment of disease, of course. However, we
did learn, by examining the experience of very many voluntary subjects (3,000 in
Uganda, 5,000 in Kenya, divided into circumcised and uncircumcised groups)
that a man’s risk of contracting HIV from heterosexual sex is reduced by half as a
result of circumcision. The risk to women is also reduced by about 30 percent.*
These are discoveries (using the inductive method called concomitant varia-
tion) of very great importance. The causal connection between the absence of cir-
cumcision and the spread of HIV is not known with certainty, the way the
conclusion of a deductive argument is known, but it is now known with a very
high degree of probability.
Inductive arguments make weaker claims than those made by deductive ar-
guments. Because their conclusions are never certain, the terms validity and
invalidity do not apply to inductive arguments. We can evaluate inductive argu-
ments, of course; appraising such arguments is a central task of scientists in every
sphere. The higher the level of probability conferred on its conclusion by the
premises of an inductive argument, the greater is the merit of that argument. We
can say that inductive arguments may be “better” or “worse,” “weaker” or
“stronger,” and so on. The argument constituted by the circumcision study is very
strong, the probability of its conclusion very high. Even when the premises are all
true, however, and provide strong support for the conclusion, that conclusion is
not established with certainty. 
Basic Logical Concepts
*So great is the advantage of circumcision shown by these studies that they were stopped, on 13 December
2006, by the Data Safety and Monitoring Board of the National Institutes of Health, to be fair to all partic-
ipants by announcing the probable risks of the two patterns of conduct.
25

Because an inductive argument can yield no more than some degree of prob-
ability for its conclusion, it is always possible that additional information will
strengthen or weaken it. Newly discovered facts may cause us to change our es-
timate of the probabilities, and thus may lead us to judge the argument to be bet-
ter (or worse) than we had previously thought. In the world of inductive
argument—even when the conclusion is judged to be very highly probable—all
the evidence is never in. New discoveries may eventually disconfirm what was
earlier believed, and therefore we never assert that the conclusion of an inductive
argument is absolutely certain.
Deductive arguments, on the other hand, cannot become better or worse.
They either succeed or they do not succeed in exhibiting a compelling relation
between premises and conclusion. If a deductive argument is valid, no addition-
al premises can possibly add to the strength of that argument. For example, if all
humans are mortal and Socrates is human, we may conclude without reservation
that Socrates is mortal—and that conclusion will follow from those premises no matter
what else may be true in the world, and no matter what other information may be discov-
ered or added. If we come to learn that Socrates is ugly, or that immortality is a bur-
den, or that cows give milk, none of those findings nor any other findings can
have any bearing on the validity of the original argument. The conclusion that
follows with certainty from the premises of a deductive argument follows from
any enlarged set of premises with the same certainty, regardless of the nature of
the premises added. If an argument is valid, nothing in the world can make it
more valid; if a conclusion is validly inferred from some set of premises, nothing
can be added to that set to make that conclusion follow more strictly, or more
validly.
This is not true of inductive arguments, however, for which the relationship
claimed between premises and conclusion is much less strict and very different
in kind. Consider the following inductive argument:
Most corporation lawyers are conservatives.
Miriam Graf is a corporation lawyer.
Therefore Miriam Graf is probably a conservative.
This is a fairly good inductive argument; its first premise is true, and if its
second premise also is true, its conclusion is more likely to be true than false. But
in this case (in contrast to the argument about Socrates’ mortality), new premises
added to the original pair might weaken or (depending on the content of those
new premises) strengthen the original argument. Suppose we also learn that
Miriam Graf is an officer of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU).
and suppose we add the (true) premise that
Most officers of the ACLU are not conservatives.
Now the conclusion (that Miriam Graf is a conservative) no longer seems
very probable; the original inductive argument has been greatly weakened by
Basic Logical Concepts
26

the presence of this additional information about Miriam Graf. Indeed, if the
final premise were to be transformed into the universal proposition
No officers of the ACLU are conservatives.
the opposite of the original conclusion would then follow deductively—and
validly—from the full set of premises affirmed.
On the other hand, suppose we enlarge the original set of premises by
adding the following additional premise:
Miriam Graf has long been an officer of the National Rifle Association (NRA).
The original conclusion (that she is a conservative) would be supported by
this enlarged set of premises with even greater likelihood than it was by the orig-
inal set.
Inductive arguments do not always acknowledge explicitly that their conclu-
sions are supported only with some degree of probability. On the other hand, the
mere presence of the word “probability” in an argument gives no assurance that
the argument is inductive. There are some strictly deductive arguments about
probabilities themselves, in which the probability of a certain combination of
events is deduced from the probabilities of other events. For example, if the
probability of three successive heads in three tosses of a coin is 
, one may infer
deductively that the probability of getting at least one tail in three tosses of a coin
is 
. 
In sum, the distinction between induction and deduction rests on the nature
of the claims made by the two types of arguments about the relations between
their premises and their conclusions. Thus we characterize the two types of argu-
ments as follows: A deductive argument is one whose conclusion is claimed to
follow from its premises with absolute necessity, this necessity not being a matter
of degree and not depending in any way on whatever else may be the case. In
sharp contrast, an inductive argument is one whose conclusion is claimed to fol-
low from its premises only with probability, this probability being a matter of de-
gree and dependent on what else may be the case.
6
Validity and Truth
A deductive argument is valid when it succeeds in linking, with logical necessity,
the conclusion to its premises. Its validity refers to the relation between its
propositions—between the set of propositions that serve as the premises and the
one proposition that serves as the conclusion of that argument. If the conclusion
follows with logical necessity from the premises, we say that the argument is
valid. Therefore validity can never apply to any single proposition by itself, because
the needed relation cannot possibly be found within any one proposition.
Truth and falsehood, on the other hand, are attributes of individual proposi-
tions. A single statement that serves as a premise in an argument may be true; the
statement that serves as its conclusion may be false. This conclusion might have
been validly inferred, but to say that any conclusion (or any single premise) is it-
self valid or invalid makes no sense.
7>8
1>8
Basic Logical Concepts
Deductive argument
One of the two major
types of argument
traditionally
distinguished, the other
being the inductive
argument. A deductive
argument claims to
provide conclusive
grounds for its
conclusion. If it does
provide such grounds, it
is valid; if it does not, it
is invalid.
Inductive argument
One of the two major
types of argument
traditionally
distinguished, the other
being the deductive
argument. An inductive
argument claims that its
premises give only some
degree of probability, but
not certainty, to its
conclusion.
27

Basic Logical Concepts
Truth is the attribute of those propositions that assert what really is the case.
When I assert that Lake Superior is the largest of the five Great Lakes, I assert
what really is the case, what is true. If I had claimed that Lake Michigan is the
largest of the Great Lakes my assertion would not be in accord with the real
world; therefore it would be false. This contrast between validity and truth is im-
portant: Truth and falsity are attributes of individual propositions or statements; validi-
ty and invalidity are attributes of arguments.
Just as the concept of validity cannot apply to single propositions, the con-
cept of truth cannot apply to arguments. Of the several propositions in an argu-
ment, some (or all) may be true and some (or all) may be false. However, the
argument as a whole is neither true nor false. Propositions, which are statements
about the world, may be true or false; deductive arguments, which consist of
inferences from one set of propositions to other propositions, may be valid or
invalid.
The relations between true (or false) propositions and valid (or invalid) argu-
ments are critical and complicated. Those relations lie at the heart of deductive
logic. It devoted largely to the examination of those complex relations, but a
preliminary discussion of the relation between validity and truth is in order here.
We begin by emphasizing that an argument may be valid even if one or more
of its premises is not true. Every argument makes a claim about the relation be-
tween its premises and the conclusion drawn from them; that relation may hold
even if the premises turn out to be false or the truth of the premises is in dispute.
This point was made dramatically by Abraham Lincoln in 1858 in one of his de-
bates with Stephen Douglas. Lincoln was attacking the Dred Scott decision of the
Supreme Court, which had held that slaves who had escaped into Northern
states must be returned to their owners in the South. Lincoln said:
I think it follows [from the Dred Scott decision], and I submit to the consideration of
men capable of arguing, whether as I state it, in syllogistic form, the argument has any
fault in it:
Nothing in the Constitution or laws of any State can destroy a right distinctly and
expressly affirmed in the Constitution of the United States.
The right of property in a slave is distinctly and expressly affirmed in the Constitution
of the United States.
Therefore, nothing in the Constitution or laws of any State can destroy the right of
property in a slave.
I believe that no fault can be pointed out in that argument; assuming the truth of the
premises, the conclusion, so far as I have capacity at all to understand it, follows in-
evitably. There is a fault in it as I think, but the fault is not in the reasoning; the false-
hood in fact is a fault of the premises. I believe that the right of property in a slave is
not distinctly and expressly affirmed in the Constitution, and Judge Douglas thinks it is.
I believe that the Supreme Court and the advocates of that decision [the Dred Scott
decision] may search in vain for the place in the Constitution where the right of proper-
ty in a slave is distinctly and expressly affirmed. I say, therefore, that I think one of the
premises is not true in fact.21
28

Basic Logical Concepts
The reasoning in the argument that Lincoln recapitulates and attacks is not
faulty—but its second premise (that “the right of property in a slave is . . . af-
firmed in the Constitution”) is plainly false. The conclusion has therefore not
been established. Lincoln’s logical point is correct and important: An argument
may be valid even when its conclusion and one or more of its premises are false. The va-
lidity of an argument, we emphasize once again, depends only on the relation of
the premises to the conclusion.
There are many possible combinations of true and false premises and conclu-
sions in both valid and invalid arguments. Here follow seven illustrative argu-
ments, each prefaced by the statement of the combination (of truth and validity)
that it represents. With these illustrations (whose content is deliberately trivial)
before us, we will be in a position to formulate some important principles con-
cerning the relations between truth and validity.
I. Some valid arguments contain only true propositions—true premises and a
true conclusion:
All mammals have lungs.
All whales are mammals.
Therefore all whales have lungs.
II. Some valid arguments contain only false propositions—false premises and
a false conclusion:
All four-legged creatures have wings.
All spiders have exactly four legs.
Therefore all spiders have wings.
This argument is valid because, if its premises were true, its conclu-
sion would have to be true also—even though we know that in fact both
the premises and the conclusion of this argument are false.
III. Some invalid arguments contain only true propositions—all their premises
are true, and their conclusions are true as well:
If I owned all the gold in Fort Knox, then I would be wealthy.
I do not own all the gold in Fort Knox.
Therefore I am not wealthy.
The true conclusion of this argument does not follow from its true
premises. This will be seen more clearly when the immediately follow-
ing illustration is considered.
IV. Some invalid arguments contain only true premises and have a false con-
clusion. This is illustrated by an argument exactly like the previous one
(III) in form, changed only enough to make the conclusion false.
If Bill Gates owned all the gold in Fort Knox, then Bill Gates would be wealthy.
Bill Gates does not own all the gold in Fort Knox.
Therefore Bill Gates is not wealthy.
29

Basic Logical Concepts
The premises of this argument are true, but its conclusion is false.
Such an argument cannot be valid because it is impossible for the prem-
ises of a valid argument to be true and its conclusion to be false.
V. Some valid arguments have false premises and a true conclusion:
All fishes are mammals.
All whales are fishes.
Therefore all whales are mammals.
The conclusion of this argument is true, as we know; moreover, it
may be validly inferred from these two premises, both of which are
wildly false.
VI. Some invalid arguments also have false premises and a true conclusion:
All mammals have wings.
All whales have wings.
Therefore all whales are mammals.
From Examples V and VI taken together, it is clear that we cannot
tell from the fact that an argument has false premises and a true conclu-
sion whether it is valid or invalid.
VII. Some invalid arguments, of course, contain all false propositions—false
premises and a false conclusion:
All mammals have wings.
All whales have wings.
Therefore all mammals are whales.
These seven examples make it clear that there are valid arguments with false
conclusions (Example II), as well as invalid arguments with true conclusions (Ex-
amples III and VI). Hence it is clear that the truth or falsity of an argument’s conclu-
sion does not by itself determine the validity or invalidity of that argument. Moreover,
the fact that an argument is valid does not guarantee the truth of its conclusion (Exam-
ple II).
Two tables (referring to the seven preceding examples) will make very
clear the variety of possible combinations. The first table shows that invalid ar-
guments can have every possible combination of true and false premises and
conclusions:
Invalid Arguments
True Conclusion
False Conclusion
True Premises
Example III
Example IV
False Premises
Example VI
Example VII
30

Basic Logical Concepts
Valid Arguments
True Conclusion
False Conclusion
True Premises
Example I
—
False Premises
Example V
Example II
The one blank position in the second table exhibits a fundamental point: If an
argument is valid and its premises are true, we may be certain that its conclusion is true
also. To put it another way: If an argument is valid and its conclusion is false, not all of
its premises can be true. Some perfectly valid arguments do have false conclusions,
but any such argument must have at least one false premise.
When an argument is valid and all of its premises are true, we call it sound.
The conclusion of a sound argument obviously must be true—and only a sound
argument can establish the truth of its conclusion. If a deductive argument is not
sound—that is, if the argument is not valid or if not all of its premises are true—
it fails to establish the truth of its conclusion even if in fact the conclusion is true.
To test the truth or falsehood of premises is the task of science in general, be-
cause premises may deal with any subject matter at all. The logician is not (pro-
fessionally) interested in the truth or falsehood of propositions so much as in the
logical relations between them. By logical relations between propositions we mean
those relations that determine the correctness or incorrectness of the arguments
in which they occur. The task of determining the correctness or incorrectness of
arguments falls squarely within the province of logic. The logician is interested
in the correctness even of arguments whose premises may be false.
Why do we not confine ourselves to arguments with true premises, ignoring
all others? Because the correctness of arguments whose premises are not known
to be true may be of great importance. In science, for example, we verify theories
by deducing testable consequences from uncertain theoretical premises—but we
cannot know beforehand which theories are true. In everyday life also, we must
often choose between alternative courses of action, first seeking to deduce the
consequences of each. To avoid deceiving ourselves, we must reason correctly
about the consequences of the alternatives, taking each as a premise. If we were
interested only in arguments with true premises, we would not know which set
of consequences to trace out until we knew which of the alternative premises
was true. But if we knew which of the alternative premises was true, we would
not need to reason about it at all, because our purpose was to help us decide
which alternative premise to make true. To confine our attention to arguments
with premises known to be true would therefore be self-defeating.
The second table shows that valid arguments can have only three of those
combinations of true and false premises and conclusions:
31

Basic Logical Concepts
EXERCISES
For each of the argument descriptions provided below, construct a deductive ar-
gument (on any subject of your choosing) having only two premises.
1. A valid argument with one true premise, one false premise, and a false
conclusion
2. A valid argument with one true premise, one false premise, and a true
conclusion
3. An invalid argument with two true premises and a false conclusion
4. An invalid argument with two true premises and a true conclusion
5. A valid argument with two false premises and a true conclusion
6. An invalid argument with two false premises and a true conclusion
7. An invalid argument with one true premise, one false premise, and a
true conclusion
8. A valid argument with two true premises and a true conclusion
chapter 
Summary
The most fundamental concepts of logic are introduced in this chapter.
In Section 1 we explained what logic is and why it is necessary, and we de-
fined it as the study of the methods and principles used to distinguish correct
from incorrect reasoning.
In Section 2 we gave an account of propositions, which may be asserted or
denied, and which are either true or false, and of arguments, which are clusters
of propositions of which one is the conclusion and the others are the premises of-
fered in its support. Arguments are the central concern of logicians.
In Section 3 we discussed difficulties in the recognition of arguments, arising
from the variety of ways in which the propositions they contain may be ex-
pressed, and sometimes even from the absence of their express statement in ar-
guments called enthymemes.
In Section 4 we discussed the differences between arguments and explana-
tions, showing why this distinction often depends on the context and on the in-
tent of the passage in that context.
In Section 5 we explained the fundamental difference between deductive ar-
guments, whose conclusions may be certain (if the premises are true and the rea-
soning valid), and inductive arguments, aiming to establish matters of fact,
whose conclusions may be very probable but are never certain.
In Section 6 we discussed validity and invalidity (which apply to deductive
arguments) as contrasted with truth and falsity (which apply to propositions).
We explored some of the key relations between validity and truth.
32

Basic Logical Concepts
END NOTES
1Scott Wallace, “Last of the Amazon,” National Geographic, January 2007.
2David Hayden, “Thy Neighbor, Thy Self,” The New York Times, 9 May 2000.
3Peter Singer, “What Should a Billionaire Give—and What Should You?” The New York Times Magazine, 17
December, 2006.
4Roger Woody, “Why Iraq’s a Mess,” The New York Times, 26 January 2007.
5Harris, Sam, Letter to a Christian Nation (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2006).
6Gratz v. Bollinger, 539 U.S. 244 (2003).
7Ibid.
8Archbishop Peter Akinola, quoted in The New York Times, 25 December 2006.
9Ramsey Colloquium of the Institute on Religion and Public Life, “Always to Care, Never to Kill,” The
Wall Street Journal, 17 November 1991.
10David Gelernter, “Ramping Up the Violence,” The Weekly Standard, 26 February 2007.
11Christopher Caldwell, Reflections on the Revolution in Europe: Immigration, Islam, and the West (Double-
day, 2009).
12Noam Chomsky, Failed States (New York: Henry Holt, 2006).
13Steven Goldberg, “The Death Penalty,” The New York Times, 20 December 2004.
14Ibid.
15“The Vote to Ban Human Cloning,” The New York Times, 2 August 2001.
16Senator Sam Brownback, of Kansas, at a Senate hearing in April 2000.
17Samuel Freeman, “John Rawls, Friend and Teacher,” Chronicle of Higher Education, 13 December 2002.
18Jeff Greenwald, “Brightness Visible,” The New York Times Magazine, 14 May 2000.
19Joseph Bamberger, “Water’s Inimitable Qualities,” The New York Times, 17 July 2007.
20James Gleick, “Cyber-Neologisms,” The New York Times Magazine, 5 November 2006.
21From The Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln, vol. 3, Roy P. Basler, editor (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press, 1953).
For additional exercises and tutorials about concepts covered in this
chapter, log in to MyLogicLab at www.mylogiclab.com and select your
current textbook.
33

This page intentionally left blank 

Analyzing Arguments
From Chapter 2 of Introduction to Logic, Fourteenth Edition. Irving M. Copi, Carl Cohen, Kenneth McMahon. 
Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Prentice Hall. All rights reserved.

Analyzing Arguments
1
Paraphrasing Arguments
2
Diagramming Arguments
3
Complex Argumentative Passages
4
Problems in Reasoning
1
Paraphrasing Arguments
Arguments in everyday life are often exceedingly complex. Premises may be nu-
merous and in topsy-turvy order; they may be formulated awkwardly, and they
may be repeated using different words; even the meaning of premises may be
unclear. To sort out the connections of premises and conclusions so as to eval-
uate an argument fairly, we need some analytical techniques.
The most common, and perhaps the most useful technique for analysis is
paraphrase. We paraphrase an argument by setting forth its propositions in clear
language and in logical order. This may require the reformulation of sentences,
and therefore great care must be taken to ensure that the paraphrase put forward
captures correctly and completely the argument that was to be analyzed.
The following passage, whose premises are confusingly intertwined, was
part of the majority decision of the U.S. Supreme Court when, in 2003, it struck
down as unconstitutional a Texas statute that had made it a crime for persons of
the same sex to engage in certain forms of intimate sexual conduct. Justice
Anthony Kennedy, writing for the majority, said this:
The [present] case does involve two adults who, with full and mutual consent from
each other, engaged in sexual practices common to a homosexual life style. The pe-
titioners are entitled to respect for their private lives. The state cannot demean their
existence or control their destiny by making their private sexual conduct a crime.
Their right to liberty under the Due Process Clause [of the 14th Amendment to the
U.S. Constitution] gives them the full right to engage in their conduct without inter-
vention of the government. It is a premise of the Constitution that there is a realm of
personal liberty which the government may not enter. The Texas statute furthers no
legitimate state interest which can justify its intrusion into the personal and private life
of the individual.1
Although the general thrust of this decision is clear, the structure of the argu-
ment, which is really a complex of distinct arguments, is not. We can clarify the
whole by paraphrasing the decision of the Court as follows:
1. The Constitution of the United States guarantees a realm of personal
liberty that includes the private, consensual sexual activity of adults.
2. The conduct of these petitioners was within that realm of liberty and
they therefore had a full right, under the Constitution, to engage in the
sexual conduct in question without government intervention.
This asset is
intentionally omitted
from this text. It may
be accessed at
www.mcescher.com.
(Waterfall by 
M.C. Escher)
36

3. The Texas statute intrudes, without justification, into the private lives of
these petitioners, and demeans them, by making their protected, private
sexual conduct a crime.
4. The Texas statute that criminalizes such conduct therefore wrongly
denies the rights of these petitioners and must be struck down as
unconstitutional.
In this case the paraphrase does no more than set forth clearly what the
premises indubitably assert. Sometimes, however, paraphrasing can bring to the
surface what was assumed in an argument but was not fully or clearly stated. For
example, the great English mathematician, G. H. Hardy, in A Mathematician’s
Apology (Cambridge University Press, 1940), argued thus: “Archimedes will be
Peter Abelard
P
eter Abelard was born near Nantes, in Brittany, in 1079 CE, to a noble family.
He could have become a wealthy knight, but rejected such a life, instead
choosing an academic career. He left home for Paris, and studied with
William of Champeaux, with whom he quarreled acrimoniously, resulting in his
opening a school of his own. Eventually he was elected to the faculty of the school
of Notre Dame, where he was extremely popular, attracting students
from all over Europe. He was primarily interested in logic, which was
then called dialectic, and in metaphysics. He confronted the deep
metaphysical problem of universals, or abstract objects. General terms
(e.g., justice, yellow, smooth) plainly do exist, but are there abstract objects
that actually exist, beneath or behind those terms, in some non-physi-
cal world? Abelard held that there are no such entities, but that we are
sometimes misled by the words we use for the common properties of
things. His position came to be known as nominalism.
While working as a tutor to Heloise, the seventeen-year-old niece
of a Parisian named Fulbert, a relationship developed that resulted in
her becoming pregnant. The couple ran away to his home in Brittany,
where she gave birth to a child. Abelard eventually married Heloise,
later sending her to become a nun. Her uncle, outraged by the scan-
dal, hired thugs to assault Abelard and castrate him. Abelard then be-
came a monk and lecturer, unpopular among colleagues because of
his intellectual arrogance. He was obliged to move from abbey to abbey, became
embroiled in theological controversies, and died in Paris in 1142.
In logic, Abelard explored the relations of premises and conclusions in de-
ductive arguments. He was one of the first to emphasize the syntactic nature of
validity. An argument is valid, he pointed out, not because of the semantic
content of its propositions, but because of the formal relations among those
propositions.
Biography
Analyzing Arguments
INTERFOTO/Alamy Images
37

remembered when Aeschylus is forgotten, because languages die and mathemat-
ical ideas do not.” We may paraphrase this argument by spelling out its claims:
1. Languages die.
2. The plays of Aeschylus are written in a language.
3. So the work of Aeschylus will eventually die.
4. Mathematical ideas never die.
5. The work of Archimedes was with mathematical ideas.
6. So the work of Archimedes will never die.
7. Therefore Archimedes will be remembered when Aeschylus is forgotten.
This paraphrase enables us to distinguish and examine the premises and in-
ferences compressed into Hardy’s single sentence.
EXERCISES
Paraphrase each of the following passages, which may contain more than one
argument.
1. The [Detroit] Pistons did not lose because of the lack of ability. They are
an all-around better team. They lost because of the law of averages.
They will beat the [San Antonio] Spurs every two times out of three.
When you examine the NBA finals [of 2005], that is exactly how they
lost the seventh (last game) because that would have been three out of
three. The Spurs will beat the Pistons one out of three. It just so happens
that, that one time was the final game, because the Pistons had already
won two in a row.
—Maurice Williams, “Law of Averages Worked Against Detroit Pistons,” 
The Ann Arbor (Michigan) News, 8 July 2005
2. Hundreds of thousands of recent college graduates today cannot ex-
press themselves with the written word. Why? Because universities
have shortchanged them, offering strange literary theories, Marxism,
feminism, deconstruction, and other oddities in the guise of writing
courses.
—Stanley Ridgeley, “College Students Can’t Write?” 
National Review Online, 19 February 2003
3. Racially diverse nations tend to have lower levels of social support than
homogenous ones. People don’t feel as bound together when they are
divided on ethnic lines and are less likely to embrace mutual support
programs. You can have diversity or a big welfare state. It’s hard to have
both.
—David Brooks (presenting the views of Seymour Lipset), 
“The American Way of Equality,” The New York Times, 14 January 2007
4. Orlando Patterson claims that “freedom is a natural part of the human
condition.” Nothing could be further from the truth. If it were true, we
Analyzing Arguments
38

could expect to find free societies spread throughout human history. We
do not. Instead what we find are every sort of tyrannical government
from time immemorial.
—John Taylor, “Can Freedom Be Exported?” The New York Times, 
22 December 2006
5. The New York Times reported, on 30 May 2000, that some scientists were
seeking a way to signal back in time. A critical reader responded thus:
It seems obvious to me that scientists in the future will never find a way to
signal back in time. If they were to do so, wouldn’t we have heard from
them by now?
—Ken Grunstra, “Reaching Back in Time,” The New York Times, 6 June 2000
6. Nicholas Kristof equates the hunting of whales by Eskimos with the
whaling habits of Japanese, Norwegians, and Icelanders. The harsh en-
vironment of the Inupiat [Eskimos] dictates their diet, so not even the
most rabid antiwhaling activist can deny their inalienable right to sur-
vive. The Japanese and the European whale-hunting countries can
choose the food they consume; they have no need to eat whales. It is not
hypocritical to give a pass to the relatively primitive society of the Inu-
piat to hunt a strictly controlled number of whales for survival while
chastising the modern societies that continue to hunt these magnificent
mammals for no good reason.
—Joseph Turner, “Their Whale Meat, and Our Piety,” The New York Times, 
18 September 2003
7. Space contains such a huge supply of atoms that all eternity would not
be enough time to count them and count the forces which drive the
atoms into various places just as they have been driven together in this
world. So we must realize that there are other worlds in other parts of
the universe with races of different men and different animals.
—Lucretius, De Rerum Natura, First Century BCE
8. If you marry without love, it does not mean you will not later come to
love the person you marry. And if you marry the person you love, it
does not mean that you will always love that person or have a success-
ful marriage. The divorce rate is very low in many countries that have
prearranged marriage. The divorce rate is very high in countries where
people base their marriage decisions on love.
—Alex Hammoud, “I Take This Man, for Richer Only,” The New York Times, 
18 February 2000
9. Our entire tax system depends upon the vast majority of taxpayers who
attempt to pay the taxes they owe having confidence that they’re being
treated fairly and that their competitors and neighbors are also paying
what is due. If the public concludes that the IRS cannot meet these basic
expectations, the risk to the tax system will become very high, and the
effects very difficult to reverse.
—David Cay Johnston, “Adding Auditors to Help IRS Catch Tax Cheaters,”
The New York Times, 13 February 2000
Analyzing Arguments
39

3
2
1
When the several premises of an argument are not all coordinate—that is,
when some premises give direct support not to the conclusion but to other prem-
ises that support the conclusion—the diagram can show this quite clearly. Here is
an argument illustrating this feature of diagramming:
10. People and governments want to talk, talk, talk about racism and other
forms of intolerance; we are obsessed with racial and ethnic issues. But
we come to these issues wearing earplugs and blinders, and in a state of
denial that absolves us of complicity in any of these hateful matters.
Thus, the other guy is always wrong.
—Bob Herbert, “Doomed to Irrelevance,” The New York Times, 
6 November 2001
2
Diagramming Arguments
A second technique for the analysis of arguments is diagramming. With a diagram
we can represent the structure of an argument graphically; the flow of premises
and conclusions is displayed in a two-dimensional chart, or picture, on the page.
A diagram is not needed for a simple argument, even though drawing one can
enhance our understanding. When an argument is complex, with many premis-
es entwined in various ways, a diagram can be exceedingly helpful.
To construct the diagram of an argument we must first number all the propo-
sitions it contains, in the order in which they appear, circling each number. Using
arrows between the circled numbers, we can then construct a diagram that
shows the relations of premises and conclusions without having to restate them.
To convey the process of inference on the two-dimensional page, we adopt this
convention: A conclusion always appears in the space below the premises that
give it support; coordinate premises are put on the same horizontal level. In this
way, an argument whose wording may be confusing can be set forth vividly in
iconic form. The structure of the argument is displayed visually.2
Here follows a straightforward argument that may be readily diagrammed:
There is no consensus among biologists that a fertilized cell is alive in a sense that
an unfertilized egg or unused sperm is not. 
Nor is there a consensus about whether
a group of cells without even a rudimentary nervous system is in any sense human.
Hence there are no compelling experimental data to decide the nebulous issue of
when “human” life begins.3
The circled numbers serve to represent the propositions, so we can diagram
the argument as follows:
~
3
~
2
~
1
Analyzing Arguments
40

An alternative plausible interpretation of this argument can be represented by a
different diagram:
2
3
4
1
1
2
4
3
Another strength of diagrams is their ability to exhibit relations between the
premises—relations that may be critical to the argument. Each premise of an ar-
gument may support its conclusion separately, as in the arguments above. In
some arguments, however, the premises support the conclusion only when they
are considered jointly—and this is a feature of the reasoning that a diagram is
well suited to display, by providing a visual representation of that connection.
The following argument illustrates this:
General Motors makes money (when it does) on new cars and on the financing 
of loans.
Car dealers, by contrast, make most of their money on servicing old cars
and selling used ones.
So car dealers can thrive even when the automaker
languishes.5
By bracketing the premises in the diagram of this argument, we show that its
premises give support only because they are joined, thus:
~
3
~
2
~
1
Football analysis is trickier than the baseball kind because 
Football really is a
team sport.
Unlike in baseball, all eleven guys on the field are involved in every play.
Who deserves the credit or blame is harder to know than it looks.4
The diagram looks like this:
~
4
~
3
~
2
~
1
Analyzing Arguments
41

Some complications may be revealed more clearly using paraphrase. When
an argument has a premise that is not stated explicitly, a paraphrase allows us to
formulate the tacit premise and then add it to the list explicitly. A diagram re-
quires the representation of the tacit premise in some way that indicates visual-
ly that it has been added (a broken circle around a number is commonly used),
but even then the added premise remains to be precisely formulated. Thus the
argument
Since there are no certainties in the realm of politics, politics must be the arena for
negotiation between different perspectives, with cautious moderation likely to be the
best policy.7
is best clarified by a paraphrase in which its tacit premise and internal complexi-
ty is made explicit, thus:
1
2
3
2
4
1
3
In this argument, neither premise supports the conclusion independently. It is
the combination of the facts that General Motors makes most of its money in one
way, while car dealers make most of their money in another way, that supports
the conclusion that the latter may thrive while the former languishes.
Often we can show what we cannot as conveniently say. Diagrams are partic-
ularly useful when an argument’s structure is complicated. Consider the follow-
ing argument:
Desert mountaintops make good sites for astronomy.
Being high, they sit above
a portion of the atmosphere, enabling a star’s light to reach a telescope without having to
swim through the entire depths of the atmosphere.
Being dry, the desert is also rela-
tively cloud-free. 
The merest veil of haze or cloud can render a sky useless for
many astronomical measures.6
Proposition 
is plainly the conclusion of this argument, and the other
three provide support for it—but they function differently in giving that sup-
port. Statement 
supports, by itself, the claim that mountaintops are good
sites for telescopes. But statements 
and 
must work together to support
the claim that desert mountaintops are good sites for telescopes. A diagram
shows this neatly:
~
4
~
3
~
2
~
1
~
4
~
3
~
2
~
1
Analyzing Arguments
42

Two conclusions (and hence two arguments) may have a single stated prem-
ise. For example,
Older women have less freedom to fight sexual harassment at their jobs or to leave a
battering husband, because age discrimination means they won’t easily find other
ways of supporting themselves.9
The single premise here is that older women cannot easily find alternative
ways to support themselves. The two conclusions supported by that premise are
(a) that older women have less freedom to fight sexual harassment at their jobs,
and (b) that older married women have less freedom to leave a battering hus-
band. A single argument ordinarily means an argument with a single conclusion,
regardless of how many premises are adduced in its support.
When there are two or more premises in an argument, or two or more argu-
ments in a passage, the order of appearance of premises and conclusions may
need to be clarified. The conclusion may be stated last, or first; it may sometimes
be sandwiched between the premises offered in its support, as in the following
passage:
3
4
1
2
1. There are no certainties in the realm of politics.
2. Where there are no certainties, those with different perspectives must
negotiate their differences.
3. The best policy likely to emerge from such negotiation is one of cautious
moderation.
4. Therefore politics is the realm for negotiation between different perspec-
tives, with cautious moderation likely to be the best policy.
The number of arguments in a passage is determined, most logicians agree,
by the number of conclusions it contains. If a passage contains two or more argu-
ments, and a number of propositions whose relations are not obvious, a diagram
may prove particularly useful in sorting things out. A passage in a letter from
Karl Marx to Friedrich Engels illustrates this nicely:
To hasten the social revolution in England is the most important object of the
International Workingman’s Association. 
The sole means of hastening it is to make
Ireland independent. Hence 
the task of the “International” is everywhere to put the
conflict between England and Ireland in the foreground, and 
everywhere to side
openly with Ireland.8
There are two conclusions in this passage and hence two arguments. But
both conclusions are inferred from the same two premises. A diagram exhibits
this structure:
~
4
~
3
~
2
~
1
Analyzing Arguments
43

The real and original source of inspiration for the Muslim thinkers was the Quran and
the sayings of the Holy Prophet. It is therefore clear that the Muslim philosophy was
not a carbon copy of Greek thought, as it concerned itself primarily and specifically
with those problems which originated from and had relevance to Muslims.10
Here the conclusion, that “Muslim philosophy was not a carbon copy of Greek
thought,” appears after the first premise of the argument and before the second.
The same proposition that serves as a conclusion in one argument may serve
as premise in a different argument, just as the same person may be a commander
in one context and a subordinate in another. This is well illustrated by a passage
from the work of Thomas Aquinas. He argues:
Human law is framed for the multitude of human beings.
The majority of human beings are not perfect in virtue.
Therefore human laws do not forbid all vices.11
The conclusion of this argument is used immediately thereafter as a premise
in another, quite different argument:
Vicious acts are contrary to acts of virtue.
But human law does not prohibit all vices. . . .
Therefore neither does it prescribe all acts of virtue.12
No special techniques are needed to grasp these arguments of St. Thomas.
However, when the cascade of arguments is compressed, a paraphrase is helpful
in showing the flow of reasoning. Consider the following passage:
Because 
the greatest mitochondrial variations occurred in African people, scientists
concluded that 
they had the longest evolutionary history, indicating 
a probable
African origin for modern humans.13
We might diagram the passage thus:
~
3
~
2
~
1
A paraphrase of this passage, although perhaps more clumsy, exhibits more
fully the cascade of the two arguments that are compressed in it:
1. The more mitochondrial variation in a people, the longer its evolutionary history.
2. The greatest mitochondrial variations occur in African people.
Therefore African people have had the longest evolutionary history.
1. African people have had the longest evolutionary history.
2. Modern humans probably originated where people have had the longest evolution-
ary history.
Therefore modern humans probably originated in Africa.
2
1
3
Analyzing Arguments
44

which shows that the conclusion of the second argument is stated between the con-
clusion and the premise of the first argument, and that the premise of the first argu-
ment is stated between the conclusion and the premise of the second argument.
The diagram also shows that both conclusions are stated before their premises.
That very same diagram shows the logical structure of two related argu-
ments of the Roman philosopher Seneca, in support of the deterrence theory of
punishment. He wrote:
No one punishes because a sin has been committed, 
but in order that a sin will
not be committed. [For] 
what has passed cannot be recalled, but 
what lies in
the future may be prevented.
That “no one punishes because a sin has been committed” is the conclu-
sion of one argument; its premise is that “what has passed cannot be recalled.”
That “[we do punish] in order that a sin will not be committed” is the conclu-
sion of a second argument, whose premise is that “what lies in the future may
be prevented.”
Diagramming and paraphrasing are both very useful tools with which we
can analyze arguments so as to understand more fully the relations of premises
to conclusions.
EXERCISES
A. Diagram each of the following passages, which may contain more than one
argument.
~
4
~
3
~
2
~
1
3
4
1
2
These examples make it evident that the same proposition can serve as a
premise where it occurs as an assumption in an argument; or as a conclusion
where it is claimed to follow from other propositions assumed in an argument.
“Premise” and “conclusion” are always relative terms.
Multiple arguments may be interwoven in patterns more complicated than
cascades, and these will require careful analysis. The diagramming technique
then becomes particularly useful. In John Locke’s Second Treatise of Government,
for example, two arguments are combined in the following passage:
It is not necessary—no, nor so much as convenient—that the legislative should be
always in being; but absolutely necessary that the executive power should, because
there is not always need of new laws to be made, but always need of execution of the
laws that are made.
The component propositions here may be numbered thus: 
It is not neces-
sary or convenient that the legislative [branch of government] should be always in
being; 
it is absolutely necessary that the executive power should be always in
being; 
there is not always need of new laws to be made; 
there is always need
of execution of the laws that are made. The diagram for this passage is
~
4
~
3~
2
~
1
Analyzing Arguments
45

2. At any cost we must have filters on our Ypsilanti Township library com-
puters. Pornography is a scourge on society at every level. Our public
library must not be used to channel this filth to the people of the area.
—Rob. J. and Joan D. Pelkey, The Ann Arbor (Michigan) News, 3 February 2004
3. At his best, Lyndon Johnson was one of the greatest of all American
presidents. He did more for racial justice than any president since
Abraham Lincoln. He built more social protections than anyone since
Franklin Roosevelt. He was probably the greatest legislative politician in
American history. He was also one of the most ambitious idealists. John-
son sought power to use it to accomplish great things.
—Alan Brinkley, “The Making of a War President,” 
The New York Times Book Review, 20 August 2006
4. Married people are healthier and more economically stable than single
people, and children of married people do better on a variety of indicators.
Marriage is thus a socially responsible act. There ought to be some way of
spreading the principle of support for marriage throughout the tax code.
—Anya Bernstein, “Marriage, Fairness and Taxes,” The New York Times, 
15 February 2000
5. The distinguished economist J. K. Galbraith long fought to expose and
improve a society exhibiting “private opulence and public squalor.” In
1
3
4
2
EXAMPLE
1. In a recent attack upon the evils of suburban sprawl, the authors argue
as follows:
The dominant characteristic of sprawl is that each component of a community—
housing, shopping centers, office parks, and civic institutions—is segregated,
physically separated from the others, causing the residents of suburbia to
spend an inordinate amount of time and money moving from one place to the
next. And since nearly everyone drives alone, even a sparsely populated area
can generate the traffic of a much larger traditional town.14
SOLUTION
The dominant characteristic of sprawl is that each component of a
community—housing, shopping centers, office parks, and civic institutions—is
segregated, physically separated from the others, causing 
the residents of
suburbia to spend an inordinate amount of time and money moving from one
place to the next. And since 
nearly everyone drives alone, 
even a sparse-
ly populated area can generate the traffic of a much larger traditional town.
~
4
~
3
~
2
~
1
Analyzing Arguments
46

his classic work, The Affluent Society (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1960),
he argued as follows:
Vacuum cleaners to insure clean houses are praiseworthy and essential in our
standard of living. Street cleaners to insure clean streets are an unfortunate 
expense. Partly as a result, our houses are generally clean and our streets 
generally filthy.
6. Defending the adoption of the euro in place of the pound as the mone-
tary unit of the United Kingdom, Prime Minister Tony Blair said this:
“The argument is simple. We are part of Europe. It affects us directly
and deeply. Therefore we should exercise leadership in order to change
Europe in the direction we want.”
—Reported by Alan Cowell in the The New York Times, 9 December 2001
7. California’s “three strikes and you’re out” law was enacted 10 years ago
this month (March, 2004). Between 1994 and 2002, California’s prison
population grew by 34,724, while that of New York, a state without a
“three strikes” law, grew by 315. Yet during that time period New York’s
violent crime rate dropped 20 percent more than California’s. No better
example exists of how the drop in crime cannot be attributed to dracon-
ian laws with catchy names.
—Vincent Schiraldi, “Punitive Crime Laws,” 
The New York Times, 19 March 2004
8. No one means all he says, and yet very few say all they mean, for words
are slippery and thought is viscous.
—Henry Adams, The Education of Henry Adams (1907)
9. The first impression becomes a self-fulfilling prophesy: we hear what we
expect to hear. The interview is hopelessly biased in favor of the nice.
—Malcom Gladwell, “The New-Boy Network,” The New Yorker, 29 May 2000
10. No government can ever guarantee that the small investor has an equal
chance of winning. It is beyond dishonest to pretend that rules can be
written to prevent future financial scandals. No set of regulations can
insure fairness and transparency in the [securities] markets.
—Lester Thurow, “Government Can’t Make the Market Fair,” 
The New York Times, 23 July 2002
B. There may be one argument or more than one argument in each of the fol-
lowing passages. Paraphrase the premises and conclusions (or use diagrams if
that is helpful) to analyze the arguments found in each passage.
EXAMPLE
1. An outstanding advantage of nuclear over fossil fuel energy is how easy
it is to deal with the waste it produces. Burning fossil fuels produces
27,000 million tons of carbon dioxide yearly, enough to make, if
Analyzing Arguments
47

solidified, a mountain nearly one mile high with a base twelve miles in
circumference. The same quantity of energy produced from nuclear fis-
sion reactions would generate two million times less waste, and it
would occupy a sixteen-meter cube. All of the high-level waste pro-
duced in a year from a nuclear power station would occupy a space
about a cubic meter in size and would fit safely in a concrete pit.
—James Lovelock, The Revenge of Gaia: Earth’s Climate Crisis and the Fate 
of Humanity (New York: Basic Books, 2006)
SOLUTION
An outstanding advantage of nuclear over fossil fuel energy is how easy it is
to deal with the waste it produces. 
Burning fossil fuels produces 27,000 mil-
lion tons of carbon dioxide yearly, enough to make, if solidified, a mountain
nearly one mile high with a base twelve miles in circumference. 
The same
quantity of energy produced from nuclear fission reactions would generate
two million times less waste, and it would occupy a sixteen-meter cube. 
All
of the high level waste produced in a year from a nuclear power station would
occupy a space about a cubic meter in size and would fit safely in a concrete pit.
~
4
~
3
~
2
~
1
2
4
1
3
2. Why decry the wealth gap? First, inequality is correlated with political
instability. Second, inequality is correlated with violent crime. Third,
economic inequality is correlated with reduced life expectancy. A fourth
reason? Simple justice. There is no moral justification for chief execu-
tives being paid hundreds of times more than ordinary employees.
—Richard Hutchinsons, “When the Rich Get Even Richer,” 
The New York Times, 26 January 2000
3. Genes and proteins are discovered, not invented. Inventions are patentable,
discoveries are not. Thus, protein patents are intrinsically flawed.
—Daniel Alroy, “Invention vs. Discovery,” The New York Times, 29 March 2000
4. Ultimately, whaling’s demise in Japan may have little to do with how ma-
jestic, smart, or endangered the mammals are, but a good deal to do with
simple economics. A Japanese newspaper conducted a survey in Japan re-
garding the consumption of whale meat, and reported that of all the thou-
sands of respondents, only 4 percent said that they actually ate whale meat
at least sometimes. The newspaper then wrote this: “A growing number of
Japanese don’t want to eat whale meat. And if they won’t eat it, they won’t
buy it. And if they won’t buy it, say goodbye to Japanese whaling.”
—Reported in Asahi Shimbun, April 2002
5. On the 18th of July, 2002, the Consejo Juvenil Sionista Argentino (Young
Zionists of Argentina) held a mass demonstration to promote
Analyzing Arguments
48

widespread remembrance of the horror of the bombing of the Jewish
Community Center in Buenos Aires, exactly eight years earlier. At this
demonstration the Young Zionists carried a huge banner, which read:
“Sin memoria, no hay justicia. Sin justicia, no hay futuro.” (“Without re-
membrance, there is no justice. Without justice, there is no future.”)
6. Back in 1884, Democratic nominee Grover Cleveland was confronted by
the charge that he had fathered an out-of-wedlock child. While Republi-
cans chanted, “Ma, Ma, where’s my Pa,” Cleveland conceded that he
had been supporting the child. No excuses, no evasions. One of his sup-
porters—one of the first spin doctors—gave this advice to voters:
Since Grover Cleveland has a terrific public record, but a blemished private life,
and since his opponent, James G. Blaine, has a storybook private life but a
checkered public record, why not put both where they perform best—return
Blaine to private life, keep Cleveland in public life.
7. “Wars don’t solve problems; they create them,” said an October 8 letter
about Iraq.
World War II solved problems called Nazi Germany and militaristic
Japan, and created alliances with the nations we crushed. The Revolution-
ary War solved the problem of taxation without representation, and created
the United States of America. The Persian Gulf War solved the problem of
the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. The Civil War solved the problem of slavery.
These wars created a better world. War is the only way to defeat evil
enemies with whom there is no reasoning. It’s either us or them. What
creates true peace is victory.
—Keith Kraska, “Necessary Wars,” 
The New York Times, 15 October 2002
8. In the Crito, Plato presents the position of the Athenian community, per-
sonified as “the Laws,” speaking to Socrates or to any citizen of the
community who may contemplate deliberate disobedience to the state:
He who disobeys us is, as we maintain, thrice wrong; first, because in disobey-
ing us he is disobeying his parents; secondly, because we are the authors of
his education; thirdly, because he has made an agreement with us that he will
duly obey our commands.
9. The reality is that money talks. Court officers, judges and juries treat
private lawyers and their clients differently from those who cannot pay
for representation. Just as better-dressed diners get prime tables at a
restaurant, human nature dictates better results for those who appear to
have money.
—Desiree Buenzle, “Free Counsel and Fairness,” The New York Times, 
15 January 2007
10. The town of Kennesaw, GA passed a mandatory gun ownership law, in
1982, in response to a handgun ban passed in Morton Grove, IL. Kenne-
saw’s crime rate dropped sharply, while Morton Grove’s did not. Crimi-
nals, unsurprisingly, would rather break into a house where they aren’t
at risk of being shot. . . . Criminals are likely to suspect that towns with
Analyzing Arguments
49

laws like these on the books will be unsympathetic to malefactors in
general, and to conclude that they will do better elsewhere. To the ex-
tent that’s true, we’re likely to see other communities adopting similar
laws so that criminals won’t see them as attractive alternatives.
—Glenn Reynolds, “A Rifle in Every Pot,” The New York Times, 16 January 2007
William of Ockham
W
illiam of Ockham, sometimes spelled Occam, (c. 1288–c. 1348) was an
influential Franciscan friar, born in the village in Surrey, England, after
which he was named. Sent while young to a monastery, he went on to
study theology and philosophy at Oxford, and then at the University of Paris,
where he eventually taught.
The great intellectual theme of William’s life was simplification. This
was manifested most famously in what came to be known as “Ockham’s
Razor” —the drive for parsimony in the construction of theories. If any
phenomenon can be explained without the assumption of this or that hy-
pothetical entity, we ought not assume that entity; one should not multi-
ply entities beyond necessity. In metaphysics this drive for simplification
led him to the position known as nominalism: what exists in the universe
are only individuals. The universals, or Platonic forms, of which some
philosophers write, he believed to be no more than the products of ab-
straction by the human mind.
William became deeply involved in the theological controversies of
those medieval days. He was summoned to the Papal court in Avignon
in 1324, apparently under charges of heresy. While there a dispute arose
concerning the poverty of Christ, many zealous Franciscans insisting
that Jesus and his apostles owned no personal property. William came to share
that view; he asserted that Pope John XXII, unwilling to accept the poverty of
Jesus, was himself an heretic. William was then obliged to take refuge in the
court of the Holy Roman Emperor, Ludwig of Bavaria, and while there, not sur-
prisingly, was himself excommunicated. He died in Munich in 1348.
William of Ockham was an inventive logician, suggesting that we might
better rely upon a logical system that did not force us to view all propositions as
either true or false (a so-called two-valued logic), but that a three-valued logic, de-
veloped more fully many centuries later, would permit a better reflection of the
state of our knowledge. Some central logical equivalences, which came later to
be known as De Morgan’s theorems, he well understood and actually wrote out
in words, not having at his disposal the modern notation with which we now
express them.
A powerful and widely respected mind, William of Ockham was referred
to by many as Doctor Invincibilis—“unconquerable teacher.”
Biography
Analyzing Arguments
INTERFOTO/Alamy Images
50

3
6
1
4
5
9
2
7
8
3
Complex Argumentative Passages
Some arguments are exceedingly complicated. Analyzing passages in which sev-
eral arguments are interwoven, with some propositions serving as both premises
and subconclusions while other propositions serve only as premises, and still
others are repeated in different words, can be a challenge. The diagramming
technique is certainly helpful, but there is no mechanical way to determine
whether the diagram actually does represent the author’s intent accurately. More
than one plausible interpretation may be offered, and in that case more than one
diagram can reasonably be used to show the logical structure of that passage.
To analyze fairly, we must strive to understand the flow of the author’s reason-
ing, and to identify the role of each element in the passage as part of that flow. The ex-
amples that follow (in which component propositions have been numbered for
purposes of analysis) show the ways in which we can set forth the connections be-
tween premises and conclusions. Only after that is done, when we have identified the
arguments within a passage and the relations of those arguments, can we go about
deciding whether the conclusions do indeed follow from the premises affirmed.
In the following set of arguments, the final conclusion of the passage appears
in the very first statement, which is not unusual. Four premises directly support
this conclusion; two of these are subconclusions, which in turn are supported, in
different ways, by other premises affirmed in the passage:
It is very unlikely that research using animals will be unnecessary or poorly done. 
Before an experiment using a vertebrate animal is carried out, the protocol for that experi-
ment must be reviewed by an institutional committee that includes a veterinarian and a
member of the public, and 
during the research the animal’s health and care are moni-
tored regularly. 
Researchers need healthy animals for study in science and medicine,
because 
unhealthy animals could lead to erroneous results. This is a powerful incentive
for 
scientists to make certain that any animals they use are healthy and well nourished.
Furthermore, 
research involving animals is expensive, and because 
funding is limit-
ed in science, 
only high-quality research is able to compete effectively for support.15
The following diagram shows the logical structure of this passage. To “read”
the diagram we replace the numbers with the indicated propositions, beginning
with those highest on the page and therefore earliest in the logical cascade. We
thus follow each of the several paths of reasoning to the final conclusion.
~
9
~
8
~
7
~
6
~
5
~
4
~
3
~
2
~
1
Analyzing Arguments
51

Repetition complicates the task of analysis. Individual propositions are some-
times repeated within an argument in differently worded sentences, sometimes
for emphasis and at other times by oversight. The diagram reveals this because
we can assign the same number to different formulations of the same proposition.
The following passage, comprising three distinct arguments, exhibits this confus-
ing duplication of propositions:
The Big Bang theory is crumbling. . . . 
According to orthodox wisdom, the cosmos
began with the Big Bang—an immense, perfectly symmetrical explosion 20 billion years
ago. The problem is that 
astronomers have confirmed by observation the existence of
huge conglomerations of galaxies that are simply too big to have been formed in a mere
20 billion years. . . . Studies based on new data collected by satellite, and backed up by
earlier ground surveys, show that 
galaxies are clustered into vast ribbons that stretch
billions of light years, and 
are separated by voids hundreds of millions of light years
across. Because 
galaxies are observed to travel at only a small fraction of the speed of
light, mathematics shows that 
such large clumps of matter must have taken at least
one hundred billion years to come together—five times as long as the time since the hypo-
thetical Big Bang. . . . 
Structures as big as those now seen can’t be made in 20 billion
years. . . . 
The Big Bang theorizes that matter was spread evenly through the universe.
From this perfection, 
there is no way for such vast clumps to have formed so quickly.16
In this passage the premises that report observational evidence, 
, 
, and
, give reasons for 
, the great length of time that would have had to elapse
since the Big Bang. This passage of time is used to support the subconclusion
(formulated in three slightly different ways) that 
structures as big as those
now seen are too big to have been formed in that period of time. From that sub-
conclusion, combined with 
, a short statement (formulated in two slightly dif-
ferent ways) of the original symmetry and spread that the Big Bang theory
supposes, we infer the final conclusion of the passage, 
: that the Big Bang the-
ory is crumbling—the proposition with which the passage begins. The following
diagram shows this set of logical relations:
~
1
~
2
~
3
~
7
~
6
~
5
~
4
~
3
~
2
~
3
~
7
~
6
~
5
~
4
~
3
~
2
~
1
4
6
7
5
3
2
1
The fact that a premise may appear in compressed form, sometimes as a short
noun phrase, must be borne in mind. In the following argument the phrase “the
scattering in the atmosphere” serves as a premise, 
, that may be reformulated as
~
4
Analyzing Arguments
52

Complex argumentative passages can be entirely cogent. The following com-
plex argument, for example, was offered by a distinguished editor in defense of
her highly controversial editorial policy:
The Journal [the New England Journal of Medicine] . . . has taken the position that 
it
will not publish reports of unethical research, regardless of their scientific merit. . . . There
are three reasons for our position. First, 
the policy of publishing only ethical research, if
generally applied, would deter unethical work. 
Publication is an important part of the
reward system in medical research, and 
investigators would not undertake unethical
studies if they knew the results would not be published. Furthermore, 
any other policy
would tend to lead to more unethical work, because, as I have indicated, 
such studies
may be easier to carry out and thus 
may give their practitioners a competitive edge.
Second, 
denying publication even when the ethical violations are minor protects the
principle of the primacy of the research subject. 
If small lapses were permitted we
would become inured to them, and 
this would lead to larger violations. And finally, 
refusal to publish unethical work serves notice to society at large that even scientists
do not consider science the primary measure of a civilization. 
Knowledge, although
important, may be less important to a decent society than the way it is obtained.18
~
12
~
11
~
10
~
9
~
8
~
7
~
6
~
5
~
4
~
3
~
2
~
1
3
5
6
4
7
8
2
1
“the sun’s energy is scattered in the atmosphere.” This compression, along with
repetition, makes it more difficult to analyze this argument:
Solar-powered cars can never be anything but experimental devices. 
Solar
power is too weak to power even a mini-car for daily use. 
The solar power entering
the atmosphere is about 1 kilowatt per square yard. Because of 
the scattering in the
atmosphere, and because 
the sun shines half a day on the average at any place on
earth, 
average solar power received is 1/6 kilowatt, or 4 kilowatt hours a day. . . .
Tests on full-size cars indicate that 
300,000 watt hours are required in a battery for
an electric car to perform marginally satisfactorily. So, 
40 square yards of cells would
be needed to charge the car batteries, about the size of the roof of a tractor-trailer. 
It
is not undeveloped technologies that put solar power out of the running to be anything
but a magnificently designed experimental car. It is cosmology.17
The first proposition in this passage, asserting that “solar powered cars can
never be more than experimental,” is the final conclusion. It is repeated in more
elaborate form at the end of the passage, as a diagram of the passage shows:
~
1
~
8
~
7
~
6
~
5
~
4
~
3
~
2
~
1
Analyzing Arguments
53

Arguments in newspaper editorials and letters-to-the-editor columns often
fall short of this standard. They may include statements whose role is unclear;
connections among the statements in the argument may be tangled or misstated;
the flow of argument may be confused even in the mind of the author. Logical
analysis, paraphrase supported by diagrams, can expose such deficiencies. By
exhibiting the structure of a reasoning process, we can better see what its
strengths and weaknesses may be. The aim and special province of logic is the
evaluation of arguments, but successful evaluation presupposes a clear grasp of
the structure of the argument in question.
EXERCISES
Each of the following famous passages, taken from classical literature and phi-
losophy, comprises a set of arguments whose complicated interrelations are crit-
ical for the force of the whole. Construct for each the diagram that you would
find most helpful in analyzing the flow of argument in that passage. More than
one interpretation will be defensible.
1. A question arises: whether it be better [for a prince] to be loved than
feared or feared than loved? One should wish to be both, but, because it
is difficult to unite them in one person, it is much safer to be feared than
loved, when, of the two, one must be dispensed with. Because this is to
5
1
7
6
11
2
3
4
9
10
8
12
Again, the final conclusion appears at the beginning of the passage, and the
three major premises that support it directly, 
, and 
, are themselves sup-
ported by various other premises arranged differently. However, each of the
many propositions in the passage has a clear logical role in leading to the conclu-
sion that the passage aims to justify: Reports of research done in unethical ways
will not be published in the New England Journal of Medicine, regardless of their
scientific merit. The following diagram shows the logical structure of this com-
plicated but carefully reasoned passage:
~
11
~
8
~
2
Analyzing Arguments
54

be asserted in general of men, that they are ungrateful, fickle, false, cow-
ards, covetous. . . . and that prince who, relying entirely on their promis-
es, has neglected other precautions, is ruined, because friendships that
are obtained by payments may indeed be earned but they are not se-
cured, and in time of need cannot be relied upon. Men have less scruple
in offending one who is beloved than one who is feared, for love is pre-
served by the link of obligation which, owing to the baseness of men, is
broken at every opportunity for their advantage; but fear preserves you
by a dread of punishment which never fails.
—Niccolò Machiavelli, The Prince, 1515
2. Democratic laws generally tend to promote the welfare of the greatest
possible number; for they emanate from the majority of the citizens,
who are subject to error, but who cannot have an interest opposed to
their own advantage. The laws of an aristocracy tend, on the contrary, to
concentrate wealth and power in the hands of the minority; because an
aristocracy, by its very nature, constitutes a minority. It may therefore be
asserted, as a general proposition, that the purpose of a democracy in its
legislation is more useful to humanity than that of an aristocracy.
—Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, 1835
3. “. . . You appeared to be surprised when I told you, on our first meeting,
that you had come from Afghanistan.”
“You were told, no doubt.”
“Nothing of the sort. I knew you came from Afghanistan. From long
habit the train of thoughts ran so swiftly through my mind that I arrived
at the conclusion without being conscious of intermediate steps. There
were such steps, however. The train of reasoning ran, ‘Here is a gentle-
man of medical type, but with the air of a military man. Clearly an army
doctor, then. He has just come from the tropics, for his face is dark, and
that is not the natural tint of his skin, for his wrists are fair. He has un-
dergone hardship and sickness, as his haggard face says clearly. His left
arm has been injured. He holds it in a stiff and unnatural manner.
Where in the tropics could an English army doctor have seen much
hardship and got his arm wounded? Clearly in Afghanistan.’ The whole
train of thought did not occupy a second. I then remarked that you
came from Afghanistan, and you were astonished.”
“It is simple enough as you explain it,” I said, smiling.
—A. Conan Doyle, A Study in Scarlet, 1887
4. Nothing is demonstrable unless the contrary implies a contradiction.
Nothing that is distinctly conceivable implies a contradiction. Whatever
we conceive as existent, we can also conceive as nonexistent. There is no
being, therefore, whose nonexistence implies a contradiction. Conse-
quently there is no being whose existence is demonstrable.
—David Hume, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, Part IX, 1779
Analyzing Arguments
55

In the Ethics (1677), Baruch Spinoza, one of the most influential of all modern
thinkers, presents a deductive philosophical system in which the central
conclusions—about God, about nature, and about human life and human
freedom—are demonstrated in “geometrical” fashion. Here follows an example.
Proposition 29 of the first book of the Ethics (there are five books in all) reads:
In nature there is nothing contingent, but all things are determined from the necessi-
ty of the divine nature to exist and act in a certain manner.
Immediately after the statement of each proposition in the Ethics appears its
proof. The proof of Prop. 29 (from which internal references to proofs given ear-
lier in the same work have been omitted for the sake of clarity) appears immedi-
ately below. Analyze this proof, by constructing a diagram that shows the
structure of the argument, or by paraphrasing it in a way that makes it clear and
persuasive to a modern reader.
Whatever is, is in God. But God cannot be called a contingent thing, for He exists
necessarily and not contingently. Moreover, the modes of the divine nature [the cre-
ations which depend on, or have been created by, God immediately] have followed
from it necessarily and not contingently. . . . But God is the cause of these modes
not only in so far as they simply exist, but also in so far as they are considered as
determined to any action. If they are not determined by God it is an impossibility
and not a contingency that they should determine themselves; and, on the other
hand, if they are determined by God it is an impossibility and not a contingency that
they should render themselves indeterminate. Wherefore all things are determined
from a necessity of the divine nature, not only to exist, but to exist and act in a cer-
tain manner, and there is nothing contingent. 
Challenge to the Reader
4
Problems in Reasoning
In reasoning we advance from premises known (or affirmed for the purpose) to
conclusions. We construct arguments of our own every day, in deciding how we
shall act, in judging the conduct of others, in defending our moral or political
convictions, and so on. Skill in devising good arguments (and in deciding
whether a proffered argument is good) is of enormous value, and this skill can be
improved with practice. Ancient games of reasoning, such as chess and go, exer-
cise that skill, and there are some widely known commercial games (Clue and
Mastermind are examples) that also have this merit.
Problems may be contrived which are designed to test and strengthen logical
skills; some of these are presented in this section. Such problems are far neater
than those that arise in real life, of course. But solving them may require extend-
ed reasoning in patterns not very different from those employed by a detective, a
journalist, or a juror. Chains of inferences will be needed, in which subconclu-
sions are used as premises in subsequent arguments. Finding the solution may
require the creative recombination of information given earlier or discovered.
Contrived problems can prove frustrating—but solving them, like every successful
Analyzing Arguments
56

application of reasoning, is quite satisfying. In addition to being models for the
employment of reason, logical games and puzzles are good fun. “The enjoyment
of the doubtful,” wrote the philosopher John Dewey, “is a mark of the educated
mind.”
One type of reasoning problem is the common brainteaser in which, using
only the clues provided, we must determine the names or other facts about cer-
tain specified characters. Here is a simple example:
In a certain flight crew, the positions of pilot, copilot, and flight engineer are held by
three persons, Allen, Brown, and Carr, though not necessarily in that order. The co-
pilot, who is an only child, earns the least. Carr, who married Brown’s sister, earns
more than the pilot. What position does each of the three persons hold?
To solve such problems we look first for a sphere in which we have enough
information to reach some conclusions going beyond what is given in the prem-
ises. In this case we know most about Carr: he is not the pilot, because he earns
more than the pilot; and he is not the copilot because the copilot earns the least.
By elimination we may infer that Carr must be the flight engineer. Using that
subconclusion we can determine Brown’s position. Brown is not the copilot be-
cause he has a sister and the copilot is an only child; he is not the flight engineer
because Carr is. Brown must therefore be the pilot. Allen, the only one left, must
therefore be the copilot.
When problems of this type become more complex, it is useful to construct a
graphic display of the alternatives, called a matrix, which we fill in as we accu-
mulate new information. The helpfulness of such a matrix will be seen in solving
the following problem:
Alonzo, Kurt, Rudolf, and Willard are four creative artists of great talent. One is a
dancer, one is a painter, one is a singer, and one is a writer, though not necessarily in
that order.
1. Alonzo and Rudolf were in the audience the night the singer made his debut on
the concert stage.
2. Both Kurt and the writer have had their portraits painted from life by the painter.
3. The writer, whose biography of Willard was a best-seller, is planning to write a
biography of Alonzo.
4. Alonzo has never heard of Rudolf.
What is each man’s artistic field?
To remember the facts asserted in these premises, as well as the subconclu-
sions that may be inferred from them, would be a demanding task. Written notes
could become a confusing clutter. We need a method for storing and exhibiting
the information given and the intermediate conclusions drawn, keeping it all
available for use as the number of inferences increases and the chain of argu-
ments lengthens. The matrix we construct allows us to represent all the relevant
possibilities and to record each inference drawn.
For this problem the matrix must display an array of the four persons (in
four rows) and the four artistic professions (in four columns) that they hold. It
would look like this:
Analyzing Arguments
57

When we conclude that one of those individuals (named at the left of one of
the rows) cannot be the artist whose profession is at the top of one of the
columns, we write an N (for “No”) in the box to the right of that person’s name
and in the column headed by that profession. We can immediately infer, from
premise (1), that neither Alonzo nor Rudolph is the singer, so we place an N to
the right of their names, in the third (singer) column. We can infer from premise
(2) that Kurt is neither the painter nor the writer, so we enter an N to the right of
his name in the second (painter) and the fourth (writer) columns. From premise
(3) we see that the writer is neither Alonzo nor Willard, so we enter an N to the
right of their names in the fourth column. The entries we have made thus far are
all justified by the information given originally, and our matrix now looks like this:
Dancer
Painter
Singer
Writer
Alonzo
Kurt
Rudolf
Willard
Dancer
Painter
Singer
Writer
Alonzo
N
N
Kurt
N
N
Rudolf
N
Willard
N
Dancer
Painter
Singer
Writer
Alonzo
Y
N
N
N
Kurt
N
N
Y
N
Rudolf
N
N
N
Y
Willard
N
Y
N
N
From the information now clearly exhibited, we can conclude by elimination
that Rudolf must be the writer, so we enter a Y (for “Yes”) in the box to the right of
Rudolf’s name in the fourth (writer) column, and we place an N in the other boxes
to the right of his name. The array now makes it evident that the painter must be
either Alonzo or Willard, and we can eliminate Alonzo in this way: Rudolf had his
portrait painted by the painter (from premise 2), and Alonzo has never heard of
Rudolf (from premise 4)—therefore Alonzo cannot be the painter. So we enter an
N to the right of Alonzo’s name under column 2 (painter). We may conclude that
Alonzo must be the dancer, so we enter a Y to the right of Alonzo’s name in the
first (dancer) column. In that same column we can now enter an N for both Kurt
and Willard. The only possible category remaining for Kurt is singer, and there-
fore we enter a Y in that box for him, and an N in the singer column for Willard.
By elimination, we conclude that Willard must be the painter and put a Y in the
last empty box in the matrix. Our completed graphic display looks like this:
Analyzing Arguments
58

1
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Retrograde analysis
Reasoning that seeks to
explain how things must
have developed from
what went before.
Our matrix now filled in, the full solution is evident: Alonzo is the dancer;
Kurt is the singer; Rudolf is the writer; Willard is the painter.
Some brainteasers of this kind, requiring solutions on several dimensions,
are very challenging and almost impossible to solve without using a matrix.
In the real world, we are often called upon to reason from some present state
of affairs to its causes, from what is to what was. Scientists—especially archeolo-
gists, geologists, astronomers, and physicians—commonly confront events or
conditions whose origins are problematic. Reasoning that seeks to explain how
things must have developed from what went before is called retrograde analysis.
For example, to the amazement of astronomers, comet Hyakutake, streaking by
the earth in 1996, was found to be emitting variable X-rays a hundred times
stronger than anyone had ever predicted a comet might emit. A comet expert at
the Max Planck Institute in Germany remarked, “We have our work cut out for us
in explaining these data—but that’s the kind of problem you love to have.”
We do love to have them, and for that reason problems in retrograde analysis
are often devised for amusement. In the real world, logical problems arise with-
in a theoretical framework that is supplied by scientific or historical knowledge;
but in contrived problems that framework must be provided by the problem it-
self. Some rules or laws must be set forth within which logical analysis can pro-
ceed. The chessboard is the setting for the most famous of all problems in
retrograde analysis; the rules of chess provide the needed theoretical context. No
skill in playing chess is required, but readers who are not familiar with the rules
of chess may skip the illustration that follows.
Retrograde problems in chess commonly take this form: An arrangement of
pieces on the chessboard is given; it was reached in a game of chess in which all
the rules of the game were obeyed. What move, or series of moves, has just been
completed? An example of such a problem follows. The diagram presents a posi-
tion reached in an actual game of chess, all moves in that game having been
made in accordance with the rules of chess. The black king has just moved.
Analyzing Arguments
59

For the purpose of analysis, the rows are numbered from bottom to top, 1 to
8, and the columns are lettered from left to right, a to h. Each square on the board
can then be identified by a unique letter-number combination: The black king is
on a8, the white pawn on h2, and so on. The problem is this: The last move was
made by black. What was that move? And what was white’s move just before
that? Can you reason out the solution before reading the next paragraph?
Solution: Because the two kings may never rest on adjacent squares, the
black king could not have moved to its present position from b7 or from b8;
therefore we may be certain that the black king has moved from a7, where it was
in check.
That much is easily deduced. But what preceding white move could have
put the black king in check? No move by the white bishop (on g1) could have
done it, because there would have been no way for that bishop to move to that
square, g1, without the black king having been in check with white to move.
Therefore it must be that the check was discovered by the movement of a white
piece that had been blocking the bishop’s attack and was captured by the black
king on its move to a8. What white piece could have been on that black diago-
nal and moved from there to the white square in the corner? Only a knight that
had been on b6. We may therefore be certain that before black’s last move (the
black king from a7 to a8), white’s last move was that of a white knight from b6
to a8.19
Problems of reasoning that confront us in the real world are rarely this tidy.
Many real problems are not described accurately, and their misdescription may
prove so misleading that no solution can be reached. In cases of that kind, some
part or parts of the description of the problem need to be rejected or replaced.
However, we cannot do this when we are seeking to solve logical puzzles of the
sort presented here.
In the real world, moreover, even when they are described accurately, prob-
lems may be incomplete in that something not originally available may be essen-
tial for the solution. The solution may depend on some additional scientific
discovery, or some previously unimagined invention or equipment, or the search
of some as-yet-unexplored territory. In the statement of a logical puzzle, as in the
writing of a good murder mystery, all the information that is sufficient for the so-
lution must be given; otherwise we feel that the mystery writer, or the problem
maker, has been unfair to us.
Finally, the logical puzzle presents a sharply formulated question (for ex-
ample, which member of the artistic foursome is the singer? What were
black’s and white’s last moves?) whose answer, if given and proved, solves
the problem definitively. But that is not the form in which many real-world
problems arise. Real problems are often identified, initially at least, only by
the recognition of some inconsistency or the occurrence of an unusual event,
or perhaps just by the feeling that something is amiss, rather than by a well-
formed question seeking a clearly defined answer. In spite of these differ-
ences, contrived problems and puzzles are useful in strengthening our
reasoning skills—and they are fun.
Analyzing Arguments
60

EXERCISES
The following problems require reasoning for their solution. To prove that an
answer is correct requires an argument (often containing subsidiary arguments)
whose premises are contained in the statement of the problem—and whose final
conclusion is the answer to it. If the answer is correct, it is possible to construct
a valid argument proving it. In working these problems, readers are urged to
concern themselves not merely with discovering the answers but also with for-
mulating arguments to prove that those answers are correct.
1. In a certain mythical community, politicians never tell the truth, and non-
politicians always tell the truth. A stranger meets three natives and asks the
first of them, “Are you a politician?” The first native answers the question.
The second native then reports that the first native denied being a politi-
cian. The third native says that the first native is a politician.
How many of these three natives are politicians?
2. Of three prisoners in a certain jail, one had normal vision, the second
had only one eye, and the third was totally blind. The jailor told the
prisoners that, from three white hats and two red hats, he would select
three and put them on the prisoners’ heads. None could see what color
hat he wore. The jailor offered freedom to the prisoner with normal vi-
sion if he could tell what color hat he wore. To prevent a lucky guess,
the jailor threatened execution for any incorrect answer. The first prison-
er could not tell what hat he wore. Next the jailor made the same offer
to the one-eyed prisoner. The second prisoner could not tell what hat he
wore either. The jailor did not bother making the offer to the blind pris-
oner, but he agreed to extend the same terms to that prisoner when he
made the request. The blind prisoner said:
I do not need to have my sight;
From what my friends with eyes have said,
I clearly see my hat is _____!
How did he know?
3. On a certain train, the crew consists of the brakeman, the fireman, and the
engineer. Their names, listed alphabetically, are Jones, Robinson, and
Smith. On the train are also three passengers with corresponding names,
Mr. Jones, Mr. Robinson, and Mr. Smith. The following facts are known:
a.
Mr. Robinson lives in Detroit.
b.
The brakeman lives halfway between Detroit and Chicago.
c.
Mr. Jones earns exactly $40,000 a year.
d.
Smith once beat the fireman at billiards.
e.
The brakeman’s next-door neighbor, one of the three passengers
mentioned, earns exactly three times as much as the brakeman.
f.
The passenger living in Chicago has the same name as the brakeman.
What is the engineer’s name?
Analyzing Arguments
61

4. The employees of a small loan company are Mr. Black, Mr. White,
Mrs. Coffee, Miss Ambrose, Mr. Kelly, and Miss Earnshaw. The posi-
tions they occupy are manager, assistant manager, cashier, stenogra-
pher, teller, and clerk, though not necessarily in that order. The
assistant manager is the manager’s grandson, the cashier is the stenog-
rapher’s son-in-law, Mr. Black is a bachelor, Mr. White is twenty-two
years old, Miss Ambrose is the teller’s stepsister, and Mr. Kelly is the
manager’s neighbor.
Who holds each position?
5. Benno Torelli, genial host at Miami’s most exclusive nightclub, was shot
and killed by a racketeer gang because he fell behind in his protection
payments. After considerable effort on the part of the police, five sus-
pects were brought before the district attorney, who asked them what
they had to say for themselves. Each of them made three statements,
two true and one false. Their statements were
Lefty:
I did not kill Torelli. I never owned a revolver in all my
life. Spike did it.
Red:
I did not kill Torelli. I never owned a revolver. The others
are all passing the buck.
Dopey:
I am innocent. I never saw Butch before. Spike is guilty.
Spike:
I am innocent. Butch is the guilty one. Lefty did not tell
the truth when he said I did it.
Butch:
I did not kill Torelli. Red is the guilty one. Dopey and I are
old pals.
Whodunnit?
6. Mr. Short, his sister, his son, and his daughter are fond of golf and often
play together. The following statements are true of their foursome:
a.
The best player’s twin and the worst player are of the opposite sex.
b.
The best player and the worst player are the same age.
Which one of the foursome is the best player?
7. Daniel Kilraine was killed on a lonely road, 2 miles from Pontiac, Michi-
gan, at 3:30 A.M. on March 17 of last year. Otto, Curly, Slim, Mickey, and
the Kid were arrested a week later in Detroit and questioned. Each of
the five made four statements, three of which were true and one of
which was false. One of these persons killed Kilraine.
Their statements were
Otto:
I was in Chicago when Kilraine was murdered. I never
killed anyone. The Kid is the guilty one. Mickey and I
are pals.
Analyzing Arguments
62

Curly:
I did not kill Kilraine. I never owned a revolver in my life.
The Kid knows me. I was in Detroit the night of March 17.
Slim:
Curly lied when he said he never owned a revolver. The
murder was committed on St. Patrick’s Day. Otto was in
Chicago at this time. One of us is guilty.
Mickey:
I did not kill Kilraine. The Kid has never been in Pontiac. I
never saw Otto before. Curly was in Detroit with me on
the night of March 17.
The Kid: I did not kill Kilraine. I have never been in Pontiac. I
never saw Curly before. Otto erred when he said I am
guilty.
Whodunnit?
8. Six balls confront you. Two are red; two are green; two are blue. You
know that in each color pair, one ball is heavier than the other. You also
know that all three of the heavier balls weigh the same, as do all three of
the lighter balls. The six balls (call them R1, R2, G1, G2, B1, and B2) are
otherwise indistinguishable. You have only a balance scale; if equal
weights are placed on the two sides of your scale, they will balance; if
unequal weights are placed on the two sides, the heavier side will go
down. With no more than two weighings on that balance scale, how can
you identify the heavier and the lighter balls in all three pairs?
9. In the same mythical community described in Exercise 1, a stranger
meets three other natives and asks them, “How many of you are politi-
cians?” The first native replies, “We are all politicians.” The second na-
tive says, “No, just two of us are politicians.” The third native then says,
“That isn’t true either.”
Is the third native a politician?
10. Imagine a room with four walls, with a nail placed in the center of each
wall, as well as in the ceiling and floor, six nails in all. The nails are con-
nected to each other by strings, each nail connected to every other nail
by a separate string. These strings are of two colors, red or blue, and of
no other color. All these strings obviously make many triangles, because
any three nails may be considered the apexes of a triangle.
Can the colors of the strings be distributed so that no one triangle
has all three sides (strings) of the same color? If so, how? And if not,
why not?
Analyzing Arguments
63

Here is a final reasoning problem whose solution requires the construction of a
set of sustained arguments. It isn’t easy—but solving it is well within your
power and will give you great pleasure.
You are presented with a set of twelve metal balls, apparently identical in
every respect: size, color, and so on. In fact, eleven of them are identical, but one
of them is “odd”: It differs from all the rest in weight only; it is either heavier, or
lighter, than all the others. You are given a balance scale, on which the balls can
be weighed against one another. If the same number of balls are put on each
side of the balance, and the “odd” ball is on one side, that side will go down if
the odd ball is heavier, or up if the odd ball is lighter; the two sides will balance
if the odd ball is not among those weighed and the same number of balls are
placed on each side. You are allowed three weighings only; any removal or
addition of a ball constitutes a separate weighing.
Your challenge is this: Devise a set of three weighings that will enable you
to identify the odd ball wherever it may lie in a random mixing of the twelve
balls, and that will enable you to determine whether the odd ball is heavier or
lighter than the rest. 
Challenge to the Reader
chapter 
Summary
In this chapter we have discussed techniques for the analysis of arguments, and
some of the difficulties confronted in that process.
In Section 1 we explained the paraphrasing of an argumentative passage, in
which the essential propositions may be reworded (or supplied if they are as-
sumed but missing), and in which premises and conclusions are put into the
most intelligible order.
In Section 2 we explained the diagramming of an argument, in which the
propositions of an argument are represented by numbers, and the relations of the
premises and conclusions are then exhibited graphically in two dimensions, by
showing on a page the relations of those numbered propositions.
In Section 3 we discussed complex argumentative passages, in which the
conclusions of subarguments may serve as premises for further arguments, and
whose complete analysis generally requires an intricate diagram or an extensive
paraphrase.
In Section 4 we discussed contrived problems of reasoning, which often mir-
ror the complexities confronted by many different kinds of investigation in real
life, and whose solutions require the construction of extended sets of arguments
and subarguments.
Analyzing Arguments
64

For additional exercises and tutorials about concepts covered in this
chapter, log in to MyLogicLab at www.mylogiclab.com and select your
current textbook.
END NOTES
1Lawrence v Texas, 539 Us558 (2003).
2This technique was first developed and perfected decades ago by several distinguished logicians: Mon-
roe C. Beardsley, in Practical Logic (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1950); Stephen N. Thomas, in
Practical Reasoning in Natural Language (Englewod Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1973); and Michael Scriven, in
Reasoning (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1976). We follow their lead.
3John Blass “Stem Cell Research: When Does Life Begin?” The New York Times, 25 January 2007.
4Adam Gopnick, “The Unbeautiful Game,” The New Yorker, 8 January 2007.
5James Surowieki, “Dealer’s Choice,” The New Yorker, 4 September 2006.
6Blanchard Hiatt, University of Michigan Research News, September 1979.
7Robert Alter, “Neocon or Not?” The New York Times Book Review, 25 June 2006.
8Karl Marx, Letter #141, 9 April 1870, in Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels Correspondence, 1846–1895 (New
York: International Publishers, 1936).
9Boston Women’s Health Book Collective, Our Bodies, Ourselves (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1984).
10C. A. Quadir, Philosophy and Science in the Islamic World (London: Croom Helm, 1988).
11Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologiae, I, Question 96, Article 2, circa 1265.
12Ibid., Article 3.
13Science, 26 May 1995.
14Paraphrased in part from Andres Duany, Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk, and Jeff Speck, Suburban Nation: The
Rise of Sprawl and the Decline of the American Dream (New York: North Point Press, 2000).
15Science, Medicine, and Animals (Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences, 1991).
16Eric J. Lerner, “For Whom the Bang Tolls,” The New York Times, 2 June 1991.
17Victor Wouk, “You Can’t Drive Solar Cars to Work,” The New York Times, 15 July 1991.
18Marcia Angell, “The Nazi Hypothermia Experiments and Unethical Research Today,” New England
Journal of Medicine, 17 May 1990.
19Readers who find retrograde analysis enjoyable will take delight in a collection of such problems, com-
piled by the logician Raymond Smullyan, and entitled The Chess Mysteries of Sherlock Homes (New York:
Alfred A. Knopf, 1979).
Analyzing Arguments
65

This page intentionally left blank 

Language and Definitions
From Chapter 3 of Introduction to Logic, Fourteenth Edition. Irving M. Copi, Carl Cohen, Kenneth McMahon. 
Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Prentice Hall. All rights reserved.

Language and Definitions
1
Language Functions
2
Emotive Language, Neutral Language, and Disputes
3
Disputes and Ambiguity
4
Definitions and Their Uses
5
The Structure of Definitions: Extension and Intension
6
Definition by Genus and Difference
1
Language Functions
When people reason, they typically do so using language, manipulating proposi-
tions in a logical or informative spirit. But language is used in a great variety of
ways, only some of which are informative. Without the intention to inform, we
may express ourselves using language: “That’s really great!” we may say; and the
poet, overcome by the beauty of an ancient city, channels his emotions in writing
these lines:
Match me such marvel, save in Eastern clime—
A rose-red city—“half as old as time.”1
Of course, some expressive discourse also has informative content, and may
express attitudes as well as beliefs.
Grow old along with me!
The best is yet to be,
The last of life for which the first was made.2
Moreover, some discourse is directive, with or without expressive or informa-
tive elements. It seeks to guide or to command. “Step on the scale, please,” we
may be told, or we may receive this good advice:
Drive defensively. The cemetery is full of law-abiding citizens who had the right of way.
A mixture of functions is a natural feature of almost all our uses of language.
We can see this in our own speech and writing. Emotive language may be used to
advance our purposes in directing others: “That conduct is utterly disgusting!”
says parent to child, expressing an attitude, seeking to direct behavior, and (with
those same words) probably reporting a fact. We may say that language has three
major functions:
1. Informative
2. Expressive
This asset is
intentionally omitted
from this text. It may
be accessed at
www.mcescher.com.
(Waterfall by 
M.C. Escher)
68

3. Directive
To these we may add less common types of use:
4. Ceremonial language (as when we say, “How do you do?” upon being 
introduced to a stranger), in which words may combine expressive and
other functions; and
5. Performative language (as when we say, “I apologize for my foolish 
remark”), in which words themselves serve, when spoken or written, to
perform the function they announce. Other examples are “I congratulate
you, . . .” “I accept your offer, . . .” and “I promise you that. . . .”
Logicians are chiefly concerned with language used informatively–affirming
or denying propositions, formulating or evaluating arguments, and so on.
In reasoning it is this informative function of language that is the principal
concern.
In this informative mode we can distinguish between facts a sentence formu-
lates and facts about the speaker who formulates them. If someone says, “War is
always the wrong solution to international conflict,” that may indeed be true, but
it is also evidence of the beliefs of the person who utters that remark. When some-
one says, “I strongly oppose our involvement in this war on moral grounds,”
that is a statement (very probably true) about the speaker, but it also serves to ex-
press a judgment about the morality of the war under discussion. To open an ar-
gument with a statement of one’s own views is by no means deceptive; it is one
of the common ways in which judgment and biographical report are appropri-
ately integrated.
The uses of language must be distinguished from the forms of language. The
several uses of language (informative, expressive, etc.) are implemented using
different forms. Sentences (the units of our language that express complete
thoughts) may be declarative in form, or exclamatory, or imperative, or interrogative.
When we are reasoning our sentences are usually declarative. When we are ex-
pressing emotion our sentences (e.g., “That’s fantastic!”) are often exclamatory.
When we are seeking to direct conduct our sentences (e.g., “Take off your shirt!”)
are likely to be imperative in form—but there is no strict correlation between
function and form.
For example, we noted earlier that a premise may be affirmed by asking a
rhetorical question. The devout believer asks in prayer, “Who is like unto
Thee?”—but it is plain that this interrogative expresses a religious belief. When
one responds in a conversation, “What can you possibly mean by that?” a skep-
tical attitude is very plainly being expressed. Similarly, a directive function may
be served by reporting a fact in apparently declarative mode, as when we urge a
companion to move more quickly by saying, “It is very late; we are running short
of time.” And the exclamation, “What lovely flowers!” uttered by a young
woman to her gentleman friend as they pass a florist’s window, may be intended
to function more directively than expressively.
Language and Definitions
69

The combination of functions can create a kind of dissonance, even at times
leading to troubling controversy. Here is a famous example: During the Vietnam
War, a young man protesting the military draft was arrested in the Los Angeles
County Courthouse for wearing a jacket on which a deliberate obscenity was
emblazoned. He was convicted of “offensive conduct” under the California
penal code. His conviction was reversed, however, by the Supreme Court of the
United States, whose majority recognized that there was in this case a tension be-
tween the expressive spirit of his language and the informative function of his
protest, the latter being protected by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitu-
tion. Justice John Harlan wrote:
[M]uch linguistic expression serves a dual communicative function: it conveys not only
ideas capable of relatively precise, detached explication, but otherwise inexpressible
emotions as well. In fact, words are often chosen as much for their emotive as their
cognitive force. We cannot sanction the view that the Constitution, while solicitous of
the cognitive content of individual speech, has little or no regard for that emotive func-
tion which, practically speaking, may often be the more important element of the mes-
sage sought to be communicated. . . . and in the same vein, we cannot indulge the
facile assumption that one can forbid particular words without also running a substan-
tial risk of suppressing ideas in the process.3
The emotional offensiveness of some words may (in some contexts) be over-
ridden by their more important informative function. Being sensitive to the flex-
ibility of language, and recognizing the different functions served by language in
a given context, are necessary precursors to the application of the logical analysis
that is our central concern in this chapter.
It would be convenient if a given function were invariably executed using
language in some specific grammatical form, but that is simply not the case. Lan-
guage is too loose, and its uses too variable to expect that. In determining the real
function of a sentence, therefore, context is always critical.
In summary, the principal uses of language are three: informative, expres-
sive, and directive. The grammatical forms of language are essentially four: de-
clarative, interrogative, imperative, and exclamatory. There is no sure connection
between the grammatical form of a passage and the use or uses its author in-
tends. Language that serves any one of the three principal functions may take
any one of the four grammatical forms.
EXERCISES
A. Which of the various functions of language are exemplified by each of the
following passages?
1. Check the box on line 6a unless your parent (or someone else) can claim
you as a dependent on his or her tax return.
—U.S. Internal Revenue Service, “Instructions,” 
Form 1040, 2006
Language and Definitions
70

2. ‘Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
Did gyre and gimble in the wabe;
All mimsy were the borogoves,
And the mome raths outgrabe.
—Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass, 1871
3. What traveler among the ruins of Carthage, of Palmyra, Persepolis, or
Rome, has not been stimulated to reflections on the transiency of king-
doms and men, and to sadness at the thought of a vigorous and rich life
now departed . . . ?
—G. W. F. Hegel, Lectures on the Philosophy of History, 1823
4. Moving due south from the center of Detroit, the first foreign country
one encounters is not Cuba, nor is it Honduras or Nicaragua or any
other Latin American nation; it is Canada.
5. I was a child and she was a child,
In this kingdom by the sea,
But we loved with a love that was more than love—
I and my Annabel Lee—
—Edgar Allan Poe, “Annabel Lee,” 1849
6. Reject the weakness of missionaries who teach neither love nor brother-
hood, but chiefly the virtues of private profit from capital, stolen from
your land and labor. Africa awake, put on the beautiful robes of Pan-
African Socialism!
—W. E. B. Dubois, “Pan-Africa,” 1958
7. If I speak in the tongues of men and of angels, but have not love, I am a
noisy gong or a clanging cymbal.
—I Cor. 13:1
8. I herewith notify you that at this date and through this document I
resign the office of President of the Republic to which I was elected.
—President Fernando Collor De Mello, in a letter to the Senate of Brazil, 
29 December 1992
9. American life is a powerful solvent. It seems to neutralize every
intellectual element, however tough and alien it may be, and to fuse
it in the native good will, complacency, thoughtlessness, and
optimism.
—George Santayana, Character and Opinion in the United States, 1934
10. The easternmost point of land in the United States—as well as the
northernmost point and the westernmost point—is in Alaska.
B. What language functions are most probably intended to be served by each of
the following passages?
Language and Definitions
71

1. There is no caste here. Our Constitution is color-blind, and neither
knows nor tolerates classes among citizens. In respect of civil rights, all
citizens are equal before the law. The humblest is the peer of the most
powerful.
—Justice John Harlan, dissenting in Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537, 1896
2. Judges do not know how to rehabilitate criminals—because no one
knows.
—Andrew Von Hirsch, Doing Justice—The Choice of Punishment
(New York: Hill & Wang, 1976)
3. When tillage begins, other arts follow. The farmers therefore are the
founders of human civilization.
—Daniel Webster, “On Agriculture,” 1840
4. The only thing necessary for the triumph of evil is for good men to do
nothing.
—Edmund Burke, letter to William Smith, 1795
5. They have no lawyers among them, for they consider them as a sort of
people whose profession it is to disguise matters.
—Sir Thomas More, Utopia, 1516
6. White society is deeply implicated in the ghetto. White institutions 
created it, white institutions maintain it, and white society condones it.
—The National Commission on Civil Disorders (Kerner Commission), 1968
7. The bad workmen who form the majority of the operatives in many
branches of industry are decidedly of the opinion that bad workmen
ought to receive the same wages as good.
—John Stuart Mill, On Liberty, 1859
8. War is the greatest plague that can afflict humanity; it destroys
religion, it destroys states, it destroys families. Any scourge is preferable
to it.
—Martin Luther, Table Talk, 1566
9. Human history becomes more and more a race between education and
catastrophe.
—H. G. Wells, The Outline of History, 1920
10. The man who insists upon seeing with perfect clearness before he de-
cides, never decides.
—Henri-Frédéric Amiel, Amiel’s Journal, 1885
11. Among other evils which being unarmed brings you, it causes you to be
despised.
—Niccolò Machiavelli, The Prince, 1515
12. Eternal peace is a dream, and not even a beautiful one. War is a part of
God’s world order. In it are developed the noblest virtues of man:
courage and abnegation, dutifulness and self-sacrifice. Without war the
world would sink into materialism.
—Helmuth von Moltke, 1892
Language and Definitions
72

13. Language! the blood of the soul, sir, into which our thoughts run, and
out of which they grow.
—Oliver Wendell Holmes, The Autocrat of the Breakfast-Table, 1858
14. Over the past 133 years, more than 7,500 scientists, including social sci-
entists, have been elected to the National Academy of Sciences. It
appears that only three of them have been black.
—The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education, Summer 1996
15. A little philosophy inclineth man’s mind to atheism; but depth in
philosophy bringeth man’s mind about to religion.
—Francis Bacon, Essays, 1601
16. You’ll never have a quiet world until you knock the patriotism out of
the human race.
—George Bernard Shaw, O’Flaherty, V.C., 1915
17. If [he] does really think that there is no distinction between virtue and
vice, why, sir, when he leaves our houses let us count our spoons.
—Samuel Johnson, 1763
18. Man scans with scrupulous care the character and pedigree of his hors-
es, cattle, and dogs before he matches them; but when he comes to his
own marriage he rarely, or never, takes any such care.
—Charles Darwin, The Descent of Man, 1871
19. The story of the whale swallowing Jonah, though a whale is large
enough to do it, borders greatly on the marvelous; but it would have 
approached nearer to the idea of miracle if Jonah had swallowed the
whale.
—Thomas Paine, The Age of Reason, 1796
20. The notion of race is the hydra-headed monster which stifles our most
beautiful dreams before they are fairly dreamt, calling us away from the
challenges of normal human interaction to a dissonance of suspicion
and hatred in pursuit of a fantasy that never was.
—C. Eric Lincoln, Coming Through the Fire
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1996)
C. For the following passages, indicate what propositions they may be intended to
assert, if any; what overt actions they may be intended to cause, if any; and what
they may be regarded as providing evidence for about the speaker, if anything.
1. I will not accept if nominated and will not serve if elected.
—William Tecumseh Sherman, message to the 
Republican National Convention, 1884
2. The government in its wisdom considers ice a “food product.” This
means that Antarctica is one of the world’s foremost food producers.
—George P. Will
3. Mankind has grown strong in eternal struggles and it will only perish
through eternal peace.
—Adolf Hitler, Mein Kampf, 1925
Language and Definitions
73

4. Without music, earth is like a barren, incomplete house with the
dwellers missing. Therefore the earliest Greek history and Biblical histo-
ry, nay the history of every nation, begins with music.
—Ludwig Tieck, quoted in Paul Henry Lang, Music in Western Civilization
(New York: W. W. Norton, 1941)
5. Research is fundamentally a state of mind involving continual reexami-
nation of doctrines and axioms upon which current thought and action
are based. It is, therefore, critical of existing practices.
—Theobald Smith, American Journal of Medical Science, 1929
6. I have tried sedulously not to laugh at the acts of man, nor to lament
them, nor to detest them, but to understand them.
—Baruch Spinoza, Tractatus Theologico-politicus, 1670
7. Of what use is political liberty to those who have no bread? It is of value
only to ambitious theorists and politicians.
—Jean-Paul Marat, L’Ami du peuple, 1789
8. While there is a lower class I am in it, while there is a criminal element I
am of it, and while there is a soul in prison I am not free.
—Eugene Debs, 1918
9. If there were a nation of gods they would be governed democratically,
but so perfect a government is not suitable to men.
—Jean-Jacques Rousseau, The Social Contract, 1762
10. There are three classes of citizens. The first are the rich, who are indolent
and yet always crave more. The second are the poor, who have nothing,
are full of envy, hate the rich, and are easily led by demagogues.
Between the two extremes lie those who make the state secure and up-
hold the laws.
—Euripides, The Suppliant Women
11. I am convinced that turbulence as well as every other evil temper of this
evil age belongs not to the lower but to the middle classes—those
middle classes of whom in our folly we are so wont to boast.
—Lord Robert Cecil, Diary in Australia, 1852
12. God will see to it that war shall always recur, as a drastic medicine for
ailing humanity.
—Heinrich von Treitschke, Politik, 1916
13. I would rather that the people should wonder why I wasn’t President
than why I am.
—Salmon P. Chase, at the Republican National Convention, 1860
14. He [Benjamin Disraeli] is a self-made man, and worships his creator.
—John Bright, 1882
15. We hear about constitutional rights, free speech and the free press. Every
time I hear these words I say to myself, “That man is a Red, that man is a
Communist.” You never heard a real American talk in that manner.
—Frank Hague, speech before the Jersey City Chamber of Commerce, 
12 January 1938
Language and Definitions
74

16. Even a fool, when he holdeth his peace, is counted wise: And he that
shutteth his lips is esteemed a man of understanding.
—Prov. 17:28
17. A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in ornaments of silver.
—Prov. 25:11
18. I have sworn upon the altar of God eternal hostility against every form
of tyranny over the mind of man.
—Thomas Jefferson, 1800
19. A free man thinks of nothing less than of death, and his wisdom is not a
meditation upon death but upon life.
—Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, 1677
20. I have seen, and heard, much of Cockney impudence before now; but
never expected to hear a coxcomb ask two hundred guineas for flinging
a pot of paint in the public’s face.
—John Ruskin, on Whistler’s painting, 
Nocturne in Black and Gold, 1878
2
Emotive Language, Neutral Language, 
and Disputes
Because a given sentence, or passage, can serve several functions—that is, for ex-
ample, it can express feelings while reporting facts—the clever use of language
can be deceptive or manipulative, and the careless use of language can lead to
needless misunderstanding and dispute.
The words we use to convey beliefs may be neutral and exact, but they may
also have (by accident or by design) an impact on the attitudes of our listeners. A
rose by any other name would smell as sweet (as Shakespeare wrote), but our re-
sponse to a flower is likely to be influenced if we are told, as it is handed to us,
that it is commonly called “skunkweed.” The negative attitudes that are com-
monly evoked by some words lead to the creation of euphemisms to replace
them—gentle words for harsh realities. Janitors become “maintenance workers,”
and then “custodians.” “Waiters” become “waitpersons,” and then “servers”—
and so on.
The medical vocabulary dealing with human reproduction and elimination
is neutral and not offensive, but the four-letter words that are vulgar synonyms
of those medical terms are shocking to many because of the attitudes they evoke.
There are “seven dirty words” that may not be used on the broadcast media in
the United States—because they have unacceptable emotive meanings that are
sharply distinguishable from their literal meanings.4
Emotionally colored language is appropriate in some contexts—in poetry
for example—but it is highly inappropriate in other contexts, for example, in
Language and Definitions
75

survey research. The responses to a survey will certainly depend in good meas-
ure on the words used in asking the questions. Whether we should avoid emo-
tive language, or rely on it, depends on the purpose language is intended to
serve in the context. If we aim to provide an unbiased report of facts, we un-
dermine that objective if we use words that are heavily charged with emotion-
al meaning. Sometimes, however, it is nearly impossible to avoid some emotive
content—such as when those in conflict about the morality of abortion call
themselves either “pro-life,” or “pro-choice.” In logic we generally strive for
language that is, so far as possible, free of the distortion that emotive meanings
introduce.
Playing on the emotions of readers and listeners is a central technique in the
advertising industry. When the overriding aims are to persuade and sell, manip-
ulating attitudes becomes a sophisticated professional art. Rhetorical tricks are
also common in political campaigns, and the choice of words is critical. The best
defense against trickery, for voters as for consumers, is an awareness of the real
uses to which the language before us is being put. We must be on guard against
those who use words to make the worse appear the better cause. “With words,”
said Benjamin Disraeli, “we govern men.”
When parties are in dispute, the differences between them that lead to that
dispute may be disagreements in beliefs about the facts, or disagreements in atti-
tude about facts that are actually agreed upon. This uncertainty, and the confu-
sion to which it can lead, may arise because the words being used in the dispute
have very different emotive meanings. To illustrate this, imagine a dispute be-
tween X and Y about legislation authorizing the death penalty for murder. X and
Y may agree or disagree about the facts: whether capital punishment really is an
effective deterrent to murder. They may also agree or disagree about whether it
is right for the state to execute criminals, whatever may be the facts about its de-
terrent effectiveness. So it is possible that they could agree about factual beliefs
but disagree in their attitudes, or they might agree in their attitudes but disagree
about their beliefs. It is also possible, of course, that they disagree both in attitude
and in belief.
When one seeks to resolve disputes that have both factual and emotional
aspects, it is important to determine what really is at issue between the disput-
ing parties. If the disagreement truly is one about whether the death penalty
deters in fact, then resolution of the dispute will require, first, an effort to deter-
mine those facts objectively—although this may not be easy to do. If, on the
other hand, the disagreement arises from conflicting convictions about the
rightness of state-authorized executions, whether or not the death penalty de-
ters, coming to agreement about the facts is likely to prove insufficient to re-
solve the dispute.
In many cases a disagreement in attitude about some event or possible out-
come is rooted in a disagreement in some belief about facts; in other cases it is
not. One of the greatest of all football coaches and one of the greatest of all writ-
ers on sports differed profoundly about the importance of winning. Wrote the
journalist, Grantland Rice:
Language and Definitions
76

For when the One Great Scorer comes
To write against your name,
He marks—not that you won or lost—
But how you played the game.
Said the coach, Vince Lombardi:
Winning isn’t everything. It’s the only thing.
Do you believe that this disagreement in attitude was rooted in a disagree-
ment in belief?
Of course, we do not reach agreement simply by recognizing the nature of
the dispute. But until we recognize the real nature of a dispute, and the differing
functions of the language used by the conflicting parties, it is unlikely that the
resolution of differences can be achieved.
EXERCISES
Identify the kinds of agreement or disagreement most probably exhibited by the
following pairs:
1. a. Answer a fool according to his folly,
Lest he be wise in his own conceit.
—Prov. 26:5
b. Answer not a fool according to his folly,
Lest thou also be like unto him.
—Prov. 26:4
2. a. Our country: in her intercourse with foreign nations may she always
be in the right; but our country, right or wrong!
—Stephen Decatur, toast at a dinner in Norfolk, Virginia, April 1816
b. Our country, right or wrong. When right, to be kept right; when
wrong, to be put right.
—Carl Schurz, speech in the U.S. Senate, January 1872
3. a. A bad peace is even worse than war.
—Tacitus, Annals
b. The most disadvantageous peace is better than the most just war.
—Desiderius Erasmus, Adagia, 1539
4. a. A stitch in time saves nine.
b. Better late than never.
5. a. Absence makes the heart grow fonder.
b. Out of sight, out of mind.
6. a. The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong.
—Eccl. 9:11
b. But that’s the way to bet.
—Jimmy the Greek
Language and Definitions
77

7. a. For that some should rule and others be ruled is a thing not only nec-
essary, but expedient; from the hour of their birth, some are marked
out for subjection, others for rule. . . . It is clear, then, that some men
are by nature free, and others slaves, and that for these latter slavery
is both expedient and right.
—Aristotle, Politics
b. If there are some who are slaves by nature, the reason is that men
were made slaves against nature. Force made the first slaves, and
slavery, by degrading and corrupting its victims, perpetuated their
bondage.
—Jean-Jacques Rousseau, The Social Contract, 1762
8. a. War alone brings up to its highest tension all human energy and
puts the stamp of nobility upon the peoples who have the courage to
face it.
—Benito Mussolini, Encyclopedia Italiana, 1932
b. War crushes with bloody heel all justice, all happiness, all that is
Godlike in man. In our age there can be no peace that is not honor-
able; there can be no war that is not dishonorable.
—Charles Sumner, Addresses on War, 1904
9. a. Next in importance to freedom and justice is popular education,
without which neither freedom nor justice can be permanently
maintained.
—James A. Garfield, 1880
b. Education is fatal to anyone with a spark of artistic feeling. Educa-
tion should be confined to clerks, and even them it drives to drink.
Will the world learn that we never learn anything that we did not
know before?
—George Moore, Confessions of a Young Man, 1888
10. a. Belief in the existence of god is as groundless as it is useless. The
world will never be happy until atheism is universal.
—J. O. La Mettrie, L’Homme Machine, 1865
b. Nearly all atheists on record have been men of extremely debauched
and vile conduct.
—J. P. Smith, Instructions on Christian Theology
11. a. I know of no pursuit in which more real and important services
can be rendered to any country than by improving its agriculture,
its breed of useful animals, and other branches of a husbandsman’s
cares.
—George Washington, in a letter to John Sinclair
b. With the introduction of agriculture mankind entered upon a
long period of meanness, misery, and madness, from which
they are only now being freed by the beneficent operations of
the machine.
—Bertrand Russell, The Conquest of Happiness, 1930
Language and Definitions
78

12. a. Whenever there is, in any country, uncultivated land and unem-
ployed poor, it is clear that the laws of property have been so far
extended as to violate natural right.
—Thomas Jefferson
b. Every man has by nature the right to possess property of his own.
This is one of the chief points of distinction between man and the
lower animals.
—Pope Leo XIII, Rerum Novarum, 1891
13. a. The right of revolution is an inherent one. When people are op-
pressed by their government, it is a natural right they enjoy to relieve
themselves of the oppression, if they are strong enough, either by
withdrawal from it, or by overthrowing it and substituting a govern-
ment more acceptable.
—Ulysses S. Grant, Personal Memoirs, vol. 1
b. Inciting to revolution is treason, not only against man, but against
God.
—Pope Leo XIII, Immortale Dei, 1885
14. a. Language is the armory of the human mind; and at once contains the
trophies of its past, and the weapons of its future conquests.
—Samuel Taylor Coleridge
b. Language—human language—after all, is little better than the croak
and cackle of fowls, and other utterances of brute nature—sometimes
not so adequate.
—Nathaniel Hawthorne, American Notebooks, 1835
15. a. How does it become a man to behave towards the American govern-
ment today? I answer, that he cannot without disgrace be associated
with it.
—Henry David Thoreau, An Essay on Civil Disobedience, 1849
b. With all the imperfections of our present government, it is without
comparison the best existing, or that ever did exist.
—Thomas Jefferson
3
Disputes and Ambiguity
Many disputes, whether about beliefs or about attitudes, are genuine. However,
some disputes are merely verbal, arising only as a result of linguistic misunder-
standing. The terms used by the disputing parties may have more than one
meaning—they may be ambiguous—but such ambiguity may be unrecognized by
the disputing parties. To uncover and to resolve verbal disagreements, ambigui-
ties must be identified, and the alternative meanings of the critical terms in the
dispute must be distinguished and clarified.
Disputes fall into three categories. The first is the obviously genuine dispute. If
A roots for the Yankees, and B for the Red Sox, they are in genuine disagreement,
although they disagree mainly in attitude. If C believes that Miami is south of
Language and Definitions
79

Honolulu, and D denies this, they too are in genuine disagreement, but in this
dispute about geographic facts a good map can settle the matter.
A second category is disputes in which the apparent conflict is not genuine
and can be resolved by coming to agreement about how some word or phrase is
to be understood. These may be called merely verbal disputes. F may hold that a
tree falling in the wilderness with no person to hear it creates no sound, while G
insists that a sound really is produced by the falling tree. If a “sound” is the out-
come of a human auditory sensation, then F and G may agree that there was
none; or if a “sound” is simply what is produced by vibrations in the air, then
they may agree that a sound was indeed produced. Getting clear about what is
meant by “sound” will resolve the disagreement, which was no more than verbal.
A third category, more slippery, is disputes that are apparently verbal but really
genuine. A misunderstanding about the use of terms may be involved in such
cases, but when that misunderstanding has been cleared up there remains a dis-
agreement that goes beyond the meanings of the words. For example, should a
film in which explicit sexual activity is depicted be considered “pornography”?
J holds that its explicitness makes it pornographic and offensive; K holds that its
beauty and sensitivity make it art and not pornography. Plainly they disagree
about what “pornography” means—but after that ambiguity has been exposed,
it is likely that the parties will still disagree in their judgment of that film.
Whether the film is “pornographic” may be settled by a definition of that term,
but a deeper disagreement is then likely to be exposed. The word “pornograph-
ic” plainly carries pejorative associations. J, who finds the film objectionable, un-
derstands the word “pornographic” in one way, while K, who approves of the
film, uses the word “pornographic” differently. Does the sexually explicit con-
tent of the film make it objectionable and thus “pornographic”? J and K differ in
their uses of the word, but for both of them the emotional meaning of the word is
very negative; and they also differ about the criteria for the application of that
negative word, “pornography.”
In summary, when confronting a dispute that arises in discourse, we must
first ask whether there is some ambiguity that can be eliminated by clarifying the
alternative meanings in play. If there is, then we must ask whether clearing up
that linguistic issue will resolve the matter. If it does, the dispute was indeed
merely verbal. If it does not, the dispute was genuine, although it may have ap-
peared to be merely verbal.
EXERCISES
A. Identify three disagreements in current political or social controversy that
are of the three types described in this section: one that is genuine, one that is
merely verbal, and one that is apparently verbal but really genuine. Explain the
disagreements in each case.
B. Discuss each of the following disputes. If the dispute is obviously genuine,
indicate each of the disputers’ positions with respect to the proposition at issue.
Language and Definitions
80

If it is merely verbal, resolve it by explaining the different senses attached by the
disputers to the key word or phrase that is used ambiguously. If it is an appar-
ently verbal dispute that is really genuine, locate the ambiguity and explain the
real disagreement involved.
1.
Daye:
Pete Rose was the greatest hitter in the history of baseball.
He got more hits than any other major-league player.
Knight:
No, Barry Bonds deserves that title. He hit more home
runs than any other major-league player.
2. 
Daye:
Despite their great age, the plays of Sophocles are enor-
mously relevant today. They deal with eternally recurring
problems and values such as love and sacrifice, the con-
flict of generations, life and death—as central today as
they were over two thousand years ago.
Knight:
I don’t agree with you at all. Sophocles has nothing to say
about the pressing and immediate issues of our time:
inflation, unemployment, the population explosion, and
the energy crisis. His plays have no relevance to today.
3. 
Daye:
Bob Jones is certainly a wonderful father to his children.
He provides a beautiful home in a fine neighborhood,
buys them everything they need or want, and has made
ample provision for their education.
Knight:
I don’t think Bob Jones is a good father at all. He is so
busy getting and spending that he has no time to be with
his children. They hardly know him except as somebody
who pays the bills.
4. 
Daye:
Amalgamated General Corporation’s earnings were higher
than ever last year, I see by reading their annual report.
Knight:
No, their earnings were really much lower than in the
preceding year, and they have been cited by the Securities
and Exchange Commission for issuing a false and 
misleading report.
5. 
Daye:
Business continues to be good for National Conglomerate,
Inc. Their sales so far this year are 25 percent higher than
they were at this time last year.
Knight:
No, their business is not so good now. Their profits so far
this year are 30 percent lower than they were last year at
this time.
6. 
Daye:
Ann is an excellent student. She takes a lively interest in
everything and asks very intelligent questions in class.
Knight:
Ann is one of the worst students I’ve ever seen. She never
gets her assignments in on time.
Language and Definitions
81

7. 
Daye:
Tom did it of his own free will. No pressure was brought
to bear on him; no threats were made; no inducements
were offered; there was no hint of force. He deliberated
about it and made up his own mind.
Knight:
That is impossible. Nobody has free will, because every-
thing anyone does is inevitably determined by heredity
and environment according to inexorable causal laws of
nature.
8. 
Daye:
Professor Graybeard is one of the most productive schol-
ars at the university. The bibliography of his publications
is longer than that of any of his colleagues.
Knight:
I wouldn’t call him a productive scholar. He is a great
teacher, but he has never produced any new ideas or dis-
coveries in his entire career.
9. 
Daye:
Betty finally got rid of that old Chevy and bought herself
a new car. She’s driving a Buick now.
Knight:
No, Betty didn’t buy herself a new car. That Buick is a
good three years old.
10. 
Daye:
Dick finally got rid of that old Ford of his and bought
himself a new car. He’s driving a Pontiac now.
Knight:
No, Dick didn’t buy himself a new car. It’s his roommate’s
new Pontiac that he’s driving.
11. 
Daye:
Helen lives a long way from campus. I walked out to see
her the other day, and it took me nearly two hours to get
there.
Knight:
No, Helen doesn’t live such a long way from campus. I
drove her home last night, and we reached her place in
less than ten minutes.
12. 
Daye:
Senator Gray is a fine man and a genuine liberal. He
votes for every progressive measure that comes before
the legislature.
Knight:
He is no liberal, in my opinion. The old skinflint con-
tributes less money to worthy causes than any other man
in his income bracket.
13. 
Daye:
The University of Winnemac overemphasizes athletics,
for it has the largest college stadium in the world and has
constructed new sports buildings instead of badly needed
classroom space.
Knight:
No, the University of Winnemac does not overemphasize
athletics. Its academic standards are very high, and it
sponsors a wide range of extracurricular activities for stu-
dents in addition to its athletic program.
Language and Definitions
82

14. 
Daye:
It was in bad taste to serve roast beef at the banquet.
There were Hindus present, and it is against their religion
to eat beef.
Knight:
Bad taste, nothing! That was the tastiest meal I’ve had in a
long time. I think it was delicious!
15. 
Daye:
Don’t ask your wife about it. You ought to use your own
judgment.
Knight:
I will use my own judgment, and in my judgment, I
should ask my wife.
4
Definitions and Their Uses
Good definitions are plainly very helpful in eliminating verbal disputes, but
there are other uses of definition that are important in logic. Before distinguish-
ing these uses, one feature of all definitions must be emphasized: Definitions are
definitions of symbols (not of objects), because only symbols have the meanings
that definitions may explain. To illustrate, we can define the word “chair” be-
cause it has meaning; but a chair itself we cannot define. We can sit on a chair, or
paint it, or burn it, or describe it—but we cannot define it because an actual chair
is not a symbol that has a meaning to be explained. Sometimes we say, mislead-
ingly, that the thing is being defined; in fact, what we define are always symbols.
Two commonly used technical terms are useful in discussing definitions. The
definiendum is the symbol being defined. The definiens is the symbol (or group
of symbols) used to explain the meaning of the definiendum. Put otherwise, the
definiendum is the term to be defined and the definiens is the definition of it. How-
ever, it would be a mistake to say that the definiens is the meaning of the
definiendum—rather, it is another symbol (or group of symbols) that has the same
meaning as the definiendum.
With this preface, we may say that definitions, depending on how they are
used, are of five kinds: (1) stipulative, (2) lexical, (3) precising, (4) theoretical, and
(5) persuasive. We shall consider each in turn:
A. Stipulative Definitions
A definition that has a meaning that is deliberately assigned to some symbol is
called a stipulative definition. One who introduces a new symbol is free to as-
sign to it, or stipulate, whatever meaning she cares to. Even an old term put into a
new context may have its meaning stipulated. Definitions of this sort are some-
times called nominal.
Why introduce a term by stipulation? Many reasons can justify doing so. It
may simply be convenient; one word may stand for many words in a message. It
may protect secrecy, if the sender and the receiver are the only persons who un-
derstand the stipulation. It may advance economy of expression. In the sciences,
new symbols are often defined by stipulation to mean what has been meant by a
long sequence of familiar words, thus saving time and increasing clarity. Many
Language and Definitions
Definiendum
In any definition, the
word or symbol being
defined.
Definiens
In any definition, a
symbol or group of
symbols that is said to
have the same meaning
as the definiendum.
Stipulative definition
A definition in which a
new symbol is
introduced to which
some meaning is
arbitrarily assigned; as
opposed to a lexical
definition, a stipulative
definition cannot be
correct or incorrect.
83

numbers that would be cumbersome to write out, for example, have been given
names by stipulation: The prefix “zetta-” has been stipulatively defined as the
number equal to a billion trillions (1021), and the prefix “yotta-” as the number
equal to a trillion trillions (1024). These were defined stipulatively in 1991 by the
Conférence générale des poids et mesures (General Committee on Weights and
Measures), the international body that governs in the realm of scientific units. At
the other extreme, “zepto-” has been stipulatively defined as “a billionth of a tril-
lionth,” and “yocto-” as a trillionth of a trillionth. Perhaps the most famous of all
stipulations was the arbitrary naming of the number 10100 (represented by the
digit 1 followed by 100 zeros) as a “googol”—a name suggested by the 9-year-old
nephew of the mathematician, Edward Kasner, when he was asked for a word
that might appropriately represent a very large number. The name of the now-fa-
mous Internet search firm, Google, is a deliberate misspelling of this term.
Some stipulative definitions are introduced in science to free the investigator
from the distractions of the emotive associations of more familiar terms. In mod-
ern psychology, for example, the word “intelligence” is widely replaced by Spear-
man’s “g factor”—a term intended to convey the same descriptive meaning
without any emotional baggage. Excitement and interest may also be provided by
introducing a catchy new term, as when “black hole” was introduced to replace
“gravitationally completely collapsed star.” The term was introduced by Dr. John
Archibald Wheeler at a 1967 meeting of the Institute for Space Studies in New
York City. The word “quark,” now widely used in physics, was introduced by the
physicist Murray Gell-Mann in 1963 to name a type of subatomic particle about
which he had been theorizing. In James Joyce’s novel Finnegan’s Wake, the word
“quark” appears in the line, “Three quarks for Muster Mark,” but Dr. Gell-Mann
reported that he had chosen this name for the particle before he had encountered
it in that novel. In philosophy, Charles Sanders Peirce had long referred to his phi-
losophy as “pragmatism,” but when that word came to be used carelessly he stip-
ulated that his views would henceforth be known as “pragmaticism”—a word
that is ugly enough, he said, that no one would want to steal it!
A stipulative definition is neither true nor false; it is neither accurate nor in-
accurate. A symbol defined by a stipulative definition did not have that meaning
before it was given that meaning by the definition, so the definition cannot be a
report of the term’s meaning. For anyone who accepts the stipulative definition,
the definiendum and the definiens have the same meaning; that is a consequence of
the definition, not a fact asserted by it. A stipulative definition is a proposal (or a res-
olution or a request or an instruction) to use the definiendum to mean what is meant
by the definiens. Such a definition is therefore directive rather than informative.
Proposals may be rejected, requests refused, instructions disobeyed—but they
can be neither true nor false.
Stipulative definitions may be evaluated as useful in advancing some pur-
pose, or as useless because they are too complex or unclear, but they cannot re-
solve genuine disagreements. By reducing the emotive role of language, however,
and by simplifying discourse, they can help to prevent fruitless conflict.
Language and Definitions
84

B. Lexical Definitions
Most often the term being defined has some established use. When the purpose
of the definition is to explain that use, or to eliminate ambiguity, the definition is
called lexical. A lexical definition reports a meaning the definiendum already has.
That report may be correct or incorrect—and therefore it is clear that a lexical
definition may be either true or false. Thus the definition “the word ‘bird’ means
any warm-blooded vertebrate with feathers” is true; that is a correct report of
how the word “bird” is generally used by speakers of English. On the other
hand, the definition “the word ‘bird’ means any two-footed mammal” is obvi-
ously false.
Mistakes in word usage are usually not so obvious. We may call muddy
water “turgid” when we mean to say that it is “turbid”; the lexical definition of
“turgid” is “swollen” or “pompous.” Some mistakes are downright funny, as
when Mrs. Malaprop, a comically misspeaking character of the Restoration
dramatist Richard Sheridan, gives the order to “illiterate him . . . from your
memory” or uses the phrase “as headstrong as an allegory on the banks of the
Nile.” Nor are such confusions always fictional. At a U.S. university not long
ago, students defined “actuary” as “a home for birds,” and the definition of
“duodenum” was given as “a number system in base 2.”5 Whether they are
funny or sad, these are mistakes—incorrect reports of how English-speaking
people use these words.
Here lies the central difference between lexical and stipulative definitions:
Truth or falsity may apply to the former but not the latter. In a stipulative defini-
tion the definiendum has no meaning apart from (or before) the definition that in-
troduces it, so that the definition cannot be true or false. But the definiendum of a
lexical definition does have a prior and independent meaning, and therefore its
definition may be true, or false, depending on whether that meaning is reported
correctly or incorrectly.
What we here call a lexical definition has been referred to by some as a “real”
definition—to indicate that the definiendum really does have the meaning identi-
fied. However, the question of whether the definiendum names any real or actual-
ly existing thing has nothing to do with whether the definition is lexical or
stipulative. The definition “the word ‘unicorn’ means an animal like a horse but
having a single straight horn projecting from its forehead” surely is a lexical def-
inition, and a correct one; its definiendum means exactly what is meant by the
definiens—but the definiendum in this case does not name or denote any existing
thing, because there are no unicorns.
A qualification must be made at this point. Some definitions are indeed sim-
ply mistaken, but some uses that depart from what is normal may be better de-
scribed as unusual or unorthodox. Word usage is a statistical matter, subject to
variation over time—and therefore we cannot always specify “the” correct
meaning of a term, but must give an account of its various meanings, as deter-
mined by the uses it has in actual speech and writing.
Language and Definitions
Lexical definition
A definition that reports
the meaning that the
definiendum already
has. A lexical definition
can be true or false.
85

Some lexicographers try to overcome this variability by referring to “best”
usage or “correct” usage. This effort cannot fully succeed, however, because “best”
usage is also an inexact matter, measured by the number of prominent authors and
speakers whose uses of the given term are in accord with that definition. Literary
and academic uses of words lag behind changes in a living language, so definitions
that report meanings accepted by some intellectual aristocracy are likely to be out
of date. What is unorthodox at a given time may soon become commonplace. So
lexical definitions must not ignore the ways in which a term is used by great num-
bers of those who speak that language, because if lexical definitions are not true to
actual usage, the reports they give will not be entirely correct. To take account of
language growth, good dictionaries often indicate which meanings of words are
“archaic” or “obsolete,” and which meanings are “colloquial” or “slang.”
With this qualification understood—that is, bearing in mind the variability of
a living language—lexical definitions are in essence true or false, in the sense that
they may be true to actual usage, or may fail to be true to it.
C. Precising Definitions
Some terms are ambiguous; some terms are vague. A term is ambiguous in a given
context when it has more than one distinct meaning and the context does not
make clear which meaning is intended. A term is vague when there are borderline
cases to which the term might or might not apply. A word or a phrase—for exam-
ple, “libel” or “freedom of speech”—may be both ambiguous and vague.
Precising definitions are those used to eliminate ambiguity or vagueness.
Every term is vague to some degree, but excessive vagueness causes serious
practical problems. This is particularly true in the law, where acts that are forbid-
den by some statute need to be sharply defined. For example, as this is being
written the precise meaning of the phrase “unreasonable searches,” which lies at
the heart of the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, is becoming the
focus of a sharp debate within, and among, appellate courts. Global Positioning
Devices surreptitiously placed by police now make possible the tracking of all
the movements of persons suspected of a crime. Such tracking yields evidence
that sometimes results in criminal conviction. Is evidence gathered in this way
permissible? Simply trailing a suspect is not a violation of the Fourth Amend-
ment because people have no expectation of privacy for actions exposed to pub-
lic view. But GPS technology permits prolonged surveillance; it reveals business
practices, church-going habits, recreational interests, the identity of associates
and even sexual escapades. Is this a search that requires a judicial warrant? In
2010 the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia held that it is, over-
turning a conviction that had been obtained using such evidence without a war-
rant.6 The supreme courts of Massachusetts, New York, Oregon and Washington
agree, recently ruling that their state constitutions require police to obtain a war-
rant for the use of such devices. But decisions in three similar GPS-related cases
(in Chicago, St, Louis, and San Francisco) have been criticized by the U.S.
Supreme Court. Some judges have argued that tracing the movements of a car is
not a search at all. “Unreasonable searches” is certainly a vague phrase that cries
Language and Definitions
Precising definition
A definition devised to
eliminate ambiguity or
vagueness by
delineating a concept
more sharply.
86

out for more precision. A precising definition of that phrase is very likely to come
soon from the Supreme Court of the United States.
The vagueness of units of measurement in science is a serious problem. “Horse-
power,” for example, is commonly used in reporting the power of motors, but its
vagueness invited commercial deception. To overcome that, a precise definition
was needed. “One horsepower” is now defined precisely as “the power needed to
raise a weight of 550 pounds by one foot in one second”—calculated to be equal to
745.7 watts. (The power of one real horse is much greater, estimated to be about
equal to 18,000 watts! A 200-horsepower automobile, therefore, has approximately
the power of ten real horses.)
A meter is the internationally accepted unit of measure for distance. Origi-
nally it was defined, by stipulation, as one ten-millionth of the distance from one
of the Earth’s poles to the equator, and this was represented by a pair of careful-
ly inscribed scratches on a metal bar made of platinum-iridium, kept in a vault
near Paris, France. However, scientific research required more precision. A
“meter” is now defined, precisely, as “the distance light travels in vacuum in one
299,792,458th of a second.” Building on this, a “liter” is defined precisely as the
volume of a cube having edges of 0.1 meter.
The vagueness of terms such as “horsepower” and “meter” cannot be elimi-
nated by appealing to ordinary usage, because ordinary usage is not sufficiently
exact. If it were, the terms would not have been vague. Therefore, borderline
cases can be resolved only by going beyond the report of normal usage with the
definition given. Such definitions are called precising definitions.
A precising definition differs from both lexical and stipulative definitions. It
differs from stipulative definitions in that its definiendum is not a new term, but
one whose usage is known, although unhappily vague. In constructing a precis-
ing definition, therefore, we are not free to assign to the definiendum any meaning
we please. Established usage must be respected as far as possible, while making
the known term more precise. Neither can a precising definition be a simple re-
port, because it must go beyond established usage if the vagueness of the
definiendum is to be reduced. How that is done—how the gaps in ordinary lan-
guage are filled in—may indeed be a matter of outright stipulation.
Appellate court judges are often obliged to define some common terms more
precisely. The definitions they provide are not mere stipulations, because even
when the judges go beyond established usage, they will explain their reasons for
the refinements being introduced. For example, unreasonable searches and
seizures are forbidden by the Fourth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, and
evidence obtained through an unreasonable seizure is generally held to be inad-
missible in court. But what is a “seizure”? Suppose a suspect, running from the
police, throws away a packet of drugs, which is then confiscated. Have those
drugs been seized? A precising definition was formulated by the U.S. Supreme
Court to resolve this matter. A seizure, the Court concluded, must involve either
the use of some physical force that restrains movement, or the assertion of au-
thority (such as an order to stop) to which a subject yields. If the subject keeps
running, no seizure has occurred; the packet of drugs he throws while running
Language and Definitions
87

from the police therefore cannot be the product of an unreasonable seizure, and
will be admissible as evidence.7
The precise definitions of terms can be very important in the world of com-
merce. For example, is a sport utility vehicle (SUV) a car or a light truck? The fuel
economy standards applied to “light trucks” are more lenient than those applied to
“cars,” and therefore auto manufacturers must know the criteria that will be used
by the U.S. Department of Transportation to define these categories precisely.8
If a law is so vague that a citizen cannot be expected to be sure when he is
disobeying it, it may be struck down by a court. U.S. Supreme Court Justice
Thurgood Marshall long ago explained the need for precising definitions in law:
It is a basic principle of due process that an enactment is void for vagueness if its pro-
hibitions are not clearly defined. Vague laws offend several important values. First . . .
we insist that laws give the person of ordinary intelligence a reasonable opportunity to
know what is prohibited, so that he may act accordingly. Vague laws may trap the in-
nocent by not providing fair warning. Second, if arbitrary and discriminatory enforce-
ment is to be prevented, law must provide explicit standards for those who apply
them. A vague law impermissibly delegates basic policy matters to policemen, judges,
and juries for resolution on an ad hoc and subjective basis, with the attendant dangers
of arbitrary and discriminatory application. Third . . . where a vague statute abuts upon
sensitive areas of basic First Amendment freedoms, it operates to inhibit the exercise
of those freedoms. Uncertain meanings inevitably lead citizens to “steer far wider of the
unlawful zone” than if the boundaries of the forbidden areas were clearly marked.9
This principle was applied in 1996 when a federal law making it illegal to
transmit “indecent” or “patently offensive” materials on the Internet was struck
down as impermissibly vague.10 To avoid such uncertainties, legislatures often
preface the operative portions of a statute with a section called “definitions,” in
which the precise meanings of key terms in that statute are spelled out. Similarly,
in labor–management contracts, the terms setting forth the agreed-upon rules of
the workplace will be very carefully defined. Precising definitions are conceptu-
al instruments of wide importance.
D. Theoretical Definitions
In science, and in philosophy, definitions often serve as a compressed summary,
or recapitulation, of some theory. Such definitions, when they are faulty, are crit-
icized not so much because they are not precise as because they are not ade-
quate—they do not correctly encapsulate the theory in question.
How, for example, should we define the word “planet”? For many years it
was believed with little controversy, and all children were taught, that planets
are simply bodies in orbit around the sun and that there are nine planets in the
solar system—of which the smallest is Pluto, made of unusual stuff, with an un-
usual orbit, and most distant from the sun. But other bodies, larger than Pluto
and oddly shaped, have been recently discovered orbiting the sun. Are they also
planets? Why not? Older definitions had become conceptually inadequate. An
intense controversy within the International Astronomical Union (IAU), still not
fully resolved, has recently resulted in a new definition of “planet,” according to
Language and Definitions
88

which there are only eight planets in our solar system. And now a new category,
“dwarf planet” (for bodies such as Pluto, Ceres, and Eris), has been defined.
Needed were definitions that would accommodate new discoveries as well as
old, while maintaining a consistent and fully intelligible account of the entire
system. Such definitions (not as simple as we might like) were adopted by the
IAU in 2006. A planet is “a celestial body that, within the Solar System, (1) is in
orbit around the Sun; and (2) has sufficient mass for its self-gravity to overcome
rigid body forces so that it assumes a hydrostatic equilibrium (nearly round)
shape; and (3) has cleared the neighborhood around its orbit. In a system other
than our solar system, the new definition requires that the body (1) be in orbit
around a star or stellar remnant; and (2) have a mass below the limiting mass for
thermonuclear fusion of deuterium; and (3) be above the minimum mass/size
requirement for planetary status in the solar system.
In such controversies it is not simply the use of some word, such as “planet,”
that is at issue. What is wanted is a comprehensive grasp of the theory in which
that term is a key element. A definition that encapsulates this larger understand-
ing we rightly call a theoretical definition.
In philosophy also, theoretical definitions are sought. When Socrates strug-
gles to find the correct definition of “justice” in Plato’s Republic, he is not simply
seeking a set of words that can serve as a synonym for “justice.” When Spinoza,
in the Ethics, seeks to define “bondage” and “freedom,” he is not examining how
people use those words, nor is he merely hoping to eliminate borderline cases.
Neither lexical nor precising (and certainly not stipulative) definitions are the
philosophical objectives. More deeply, philosophers commonly seek to develop
an account of human virtues that will help us to understand these and other
forms of right conduct.
The quest for theoretical definitions remains compelling. What is a “right”? Is
health care a right? Do nonhuman animals have rights? How might we best define
the term? Which nations truly manifest “democracy”? Is the fact that leaders are
elected by popular vote sufficient to make a government democratic? If not, what
other political institutions or patterns of citizen conduct characterize democratic
communities? What is the most appropriate application of that term? Theoretical
definitions are the products of our comprehensive understanding in some sphere.
E. Persuasive Definitions
The four categories we have discussed so far are concerned chiefly with the in-
formative use of language. But definitions are also used at times to express
feelings as well, so as to influence the conduct of others. A definition put for-
ward to resolve a dispute by influencing attitudes or stirring emotions may be
called a persuasive definition.
Persuasive definitions are common in political argument. From the left we hear
socialism defined as “democracy extended to the economic sphere.” From the right
we hear capitalism defined as “freedom in the economic sphere.” The directive in-
tent of the emotive language in these definitions is obvious—but emotive coloration
Language and Definitions
Theoretical definition
A definition that
encapsulates an
understanding of the
theory in which that term
is a key element.
Persuasive definition
A definition formulated
and used to resolve a
dispute by influencing
attitudes or stirring
emotions, often relying
upon the use of emotive
language.
89

may also be injected subtly into wording that purports to be a correct lexical defini-
tion, and that appears on the surface to be that. As we seek to distinguish good rea-
soning from bad, we must be on guard against persuasive definitions.
In summary, we have distinguished five ways in which definitions are used.
Thus any definition may be categorized in accordance with its principal function:
Stipulative
Lexical
Precising
Theoretical
Persuasive
Of course, some definitions may serve more than one of these functions.
A stipulative definition may be intended to influence hearers manipulatively.
A lexical definition may be used objectively to make discussion of some matter
more precise, and so on. Here, as everywhere in language, context is critical.
EXERCISES
A. Find examples of definitions that function in each of the five ways distin-
guished and explain, in each case, how the definition serves that purpose.
B. Discuss the following:
Federal law imposes a five-year mandatory prison sentence on anyone who
“uses or carries a firearm” in connection with a narcotics crime. In 1998 the U.S.
Supreme Court faced this question: Does traveling in a car with a gun in a locked
glove compartment or trunk—as opposed to carrying a gun on one’s person—sat-
isfy the meaning of “carry” in that law? Justice Stephen Breyer argued that Con-
gress intended the word in its ordinary, everyday meaning, without the artificial
limitation that it be immediately accessible. Quoting Robinson Crusoe and Moby
Dick, he pointed to the common use of “carry” to mean “convey in a vehicle.” The
mandatory sentence, he concluded, is thus properly imposed. Justice Ruth Bader
Ginsburg found Breyer’s literary evidence selective and unpersuasive; in re-
sponse, she offered quotations from Rudyard Kipling, the TV series M*A*S*H.,
and President Theodore Roosevelt’s “Speak softly and carry a big stick” to show
that “carry” is properly understood in the federal statute to mean “the gun at
hand, ready for use as a weapon” [Muscarello v. U.S., U.S. 96-1654 (1998)]. In this
controversy, which side puts forward the better precising definition?
5
The Structure of Definitions: 
Extension and Intension
A definition states the meaning of a term. When we look closely at the literal (or
descriptive) meaning of a term, however, we see that there are different senses in
which that term has meaning. With those different senses distinguished (our ob-
ject just below), we will also see that definitions may be grouped and understood
Language and Definitions
90

not only on the basis of their functions (as in the preceding section), but in view
of the way those definitions are built: their structure.
We focus on general terms—terms that are applicable to more than one ob-
ject—which are of critical importance in reasoning. The word “planet” is a typi-
cal general term; it is applicable to a number of objects, and it applies in the same
sense equally to Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Nep-
tune. (But not to Pluto! As explained in the preceding section, Pluto is now clas-
sified by the International Astronomical Union as a “dwarf planet.”) What is
meant by the word “planet” is (in one sense) that set of objects. The collection of
planets constitutes the meaning of the term, its extensional meaning. If I say that
all planets have elliptical orbits, part of what I assert is that Mars has an elliptical
orbit, and another part is that Venus has an elliptical orbit, and so on. The
extension of the general term “planet” consists of the objects to which the term
may be correctly applied. The extensional meaning (also called the denotative mean-
ing) of a general term is the collection of the objects that constitutes the extension
(or denotation) of the term.
To understand the meaning of a general term is to know how to apply it cor-
rectly; however, it is not necessary to know all the objects to which it may be ap-
plied correctly in order to apply it correctly. All the objects within the extension
of a given term have some common attributes or characteristics that lead us to use
the same term to denote them. If we know these attributes, we may know the
meaning of a term in a different sense, without knowing its extension. In this sec-
ond sense, meaning supposes some criterion for deciding, with respect to any given
object, whether it falls within the extension of that term. This sense of meaning is
called the intensional meaning (or, sometimes, connotative meaning) of the term.
The set of attributes shared by all and only those objects to which a general term
refers is called the intension (or connotation) of that term.
Every general term has both an intensional (or connotative) meaning and an
extensional (or denotative) meaning. Consider the general term “skyscraper.” It
applies correctly to all buildings over a certain height; that is its intension. The ex-
tension of the term “skyscraper” is the class of buildings that contains the Empire
State Building in New York, the Willis Tower in Chicago, the Shanghai World Fi-
nancial Center, the Petronas Twin Towers in Kuala Lumpur, and others also—
that is, the collection of the objects to which the term applies.
The extension of a term (its membership) is determined by its intension. The
intension of the term “equilateral triangle” is the attribute of being a plane figure
enclosed by three straight lines of equal length. The extension of “equilateral trian-
gle” is the class of all those objects, and only those objects, that have this attribute.
Because any object that has this attribute must be a member of that class, we say
that the term’s intension determines its extension.
However, the reverse is not true: The extension of a term does not determine
its intension. Consider “equiangular triangle,” which has an intension different
from that of “equilateral triangle.” The intension of “equiangular triangle” is the
attribute of being a plane figure enclosed by three straight lines that intersect
each other to form equal angles. It is true, of course, that the extension of the term
Language and Definitions
Extension
The collection of all the
objects to which a term
may correctly be
applied.
Intension
The attributes shared by
all and only the objects
in the class that a given
term denotes; the
connotation of the term.
91

“equiangular triangle” is exactly the same as the extension of the term “equilat-
eral triangle.” So if we were to identify the extension of one of these terms, that
would leave the intension of the class uncertain; intension is not determined by
extension. Terms may have different intensions and the same extension; but
terms with different extensions cannot possibly have the same intension.
When attributes are added to the intension of a term, we say that the intension
increases. Begin with a general term such as “person.” Add “living.” Add “over
twenty years old.” Add “born in Mexico.” With each such addition the intension
increases; the intension of the term, “Living person over twenty years old born in
Mexico,” is far greater than that of “person.” So these terms are given here in
order of increasing intension. However, increasing their intention decreases their
extension. The number of living persons is much lower than that of persons, and
the number of living persons over twenty years old is lower still, and so on.
One may be tempted to say that extension and intension always vary in-
versely, but in fact that is not the case. This is because there comes a point when
increasing the intension of the term has no effect on its extension. Consider this
series: “living person,” “living person with a spinal column,” “living person
with a spinal column less than one thousand years old,” “living person with a
spinal column less than one thousand years old who has not read all the books in
the Library of Congress.” These terms are clearly in order of increasing intension,
but the extension of each of them is exactly the same, not decreasing at all. So we
can say that, if terms are arranged in order of increasing intension, their exten-
sions will be in nonincreasing order. That is, if extensions vary, they will vary in-
versely with the intensions.
Note that the extensions of some terms are empty; there simply are no objects
having the indicated attributes. In Greek mythology, Bellerophon killed the fire-
breathing Chimera, a monster with a lion’s head, a goat’s body, and a serpent’s tail.
We fully understand the intension of the term Chimera, but it has no extension.
Some bad arguments play on the fact that meaning can refer to extension or
to intension, while extension may be empty. For example:
The word “God” is not meaningless; therefore it has a meaning. But by definition, the
word “God” means a being who is all-powerful and supremely good. Therefore that all-
powerful and supremely good being, God, must exist.
The word “God” is certainly not meaningless, and so there is an intension
that is its meaning. However, it does not follow from the fact that a term has an
intension that it denotes any existent thing. The useful distinction between inten-
sion and extension was introduced and emphasized by St. Anselm of Canterbury
(1033–1109), who is best known for his “ontological argument”—to which the
preceding fallacious argument has little resemblance.
A contemporary critic has argued in similar fashion:
Kitsch is the sign of vulgarity, sleaze, schlock, sentimentality, and bad faith that mark
and mar our human condition. That is why utopia can be defined as a state of affairs in
which the term has disappeared because it no longer has a referent.11
Here the writer has failed to distinguish between meaning and referent. Many
valuable terms—those naming mythological creatures, for example—have no
Language and Definitions
92

existing referent, no extension, but we do not want or expect such terms to disap-
pear. Terms with intension but no extension are very useful. If utopia someday
comes, we may wish to express our good fortune in having eliminated “kitsch”
and “sleaze,” but to do that we will need to be able to use those very words
meaningfully.
We now use the distinction between intension and extension to explain some
techniques for constructing definitions. Some definitions approach a general
term by focusing on the class of objects to which the term refers. Some definitions
approach a general term by focusing on the attributes that determine the class.
Each approach, as we shall see, has advantages and disadvantages.
EXERCISES
A. Arrange each of the following groups of terms in order of increasing intension:
1. Animal, feline, lynx, mammal, vertebrate, wildcat.
2. Alcoholic beverage, beverage, champagne, fine white wine, white wine,
wine.
3. Athlete, ball player, baseball player, fielder, infielder, shortstop.
4. Cheese, dairy product, Limburger, milk derivative, soft cheese, strong
soft cheese.
5. Integer, number, positive integer, prime number, rational number, real
number.
B. Divide the following list of terms into five groups of five terms each,
arranged in order of increasing intension:
Aquatic animal, beast of burden, beverage, brandy, cognac, domestic animal, filly, fish,
foal, game fish, horse, instrument, liquid, liquor, musical instrument, muskellunge, 
parallelogram, pike, polygon, quadrilateral, rectangle, square, Stradivarius, string 
instrument, violin.
A. Extension and Denotative Definitions
Denotative definitions employ techniques that identify the extension of the
term being defined. The most obvious way to explain the extension of a term is to
identify the objects denoted by it. This is one very effective technique, but it has
serious limitations.
We saw in the preceding section that two terms with different intensions
(e.g., “equilateral triangle” and “equiangular triangle”) may have the same ex-
tension. Therefore, even if we could enumerate all the objects denoted by a gen-
eral term, that would not distinguish it from another term that has the very same
extension.
Of course it is usually impossible to enumerate all the objects in a class. The
objects denoted by the term “star” are literally astronomical in number; the ob-
jects denoted by the term “number” are infinitely many. For most general terms,
complete enumeration is practically out of the question. Therefore denotative
Language and Definitions
Denotative definition
A definition that identifies
the extension of a term,
by (for example) listing
the members of the class
of objects to which the
term refers. An
extensional definition.
93

definitions are restricted to partial enumerations of the objects denoted—and
this limitation gives rise to serious difficulties. The core of the problem is this:
Partial enumeration of a class leaves the meaning of the general term very
uncertain.
Any given object has many attributes, and thus may be included in the ex-
tensions of many different general terms. Therefore, any object given as an ex-
ample of a general term is likely to be an example of many general terms with
very different intensions. If I give the example of the Empire State Building to
explain the term “skyscraper,” there are many other classes of things to which I
could be referring. Even if we give two examples, or three, or four, the same
problem arises. Suppose I list, along with the Empire State Building, the
Chrysler Building and the Trump Tower. What is the class I have in mind? It
could be skyscrapers, but all these are also “great structures of the twentieth
century,” or “expensive pieces of real estate in Manhattan,” or “landmarks in
New York City.” In addition, each of these general terms denotes objects not de-
noted by the others. Hence, partial enumeration cannot distinguish among
terms that have different extensions.
We may seek to overcome this problem by naming groups of members of the
class as examples. This technique, definition by subclass, does sometimes make
complete enumeration possible. Thus we might define “vertebrate” to mean
“amphibians and birds and fishes and reptiles and mammals.” The completeness
of the list gives some psychological satisfaction—but the meaning of the term
“vertebrate” has not been adequately specified by such a definition.
Instead of naming or describing the objects denoted by the term being de-
fined, as ordinary denotative definitions do, we might try pointing at them. Such
definitions are called ostensive definitions or demonstrative definitions. An exam-
ple of an ostensive definition is “the word ‘desk’ means this,” accompanied by a
gesture such as pointing a finger in the direction of a desk.
Ostensive definitions have all the limitations mentioned earlier, as well as
some limitations peculiar to themselves. Gestures have a geographic limita-
tion; one can only indicate what is visible. We cannot ostensively define the
word “ocean” in an inland valley. More seriously, gestures are invariably am-
biguous. To point to a desk is also to point to a part of it, as well as to its color
and its size and its shape and material, and so on—in fact, one points to every-
thing that lies in the general direction of the desk, including the lamp or the
wall behind it.
This ambiguity might sometimes be resolved by adding a descriptive phrase
to the definiens, thus producing a quasi-ostensive definition—for example, “the
word ‘desk’ means this article of furniture” accompanied by the appropriate ges-
ture. However, such an addition supposes the prior understanding of the phrase
“article of furniture,” which defeats the purpose that ostensive definitions have
been claimed to serve, having been alleged by some to be the “primary” (or
primitive) definitions—the way we first learn the meanings of words. In reality,
we first learn language by observing and imitating, not by relying on definitions.
Language and Definitions
Ostensive definition
A kind of denotative
definition in which the
objects denoted by the
term being defined are
referred to by means of
pointing, or with some
other gesture;
sometimes called a
demonstrative
definition.
Quasi-ostensive
definition
A variety of denotative
definition that relies
upon gesture, in
conjunction with a
descriptive phrase.
94

Beyond such difficulties, all denotative definitions have this further inade-
quacy: They cannot define words that, although perfectly meaningful, do not de-
note anything at all. When we say that there are no unicorns we are asserting,
meaningfully, that the term “unicorn” does not denote, that its extension is
empty. Terms with no extension are very important, and this shows that tech-
niques of definition that rely on extension cannot reach the heart of the matter.
“Unicorn” has no extension, but the term is certainly not meaningless. If it were
meaningless, it would also be meaningless to say, “There are no unicorns.” This
statement we fully understand, and it is true. Meaning pertains more to inten-
sion than to extension; the real key to definition is intension.
EXERCISES
C. Define the following terms by example, enumerating three examples for
each term:
1. actor
2. boxer
3. composer
4. dramatist
5. element
6. flower
7. general (officer)
8. harbor
9. inventor
10. poet
D. For each of the terms given in Exercise Set A, find a nonsynonymous general
term that your three examples serve equally well to illustrate.
B. Intension and Intensional Definitions
A term that is sometimes used instead of “intension” is “connotation”; inten-
sional definitions are connotative definitions. We avoid the use of the word
“connotation” here because, in everyday English, the connotation of a term is its
total significance, including especially its emotive as well as its descriptive
meaning. Because we are concerned here only with informative significance, we
put the term “connotation” aside; this section therefore uses the terms “inten-
sion” and “intensional.”
The intension of a term, we have said, consists of the attributes shared by all
the objects denoted by the term, and shared only by those objects. If the attrib-
utes that define the term “chair” are “being a single raised seat” and “having a
back,” then every chair is a single raised seat with a back, and only chairs are sin-
gle raised seats with a back.
Language and Definitions
95

Even within this restriction, three different senses of intension must be dis-
tinguished: the subjective, the objective, and the conventional. The subjective in-
tension of a word for a speaker is the set of all the attributes the speaker believes
to be possessed by objects denoted by that word. This set varies from individual
to individual, and even from time to time for the same individual, and thus can-
not serve the purposes of definition. The public meanings of words, not their pri-
vate interpretations, are the logician’s concern. The objective intension of a
word is the total set of characteristics shared by all the objects in the word’s ex-
tension. Within the objective intension of the term “circle,” therefore, is the attrib-
ute that a circle encloses a greater area than any other plane figure having an
equal perimeter. However, this attribute of circles is one that many who use the
word are completely unaware of. No one possesses the omniscience required to
understand all the attributes shared by the objects denoted by general terms, and
therefore objective intension cannot be the public meaning whose explanation
we seek to give.
People do communicate with one another and therefore do understand the
terms they use; hence there must be publicly available intensions that are nei-
ther subjective nor objective in the senses just explained. Terms have stable
meanings because there is an implicit agreement to use the same criterion for
deciding about any object whether it is part of a given term’s extension. What
makes a thing a circle, in common discourse, is its being a closed plane curve,
all points of which are equidistant from a point within called the center. It is by
convention that this criterion is established, and this meaning is the
conventional intension of the term “circle.” This is the important sense of in-
tension for purposes of definition: It is public but does not require omniscience
to use. The word “intension” is normally taken to mean conventional intension,
and that is our usage here.
What are the techniques, using intension, for defining terms? Several meth-
ods are common. The simplest and most frequently used is that of providing an-
other word, whose meaning is already understood, that has the same meaning as
the word being defined. Two words with the same meaning are called syn-
onyms, so a definition given in this way is called a synonymous definition. Dic-
tionaries, especially smaller ones, rely heavily on this method of defining terms.
Thus a dictionary may define adage as meaning “proverb”; bashful may be de-
fined as “shy”; and so on. Synonymous definitions are particularly useful when
it is the meanings of words in another language that call for explanation. The
word chat means “cat” in French; amigo means “friend” in Spanish; and so on.
One learns the vocabulary of a foreign language by studying definitions using
synonyms.
This is a good method of defining terms; it is easy, efficient, and helpful; but
it has very serious limitations. Many words have no exact synonym, and there-
fore synonymous definitions are often not fully accurate and may mislead.
Translation from one language to another can never be perfectly faithful to the
original, and often fails to catch its spirit or convey its depth. From this realiza-
tion comes the Italian proverb, “Traduttore, traditore” (“Translator, traitor”).
Language and Definitions
Subjective intension
The set of all attributes
that the speaker
believes to be
possessed by objects
denoted by a given
term.
Objective intension
The total set of
attributes shared by all
the objects in the
extension of a term.
Conventional
intension
The commonly
accepted intension of a
term; the criteria
generally agreed upon
for deciding, with
respect to any object,
whether it is part of the
extension of that term.
Synonymous
definition
A kind of connotative
definition in which a
word, phrase or symbol
is defined in terms of
another word, phrase or
symbol that has the
same meaning and is
already understood.
96

A more serious limitation of synonymous definitions is this: When the con-
cept the word aims to convey is simply not understood, every synonym may be
as puzzling to the reader or hearer as the definiendum itself. Synonyms are virtu-
ally useless, therefore, when the aim is to construct a precising or a theoretical
definition.
One may seek to explain the intension of a term by tying the definiendum to
some clearly describable set of actions or operations; doing that is giving the
term what is called an operational definition.
The term operational definition was first used by the Nobel Prize-winning
physicist P. W. Bridgeman in his 1927 book, The Logic of Modern Physics.
For example, in the wake of the success of Einstein’s theory of relativity,
space and time could no longer be defined in the abstract way that Newton had
used. It was therefore proposed to define such terms “operationally”—that is, by
means of the operations actually undertaken when we measure distances and
durations. An operational definition of a term states that the term is applied cor-
rectly to a given case if and only if the performance of specified operations in that
case yields a specified result. The numerical value given for length can be de-
fined operationally by referring to the results of a specified measuring proce-
dure, and so on. Only public and repeatable operations are accepted in the
definiens of an operational definition. Social scientists have also applied this tech-
nique. Some psychologists, for example, have sought to replace abstract defini-
tions of “mind” and “sensation” by operational definitions that refer only to
behavior or to physiological observations.
Of all the kinds of definition, the one that is most widely applicable is
definition by genus and difference. This is the most important of all uses of the
intension of general terms, and it is by far the technique that is most commonly
relied upon in defining terms. We therefore devote the next and final section of
this chapter to a detailed examination of definition by genus and difference, and
the rules that properly guide its use.
The following table summarizes the kinds of definition by function (of which
there are five), and the six techniques that depend on extension (three) and inten-
sion (three).
Language and Definitions
Five Types of Definition
1. Stipulative
2. Lexical
3. Precising
4. Theoretical
5. Persuasive
Six Techniques for Defining Terms
A. Extensional Techniques
B. Intensional Techniques
1. Definitions by example
4. Synonymous definitions
2. Ostensive definitions
5. Operational definitions
3. Quasi-ostensive definitions
6. Definitions by genus and difference
Operational definition
A kind of connotative
definition that states that
the term to be defined is
correctly applied to a
given case if and only if
the performance of
specified operations in
that case yields a
specified result.
Definition by genus
and difference
A type of connotative
definition of a term that
first identifies the larger
class (“genus”) of which
the definiendum is a
species or subclass, and
then identifies the
attribute (“difference”)
that distinguishes the
members of that species
from members of all
other species in that
genus.
97

EXERCISES
E. Give synonymous definitions for each of the following terms:
Language and Definitions
6
Definition by Genus and Difference
Definition by genus and difference relies directly on the intension of the terms
defined, and it does so in the most helpful way. In view of their exceedingly com-
mon use, we look very closely at definitions of this type. Definitions by genus
and difference are also called analytical definitions, or by their Latin name, defini-
tions per genus et differentia.
Earlier we referred to the attributes that define a class. Normally these attrib-
utes are complex—that is, they can be analyzed into two or more other attributes.
This complexity and analyzability can be understood in terms of classes. Any
class of things having members may have its membership divided into subclass-
es. For example, the class of all triangles can be divided into three nonempty sub-
classes: equilateral triangles, isosceles triangles, and scalene triangles. The class
whose membership is thus divided into subclasses is called the genus, and the
various subclasses are its species. As used here, the terms “genus” and “species”
are relative terms, like “parent” and “offspring.” The same persons may be par-
ents in relation to their children, but also offspring in relation to their parents.
Likewise, a class may be a genus with respect to its own subclasses, but also a
species with respect to some larger class of which it is a subclass. Thus the class
of all triangles is a genus relative to the species scalene triangle and a species
relative to the genus polygon. The logician’s use of the words “genus” and
“species” as relative terms is different from the biologist’s use of them as fixed or
absolute terms, and the two uses should not be confused.
A class is a collection of entities having some common characteristic. There-
fore all members of a given genus have some characteristic in common. All
members of the genus polygon (for example) share the characteristic of being
closed plane figures bounded by straight line segments. This genus may be di-
vided into different species or subclasses, such that all the members of each sub-
class have some further attribute in common that is shared by no member of any
other subclass. The genus polygon is divided into triangles, quadrilaterals,
1. absurd
2. buffoon
3. cemetery
4. dictator
5. egotism
6. feast
7. garret
8. hasten
9. infant
10. jeopardy
11. kine
12. labyrinth
13. mendicant
14. novice
15. omen
16. panacea
17. quack
18. rostrum
19. scoundrel
20. tepee
98

pentagons, hexagons, and so on. Each species of the genus polygon differs from
all the rest. What differentiates members of the subclass hexagon from the mem-
bers of all other subclasses is having precisely six sides. All members of all species
of a given genus share some attribute that makes them members of the genus,
but the members of any one species share some further attribute that differenti-
ates them from the members of every other species of that genus. The character-
istic that serves to distinguish them is called the specific difference. Having six
sides is the specific difference between the species hexagon and all other species
of the genus polygon.
Thus, we may say that the attribute of being a hexagon is analyzable into the
attributes of (1) being a polygon and (2) having six sides. To someone who did
not know the meaning of the word “hexagon” or of any synonym of it, but who
did know the meanings of the words “polygon,” “sides,” and “six,” the meaning
of the word “hexagon” can be readily explained by means of a definition by
genus and difference: The word hexagon means “a polygon having six sides.”
Using the same technique, we can readily define “prime number”: A prime
number is any natural number greater than one that can be divided exactly, with-
out remainder, only by itself or by one.
Two steps are required to define a term by genus and difference. First, a genus
must be named—the genus of which the species designated by the definiendum is
the subclass. Second, the specific difference must be named—the attribute that
distinguishes the members of that species from members of all others species in
that genus. In the definition of prime number just given, the genus is the class of
natural numbers greater than one: 2, 3, 4, . . . and so on; the specific difference is
the quality of being divisible without remainder only by itself or by one: 2, 3, 5, 7,
11, . . . and so on. Definitions by genus and difference can be very precise.
Two limitations of definitions by genus and difference deserve notice, al-
though such definitions remain, nevertheless, exceedingly useful. First, the
method is applicable only to terms whose attributes are complex in the sense
indicated above. If there are any attributes that are absolutely unanalyzable,
then the words with those intensions cannot be defined by genus and differ-
ence. The sensed qualities of the specific shades of a color have been thought
by some to be simple and unanalyzable in this sense. Whether there really are
such unanalyzable attributes remains an open question, but if there are, they
limit the applicability of definition by genus and difference. Second, the tech-
nique is not applicable when the attributes of the term are universal. Words
such as “being,” “entity,” “existent,” and “object” cannot be defined by the
method of genus and difference because the class of all entities (for example) is
not a species of some broader genus. A universal class (if there is one) consti-
tutes the very highest class, or summum genus, as it is called. The same limita-
tion applies to words referring to ultimate metaphysical categories, such as
“substance” or “attribute.” Neither of these limitations, however, is a serious
handicap in most contexts in which definitions are needed.
Constructing good definitions by genus and difference is by no means a sim-
ple task; it requires thoughtful selection of the most appropriate genus for the
Language and Definitions
99

term in question, as well as identification of the most helpful specific difference
for that term. In appraising proposed definitions by genus and difference, espe-
cially when they are intended as lexical, there are five good rules that have been
traditionally laid down.
Rule 1: A definition should state the essential attributes of the species.
Earlier we distinguished the conventional intension of a term from the subjec-
tive intension and the objective intension. To define a term using, as its specific
difference, some attribute that is not normally recognized as its attribute, even
though it may be a part of that term’s objective intension, would be a violation
of the spirit of this rule. The rule itself might best be expressed, using our termi-
nology, by saying that a definition should state the conventional intension of the term
being defined.
The conventional intension of a term is not always an intrinsic characteristic
of the things denoted by that term. It may concern the origin of those things, or
relations of the members of the class defined to other things, or the uses to which
the members of that class are normally put. Thus the term “Stradivarius violin,”
which denotes a number of violins, has as its conventional intension no actual
physical characteristic but rather the attribute of being a violin made in the Cre-
mona workshop of Antonio Stradivari. The essential attributes of “governors” or
“senators” would not be any specific mental or physical features that differenti-
ate them from other persons, but the special relations they have to other citizens.
The use of shape, or material, as the specific difference of a class is usually an in-
ferior way to construct a definition. It is not an essential attribute of a “shoe,” for
example, that it is made of leather; what is critical in its definition is the use to
which it is put, as an outer covering for the foot.
Rule 2: A definition must not be circular.
If the definiendum itself appears in the definiens, the definition can explain the
meaning of the term being defined only to those who already understand it. So if
a definition is circular it must fail in its purpose, which is to explain the meaning
of the definiendum.
A book on gambling contains this blatant violation of the rule: “A compul-
sive gambler is a person who gambles compulsively.”12 As another example, a
sophisticated scientist, writing in a medical journal, lapses into definitional circu-
larity in this passage: “This review defines stress as a specific morphological, bio-
chemical, physiological, and/or behavioral change experienced by an organism
in response to a stressful event or stressor.”13
As applied to definitions by genus and difference, avoiding circularity rules
out the use, in the definiens, of any synonym of the definiendum. For example,
there is no point in defining lexicon as “a compilation of words in the form of a
dictionary.” If the synonym “dictionary” is assumed to be understood, one could
as well give a straightforward synonymous definition of “lexicon” instead of re-
sorting to the more powerful but more complicated technique of genus and dif-
ference. Similarly, antonyms of the definiendum are also ruled out.
Language and Definitions
100

Rule 3: A definition must be neither too broad nor too narrow.
This is an easy rule to understand, but it is often difficult to respect. We don’t
want the definiens to denote more things than are denoted by the definiendum, or
fewer things either, of course, but mistakes are often made. When Plato’s succes-
sors in the Academy at Athens settled on the definition of “man” as “featherless
biped,” their critic, Diogenes, plucked a chicken and threw it over the wall into
the Academy. There was a featherless biped—but no man! The definiens was too
broad. Legend has it that to narrow the definition of “man,” the attribute “hav-
ing broad nails” was added to the definiens.
Finding or constructing the definiens that has precisely the correct breadth is
the task faced by the lexicographer, and it is often very challenging, but if Rule 1
has been fully observed, the essence of the definiendum stated in the definiens, this
rule will have been obeyed, because the conventional intension of the term can-
not be too broad or too narrow.
Rule 4:
Ambiguous, obscure, or figurative language must not be used in a
definition.
Ambiguous terms in the definiens obviously prevent the definition from perform-
ing its function of explaining the definiendum. Obscure terms also defeat that pur-
pose, but obscurity is a relative matter. What is obscure to amateurs may be
perfectly familiar to professionals. A “dynatron oscillator” does truly mean “a
circuit that employs a negative-resistance volt-ampere curve to produce an alter-
nating current.” Although it may be obscure to the ordinary person, the language
of this definiens is wholly intelligible to the students of electrical engineering for
whom the definition was written; its technical nature is unavoidable. Obscure
language in nontechnical definitions may result in an effort to explain the un-
known using what is even more unknown. Dr. Samuel Johnson, in his great
Dictionary of the English Language (1755), defined net as meaning “anything retic-
ulated or decussated at equal distances with interstices between the intersec-
tions”—a good example of obscurity in definition.
Another sort of obscurity arises when the language of the definiens is
metaphorical. Figurative language may convey a “feel” for the term being de-
fined, but it cannot give a clear explanation of the term. We do not learn the
meaning of the word “bread” if we are told only that it is “the staff of life.” The
Devil’s Dictionary (1911), by Ambrose Bierce, is a collection of witty definitions,
many of which have a cynical bite. Bierce defined “fib” as “a lie that has not cut
its teeth,” and “oratory” as “a conspiracy between speech and action to cheat the
understanding.” Entertaining and insightful such definitions may be, but serious
explanations of the definienda they are not.
Rule 5: A definition should not be negative when it can be affirmative.
What a term does mean, rather than what it does not mean, is what the definition
seeks to provide. There are far too many things that the vast majority of terms do
not mean; we are unlikely to cover them all in a definition. “A piece of furniture
Language and Definitions
101

that is not a bed or a chair or a stool or a bench” does not define a couch; neither
does it define a dresser. We need to identify the attributes that the definiendum
has, rather than those it does not have.
Of course there are some terms that are essentially negative and therefore re-
quire negative definitions. The word baldness means “the state of not having hair on
one’s head,” and the word orphan means “a child who does not have parents.”
Sometimes affirmative and negative definitions are about equally useful; we may
define a “drunkard” as “one who drinks excessively,” but also as “one who is not
temperate in drinking.” In those cases in which negatives are used appropriately in
specifying the essential attributes, the genus must first be mentioned affirmatively.
Then, sometimes, the species can be characterized accurately by rejecting all other
species of that genus. Only rarely are the species few enough to make this possible.
If, for example, we define “scalene” triangle as “a triangle that is neither equilateral
nor isosceles,” we respect poorly the spirit of Rule 1—because it is the essential at-
tribute that the class does possess, “having sides of unequal length,” that best de-
fines it. In general, affirmative definitions are much preferred over negative ones.
In summary, intensional definitions, and among them definitions by genus
and difference especially, can serve any of the purposes for which definitions are
sought. They may help to eliminate ambiguity, to reduce vagueness, to give the-
oretical explanation, and even to influence attitudes. They are also commonly
used to increase and enrich the vocabulary of those to whom they are provided.
For most purposes, intensional definitions are much superior to extensional def-
initions, and of all definitions that rely on intensions, those constructed by genus
and difference are usually the most effective and most helpful.
EXERCISES
A. Construct definitions for the following terms (in the box on the left side) by
matching the definiendum with an appropriate genus and difference (from the
box on the right side).
Language and Definitions
Definiendum
Definiens
Genus
Difference
1. banquet
11. lamb
1. offspring
1. female
2. boy
12. mare
2. horse
2. male
3. brother
13. midget
3. man
3. very large
4. child
14. mother
4. meal
4. very small
5. foal
15. pony
5. parent
5. young
6. daughter
16. ram
6. sheep
7. ewe
17. sister
7. sibling
8. father
18. snack
8. woman
9. giant
19. son
9. person
10. girl
20. stallion
102

B. Criticize the follow0ing in terms of the rules for definition by genus and differ-
ence. After identifying the difficulty (or difficulties), state the rule (or rules) that
are being violated. If the definition is either too narrow or too broad, explain
why.
1. A genius is one who, with an innate capacity, affects for good or evil the
lives of others.
—Jacqueline Du Pre, in Jacqueline Du Pre: Her Life, Her Music, Her Legend
(Arcade Publishing, 1999)
2. Knowledge is true opinion.
—Plato, Theaetetus
3. Life is the art of drawing sufficient conclusions from insufficient
premises.
—Samuel Butler, Notebooks
4. “Base” means that which serves as a base.
—Ch’eng Wei-Shih Lun, quoted in Fung Yu-Lan, 
A History of Chinese Philosophy, 1959
5. Alteration is combination of contradictorily opposed determinations in
the existence of one and the same thing.
—Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, 1787
6. Honesty is the habitual absence of the intent to deceive.
7. Hypocrisy is the homage that vice pays to virtue.
—François La Rochefoucauld, Reflections, 1665
8. The word body, in the most general acceptation, signifieth that which fil-
leth, or occupieth some certain room, or imagined place; and dependeth
not on the imagination, but is a real part of that we call the universe.
—Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, 1651
9. Torture is “any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical
or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person for such purposes as ob-
taining from him or a third person information or a confession.”
—United Nations Convention Against Torture, 1984
10. “Cause” means something that produces an effect.
11. War . . . is an act of violence intended to compel our opponent to fulfill
our will.
—Carl von Clausewitz, On War, 1911
12. A raincoat is an outer garment of plastic that repels water.
13. A hazard is anything that is dangerous.
—Safety with Beef Cattle, U.S. Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration, 1976
14. To sneeze [is] to emit wind audibly by the nose.
—Samuel Johnson, Dictionary, 1814
15. A bore is a person who talks when you want him to listen.
—Ambrose Bierce, 1906
Language and Definitions
103

16. Art is a human activity having for its purpose the transmission to others
of the highest and best feelings to which men have risen.
—Leo Tolstoi, What Is Art?, 1897
17. Murder is when a person of sound memory and discretion unlawfully
killeth any reasonable creature in being, and under the king’s peace,
with malice aforethought, either express or implied.
—Edward Coke, Institutes, 1684
18. A cloud is a large semi-transparent mass with a fleecy texture suspend-
ed in the atmosphere whose shape is subject to continual and kaleido-
scopic change.
—U. T. Place, “Is Consciousness a Brain Process?” 
The British Journal of Psychology, February 1956
19. Freedom of choice: the human capacity to choose freely between two or
more genuine alternatives or possibilities, such choosing being always lim-
ited both by the past and by the circumstances of the immediate present.
—Corliss Lamont, Freedom of Choice Affirmed, 1967
20. Health is a state of complete physical, mental, and social well-being and
not merely the absence of disease or infirmity.
—Constitution of the World Health Organization, 1946
21. By analysis, we mean analyzing the contradictions in things.
—Mao Zedong, Quotations from Chairman Mao, 1966
22. Noise is any unwanted signal.
—Victor E. Ragosine, “Magnetic Recording,” Scientific American, February 1970
23. To explain (explicate, explicare) is to strip reality of the appearances cov-
ering it like a veil, in order to see the bare reality itself.
—Pierre Duhem, The Aim and Structure of Physical Theory, 1991
24. The Master said, Yu, shall I teach you what knowledge is? When you
know a thing, to recognize that you know it, and when you do not
know a thing, to recognize that you do not know it. That is knowledge.
—Confucius, The Analects
25. I would define political correctness as a form of dogmatic relativism, in-
tolerant of those, such as believers in “traditional values,” whose posi-
tions are thought to depend on belief in objective truth.
—Philip E. Devine, Proceedings of the American Philosophical Association, 
June 1992
C. Discuss the following definitions:
1. Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.
—Heb. 11:1
2. Faith is when you believe something that you know ain’t true.
—Definition attributed to a schoolboy by William James 
in “The Will to Believe,” 1897
3. Faith may be defined briefly as an illogical belief in the occurrence of
the improbable.
—H. L. Mencken, Prejudice, 1922
Language and Definitions
104

4. Poetry is simply the most beautiful, impressive, and widely effective
mode of saying things.
—Matthew Arnold, 1865
5. Poetry is the record of the best and happiest moments of the happiest
and best minds.
—Percy Bysshe Shelley, The Defence of Poetry, 1821
6. Dog, n. A kind of additional or subsidiary Deity designed to catch the
overflow and surplus of the world’s worship.
—Ambrose Bierce, The Devil’s Dictionary, c. 1911
7. Conscience is an inner voice that warns us somebody is looking.
—H. L. Mencken, 1949
8. A bond is a legal contract for the future delivery of money.
—Alexandra Lebenthal, Lebenthal and Company, 2001
9. “The true,” to put it very briefly, is only the expedient in the way of our
thinking, just as “the right” is only the expedient in the way of our be-
having.
—William James, “Pragmatism’s Conception of Truth,” 1907
10. To be conceited is to tend to boast of one’s own excellences, to pity or
ridicule the deficiencies of others, to daydream about imaginary tri-
umphs, to reminisce about actual triumphs, to weary quickly of conver-
sations which reflect unfavorably upon oneself, to lavish one’s society
upon distinguished persons and to economize in association with the
undistinguished.
—Gilbert Ryle, The Concept of Mind, 1949
11. Economics is the science which treats of the phenomena arising out of
the economic activities of men in society.
—J. M. Keynes, Scope and Methods of Political Economy, 1891
12. Justice is doing one’s own business, and not being a busybody.
—Plato, The Republic
13. Legend has it that the distinguished economist, John Maynard Keynes,
enjoyed referring to a university education as “the inculcation of the in-
comprehensible into the indifferent by the incompetent.”
14. By good, I understand that which we certainly know is useful to us.
—Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, 1677
15. Political power, then, I take to be a right of making laws with penalties
of death, and consequently all less penalties, for the regulating and pre-
serving of property, and of employing the force of the community in the
execution of such laws, and in defense of the commonwealth from for-
eign injury, and all this only for the public good.
—John Locke, Essay Concerning Civil Government, 1690
16. And what, then, is belief? It is the demi-cadence which closes a musical
phrase in the symphony of our intellectual life.
—Charles Sanders Peirce, “How to Make Our Ideas Clear,” 1878
Language and Definitions
105

17. Political power, properly so called, is merely the organized power of one
class for oppressing another.
—Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Communist Manifesto, 1847
18. Grief for the calamity of another is pity; and ariseth from the imagina-
tion that the like calamity may befall himself.
—Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, 1651
19. We see that all men mean by justice that kind of state of character which
makes people disposed to do what is just and makes them act justly and
wish for what is just.
—Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics
20. Inquiry is the controlled or directed transformation of an indeterminate
situation into one that is so determinate in its constituent distinctions
and relations as to convert the elements of the original situation into a
unified whole.
—John Dewey, Logic: The Theory of Inquiry, 1938
21. A fanatic is one who can’t change his mind and won’t change the subject.
—Winston Churchill
22. Regret is the pain people feel when they compare what is with what
might have been.
—Richard Gotti, “How Not to Regret Regret,” Bottom Line Personal, 30 
September 1992
23. Happiness is the satisfaction of all our desires, extensively, in respect of
their manifoldness, intensively, in respect of their degree, and potensively,
in respect of their duration.
—Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, 1787
24. A tragedy is the imitation of an action that is serious and also, as having
magnitude, complete in itself; in language with pleasurable accessories,
each kind brought in separately in the parts of the work; in a dramatic,
not in a narrative form; with incidents arousing pity and fear, where-
with to accomplish its catharsis of such emotions.
—Aristotle, Poetics
25. Propaganda is manipulation designed to lead you to a simplistic conclu-
sion rather than a carefully considered one.
—Anthony Pratkanis, The New York Times, 27 October 1992
26. . . . the frequently celebrated female intuition . . . is after all only a facul-
ty for observing tiny insignificant aspects of behavior and forming an
empirical conclusion which cannot be syllogistically examined.
—Germaine Greer, The Female Eunuch, 1971
27. A fetish is a story masquerading as an object.
—Robert Stoller, “Observing the Erotic Imagination,” 1985
28. Religion is a complete system of human communication (or a “form of
life”) showing in primarily “commissive,” “behabitive,” and
Language and Definitions
106

“exercitive” modes how a community comports itself when it encoun-
ters an “untranscendable negation of . . . possibilities.”
—Gerald James Larson, “Prolegomenon to a Theory of Religion,”
Journal of the American Academy of Religion, 1978
29. Robert Frost, the distinguished New England poet, used to define a lib-
eral as someone who refuses to take his own side in an argument.
—“Dreaming of JFK,” The Economist, 17 March 1984
30. The meaning of a word is what is explained by the explanation of the
meaning.
—Ludwig Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, 1953
Language and Definitions
chapter 
Summary
In this chapter we have been concerned with the uses of language and with
definitions.
In Section 1 we identified the three chief uses of language—the informative,
the expressive, and the directive—and two less common uses—the ceremonial and
the performative.
In Section 2 we discussed the emotive and the neutral meanings of words. Dis-
putes, we explained, may arise from conflicting beliefs about facts, or from con-
flicting attitudes about facts whose truth may (or may not) be agreed on, and we
emphasized the importance of the neutral uses of language in logical discourse.
In Section 3 we explained that ambiguous terms are those that have more than
one distinct meaning in a given context. We distinguished three different kinds of
disputes: those that are genuine, whether the conflict be about beliefs or attitudes;
those that are merely verbal, arising from the unrecognized use of ambiguous terms,
and those that are genuine but appear on the surface to be verbal, in which a real differ-
ence remains even after apparent ambiguity has been eliminated.
In Section 4 we began the discussion of definitions, distinguishing the
definiendum (the symbol that is to be defined) from the definiens (the symbol or
group of symbols used to explain the meaning of the definiendum). We distin-
guished five different kinds of definition based on their functions: (1) stipulative
definitions, with which a meaning is assigned to a term (and hence which cannot
be true or false); (2) lexical definitions, which report the meaning that the term al-
ready has (and hence can be true or false); (3) precising definitions, which aim to
eliminate vagueness or ambiguity; (4) theoretical definitions, which aim to encap-
sulate our understanding of some intellectual sphere; and (5) persuasive defini-
tions, which aim to influence conduct.
In Section 5 we explained the structure of definitions, first distinguishing the
extension of a general term, the objects denoted by it, from its intension, the attrib-
utes shared by all and only the members of the class designated by that term. We
explained three varieties of extensional definition: definitions by example, in which
we list or give examples of the objects denoted by the term; ostensive definitions, in
107

which we point to, or indicate by gesture the extension of the term being defined;
and semi-ostensive definitions, in which the pointing or gesture is accompanied by
a descriptive phrase whose meaning is assumed known.
We also distinguished three varieties of intensional definition: synonymous
definitions, in which we provide another word whose meaning is already un-
derstood that has the same meaning as the word being defined; operational defi-
nitions, which state that a term is applied correctly to a given case if and only if
the performance of specified operations in that case yields a specified result;
and definitions by genus and difference, of which a full account was given in
Section 6.
In Section 6 we closely examined definitions by genus and difference, in
which we first name the genus of which the species designated by the
definiendum is a subclass, and then name the attribute (or specific difference) that
distinguishes the members of that species from members of all other species of
that genus. We formulated and explained five rules for the construction of good
definitions by genus and difference: (1) A definition should state essential attrib-
utes; (2) a definition must not be circular; (3) a definition must not be too broad
or too narrow; (4) definitions should not rely on ambiguous, obscure, or figura-
tive language; and (5) when possible, definitions should not be negative.
Language and Definitions
For additional exercises and tutorials about concepts covered in this
chapter, log in to MyLogicLab at www.mylogiclab.com and select your
current textbook.
END NOTES
1John Burgon, “Petra” (1845), on the ruins of Petra, now in Jordan.
2Robert Browning, “Rabbi Ben Ezra,” 1864.
3Cohen v. California, 403 U.S. 15, at p. 26 (1971).
4By provision of the Federal Communications Decency Act. The reason those seven words are held not fit
to broadcast is the reason they are not listed here. The letters with which they begin are: S, P, F, C, C, M,
and T.
5See The Chronicle of Higher Education, 30 May 1993.
6The Washinton Post, Washington D.C., 7 August 2010.
7California v. Hoary D., 499 U.S. 621 (1991).
8D. Hakim, “Government May Alter Line Between a Car and Truck,” The New York Times, 25 March 2003.
9Greyned v. City of Rockford, 408 U.S. 104 (1972).
10American Civil Liberties Union v. Reno, 929 Fed. Supp. 824 (1996).
11John P. Sisk, “Art, Kitsch and Politics,” Commentary, May 1988.
12Jay Livingston, Compulsive Gamblers (New York: Harper & Row, 1974), p. 2.
13W. H. Voge, “Stress—The Neglected Variable in Experimental Pharmacology and Toxicology,” Trends in
Pharmacological Science, January 1987.
108

Fallacies
1
What Is a Fallacy?
2
Classification of Fallacies
3
Fallacies of Relevance
4
Fallacies of Defective Induction
5
Fallacies of Presumption
6
Fallacies of Ambiguity
1
What Is a Fallacy?
When we reason, we (presumably) strive to reason correctly, so one of the central
tasks of logic is to identify the ways in which we are tempted to reason
incorrectly. One reasons incorrectly when the premises of an argument fail to
support its conclusion, and arguments of that sort may be called fallacious. So in
a very general sense, any error in reasoning is a fallacy. Similarly, any mistaken
idea or false belief may sometimes be labeled “fallacious.”
Logicians, however, commonly use the term “fallacy” more narrowly, to
designate not just any error in reasoning, but typical errors—mistakes in reason-
ing that exhibit a pattern that can be identified and named. The great logician
Gottlob Frege observed that it is one of the logician’s tasks to “indicate the
pitfalls laid by language in the way of the thinker.”
In this narrower sense, each fallacy is a type of incorrect argument. Of course,
many different arguments may make an error of some given type; that is, it may
exhibit the same kind of mistake in reasoning. Any argument that does exhibit that
kind of mistake is said to commit that fallacy. The particular argument that com-
mits some known fallacy is commonly said to be a fallacy, because it is an indi-
vidual example of that typical mistake.
To illustrate: If one accepts the premise that all science is essentially mate-
rialistic and then goes on to argue that Karl Marx, a very influential philoso-
pher of the nineteenth century who was certainly a materialist, must
therefore have been scientific, one reasons badly. It may indeed be true that
Marx was scientific (as he claimed to be), but it does not follow from the fact
that he was a materialist (which he certainly was) that he was scientific. The
bad reasoning here is fallacious. If every P is a Q, it does not follow from the
fact that one is a Q that one is a P. All dogs are mammals, but not every mam-
mal is a dog. What is identified here is a pattern of mistake. Because that pat-
tern of error, or fallacy, appears in many different contexts, it is flagged, and
labeled: “the fallacy of affirming the consequent.” The argument concerning
Karl Marx is a fallacy because it commits that fallacy, and the fallacy it commits
Fallacy
A type of argument that
seems to be correct, but
contains a mistake in
reasoning.
From Chapter 4 of Introduction to Logic, Fourteenth Edition. Irving M. Copi, Carl Cohen, Kenneth McMahon. 
Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Prentice Hall. All rights reserved.
This asset is
intentionally omitted
from this text. It may
be accessed at
www.mcescher.com.
(Waterfall by 
M.C. Escher)

Fallacies
is the fallacy of affirming the consequent. This is independent of the equivo-
cation in the use of the term “materialist,” which means different things in
science and in Marxism.
In this illustration the mistake that has been made is called a formal fallacy; it
is a pattern of mistake that appears in deductive arguments of a certain specifiable
form. There are other formal fallacies. Most fallacies, however, are not formal but
informal: They are patterns of mistake that are made in the everyday uses of 
language. Informal fallacies, which we examine very closely in this chapter, arise
from confusions concerning the content of the language used. There is no limit to
the variety of forms in which that content may appear, and thus informal 
fallacies are often more difficult to detect than formal ones. It is language that 
deceives us here; we may be tricked by inferences that seem plausible on the 
surface but that are in reality not warranted. Such traps, the “pitfalls” that 
language sets, can be avoided if the patterns of those mistakes are well under-
stood. Considerable attention will be devoted to these informal fallacies—the
kinds of mistakes made in everyday speaking and writing, and commonly 
encountered, for example, in the “letters to the editor” in daily newspapers.
These are the logical mistakes that we will name and explain.
Because language is slippery and imprecise, we must be cautious in this en-
terprise. Of course we must be careful not to make the mistakes in question, but
we must also be careful to refrain from accusing others of making mistakes when
they do not really do so. If we encounter an argument that appears to be falla-
cious, we must ask ourselves what really was meant by terms being used. The ac-
cusation of fallacy is sometimes unjustly leveled at a passage intended by its
author to make a point that the critic has missed—perhaps even to make a joke.
As patterns of mistakes in spoken and written language, are identified, the type
of language used needs to be unerdstood. Our logical standards should be high,
but our application of those standards to arguments in ordinary life should also
be generous and fair.
2
Classification of Fallacies
Informal fallacies are numerous and can therefore be best understood if they are
grouped into categories, each with clearly identifiable features. This classifica-
tion of fallacies is a controversial matter in logic. There is no one correct taxono-
my of fallacies. Logicians have proposed lists of fallacies that vary greatly in
length; different sets have been specified, and different names have been given to
both the sets and the individual fallacies. Any classification of the kind that will
follow here is bound to be arbitrary in some degree. Our aim is to provide a com-
prehensive scheme within which the most common informal fallacies can be
helpfully identified—and avoided.
The outline of this classification appears immediately below. After present-
ing it, we will examine each group, and each individual fallacy, in detail.
110

Fallacies

Fallacies of relevance. Fallacies of relevance are the most numerous and
the most frequently encountered. In these fallacies, the premises of the argu-
ment are simply not relevant to the conclusion. However, because they are made
to appear to be relevant, they may deceive. We will distinguish and discuss:
• R1: The appeal to the populace
• R2: The appeal to emotion
• R3: The red herring
• R4: The straw man
• R5: The attack on the person
• R6: The appeal to force
• R7: Missing the point (irrelevant conclusion)

Fallacies of defective induction. In fallacies of defective induction, which
are also common, the mistake arises from the fact that the premises of the ar-
gument, although relevant to the conclusion, are so weak and ineffective that
relying on them is a blunder. We will distinguish and discuss:
• D1: The argument from ignorance
• D2: The appeal to inappropriate authority
• D3: False cause
• D4: Hasty generalization

Fallacies of presumption. In fallacies of presumption, too much is assumed in
the premises. The inference to the conclusion depends mistakenly on these
unwarranted assumptions. We will distinguish and discuss:
• P1: Accident
• P2: Complex question
• P3: Begging the question

Fallacies of ambiguity. The incorrect reasoning in fallacies of ambiguity
arises from the equivocal use of words or phrases. Some word or phrase in one
part of the argument has a meaning different from that of the same word or
phrase in another part of the argument. We will distinguish and discuss:
• A1: Equivocation
• A2: Amphiboly
• A3: Accent
• A4: Composition
• A5: Division
Which of all these fallacies is actually committed by a specific passage is
often disputable. The mistake that is made in a given argument might be con-
strued in different ways and thus might reasonably be viewed as an instance of
more than one fallacy. Once again, in the realm of natural language, context is
critical, and much depends on reasonable interpretation.1
111

Fallacies
3
Fallacies of Relevance
Fallacies of relevance are bald mistakes; they might better be called fallacies of
irrelevance, because they arise when there is no real connection between the
premises and the conclusion of an argument. Because that connection is miss-
ing, the premises offered cannot possibly establish the truth of the conclusion
drawn. Of course, the premises may still be psychologically relevant, in that they
may evoke attitudes likely to cause the acceptance of the conclusion. The mis-
take arises when some emotive features of language are used to support the
truth of a claim for which no objective reasons have been given. The modern
names of these fallacies are used here, but many of them have traditional names
as well (usually in Latin), which will also be included. Seven fallacies of rele-
vance are of principal interest.
R1. The Appeal to the Populace (Argumentum ad Populum)
This fallacy is sometimes defined as the fallacy committed in making an emo-
tional appeal; but this definition is so broad as to include most of the fallacies of
relevance. It is defined more narrowly as the attempt to win popular assent to a
conclusion by arousing the feelings of the multitude. The argument ad populum
(“to the populace”) is the baldest of all fallacies, and yet it is one of the most
common. It is the instrument on which every demagogue and propagandist re-
lies when faced with the task of mobilizing public sentiment. It is a fallacy be-
cause, instead of evidence and rational argument, the speaker (or writer) relies
on expressive language and other devices calculated to excite enthusiasm for or
against some cause. Patriotism is one common cause about which it is easy to stir
emotions, and we know that terrible abuses and injustices have been perpetrated
in the name of patriotism. The oratory of Adolf Hitler, whipping up the racist en-
thusiasms of his German listeners, is a classic example. Love of country is an
honorable emotion, but the appeal to that emotion in order to manipulate and
mislead one’s audience is intellectually disreputable. “Patriotism,” Samuel John-
son observed, “is the last refuge of a scoundrel.”
The patriotic argument may be used when the national cause is good and the
argument’s author is no scoundrel. An emotional defense of belief lacks intellec-
tual merit, but the conclusion of that bad argument may be supportable by other
premises of a more rational sort. Still, offered as the premises of an argument,
sheer emotion is fallacious. On 23 March 1775 the Virginia House of Burgesses
passed a resolution delivering Virginia’s troops to the Revolutionary War. The
House was spurred to adopt this resolution by an oration whose emotional con-
tent has rarely been exceeded. Patrick Henry concluded this famous speech with
the following appeal:
. . . if we mean not basely to abandon the noble struggle in which we have been so
long engaged, and which we have pledged ourselves never to abandon until the
glorious object of our contest shall be obtained—we must fight! I repeat it, sir, we must
fight! An appeal to arms and to the God of hosts is all that is left to us. . . . There is no
retreat but in submission and slavery! Our chains are forged! Their clanking may be
Fallacy of relevance
A fallacy in which the
premises are irrelevant
to the conclusion.
Appeal to the
populace An informal
fallacy in which the
support given for some
conclusion is an appeal
to popular belief.  Also
known as argument ad
populum.
112

Fallacies
heard on the plains of Boston!. . . . Is life so dear, or peace so sweet, as to be
purchased at the price of chains and slavery? Forbid it, Almighty God! I know not 
what course others may take; but as for me, give me liberty or give me death!
It is reported that the crowd, upon hearing his speech, jumped up and shouted:
“To arms! To arms!”
A qualification may be in order here. If the passions of the speaker are used to
convince his listeners that some beliefs are true, the argument is indeed fallacious.
However, if the speaker and his listener are in complete agreement in their beliefs,
and the speaker aims only to spur his listeners to act in support of those mutual be-
liefs, the emotion he exhibits may serve a useful purpose. There is a distinction to
be drawn between emotions used improperly as premises in argument and emo-
tions used reasonably as triggers for appropriate conduct. However, this distinc-
tion will always be problematic because, when the speaker succeeds in spurring to
action, it may be said that he has relied on emotion to convince his audience of the
truth of some claim—the claim that now is the time to act, or the claim that the way
to act in pursuit of the common goal is his way. In controversy, in deciding what
conduct is appropriate, the appeal to emotion is unavoidably troubling.
The heaviest reliance on arguments ad populum is to be found in commercial
advertising, where its use has been elevated almost to the status of a fine art. The
products advertised are associated, explicitly or slyly, with things that we yearn
for or that excite us favorably. Breakfast cereal is associated with trim youthful-
ness, athletic prowess, and vibrant good health; whiskey is associated with luxu-
ry and achievement, and beer with high adventure; the automobile is associated
with romance, riches, and sex. The men depicted using the advertised product
are generally handsome and distinguished, the women are sophisticated and
charming, very well-dressed or hardly dressed at all. So clever and persistent are
the ballyhoo artists of our time that we are all influenced to some degree, in spite
of our resolution to resist. Almost every imaginable device may be used to com-
mand our attention, even to penetrate our subconscious thoughts. We are manip-
ulated by relentless appeals to emotion of every kind.
Of course, the mere association of some product with an agreeable feeling or
satisfying emotion is by itself no argument at all, but when such associations are
systematically impressed on us, there usually is an argument ad populum lurking
not far below the surface. It is suggested that the product—some beer perhaps, or
some perfume, or some brand of jeans—is sexy, or is associated with wealth, or
power, or some other admired characteristic, and therefore we, in purchasing it,
will acquire some of that same merit.
One variety of this bad argument is particularly crass because it suggests
no more than that one is well advised to buy (or join, or support, etc.) simply
because that is what everyone else is doing. Some call this the “bandwagon falla-
cy,” from the known phenomenon that, in an exciting campaign, many will be
anxious to “jump on the bandwagon”—to do what others do because so many
others are doing it. Brazen examples of this bandwagon fallacy are common in
the public media; here, for example, are the exact words of a recent advertise-
ment on ABC TV:
113

Fallacies
Why are so many people attracted to the Pontiac Grand Prix? It could be that so many
people are attracted to the Grand Prix because—so many people are attracted to the
Grand Prix!
This is the essence of an appeal to the populace.
Playing on the emotions of the general population is pernicious in the con-
text of public polling. Those who are conducting the poll, if they are unscrupu-
lous, may frame questions in ways designed to get the responses they seek, by
using words or phrases with known emotive impact. Alternatively, if used with-
out design but carelessly, some words may have an impact that will vitiate the
poll results. In serious survey research, therefore, questions will be worded with
the very greatest care, avoiding terms that are emotionally loaded, to preserve
the integrity of the poll results. It is sometimes difficult to avoid all emotional
taint. Many Americans support “affirmative action,” viewing it as a policy de-
signed to treat minorities fairly. But many Americans also oppose “racial prefer-
ences” in college admissions or in employment. The outcome of any random poll
on this topic will depend critically on which set of words—“affirmative action”
or “racial preference”—is used in the questions asked.
When results using different words conflict, it may be said that importantly
different questions have been asked. Perhaps. This is a perennial problem in sur-
vey research. In argument, however, the logical point remains very important: A
conclusion defended with premises that are directed mainly at emotions is a fal-
lacious argument ad populum.
R2. Appeals to Emotion
Appeal to Pity (ad Misericordiam)
One variety of the appeal to emotion that appears with great frequency is the ar-
gument ad misericordiam. The Latin word misericordiam literally means “merciful
heart”; this fallacy is the emotional appeal to pity.
Pity is often an admirable human response. Justice, it is wisely said, should be
tempered with mercy. Surely there are many situations in which leniency in
punishment is justified by the special circumstances of the offender. In such
situations—in the sentencing phase of a trial, for example—the identification of
those circumstances and the reasons they might apply to a criminal already con-
victed are appropriately put before the court. That is no fallacy. It would be a fal-
lacy, however, if such considerations were registered in the effort to cause a jury to
acquit a defendant who is indeed guilty of the acts with which he or she is
charged. When the premises (or intimated premises) of an argument boil down to
no more than an appeal to the merciful heart, the argument is plainly ad misericor-
diam, and fallacious. What is special about this variety is only that the emotions
appealed to are of a particular kind: generosity and mercy.
In civil suits, when attorneys are seeking compensatory damages for the in-
juries suffered by their clients, there is often an effort to rely implicitly on the ap-
peal to pity. The cause of the injury may be described as a faceless and unfeeling
corporate juggernaut; or the injured party may be presented as the helpless victim
Appeal to pity
A fallacy in which the
argument relies on
generosity, altruism, or
mercy, rather than on
reason.  Also known as
argument ad
misericordiam.
114

Fallacies
of an uncaring bureaucracy or an incompetent professional. The miseries of the
client’s continuing disability may be depicted in some heart-rending way. The in-
jured plaintiff may make it a point to limp painfully into the courtroom. A study
by the Harvard School of Public Health has demonstrated that the appeal to pity
really works. When doctors are sued for malpractice, this study shows, the size
of the monetary award to successful plaintiffs depends much more on the nature
of the disability they suffered than on whether it could be shown that the doctor
accused had in fact done anything wrong.2
In criminal trials, the sympathies of the jury plainly have no bearing on the
guilt or innocence of the accused, but an appeal to those sympathies may never-
theless be made. Such an appeal may be made obliquely. At his trial in Athens,
Socrates referred with disdain to other defendants who had appeared before
their juries accompanied by their children and families, seeking acquittal by
evoking pity. Socrates continued:
I, who am probably in danger of my life, will do none of these things. The contrast may
occur to [each juror’s] mind, and he may be set against me, and vote in anger because
he is displeased at me on this account. Now if there be such a person among you—
mind, I do not say that there is—to him I may fairly reply: My friend, I am a man, and
like other men, a creature of flesh and blood, and not “of wood or stone” as Homer
says; and I have a family, yes, and sons, O Athenians, three in number, one almost a
man, and two others who are still young; and yet I will not bring any of them here to
petition you for acquittal.3
There are many ways to pull heartstrings. Although it is often successful, the
appeal to pity is an obvious fallacy, ridiculed in the story of the trial of a youth
accused of the murder of his mother and father with an ax. Confronted with
overwhelming proof of his guilt, his attorney pleads for leniency on the grounds
that his client is now an orphan!
Logicians give special names to other clusters of fallacious emotional ap-
peals. Thus one might also distinguish the appeal to envy (ad invidiam), the ap-
peal to fear (ad metum), the appeal to hatred (ad odium), and the appeal to pride
(ad superbium). In all of these, the underlying mistake is the argument’s reliance
on feelings as premises.
R3. The Red Herring
The red herring is a fallacious argument whose effectiveness lies in distraction.
Attention is deflected; readers or listeners are drawn to some aspect of the
topic under discussion by which they are led away from the issue that had
been the focus of the discussion. They are urged to attend to some observation
or some claim that may be associated with the topic, but that is not relevant to
the truth of what had originally been in dispute. A red herring has been drawn
across the track.
This fallacy has a fascinating history. The phrase is believed to have been de-
rived from the practice of those who tried to save a fox being hunted by leaving
a misleading trail of scent (a smoked herring is very smelly and does become
dark red) that would be likely to distract or confuse the dogs in hot pursuit. In
Red herring
A fallacy in which
attention is deliberately
deflected away from the
issue under discussion.
115

Fallacies
many contexts, any deliberately misleading trail is commonly called a red herring.
Especially in literature, and above all in suspense or detective stories, it is not
rare for some character or event to be introduced deliberately to mislead the in-
vestigators (and the readers) and thus to add to the excitement and complexity of
the plot. An ulterior political motivation may be suggested, a sexual scandal may
be intimated—whatever can put the reader off the track may serve as a red her-
ring. In the very popular novel and film, The Da Vinci Code,4 one of the characters,
a Catholic bishop, enters the plot in ways that very cleverly mislead. His name is
the author’s joke: Bishop Aringarosa—meaning “red herring” in Italian. In the
world of finance, a prospectus issued to attract investors in a company about to
go public, which tells much about the company but not the price of its shares, is
also called a red herring.
Fallacious arguments use this technique in various ways. The opponents of
an appropriate tax measure may call attention to a new and appealing way in
which funds can be raised by state-sponsored gambling. A defense of the pros-
perity produced by an economic system may be deflected by vigorously con-
demning the economic inequality that system permits. Economic inequality may
well be excessive or unfair, but if most of the members of a community are rea-
sonably well off, that fact is not disproved by the reality of the enormous gap be-
tween the moderate wealth of most and the great wealth of some.
The distinguished political columnist David Broder has observed that in re-
cent discussions of U.S. foreign policy in the Middle East, it has been the policy
of some to urge that a show of military strength is a necessary element of our in-
ternational posture. As Broder points out, however, it is a “rhetorical trick” to re-
spond, whenever there is criticism of military expansion, that “its critics are soft
on terror.”5 This is a classic red herring.
Another recent example arose during debate in Congress over legislation
originally designed to oblige corporations to protect the accumulated funds
that had been set aside for the pensions of their employees. One legislator, ap-
parently seeking to protect his corporate donors, entered the debate with the ir-
relevant point that there is a serious need for the provision of better advice to
retired persons on the investment of their pensions. No doubt there is. But one
commentator astutely observed, “What does this have to do with employers
squandering their workers’ retirement? It’s a red herring. . . . Mr. Smith’s her-
ring replaces a major national scandal with a minor scandal, in an attractive
rhetorical wrapping.”6
Again: At Duke University in 2006, three student athletes were indicted for
rape; the indictments were plainly unfounded and soon withdrawn. When the
prosecutor was charged with misconduct in office, feelings at the university
grew intense. One member of the Duke faculty, writing in the local newspaper,
defended the prosecutor and some other faculty members who had supported
him. In the course of this defense she argued that the real “social disaster” in the
Duke rape case was that “18 percent of the American population lives below the
poverty line,” and that we do not have “national health care or affordable child-
care.” That herring was bright red.7
116

Fallacies
R4. The Straw Man
It is very much easier to win a fight against a person made of straw than against
one made of flesh and blood. If one argues against some view by presenting an
opponent’s position as one that is easily torn apart, the argument is fallacious, of
course. Such an argument commits the fallacy of the straw man.
One may view this fallacy as a variety of the red herring, because it also in-
troduces a distraction from the real dispute. In this case, however, the distraction
is of a particular kind: It is an effort to shift the conflict from its original complex-
ity into a different conflict, between parties other than those originally in dis-
pute. So common is this variety of distraction that the pattern of argument that
relies on it has long carried its own name: the straw man argument.
In controversies of a moral or a political nature, a successful argument al-
most invariably requires some reasonable and nuanced distinctions, and perhaps
also some narrowly described exceptions. The extreme position in any dispute—
the claim that conduct of a certain kind is always wrong, or always justified—is
likely to be difficult if not impossible to defend. Therefore it is often a fallacious
device to contend that what one aims to defeat is indefensible because it is cate-
gorical or absolute. Victory may be achieved over this fictitious opponent, but
one will have destroyed only a straw man.
One who urges the enlargement of the authority of some central administra-
tion may be fallaciously accused of seeking to transform the state into a “big
brother” whose reach will extend into every corner of citizens’ private lives. Such
a “big brother” is likely to be no more than a straw man. One who urges the de-
volution of authority from central to more local governments may be portrayed,
with similar fallacy, as the enemy of an efficient and effective administration—
and that, too, is likely to be a straw man. Straw man arguments often take the
form of supposing that the position under attack adopts the most extreme view
possible—that every act or policy of a certain kind is to be rejected. The argument
is easy to win, but its premises are not relevant to the conclusion that was origi-
nally proposed. The straw man argument often presents a genuine objection or
criticism, and the objection may be sound, but it is aimed at a new and irrelevant
target.
Straw man arguments present a special risk to their proponents. If, in contro-
versy, a critic depicts his or her opponents in a way that is clearly more extreme
and more unreasonable than is justifiable given what they had written or said,
readers or members of the audience are likely to recognize the exaggeration and
to respond in a way quite opposite to what was hoped for. Readers (or listeners)
may sense the unreasonableness of the portrayal and be offended by the unfair-
ness. Even further, the readers or listeners, recognizing the distortion, may be
caused by its unfairness to move intellectually to the side of the party that has
been misrepresented, formulating in their own minds the response that may just-
ly be made to the fallacious attack. Neutral persons who were to be persuaded
may be thus transformed, by unfair fallacious argument, into adversaries. Every
fallacious argument presents some risk of this kind; the fallacy of the straw man
invites it with special force.
Straw man
A fallacy in which an
opponent's position is
depicted as being more
extreme or
unreasonable than is
justified by what was
actually asserted.
117

Fallacies
R5. Argument Against the Person (Argumentum ad Hominem)
Of all the fallacies of irrelevance, the argument against the person, or ad
hominem, is among the most pernicious. Such arguments are common, as many
fallacies are. These, in addition to being unfair to the adversary (as straw man ar-
guments are also), are hurtful, often inflicting serious personal damage without
any opportunity for the fallacy to be exposed or its author chastised.
The phrase ad hominem translates as “against the person.” An ad hominem ar-
gument is one in which the thrust is directed, not at a conclusion, but at some
person who defends the conclusion in dispute. This personalized attack might be
conducted in either of two different ways, for which reason we distinguish two
major forms of the argument ad hominem: the abusive and the circumstantial.
A. Argumentum ad hominem, Abusive
One is tempted, in heated argument, to disparage the character of one’s oppo-
nents, to deny their intelligence or reasonableness, to question their understand-
ing, or their seriousness, or even their integrity. However, the character of an
adversary is logically irrelevant to the truth or falsity of what that person asserts,
or to the correctness of the reasoning employed. A proposal may be attacked as
unworthy because it is supported by “radicals,” or by “reactionaries,” but such al-
legations, even when plausible, are not relevant to the merit of the proposal itself.
Personal abuse can be psychologically persuasive, however, because it may
induce strong disapproval of some advocate, and by unjustifiable extension in
the mind of the hearer, disapproval of what had been advocated. For example,
Judge Constance Baker Motley, long active in the civil rights movement, defends
affirmative action with an ad hominem attack on its critics. She writes:
Those who resist [affirmative action programs] deny that they are racists, but the truth
is that their real motivation is racism, a belief in the inherent inferiority of African-
Americans and people of mixed racial backgrounds.8
However, the merits (or demerits) of arguments about affirmative action are
not illuminated by denigrating the character of those who take the side one rejects.
Ad hominem abusive has many variations. The opponent may be reviled (and
his claims held unworthy) because he is of a certain religious or political persua-
sion: a “Papist” or an “atheist,” a member of the “radical right” or the “loony left,”
or the like. A conclusion may be condemned because it has been defended by per-
sons believed to be of bad character, or because its advocate has been closely associ-
ated with those of bad character. Socrates was convicted of impiety partly because
of his long association with persons known to have been disloyal to Athens and ra-
pacious in conduct. Very recently, when Clyde Collins Snow was called a racist be-
cause of the conclusions he reached as a forensic scientist, he replied as follows:
My work devoted to the investigation of the disappearance, torture, and extrajudicial
execution of human rights victims in many countries has often made me the target of
public criticism and official outrage. To date, however, none of my critics has called me
a racist. Among my detractors have been apologists for the brutal military junta in
Argentina, representatives of General Pinochet’s military in Chile, the Guatemalan
Argument against the
person A fallacy in
which the argument
relies upon an attack
against the person taking
a position. This fallacy is
also known as
“argument ad hominem.”
118

Fallacies
Defense Minister, and Serbian government spokesmen. Thus Mr. Goodman [Snow’s
accuser] finds himself in interesting company.9
The accusation of guilt by association is a common form of ad hominem abuse.
B. Argumentum ad hominem, Circumstantial
The circumstances of one who makes (or rejects) some claim have no more bear-
ing on the truth of what is claimed than does his character. The mistake made in
the circumstantial form of the ad hominem fallacy is to treat those personal circum-
stances as the premise of an opposing argument.
Thus it may be argued fallaciously that an opponent should accept (or reject)
some conclusion merely because of that person’s employment, or nationality, or
political affiliation, or other circumstances. It may be unfairly suggested that a
member of the clergy must accept a given proposition because its denial would
be incompatible with the Scriptures; or it may be claimed that political candi-
dates must support a given policy because it is explicitly propounded in the plat-
form of their party. Such argument is irrelevant to the truth of the proposition in
question; it simply urges that some persons’ circumstances require its accept-
ance. Hunters, accused of the needless slaughter of unoffending animals, some-
times reply by noting that their critics eat the flesh of harmless cattle. Such a
reply is plainly ad hominem: The fact that the critic eats meat does not even begin
to prove that it is right for the hunter to kill animals for amusement.
When the circumstances of the speaker are used not merely as grounds for
attack—suggesting a foolish inconsistency or the like—but used rather in a
plainly negative spirit, a special name is given to such ad hominem arguments.
They are called by their traditional Latin name, tu quoque. This Latin expression
does not translate simply, but it means, in essence, “You’re another,” or more
loosely, “Look who’s talking.” The substance of the fallacy is to contend that you
(the first party) are just as bad as I am, just as guilty of whatever it is that you
complained about. But of course, that response is not a refutation of the original
complaint. It may be true that the first party is guilty of the conduct in question,
but calling that guilt to attention does not support the innocence of the second
party, which is the issue in the argument at hand.
An illustration will be helpful. A correspondent for CNN interviewed Osama
bin Laden, leader of the terrorist organization Al Qaeda, some years ago in
Afghanistan. The exchange went like this:
Cliff Arnett (CNN):
The United States government says that you are still
funding military training camps here in Afghanistan
for militant Islamic fighters and that you’re a spon-
sor of international terrorism. . . . Are these accusa-
tions true?
Osama bin Laden:
. . . At the time that they condemn any Muslim leader
who calls for his rights, they receive the highest offi-
cial of the Irish Republican Army at the White House
as a political leader. Wherever we look we find the
119

Fallacies
U.S. as the leader of terrorism and crime in the
world. The U.S. does not consider it a terrorist act to
throw atomic bombs at nations thousands of miles
away. . . . The U.S. does not consider it terrorism
when hundreds of thousands of our sons and broth-
ers in Iraq die for lack of food or medicine. So there
is no basis for what the U.S. says.10
How the United States conducts its international relations is rightly open to
criticism—but whatever may be true about that behavior, attacking it is no response
to the allegation of Al Qaeda terrorism. This is a classic tu quoque.
The circumstances of an opponent are not properly the issue in serious argu-
ment. It is the substance of what is claimed, or denied, that must be addressed. It
is true that highlighting one’s opponent’s circumstances may prove rhetorically
effective in winning assent, or in persuading others, but the effectiveness of this
device does not make up for its error. Arguments of this kind are fallacious.
Circumstantial ad hominem arguments are sometimes used to suggest that the
opponents’ conclusion should be rejected because their judgment is warped, dic-
tated by their special situation rather than by reasoning or evidence. However,
an argument that is favorable to some group deserves discussion on its merits; it
is fallacious to attack it simply on the ground that it is presented by a member of
that group and is therefore self-serving. The arguments in favor of a protective
tariff (for example) may be bad, but they are not bad because they are presented
by a manufacturer who benefits from such tariffs.
One argument of this kind, called poisoning the well, is particularly per-
verse. The incident that gave rise to the name illustrates the argument forcefully.
The British novelist and Protestant clergyman Charles Kingsley, attacking the fa-
mous Catholic intellectual John Henry Cardinal Newman, argued thus: Cardinal
Newman’s claims were not to be trusted because, as a Roman Catholic priest
(Kingsley alleged), Newman’s first loyalty was not to the truth. Newman coun-
tered that this ad hominem attack made it impossible for him, and indeed for all
Catholics, to advance their arguments, because anything they might say to de-
fend themselves would then be undermined by others’ alleging that, after all,
truth was not their first concern. Kingsley, said Cardinal Newman, had “poi-
soned the well of discourse.”
Between the abusive and the circumstantial varieties of argument ad hominem
there is a clear connection: The circumstantial may be regarded as a special case of
the abusive. When a circumstantial ad hominem argument explicitly or implicitly
charges the opponents with inconsistency (among their beliefs, or between what
they profess and what they practice, not logical inconsistency), that is clearly one
kind of abuse. When a circumstantial ad hominem argument charges the oppo-
nents with a lack of trustworthiness in virtue of membership in a group, that is an
accusation of prejudice in defense of self-interest and is clearly also an abuse.
An important qualification is called for at this point. Ad hominem arguments
are fallacious (and often unfair to the adversary) because an attack against some
Poisoning the well
A variety of abusive ad
hominem argument in
which continued rational
exchange is undermined
by attacking the good
faith or intellectual
honesty of the
opponent.
120

Fallacies
person is generally not relevant to the objective merits of the argument that per-
son has put forward. However, there are some circumstances in which it is in-
deed reasonable to raise doubts about some conclusion by impeaching the
testimony of one who makes a claim that would (if true) support the conclusion
in question. In courtroom proceedings, for example, it is acceptable, and often ef-
fective, to call a jury’s attention to the unreliability of a witness, and by so doing
to undermine the claims upheld by the testimony of that witness. This may be
done by exhibiting contradictions in the testimony given, showing that at least
some of what has been asserted must be false. It may be done by showing (not
merely asserting) that the witness lied—an abusive but in this context appropri-
ate counterargument. Testimony may also be undermined by exhibiting the great
benefits that would accrue to the witness from the acceptance of his testimony—
impeaching by circumstance. These are, strictly speaking, ad hominem considera-
tions, and yet they are not fallacious because of the special context in which those
assertions are being put forward, and because of the agreed-upon rules for the
evaluation of conflicting witnesses.
Even in these special circumstances, an attack on the person of the witness
does not establish the falsehood of what had been asserted. Revealing a pattern
of past dishonesty or duplicity, or showing an inconsistency with testimony ear-
lier given, may cast justifiable doubt on the reliability of the speaker, but the
truth or falsity of the factual claim made can be established only with evidence
that bears directly on that claim, and not merely on some person who denies or
asserts it. In each case we must ask: Is the attack on the person relevant to the
truth of what is at issue? When, as commonly occurs, the attack is not relevant to
the merits of the claim, the ad hominem argument is indeed fallacious.
R6. The Appeal to Force (Argumentum ad Baculum)
It seems odd to suppose that one could hope to establish some proposition as
true, or persuade some other person of its truth, by resorting to force. Threats or
strong-arm methods to coerce one’s opponents can hardly be considered argu-
ments at all. Traditionally, a category of fallacies of this kind has been identified
as the appeal to force or the argument ad baculum (appeal ad baculum means liter-
ally “appeal to the stick”!), and it surely is clear that however expedient force
may prove to be, it cannot replace rational methods of argument. “Might makes
right” is not a subtle principle, and we all reject it.
The force threatened need not be physical, of course. In 2000, two professors
of law at Boise State University published (in a law journal of the University of
Denver) an article that was harshly critical of the Boise Cascade Corporation, one
of the world’s largest producers of paper and wood products. Subsequently, the
university issued a formal “errata” notice that “this article has been retracted for
its lack of scholarship and false content.”
Why did the university retract the article? Did Boise Cascade threaten the
university with a lawsuit? “Well,” said the university’s general counsel, “‘threat-
en’ is an interesting word. Let’s just say they pointed out that the objections they
Appeal to force
A fallacy in which the
argument relies upon an
open or veiled threat of
force. Also known as
“argument ad baculum.”
121

Fallacies
raised did rise to the level of being actionable.” The university, it turns out, had
received a highlighted copy of the article in question from the general counsel of
Boise Cascade, together with a letter saying, “I have been advised to proceed
with litigation against Denver University if any of these highlighted areas are re-
published by Denver University in any form.”11
There are some circumstances in which threats may be introduced with more
subtlety, and in such circumstances we may say that something like an argument—
a plainly fallacious argument, to be sure—has been presented. What is put for-
ward may be a veiled threat, or a proposition that suggests some danger if the
proposition in question is not given full assent. It may be that certain behaviors
are of importance, whatever may be doubted or believed. To illustrate, when the
U.S. attorney general in the administration of President Ronald Reagan was
under strong attack in the press for misconduct, the White House chief of staff at
the time, Howard Baker, opened one meeting of his staff by saying:
The President continues to have confidence in the Attorney General and I have
confidence in the Attorney General and you ought to have confidence in the Attorney
General, because we work for the President and because that’s the way things are.
And if anyone has a different view of that, or any different motive, ambition, or
intention, he can tell me about it because we’re going to have to discuss your status.12
One might say that nobody is fooled by an argument of this sort; the threat-
ened party may behave appropriately but need not, in the end, accept the truth of
the conclusion being insisted on. To this it was answered, by representatives of
twentieth-century Italian fascism, that real persuasion can come through many
different instruments, of which reason is one and the blackjack is another. Once
the opponent is truly persuaded, they held, the instrument of persuasion may be
forgotten. That fascist view appears to guide many of the governments of the
globe to this day; but the argument ad baculum—reliance on the club, or on the
threat of force in any form—is by reason unacceptable. The appeal to force is the
abandonment of reason.
R7. Missing the Point (Ignoratio Elenchi)
Among the fallacies of relevance, the final category to be identified is perhaps the
most difficult to describe with precision. A variety of alternative names have
been applied to this category, including irrelevant conclusion and mistaken refu-
tation. It arises when the argument goes awry—when, on close examination,
there is a “disconnect” between the premises and the conclusion. The twist may
on occasion be an instrument of deliberate deception, but more often the fallacy
is the product of sloppy thinking, a confusion in reasoning that the author of the
argument herself does not fully recognize, or grasp.
Aristotle, the first to give a systematic classification of the informal fallacies,
explains the fallacy we call missing the point, or ignoratio elenchi, as a mistake that
is made in seeking to refute another’s argument. The Latin word elenchi is de-
rived from a Greek word that means a “disproof,” or a “refutation.” An ignoratio
elenchi is a mistaken refutation, one that goes haywire because the person present-
Missing the point
A fallacy in which the
premises support a
different conclusion from
the one that is
proposed.  Also known
as “irrelevant
conclusion” and
“ignoratio elenchi.”
122

Fallacies
ing it does not fully understand the proposition in dispute. He refutes, or tries to
refute, a claim other than that which was originally at issue. He misses the point.
As an example, suppose that one person emphasizes how important it is to
increase funding for the public schools. His opponent responds by insisting that
a child’s education involves much more than schooling and gets underway long
before her formal schooling begins. That assertion is entirely reasonable, of
course, but it misses the point of what was said earlier. One party presents an ar-
gument for P, to alleviate the need for funds; his interlocutor counters with an ir-
relevant Q, about the importance of pre-school education.
Suppose that some very controversial amendment to the tax code is 
proposed—say, the elimination of inheritance taxes. Such taxes, it is argued, are not
fair, because the money in the estate of a deceased person was already taxed at the
time it was earned—and therefore to tax it again upon the person’s death is to tax
the same funds twice. But, responds the supporter of the tax, inheritance taxes are
imposed only on large estates that can well afford the tax; and furthermore (the ad-
vocate of the tax continues), our government needs that money. This response is an
ignoratio elenchi. The inheritance tax may certainly be defended, but the size of es-
tates taxed and the need for the resulting funds misses the point of the argument
that had been put forward: the claim of unfair double taxation. Similarly, in a con-
troversy over a new and very expensive weapons system for the military, criticized
(let us suppose) for its doubtful practicality and enormous expense, the premises of
an argument offered in support of the new weapons will miss the point if they do
no more than underscore the pressing need for strong national defense. Objectives
stated in general terms—national security, a balanced budget—are easy to endorse;
the difficult questions in dispute are likely to be whether some particular proposed
measure (a particular weapon system, a particular tax) will in fact promote the end
sought, and whether it is likely to do so as effectively and efficiently as its alterna-
tives. Bypassing the hard questions by emphasizing our agreement on easy gener-
alizations about larger objectives commits the ignoratio elenchi: It misses the point.
There is a sense in which every fallacy of irrelevance is an ignoratio elenchi, be-
cause in all these fallacies there is a gap between the premises and the conclusion.
Premises that are not relevant—red herrings, straw men, personal attacks—all
miss the point; that is true. But we reserve this name for those fallacies of irrele-
vance that do not fit into other categories. The ignoratio elenchi is, we may say, a
catchall class of fallacies: fallacies in which the premises simply fail to connect to
the intended conclusion with the coherence that rational argument requires.
There is another expression with similar breadth and flexibility, the widely
used phrase non sequitur. Its meaning is “does not follow”: A non sequitur is an
argument in which the conclusion simply does not follow from the premises.
Thus every fallacy is, in that general sense, also a non sequitur. As a candidate for
the presidency of the United States in 2000, George W. Bush indicated that he
was planning to grant a reprieve (under his authority as the governor of Texas)
to a man who had been convicted of murder and was scheduled for execution.
Why, he was asked, did he telegraph his intention before announcing his formal
decision? He replied:
123

Fallacies
I believe this is a case where it’s important for me to send a signal about what I may do
because it’s a case where we’re dealing with a man’s innocence or guilt.13
The term non sequitur is most commonly applied when the failure of the ar-
gument is obvious, when the gap between the premises and the conclusion is
painfully wide. “A great, rough non sequitur,” Abraham Lincoln observed in a
speech in 1854, “was sometimes twice as dangerous as a well polished fallacy.”14
Yet, there are times when what appears at first to be a non sequitur will be seen
upon reflection not to be one. Consider this report of a historic “legal fiasco.”
The prisoner pleaded guilty. He then said he had made a mistake, and the judge
allowed him to change his plea to not guilty. The case was tried. The jury acquitted.
“Prisoner,” said Mr. Justice Hawkins, “a few minutes ago you said you were a thief.
Now the jury say you are a liar. Consequently you are discharged.”15
Fallacies of Relevance
R1. The Appeal to the Populace (ad Populum)
An informal fallacy committed when the support offered for some conclusion is
an inappropriate appeal to the multitude.
R2. The Appeal to Emotion
An informal fallacy committed when the support offered for some conclusion is
emotions—fear, envy, pity, or the like—of the listeners.
R3. The Red Herring
An informal fallacy committed when some distraction is used to mislead and
confuse.
R4. The Straw Man
An informal fallacy committed when the position of one’s opponent is misrepre-
sented and that distorted position is made the object of attack.
R5. Argument Against the Person (ad Hominem)
An informal fallacy committed when, rather than attacking the substance of
some position, one attacks the person of its advocate, either abusively or as a
consequence of his or her special circumstances.
R6. Appeal to Force (ad Baculum)
An informal fallacy committed when force, or the threat of force, is relied on to
win consent.
R7. Missing the Point (Ignoratio Elenchi)
An informal fallacy committed when one refutes, not the thesis one’s interlocutor
is advancing, but some different thesis that one mistakenly imputes to him or her.
o v e r v i e w
124

Fallacies
EXERCISES
A. Identify and explain the fallacies of relevance in the following passages:
1. If you can’t blame the English language and your own is unforgivingly
precise, blame the microphone. That was the route Jacques Chirac took
after his nuclear remark about a nuclear Iran. “Having one or perhaps a
second bomb a little later, well, that’s not very dangerous,” Mr. Chirac
said with a shrug. The press was summoned back for a retake. “I should
rather have paid attention to what I was saying and understood that
perhaps I was on the record,” Mr. Chirac offered, as if the record rather
than the remark were the issue.
—Stacy Schiff, “Slip Sliding Away,” The New York Times, 2 February 2007
2. Nietzsche was personally more philosophical than his philosophy. His
talk about power, harshness, and superb immorality was the hobby of a
harmless young scholar and constitutional invalid.
—George Santayana, Egotism in German Philosophy, 1915
3. Like an armed warrior, like a plumed knight, James G. Blaine marched
down the halls of the American Congress and threw his shining lances
full and fair against the brazen foreheads of every defamer of his coun-
try and maligner of its honor.
For the Republican party to desert this gallant man now is worse
than if an army should desert their general upon the field of battle.
—Robert G. Ingersoll, nominating speech at the 
Republican National Convention, 1876
4. However, it matters very little now what the king of England either says
or does; he hath wickedly broken through every moral and human obli-
gation, trampled nature and conscience beneath his feet, and by a
steady and constitutional spirit of insolence and cruelty procured for
himself an universal hatred.
—Thomas Paine, Common Sense, 1776
5. This embarrassing volume is an out-and-out partisan screed made up of
illogical arguments, distorted and cherry-picked information, ridiculous
generalizations and nutty asides. It’s a nasty stewpot of intellectually
untenable premises and irresponsible speculation that frequently reads
like a “Saturday Night Live” parody of the crackpot right.
—Michiko Kakutani, “Dispatch from Gomorrah, Savaging the Cultural Left,”
The New York Times, 6 February 2007.
6. I was seven years old when the first election campaign which I can re-
member took place in my district. At that time we still had no political
parties, so the announcement of this campaign was received with very
little interest. But popular feeling ran high when it was disclosed that
one of the candidates was “the Prince.” There was no need to add Chris-
tian and surname to realize which Prince was meant. He was the owner
125

Fallacies
of the great estate formed by the arbitrary occupation of the vast tracts
of land reclaimed in the previous century from the Lake of Fucino.
About eight thousand families (that is, the majority of the local popula-
tion) are still employed today in cultivating the estate’s fourteen thou-
sand hectares. The Prince was deigning to solicit “his” families for their
vote so that he could become their deputy in parliament. The agents of
the estate, who were working for the Prince, talked in impeccably liberal
phrases: “Naturally,” said they, “naturally, no one will be forced to vote
for the Prince, that’s understood; in the same way that no one, naturally,
can force the Prince to allow people who don’t vote for him to work on
his land. This is the period of real liberty for everybody; you’re free, and
so is the Prince.” The announcement of these “liberal” principles pro-
duced general and understandable consternation among the peasants.
For, as may easily be guessed, the Prince was the most hated person in
our part of the country.
—Ignazio Silone, The God That Failed, 1949
7. According to R. Grunberger, author of A Social History of the Third Reich,
Nazi publishers used to send the following notice to German readers
who let their subscriptions lapse: “Our paper certainly deserves the sup-
port of every German. We shall continue to forward copies of it to you,
and hope that you will not want to expose yourself to unfortunate con-
sequences in the case of cancellation.”
8. In While Europe Slept: How Radical Islam Is Destroying the West from Within
(2006), Bruce Bawer argues that “by appeasing a totalitarian [Muslim]
ideology Europe is “imperiling its liberty.” Political correctness, he
writes, is keeping Europeans from defending themselves, resulting in
“its self-destructive passivity, softness toward tyranny, its reflexive incli-
nation to appease.” A review of the book in The Economist observes that
Mr. Bawer “weakens his argument by casting too wide a net,” and an-
other reviewer, Imam Fatih Alev, says of Bawer’s view that “it is a con-
structed idea that there is this very severe difference between Western
values and Muslim values.”
—“Clash Between European and Islamic Views,” in Books, 
The New York Times, 8 February 2007.
9. To know absolutely that there is no God one must have infinite knowl-
edge. But to have infinite knowledge one would have to be God. It is
impossible to be God and an atheist at the same time. Atheists cannot
prove that God doesn’t exist.
—“Argument Against Atheism,” 
http://aaron_mp.tripod.com/id2.html (2007)
10. When we had got to this point in the argument, and everyone saw that
the definition of justice had been completely upset, Thrasymachus, in-
stead of replying to me, said: “Tell me, Socrates, have you got a nurse?”
126

Fallacies
“Why do you ask such a question,” I said, “when you ought rather
to be answering?”
“Because she leaves you to snivel, and never wipes your nose; she
has not even taught you to know the shepherd from the sheep.”
—Plato, The Republic
11. I also admit that there are people for whom even the reality of the exter-
nal world [is] a grave problem. My answer is that I do not address them,
but that I presuppose a minimum of reason in my readers.
—Paul Feyerabend, “Materialism and the Mind-Body Problem,” 
The Review of Metaphysics, 1963
12. Clarence Darrow, renowned criminal trial lawyer, began one shrewd
plea to a jury thus:
You folks think we city people are all crooked, but we city people think you
farmers are all crooked. There isn’t one of you I’d trust in a horse trade,
because you’d be sure to skin me. But when it comes to having sympathy
with a person in trouble, I’d sooner trust you folks than city folks, because
you come to know people better and get to be closer friends.
—Irving Stone, Clarence Darrow for the Defense, 1943
13. A national organization called In Defense of Animals registered protest,
in 1996, against alleged cruelty to animals being sold live or slaughtered
in Chinese markets in San Francisco. Patricia Briggs, who brought the
complaint to the city’s Animal Welfare Commission, said: “The time of
the crustaceans is coming. You’d think people wouldn’t care about lob-
sters, because they aren’t cuddly and fuzzy and they have these vacant
looks and they don’t vocalize. But you’d be surprised how many people
care.” To which response was given by Astella Kung, proprietor of Ming
Kee Game Birds, where fowl are sold live: “How about the homeless
people? Why don’t the animal people use their energy to care for those
people? They have no homes! They are hungry!”
—“Cuisine Raises Debate on Cruelty and Culture,” 
The New York Times, 26 August 1996
14. The U.S. Department of Agriculture operates a price support program
for the benefit of tobacco producers; its regulations limit the amount of
tobacco that can be grown, and thus keep the price of tobacco high.
Those same producers fight against consumer health regulations. On
what ground? One analyst observed:
For the proponent of price support regulations to turn around and fight
consumer-health regulations on the grounds that government regulation is
unwarranted interference by big brother and bad for the economy is the
kind of argument that makes rational people wince.
—A. L. Fritschler, Smoking and Politics
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1983)
15. During World War I, the British government deliberately inflamed the
anti-German sentiments of the people with cartoons. One of these car-
toons appears on the next page.
127

Fallacies
B. Each of the following passages may be plausibly criticized by some who con-
clude that it contains a fallacy, but each will be defended by some who deny
that the argument is fallacious. Discuss the merits of each argument and explain
why you conclude that it does or does not contain a fallacy of relevance.
1. The chairman of General Electric, Jack Welch, was challenged at a stock-
holder’s meeting recently by a nun who argued that GE was responsible
for the cleanup of the Hudson River where pollutants from GE’s plants
had for many years been allowed to collect. Welch flatly denied the
company’s responsibility, saying, “Sister, you have to stop this conversa-
tion. You owe it to God to be on the side of truth here.”
—Elizabeth Kolbert, “The River,” The New Yorker, 4 December 2000
2. Gender feminism is notoriously impossible to falsify: it chews up and di-
gests all counterevidence, transmuting it into confirming evidence. The
fact that most people, including most women, do not see the pervasive
and tenacious system of male power only shows how thoroughly they
have been socialized to perpetuate it. The more women who reject the
gender feminist perspective, the more this proves them in thrall to the
androcentric system. Nothing and no one can refute the hypothesis of
the sex-gender system for those who . . . see it so clearly “everywhere.”
—Christina Sommers, Proceedings of the American Philosophical Association, 
June 1992
Source: Wilson, David (20th
century). The Bridgeman Art
Library International. Private
Collection/The Bridgeman Art
Library.
128

Fallacies
3. As the American Revolution began to appear likely, some Americans
sought reconciliation with England; Thomas Paine opposed reconcilia-
tion bitterly. In Common Sense (1776), he wrote:
. . . all those who espouse the doctrine of reconciliation may be included
within the following descriptions. Interested men, who are not to be trusted,
weak men who cannot see, prejudiced men who will not see, and a certain
set of moderate men who think better of the European world than it deserves;
and this last class, by an ill-judged deliberation, will be the cause of more
calamities to this Continent than all the other three.
4. “But I observe,” says Cleanthes, “with regard to you, Philo, and all spec-
ulative sceptics, that your doctrine and practice are as much at variance
in the most abstruse points of theory as in the conduct of common life.”
—David Hume, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, 1779
5. A press release from the National Education Association (NEA) begins
with the following statement: “America’s teachers see smaller classes as
the most critical element in doing a better job, a survey by the NEA indi-
cates.” . . . But the NEA, of course, is interested in having as many teach-
ers in the schools as possible. For example, in a 3,000-pupil school
system with 30 pupils assigned to each class, the teaching staff would be
approximately 100. But if class size were changed to 25 the total number
of teachers would rise to 120. And in a time of shrinking enrollments,
that is a way to keep teachers on the public payroll. . . .
It is unfortunate that an organization with the professional reputa-
tion the National Education Association enjoys should be so self-serving.
—Cynthia Parsons, Christian Science Monitor Service
6. I testify unto every man that heareth the words of the prophecy of this
book. If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him
the plagues that are written in this book: And if any man shall take
away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away
his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city and from the
things which are written in this book.
—Rev. 22: 18–19
7. Anytus: “Socrates, I think that you are too ready to speak evil of men: and,
if you will take my advice, I would recommend you to be careful. Perhaps
there is no city in which it is not easier to do men harm than to do them
good, and this is certainly the case at Athens, as I believe that you know.”
—Plato, Meno
8. The Greek historian Thucydides, in his History of the Peloponnesian War,
gave the following account of an Athenian’s appeal to representatives of
the small island of Melos, to join Athens in its war against Sparta:
You know as well as we do that, in the logic of human nature, right only
comes into question where there is a balance of power, while it is might that
determines what the strong exhort and the weak concede. . . . Your
strongest weapons are hopes yet unrealized, while the weapons in your
129

Fallacies
hands are somewhat inadequate for holding out against the forces already
arranged against you. . . . Reflect that you are taking a decision for your
country, a country whose fate hangs upon a single decision right or wrong.
9. In that melancholy book, The Future of an Illusion, Dr. Freud, himself one
of the last great theorists of the European capitalist class, has stated with
simple clarity the impossibility of religious belief for the educated man
of today.
—John Strachey, The Coming Struggle for Power, 1933
10. The classic trap for any revolutionary is always “What’s your alterna-
tive?” But even if you could provide the interrogator with a blueprint,
this does not mean he would use it; in most cases he is not sincere in
wanting to know.
—Shulamith Firestone, The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for Feminist Revolution, 1970
4
Fallacies of Defective Induction
The premises of the fallacious arguments described in the preceding section are
not relevant to the conclusions drawn. However, there are many fallacious argu-
ments in which the premises are relevant and yet are wholly inadequate. These
we call fallacies of defective induction. What are asserted as premises simply
do not serve as good reasons to reach the conclusion drawn.
D1. The Argument from Ignorance (Argumentum
ad Ignorantiam)
Someone commits the fallacy argumentum ad ignorantiam if he or she argues that
something is true because it has not been proved false, or false because it has not
been proved true. Just because some proposition has not yet been proved false,
we are not entitled to conclude that it is true. The same point can be made in re-
verse: If some proposition has not yet been proved true, we are not entitled to
conclude that it is false. Many true propositions have not yet been proved true, of
course, just as many false propositions have not yet been proved false. The fact
that we cannot now be confident rarely serves as a good reason to assert knowl-
edge of falsity, or of truth. Such an inference is defective; the fallacy is called the
argument from ignorance, or the argument ad ignorantiam. Ignorance sometimes
obliges us to suspend judgment, assigning neither truth nor falsity to the propo-
sition in doubt.
As a current illustration, the great abolitionist, Frederick Douglass, will soon
have a memorial, now being built at the northwest corner of Central Park in New
York City. Beneath an 8-foot statue of Douglass himself is planned a quilt in gran-
ite, an array of squares that are supposed, in legend, to be part of a secret code
used along the Underground Railroad to aid slaves escaping from their southern
owners. However, prominent historians now agree that there never was such a
code. There is no surviving example of such a quilt, and there is not a single men-
tion of quilting codes in any diaries or memoirs from that period. The designer of
Fallacy of defective
induction
A fallacy in which the
premises are too weak
or ineffective to warrant
the conclusion.
Argument from
ignorance
A fallacy in which a
proposition is held to be
true just because it has
not been proven false,
or false because it has
not been proven true.
Also known as
“argument ad
ignorantiam.”
130

Fallacies
the memorial, Algernon Miller, nevertheless insists that the quilt remain part of
the memorial project. “No matter what anyone has to say,” argues Miller, “they
[his scholarly critics] weren’t there in that particular moment.” Not knowing that
the legend is false, he concludes that we are justified in presuming it true.
The fallacious appeal to ignorance crops up in science when plausible
claims are held to be false because evidence of their truth cannot be provided.
There may be good reason for its absence: In archeology or in paleontology, for
instance, that evidence may have been destroyed over time. In astronomy or in
physics, the evidence desired may be so distant in space or in time that it is
physically unobtainable. The fact that some desired evidence has not been
gathered does not justify the conclusion that an otherwise plausible claim is
false.
The argument from ignorance is particularly attractive to those who defend
propositions that are very doubtful, even far-fetched. Pseudo-scientists who
make unverifiable claims about psychic phenomena (for example, about
telepathy, or about contact with the dead) may insist that the truth of their
claims is supported by the fact that their critics have been unable to prove their
falsehood.
An argument from ignorance was confronted by Galileo, whose newly in-
vented telescope, early in the seventeenth century, plainly revealed the moun-
tains and valleys of the moon. In his day, the “truth” that the moon was a perfect
crystalline sphere was unquestioned; it had to be perfect because that was what
Aristotle had taught. Confronted by the evidence the telescope revealed,
Galileo’s Aristotelian opponents responded with an argument that seemed ir-
refutable: Any apparent irregularities on the moon’s surface are filled in with a
crystalline substance that is, of course, invisible! This hypothesis saved the
moon’s perfection, was in accord with what Aristotle had taught—and could not
be proved false. This fallacy deserved ridicule. Galileo answered with an
argumentum ad ignorantiam of his own, absurd enough to expose his critics: The
moon is not a perfect sphere, he replied, because there are surely crystal
mountains—invisible!—rising high from its surface. Because my theological crit-
ics cannot prove the claim false, we cannot conclude that such mountains are not
there!
Whenever some great change is proposed, within an institution, or in society
at large, those threatened by it are likely to attack with an argument from igno-
rance. How do we know it will work? How do we know that it is safe? We do not
know; and without the knowledge that it is workable and safe, we must not
adopt the change proposed. To prove workability or safety in advance, however,
is often impossible. The objection sometimes takes the form of questions that
suggest (but do not assert) the most horrific outcomes.
The fallacy can be a serious hindrance to progress. When the recombination
of DNA, now an invaluable tool in medical science, first became possible in the
1970s, objections to further experimentation in that field were based largely on
ignorance. All experiments with recombinant DNA should be stopped immedi-
ately, said one prominent scientist, who asked: “If Dr. Frankenstein must go on
131

producing his little biological monsters . . . how can we be sure what would hap-
pen once the little beasts escaped from the laboratory?”16 Another fearful scien-
tist who sought to block these investigations made the appeal to ignorance
explicitly:
Can we predict the consequences? We are ignorant of the broad principles of
evolution. . . . We simply do not know. We are ignorant of the various factors we
currently perceive to participate in the evolutionary process. We are ignorant of the
depth of security of our own environmental niche. . . . We do not know.17
What we do not know does not justify condemning the effort to learn. Fortu-
nately, these appeals to ignorance were not successful in halting experimentation
in a scientific realm whose value in saving and improving lives has proved, in
the years since, to be incalculable.
Policy changes may be supported, as well as opposed, by an appeal to igno-
rance. When the federal government issued a waiver allowing Wisconsin to re-
duce the additional benefits it had been giving to welfare mothers for having
more than one child, the governor of Wisconsin was asked if there was any evi-
dence that unwed mothers were having additional children simply to gain the
added income. His reply, ad ignorantiam, was this: “No, there isn’t. There really
isn’t, but there is no evidence to the contrary, either.”18
In some circumstances, of course, the fact that certain evidence or results
have not been obtained, even after they have been actively sought in ways calcu-
lated to reveal them, may have substantial argumentative force. New drugs
being tested for safety, for example, are commonly given to rodents or other ani-
mal subjects for prolonged periods; the absence of any toxic effect on the animals
is taken to be evidence (although not conclusive evidence) that the drug is prob-
ably not toxic to humans. Consumer protection often relies on evidence of this
kind. In circumstances like these we rely, not on ignorance, but on our knowl-
edge, or conviction, that if the result we are concerned about were likely to arise,
it would have arisen in some of the test cases. This use of the inability to prove
something true supposes that investigators are highly skilled, and that they very
probably would have uncovered the evidence sought had that been possible.
Tragic mistakes sometimes are made in this sphere, but if the standard is set too
high—if what is required is a conclusive proof of harmlessness that cannot ever
be given—consumers will be denied what may prove to be valuable, even life-
saving, medical therapies.
Similarly, when a security investigation yields no evidence of improper con-
duct by the persons investigated, it would be wrong to conclude that the investi-
gation has left us ignorant. A thorough investigation will properly result in the
persons being “cleared.” Not to draw a conclusion, in some cases, is as much a
breach of correct reasoning as it would be to draw a mistaken conclusion.
The appeal to ignorance is common and often appropriate in a criminal
court, where an accused person, in U.S. jurisprudence and British common law,
is presumed innocent until proved guilty. We adopt this principle because we
recognize that the error of convicting the innocent is far more grave than that of
Fallacies
132

Fallacies
acquitting the guilty—and thus the defense in a criminal case may legitimately
claim that if the prosecution has not proved guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, the
only verdict possible is “not guilty.” The U.S. Supreme Court strongly reaffirmed
this standard of proof in these words:
The reasonable-doubt standard . . . is a prime instrument for reducing the risk of
convictions resting on factual error. The standard provides concrete substance for the
presumption of innocence—that bedrock axiomatic and elementary principle whose
enforcement lies at the foundation of the administration of our criminal law.19
However, this appeal to ignorance succeeds only when innocence must be as-
sumed in the absence of proof to the contrary; in other contexts, such an appeal is
indeed an argument ad ignorantiam.
D2. The Appeal to Inappropriate Authority
(Argumentum ad Verecundiam)
The argument ad verecundiam is committed when someone argues that a proposi-
tion is true because an expert in a given field has said that it is true. This fallacy is
predicated upon the feeling of respect that people have for the famous. An expert’s
judgment constitutes no conclusive proof; experts disagree, and even when they
are in agreement they may be wrong. However, reference to an authority in an area
of competence may carry some weight, but it doesn’t prove a conclusion. Ultimate-
ly, even experts need to rely upon empirical evidence and rational inference.
The fallacy of the appeal to inappropriate authority arises when the appeal
is made to parties who have no legitimate claim to authority in the matter at
hand. Thus, in an argument about morality, an appeal to the opinions of Dar-
win, a towering authority in biology, would be fallacious, as would be an appeal
to the opinions of a great artist such as Picasso to settle an economic dispute.
Care must be taken in determining whose authority it is reasonable to rely on,
and whose to reject. Although Picasso was not an economist, his judgment
might plausibly be given some weight in a dispute pertaining to the economic
value of an artistic masterpiece; and if the role of biology in moral questions
were in dispute, Darwin might indeed be an appropriate authority. This is not to
say that an authority in one field might not be correct when speaking outside
his or her area of expertise—to allege that would constitute a species of
argumentum ad hominem circumstantial. In every instance, an argument must be
judged upon its own merits.
The most blatant examples of misplaced appeals to inappropriate authority
appear in advertising “testimonials.” We are urged to drive an automobile of a par-
ticular make because a famous golfer or tennis player affirms its superiority; we
are urged to drink a beverage of a certain brand because some movie star or foot-
ball coach expresses enthusiasm about it. Whenever the truth of some proposition
is asserted on the basis of the authority of one who has no special competence in
that sphere, the appeal to inappropriate authority is the fallacy committed.
This appears to be a simple-minded mistake that is easy to avoid, but there
are circumstances in which the fallacious appeal is tempting, and therefore
Appeal to
inappropriate
authority A fallacy in
which a conclusion is
accepted as true simply
because an expert has
said that it is true. This is
a fallacy whether or not
the expert’s area of
expertise is relevant to
the conclusion. Also
known as “argument ad
verecundiam.”
133

Fallacies
intellectually dangerous. Here are two examples: In the sphere of internation-
al relations, in which weapons and war unhappily play a major role, one opin-
ion or another is commonly supported by appealing to those whose special
competence lies in the technical design or construction of weapons. Physicists
such as Robert Oppenheimer and Edward Teller, for example, may indeed
have been competent to give authoritative judgments regarding how certain
weapons can (or cannot) function, but their knowledge in this sphere did not
give them special wisdom in determining broad political goals. An appeal to
the strong judgment of a distinguished physicist as to the wisdom of ratifying
some international treaty would be an argument ad verecundiam. Similarly, we
admire the depth and insight of great fiction—say, in the novels of Alexander
Solzhenitsyn or Saul Bellow—but to resort to their judgment in determining
the real culprit in some political dispute would be an appeal ad verecundiam.
The Latin name was originated by John Locke, whose criticism was directed
chiefly at those who think that citing learned authorities is enough to win any
argument, who think it “a breach of modesty for others to derogate any way
from it, and question authority,” and who “style it impudence in anyone who
shall stand out against them.” That argument Locke named ad verecundiam—
literally, an appeal to the modesty of those who might be so bold as to oppose
authority.20
This species of the argumentum ad verecundiam is an appeal to one who has
no legitimate claim to authority. Even one who does have a legitimate claim to
authority may well prove mistaken, of course, and we may later regret our
choice of experts. However, if the experts we chose deserved their reputation for
knowledge, it was no fallacy to consult them even if they erred. Our mistake be-
comes a fallacy when our conclusion is based exclusively upon the verdict of an
authority.
D3. False Cause (Argument non Causa pro Causa)
It is obvious that any reasoning that relies on treating as the cause of some thing
or event what is not really its cause must be seriously mistaken. Often we are
tempted to suppose, or led to suppose, that we understand some specific cause-
and-effect relation when in fact we do not. The nature of the connection between
cause and effect, and how we determine whether such a connection is present,
are central problems of inductive logic and scientific method. Presuming the re-
ality of a causal connection that does not really exist is a common mistake; in
Latin the mistake is called the fallacy of non causa pro causa; we call it simply the
fallacy of false cause.
Whether the causal connection alleged is indeed mistaken may sometimes be
a matter for dispute. Some college faculty members, it has been argued, grade le-
niently because they fear that rigorous grading will cause lowered evaluations of
them by their students and damage to their careers. Gradual “grade inflation” is
said to be the result of this fear. One college professor wrote this:
False cause
A fallacy in which
something that is not
really the cause of
something else is
treated as its cause.
Also known as non
causa pro causa.
134

Fallacies
Course evaluation forms [completed by students] are now required in many
institutions, and salaries are influenced by the results. When I joined the University of
Michigan 30 years ago, my salary was higher than that of any member of the
anthropology department who is still active today. My standards for grading have not
followed the trend toward inflation. Student complaints about grades have increased,
and now my salary is at the bottom of the professorial list.21
Do you think the author of this passage commits the fallacy of false cause?
We sometimes mistakenly presume that one event is caused by another be-
cause it follows that other closely in time. In primitive cultures such mistakes
were common; the sun would invariably reappear after an eclipse if the drums
had been beaten in the darkness, but we know that it is absurd to suppose that the
beating of the drums was the cause of the sun’s reappearance. Mere temporal suc-
cession does not establish a causal connection. This variety of false cause is called
the fallacy of post hoc ergo propter hoc—“after this, therefore because of this.”
Even very sophisticated people sometimes commit this fallacy. A few years
ago, a critic ridiculed the reasoning of a U.S. congressman this way:
I’m getting tired of assertions like those of Rep. Ernest Istook, Jr.—“As prayer has
gone out of the schools, guns, knives, drugs, and gangs have come in”—with the
unsupported implication that there is some causal connection between these events. . . .
We could just as well say, “After we threw God out of the schools, we put a man on
the moon.” Students may or may not need more faith, but Congress could certainly
use more reason.22
Some suggested that the 1954 insertion of the words “under God” into the
Pledge of Allegiance was the cause of the host of social ills that followed!23
Mistakes of this kind are widespread. Unusual weather conditions are
blamed on some unrelated celestial phenomenon that happened to precede
them; an infection really caused by a virus is thought to be caused by a chill
wind, or wet feet, and so on. Perhaps no sphere is more vulnerable to this sort of
argument than that of crimes and punishments. Typical is this remark in a letter
to The New York Times:
The death penalty in the United States has given us the highest crime rate and
greatest number of prisoners per 100,000 population in the industrialized world.24
Post hoc ergo propter hoc is an easy fallacy to detect when it is blatant, but even
the best of scientists and statesmen are occasionally misled by it.
False cause is also the fallacy committed when one mistakenly argues against
some proposal on the ground that any change in a given direction is sure to lead
to further changes in the same direction—and thus to grave consequences. Tak-
ing this step, it may be said, will put us on a slippery slope to disaster—and such
reasoning is therefore called the fallacy of the slippery slope. Whether the feared
consequences will indeed arise is not determined by the first step in a given di-
rection; the suggestion that a change in that direction will trigger a catastrophic
chain reaction is not generally warranted, although such argument is commonly
invoked in defense of the status quo. What needs to be determined is what, in
fact, probably will (or will not) cause the results feared.
Post hoc ergo propter
hoc A fallacy in which
an event is presumed to
have been caused by
a closely preceding
event. Literally, “After
this; therefore, because
of this.” 
Slippery slope
A fallacy in which
change in a particular
direction is asserted to
lead inevitably to further
changes (usually
undesirable) in the same
direction.
135

Fallacies
Consider the following illustration: One common objection to the legaliza-
tion of assisted suicide is that once formal permission has been given to medical
doctors to act in a way that is of disputable morality, doctors will be led to en-
gage in more and greater immorality of the same or similar type. The first lenien-
cy ought to be avoided, according to this argument, because it will leave us
insecure on a slope so slippery that our first step down cannot be our last. To this
argument one keen critic responded:
The slippery slope argument, although influential, is hard to deal with rationally. It
suggests that once we allow doctors to shorten the life of patients who request it,
doctors could and would wantonly kill burdensome patients who do not want to die.
This suggestion is not justified. . . .
Physicians often prescribe drugs which, in doses greater than prescribed, would
kill the patient. No one fears that the actual doses prescribed will lead to their use of
lethal doses. No one objects to such prescriptions in fear of a “slippery slope.”
Authorizing physicians to assist in shortening the life of patients who request this
assistance no more implies authority to shorten the life of patients who want to prolong
it, than authority for surgery to remove the gall bladder implies authority to remove the
patient’s heart.25
The supposition that moving in a given direction, however prudently, is sure
to produce the dreadful result of moving in the same direction to excess, is the
fallacy of the slippery slope.
There are circumstances, of course, in which the first step in a new direction
does establish a precedent that makes additional movement in that direction eas-
ier to achieve. This may be good or bad. Opposing new legislation that would
punish crimes more severely if they were motivated by racial hatred, one critic
writes:
There should not be a separate category for hate crimes. A murder is a murder; 
a beating is a beating. We should prosecute people for the crimes they commit, not
why they commit them. If we start to categorize crimes by their motivation, we start
down a very slippery slope.26
Some arguments of this kind have merit, because precedent can affect sub-
sequent decision making. The slippery slope is indeed a fallacy—but the mere
allegation that that fallacy has been committed does not prove the argument in
question faulty.
D4. Hasty Generalization
Throughout our lives, we rely on statements about how things generally are and
how people generally behave. Nonetheless, general claims, although critical in
reasoning, must be carefully scrutinized: The universality of their application
ought never be accepted or assumed without justification. Hasty generalization
is the fallacy we commit when we draw conclusions about all the persons or
things in a given class on the basis of our knowledge about only one (or only a
very few) of the members of that class. We all know of persons who have gener-
alized mistakenly about certain companies or governments because of a single
Hasty generalization
A fallacy of defective
induction in which one
moves carelessly from a
single case, or a very
few cases, to a large-
scale generalization
about all or most cases.
Also known as
“converse accident.”
136

Fallacies
experience. Stereotypes about people who come from certain countries, or cul-
tures, are widespread and commonly mistaken; hasty generalizations about for-
eign cultures can be downright nasty, and are good illustrations of the fallacious
leap to broad generalization on the basis of very little evidence.
An anecdote or single instance may indeed be relevant support for a general
rule or theory; but when it is treated as proof of that theory, the generalization is
not well founded—the induction is defective. Here is an example: Eating deep-
fried foods tends to raise one’s cholesterol level. A single instance in which it
does not do so is hardly sufficient to show that such foods are healthy. The owner
of a “fish and chips” shop in England fallaciously defended the healthfulness of
his deep-fried cookery with this argument:
Take my son, Martyn. He’s been eating fish and chips his whole life, and he just had
a cholesterol test, and his level is below the national average. What better proof could
there be than a fryer’s son?27
Foods or drugs that are harmless in one context may be harmful in another.
To move from a single case, or a very few cases, to a large-scale generalization
about all or most cases, is fallacious reasoning, but it is common and often tempt-
ing. It is also called the fallacy of converse accident because it is the reverse of an-
other common mistake, known as the fallacy of accident, in which generalizations
are misused in another way. We turn to it next.
Fallacies of Defective Induction
D1. The Argument from Ignorance (ad Ignorantiam)
An informal fallacy in which a conclusion is supported by an illegitimate appeal
to ignorance, as when it is supposed that something is likely to be true because
we cannot prove that it is false.
D2. The Appeal to Inappropriate Authority (ad Verecundiam)
An informal fallacy in which the appeal to authority is illegitimate, either be-
cause the authority appealed to has no special claim to expertise on the topic at
issue, or, more generally, because no authority is assured to be reliable.
D3. False Cause (non Causa pro Causa)
An informal fallacy in which the mistake arises from accepting as the cause of an
event what is not really its cause.
D4. Hasty Generalization
An informal fallacy in which a principle that is true of a particular case is ap-
plied, carelessly or deliberately, to the great run of cases.
o v e r v i e w
137

Fallacies
5
Fallacies of Presumption
Some mistakes in everyday reasoning are the consequence of an unjustified assump-
tion, often suggested by the way in which the argument is formulated. That sugges-
tion may be deliberate, or the assumption may be only an oversight. In either case,
the upshot is that the reader, the listener, and even the author of the passage may be
led to assume the truth of some unproved and unwarranted proposition. When
such dubious propositions, buried in the argument, are crucial for the support of
the conclusion, the argument is bad and can be very misleading. Arguments that
depend on such unwarranted leaps are called fallacies of presumption.
In fallacious arguments of this kind the premises may indeed be relevant to
the conclusion drawn, but that relevance is likely to flow from the tacit supposi-
tion of what has not been given support and may even be unsupportable. The
presumption often goes unnoticed. To expose such a fallacy it is therefore usually
sufficient to call attention to the smuggled assumption, or supposition, and to its
doubtfulness or its falsity. Three common fallacies are included in this category.
P1. Accident
Circumstances alter cases. A generalization that is largely true may not apply in
a given case (or to some subcategory of cases) for good reasons. The reasons the
generalization does not apply in those cases have to do with the special circum-
stances, also called the “accidental” circumstances, of that case or those cases. If
these accidental circumstances are ignored, and we assume that the generaliza-
tion applies universally, we commit the fallacy of accident.
In the preceding section we explained the fallacy of converse accident, or hasty
generalization, the mistake of moving carelessly or too quickly to a generalization
that the evidence does not support. Accident is the fallacy that arises when we
move carelessly or unjustifiably from a generalization to some particulars that it
does not in fact cover.
Experience teaches us that even generalizations that are widely applicable
and very useful are likely to have exceptions for which we must be on guard. For
example, there is a general principle in law that hearsay evidence—statements
made by a third party outside court—may not be accepted as evidence in court;
this is the “hearsay rule,” and it is a good rule. However, when the person whose
oral communications are reported is dead, or when the party reporting the
hearsay in court does so in conflict with his own best interest, that rule may not
apply. Indeed, there is hardly any rule or general principle that does not have
plausible exceptions, and we are likely to argue fallaciously if we reason on the
supposition that some rule applies universally.
P2. Complex Question (Plurium Interrogationum)
One of the most common fallacies of presumption is to ask a question in such a
way as to presuppose the truth of some conclusion that is buried in the question.
The question itself is likely to be rhetorical, with no answer actually being
sought. But putting the question seriously, thereby introducing its presupposi-
tion surreptitiously, often achieves the questioner’s purpose—fallaciously.
Fallacy of
presumption
Any fallacy in which the
conclusion depends on
a tacit assumption that is
dubious, unwarranted,
or false.
Fallacy of accident
A fallacy in which a
generalization is
mistakenly applied to a
particular case to which
the generalization does
not apply.
138

Fallacies
Thus an essayist recently asked:
With all of the hysteria, all of the fear, all of the phony science, could it be that man-made
global warming is the greatest hoax ever perpetrated on the American people?28
Such a statement assumes that much of the evidence supporting global warm-
ing is unreliable or “phony.” Or a homeowner might ask, regarding a proposed in-
crease in the property tax, “How can you expect the majority of the voters, who
rent but don’t own property and don’t have to pay the tax, to care if the tax burden
of others is made even more unfair?”—assuming both that the burden of the pro-
posed tax is unfair and that those who rent rather than own their own homes are
not affected by tax increases on property. Because assumptions like these are not
asserted openly, the questioners evade the need to defend them forthrightly.
The complex question is often a deceitful device. The speaker may pose some
question, then answer it or strongly suggest the answer with the truth of the
premise that had been buried in the question simply assumed. Aletter writer asks,
“If America’s booming economy depends on people’s using consumer credit be-
yond their means, thus creating poverty, do we really have a healthy economy?”29
But the role and the results of consumer credit remain to be addressed.
One critic of research in genetics hides his assumptions in this question:
“What are the consequences of reducing the world’s gene pool to patented intel-
lectual property, controlled by a handful of life-science corporations?”30 The
“consequences” asked about are never actually discussed; they are only a device
with which the reader may be frightened by the assumptions of the question—
that the world’s gene pool is soon likely to be reduced to patented intellectual
property, and that a handful of corporations will soon control that gene pool.
Establishing the plausibility of such threats requires much more than asking
questions designed to presuppose them.
The appearance of a question in an editorial or headline often has the pur-
pose of suggesting the truth of the unstated assumptions on which it is built:
“Judge Took Bribe?” This technique is a common mark of what is called “yellow
journalism.” In debate, whenever a question is accompanied by the aggressive
demand that it be answered “yes or no,” there is reason to suspect that the ques-
tion is “loaded”—that it is unfairly complex.
Does the distinguished senator believe that the American public is really so naïve that
they will endorse just any stopgap measure?
This “question,” of course, cannot be answered “Yes.” It conceals several un-
challenged assumptions: that what is proposed is a “stopgap” measure, that it is
inadequate, and that the American public would reject it.
The mistake that underlies the fallacy of complex question also underlies a
common problem in parliamentary procedure. Deliberative bodies sometimes con-
front a motion that, although not intended deceptively, is covertly complex. In such
circumstances there is a need, before discussion, to simplify the issues confronting
the body. This accounts for the privileged position, in parliamentary procedure
governed by Robert’s Rules of Order or similar manuals, of the motion to divide the
question. For example, a motion that the body “postpone for one year” action on
Complex question
An informal fallacy in
which a question is
asked in such a way as
to presuppose the truth
of some conclusion
buried in that question.
139

Fallacies
some controversial matter may wisely be divided into the questions of whether to
postpone action, and if that is done, then to determine the length of the postpone-
ment. Some members may support the postponement itself yet find the one-year
period intolerably long; if the opportunity to divide the question were not given
priority, the body might be maneuvered into taking action on a motion that, be-
cause of its complexity, cannot be decided in a way that captures the true will of the
body. A presiding officer, having the duty to promote a fully rational debate, may
solicit the motion to divide the question before beginning the substantive discussion.
Egregious examples of the fallacy of the complex question arise in dialogue
or cross-examination in which one party poses a question that is complex, a sec-
ond party answers the question, and the first party then draws a fallacious infer-
ence for which that answer was the ground. For example:
Lawyer:
The figures seem to indicate that your sales increased as a result
of these misleading advertisements. Is that correct?
Witness:
They did not!
Lawyer:
But you do admit, then, that your advertising was misleading.
How long have you been engaging in practices like these?
When a question is complex, and all of its presuppositions are to be denied,
they must be denied individually. The denial of only one presupposition may
lead to the assumption of the truth of the other. In law, this has been called “the
negative pregnant.” Here is an illustration from a notorious murder trial:
Q:
Lizzie, did you not take an axe and whack your mother forty times, and
then whack your father forty-one times when faced with the prospect of
cold mutton stew?
A:
Not true. We were to eat Brussels sprouts fondue that day.
P3. Begging the Question (Petitio Principii)
The fallacy called begging the question is widely misunderstood, partly because
its name is misleading. It is the mistake of assuming the truth of what one seeks
to prove. The “question” in a formal debate is the issue that is in dispute; to
“beg” the question is to ask, or to suppose, that the very matter in controversy be
conceded. This is an argument with no merit at all, of course, and one who
makes such an assumption commits a gross fallacy.
The Latin name of the fallacy, for which “begging the question” is the trans-
lation, is petitio principii, so each instance of it is called a petitio. One might think
the fallacy would be so obvious that no one would ever commit it, but that is not
the case. The logical mistake arises because it is obscured, even from its author,
by the language used. Logician Richard Whately used this classic example of a
deceptive petitio:
To allow every man unbounded freedom of speech must always be, on the whole,
advantageous to the state; for it is highly conducive to the interests of the community that
each individual should enjoy a liberty, perfectly unlimited, of expressing his sentiments.31
Begging the question
An informal fallacy in
which the conclusion of
an argument is stated or
assumed in any one of
the premises. Also
known as “circular
argument” and petitio
principii.
140

Fallacies
This statement says only that freedom of speech is a good thing because it is
a good thing—which is not much of an argument.
In the effort to establish the desired conclusion, an author may cast about,
searching for premises that will do the trick. Of course, the conclusion itself, refor-
mulated in other words, will do the trick very nicely. Another illustration, equally
fallacious, is found in this claim by a sixteenth-century Chinese philosopher:
There is no such thing as knowledge which cannot be carried into practice, for such
knowledge is really no knowledge at all.32
This fallacy, like the fallacy of missing the point, is often a mistake that is not
recognized by the author of the passage. The presumption that is the heart of the
fallacy is buried in the verbiage of the premises, sometimes obscured by confus-
ing or unrecognized synonyms. The arguments are circular—every petitio is a cir-
cular argument—but the circle that has been constructed may be large and
confusing, and thus the logical mistake goes unseen.
It would be wrong to suppose that only silly authors make this mistake. Even
powerful minds are on occasion snared by this fallacy, as is illustrated by a high-
ly controversial issue in the history of philosophy. Logicians have long sought to
establish the reliability of inductive procedures by establishing the truth of what
is called the principle of induction. This is the principle that the laws of nature will
operate tomorrow as they operate today, that in basic ways nature is essentially
uniform, and that therefore we may rely on past experience to guide our conduct
in the future. “That the future will be essentially like the past” is the claim at
issue, but this claim, never doubted in ordinary life, turns out to be very difficult
to prove. Some thinkers have claimed that they could prove it by showing that,
when we have in the past relied on the inductive principle, we have always
found that this method has helped us to achieve our objectives. They ask, “Why
conclude that the future will be like the past?” and answer, “Because it always
has been like the past.”
As David Hume pointed out, however, this common argument is a petitio—it
begs the question. The point at issue is whether nature will continue to behave reg-
ularly. That it has done so in the past cannot serve as proof that it will do so in the
future, unless one assumes the very principle that is here in question: that the fu-
ture will be like the past. Hence Hume, granting that in the past the future has been
like the past, asked the telling question with which philosophers still tussle: How
can we know that future futures will be like past futures? They may be so, of course,
but we cannot assume that they will be for the sake of proving that they will.33
Because the name of this fallacy is widely misunderstood, that name is some-
times wrongly used to refer to a linguistic device that is not a fallacy, not even an ar-
gument of any kind, but merely a provocative observation. A claim “begs” the
question (in this sense) when it raises some question or opens the door to some con-
troversy. Thus a magazine headline may mistakenly read, “The President’s decision
to invade Iraq begs the question: What are the limits of the President’s war-making
authority?” This use of the phrase is simply a linguistic mistake. To “beg the ques-
tion” is not to raise the issue, but to assume the truth of the conclusion sought.
141

Fallacies
Circular arguments are certainly fallacious, but the premises are not irrele-
vant to the conclusions drawn. They are relevant; indeed, they prove the conclu-
sion, but they do so trivially—they end where they began. A petitio principii is
always technically valid, but always worthless.
Fallacies of Presumption
P1. Accident
An informal fallacy in which a generalization is applied to individual cases that
it does not govern.
P2. Complex Question (Plurium Interrogationum)
An informal fallacy in which a question is asked in such a way as to presuppose
the truth of some proposition buried in the question.
P3. Begging the Question (Petitio Principii)
An informal fallacy in which the conclusion of an argument is stated or assumed
in one of the premises.
o v e r v i e w
EXERCISES
Identify and explain any fallacies of defective induction or of presumption in
the following passages:
1. My generation was taught about the dangers of social diseases, how
they were contracted, and the value of abstinence. Our schools did not
teach us about contraception. They did not pass out condoms, as many
of today’s schools do. And not one of the girls in any of my classes, not
even in college, became pregnant out of wedlock. It wasn’t until people
began teaching the children about contraceptives that our problems
with pregnancy began.
—Frank Webster, “No Sex Education, No Sex,” Insight, 17 November 1997
2. A national mailing soliciting funds, by People for the Ethical Treatment
of Animals (PETA), included a survey in which questions were to be an-
swered “yes” or “no.” Two of the questions asked were these:
“Do you realize that the vast majority of painful animal experi-
mentation has no relation at all to human survival or the elimination
of disease?”
“Are you aware that product testing on animals does not keep un-
safe products off the market?”
3. If you want a life full of sexual pleasures, don’t graduate from college.
A study to be published next month in American Demographics magazine
shows that people with the most education have the least amount of sex.
—The Chronicle of Higher Education, 23 January 1998
142

Fallacies
4. There is no surprise in discovering that acupuncture can relieve pain
and nausea. It will probably also be found to work on anxiety, insomnia,
and itching, because these are all conditions in which placebos work.
Acupuncture works by suggestion, a mechanism whose effects on hu-
mans are well known.
The danger in using such placebo methods is that they will be ap-
plied by people inadequately trained in medicine in cases where essen-
tial preliminary work has not been done and where a correct diagnosis
has not been established.
—Fred Levit, M.D., “Acupuncture Is Alchemy, Not Medicine,” 
The New York Times, 12 November 1997
5. In a motion picture featuring the famous French comedian Sacha Guitry,
three thieves are arguing over division of seven pearls worth a king’s
ransom. One of them hands two to the man on his right, then two to the
man on his left. “I,” he says, “will keep three.” The man on his right
says, “How come you keep three?” “Because I am the leader.” “Oh. But
how come you are the leader?” “Because I have more pearls.”
6. “. . . I’ve always reckoned that looking at the new moon over your left
shoulder is one of the carelessest and foolishest things a body can do.
Old Hank Bunker done it once, and bragged about it; and in less than
two years he got drunk and fell off of the shot tower, and spread himself
out so that he was just a kind of a layer, as you may say; and they slid
him edgeways between two barn doors for a coffin, and buried him so,
so they say, but I didn’t see it. Pap told me. But anyway it all come of
looking at the moon that way, like a fool.”
—Mark Twain, The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, 1885
7. Former Senator Robert Packwood of Oregon became so angry at the
state’s leading newspaper, the Portland Oregonian, that in response to a
request from that paper for a quote, he offered this: “Since I quit talking
to the Oregonian, my business has prospered beyond all measure. I assume
that my business has prospered because I don’t talk to the Oregonian.
Therefore I will continue that policy. Thanks.”
—The New York Times, 7 February 1999
8. Mr. Farrakhan, the Black Muslim leader, citing the example of Israel,
said black Americans should also be able to form a country of their own
on the African continent, and said he plans to ask African leaders to
“carve out a territory for all people in the diaspora.” He said black
Americans should also be granted dual citizenship by all African coun-
tries. “We want dual citizenship,” he said, “and because we don’t know
where we came from, we want dual citizenship everywhere.”
—Kenneth Noble, “U.S. Blacks and Africans Meet to Forge Stronger Ties,” 
The New York Times, 27 May 1993
9. The French claim to be a nation of rebels. In fact their heyday of revolu-
tion is over. Twenty-first century France rebels against change, not for it.
143

Fallacies
What typically happens is that a French government decides to do some-
thing radical like, say, enable companies to fire service-sector workers
who assault their customers. The unions see this as the first step on the
road to slavery and call a national strike. After a week of posturing the
government backs down and waiters and sales clerks go back to insult-
ing customers just as they have done since time immemorial.
—S. Clarke, “No Sex, Please, We’re French,” 
The New York Times, 23 March 2007
10. Hiroyuki Suzuki was formerly a member of the Sakaume gumi, an
independent crime family in Japan known for its role in gambling. 
Mr. Suzuki’s wife Mariko broke her kneecap, and when Mariko went to
church the next Sunday, the minister put his hands on her broken knee
and pronounced it healed. She walked away from church that day. 
Mr. Suzuki regarded her religion as a silly waste of time—but he was
fascinated by the recovery of her knee. “In gambling,” he said, “you use
dice. Dice are made from bone. If God could heal her bone, I figured he
could probably assist my dice and make me the best dice thrower in all
of Japan.” Mr. Suzuki’s gambling skills did improve, enabling him to
pay off his debts. He now says his allegiance is to Jesus.
—Stephanie Strom, “He Watched over His Rackets,” 
The New York Times, 22 June 1999
6
Fallacies of Ambiguity
The meaning of words or phrases may shift as a result of inattention, or may be
deliberately manipulated within the course of an argument. A term may have
one sense in a premise but quite a different sense in the conclusion. When the in-
ference drawn depends on such changes it is, of course, fallacious. Mistakes of
this kind are called fallacies of ambiguity or sometimes “sophisms.” The delib-
erate use of such devices is usually crude and readily detected—but at times the
ambiguity may be obscure, the error accidental, the fallacy subtle. Five varieties
are distinguished here.
A1. Equivocation
Most words have more than one literal meaning, and most of the time we have
no difficulty keeping those meanings separate by noting the context and using
our good sense when reading and listening. Yet when we confuse the several
meanings of a word or phrase—accidentally or deliberately—we are using the
word equivocally. If we do that in the context of an argument, we commit the
fallacy of equivocation.
Sometimes the equivocation is obvious and absurd and is used in a joking
line or passage. Lewis Carroll’s account of the adventures of Alice in Through the
Looking-Glass is replete with clever and amusing equivocations. One of them
goes like this:
Fallacy of
equivocation
A fallacy in which two or
more meanings of a
word or phrase are
used, accidentally or
deliberately, in different
parts of an argument.
Fallacy of ambiguity
An informal fallacy
caused by a shift or a
confusion in the
meanings of words or
phrases within an
argument. Also known
as a “sophism.”
144

Fallacies
”Who did you pass on the road?” the King went on, holding his hand out to the
messenger for some hay.
”Nobody,” said the messenger.
”Quite right,” said the King; “this young lady saw him too. So of course Nobody walks
slower than you.”
The equivocation in this passage is rather subtle. As it is first used here, the
word “nobody” simply means “no person.” Reference is then made using a pro-
noun (“him”), as though that word (“nobody”) had named a person. When subse-
quently the same word is capitalized and plainly used as a name (“Nobody”), it
putatively names a person having a characteristic (being passed on the road) de-
rived from the first use of the word. Equivocation is sometimes the tool of wit—
and Lewis Carroll was a very witty logician.*
Equivocal arguments are always fallacious, but they are not always silly or
comical, as in the example discussed in the following excerpt:
There is an ambiguity in the phrase “have faith in” that helps to make faith look
respectable. When a man says that he has faith in the president he is assuming that it
is obvious and known to everybody that there is a president, that the president exists,
and he is asserting his confidence that the president will do good work on the whole.
But, if a man says he has faith in telepathy, he does not mean that he is confident that
telepathy will do good work on the whole, but that he believes that telepathy really
occurs sometimes, that telepathy exists. Thus the phrase “to have faith in x”
sometimes means to be confident that good work will be done by x, who is assumed
or known to exist, but at other times means to believe that x exists. Which does it
mean in the phrase “have faith in God”? It means ambiguously both; and the self-
evidence of what it means in the one sense recommends what it means in the other
sense. If there is a perfectly powerful and good god it is self-evidently reasonable to
believe that he will do good. In this sense “have faith in God” is a reasonable
exhortation. But it insinuates the other sense, namely “believe that there is a perfectly
powerful and good god, no matter what the evidence.” Thus the reasonableness of
trusting God if he exists is used to make it seem also reasonable to believe that he
exists.34
One kind of equivocation deserves special mention. This is the mistake that
arises from the misuse of “relative” terms, which have different meanings in dif-
ferent contexts. For example, the word “tall” is a relative word; a tall man and a
tall building are in quite different categories. A tall man is one who is taller than
most men, a tall building is one that is taller than most buildings. Certain forms
of argument that are valid for nonrelative terms break down when relative terms
are substituted for them. The argument “an elephant is an animal; therefore a
gray elephant is a gray animal” is perfectly valid. The word “gray” is a nonrela-
tive term. In contrast, the argument “an elephant is an animal; therefore a small
*This passage very probably inspired David Powers, who formally changed his name to Absolutely No-
body and ran as an independent candidate for lieutenant governor of the state of Oregon. His campaign
slogan was “Hi, I’m Absolutely Nobody. Vote for me.” In the general election of 1992, he drew 7 percent of
the vote.
145

elephant is a small animal” is ridiculous. The point here is that “small” is a rela-
tive term: A small elephant is a very large animal. The fallacy is one of equivoca-
tion with respect to the relative term “small.” Not all equivocation on relative
terms is so obvious, however. The word “good” is a relative term and is frequent-
ly equivocated on when it is argued, for example, that so-and-so is a good gener-
al and would therefore be a good president, or that someone is a good scholar
and is therefore likely to be a good teacher.
A2. Amphiboly
The fallacy of amphiboly occurs when one is arguing from premises whose for-
mulations are ambiguous because of their grammatical construction. The word
“amphiboly” is derived from the Greek, its meaning in essence being “two in a
lump,” or the “doubleness” of a lump. A statement is amphibolous when its
meaning is indeterminate because of the loose or awkward way in which its
words are combined. An amphibolous statement may be true in one interpreta-
tion and false in another. When it is stated as premise with the interpretation that
makes it true, and a conclusion is drawn from it on the interpretation that makes
it false, then the fallacy of amphiboly has been committed.
In guiding electoral politics, amphiboly can mislead as well as confuse. Dur-
ing the 1990s, while he sat in the U.S. House of Representatives as a Democrat
from California, Tony Coelho is reported to have said: “Women prefer Democ-
rats to men.” Amphibolous statements make dangerous premises—but they are
seldom encountered in serious discourse.
What grammarians call “dangling” participles and phrases often present am-
phiboly of a striking sort, as in “The farmer blew out his brains after taking affec-
tionate farewell of his family with a shotgun.” Some tidbits in The New Yorker
make acid fun of writers and editors who overlook careless amphiboly:
Dr. Salick donated, along with his wife, Gloria, $4.5 million to Queens College 
for the center.
Gloria is tax-deductible.35
A3. Accent
We have seen that shifting the meaning of some term in an argument may result
in a fallacy of ambiguity. Most commonly that shift is an equivocation, as noted
earlier. Sometimes, however, the shift is the result of a change in emphasis on a
single word or phrase, whose meaning does not change. When the premise of an
argument relies on one possible emphasis, but a conclusion drawn from it relies
on the meaning of the same words emphasized differently, the fallacy of accent
has been committed.
This fallacy can be very serious, and in argument it can be very damaging. Its
name seems innocuous. This is due, in part, to the origin of the name in the clas-
sification of fallacies first presented by Aristotle.36 It happens that in the Greek
language of Aristotle’s day, some words spelled identically had different
Fallacies
Fallacy of Accent
A fallacy of ambiguity
that occurs when an
argument contains a
premise that relies on
one possible emphasis
of certain words, but the
conclusion relies on a
different emphasis that
gives those same words
a different meaning.
Fallacy of amphiboly
A fallacy in which a
loose or awkward
combination of words
can be interpreted in
more than one way; the
argument contains a
premise based upon
one interpretation, while
the conclusion relies on
a different interpretation.
146

meanings depending on the way in which they were pronounced, or accented.
Those different meanings could result in a deceptive argument, appropriately
called a fallacy of accent. In English today there are not very many cases in which
changing the accent in a word changes the meaning of the word. Three of the
most common are increase and increase, insult and insult, record and record. These
pairs of words accented differently mean different parts of speech—one member
of each pair is a noun, the other a verb—and thus it is unlikely that fallacious ar-
gument would now arise from those differently accented words.
Over the centuries, however, while the Aristotelian name has been retained,
it has come to be applied to a much wider category, which includes the mislead-
ing uses of emphasis in various forms and the use of meanings deliberately taken
out of context. We are greatly stretching the name “accent” that Aristotle used. If
we could overcome the weight of tradition, we might wisely rename the argu-
ment that misleads in this way “the fallacy of emphasis.”
Consider, as an illustration, the different meanings that can be given to the
statement
We should not speak ill of our friends.
When the sentence is read without any special stress on one of its words, this in-
junction is surely one with which we would all agree. But, if the sentence is read
with stress on the word “friends,” we might understand it to suggest that speak-
ing ill of those who are not our friends is not precluded. Such an injunction is no
longer acceptable as a moral rule. Suppose we stress the word “speak” in this
sentence. Then it might suggest that whereas nasty speech is to be avoided, one
may work ill even on one’s friends—a very troubling conclusion. If the word
“we” is emphasized, the suggestion arises that the injunction applies to us but
not to others, and so on. The various arguments that emerge are plainly the out-
come of the deliberate manipulation of emphasis; the sentence can be used to
achieve assorted fallacious ambiguities. How is the sentence to be rightly under-
stood? That depends on its context, of course. Often, a phrase or a passage can be
understood correctly only when its context is known, because that context makes
clear the sense in which the words are intended.
Therefore the fallacy of accent may be construed broadly to include the dis-
tortion produced by pulling a quoted passage out of its context, putting it in an-
other context, and there drawing a conclusion that could never have been drawn
in the original context. Quoting out of context is sometimes done with deliberate
craftiness. In the presidential election campaign of 1996 the Democratic vice-
presidential candidate, Al Gore, was quoted by a Republican press aide as hav-
ing said that “there is no proven link between smoking and lung cancer.” Those
were indeed Mr. Gore’s exact words, uttered during a television interview in
1992. But they were only part of a sentence. In that interview, Mr. Gore’s full
statement was that some tobacco company scientists “will claim with a straight face
that there is no proven link between smoking and lung cancer. . . . But the weight
of the evidence accepted by the overwhelming preponderance of scientists is,
yes, smoking does cause lung cancer.”37
Fallacies
147

Fallacies
The omission of the words “will claim with a straight face”—and of Gore’s
express conviction that cancer is caused by smoking—unfairly reversed the
sense of the passage from which the quotation was pulled. The argument sug-
gested by the abbreviated quotation, having the apparent conclusion that Mr.
Gore seriously doubts the causal link between smoking and cancer, is an egre-
gious example of the fallacy of accent.
Deliberate distortion of this kind is not rare. Abiography by Thomas DiLoren-
zo, purporting to show that Abraham Lincoln was not the advocate of human
equality he is widely thought to have been, quotes words of Lincoln that appear
to mock the principle that “all men are created equal.” Lincoln is quoted thus: “I
am sorry to say that I have never seen two men of whom it is true. But I must
admit I never saw the Siamese Twins, and therefore will not dogmatically say that
no man ever saw a proof of this sage aphorism.” DiLorenzo then remarks that
such mockery contrasts sharply with the “seductive words of the Gettysburg Ad-
dress, eleven years later, in which he purported to rededicate the nation to the no-
tion that all men are created equal.”38 However, DiLorenzo fails to report that
those quoted words were in fact Lincoln’s account of the view of an unnamed Vir-
ginia clergyman, a view he goes on immediately to reject, saying that it “sounds
strangely in republican America.” DiLorenzo’s failure to report the context of the
words quoted renders his argument fallacious and disreputable.
Advertising often relies on the same device. A theater critic who says of a
new play that it is far from the funniest appearing on Broadway this year may
find herself quoted in an ad for the play: “Funniest appearing on Broadway this
year!” To avoid such distortions, and the fallacies of accent that are built on them,
the responsible writer must be scrupulously accurate in quotation, always indi-
cating whether italics were in the original, indicating (with dots) whether pas-
sages have been omitted, and so on.
Physical manipulation of print or pictures is commonly used to mislead de-
liberately through accent. Sensational words appear in large letters in the head-
lines of newspaper reports, deliberately suggesting mistaken conclusions to
those who glance hastily at them. Later in the report the headline is likely to be
qualified by other words in much smaller letters. To avoid being tricked, by news
reports or in contracts, one is well advised to give careful attention to “the small
print.” In political propaganda the misleading choice of a sensational heading or
the use of a clipped photograph, in what purports to be a factual report, will use
accent shrewdly to encourage the drawing of conclusions known by the propa-
gandist to be false. An account that may not be an outright lie may yet distort by
accent in ways that are deliberately manipulative or dishonest.
Such practices are hardly rare in advertising. A remarkably low price often ap-
pears in very large letters, followed by “and up” in tiny print. Wonderful bargains
in airplane fares are followed by an asterisk, with a distant footnote explaining that
the price is available only three months in advance for flights on Thursdays follow-
ing a full moon, or that there may be other “applicable restrictions.” Costly items
with well-known brand names are advertised at very low prices, with a small note
elsewhere in the ad that “prices listed are for limited quantities in stock.” Readers
148

Fallacies
are drawn into the store but are likely to be unable to make the purchase at the ad-
vertised price. Accented passages, by themselves, are not strictly fallacies; they be-
come embedded in fallacies when one interpretation of a phrase, flowing from its
accent, is relied on to suggest a conclusion (for example, that the plane ticket or
brand item can be purchased at the listed price) that is very doubtful when account
is taken of the misleading accent.
Even the literal truth can be used, by manipulating its placement, so as to de-
ceive with accent. Disgusted with his first mate, who was repeatedly inebriated
while on duty, the captain of a ship noted in the ship’s log, almost every day, “The
mate was drunk today.” The angry mate took his revenge. Keeping the log himself
on a day when the captain was ill, the mate recorded, “The captain was sober today.”
A4. Composition
The term fallacy of composition is applied to both of two closely related types of
mistaken argument. The first may be described as reasoning fallaciously from the
attributes of the parts of a whole to the attributes of the whole itself. A flagrant example
is to argue that, because every part of a certain machine is light in weight, the
machine “as a whole” is light in weight. The error here is manifest when we rec-
ognize that a very heavy machine may consist of a very large number of light-
weight parts. Not all examples of fallacious composition are so obvious,
however. Some are misleading. One may hear it seriously argued that, because
each scene of a certain play is a model of artistic perfection, the play as a whole is
artistically perfect. This is as much a fallacy of composition as to argue that, be-
cause every ship is ready for battle, the whole fleet must be ready for battle.
The other type of composition fallacy is strictly parallel to that just described.
Here, the fallacy is reasoning from attributes of the individual elements or members of a
collection to attributes of the collection or totality of those elements. For example, it would
be fallacious to argue that because a bus uses more gasoline than an automobile, all
buses use more gasoline than all automobiles. This version of the fallacy of compo-
sition turns on a confusion between the “distributive” and the “collective” use of
general terms. Thus, although college students may enroll in no more than six dif-
ferent classes each semester, it is also true that college students enroll in hundreds of
different classes each semester. This verbal conflict is easily resolved. It may be true
of college students, distributively, that each may enroll in no more than six classes
each semester. We call this a distributive use of the term “college students,” because
we are speaking of college students taken singly. But it is true of college students,
taken collectively, that they enroll in hundreds of different classes each semester.
This is a collective use of the term “college students,” in that we are speaking of col-
lege students all together, as a totality. Thus, buses, distributively, use more gasoline
than automobiles, but collectively, automobiles use more gasoline than buses, be-
cause there are so many more of them.
This second kind of composition fallacy may be defined as the invalid infer-
ence that what may truly be predicated of a term distributively may also be truly
predicated of the term collectively. Thus, the nuclear bombs dropped during
World War II did more damage than did the ordinary bombs dropped—but only
Fallacy of
composition
A fallacy of ambiguity in
which an argument
erroneously assigns
attributes to a whole (or
to a collection) based on
the fact that parts of that
whole (or members of
that collection) have
those attributes.
149

Fallacies
distributively. The matter is exactly reversed when the two kinds of bombs are
considered collectively, because so many more conventional bombs were
dropped than nuclear ones. Ignoring this distinction in an argument permits the
fallacy of composition.
These two varieties of composition, though parallel, are really distinct be-
cause of the difference between a mere collection of elements and a whole con-
structed out of those elements. Thus, a mere collection of parts is no machine; a
mere collection of bricks is neither a house nor a wall. A whole, such as a machine,
a house, or a wall, has its parts organized or arranged in certain definite ways. Be-
cause organized wholes and mere collections are distinct, so are the two versions
of the composition fallacy, one proceeding invalidly to wholes from their parts,
the other proceeding invalidly to collections from their members or elements.
A5. Division
The fallacy of division is simply the reverse of the fallacy of composition. In it
the same confusion is present, but the inference proceeds in the opposite direc-
tion. As in the case of composition, two varieties of the fallacy of division may be
distinguished. The first kind of division consists of arguing fallaciously that what is
true of a whole must also be true of its parts. To argue that, because a certain corpo-
ration is very important and Mr. Doe is an official of that corporation, therefore
Mr. Doe is very important, is to commit the fallacy of division. This first variety
of the division fallacy is committed in any such argument, as in moving from the
premise that a certain machine is heavy, or complicated, or valuable, to the con-
clusion that this or any other part of the machine must be heavy, or complicated,
or valuable. To argue that a student must have a large room because the room is
located in a large dormitory would be still another instance of the first kind of
fallacy of division.
The second type of division fallacy is committed when one argues from the at-
tributes of a collection of elements to the attributes of the elements themselves. To argue
that, because university students study medicine, law, engineering, dentistry, and
architecture, therefore each, or even any, university student studies medicine, law,
engineering, dentistry, and architecture is to commit the second kind of division
fallacy. It is true that university students, collectively, study all these various sub-
jects, but it is false that university students, distributively, do so. Instances of this
fallacy of division often look like valid arguments, for what is true of a class dis-
tributively is certainly true of each and every member. Thus the argument
Dogs are carnivorous.
Afghan hounds are dogs.
Therefore Afghan hounds are carnivorous.
is perfectly valid. Closely resembling this argument is another,
Dogs are frequently encountered in the streets.
Afghan hounds are dogs.
Therefore Afghan hounds are frequently encountered in the streets.
Fallacy of division
A fallacy of ambiguity in
which an argument
erroneously assigns
attributes to parts of a
whole (or to members of
a collection) based on
the fact that the whole
(or the collection) has
those attributes.
150

Fallacies
This statement says only that freedom of speech is a good thing because it is
a good thing—which is not much of an argument.
In the effort to establish the desired conclusion, an author may cast about,
searching for premises that will do the trick. Of course, the conclusion itself, refor-
mulated in other words, will do the trick very nicely. Another illustration, equally
fallacious, is found in this claim by a sixteenth-century Chinese philosopher:
There is no such thing as knowledge which cannot be carried into practice, for such
knowledge is really no knowledge at all.32
This fallacy, like the fallacy of missing the point, is often a mistake that is not
recognized by the author of the passage. The presumption that is the heart of the
fallacy is buried in the verbiage of the premises, sometimes obscured by confus-
ing or unrecognized synonyms. The arguments are circular—every petitio is a cir-
cular argument—but the circle that has been constructed may be large and
confusing, and thus the logical mistake goes unseen.
It would be wrong to suppose that only silly authors make this mistake. Even
powerful minds are on occasion snared by this fallacy, as is illustrated by a high-
ly controversial issue in the history of philosophy. Logicians have long sought to
establish the reliability of inductive procedures by establishing the truth of what
is called the principle of induction. This is the principle that the laws of nature will
operate tomorrow as they operate today, that in basic ways nature is essentially
uniform, and that therefore we may rely on past experience to guide our conduct
in the future. “That the future will be essentially like the past” is the claim at
issue, but this claim, never doubted in ordinary life, turns out to be very difficult
to prove. Some thinkers have claimed that they could prove it by showing that,
when we have in the past relied on the inductive principle, we have always
found that this method has helped us to achieve our objectives. They ask, “Why
conclude that the future will be like the past?” and answer, “Because it always
has been like the past.”
As David Hume pointed out, however, this common argument is a petitio—it
begs the question. The point at issue is whether nature will continue to behave reg-
ularly. That it has done so in the past cannot serve as proof that it will do so in the
future, unless one assumes the very principle that is here in question: that the fu-
ture will be like the past. Hence Hume, granting that in the past the future has been
like the past, asked the telling question with which philosophers still tussle: How
can we know that future futures will be like past futures? They may be so, of course,
but we cannot assume that they will be for the sake of proving that they will.33
Because the name of this fallacy is widely misunderstood, that name is some-
times wrongly used to refer to a linguistic device that is not a fallacy, not even an ar-
gument of any kind, but merely a provocative observation. A claim “begs” the
question (in this sense) when it raises some question or opens the door to some con-
troversy. Thus a magazine headline may mistakenly read, “The President’s decision
to invade Iraq begs the question: What are the limits of the President’s war-making
authority?” This use of the phrase is simply a linguistic mistake. To “beg the ques-
tion” is not to raise the issue, but to assume the truth of the conclusion sought.
141

Fallacies
Circular arguments are certainly fallacious, but the premises are not irrele-
vant to the conclusions drawn. They are relevant; indeed, they prove the conclu-
sion, but they do so trivially—they end where they began. A petitio principii is
always technically valid, but always worthless.
Fallacies of Presumption
P1. Accident
An informal fallacy in which a generalization is applied to individual cases that
it does not govern.
P2. Complex Question (Plurium Interrogationum)
An informal fallacy in which a question is asked in such a way as to presuppose
the truth of some proposition buried in the question.
P3. Begging the Question (Petitio Principii)
An informal fallacy in which the conclusion of an argument is stated or assumed
in one of the premises.
o v e r v i e w
EXERCISES
Identify and explain any fallacies of defective induction or of presumption in
the following passages:
1. My generation was taught about the dangers of social diseases, how
they were contracted, and the value of abstinence. Our schools did not
teach us about contraception. They did not pass out condoms, as many
of today’s schools do. And not one of the girls in any of my classes, not
even in college, became pregnant out of wedlock. It wasn’t until people
began teaching the children about contraceptives that our problems
with pregnancy began.
—Frank Webster, “No Sex Education, No Sex,” Insight, 17 November 1997
2. A national mailing soliciting funds, by People for the Ethical Treatment
of Animals (PETA), included a survey in which questions were to be an-
swered “yes” or “no.” Two of the questions asked were these:
“Do you realize that the vast majority of painful animal experi-
mentation has no relation at all to human survival or the elimination
of disease?”
“Are you aware that product testing on animals does not keep un-
safe products off the market?”
3. If you want a life full of sexual pleasures, don’t graduate from college.
A study to be published next month in American Demographics magazine
shows that people with the most education have the least amount of sex.
—The Chronicle of Higher Education, 23 January 1998
142

Fallacies
4. There is no surprise in discovering that acupuncture can relieve pain
and nausea. It will probably also be found to work on anxiety, insomnia,
and itching, because these are all conditions in which placebos work.
Acupuncture works by suggestion, a mechanism whose effects on hu-
mans are well known.
The danger in using such placebo methods is that they will be ap-
plied by people inadequately trained in medicine in cases where essen-
tial preliminary work has not been done and where a correct diagnosis
has not been established.
—Fred Levit, M.D., “Acupuncture Is Alchemy, Not Medicine,” 
The New York Times, 12 November 1997
5. In a motion picture featuring the famous French comedian Sacha Guitry,
three thieves are arguing over division of seven pearls worth a king’s
ransom. One of them hands two to the man on his right, then two to the
man on his left. “I,” he says, “will keep three.” The man on his right
says, “How come you keep three?” “Because I am the leader.” “Oh. But
how come you are the leader?” “Because I have more pearls.”
6. “. . . I’ve always reckoned that looking at the new moon over your left
shoulder is one of the carelessest and foolishest things a body can do.
Old Hank Bunker done it once, and bragged about it; and in less than
two years he got drunk and fell off of the shot tower, and spread himself
out so that he was just a kind of a layer, as you may say; and they slid
him edgeways between two barn doors for a coffin, and buried him so,
so they say, but I didn’t see it. Pap told me. But anyway it all come of
looking at the moon that way, like a fool.”
—Mark Twain, The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, 1885
7. Former Senator Robert Packwood of Oregon became so angry at the
state’s leading newspaper, the Portland Oregonian, that in response to a
request from that paper for a quote, he offered this: “Since I quit talking
to the Oregonian, my business has prospered beyond all measure. I assume
that my business has prospered because I don’t talk to the Oregonian.
Therefore I will continue that policy. Thanks.”
—The New York Times, 7 February 1999
8. Mr. Farrakhan, the Black Muslim leader, citing the example of Israel,
said black Americans should also be able to form a country of their own
on the African continent, and said he plans to ask African leaders to
“carve out a territory for all people in the diaspora.” He said black
Americans should also be granted dual citizenship by all African coun-
tries. “We want dual citizenship,” he said, “and because we don’t know
where we came from, we want dual citizenship everywhere.”
—Kenneth Noble, “U.S. Blacks and Africans Meet to Forge Stronger Ties,” 
The New York Times, 27 May 1993
9. The French claim to be a nation of rebels. In fact their heyday of revolu-
tion is over. Twenty-first century France rebels against change, not for it.
143

Fallacies
What typically happens is that a French government decides to do some-
thing radical like, say, enable companies to fire service-sector workers
who assault their customers. The unions see this as the first step on the
road to slavery and call a national strike. After a week of posturing the
government backs down and waiters and sales clerks go back to insult-
ing customers just as they have done since time immemorial.
—S. Clarke, “No Sex, Please, We’re French,” 
The New York Times, 23 March 2007
10. Hiroyuki Suzuki was formerly a member of the Sakaume gumi, an
independent crime family in Japan known for its role in gambling. 
Mr. Suzuki’s wife Mariko broke her kneecap, and when Mariko went to
church the next Sunday, the minister put his hands on her broken knee
and pronounced it healed. She walked away from church that day. 
Mr. Suzuki regarded her religion as a silly waste of time—but he was
fascinated by the recovery of her knee. “In gambling,” he said, “you use
dice. Dice are made from bone. If God could heal her bone, I figured he
could probably assist my dice and make me the best dice thrower in all
of Japan.” Mr. Suzuki’s gambling skills did improve, enabling him to
pay off his debts. He now says his allegiance is to Jesus.
—Stephanie Strom, “He Watched over His Rackets,” 
The New York Times, 22 June 1999
6
Fallacies of Ambiguity
The meaning of words or phrases may shift as a result of inattention, or may be
deliberately manipulated within the course of an argument. A term may have
one sense in a premise but quite a different sense in the conclusion. When the in-
ference drawn depends on such changes it is, of course, fallacious. Mistakes of
this kind are called fallacies of ambiguity or sometimes “sophisms.” The delib-
erate use of such devices is usually crude and readily detected—but at times the
ambiguity may be obscure, the error accidental, the fallacy subtle. Five varieties
are distinguished here.
A1. Equivocation
Most words have more than one literal meaning, and most of the time we have
no difficulty keeping those meanings separate by noting the context and using
our good sense when reading and listening. Yet when we confuse the several
meanings of a word or phrase—accidentally or deliberately—we are using the
word equivocally. If we do that in the context of an argument, we commit the
fallacy of equivocation.
Sometimes the equivocation is obvious and absurd and is used in a joking
line or passage. Lewis Carroll’s account of the adventures of Alice in Through the
Looking-Glass is replete with clever and amusing equivocations. One of them
goes like this:
Fallacy of
equivocation
A fallacy in which two or
more meanings of a
word or phrase are
used, accidentally or
deliberately, in different
parts of an argument.
Fallacy of ambiguity
An informal fallacy
caused by a shift or a
confusion in the
meanings of words or
phrases within an
argument. Also known
as a “sophism.”
144

Fallacies
”Who did you pass on the road?” the King went on, holding his hand out to the
messenger for some hay.
”Nobody,” said the messenger.
”Quite right,” said the King; “this young lady saw him too. So of course Nobody walks
slower than you.”
The equivocation in this passage is rather subtle. As it is first used here, the
word “nobody” simply means “no person.” Reference is then made using a pro-
noun (“him”), as though that word (“nobody”) had named a person. When subse-
quently the same word is capitalized and plainly used as a name (“Nobody”), it
putatively names a person having a characteristic (being passed on the road) de-
rived from the first use of the word. Equivocation is sometimes the tool of wit—
and Lewis Carroll was a very witty logician.*
Equivocal arguments are always fallacious, but they are not always silly or
comical, as in the example discussed in the following excerpt:
There is an ambiguity in the phrase “have faith in” that helps to make faith look
respectable. When a man says that he has faith in the president he is assuming that it
is obvious and known to everybody that there is a president, that the president exists,
and he is asserting his confidence that the president will do good work on the whole.
But, if a man says he has faith in telepathy, he does not mean that he is confident that
telepathy will do good work on the whole, but that he believes that telepathy really
occurs sometimes, that telepathy exists. Thus the phrase “to have faith in x”
sometimes means to be confident that good work will be done by x, who is assumed
or known to exist, but at other times means to believe that x exists. Which does it
mean in the phrase “have faith in God”? It means ambiguously both; and the self-
evidence of what it means in the one sense recommends what it means in the other
sense. If there is a perfectly powerful and good god it is self-evidently reasonable to
believe that he will do good. In this sense “have faith in God” is a reasonable
exhortation. But it insinuates the other sense, namely “believe that there is a perfectly
powerful and good god, no matter what the evidence.” Thus the reasonableness of
trusting God if he exists is used to make it seem also reasonable to believe that he
exists.34
One kind of equivocation deserves special mention. This is the mistake that
arises from the misuse of “relative” terms, which have different meanings in dif-
ferent contexts. For example, the word “tall” is a relative word; a tall man and a
tall building are in quite different categories. A tall man is one who is taller than
most men, a tall building is one that is taller than most buildings. Certain forms
of argument that are valid for nonrelative terms break down when relative terms
are substituted for them. The argument “an elephant is an animal; therefore a
gray elephant is a gray animal” is perfectly valid. The word “gray” is a nonrela-
tive term. In contrast, the argument “an elephant is an animal; therefore a small
*This passage very probably inspired David Powers, who formally changed his name to Absolutely No-
body and ran as an independent candidate for lieutenant governor of the state of Oregon. His campaign
slogan was “Hi, I’m Absolutely Nobody. Vote for me.” In the general election of 1992, he drew 7 percent of
the vote.
145

elephant is a small animal” is ridiculous. The point here is that “small” is a rela-
tive term: A small elephant is a very large animal. The fallacy is one of equivoca-
tion with respect to the relative term “small.” Not all equivocation on relative
terms is so obvious, however. The word “good” is a relative term and is frequent-
ly equivocated on when it is argued, for example, that so-and-so is a good gener-
al and would therefore be a good president, or that someone is a good scholar
and is therefore likely to be a good teacher.
A2. Amphiboly
The fallacy of amphiboly occurs when one is arguing from premises whose for-
mulations are ambiguous because of their grammatical construction. The word
“amphiboly” is derived from the Greek, its meaning in essence being “two in a
lump,” or the “doubleness” of a lump. A statement is amphibolous when its
meaning is indeterminate because of the loose or awkward way in which its
words are combined. An amphibolous statement may be true in one interpreta-
tion and false in another. When it is stated as premise with the interpretation that
makes it true, and a conclusion is drawn from it on the interpretation that makes
it false, then the fallacy of amphiboly has been committed.
In guiding electoral politics, amphiboly can mislead as well as confuse. Dur-
ing the 1990s, while he sat in the U.S. House of Representatives as a Democrat
from California, Tony Coelho is reported to have said: “Women prefer Democ-
rats to men.” Amphibolous statements make dangerous premises—but they are
seldom encountered in serious discourse.
What grammarians call “dangling” participles and phrases often present am-
phiboly of a striking sort, as in “The farmer blew out his brains after taking affec-
tionate farewell of his family with a shotgun.” Some tidbits in The New Yorker
make acid fun of writers and editors who overlook careless amphiboly:
Dr. Salick donated, along with his wife, Gloria, $4.5 million to Queens College 
for the center.
Gloria is tax-deductible.35
A3. Accent
We have seen that shifting the meaning of some term in an argument may result
in a fallacy of ambiguity. Most commonly that shift is an equivocation, as noted
earlier. Sometimes, however, the shift is the result of a change in emphasis on a
single word or phrase, whose meaning does not change. When the premise of an
argument relies on one possible emphasis, but a conclusion drawn from it relies
on the meaning of the same words emphasized differently, the fallacy of accent
has been committed.
This fallacy can be very serious, and in argument it can be very damaging. Its
name seems innocuous. This is due, in part, to the origin of the name in the clas-
sification of fallacies first presented by Aristotle.36 It happens that in the Greek
language of Aristotle’s day, some words spelled identically had different
Fallacies
Fallacy of Accent
A fallacy of ambiguity
that occurs when an
argument contains a
premise that relies on
one possible emphasis
of certain words, but the
conclusion relies on a
different emphasis that
gives those same words
a different meaning.
Fallacy of amphiboly
A fallacy in which a
loose or awkward
combination of words
can be interpreted in
more than one way; the
argument contains a
premise based upon
one interpretation, while
the conclusion relies on
a different interpretation.
146

meanings depending on the way in which they were pronounced, or accented.
Those different meanings could result in a deceptive argument, appropriately
called a fallacy of accent. In English today there are not very many cases in which
changing the accent in a word changes the meaning of the word. Three of the
most common are increase and increase, insult and insult, record and record. These
pairs of words accented differently mean different parts of speech—one member
of each pair is a noun, the other a verb—and thus it is unlikely that fallacious ar-
gument would now arise from those differently accented words.
Over the centuries, however, while the Aristotelian name has been retained,
it has come to be applied to a much wider category, which includes the mislead-
ing uses of emphasis in various forms and the use of meanings deliberately taken
out of context. We are greatly stretching the name “accent” that Aristotle used. If
we could overcome the weight of tradition, we might wisely rename the argu-
ment that misleads in this way “the fallacy of emphasis.”
Consider, as an illustration, the different meanings that can be given to the
statement
We should not speak ill of our friends.
When the sentence is read without any special stress on one of its words, this in-
junction is surely one with which we would all agree. But, if the sentence is read
with stress on the word “friends,” we might understand it to suggest that speak-
ing ill of those who are not our friends is not precluded. Such an injunction is no
longer acceptable as a moral rule. Suppose we stress the word “speak” in this
sentence. Then it might suggest that whereas nasty speech is to be avoided, one
may work ill even on one’s friends—a very troubling conclusion. If the word
“we” is emphasized, the suggestion arises that the injunction applies to us but
not to others, and so on. The various arguments that emerge are plainly the out-
come of the deliberate manipulation of emphasis; the sentence can be used to
achieve assorted fallacious ambiguities. How is the sentence to be rightly under-
stood? That depends on its context, of course. Often, a phrase or a passage can be
understood correctly only when its context is known, because that context makes
clear the sense in which the words are intended.
Therefore the fallacy of accent may be construed broadly to include the dis-
tortion produced by pulling a quoted passage out of its context, putting it in an-
other context, and there drawing a conclusion that could never have been drawn
in the original context. Quoting out of context is sometimes done with deliberate
craftiness. In the presidential election campaign of 1996 the Democratic vice-
presidential candidate, Al Gore, was quoted by a Republican press aide as hav-
ing said that “there is no proven link between smoking and lung cancer.” Those
were indeed Mr. Gore’s exact words, uttered during a television interview in
1992. But they were only part of a sentence. In that interview, Mr. Gore’s full
statement was that some tobacco company scientists “will claim with a straight face
that there is no proven link between smoking and lung cancer. . . . But the weight
of the evidence accepted by the overwhelming preponderance of scientists is,
yes, smoking does cause lung cancer.”37
Fallacies
147

Fallacies
The omission of the words “will claim with a straight face”—and of Gore’s
express conviction that cancer is caused by smoking—unfairly reversed the
sense of the passage from which the quotation was pulled. The argument sug-
gested by the abbreviated quotation, having the apparent conclusion that Mr.
Gore seriously doubts the causal link between smoking and cancer, is an egre-
gious example of the fallacy of accent.
Deliberate distortion of this kind is not rare. Abiography by Thomas DiLoren-
zo, purporting to show that Abraham Lincoln was not the advocate of human
equality he is widely thought to have been, quotes words of Lincoln that appear
to mock the principle that “all men are created equal.” Lincoln is quoted thus: “I
am sorry to say that I have never seen two men of whom it is true. But I must
admit I never saw the Siamese Twins, and therefore will not dogmatically say that
no man ever saw a proof of this sage aphorism.” DiLorenzo then remarks that
such mockery contrasts sharply with the “seductive words of the Gettysburg Ad-
dress, eleven years later, in which he purported to rededicate the nation to the no-
tion that all men are created equal.”38 However, DiLorenzo fails to report that
those quoted words were in fact Lincoln’s account of the view of an unnamed Vir-
ginia clergyman, a view he goes on immediately to reject, saying that it “sounds
strangely in republican America.” DiLorenzo’s failure to report the context of the
words quoted renders his argument fallacious and disreputable.
Advertising often relies on the same device. A theater critic who says of a
new play that it is far from the funniest appearing on Broadway this year may
find herself quoted in an ad for the play: “Funniest appearing on Broadway this
year!” To avoid such distortions, and the fallacies of accent that are built on them,
the responsible writer must be scrupulously accurate in quotation, always indi-
cating whether italics were in the original, indicating (with dots) whether pas-
sages have been omitted, and so on.
Physical manipulation of print or pictures is commonly used to mislead de-
liberately through accent. Sensational words appear in large letters in the head-
lines of newspaper reports, deliberately suggesting mistaken conclusions to
those who glance hastily at them. Later in the report the headline is likely to be
qualified by other words in much smaller letters. To avoid being tricked, by news
reports or in contracts, one is well advised to give careful attention to “the small
print.” In political propaganda the misleading choice of a sensational heading or
the use of a clipped photograph, in what purports to be a factual report, will use
accent shrewdly to encourage the drawing of conclusions known by the propa-
gandist to be false. An account that may not be an outright lie may yet distort by
accent in ways that are deliberately manipulative or dishonest.
Such practices are hardly rare in advertising. A remarkably low price often ap-
pears in very large letters, followed by “and up” in tiny print. Wonderful bargains
in airplane fares are followed by an asterisk, with a distant footnote explaining that
the price is available only three months in advance for flights on Thursdays follow-
ing a full moon, or that there may be other “applicable restrictions.” Costly items
with well-known brand names are advertised at very low prices, with a small note
elsewhere in the ad that “prices listed are for limited quantities in stock.” Readers
148

Fallacies
are drawn into the store but are likely to be unable to make the purchase at the ad-
vertised price. Accented passages, by themselves, are not strictly fallacies; they be-
come embedded in fallacies when one interpretation of a phrase, flowing from its
accent, is relied on to suggest a conclusion (for example, that the plane ticket or
brand item can be purchased at the listed price) that is very doubtful when account
is taken of the misleading accent.
Even the literal truth can be used, by manipulating its placement, so as to de-
ceive with accent. Disgusted with his first mate, who was repeatedly inebriated
while on duty, the captain of a ship noted in the ship’s log, almost every day, “The
mate was drunk today.” The angry mate took his revenge. Keeping the log himself
on a day when the captain was ill, the mate recorded, “The captain was sober today.”
A4. Composition
The term fallacy of composition is applied to both of two closely related types of
mistaken argument. The first may be described as reasoning fallaciously from the
attributes of the parts of a whole to the attributes of the whole itself. A flagrant example
is to argue that, because every part of a certain machine is light in weight, the
machine “as a whole” is light in weight. The error here is manifest when we rec-
ognize that a very heavy machine may consist of a very large number of light-
weight parts. Not all examples of fallacious composition are so obvious,
however. Some are misleading. One may hear it seriously argued that, because
each scene of a certain play is a model of artistic perfection, the play as a whole is
artistically perfect. This is as much a fallacy of composition as to argue that, be-
cause every ship is ready for battle, the whole fleet must be ready for battle.
The other type of composition fallacy is strictly parallel to that just described.
Here, the fallacy is reasoning from attributes of the individual elements or members of a
collection to attributes of the collection or totality of those elements. For example, it would
be fallacious to argue that because a bus uses more gasoline than an automobile, all
buses use more gasoline than all automobiles. This version of the fallacy of compo-
sition turns on a confusion between the “distributive” and the “collective” use of
general terms. Thus, although college students may enroll in no more than six dif-
ferent classes each semester, it is also true that college students enroll in hundreds of
different classes each semester. This verbal conflict is easily resolved. It may be true
of college students, distributively, that each may enroll in no more than six classes
each semester. We call this a distributive use of the term “college students,” because
we are speaking of college students taken singly. But it is true of college students,
taken collectively, that they enroll in hundreds of different classes each semester.
This is a collective use of the term “college students,” in that we are speaking of col-
lege students all together, as a totality. Thus, buses, distributively, use more gasoline
than automobiles, but collectively, automobiles use more gasoline than buses, be-
cause there are so many more of them.
This second kind of composition fallacy may be defined as the invalid infer-
ence that what may truly be predicated of a term distributively may also be truly
predicated of the term collectively. Thus, the nuclear bombs dropped during
World War II did more damage than did the ordinary bombs dropped—but only
Fallacy of
composition
A fallacy of ambiguity in
which an argument
erroneously assigns
attributes to a whole (or
to a collection) based on
the fact that parts of that
whole (or members of
that collection) have
those attributes.
149

Fallacies
distributively. The matter is exactly reversed when the two kinds of bombs are
considered collectively, because so many more conventional bombs were
dropped than nuclear ones. Ignoring this distinction in an argument permits the
fallacy of composition.
These two varieties of composition, though parallel, are really distinct be-
cause of the difference between a mere collection of elements and a whole con-
structed out of those elements. Thus, a mere collection of parts is no machine; a
mere collection of bricks is neither a house nor a wall. A whole, such as a machine,
a house, or a wall, has its parts organized or arranged in certain definite ways. Be-
cause organized wholes and mere collections are distinct, so are the two versions
of the composition fallacy, one proceeding invalidly to wholes from their parts,
the other proceeding invalidly to collections from their members or elements.
A5. Division
The fallacy of division is simply the reverse of the fallacy of composition. In it
the same confusion is present, but the inference proceeds in the opposite direc-
tion. As in the case of composition, two varieties of the fallacy of division may be
distinguished. The first kind of division consists of arguing fallaciously that what is
true of a whole must also be true of its parts. To argue that, because a certain corpo-
ration is very important and Mr. Doe is an official of that corporation, therefore
Mr. Doe is very important, is to commit the fallacy of division. This first variety
of the division fallacy is committed in any such argument, as in moving from the
premise that a certain machine is heavy, or complicated, or valuable, to the con-
clusion that this or any other part of the machine must be heavy, or complicated,
or valuable. To argue that a student must have a large room because the room is
located in a large dormitory would be still another instance of the first kind of
fallacy of division.
The second type of division fallacy is committed when one argues from the at-
tributes of a collection of elements to the attributes of the elements themselves. To argue
that, because university students study medicine, law, engineering, dentistry, and
architecture, therefore each, or even any, university student studies medicine, law,
engineering, dentistry, and architecture is to commit the second kind of division
fallacy. It is true that university students, collectively, study all these various sub-
jects, but it is false that university students, distributively, do so. Instances of this
fallacy of division often look like valid arguments, for what is true of a class dis-
tributively is certainly true of each and every member. Thus the argument
Dogs are carnivorous.
Afghan hounds are dogs.
Therefore Afghan hounds are carnivorous.
is perfectly valid. Closely resembling this argument is another,
Dogs are frequently encountered in the streets.
Afghan hounds are dogs.
Therefore Afghan hounds are frequently encountered in the streets.
Fallacy of division
A fallacy of ambiguity in
which an argument
erroneously assigns
attributes to parts of a
whole (or to members of
a collection) based on
the fact that the whole
(or the collection) has
those attributes.
150

Fallacies
which is invalid, committing the fallacy of division. Some instances of division
are obviously jokes, as when the classical example of valid argumentation,
Humans are mortal.
Socrates is a human.
Therefore Socrates is mortal.
is parodied by the fallacious
American Indians are disappearing.
That man is an American Indian.
Therefore that man is disappearing.
The old riddle, “Why do white sheep eat more than black ones?” turns on the
confusion involved in the fallacy of division, for the answer (“Because there are
more of them”) treats collectively what seemed to be referred to distributively in
the question.
The fallacy of division, which springs from a kind of ambiguity, resembles
the fallacy of accident (discussed in Section 5), which springs from unwarranted
presumption. Likewise, the fallacy of composition, also flowing from ambiguity,
resembles the hasty generalization we call “converse accident.” These likenesses
are superficial. An explanation of the differences between the two pairs of falla-
cies will be helpful in grasping the errors committed in all four.
If we infer, from looking at one or two parts of a large machine, that because
they happen to be well designed, every one of the machine’s many parts is well
designed, we commit the fallacy of converse accident or hasty generalization, for
what is true about one or two parts may not be true of all. If we examine every
part and find that each is carefully made, and from that finding infer that the en-
tire machine is carefully made, we also reason fallaciously, because however care-
fully the parts were produced, they may have been assembled awkwardly or
carelessly. Here the fallacy is one of composition. In converse accident, one argues
that some atypical members of a class have a specified attribute, and therefore
that all members of the class, distributively, have that attribute; in composition,
one argues that, because each and every member of the class has that attribute,
the class itself (collectively) has that attribute. The difference is great. In converse
accident, all predications are distributive, whereas in the composition fallacy, the
mistaken inference is from distributive to collective predication.
Similarly, division and accident are two distinct fallacies; their superficial re-
semblance hides the same kind of underlying difference. In division, we argue
(mistakenly) that, because the class itself has a given attribute, each of its mem-
bers also has it. Thus, it is the fallacy of division to conclude that, because an
army as a whole is nearly invincible, each of its units is nearly invincible. In acci-
dent, we argue (also mistakenly) that, because some rule applies in general, there
are no special circumstances in which it might not apply. Thus, we commit the
fallacy of accident when we insist that a person should be fined for ignoring a
“No Swimming” sign when jumping into the water to rescue someone from
drowning.
151

Fallacies
EXERCISES
A. Identify and explain the fallacies of ambiguity that appear in the following
passages:
1. . . . the universe is spherical in form . . . because all the constituent parts
of the universe, that is the sun, moon, and the planets, appear in this
form.
—Nicolaus Copernicus, The New Idea of the Universe, 1514
2. Robert Toombs is reputed to have said, just before the Civil War, “We
could lick those Yankees with cornstalks.” When he was asked after the
war what had gone wrong, he is reputed to have said, “It’s very simple.
Those damn Yankees refused to fight with cornstalks.”
—E. J. Kahn, Jr., “Profiles (Georgia),” The New Yorker, 13 February 1978
Fallacies of Ambiguity
A1. Equivocation
An informal fallacy in which two or more meanings of the same word or phrase
have been confused.
A2. Amphiboly
An informal fallacy arising from the loose, awkward, or mistaken way in which
words are combined, leading to alternative possible meanings of a statement.
A3. Accent
An informal fallacy committed when a term or phrase has a meaning in the con-
clusion of an argument different from its meaning in one of the premises, the dif-
ference arising chiefly from a change in emphasis given to the words used.
A4. Composition
An informal fallacy in which an inference is mistakenly drawn from the attrib-
utes of the parts of a whole to the attributes of the whole itself.
A5. Division
An informal fallacy in which a mistaken inference is drawn from the attributes
of a whole to the attributes of the parts of the whole.
Unlike accident and converse accident, composition and division are falla-
cies of ambiguity, resulting from the multiple meanings of terms. Wherever the
words or phrases used may mean one thing in one part of the argument and an-
other thing in another part, and those different meanings are deliberately or ac-
cidentally confounded, we can expect the argument to be fallacious.
o v e r v i e w
152

Fallacies
3. To press forward with a properly ordered wage structure in each industry
is the first condition for curbing competitive bargaining; but there is no
reason why the process should stop there. What is good for each industry
can hardly be bad for the economy as a whole.
—Edmond Kelly, Twentieth Century Socialism, 1910
4. No man will take counsel, but every man will take money: therefore
money is better than counsel.
—Jonathan Swift
5. I’ve looked everywhere in this area for an instruction book on how to
play the concertina without success. (Mrs. F. M., Myrtle Beach, S.C.,
Charlotte Observer)
You need no instructions. Just plunge ahead boldly.
—The New Yorker, 21 February 1977
6. . . . each person’s happiness is a good to that person, and the general
happiness, therefore, a good to the aggregate of all persons.
—John Stuart Mill, Utilitarianism, 1861
7. If the man who “turnips!” cries
Cry not when his father dies,
‘Tis a proof that he had rather
Have a turnip than his father.
—Hester L. Piozzi, Anecdotes of Samuel Johnson, 1932
8. Fallaci wrote her: “You are a bad journalist because you are a bad
woman.”
—Elizabeth Peer, “The Fallaci Papers,” Newsweek, 1 December 1980
9. A Worm-eating Warbler was discovered by Hazel Miller in Concord,
while walking along the branch of a tree, singing, and in good view.
(New Hampshire Audubon Quarterly)
That’s our Hazel—surefooted, happy, and with just a touch of the
exhibitionist.
—The New Yorker, 2 July 1979
10. The basis of logic is the syllogism, consisting of a major and a minor
premise and a conclusion—thus:
Major Premise: Sixty men can do a piece of work sixty times as quickly
as one man;
Minor Premise: One man can dig a post-hole in sixty seconds; therefore—
Conclusion: Sixty men can dig a post-hole in one second.
This may be called the syllogism arithmetical, in which, by combining
logic and mathematics, we obtain a double certainty and are twice
blessed.
—Ambrose Bierce, The Devil’s Dictionary, 1911
153

B. Each of the following passages may be plausibly criticized by some who con-
clude that it contains a fallacy, but each may be defended by some who deny
that the argument is fallacious. Discuss the merits of the argument in each pas-
sage, and explain why you conclude that it does (or does not) contain a fallacy.
1. Seeing that eye and hand and foot and every one of our members has
some obvious function, must we not believe that in like manner a
human being has a function over and above these particular functions?
—Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics
2. All phenomena in the universe are saturated with moral values. And,
therefore, we can come to assert that the universe for the Chinese is a
moral universe.
—T. H. Fang, The Chinese View of Life, 1956
3. The only proof capable of being given that an object is visible, is that
people actually see it. The only proof that a sound is audible, is that
people hear it: and so of the other sources of our experience. In like
manner, I apprehend, the sole evidence it is possible to produce that
anything is desirable, is that people actually desire it.
—John Stuart Mill, Utilitarianism, 1863
4. Thomas Carlyle said of Walt Whitman that he thinks he is a big poet be-
cause he comes from a big country.
—Alfred Kazin, “The Haunted Chamber,” The New Republic, 23 June 1986
5. Mr. Levy boasts many excellent bona fides for the job [of Chancellor of
the New York City Public Schools]. But there is one bothersome fact: His
two children attend an elite private school on Manhattan’s Upper East
Side. Mr. Levy . . . should put his daughter and son in the public
schools. I do not begrudge any parent the right to enroll a child in a pri-
vate school. My wife and I considered several private schools before
sending our children to a public school in Manhattan. Mr. Levy is essen-
tially declaring the public schools unfit for his own children.
—Samuel G. Freedman, “Public Leaders, Private Schools,” 
The New York Times, 15 April 2000
C. Identify and explain the fallacies of relevance or defective induction, or pre-
sumption, or ambiguity as they occur in the following passages. Explain why, in
the case of some, it may be plausibly argued that what appears at first to be a
fallacy is not, when the argument is interpreted correctly.
1. John Angus Smith, approaching an undercover agent, offered to trade
his firearm, an automatic, for two ounces of cocaine that he planned to
sell at a profit. Upon being apprehended, Smith was charged with
“using” a firearm “during and in relation to . . . a drug trafficking
crime.” Ordinarily conviction under this statute would result in a prison
sentence of five years; however, if the firearm, as in this case, is “a ma-
chine gun or other automatic weapon,” the mandatory sentence is 30
years. Smith was convicted and sentenced to 30 years in prison. The
case was appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Fallacies
154

Justice Antonin Scalia argued that, although Smith certainly did intend
to trade his gun for drugs, that was not the sense of “using” intended by
the statute. “In the search for statutory meaning we give nontechnical
terms their ordinary meanings . . . to speak of ‘using a firearm’ is to
speak of using it for its distinctive purpose, as a weapon.” If asked
whether you use a cane, he pointed out, the question asks whether
you walk with a cane, not whether you display “your grandfather’s
silver-handled walking stick in the hall.”
Justice Sandra Day O’Connor retorted that we may do more than
walk with a cane. “The most infamous use of a cane in American history
had nothing to do with walking at all—the caning (in 1856) of Senator
Charles Sumner in the United States Senate.”
Justice Scalia rejoined that the majority of the Court “does not appear
to grasp the distinction between how a word can be used and how it is
ordinarily used. . . . I think it perfectly obvious, for example, that the fal-
sity requirement for a perjury conviction would not be satisfied if a wit-
ness answered ‘No’ to a prosecutor’s enquiry whether he had ever ‘used
a firearm’ even though he had once sold his grandfather’s Enfield rifle
to a collector.”
Justice O’Connor prevailed; Smith’s conviction was affirmed.
—John Angus Smith v. United States, 508 U.S. 223, 1 June 1993
2. Time Magazine book critic Lev Grossman was “quite taken aback” in the
summer of 2006 when he saw a full-page newspaper advertisement for
Charles Frazier’s novel, Thirteen Moons, that included a one-word quo-
tation attributed to Time. Grossman had written, “Frazier works on an
epic scale, but his genius is in the detail.” The one-word quotation by
which he was struck was “Genius.”
—Henry Alford, “Genius!,” The New York Times Review of Books, 29 April 2007
3. In the Miss Universe Contest of 1994, Miss Alabama was asked: If you
could live forever, would you? And why? She answered:
I would not live forever, because we should not live forever, because if we
were supposed to live forever, then we would live forever, but we cannot live
forever, which is why I would not live forever.
4. Order is indispensable to justice because justice can be achieved only by
means of a social and legal order.
—Ernest van den Haag, Punishing Criminals, 1975
5. The Inquisition must have been justified and beneficial, if whole peo-
ples invoked and defended it, if men of the loftiest souls founded and
created it severally and impartially, and its very adversaries applied it
on their own account, pyre answering to pyre.
—Benedetto Croce, Philosophy of the Practical, 1935
6. The following advertisement for a great metropolitan newspaper
appears very widely in Pennsylvania:
In Philadelphia nearly everybody reads the Bulletin.
Fallacies
155

Fallacies
7. . . . since it is impossible for an animal or plant to be indefinitely big or
small, neither can its parts be such, or the whole will be the same.
—Aristotle, Physics
8. For the benefit of those representatives who have not been here before
this year, it may be useful to explain that the item before the General As-
sembly is that hardy perennial called the “Soviet item.” It is purely a
propaganda proposition, not introduced with a serious purpose of seri-
ous action, but solely as a peg on which to hang a number of speeches
with a view to getting them into the press of the world. This is consid-
ered by some to be very clever politics. Others, among whom the pres-
ent speaker wishes to be included, consider it an inadequate response to
the challenge of the hour.
—Henry Cabot Lodge, speech to the United Nations General Assembly, 
30 November 1953
9. The war-mongering character of all this flood of propaganda in the
United States is admitted even by the American press. Such provocative
and slanderous aims clearly inspired today’s speech by the United
States Representative, consisting only of impudent slander against the
Soviet Union, to answer which would be beneath our dignity. The hero-
ic epic of Stalingrad is impervious to libel. The Soviet people in the bat-
tles at Stalingrad saved the world from the fascist plague and that great
victory which decided the fate of the world is remembered with recog-
nition and gratitude by all humanity. Only men dead to all shame could
try to cast aspersions on the shining memory of the heroes of that battle.
—Anatole M. Baranovsky, speech to the United Nations General Assembly, 
30 November 1953
10. Prof. Leon Kass reports a notable response to an assignment he had
given students at the University of Chicago. Compose an essay, he
asked, about a memorable meal you have eaten. One student wrote as
follows:
I had once eaten lunch with my uncle and my uncle’s friend. His friend had
once eaten lunch with Albert Einstein. Albert Einstein was once a man of great
spirituality. Therefore, by the law of the syllogism, I had once eaten lunch with
God.
—Leon Kass, The Hungry Soul: Eating and the Perfecting of Our Nature
(New York: The Free Press, 1995)
11. Consider genetically engineered fish. Scientists hope that fish that con-
tain new growth hormones will grow bigger and faster than normal
fish. Other scientists are developing fish that could be introduced into
cold, northern waters, where they cannot now survive. The intention is
to boost fish production for food. The economic benefits may be obvi-
ous, but not the risks. Does this make the risks reasonable?
—Edward Bruggemann, “Genetic Engineering Needs Strict Regulation,” 
The New York Times, 24 March 1992
156

Fallacies
12. The multiverse theory actually injects the concept of a transcendent Cre-
ator at almost every level of its logical structure. Gods and worlds, cre-
ators and creatures, lie embedded in each other, forming an infinite
regress in unbounded space.
This reductio ad absurdum of the multiverse theory reveals what a very
slippery slope it is indeed. Since Copernicus, our view of the universe
has enlarged by a factor of a billion billion. The cosmic vista stretches
one hundred billion trillion miles in all directions—that’s a 1 with 23
zeros. Now we are being urged to accept that even this vast region is
just a miniscule fragment of the whole.
—Paul Davies, “A Brief History of the Multiverse,” 
The New York Times, 12 April 2003
13. When Copernicus argued that the Ptolemaic astronomy (holding that
the celestial bodies all revolved around the Earth) should be replaced by
a theory holding that the Earth (along with all the other planets) re-
volved around the sun, he was ridiculed by many of the scientists of his
day, including one of the greatest astronomers of that time, Clavius,
who wrote in 1581:
Both [Copernicus and Ptolemy] are in agreement with the observed
phenomena. But Copernicus’s arguments contain a great many principles
that are absurd. He assumed, for instance, that the earth is moving with a
triple motion . . . [but] according to the philosophers a simple body like the
earth can have only a simple motion. . . . Therefore it seems to me that
Ptolemy’s geocentric doctrine must be preferred to Copernicus’s doctrine.
14. All of us cannot be famous, because all of us cannot be well known.
—Jesse Jackson, quoted in The New Yorker, 12 March 1984
15. The God that holds you over the pit of hell, much as one holds a spider
or some loathsome insect over the fire, abhors you, and is dreadfully
provoked; his wrath towards you burns like fire; he looks upon you as
worthy of nothing else but to be cast into the fire; you are ten thousand
times so abominable in his eyes as the most hateful and venomous ser-
pent is in ours. You have offended him infinitely more than a stubborn
rebel did his prince; and yet it is nothing but his hand that holds you
from falling into the fire every moment.
—Jonathan Edwards, “The Pit of Hell,” 1741
16. Mysticism is one of the great forces of the world’s history. For religion is
nearly the most important thing in the world, and religion never re-
mains for long altogether untouched by mysticism.
—John McTaggart, Ellis McTaggart, “Mysticism,” Philosophical Studies, 1934
17. If science wishes to argue that we cannot know what was going on in
[the gorilla] Binti’s head when she acted as she did, science must also
acknowledge that it cannot prove that nothing was going on. It is be-
cause of our irresolvable ignorance, as much as fellow-feeling, that we
157

Fallacies
should give animals the benefit of doubt and treat them with the respect
we accord ourselves.
—Martin Rowe and Mia Macdonald, “Let’s Give Animals Respect They
Deserve,” The New York Times, 26 August 1996
18. If we want to know whether a state is brave we must look to its army,
not because the soldiers are the only brave people in the community, but
because it is only through their conduct that the courage or cowardice of
the community can be manifested.
—Richard L. Nettleship, Lectures on the Republic of Plato, 1937
19. Whether we are to live in a future state, as it is the most important ques-
tion which can possibly be asked, so it is the most intelligible one which
can be expressed in language.
—Joseph Butler, “Of Personal Identity,” 1736
20. Which is more useful, the Sun or the Moon? The Moon is more useful
since it gives us light during the night, when it is dark, whereas the Sun
shines only in the daytime, when it is light anyway.
—George Gamow (inscribed in the entry hall of the 
Hayden Planetarium, New York City)
chapter   Summary
A fallacy is a type of argument that may seem to be correct, but that proves on ex-
amination not to be so. In this chapter we have grouped the major informal fallacies
under four headings: (1) fallacies of relevance, (2) fallacies of defective induction,
(3) fallacies of presumption, and (4) fallacies of ambiguity. Within each group we have
named, explained, and illustrated the most common kinds of reasoning mistakes.
1. Fallacies of Relevance
R1. The appeal to the populace (ad populum): When correct reasoning is
replaced by devices calculated to elicit emotional and nonrational support
for the conclusion urged.
R2. The appeal to emotion: When correct reasoning is replaced by appeals to
specific emotions, such as pity, pride, or envy.
R3. The red herring: When correct reasoning is manipulated by the introduc-
tion of some event or character that deliberately misleads the audience and
thus hinders rational inference.
R4. The straw man: When correct reasoning is undermined by the deliberate
misrepresentation of the opponent’s position.
R5. The attack on the person (ad hominem): When correct reasoning about some
issue is replaced by an attack upon the character or special circumstances of
the opponent.
R6. The appeal to force (ad baculum): When reasoning is replaced by threats in
the effort to win support or assent.
158

Fallacies
R7. Missing the point (ignoratio elenchi): When correct reasoning is replaced by
the mistaken refutation of a position that was not really at issue.
2. Fallacies of Defective Induction
In fallacies of defective induction, the premises may be relevant to the conclu-
sion, but they are far too weak to support the conclusion. Four major fallacies are
as follows:
D1. Appeal to ignorance (ad ignorantiam): When it is argued that a proposition is
true on the ground that it has not been proved false, or when it is argued
that a proposition is false because it has not been proved true.
D2. Appeal to inappropriate authority (ad verecundiam): When the premises of
an argument appeal to the judgment of some person or persons who have
no legitimate claim to authority in the matter at hand.
D3. False cause (non causa pro causa): When one treats as the cause of a thing
that which is not really the cause of that thing, often relying (as in the sub-
type post hoc ergo propter hoc) merely on the close temporal succession of
two events.
D4. Hasty generalization (converse accident): When one moves carelessly or too
quickly from one or a very few instances to a broad or universal claim.
3. Fallacies of Presumption
In fallacies of presumption, the mistake in argument arises from relying on some
proposition that is assumed to be true but is without warrant and is false or du-
bious. Three major fallacies are as follows:
P1. Accident: When one mistakenly applies a generalization to an individual
case that it does not properly govern.
P2. Complex question (plurium interrogationum): When one argues by asking a
question in such a way as to presuppose the truth of some assumption
buried in that question.
P3. Begging the question (petitio principii): When one assumes in the premises of
an argument the truth of what one seeks to establish in the conclusion of that
same argument.
4. Fallacies of Ambiguity
In fallacies of ambiguity, the mistakes in argument arise as a result of the shift in
the meaning of words or phrases, from the meanings that they have in the prem-
ises to different meanings that they have in the conclusion. Five major fallacies
are as follows:
A1. Equivocation: When the same word or phrase is used with two or more
meanings, deliberately or accidentally, in formulating an argument.
159

Fallacies
A2. Amphiboly: When one of the statements in an argument has more than one
plausible meaning, because of the loose or awkward way in which the
words in that statement have been combined.
A3. Accent: When a shift of meaning arises within an argument as a conse-
quence of changes in the emphasis given to its words or parts.
A4. Composition: This fallacy is committed (a) when one reasons mistakenly
from the attributes of a part to the attributes of the whole, or (b) when one
reasons mistakenly from the attributes of an individual member of some col-
lection to the attributes of the totality of that collection.
A5. Division: This fallacy is committed (a) when one reasons mistakenly from
the attributes of a whole to the attributes of one of its parts, or (b) when one
reasons mistakenly from the attributes of a totality of some collection of en-
tities to the attributes of the individual entities within that collection.
SUPERFASHIONALITY
The following is an excerpt from fashion and
celebrity magazine Superfashionality. Browse
this thrilling and edifying publication, and then
answer the questions that follow.
How to Tell if He Likes You
Have you been wondering whether that special
guy likes you back? Here are some ways to find
out!
1. In a study, 90 percent of men said that
they like most people. So, he probably
likes you!
2. Ask your friends. If they think he likes
you, he probably likes you!
3. Statistically speaking, women who pur-
chase mixing bowls are more likely to be
in committed relationships. So buy a
mixing bowl right away!
4. Any boy who doesn’t like you is obvi-
ously stupid.
LOGIC IN THE REAL WORLD
Trend Watch
If you love leather and you love socks, you’ll
love leather socks!
Self-Esteem Corner
Do you have self-esteem? If so, people will nat-
urally like you. Improve your self-esteem in
three easy steps:
160

Fallacies
1. Go out and make friends by getting people
to like you.
2. Tell yourself, “These people like me!”
3. Feel the self-esteem!
Capybara Controversy
A hot new trend is capybara fur! Capybara
vests and jackets have recently been seen on
numerous C-list celebrities at events where
free fur vests are given away.
What is a capybara? Dr. M. Hoffenstephen
of the University of Nova Scotia explains, “A
capybara is an animal that has qualities
particular to the species Hydrochoerus
hydrochaeris (i.e., the capybara).”
However, not everyone’s hip to capybara
fur. Martha Cupfeld, of People for the Moral
Treatment of Mammals, commented, “If we
accept the making of vests from capybaras, it’s
one small step on the path towards making
vests from hirsute human beings.”
Reality star Whitney Hudson, winner of
this season’s Design It or Die!, commented,
“Capybara fur is what everyone is wearing. If
your clothes are made of regular fabric, you’re
totally being left behind. Gross.”
What is a capybara?
It’s this!
Baby for Jen?
Jennifer Amberton was spotted wearing a big
shirt! Superfashionality waited outside her house
with a camera pointed at her front door for
eighteen hours. When she came out, we shout-
ed, “Jen, are you going to name your baby
Beryl, after your mother?”
Before entering a chauffeur-driven black
car and slamming the door behind her, she
replied, “My mother’s name is Susan, idiots.”
There you have it! If she didn’t deny that
there’s a baby on board, she must be pregnant!
Keep reading Superfashionality to stay on top of
this breaking news story!
Celebrity Quotes of the Week
“Haters say that my last movie, “The Last
Machine Gun Kickboxer,” was too violent,
but you can’t be against all violence.
Smushing bugs is violence.”
—Buck Chatham
“I am not just a handbag designer. I make
satchels, totes. I am an engineer of con-
tainers. If it has an inside and an outside, I
make it and put sequins on it.”
—Donatella Flaviatore
“I am in favor of an amendment against
Lady Cha-Cha’s flag underpants because
the most important thing is that millions of
Americans cannot afford flags.”
—Johan Colbare
Questions
1.
How to Tell if He Likes You: Match each
of the suggestions given (1, 2, 3, and 4) with
the following four fallacy names:
A. Appeal to Inappropriate Authority
B. Fallacy of Equivocation
C. Argument ad Hominem
D. False Cause
LOGIC IN THE REAL WORLD
161

Fallacies
2.
Trend Watch: The statement “If you love
leather and you love socks, you’ll love
leather socks!” is an example of what
fallacy?
A. Fallacy of Division
B. Accent
C. Fallacy of Composition
D. Begging the Question
3.
Self-Esteem Corner: The idea that self-es-
teem will cause people to like you, and that
you can build self-esteem by taking notice
of those who like you, is an example of
what fallacy?
A. Red Herring
B. Accident
C. Begging the Question
D. Straw Man
4.
Capybara Controversy: What type of defi-
nition does Dr. M. Hoffenstephen give for
the capybara?
A. Stipulative
B. Precising
C. Lexical
D. Circular
5.
Capybara Controversy: What type of defi-
nition does the box containing the capybara
photo give for the capybara?
A. Precising
B. Ostensive
C. Theoretical
D. Persuasive
6.
Capybara Controversy: What type of falla-
cy does Whitney Hudson commit when
urging us to wear capybara fur?
A. Appeal to the Populace
B. Ad Hominem
C. Appeal to Ignorance
D. Hasty Generalization
7.
Baby For Jen?: Jennifer Amberton was
asked a complex question—“Are you going
to name your baby Beryl, after your moth-
er?” The question contained two presuppo-
sitions, that Jennifer is pregnant and that her
mother’s name is Beryl. When Jennifer de-
nied the second presupposition but not the
first, the first was presumed to be true (that
is, because the starlet didn’t deny being
pregnant, Superfashionality assumed that she
was). What is the name of this error?
A. The Auspicious Bump
B. The Negative Pregnant
C. The Nosy Interlocutor
D. The Conceptive Pause
8.
Celebrity Quotes of the Week: What falla-
cy does Buck Chatham commit?
A. False Cause
B. Amphiboly
C. Straw Man
D. Fallacy of Division
9.
Celebrity Quotes of the Week: Is Donatel-
la Flaviatore’s quote decreasing or increas-
ing in intension?
A. Increasing
B. Decreasing
C. Neither
10. Celebrity Quotes of the Week: What falla-
cy does Johan Colbare commit?
A. Red Herring
B. Appeal to the Populace
C. Accent
D. Equivocation
162

Fallacies
Solutions
1.
B. The word “like” is being used in two
different ways here.
A. Your friends are highly biased.
D. Maybe 
women 
who 
already 
have
boyfriends are more likely to buy mixing
bowls.
C. Obviously an “against the man” attack.
2.
C.  This is the Fallacy of Composition: Just
because we love leather and socks individu-
ally does not mean we will like them togeth-
er. (The same could be said of ketchup ice
cream and other questionable combinations
of individually popular items).
3.
C. The argument “self-esteem will make
people like you and you can get self-esteem
by getting people to like you” is circular.
4.
D. Dr. M. Hoffenstephen essentially defines
a capybara as that which has the character-
istics of a capybara—that’s not much of a
definition at all.
5.
B. An ostensive definition is one which
“points” at an example of the definiendum.
6.
A. This is also called the “Bandwagon” fal-
lacy. As in, “Hop on this bandwagon—it’s
taking us to the fur store at the mall! Every-
body’s doing it!”
7.
B. Believe it or not, the name of that fallacy
is “The Negative Pregnant.” It was this fair-
ly incredible name that inspired this entire
fashion magazine-based exercise. Of
course, the Negative Pregnant need not
only be about pregnancy; for instance, if
someone asks, “Did you fail to do your
homework because you were robbing a
bank?” and you say, “I did my homework,”
the (fallacious) implication is that you
robbed a bank.
8.
C. Rather than arguing against those who
say that a particular movie was too vio-
lent, Buck argues against a Straw Man: the
simplistic argument that all violence is
wrong.
9.
B. Donatella has moved from defining the
items she makes as handbags to defining
them in increasingly broad ways: finally,
anything with an inside and an outside.
This is decreasing in intension.
10. A. Rats why Lady Cha-Cha’s flag under-
pants must be outlawed, Colbare attempts
to distract us by pointing out the terrible
poverty of people who cannot afford to ex-
press their patriotism. Sad, but quite irrele-
vant to a flag-underpants amendment.
LOGIC IN THE REAL WORLD
163

Fallacies
END NOTES
1For a discussion of the methods of classifying fallacies, see Howard Kahane, “The Nature and Classifica-
tion of Fallacies,” in Informal Logic, edited by J. A. Blair and R. J. Johnson (Inverness, CA: Edgepress,
1980). For a more extensive theoretical treatment of fallacies, see C. L. Hamblin, Fallacies (London:
Methuen, 1970); and J. Woods and D. Walton, Argument: The Logic of the Fallacies (Scarborough, ONT.:
McGraw-Hill Ryerson, 1982). For a more detailed listing of the varieties of fallacies, see W. W. Fernside
and W. B. Holther, Fallacy: The Counterfeit of Argument (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1959), who
name and illustrate 51 different fallacies; or D. H. Fischer, Historians’ Fallacies (New York: Harper & Row,
1979), who distinguishes 112 different fallacies.
2Reported in The New England Journal of Medicine, 26 December 1996.
3Plato, Apology, 34; Jowett translation.
4Dan Brown, The Da Vinci Code (New York: Random House, 2003).
5David Broder, “Deciding What to Do in Iraq Requires Thought, Not Gut Instinct,” The Washington Post,
12 January 2007.
6www.Figarospeech.com, 19 March 2006.
7The News & Observer, Raleigh, NC, 5 January 2007.
8Constance Baker Motley, Equal Justice Under Law (New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 2001).
9“‘Kind’ Racism,” The Sciences, June 1997.
10Interview with Osama bin Laden, CNN, March 1997.
11Peter Monaghan, “A Journal Article Is Expunged and Its Authors Cry Foul,” The Chronicle of Higher
Education, 8 December 2000.
12“White House Orders Silence on Meese,” The Washington Post, 29 April 1988.
13“Bush Expected to Grant a Stay of Execution,” The New York Times, 1 June 2000.
14 The Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln, R. P. Basler, editor (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University
Press, 1953), Vol. 2, p. 283.
15 Stephen Tumim, Great Legal Fiascos (London, Arthur Barker, 1985).
16 Erwin Chargaff, in a famous letter to the editor of Science, Science, vol. 192, p. 938, 1976.
17 Robert Sinsheimer, “Troubled Dawn for Genetic Engineering,” New Scientist, vol. 168, p. 148, 1975.
18 ”Wisconsin to Cut Welfare,” Ann Arbor News, 11 April 1992.
19 Justice William Brennan, writing for the Court, In re Winship, 397 U.S. 358, 1970.
20 J. Locke, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, 1690.
21 C. Loring Brace, “Faculty Is Powerless,” The New York Times, 24 February 1998.
22 Douglas E. McNeil, “School Prayer Fallacy,” The New York Times, 10 June 1998.
23 Peter Steinfels, “Beliefs,” The New York Times, 13 February 1996.
24 I. Harvey, “Death Penalty Ethics,” The New York Times, 13 February 1996.
25 Ernest van den Haag, “Make Mine Hemlock,” National Review, 12 June 1995.
26 Zev Simpser, “A Murder Is a Murder,” The New York Times, 3 May 2002.
27 John Bedder, reported in “Fried and Salty, Yessir, Matey, but Truly English,” The New York Times, 9
March 1993.
28 Elizabeth Kolbert, “Talk of the Town,” The New Yorker, 17 November 2003.
29 Barbara Commins, “The Slide into Poverty,” The New York Times, 10 September 2000.
30 Jeremy Rifkin, “Issues in Genetic Research,” The Chronicle of Higher Education, 3 July 1998.
164

31 In his treatise, “Logic,” which appeared in the Encyclopaedia Metropolitana (London, 1828).
32 Weng Shou-Jen, Record of Instructions (c. 1518).
33 See David Hume, “Sceptical Doubts Concerning the Operations of the Understanding,” in An Enquiry
Concerning Human Understanding, sec. 4 (1747).
34 Richard Robinson, An Atheist’s Values (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1964), p. 121.
35 The New Yorker, 3 March 2003.
36 In the work whose title is generally given as On Sophistical Refutations.
37 The New York Times, 18 June 1996.
38 Thomas DiLorenzo, The Real Lincoln: A New Look at Abraham Lincoln, His Agenda, and an Unnecessary
War (Prima Publishing, 2002).
Fallacies
For additional exercises and tutorials about concepts covered in this
chapter, log in to MyLogicLab at www.mylogiclab.com and select your
current textbook.
165

This page intentionally left blank 

Categorical Propositions
From Chapter 5 of Introduction to Logic, Fourteenth Edition. Irving M. Copi, Carl Cohen, Kenneth McMahon. 
Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Prentice Hall. All rights reserved.

Modern or modern
symbolic logic
The account of
syllogistic reasoning
accepted today. It differs
in important ways from
the traditional account.
Categorical Propositions
1
The Theory of Deduction
2
Classes and Categorical Propositions
3
The Four Kinds of Categorical Propositions
4
Quality, Quantity, and Distribution
5
The Traditional Square of Opposition
6
Further Immediate Inferences
7
Existential Import and the Interpretation of Categorical
Propositions
8
Symbolism and Diagrams for Categorical Propositions
1
The Theory of Deduction
We turn now to the analysis of the structure of arguments. We have dealt main-
ly with the language in which arguments are formulated. In this chapter we
explore and explain the relations between the premises of an argument and its
conclusion.
This section of the chapter is devoted to deductive arguments. A deductive
argument is one whose premises are claimed to provide conclusive grounds for
the truth of its conclusion. If that claim is correct—that is, if the premises of the
argument really do assure the truth of its conclusion with necessity—that deduc-
tive argument is valid. Every deductive argument either does what it claims, or it
does not; therefore, every deductive argument is either valid or invalid. If it is
valid, it is impossible for its premises to be true without its conclusion also being
true.
The theory of deduction aims to explain the relations of premises and conclu-
sion in valid arguments. It also aims to provide techniques for the appraisal of
deductive arguments—that is, for discriminating between valid and invalid de-
ductions. To accomplish this, two large bodies of theory have been developed.
The first is called classical logic (or Aristotelian logic, after the Greek philoso-
pher who initiated this study). The second is called modern logic or modern
symbolic logic, developed mainly during the nineteenth and twentieth cen-
turies. Classical logic is the topic of this chapter.
Aristotle (384–322 BCE) was one of the towering intellects of the ancient world.
After studying for twenty years in Plato’s Academy, he became tutor to Alexander
the Great; later he founded his own school, the Lyceum, where he contributed
substantially to nearly every field of human knowledge. His great treatises on rea-
soning were collected after his death and came to be called the Organon, meaning
literally the “instrument,” the fundamental tool of knowledge.
The word logic did not acquire its modern meaning until the second century
CE, but the subject matter of logic was long understood to be the matters treated in
Deductive argument
An argument whose
premises are claimed to
provide conclusive
grounds for the truth of
its conclusion.
Classical or
Aristotelian logic
The traditional account of
syllogistic reasoning, in
which certain
interpretations of
categorical propositions
are presupposed.
Validity
A characteristic of any
deductive argument
whose premises, if they
were all true, would
provide conclusive
grounds for the truth of
its conclusion. Such an
argument is said to be
valid.
This asset is
intentionally omitted
from this text. It may
be accessed at
www.mcescher.com.
(Belvedere by 
M.C. Escher)
168

Categorical Propositions
Aristotle’s seminal Organon. Aristotelian logic has been the foundation of ration-
al analysis for thousands of years. Over the course of those centuries it has been
very greatly refined: its notation has been much improved, its principles have
been carefully formulated, its intricate structure has been completed. This great
system of classical logic, set forth in this chapter, remains an intellectual tool of
enormous power, as beautiful as it is penetrating.
2
Classes and Categorical Propositions
Classical logic deals mainly with arguments based on the relations of classes of
objects to one another. By a class we mean a collection of all objects that have
some specified characteristic in common. Everyone can see immediately that two
classes can be related in at least the following three ways:
1. All of one class may be included in all of another class. Thus the class of all
dogs is wholly included (or wholly contained) in the class of all mammals.
2. Some, but not all, of the members of one class may be included in an-
other class. Thus the class of all athletes is partially included (or partially
contained) in the class of all females.
3. Two classes may have no members in common. Thus the class of all tri-
angles and the class of all circles may be said to exclude one another.
These three relations may be applied to classes, or categories, of every sort. In
a deductive argument we present propositions that state the relations between
one category and some other category. The propositions with which such argu-
ments are formulated are therefore called categorical propositions. Categorical
propositions are the fundamental elements, the building blocks of argument, in
the classical account of deductive logic. Consider the argument
No athletes are vegetarians.
All football players are athletes.
Therefore no football players are vegetarians.
This argument contains three categorical propositions. We may dispute the
truth of its premises, of course, but the relations of the classes expressed in these
propositions yield an argument that is certainly valid: If those premises are true,
that conclusion must be true. It is plain that each of the premises is indeed cate-
gorical; that is, each premise affirms, or denies, that some class S is included in some
other class P, in whole or in part. In this illustrative argument the three categorical
propositions are about the class of all athletes, the class of all vegetarians, and the
class of all football players.
The critical first step in developing a theory of deduction based on classes,
therefore, is to identify the kinds of categorical propositions and to explore the
relations among them.
Class
The collection of all
objects that have some
specified characteristic
in common.
Categorical
proposition
A proposition that can
be analyzed as being
about classes, or
categories, affirming or
denying that one class,
S, is included in some
other class, P, in whole
or in part.
169

3
The Four Kinds of Categorical Propositions
There are four and only four kinds of standard-form categorical propositions.
Here are examples of each of the four kinds:
1. All politicians are liars.
2. No politicians are liars.
3. Some politicians are liars.
4. Some politicians are not liars.
We will examine each of these kinds in turn.
1. Universal affirmative propositions. In these we assert that the whole of
one class is included or contained in another class. “All politicians are liars”
is an example; it asserts that every member of one class, the class of
politicians, is a member of another class, the class of liars. Any universal
affirmative proposition can be written schematically as
where the letters S and P represent the subject and predicate terms, re-
spectively. Such a proposition affirms that the relation of class inclusion
holds between the two classes and says that the inclusion is complete, or
universal. All members of S are said to be also members of P. Proposi-
tions in this standard form are called universal affirmative propositions.
They are also called A propositions.
Categorical propositions are often represented with diagrams, using
two interlocking circles to stand for the two classes involved. These are
called Venn diagrams, named after the English logician and mathemati-
cian, John Venn (1834–1923), who invented them. Later we will explore
these diagrams more fully, and we will find that such diagrams are ex-
ceedingly helpful in appraising the validity of deductive arguments. For
the present we use these diagrams only to exhibit graphically the sense
of each categorical proposition.
We label one circle S, for “subject class,” and the other circle P, for
“predicate class.” The diagram for the A proposition, which asserts that
all S is P, shows that portion of S which is outside of P shaded out, indi-
cating that there are no members of S that are not members of P. So the
A proposition is diagrammed thus:
All S is P.
Categorical Propositions
S
P
All S is P.
Standard-form
categorical
proposition
Any categorical
proposition of the form
“All S is P” (universal
affirmative), “No S is P”
(universal negative),
“Some S is P” (particular
affirmative), or “Some S
is not P” (particular
negative). Respectively,
these four types are
known as A, E, I, and O
propositions.
Venn diagram
Iconic representation of
a categorical proposition
or of an argument, used
to display their logical
forms by means of
overlapping circles.
170

Categorical Propositions
2. Universal negative propositions. The second example above, “No
politicians are liars,” is a proposition in which it is denied, universally,
that any member of the class of politicians is a member of the class of
liars. It asserts that the subject class, S, is wholly excluded from the
predicate class, P. Schematically, categorical propositions of this kind
can be written as
where again S and P represent the subject and predicate terms. This
kind of proposition denies the relation of inclusion between the two
terms, and denies it universally. It tells us that no members of S are
members of P. Propositions in this standard form are called universal
negative propositions. They are also called E propositions.
The diagram for the E proposition will exhibit this mutual exclusion
by having the overlapping portion of the two circles representing the
classes S and P shaded out. So the E proposition is diagrammed thus:
No S is P.
S
P
No S is P.
3. Particular affirmative propositions. The third example above, “Some
politicians are liars,” affirms that some members of the class of all politi-
cians are members of the class of all liars. But it does not affirm this of
politicians universally. Only some particular politician or politicians are
said to be liars. This proposition does not affirm or deny anything about
the class of all politicians; it makes no pronouncements about that entire
class. Nor does it say that some politicians are not liars, although in
some contexts it may be taken to suggest that. The literal and exact in-
terpretation of this proposition is the assertion that the class of politi-
cians and the class of liars have some member or members in common. That
is what we understand this standard-form proposition to mean.
“Some” is an indefinite term. Does it mean “at least one,” “at least
two,” or “at least several”? How many does it mean? Context might affect
our understanding of the term as it is used in everyday speech, but logi-
cians, for the sake of definiteness, interpret “some” to mean “at least one.”
A particular affirmative proposition may be written schematically as
which says that at least one member of the class designated by the sub-
ject term S is also a member of the class designated by the predicate
Some S is P.
171

Categorical Propositions
term P. The proposition affirms that the relation of class inclusion holds,
but does not affirm it of the first class universally—it affirms it only par-
tially; that is, it is affirmed of some particular member, or members, of
the first class. Propositions in this standard form are called particular
affirmative propositions. They are also called I propositions.
The diagram for the I proposition indicates that there is at least one
member of S that is also a member of P by placing an x in the region in
which the two circles overlap. So the I proposition is diagrammed thus:
S
P
Some S is P.
x
4. Particular negative propositions. The fourth example above, “Some
politicians are not liars,” like the third, does not refer to politicians uni-
versally, but only to some member or members of that class; it is
particular. Unlike the third example, however, it does not affirm the in-
clusion of some member or members of the first class in the second
class; this is precisely what is denied. It is written schematically as
which says that at least one member of the class designated by the sub-
ject term S is excluded from the whole of the class designated by the
predicate term P. The denial is not universal. Propositions in this stan-
dard form are called particular negative propositions. They are also called
O propositions.
The diagram for the O proposition indicates that there is at least one
member of S that is not a member of P by placing an x in the region of S
that is outside of P. So the O proposition is diagrammed thus:
Some S is not P.
S
P
Some S is not P.
x
The examples we have used in this section employ classes that are simply
named: politicians, liars, vegetarians, athletes, and so on. But subject and predi-
cate terms in standard-form propositions can be more complicated. Thus, for ex-
ample, the proposition “All candidates for the position are persons of honor and
172

Categorical Propositions
integrity” has the phrase “candidates for the position” as its subject term and the
phrase “persons of honor and integrity” as its predicate term. Subject and predi-
cate terms can become more intricate still, but in each of the four standard forms
a relation is expressed between a subject class and a predicate class. These four—
A, E, I, and O propositions—are the building blocks of deductive arguments.
This analysis of categorical propositions appears to be simple and straightfor-
ward, but the discovery of the fundamental role of these propositions, and the ex-
hibition of their relations to one another, was a great step in the systematic
development of logic. It was one of Aristotle’s permanent contributions to human
knowledge. Its apparent simplicity is deceptive. On this foundation—classes of
objects and the relations among those classes—logicians have erected, over the
course of centuries, a highly sophisticated system for the analysis of deductive ar-
gument. This system, whose subtlety and penetration mark it as one of the great-
est of intellectual achievements, we now explore in the following three steps:
A. In the remainder of this chapter we will examine the features of standard-
form categorical propositions more deeply, explaining their relations to
one another, and what inferences may be drawn directly from these cate-
gorical propositions. Much of deductive reasoning can be mastered with
no more than a thorough grasp of A, E, I, and O propositions and their
interconnections.
B.
In this text, we will examine syllogisms, the arguments that are commonly
constructed using standard-form categorical propositions. We will explore
the nature of syllogisms, and show that every valid syllogistic form is
uniquely characterized and is therefore given its own name. We will then
develop powerful techniques for determining the validity (or invalidity)
of syllogisms.
C. In this text we integrate syllogistic reasoning and the language of argu-
ment in everyday life. Some limitations of reasoning based on this founda-
tion will be identified, but the wide applicability that this foundation
makes possible will be demonstrated.
Standard-Form Categorical Propositions
o v e r v i e w
Proposition Form
Name and Type
Example
All S is P.
A
Universal affirmative
All lawyers are wealthy
people.
No S is P.
E
Universal negative
No criminals are good
citizens.
Some S is P.
I
Particular affirmative
Some chemicals are
poisons.
Some S is not P.
O
Particular negative
Some insects are not pests.
173

Categorical Propositions
EXERCISES
Identify the subject and predicate terms in, and name the form of, each of the
following propositions:
*1. Some historians are extremely gifted writers whose works read like
first-rate novels.
2. No athletes who have ever accepted pay for participating in sports are
amateurs.
3. No dogs that are without pedigrees are candidates for blue ribbons in
official dog shows sponsored by the American Kennel Club.
4. All satellites that are currently in orbit less than ten thousand miles high
are very delicate devices that cost many thousands of dollars to manu-
facture.
*5. Some members of families that are rich and famous are not persons of
either wealth or distinction.
6. Some paintings produced by artists who are universally recognized as
masters are not works of genuine merit that either are or deserve to be
preserved in museums and made available to the public.
7. All drivers of automobiles that are not safe are desperadoes who threat-
en the lives of their fellows.
8. Some politicians who could not be elected to the most minor positions
are appointed officials in our government today.
9. Some drugs that are very effective when properly administered are not
safe remedies that all medicine cabinets should contain.
*10. No people who have not themselves done creative work in the arts are
responsible critics on whose judgment we can rely.
4
Quality, Quantity, and Distribution
A. Quality
Every standard-form categorical proposition either affirms, or denies, some
class relation, as we have seen. If the proposition affirms some class inclusion,
whether complete or partial, its quality is affirmative. So the A proposition, “All
S is P,” and the I proposition, “Some S is P,” are both affirmative in quality.
Their letter names, A and I, are thought to come from the Latin word,
“AffIrmo,” meaning “I affirm.” If the proposition denies class inclusion,
whether complete or partial, its quality is negative. So the E proposition, “No S
is P,” and the O proposition, “Some S is not P,” are both negative in quality.
Their letter names, E and O, are thought to come from the Latin word, “nEgO,”
meaning “I deny.” Every categorical proposition has one quality or the other,
affirmative or negative.
Quality
An attribute of every
categorical proposition,
determined by whether
the proposition affirms
or denies class
inclusion. Thus every
categorical proposition
is either universal in
quality or particular in
quality.
174

Categorical Propositions
B. Quantity
Every standard-form categorical proposition has some class as its subject. If the
proposition refers to all members of the class designated by its subject term, its
quantity is universal. So the A proposition, “All S is P,” and the E proposition,
“No S is P,” are both universal in quantity. If the proposition refers only to some
members of the class designated by its subject term, its quantity is particular. So
the I proposition, “Some S is P,” and the O proposition, “Some S is not P,” are
both particular in quantity.
The quantity of a standard-form categorical proposition is revealed by the
word with which it begins—“all,” “no,” or “some.” “All” and “no” indicate that
the proposition is universal; “some” indicates that the proposition is particular.
The word “no” serves also, in the case of the E proposition, to indicate its nega-
tive quality, as we have seen.
Because every standard-form categorical proposition must be either affirma-
tive or negative, and must be either universal or particular, the four names
uniquely describe each one of the four standard forms by indicating its quantity
and its quality: universal affirmative (A), particular affirmative (I), universal
negative (E), particular negative (O).
C. General Schema of Standard-Form Categorical Propositions
Between the subject and predicate terms of every standard-form categorical
proposition occurs some form of the verb “to be.” This verb (accompanied by
“not” in the case of the O proposition) serves to connect the subject and predicate
terms and is called the copula. Writing the four propositions schematically, as we
did earlier (All S is P, Some S is P, etc.), only the words “is” and “is not” appear;
but (depending on context) other forms of the verb “to be” may be appropriate.
We may change the tense (for example, “Some Roman emperors were monsters”
or “Some soldiers will not be heroes”), or change to the plural form of the verb
(for example, “All squares are rectangles”). In these examples, “were,” “are,” and
“will not be” serve as copulas. However, the general skeleton of a standard-form
categorical proposition always consists of just four parts: first the quantifier, then
the subject term, next the copula, and finally the predicate term. The schema may
be written as
D. Distribution
Categorical propositions are regarded as being about classes, the classes of ob-
jects designated by the subject and predicate terms. We have seen that a proposi-
tion may refer to classes in different ways; it may refer to all members of a class
or refer to only some members of that class. Thus the proposition, “All senators
are citizens,” refers to, or is about, all senators, but it does not refer to all citizens.
That proposition does not affirm that every citizen is a senator, but it does not
deny it either. Every A proposition is thus seen to refer to all members of the class
Quantifier (subject term) copula (predicate term).
Quantity An attribute of
every categorical
proposition, determined
by whether the
proposition refers to all
members or only to
some members of the
class designated by its
subject term. Thus every
categorical proposition
is either universal in
quantity or particular in
quantity.
Copula Any form of the
verb “to be” that serves
to connect the subject
term and the predicate
term of a categorical
proposition.
175

Categorical Propositions
designated by its subject term, S, but does not refer to all members of the class
designated by its predicate term, P.
To characterize the ways in which terms can occur in categorical proposi-
tions, we introduce the technical term distribution. A proposition distributes a
term if it refers to all members of the class designated by that term. In A, E, I, and
O propositions, the terms that are distributed vary, as follows:
In the A proposition (e.g., “All senators are citizens”): In this proposition,
“senators” is distributed, but “citizens” is not. In A propositions (universal affir-
matives) the subject term is distributed, but the predicate term is undistributed.
In the E proposition (e.g., “No athletes are vegetarians”): The subject
term, “athletes,” is distributed, because the whole class of athletes is said to be
excluded from the class of vegetarians. However, in asserting that the whole
class of athletes is excluded from the class of vegetarians, it is also asserted that
the whole class of vegetarians is excluded from the class of athletes. Of each and
every vegetarian, the proposition says that he or she is not an athlete. Unlike an
A proposition, therefore, an E proposition refers to all members of the class des-
ignated by its predicate term, and therefore also distributes its predicate term. E
propositions (universal negatives) distribute both their subject and their predi-
cate terms.
In the I proposition (e.g., “Some soldiers are cowards”): No assertion is
made about all soldiers in this proposition, and no assertion is made about all
cowards either. It says nothing about each and every soldier, and nothing about
each and every coward. Neither class is wholly included, or wholly excluded,
from the other. In I propositions (particular affirmatives) both subject and predi-
cate terms are undistributed.
In the O proposition (e.g., “Some horses are not thoroughbreds”):
Nothing is said about all horses. The proposition refers to some members of the
class designated by the subject term: it says, of this part of the class of horses, that
it is excluded from the class of all thoroughbreds. But they are excluded from the
whole of the latter class. Given the particular horses referred to, the proposition
says that each and every member of the class of thoroughbreds is not one of those
particular horses. When something is said to be excluded from a class, the whole
of the class is referred to, just as, when a person is excluded from a country, all
parts of that country are forbidden to that person. In O propositions (particular
negatives) the subject term is not distributed, but the predicate term is distributed.
We thus see that universal propositions, both affirmative and negative, dis-
tribute their subject terms, whereas particular propositions, whether affirmative
or negative, do not distribute their subject terms. Thus the quantity of any stan-
dard-form categorical proposition determines whether its subject term is distrib-
uted or undistributed. We likewise see that affirmative propositions, whether
universal or particular, do not distribute their predicate terms, whereas negative
Distribution
An attribute that
describes the
relationship between a
categorical proposition
and each one of its
terms, indicating
whether or not the
proposition makes a
statement about every
member of the class
represented by a given
term.
176

Categorical Propositions
propositions, both universal and particular, do distribute their predicate terms.
Thus the quality of a standard-form categorical proposition determines whether
its predicate term is distributed or undistributed.
In summary: the A proposition distributes only its subject term; the E propo-
sition distributes both its subject and predicate terms; the I proposition distrib-
utes neither its subject nor its predicate term; and the O proposition distributes
only its predicate term.
Which terms are distributed by which standard-form categorical proposi-
tions will become very important when we turn to the evaluation of syllogisms.
The following diagram presents all these distributions graphically and may be
useful in helping you to remember which propositions distribute which of 
their terms:
A: All S is P.
O: Some S is not P.
I: Some S is P.
E: No S is P.
Subject term undistributed
Subject term distributed
Predicate
term
undistributed
Predicate
term
distributed
Visual Logic
The A proposition: All bananas are fruits
This A proposition asserts that every member of the class of bananas (the sub-
ject class) is also a member of the class of fruits (the predicate class). When a
term refers to every member of a class, we say that the term is distributed. In an
A proposition, the subject term is always distributed. But the A proposition does
not refer to every member of the predicate class; this example does not assert
that all fruits are bananas; it says nothing about every fruit. In an A proposition,
the predicate term is not distributed.
Predicate class 
(Fruits)
Subject class
(Bananas)
S
P
All S is P.
(Continued)
177

Categorical Propositions
The E proposition: No bananas are fruits
This E proposition asserts that every member of the class of bananas is outside
the class of fruits. The subject term, “bananas,” is plainly distributed. Because
bananas are excluded from the entire class of fruits, this proposition refers to
every member of the predicate class as well, because it plainly says that no
fruit is a banana. In an E proposition, both the subject term and the predicate term
are distributed.
Note that the concept of distribution has nothing to do with truth or falsi-
ty. This example proposition is certainly false—but, as in every E proposition,
both of its terms are distributed.
Predicate class 
(Fruits)
Subject class
(Bananas)
S
P
No S is P.
The I proposition: Some bananas are fruits
The word “some” in this I proposition tells us that at least one member of the
class designated by the subject term, “bananas,” is also a member of the class
designated by the predicate term, “fruits”—but this proposition makes no
claim about the subject class as a whole. Therefore, in this proposition, as in
every I proposition, the subject term is not distributed. Nor does this proposi-
tion say anything about every member of the class of fruits (we are told only
that there is at least one member of the class of bananas in it), so the predicate
is not distributed either. In an I proposition, neither the subject term nor the predi-
cate term is distributed.
Some S is P.
Predicate class 
(Fruits)
Subject class
(Bananas)
S
P
The O proposition: Some bananas are not fruits
The word “some” again tells us that this proposition is not about all members
of the class of bananas; the subject term is therefore not distributed. Because
we are told, in this proposition, that some bananas are not fruits, we are told
178

Categorical Propositions
something about the entire predicate class—namely, that the entire class of
fruits does not have one of those subject bananas among them. In an O proposi-
tion, the predicate term is distributed but the subject term is not distributed.
Some S is not P.
Predicate class 
(Fruits)
Subject class
(Bananas)
S
P
Quantity, Quality, and Distribution
o v e r v i e w
Proposition
Letter Name
Quantity
Quality
Distributes
All S is P.
A
Universal
Affirmative
S only
No S is P.
E
Universal
Negative
S and P
Some S is P.
I
Particular
Affirmative
Neither
Some S is not P.
O
Particular
Negative
P only
We conclude this section with a table that presents all the critical information
about each of the four standard-form categorical propositions:
EXERCISES
Name the quality and quantity of each of the following propositions, and state
whether their subject and predicate terms are distributed or undistributed:
*1. Some presidential candidates will be sadly disappointed people.
2. All those who died in Nazi concentration camps were victims of a cruel
and irrational tyranny.
3. Some recently identified unstable elements were not entirely accidental
discoveries.
4. Some members of the military-industrial complex are mild-mannered
people to whom violence is abhorrent.
*5. No leader of the feminist movement is a major business executive.
179

6. All hard-line advocates of law and order at any cost are people who will
be remembered, if at all, only for having failed to understand the major
social pressures of the twenty-first century.
7. Some recent rulings of the Supreme Court were politically motivated
decisions that flouted the entire history of U.S. legal practice.
8. No harmful pesticides or chemical defoliants were genuine contribu-
tions to the long-range agricultural goals of the nation.
9. Some advocates of major political, social, and economic reforms are not
responsible people who have a stake in maintaining the status quo.
*10. All new labor-saving devices are major threats to the trade union
movement.
5
The Traditional Square of Opposition
The preceding analysis of categorical propositions enables us to exhibit the rela-
tions among those propositions, which in turn provide solid grounds for a great
deal of the reasoning we do in everyday life. We need one more technical term:
opposition. Standard-form categorical propositions having the same subject terms
and the same predicate terms may (obviously) differ from each other in quality,
or in quantity, or in both. Any such kind of differing has been traditionally called
opposition. This term is used even when there is no apparent disagreement be-
tween the propositions. The various kinds of opposition are correlated with
some very important truth relations, as follows:
A. Contradictories
Two propositions are contradictories if one is the denial or negation of the
other—that is, if they cannot both be true and cannot both be false. Two stan-
dard-form categorical propositions that have the same subject and predicate
terms but differ from each other in both quantity and quality are contradictories.
Thus the A proposition, “All judges are lawyers,” and the O proposition,
“Some judges are not lawyers,” are clearly contradictories. They are opposed in
both quality (one affirms, the other denies) and quantity (one refers to all, and
the other to some). Of the pair, exactly one is true and exactly one is false. They
cannot both be true; they cannot both be false.
Similarly, the E proposition, “No politicians are idealists,” and the I proposi-
tion, “Some politicians are idealists,” are opposed in both quantity and quality,
and they too are contradictories.
In summary: A and O propositions are contradictories (“All S is P” is contra-
dicted by “Some S is not P”). E and I propositions are also contradictories (“No S
is P” is contradicted by “Some S is P”).
Categorical Propositions
Opposition
The logical relation that
exists between two
contradictories, between
two contraries, or in
general between any
two categorical
propositions that differ in
quantity, quality, or other
respects. These
relations are displayed
on the square of
opposition.
Contradictories
Two propositions so
related that one is the
denial or negation of the
other. On the traditional
square of opposition,
the two pairs of
contradictories are
indicated by the
diagonals of the square:
A and E propositions
are the contradictories
of O and I, respectively.
180

Categorical Propositions
B. Contraries
Two propositions are said to be contraries if they cannot both be true—that is, if
the truth of one entails the falsity of the other—but both can be false. Thus,
“Texas will win the coming game with Oklahoma,” and “Oklahoma will win the
coming game with Texas,” are contraries. If either of these propositions (referring
to the same game, of course) is true, then the other must be false. But these two
propositions are not contradictories, because the game could be a draw and then
both would be false. Contraries cannot both be true, but, unlike contradictories,
they can both be false.
The traditional account of categorical propositions held that universal
propositions (A and E) having the same subject and predicate terms but differing
in quality (one affirming, the other denying) were contraries. Thus it was said
that an A proposition, “All poets are dreamers,” and its corresponding E propo-
sition, “No poets are dreamers,” cannot both be true—but they can both be false
and may be regarded as contraries. This Aristotelian interpretation has some
troubling consequences that will be discussed in Section 7.
One difficulty with this Aristotelian account arises if either the A proposition
or the E proposition is necessarily true—that is, if either is a logical or mathemat-
ical truth, such as “All squares are rectangles,” or “No squares are circles.” In
such a case, the claim that the A proposition and the E proposition are contraries
cannot be correct, because a necessarily true proposition cannot possibly be false
and so cannot have a contrary, because two propositions can only be contraries if
they can both be false. Propositions that are neither necessarily true nor necessar-
ily false are said to be contingent. So the reply to this difficulty is that the present
interpretation assumes (not unreasonably) that the propositions in question are
contingent, in which case the claim that A and E propositions having the same
subject and predicate terms are contraries may be correct. For the remainder of
this chapter, we therefore make the assumption that the propositions involved
are contingent.
C. Subcontraries
Two propositions are said to be subcontraries if they cannot both be false, al-
though they may both be true.
The traditional account held that particular propositions (I and O) having
the same subject and predicate terms but differing in quality (one affirming, the
other denying) are subcontraries. It was said that the I proposition, “Some dia-
monds are precious stones,” and the O proposition, “Some diamonds are not
precious stones,” could both be true—but they could not both be false and there-
fore must be regarded as subcontraries.
A difficulty similar to the one noted above arises here too. If either the I or
the O proposition is necessarily false (for example, “Some squares are circles” or
“Some squares are not rectangles”), it cannot have a subcontrary, because two
propositions that are subcontraries can both be true. But if both the I and the O
Contraries
Two propositions so
related that they cannot
both be true, although
both may be false.
Contingent
Being neither
tautologous nor self-
contradictory. A
contingent statement
may be true or false.
Subcontraries
Two propositions so
related that they cannot
both be false, although
they may both be true.
181

are contingent propositions, they can both be true, and as we noted in connection
with contraries just above, we shall assume for the remainder of this chapter that
they are contingent.
D. Subalternation
When two propositions have the same subject and the same predicate terms, and
agree in quality (both affirming or both denying) but differ in quantity (one uni-
versal, the other particular), they are called corresponding propositions. This is also
a form of “opposition” as that term has traditionally been used. Thus the A
proposition, “All spiders are eight-legged animals,” has a corresponding I
proposition, “Some spiders are eight-legged animals.” Likewise, the E proposi-
tion, “No whales are fishes,” has a corresponding O proposition, “Some whales
are not fishes.” This opposition between a universal proposition and its corre-
sponding particular proposition is known as subalternation. In any such pair of
corresponding propositions, the universal proposition is called the superaltern,
and the particular is called the subaltern.
In subalternation (in the classical analysis), the superaltern implies the
truth of the subaltern. Thus, from the universal affirmative, “All birds have
feathers,” the corresponding particular affirmative, “Some birds have feath-
ers,” was held to follow. From the universal negative, “No whales are fishes,”
the corresponding particular, “Some whales are not fishes,” was likewise held
to follow. But of course the implication does not hold from the particular to
the universal, from the subaltern to the superaltern. From the proposition,
“Some animals are cats,” it is obvious that we cannot infer that “All animals
are cats.” And it would be absurd to infer from “Some animals are not cats”
that “No animals are cats.”
E. The Square of Opposition
There are thus four ways in which propositions may be “opposed”—as
contradictories, contraries, subcontraries, and as sub- and superalterns. These are rep-
resented using an important and widely used diagram called the square of
opposition, which is reproduced as Figure 1.
Categorical Propositions
Subalternation
The relation on the
square of opposition
between a universal
proposition (an A or an
E proposition) and its
corresponding particular
proposition (an I or an O
proposition,
respectively). In this
relation, the particular
proposition (I or O) is
called the “subaltern,”
and the universal
proposition (A or E) is
called the “superaltern.”
Square of opposition
A diagram in the form of
a square in which the
four types of categorical
propositions (A, E, I,
and O) are situated at
the corners, exhibiting
the logical relations
(called “oppositions”)
among these
propositions.
Contradictories
Contrad    ictories
Contraries
Subcontraries
Subalternation
Subalternation
(No S is P.)
Superaltern
(All S is P.)
Superaltern
A
I
O
E
Subaltern
(Some S is not P.)
Subaltern
(Some S is P.)
Figure 1
182

Categorical Propositions
Relations exhibited by this square of opposition were believed to provide the
logical basis for validating certain elementary forms of argument. To explain
these, we must first distinguish between immediate inferences and mediate
inferences.
When we draw a conclusion from one or more premises, some inference
must be involved. That inference is said to be mediate when more than one prem-
ise is relied on—as is the case with syllogisms, where the conclusion is drawn
from the first premise through the mediation of the second. However, when a
conclusion is drawn from only one premise there is no such mediation, and the
inference is said to be immediate.
A number of very useful immediate inferences may be readily drawn from
the information embedded in the traditional square of opposition. Here are some
examples:

If an A proposition is the premise, then (according to the square of opposi-
tion) one can validly infer that the corresponding O proposition (that is, the
O proposition with the same subject and predicate terms) is false.

If an A proposition is the premise, then the corresponding I proposition is true.

If an I proposition is the premise, its corresponding E proposition, which
contradicts it, must be false.
Given the truth, or the falsehood, of any one of the four standard-form cate-
gorical propositions, the truth or falsehood of some or all of the others can be in-
ferred immediately. A considerable number of immediate inferences are based
on the traditional square of opposition; we list them here:
A is given as true: 
E is false; I is true; O is false.
E is given as true: 
A is false; I is false; O is true.
I is given as true: 
E is false; A and O are undetermined.
O is given as true: 
A is false; E and I are undetermined.
A is given as false: 
O is true; E and I are undetermined.
E is given as false: 
I is true; A and O are undetermined.
I is given as false: 
A is false; E is true; O is true.
O is given as false: 
A is true; E is false; I is true.*
Immediate inference
An inference that is
drawn directly from one
premise without the
mediation of any other
premise. Various kinds
of immediate inferences
may be distinguished,
traditionally including
conversion, obversion,
and contraposition. 
Mediate inference
Any inference drawn
from more than one
premise.
*A proposition is undetermined if its truth or falsity is not determined—fixed—by the truth or falsity of any
other proposition. In another sense, a proposition is undetermined if one does not know that it is true and
one also does not know that it is false. If it is given that an A proposition is undetermined, in either sense,
we may infer that its contradictory O proposition must be undetermined in that same sense. For if that O
proposition were known to be true, the A proposition contradicting it would be known to be false; and if
that O proposition were known to be false, the A proposition contradicting it would be known to be true.
The same reasoning applies to the other standard-form propositions. If any of the four categorical propo-
sitions is given as undetermined in either sense, its contradictory must be undetermined in the same
sense.
183

Conversion A valid
form of immediate
inference for some but
not all types of
propositions. To form
the converse of a
proposition the subject
and predicate terms are
simply interchanged.
Thus, applied to the
proposition “No circles
are squares,” conversion
yields “No squares are
circles,” which is called
the “converse” of the
original proposition. The
original proposition is
called the “convertend.”
EXERCISES
A. If we assume that the first proposition in each of the following sets is true,
what can we affirm about the truth or falsehood of the remaining propositions
in each set? B. If we assume that the first proposition in each set is false, what
can we affirm?
*1. a. All successful executives are intelligent people.
b. No successful executives are intelligent people.
c. Some successful executives are intelligent people.
d. Some successful executives are not intelligent people.
2. a. No animals with horns are carnivores.
b. Some animals with horns are carnivores.
c. Some animals with horns are not carnivores.
d. All animals with horns are carnivores.
3. a. Some uranium isotopes are highly unstable substances.
b. Some uranium isotopes are not highly unstable substances.
c. All uranium isotopes are highly unstable substances.
d. No uranium isotopes are highly unstable substances.
4. a. Some college professors are not entertaining lecturers.
b. All college professors are entertaining lecturers.
c. No college professors are entertaining lecturers.
d. Some college professors are entertaining lecturers.
6
Further Immediate Inferences
There are three other important kinds of immediate inference: conversion, obver-
sion, and contraposition. These are not associated directly with the square of oppo-
sition. Each is explained below:
A. Conversion
Conversion is an inference that proceeds by interchanging the subject and pred-
icate terms of a proposition. “No men are angels” converts to “No angels are
men,” and these propositions may be validly inferred from one another. Similar-
ly, “Some women are writers” and “Some writers are women” are logically
equivalent, and by conversion either can be validly inferred from the other. Con-
version is perfectly valid for all E propositions and for all I propositions. One
standard-form categorical proposition is said to be the converse of another when
we derive it by simply interchanging the subject and predicate terms of that
other proposition. The proposition from which it is derived is called the
convertend. Thus, “No idealists are politicians” is the converse of “No politicians
are idealists,” which is its convertend.
Categorical Propositions
184

The conversion of an O proposition is not valid. The O proposition, “Some
animals are not dogs,” is plainly true; its converse is the proposition, “Some dogs
are not animals,” which is plainly false. An O proposition and its converse are
not logically equivalent.
The A proposition presents a special problem here. Of course, the converse of
an A proposition does not follow from its convertend. From “All dogs are ani-
mals” we certainly may not infer that “All animals are dogs.” Traditional logic
recognized this, of course, but asserted, nevertheless, that something like conversion
was valid for A propositions. On the traditional square of opposition, one could
validly infer from the A proposition, “All dogs are animals,” its subaltern I propo-
sition, “Some dogs are animals.” The A proposition says something about all
members of the subject class (dogs); the I proposition makes a more limited
claim, about only some of the members of that class. It was held that one could
infer “Some S is P” from “All S is P.” And, as we saw earlier, an I proposition
may be converted validly; if some dogs are animals, then some animals are dogs.
So, if we are given the A proposition, “All dogs are animals,” we first infer
that “Some dogs are animals” by subalternation, and from that subaltern we can
by conversion validly infer that “Some animals are dogs.” Hence, by a combina-
tion of subalternation and conversion, we advance validly from “All S is P” to
“Some P is S.” This pattern of inference, called conversion by limitation (or
conversion per accidens), proceeds by interchanging subject and predicate terms
and changing the quantity of the proposition from universal to particular. This
type of conversion will be considered further in the next section.
In all conversions, the converse of a given proposition contains exactly the same
subject and predicate terms as the convertend, their order being reversed, and al-
ways has the same quality (of affirmation or denial). A complete picture of this
immediate inference as traditionally understood is given by the following table:
Valid Conversions
o v e r v i e w
Convertend
Converse
A: All S is P.
I: Some P is S. (by limitation)
E: No S is P.
E: No P is S.
I: Some S is P.
I: Some P is S.
O: Some S is not P.
(conversion not valid)
Categorical Propositions
B. Classes and Class Complements
To explain other types of immediate inference we must examine more closely the
concept of a “class” and explain what is meant by the complement of a class. Any
class, we have said, is the collection of all objects that have a certain common at-
tribute, which we may refer to as the “class-defining characteristic.” The class of
all humans is the collection of all things that have the characteristic of being
185

human; its class-defining characteristic is the attribute of being human. The
class-defining characteristic need not be a “simple” attribute; any attribute may
determine a class. For example, the complex attribute of being left-handed and
red-headed and a student determines a class—the class of all left-handed,
red-headed students.
Every class has, associated with it, a complementary class, or complement,
which is the collection of all things that do not belong to the original class. The
complement of the class of all people is the class of all things that are not people.
The class-defining characteristic of that complementary class is the (negative) at-
tribute of not being a person. The complement of the class of all people contains
no people, but it contains everything else: shoes and ships and sealing wax and
cabbages—but no kings, because kings are people. It is often convenient to speak
of the complement of the class of all persons as the “class of all nonpersons.” The
complement of the class designated by the term S is then designated by the term
non-S; we may speak of the term non-S as being the complement of the term S.
Sometimes in reasoning one uses what is called the relative complement of a class,
its complement within some other class. For example, within the class of “chil-
dren of mine,” there is a subclass, “daughters of mine,” whose relative comple-
ment is another subclass, “children of mine who are not daughters,” or “sons of
mine.” But obversions, and other immediate inferences, rely on the absolute
complement of classes, as defined above.
The word complement is thus used in two senses. In one sense it is the comple-
ment of a class; in the other it is the complement of a term. These are different but
very closely connected. One term is the (term) complement of another just in case
the first term designates the (class) complement of the class designated by the
second term.
Note that a class is the (class) complement of its own complement. Likewise,
a term is the (term) complement of its own complement. A sort of “double nega-
tive” rule is involved here, to avoid strings of “non’s” prefixed to a term. Thus,
the complement of the term “voter” is “nonvoter,” but the complement of “non-
voter” should be written simply as “voter” rather than as “nonnonvoter.”
One must be careful not to mistake contrary terms for complementary terms.
“Coward” and “hero” are contraries, because no person can be both a coward
and a hero. We must not identify “cowards” with “nonheroes” because not
everyone, and certainly not everything, need be one or the other. Likewise, the
complement of the term “winner” is not “loser” but “nonwinner,” for although
not everything, or even everyone, is either a winner or a loser, absolutely every-
thing is either a winner or a nonwinner.
C. Obversion
Obversion is an immediate inference that is easy to explain once the concept of a
term complement is understood. To obvert a proposition, we change its quality
(affirmative to negative or negative to affirmative) and replace the predicate
term with its complement. However, the subject term remains unchanged,
Categorical Propositions
Complement, or
complementary class
The collection of all
things that do not
belong to a given class.
Obversion
A valid form of
immediate inference for
every standard-form
categorical proposition.
To obvert a proposition
we change its quality
(from affirmative to
negative, or from
negative to affirmative)
and replace the
predicate term with its
complement. Thus,
applied to the
proposition “All dogs are
mammals,” obversion
yields “No dogs are
nonmammals,” which is
called the “obverse” of
the original proposition.
The original proposition
is called the
“obvertend.”
186

Categorical Propositions
and so does the quantity of the proposition being obverted. For example, the
A proposition, “All residents are voters,” has as its obverse the E proposition,
“No residents are nonvoters.” These two are logically equivalent propositions, and
either may be validly inferred from the other.
Obversion is a valid immediate inference when applied to any standard-form
categorical proposition:

The E proposition, “No umpires are partisans,” has as its obverse the logically
equivalent A proposition, “All umpires are nonpartisans.”

The I proposition, “Some metals are conductors,” has as its obverse the 
O proposition, “Some metals are not nonconductors.”

The O proposition, “Some nations were not belligerents,” has as its obverse
the I proposition, “Some nations were nonbelligerents.”
The proposition serving as premise for the obversion is called the obvertend;
the conclusion of the inference is called the obverse. Every standard-form categor-
ical proposition is logically equivalent to its obverse, so obversion is a valid form
of immediate inference for all standard-form categorical propositions. To obtain
the obverse of any proposition, we leave the quantity (universal or particular)
and the subject term unchanged; we change the quality of the proposition and re-
place the predicate term with its complement. The following table gives a com-
plete picture of all valid obversions:
Obvertend
Obverse
A: All S is P.
E: No S is non-P.
E: No S is P.
A: All S is non-P.
I: Some S is P.
O: Some S is not non-P.
O: Some S is not P.
I: Some S is non-P.
Obversions
o v e r v i e w
D. Contraposition
Another type of immediate inference, contraposition, can be reduced to the first
two, conversion and obversion. To form the contrapositive of a given proposition,
we replace its subject term with the complement of its predicate term, and we re-
place its predicate term with the complement of its subject term. Neither the
quality nor the quantity of the original proposition is changed, so the contrapos-
itive of an A proposition is an A proposition, the contrapositive of an O proposition
is an O proposition, and so forth.
For example, the contrapositive of the A proposition, “All members are vot-
ers,” is the A proposition, “All nonvoters are nonmembers.” These are logically
Contraposition
A valid form of
immediate inference for
some, but not for all
types of propositions. To
form the contrapositive
of a given proposition,
its subject term is
replaced by the
complement of its
predicate term, and its
predicate term is
replaced by the
complement of its
subject term. Thus the
contrapositive of the
proposition “All humans
are mammals” is the
proposition “All
nonmammals are
nonhumans.”
187

equivalent propositions, as will be evident on reflection. Contraposition is
plainly a valid form of immediate inference when applied to A propositions. It
really introduces nothing new, because we can get from any A proposition to its
contrapositive by first obverting it, next applying conversion, and then applying
obversion again. Beginning with “All S is P,” we obvert it to obtain “No S is
non-P,” which converts validly to “No non-P is S,” whose obverse is “All non-P
is non-S.” The contrapositive of any A proposition is the obverse of the converse
of the obverse of that proposition.
Contraposition is a valid form of immediate inference when applied to
O propositions also, although its conclusion may be awkward to express. The
contrapositive of the O proposition, “Some students are not idealists,” is the
somewhat cumbersome O proposition, “Some nonidealists are not nonstu-
dents,” which is logically equivalent to its premise. This also can be shown to be
the outcome of first obverting, then converting, then obverting again. “Some S is
not P” obverts to “Some S is non-P,” which converts to “Some non-P is S,” which
obverts to “Some non-P is not non-S.”
For I propositions, however, contraposition is not a valid form of inference.
The true I proposition, “Some citizens are nonlegislators,” has as its contraposi-
tive the false proposition, “Some legislators are noncitizens.” The reason for
this invalidity becomes evident when we try to derive the contrapositive of the
I proposition by successively obverting, converting, and obverting. The obverse
of the original I proposition, “Some S is P,” is the O proposition, “Some S is not
non-P,” but (as we saw earlier) the converse of an O proposition does not follow
validly from it.
In the case of E propositions, the contrapositive does not follow validly from
the original, as can be seen when, if we begin with the true proposition, “No
wrestlers are weaklings,” we get, as its contrapositive, the obviously false propo-
sition, “No nonweaklings are nonwrestlers.” The reason for this invalidity we
will see, again, if we attempt to derive it by successive obversion, conversion,
and obversion. If we begin with the E proposition, “No S is P,” and obvert it, we
obtain the A proposition, “All S is non-P”—which in general cannot be validly
converted except by limitation. If we do then convert it by limitation to obtain
“Some non-P is S,” we can obvert this to obtain “Some non-P is not non-S.” This
outcome we may call the contrapositive by limitation—and this too we will consid-
er further in the next section.
Contraposition by limitation, in which we infer an O proposition from an
E proposition (for example, we infer “Some non-P is not non-S” from “No S is P”),
has the same peculiarity as conversion by limitation, on which it depends. Because
a particular proposition is inferred from a universal proposition, the resulting
contrapositive cannot have the same meaning and cannot be logically equivalent
to the proposition that was the original premise. On the other hand, the contra-
positive of an A proposition is an A proposition, and the contrapositive of an
O proposition is an O proposition, and in each of these cases the contrapositive
and the premise from which it is derived are equivalent.
Categorical Propositions
188

Categorical Propositions
Contraposition is thus seen to be valid only when applied to A and O propo-
sitions. It is not valid at all for I propositions, and it is valid for E propositions
only by limitation. The complete picture is exhibited in the following table:
Contraposition
o v e r v i e w
Premise
Contrapositive
A: All S is P.
A: All non-P is non-S.
E: No S is P.
O: Some non-P is not non-S. (by limitation) 
I: Some S is P.
(contraposition not valid)
O: Some S is not P.
O: Some non-P is not non-S.
Questions about the relations between propositions can often be answered
by exploring the various immediate inferences that can be drawn from one or
the other of them. For example, given that the proposition, “All surgeons are
physicians,” is true, what can we know about the truth or falsehood of the
proposition, “No nonsurgeons are nonphysicians”? Does this problematic
proposition—or its contradictory or contrary—follow validly from the one
given as true? To answer we may proceed as follows: From what we are given,
“All surgeons are physicians,” we can validly infer its contrapositive, “All non-
physicians are nonsurgeons.” From this, using conversion by limitation (valid
according to the traditional view), we can derive “Some nonsurgeons are non-
physicians.” But this is the contradictory of the proposition in question (“No
nonsurgeons are nonphysicians”), which is thus no longer problematic but
known to be false.
We noted that a valid argument whose premises are true must have a true
conclusion, but also that a valid argument whose premises are false can have a
true conclusion. Thus, from the false premise, “All animals are cats,” the true
proposition, “Some animals are cats,” follows by subalternation. Then from the
false proposition, “All parents are students,” conversion by limitation yields the
true proposition, “Some students are parents.” Therefore, if a proposition is
given to be false, and the question is raised about the truth or falsehood of some
other, related proposition, the recommended procedure is to begin drawing im-
mediate inferences from either (1) the contradictory of the proposition known to
be false, or (2) the problematic proposition itself. The contradictory of a false
proposition must be true, and all valid inferences from that will also be true
propositions. If we follow the other course and are able to show that the prob-
lematic proposition implies the proposition that is given as false, we know that it
must itself be false.
Here follows a table in which the forms of immediate inference—conversion,
obversion, and contraposition—are fully displayed:
189

Categorical Propositions
EXERCISES
A. State the converses of the following propositions, and indicate which of
them are equivalent to the given propositions:
*1. No people who are considerate of others are reckless drivers who pay
no attention to traffic regulations.
2. All graduates of West Point are commissioned officers in the U.S. Army.
3. Some European cars are overpriced and underpowered automobiles.
4. No reptiles are warm-blooded animals.
5. Some professional wrestlers are elderly persons who are incapable of
doing an honest day’s work.
Immediate Inferences: 
Conversion, Obversion, Contraposition
o v e r v i e w
C O N V E R S I O N
Convertend
Converse
A: All S is P.
I: Some P is S. (by limitation)
E: No S is P.
E: No P is S.
I: Some S is P.
I: Some P is S.
O: Some S is not P.
(conversion not valid)
O B V E R S I O N
Obvertend
Obverse
A: All S is P.
E: No S is non-P.
E: No S is P.
A: All S is non-P.
I: Some S is P.
O: Some S is not non-P.
O: Some S is not P.
I: Some S is non-P.
C O N T R A P O S I T I O N
Premise
Contrapositive
A: All S is P.
A: All non-P is non-S.
E: No S is P.
O: Some non-P is not non-S. (by limitation) 
I: Some S is P.
(contraposition not valid)
O: Some S is not P.
O: Some non-P is not non-S.
190

Categorical Propositions
B. State the obverses of the following propositions:
*1. Some college athletes are professionals.
2. No organic compounds are metals.
3. Some clergy are not abstainers.
4. No geniuses are conformists.
*5. All objects suitable for boat anchors are objects that weigh at least 
fifteen pounds.
C. State the contrapositives of the following propositions and indicate which of
them are equivalent to the given propositions.
*1. All journalists are pessimists.
2. Some soldiers are not officers.
3. All scholars are nondegenerates.
4. All things weighing less than fifty pounds are objects not more than
four feet high.
*5. Some noncitizens are not nonresidents.
D. If “All socialists are pacifists” is true, what may be inferred about the truth
or falsehood of the following propositions? That is, which can be known to be
true, which can be known to be false, and which are undetermined?
*1. Some nonpacifists are not nonsocialists.
2. No socialists are nonpacifists.
3. All nonsocialists are nonpacifists.
4. No nonpacifists are socialists.
*5. No nonsocialists are nonpacifists.
6. All nonpacifists are nonsocialists.
7. No pacifists are nonsocialists.
8. Some socialists are not pacifists.
9. All pacifists are socialists.
*10. Some nonpacifists are socialists.
E. If “No scientists are philosophers” is true, what may be inferred about the
truth or falsehood of the following propositions? That is, which can be known
to be true, which can be known to be false, and which are undetermined?
*1. No nonphilosophers are scientists.
2. Some nonphilosophers are not nonscientists.
3. All nonscientists are nonphilosophers.
4. No scientists are nonphilosophers.
*5. No nonscientists are nonphilosophers.
6. All philosophers are scientists.
7. Some nonphilosophers are scientists.
8. All nonphilosophers are nonscientists.
191

Categorical Propositions
9. Some scientists are not philosophers.
*10. No philosophers are nonscientists.
F. If “Some saints were martyrs” is true, what may be inferred about the truth
or falsehood of the following propositions? That is, which can be known to be
true, which can be known to be false, and which are undetermined?
*1. All saints were martyrs.
2. All saints were nonmartyrs.
3. Some martyrs were saints.
4. No saints were martyrs.
*5. All martyrs were nonsaints.
6. Some nonmartyrs were saints.
7. Some saints were not nonmartyrs.
8. No martyrs were saints.
9. Some nonsaints were martyrs.
*10. Some martyrs were nonsaints.
11. Some saints were not martyrs.
12. Some martyrs were not saints.
13. No saints were nonmartyrs.
14. No nonsaints were martyrs.
*15. Some martyrs were not nonsaints.
G. If “Some merchants are not pirates” is true, what may be inferred about the
truth or falsehood of the following propositions? That is, which can be known
to be true, which can be known to be false, and which are undetermined?
*1. No pirates are merchants.
2. No merchants are nonpirates.
3. Some merchants are nonpirates.
4. All nonmerchants are pirates.
*5. Some nonmerchants are nonpirates.
6. All merchants are pirates.
7. No nonmerchants are pirates.
8. No pirates are nonmerchants.
9. All nonpirates are nonmerchants.
*10. Some nonpirates are not nonmerchants.
11. Some nonpirates are merchants.
12. No nonpirates are merchants.
13. Some pirates are merchants.
14. No merchants are nonpirates.
*15. No merchants are pirates.
192

Categorical Propositions
Boolean interpretation
The modern
interpretation of
categorical propositions,
adopted in this chapter
and named after the
English logician George
Boole. In the Boolean
interpretation, often
contrasted with the
Aristotelian
interpretation, universal
propositions (A and E
propositions) do not
have existential import.
G
George Boole was born in Lincolnshire, England, in 1815, becoming by
mid-century one of the great mathematicians of his time. His family
was very poor; he was self-taught in the classical languages and in
mathematics. When his father, a shoemaker, was unable to support the family,
George became an assistant teacher at the age of 16—and then eventually the
director of a boarding school. A gold medal from the Royal Society for his
mathematical research, and then a paper entitled “The Mathematical Analysis
of Logic,” led to his appointment, in 1849, as Professor of Mathematics at
Queen’s College in Cork, Ireland.
George Boole was a penetrating thinker with a great talent for synthesis.
The later development of his work by others came to be called “Boolean alge-
bra,” which, combined with the properties of electrical switches with which
logic can be processed, was critical in the development of modern electronic
digital computers. In his great book, An Investigation into the Laws of Thought,
on Which are Founded the Mathematical Theories of Logic and Probabilities (1854),
Boole presented a fully developed system for the symbolic representation of
propositions, and also for the general method of logical inference. He showed
that with the correct representation of premises, however many terms they
may include, it is possible with purely symbolic manipulation to draw any
conclusion that is already embedded in those propositions. A modest man
and creative scholar, Boole died in 1864 at the age of 49. We continue to rely
upon his analyses, seminal in the development of modern symbolic logic.
George Boole
7
Existential Import and the Interpretation 
of Categorical Propositions
Categorical propositions are the building blocks of arguments, and our aim
throughout is to analyze and evaluate arguments. To do this we must be able to
diagram and symbolize the A, E, I, and O propositions. But before we can do that
we must confront and resolve a deep logical problem—one that has been a
source of controversy for literally thousands of years. In this section we explain
this problem, and we provide a resolution on which a coherent analysis of syllo-
gisms may be developed.
The issues here, as we shall see, are far from simple, but the analysis of syllo-
gisms in this text do not require that the complications of this controversy be
mastered. It does require that the interpretation of categorical propositions 
that emerges from the resolution of the controversy be understood. This is
commonly called the Boolean interpretation of categorical propositions—
named after George Boole (1815–1864), an English mathematician whose contri-
butions to logical theory played a key role in the later development of the
Biography
© Bettmann/CORBIS All Rights Reserved
193

modern computer. So if the outcome of the following discussion is fully grasped,
the intervening pages of this section may be safely bypassed.
To understand the problem, and the Boolean outcome with which we emerge,
it must be seen that some propositions have existential import, and some do not.
A proposition is said to have existential import if it typically is uttered to assert
the existence of objects of some kind. Why should this seemingly abstruse matter
be of concern to the student of logic? Because the correctness of the reasoning in
many arguments is directly affected by whether the propositions of which those
arguments are built do, or do not, have existential import. We must arrive at a
clear and consistent interpretation of categorical propositions in order to deter-
mine with confidence what may be rightly inferred from them, and to guard
against incorrect inferences that are sometimes drawn from them.
We begin with I and O propositions, which surely do have existential import.
Thus the I proposition, “Some soldiers are heroes,” says that there exists at least
one soldier who is a hero. The O proposition, “Some dogs are not companions,”
says that there exists at least one dog that is not a companion. Particular proposi-
tions, I and O propositions, plainly do assert that the classes designated by their
subject terms (for example, soldiers and dogs) are not empty—the class of sol-
diers, and the class of dogs (if the examples given here are true), each has at least
one member.*
If this is so, however—if I and O propositions have existential import 
(as no one would wish to deny)—wherein lies the problem? The problem arises
from the consequences of this fact, which are very awkward. Earlier we supposed
that an I proposition follows validly from its corresponding A proposition by
subalternation. That is, from “All spiders are eight-legged animals” we infer
validly that “Some spiders are eight-legged animals.” Similarly, we supposed
that an O proposition follows validly from its corresponding E proposition. But
if I and O propositions have existential import, and they follow validly from
their corresponding A and E propositions, then A and E propositions must also
have existential import, because a proposition with existential import cannot be
derived validly from another that does not have such import.†
Categorical Propositions
Existential import
An attribute of those
propositions that
normally assert the
existence of objects of
some specified kind.
Particular propositions 
(I and O propositions)
always have existential
import; thus the
proposition “Some dogs
are obedient” asserts
that there are dogs.
Whether universal
propositions (A and E
propositions) have
existential import is an
issue on which the
Aristotelian and Boolean
interpretations of
propositions differ.
*A few propositions appear to be exceptions: “Some ghosts appear in Shakespeare’s plays” and “Some
Greek gods are described in the Iliad” are particular propositions that are certainly true even though there
are (presumably) neither ghosts nor Greek gods. However, it is the formulation that misleads in such
cases. These statements do not themselves affirm the existence of ghosts or Greek gods; they say only that
there are certain other propositions that are affirmed or implied in Shakespeare’s plays and in the Iliad.
The intended meaning is “Some passages in Shakespeare’s plays are about ghosts” and “Some descrip-
tions in the Iliad are of Greek gods.” The propositions of Shakespeare and Homer may not be true, but it is
certainly true that their writings contain or imply those propositions. That is all that is affirmed by these
apparent exceptions, which arise chiefly in literary or mythological contexts. I and O propositions do have
existential import.
†There is another way to show that the existential import of A and E propositions must follow from that of
I and O propositions, on the traditional square of opposition. In the case of the A proposition, we could
show it by relying on the (traditionally assumed) validity of conversion by limitation; in the case of the E
proposition, we could show it by relying on the (traditionally assumed) validity of contraposition by lim-
itation. The result is always the same as that reached above: On the traditional square of opposition, if I
and O propositions have existential import, A and E propositions must also have existential import.
194

Categorical Propositions
Visual Logic
Aristotle v. Boole on Interpreting Categorical Propositions
There are two rival interpretations of
categorical propositions: the Aristotelian,
which is traditional, and the Boolean, which
is modern.
In the interpretation of the ancient Greek
philosopher Aristotle, the truth of a universal
proposition (“All leprechauns wear little green
hats,” or “No frogs are poisonous”) implies the
truth of its corresponding particular proposition 
(“Some leprechauns wear little green hats” or
“Some frogs are not poisonous”).
In contrast, George Boole, a nineteenth-
century English mathematician, argued that we
cannot infer the truth of the particular proposi-
tion from the truth of its corresponding universal proposition, because (as
both sides agree) every particular proposition as-
serts the existence of its subject class; if some
frogs are not poisonous, there must be at least
one frog. But if the universal proposition permits
us to infer the corresponding particular proposi-
tion, then “All leprechauns wear little green
hats” would permit us to infer that some lep-
rechauns do, and that would imply that there re-
ally are leprechauns!
So, in the modern or Boolean interpretation, a
universal proposition (an A or an E proposition)
must be understood to assert only that “If there
is such a thing as a leprechaun, it wears a little
green hat,” and “If there is such a thing as a frog,
it is not poisonous.”
Source: © Topham/The Image
Works
Source: © Topham/The Image
Works
This consequence creates a very serious problem. We know that A and O
propositions, on the traditional square of opposition, are contradictories. “All
Danes speak English” is contradicted by “Some Danes do not speak English.”
Contradictories cannot both be true, because one of the pair must be false; nor
can they both be false, because one of the pair must be true. But if corresponding
A and O propositions do have existential import, as we concluded in the
paragraph just above, then both contradictories could be false! To illustrate, the
A proposition, “All inhabitants of Mars are blond,” and its corresponding
195

O proposition, “Some inhabitants of Mars are not blond,” are contradictories; if
they have existential import—that is, if we interpret them as asserting that there
are inhabitants of Mars—then both these propositions are false if Mars has no in-
habitants. Of course, we do know that Mars has no inhabitants; the class of its in-
habitants is empty, so both of the propositions in the example are false. But if
they are both false, they cannot be contradictories!
Something seems to have gone wrong with the traditional square of opposi-
tion in cases of this kind. If the traditional square is correct when it tells us that A
and E propositions validly imply their corresponding I and O propositions, then
the square is not correct when it tells us that corresponding A and O proposi-
tions are contradictories. In that case, the square is also mistaken in holding that
the corresponding I and O propositions are subcontraries.
What is to be done? Can the traditional square of opposition be rescued? Yes,
it can, but the price is high. We could rehabilitate the traditional square of
opposition by introducing the notion of a presupposition. In this text, we observed
that some complex questions are properly answered “yes” or “no” only if the an-
swer to a prior question has been presupposed. “Did you spend the money you
stole?” can be reasonably answered “yes” or “no” only if the presupposition that
you stole some money is granted. Now, to rescue the square of opposition, we
might insist that all propositions—that is, the four standard-form categorical
propositions A, E, I, and O—presuppose (in the sense indicated above) that the
classes to which they refer do have members; they are not empty. That is, ques-
tions about the truth or falsehood of propositions, and about the logical relations
holding among them, are admissible and may be reasonably answered (in this
interpretation) only if we presuppose that they never refer to empty classes. In
this way, we may save all of the relationships set forth in the traditional square of
opposition: A and E will remain contraries, I and O will remain subcontraries,
subalterns will follow validly from their superalterns, and A and O will remain
contradictories, as will I and E. To achieve this result, however, we must pay by
accepting the blanket presupposition that all classes designated by our terms do
have members—are not empty.*
Well, why not do just that? This existential presupposition is both necessary
and sufficient to rescue Aristotelian logic. It is, moreover, a presupposition in full
accord with the ordinary use of modern languages such as English in very many
cases. If you are told, “All the apples in the barrel are Delicious,” and you find
when you look into the barrel that it is empty, what can you say? You would
probably not say that the claim is false, or true, but would instead point out that
there are no apples in the barrel. You would thus be explaining that the speaker
Categorical Propositions
*Phillip H. Wiebe argues that Aristotelian logic does not require the assumption that the class designated
by the complement of the subject term be nonempty. See “Existential Assumptions for Aristotelian Logic,”
Journal of Philosophical Research 16 (1990–1991): 321–328. But Aristotelian logic certainly does require the as-
sumption that at least the classes designated by the other three terms (the subject term, the predicate term,
and the complement of the predicate term) are not empty—and this existential assumption gives rise to all
the difficulties noted in the remarks that follow.
196

Categorical Propositions
had made a mistake, that in this case the existential presupposition (that there
exist apples in the barrel) was false. The fact that we would respond in this cor-
rective fashion shows that we do understand, and do generally accept, the exis-
tential presupposition of propositions that are ordinarily uttered.
Unfortunately, this blanket existential presupposition, introduced to rescue the
traditional square of opposition, imposes intellectual penalties that are too heavy
to bear. There are very good reasons not to do it. Here are three such reasons.
First, this rescue preserves the traditional relations among A, E, I, and O
propositions, but only at the cost of reducing their power to formulate assertions
that we may need to formulate. If we invariably presuppose that the class desig-
nated has members, we will never be able to formulate the proposition that denies that
the class has members! Such denials may sometimes be very important and must
surely be made intelligible. We would never be able to formulate the proposition,
“No unicorns are creatures that exist.”
Second, even ordinary usage of language is not in complete accord with this
blanket presupposition. “All” may refer to possibly empty classes. If a property
owner were to say, “All trespassers will be prosecuted,” far from presupposing
that the class of trespassers has members, he would be intending to ensure that
the class will become and remain empty. This statement can be true even if no
one is ever prosecuted and the word “all” in that statement refers to an empty
class. Consider, as another example, the checklist on an IRS return envelope.
There is an item that reads, “All necessary schedules have been attached.” A tax-
payer who did not need to attach any schedules would certainly not hesitate to
check the box next to this statement, essentially declaring it to be true even
though the class of necessary schedules is, in his case, empty. On the other hand,
consider the I proposition (“Some S is P”). Going back to the case of the proper-
ty owner, suppose he had asserted that “Some trespassers will be prosecuted.”
If there were no trespassers, then we would call his statement false. This is be-
cause, unlike “all,” the word “some” in an I proposition makes a clear commit-
ment that is incompatible with an empty subject class. The word “some” is
interpreted to mean “at least one”—never “zero”—and that concreteness com-
mits particular propositions, if they are to be true, to a state of affairs in which
the subject class is not empty.
Third, in science, and in other theoretical spheres, we often wish to reason with-
out making any presuppositions about existence. Newton’s first law of motion, for ex-
ample, asserts that certain things are true about bodies that are not acted on by
any external forces: They remain at rest, or they continue their straight-line mo-
tion. The law may be true; a physicist may wish to express and defend it without
wanting to presuppose that there actually are any bodies that are not acted on by
external forces.
Objections of this kind make the blanket existential presupposition unaccept-
able for modern logicians. The Aristotelian interpretation of categorical proposi-
tions, long thought to be correct, must be abandoned, and a more modern
interpretation employed.
197

Categorical Propositions
In modern logic it is not assumed that the classes to which categorical propo-
sitions refer always have members. The modern interpretation that explicitly
rejects this assumption is called, as we noted earlier, Boolean.*
We adopt the Boolean interpretation of categorical propositions in all that
follows. This has important logical consequences. Therefore we set forth now
what this Boolean interpretation of categorical propositions entails.
1. In some respects, the traditional interpretation is not upset. I and O
propositions continue to have existential import in the Boolean interpretation,
so the proposition “Some S is P” is false if the class S is empty, and the
proposition “Some S is not P” is likewise false if the class S is empty.
2. It also remains true in this interpretation that the universal propositions,
A and E, are the contradictories of the particular propositions, O and I. That
is, the proposition, “All men are mortal,” does contradict the proposi-
tion, “Some men are not mortal,” and the proposition “No gods are
mortal,” does contradict the proposition, “Some gods are mortal.”
3. All this is entirely coherent because, in the Boolean interpretation,
universal propositions are interpreted as having no existential import. So even
when the S class is empty, the proposition, “All S is P” can be true, as
can the proposition, “No S is P.” For example, the propositions, “All
unicorns have horns” and “No unicorns have wings” may both be true,
even if there are no unicorns. But if there are no unicorns, the I proposi-
tion, “Some unicorns have horns,” is false, as is the O proposition,
“Some unicorns do not have wings.”
4. Sometimes, in ordinary discourse, we utter a universal proposition with
which we do intend to assert existence. The Boolean interpretation permits
this to be expressed, but doing so requires two propositions, one existen-
tial in force but particular, the other universal but not existential in
force. For example, “All planets in our solar system revolve around the
Sun.” This is a universal proposition that has no existential import—it
says only that if there is a planet in our solar system, then it revolves
around the sun. However, if we express the proposition intending also
to assert the existence of planets in our solar system that do so revolve,
we would need to add: “Mars is a planet in our solar system.” This
proposition has that desired existential force, referring as it does to actu-
ally existing planets.
5. Some very important changes result from our adoption of the Boolean
interpretation. Corresponding A and E propositions can both be true and are
therefore not contraries. This may seem paradoxical, but the force of this
claim will be understood if we think carefully about the Boolean inter-
*Bertrand Russell, another of the founders of modern symbolic logic, also advanced this approach in a fa-
mous essay entitled “The Existential Import of Propositions,” in Mind, July 1905, and referred to it there as
“Peano’s interpretation” of propositions, after Giuseppe Peano, a great Italian mathematician of the early
twentieth century.
198

Categorical Propositions
pretation of the following two propositions: “All unicorns have wings”
and “No unicorns have wings.” The first of these asserts only that if
there is a unicorn then it has wings, and the second asserts only that if
there is a unicorn then it does not have wings—and both of these “if . . .
then” propositions, which are corresponding A and E propositions, can
indeed be true if there are no unicorns.
6. In like manner, in the Boolean interpretation, corresponding I and O
propositions, because they do have existential import, can both be false
if the subject class is empty. So corresponding I and O propositions are not
subcontraries. If there are no unicorns (that is, if the subject class is
empty) it is simply false to assert that some unicorns have horns, and in
that case it is also false to assert that some unicorns do not have horns.
These corresponding I and O propositions, which have existential im-
port, are plainly false if there are no unicorns. Since, in this case, they
can both be false, they are not subcontraries.
7. In the Boolean interpretation, subalternation—inferring an I proposition
from its corresponding A, and an O proposition from its corresponding
E—is not valid. This is because, plainly, one may not validly infer a
proposition that has existential import from one that does not.
8. The Boolean interpretation preserves most immediate inferences:
conversion for E and for I propositions is preserved; contraposition for A
and for O propositions is preserved; obversion for any proposition is pre-
served. But conversion by limitation, and contraposition by limitation,
are not valid.
9. The traditional square of opposition, in the Boolean interpretation, is
transformed in the following general way: Relations along the sides of the
square are undone, but the diagonal, contradictory relations remain in force.
In short, the blanket existential presupposition is rejected by modern logi-
cians. It is a mistake, we hold, to assume that a class has members if it is not as-
serted explicitly that it does. Any argument that relies on this mistaken
assumption is said to commit the fallacy of existential assumption, or more
briefly, the existential fallacy.* With this Boolean interpretation clearly in mind,
we are now in a position to set forth a powerful system for the symbolizing and
diagramming of standard-form categorical syllogisms.
Existential fallacy
Any mistake in
reasoning that arises
from assuming
illegitimately that some
class has members.
*The following exchange from Alice in Wonderland might serve as an example of the existential fallacy. The
confusion arises because Alice, but not the March Hare or the Mad Hatter, attaches existential import to
the word "more":
“Take some more tea,” the March Hare said to Alice, very earnestly.
“I’ve had nothing yet,” Alice replied in an offended tone, “so I can’t take more.”
“You mean you can’t take less,” said the Hatter: “it’s very easy to take more than nothing.”
All of this may seem strange at first; however, it must be borne in mind that logical formulations require
greater precision than do natural languages, and sometimes meanings are assigned to words and symbols
that are not in accord with ordinary usage.
199

Categorical Propositions
B.
(1) No citizen is one who has succeeded in accomplishing
the impossible;
therefore, (2) No one who has succeeded in accomplishing the
impossible is a citizen;
therefore, (3) All who have succeeded in accomplishing the impossible
are noncitizens;
therefore, (4) Some who have succeeded in accomplishing the
impossible are noncitizens;
therefore, (5) Some noncitizen is one who has succeeded in
accomplishing the impossible.
C.
(1) No acrobat is one who can lift himself by his own
bootstraps;
therefore, (2) No one who can lift himself by his own bootstraps is an
acrobat;
therefore, (3) Someone who can lift himself by his own bootstraps is not
an acrobat. (From which it follows that there is at least one
being who can lift himself by his own bootstraps.)
A.
(1) No mathematician is one who has squared the circle.
therefore, (2) No one who has squared the circle is a mathematician;
therefore, (3) All who have squared the circle are nonmathematicians;
therefore, (4) Some nonmathematician is one who has squared the circle.
SOLUTION
Step (3) to step (4) is invalid. The inference at this point is conversion by limi-
tation (that is, from “All S is P” to “Some P is S”), which was acceptable in the
traditional interpretation but is invalid in the Boolean interpretation. This step
relies on an inference from a universal proposition to a particular proposition,
but the preceding discussion has shown that the classes in a universal propo-
sition cannot be assumed to have members, whereas the classes in a particular
proposition do have members. Thus the invalid passage from (3) to (4) permits
the inference that the predicate class in (4) is not empty, and therefore that
there is someone who has squared the circle! In inferring (4) from (3), one com-
mits the existential fallacy.
EXERCISES
In the preceding discussion of existential import, it was shown why, in the
Boolean interpretation of propositions adopted in this chapter, most of the infer-
ences that traditionally were thought to be valid are not valid. These inferences
mistakenly assume that certain classes have members, thereby committing the
existential fallacy. This fallacy is committed in each of the arguments presented
below. Explain the point or points at which, in each argument, the mistaken
existential assumption is made.
EXAMPLE
200

Categorical Propositions
D.
(1) It is true that: No unicorns are animals found in the Bronx Zoo;
therefore, (2) It is false that: All unicorns are animals found in the Bronx Zoo;
therefore
(3) It is true that: Some unicorns are not animals found in the
Bronx Zoo. (From which it follows that there exists at least
one unicorn.)
*E.
(1) It is false that: Some mermaids are members of college
sororities;
therefore
(2) It is true that: Some mermaids are not members of college
sororities. (From which it follows that there exists at least
one mermaid.)
8
Symbolism and Diagrams 
for Categorical Propositions
Because the Boolean interpretation of categorical propositions depends heavily
on the notion of an empty class, it is convenient to have a special symbol to rep-
resent it. The zero symbol, 0, is used for this purpose. To say that the class desig-
nated by the term S has no members, we write an equals sign between S and 0.
Thus the equation S = 0 says that there are no S’s, or that S has no members.
To say that the class designated by S does have members is to deny that S is
empty. To assert that there are S’s is to deny the proposition symbolized by S = 0.
We symbolize that denial by drawing a slanting line through the equals sign.
Thus the inequality 
says that there are S’s, by denying that S is empty.
Standard-form categorical propositions refer to two classes, so the equations
that represent them are somewhat more complicated. Where each of two classes is
already designated by a symbol, the class of all things that belong to both of them
can be represented by juxtaposing the symbols for the two original classes. For ex-
ample, if the letter S designates the class of all satires and the letter P designates
the class of all poems, then the class of all things that are both satires and poems is
represented by the symbol SP, which thus designates the class of all satirical
poems (or poetic satires). The common part or common membership of two class-
es is called the product or intersection of the two classes. The product of two classes
is the class of all things that belong to both of them. The product of the class of all
Americans and the class of all composers is the class of all American composers.
(One must be on one’s guard against certain oddities of the English language
here. For example, the product of the class of all Spaniards and the class of all
dancers is not the class of all Spanish dancers, for a Spanish dancer is not neces-
sarily a dancer who is Spanish, but any person who performs Spanish dances.
Similarly, with abstract painters, English majors, antique dealers, and so on.)
This new notation permits us to symbolize E and I propositions as equations
and inequalities. The E proposition, “No S is P,” says that no members of the
class S are members of the class P; that is, there are no things that belong to both
classes. This can be rephrased by saying that the product of the two classes is
empty, which is symbolized by the equation SP = 0. The I proposition, “Some S is P,”
S Z 0
201

Categorical Propositions
says that at least one member of S is also a member of P. This means that the
product of the classes S and P is not empty and is symbolized by the inequality
.
To symbolize A and O propositions, it is convenient to introduce a new
method of representing class complements. The complement of a class is the col-
lection or class of all things that do not belong to the original class, as explained
in Section 6. The complement of the class of all soldiers is the class of all things
that are not soldiers—the class of all nonsoldiers. Where the letter S symbolizes
the class of all soldiers, we symbolize the class of all nonsoldiers by 
(read “S
bar”), the symbol for the original class with a bar above it. The A proposition,
“All S is P,” says that all members of the class S are also members of the class P;
that is, that there are no members of the class S that are not members of P or (by
obversion) that “No S is non-P.” This, like any other E proposition, says that the
product of the classes designated by its subject and predicate terms is empty. It is
symbolized by the equation 
. The O proposition, “Some S is not P,” ob-
verts to the logically equivalent I proposition, “Some S is non-P,” which is sym-
bolized by the inequality 
.
In their symbolic formulations, the interrelations among the four standard-
form categorical propositions appear very clearly. It is obvious that the A and O
propositions are contradictories when they are symbolized as 
and
, and it is equally obvious that the E and I propositions, SP = 0 and 
, are contradictories. The Boolean square of opposition may be represented as
shown in Figure 2.
SP Z 0
SP
 ¯ Z 0
SP
 ¯ = 0
SP
 ¯ Z 0
SP
 ¯ = 0
S
 ¯
SP Z 0
Contradictories
Contrad    ictories
A: SP=0
I: SP≠0
E: SP=0
O: SP≠0
¯
¯
Figure 2 The Boolean Square of Opposition
The notation shown in the table is useful, for example, in representing the rela-
tionship among contradictories in the Boolean square of opposition.
When first explaining the four types of standard-form categorical proposi-
tions, in Section 3, we represented the relations of the classes in those proposi-
tions graphically with intersecting circles, labeled S and P. Now we carry that
process of diagramming categorical propositions somewhat further, enriching
our notation in ways that will facilitate the analysis to follow. We begin by repre-
202

Categorical Propositions
Symbolic Representation of Categorical Propositions
o v e r v i e w
Symbolic
Form
Proposition
Representation
Explanation
A
All S is P.
S
= 0
P
 ¯
The class of things that are
both S and non-P is empty.
E
No S is P.
SP = 0
The class of things that are
both S and P is empty.
I
Some S is P.
SP Z 0
The class of things that are
both S and P is not empty. (SP
has at least one member.)
O
Some S is not P.
SP
 ¯ Z 0
The class of things that are
both S and non-P is not empty.
(
has at least one member.)
SP
 ¯
S
senting any class with an unmarked circle, labeled with the term that designates
that class. The class S is diagrammed with a simple circle, as shown in Figure 3.
S
S
x
S = 0
S ≠ 0
The diagram in Figure 3 is of a class, not a proposition. It represents the class
S, but it says nothing about it. To diagram the proposition that S has no mem-
bers, or that there are no S’s, we shade all of the interior of the circle representing
S, indicating in this way that it contains nothing and is empty. To diagram the
proposition that there are S’s, which we interpret as saying that there is at least
one member of S, we place an x anywhere in the interior of the circle represent-
ing S, indicating in this way that there is something inside it, that it is not empty.
Thus the two propositions, “There are no S’s,” and “There are S’s,” are represent-
ed by the two diagrams in Figure 4.
Figure 3
Figure 4
203

Note that the circle that diagrams the class S will also, in effect, diagram the
class , for just as the interior of the circle represents all members of S, so the ex-
terior of the circle represents all members of .
To diagram a standard-form categorical proposition, as explained in
Section 3, two circles are required. Figure 5 shows a pair of intersecting circles,
which we may use as the skeleton, or framework, for diagramming any standard-
form categorical proposition whose subject and predicate terms are symbolized by
S and P.
S
 ¯
S
 ¯
Categorical Propositions
S
P
SP
SP
SP
SP¯
¯
¯
¯
Figure 5 diagrams the two classes, S and P, but diagrams no proposition con-
cerning them. It does not affirm that either or both have members, nor does it
deny that they have. In fact, there are more than two classes diagrammed by the
two intersecting circles. The part of the circle labeled S that does not overlap the
circle labeled P diagrams all S’s that are not P’s and can be thought of as repre-
senting the product of the classes S and . We may label it 
. The overlapping
part of the two circles represents the product of the classes S and P, and diagrams
all things belonging to both of them. It is labeled SP. The part of the circle labeled
P that does not overlap the circle labeled S diagrams all P’s that are not S’s, and
represents the product of the class and P. It is labeled 
. Finally, the part of the
diagram external to both circles represents all things that are neither in S nor in P;
it diagrams the fourth class 
so labeled.
With these labels inserted, Figure 5 becomes Figure 6.
S
 ¯
  P
 ¯
S
 ¯P
S
 ¯
SP
 ¯
P
 ¯
Figure 6
S
P
Figure 5
Figure 6 can be interpreted in terms of the several different classes deter-
mined by the class of all Spaniards (S) and the class of all painters (P). SP is the
product of these two classes, containing all those things and only those things
that belong to both of them. Every member of SP must be a member of both S
and P; every member must be both a Spaniard and a painter. This product class
SP is the class of all Spanish painters, which contains, among others, Velázquez
and Goya. 
is the product of the first class and the complement of the second,
containing all those things and only those things that belong to the class S but
not to the class P. It is the class of all Spaniards who are not painters, all Spanish
nonpainters, and it will contain neither Velázquez nor Goya, but it will include
SP
 ¯
204

Categorical Propositions
both the novelist Cervantes and the dictator Franco, among many others. 
is
the product of the second class and the complement of the first, and is the class of
all painters who are not Spaniards. This class 
of all non-Spanish painters in-
cludes, among others, both the Dutch painter Rembrandt and the American
painter Georgia O’Keeffe. Finally, 
is the product of the complements of the
two original classes. It contains all those things and only those things that are
neither Spaniards nor painters. It is a very large class indeed, containing not
merely English admirals and Swiss mountain climbers, but such things as the
Mississippi River and Mount Everest. All these classes are diagrammed in Figure
6, where the letters S and P are interpreted as in this paragraph.
Diagrams of this kind, as noted earlier, are called Venn diagrams after John
Venn, the English logician who introduced this notation. When, in such dia-
grams, the several areas are labeled, but not marked in any other way, they rep-
resent classes only. Figure 6 illustrates this. It does not represent any proposition.
In such a diagram, if a circle or part of a circle is blank, that signifies nothing—
neither that there are, nor that there are not, members of the class represented by
that space.
With certain additions, however, Venn diagrams can be used to represent
propositions as well as classes. By shading out some spaces, or by inserting x’s in
various parts of the picture, we can accurately diagram any one of the four stan-
dard-form categorical propositions. Because Venn diagrams (with appropriate
markings) represent categorical propositions so fully and so graphically, these
diagrams have become one of the most powerful and most widely used instru-
ments for the appraisal of syllogistic arguments. Let us consider how each of the
four basic categorical propositions can be represented using this technique.
To diagram the A proposition, “All S is P,” symbolized by 
, we simply
shade out the part of the diagram that represents the class 
, thus indicating
that it has no members or is empty. To diagram the E proposition, “No S is P,”
symbolized by SP = 0, we shade out the part of the diagram that represents the
class SP, to indicate that it is empty. To diagram the I proposition, “Some S is P,”
symbolized by 
, we insert an x into the part of the diagram that represents
the class SP. This insertion indicates that the class product is not empty but has at
least one member. Finally, for the O proposition, “Some S is not P,” symbolized
by 
we insert an x into the part of the diagram that represents the class 
,
to indicate that it is not empty but has at least one member. Placed side by side,
diagrams for the four standard-form categorical propositions display their dif-
ferent meanings very clearly, as shown in Figure 7.
SP
 ¯
S  P
 ¯ Z 0,
SP Z 0
SP
 ¯
SP
 ¯ = 0
S
 ¯
  P
 ¯
S
 ¯P
S
 ¯P
S
P
S
P
S
x
x
P
S
P
A: All S is P.
SP = 0
E: No S is P.
SP = 0
I: Some S is P.
SP ≠ 0
O: Some S is not P.
SP ≠ 0
¯
¯
¯
Figure 7
205

We have constructed diagrammatic representations for “No S is P” and
“Some S is P,” and because these are logically equivalent to their converses, “No
P is S” and “Some P is S,” the diagrams for the latter have already been shown.
To diagram the A proposition, “All P is S” (symbolized by 
) within the
same framework, we must shade out the part of the diagram that represents the
class 
. It should be obvious that the class 
is the same as the class 
—if not
immediately, then by recognizing that every object that belongs to the class of all
painters and the class of all non-Spaniards must (also) belong to the class of all
non-Spaniards and the class of all painters—all painting non-Spaniards are non-
Spanish painters, and vice versa. To diagram the O proposition, “Some P is not
S,” symbolized by 
we insert an x into the part of the diagram that repre-
sents the class 
. Diagrams for these propositions then appear as shown
in Figure 8.
PS
 ¯ A = S
 ¯PB
PS
 ¯ Z 0
S
 ¯P
PS
 ¯
PS
 ¯
PS
 ¯ = 0
Categorical Propositions
S
P
S
P
S
x
x
P
S
P
A: All P is S.
PS = 0
E: No P is S.
PS = 0
I: Some P is S.
PS ≠ 0
O: Some P is not S.
PS ≠ 0
¯
¯
This further adequacy of the two-circle diagrams is mentioned because it
will be important to be able to use a given pair of overlapping circles with
given labels—say, S and M—to diagram any standard-form categorical propo-
sition containing S and M as its terms, regardless of the order in which they
occur in it.
The Venn diagrams constitute an iconic representation of the standard-form
categorical propositions, in which spatial inclusions and exclusions correspond
to the nonspatial inclusions and exclusions of classes. They provide an excep-
tionally clear method of notation. They also provide the basis for the simplest
and most direct method of testing the validity of categorical syllogisms.
EXERCISES
Express each of the following propositions as equalities or inequalities, repre-
senting each class by the first letter of the English term designating it, and sym-
bolizing the proposition by means of a Venn diagram.
EXAMPLE
1. Some sculptors are painters.
Figure 8
206

Categorical Propositions
SOLUTION
2. No peddlers are millionaires.
3. All merchants are speculators.
4. Some musicians are not pianists.
*5. No shopkeepers are members.
6. Some political leaders of high reputation are scoundrels.
7. All physicians licensed to practice in this state are medical school gradu-
ates who have passed special qualifying examinations.
8. Some stockbrokers who advise their customers about making invest-
ments are not partners in companies whose securities they recommend.
9. All puritans who reject all useless pleasure are strangers to much that
makes life worth living.
*10. No modern paintings are photographic likenesses of their objects.
11. Some student activists are middle-aged men and women striving to re-
capture their lost youth.
12. All medieval scholars were pious monks living in monasteries.
13. Some state employees are not public-spirited citizens.
14. No magistrates subject to election and recall will be punitive tyrants.
*15. Some patients exhibiting all the symptoms of schizophrenia have bipo-
lar disorder.
16. Some passengers on large jet airplanes are not satisfied customers.
17. Some priests are militant advocates of radical social change.
18. Some stalwart defenders of the existing order are not members of a 
political party.
19. No pipelines laid across foreign territories are safe investments.
*20. All pornographic films are menaces to civilization and decency.
SP Z 0
chapter 
Summary
This chapter has introduced and explained the basic elements of classical, or
Aristotelian, deductive logic, as distinguished from modern symbolic logic. (To
review this distinction, see Section 1.)
In Section 2 we introduced the concept of classes, on which traditional logic
is built, and the categorical propositions that express relations between classes.
S
x
P
207

Categorical Propositions
In Section 3 we explained the four basic standard-form categorical
propositions:
A:
universal affirmative
E:
universal negative
I:
particular affirmative
O:
particular negative
In Section 4 we discussed various features of these standard-form categorical
propositions: their quality (affirmative or negative) and their quantity (universal
or particular). We also explained why different terms are distributed or undis-
tributed, in each of the four basic kinds of propositions.
In Section 5 we explored the kinds of opposition arising among the several
standard-form categorical propositions: what it means for a proposition to have
a contradictory, a contrary, a subcontrary, or a sub- or superaltern. We showed
how these relations are exhibited on the traditional square of opposition, and ex-
plained the immediate inferences that can be drawn from them.
In Section 6 we examined other kinds of immediate inferences that are based
on categorical propositions: conversion, obversion, and contraposition.
In Section 7 we explored the controversial issue of existential import, show-
ing that the traditional square of opposition can be retained only if we make a
blanket assumption that the classes to which propositions refer always do have
some members—an assumption that modern logicians are unwilling to make.
We then explained the interpretation of propositions to be adopted throughout
this chapter: the interpretation called Boolean, which retains much, but not all,
of the traditional square of opposition while rejecting the blanket assumption of
nonempty classes. In this Boolean interpretation, we explained that particular
propositions (I and O propositions) are interpreted as having existential import,
whereas universal propositions (A and E propositions) are interpreted as not
having such import. We carefully detailed the consequences of adopting this in-
terpretation of propositions.
In Section 8 we returned to the use of Venn diagrams, using intersecting cir-
cles to represent classes. We showed how, with additional markings, Venn dia-
grams may also be used to represent categorical propositions.
This chapter has provided the tools we will need to analyze categorical syllo-
gisms, of which standard-form propositions are the essential building blocks.
For additional exercises and tutorials about concepts covered in this
chapter, log in to MyLogicLab at www.mylogiclab.com and select your
current textbook.
208

SECTION 3
Exercises
1.
S  historians;
P  extremely gifted writers whose works read like first-rate novels.
Form: Particular affirmative.
5.
S  members of families that are rich and famous;
P  persons of either wealth or distinction.
Form: Particular negative.
10.
S  people who have not themselves done creative work in the arts;
P  responsible critics on whose judgment we can rely.
Form: Universal negative.
SECTION 4
Exercises 
1.
Quality: affirmative; quantity: particular; subject and predicate terms both 
undistributed.
5.
Quality: negative; quantity: universal; subject and predicate terms both 
distributed.
10.
Quality: affirmative; quantity: universal; subject term distributed, predicate
term undistributed.
SECTION 5
Exercises
1.
If we assume that (a) is true, then:
(b), which is its contrary, is false, and
(c), which is its subaltern, is true, and
(d), which is its contradictory, is false.
If we assume that (a) is false, then:
(b), which is its contrary, is undetermined, and
(c), which is its subaltern, is undetermined, and
(d), which is its contradictory, is true.
SECTION 6
Exercises
A. 
1.
No reckless drivers who pay no attention to traffic regulations are people
who are considerate of others. Equivalent.
5.
Some elderly persons who are incapable of doing an honest day’s work are
professional wrestlers. Equivalent.
B.
1.
Some college athletes are not nonprofessionals. Equivalent.
5.
No objects suitable for boat anchors are objects that weigh less than fifteen
pounds. Equivalent.
C.
1.
All nonpessimists are nonjournalists. Equivalent.
5.
Some residents are not citizens. Equivalent.
D.
1.
False
5.
Undetermined
10.
False
E. 
1.
False
5.
Undetermined
10.
False
F. 
1.
Undetermined
5.
False
Categorical Propositions
SOLUTIONS TO SELECTED EXERCISES
209

10.
Undetermined
15.
True
G.
1.
Undetermined
5.
Undetermined
10.
True
15.
Undetermined
SECTION 7
Exercises
E. 
Step (1) to step (2) is invalid: (1) asserts the falsehood of an I proposition; (2)
asserts the truth of its corresponding O proposition. In the traditional inter-
pretation, corresponding I and O propositions are subcontraries and cannot
both be false. Therefore, if the I proposition in (1) is false, the O proposition
in (2) would have to be true, in that interpretation. But because both I and O
propositions do have existential import, both can be false (in the Boolean
interpretation) if the subject class is empty. The subject class is empty in this
case, because there are no mermaids. Hence the inference from the falsehood
of (1) to the truth of (2) is invalid. Corresponding I and O propositions are
not subcontraries in the Boolean interpretation, but the inference from (1) to
(2) assumes that they are.
SECTION 8
Exercises
Categorical Propositions
M
S 
P
M 
B
P 
M
P
SM = 0
MP = 0
PB ≠ 0
PM = 0
x
5.
10.
15.
20.
210

Categorical Syllogisms
1
Standard-Form Categorical Syllogisms
2
The Formal Nature of Syllogistic Argument
3
Venn Diagram Technique for Testing Syllogisms
4
Syllogistic Rules and Syllogistic Fallacies
5
Exposition of the Fifteen Valid Forms of the Categorical Syllogism
Appendix: Deduction of the Fifteen Valid Forms 
of the Categorical Syllogism
1
Standard-Form Categorical Syllogisms
Categorical propositions can now be used in more extended reasoning. Argu-
ments that rely on A, E, I, and O propositions commonly have two categorical
propositions as premises and one categorical proposition as a conclusion. Such
arguments are called syllogisms; a syllogism is a deductive argument in which a
conclusion is inferred from two premises.
The syllogisms with which we are concerned here are called categorical be-
cause they are arguments based on the relations of classes, or categories—relations
that are expressed by the categorical propositions with which we are familiar.
More formally, we define a categorical syllogism as a deductive argument con-
sisting of three categorical propositions that together contain exactly three terms,
each of which occurs in exactly two of the constituent propositions.
Syllogisms are very common, very clear, and readily testable. The system of
categorical syllogisms that we will explore is powerful and deep. The seventeenth-
century philosopher and mathematician Gottfried Leibniz said, of the invention
of the form of syllogisms, that it was “one of the most beautiful and also one of
the most important made by the human mind.” Syllogisms are the workhorse
arguments with which deductive logic, as traditionally practiced, has been made
effective in writing and in controversy.
It will be convenient to have an example to use as we discuss the parts and
features of the syllogism. Here is a valid standard-form categorical syllogism
that we shall use as an illustration:
No heroes are cowards.
Some soldiers are cowards.
Therefore some soldiers are not heroes.
To analyze such an argument accurately, it needs to be in standard form. A cate-
gorical syllogism is said to be in standard form (as the above example is) when
two things are true of it: (1) its premises and its conclusion are all standard-form
categorical propositions (A, E, I, or O); and (2) those propositions are arranged in
Syllogism
Any deductive argument
in which a conclusion is
inferred from two
premises.
Categorical syllogism
A deductive argument
consisting of three
categorical propositions
that contain exactly
three terms, each of
which occurs in exactly
two of the propositions.
Standard form
The form in which a
syllogism is said to be
when its premises and
conclusion are all
standard-form
categorical propositions
(A, E, I, or O) and are
arranged in standard
order (major premise,
then minor premise,
then conclusion).
From Chapter 6 of Introduction to Logic, Fourteenth Edition. Irving M. Copi, Carl Cohen, Kenneth McMahon. 
Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Prentice Hall. All rights reserved.
This asset is
intentionally omitted
from this text. It may
be accessed at
www.mcescher.com.
(Belvedere by 
M.C. Escher)

a specified standard order. The importance of this standard form will become evi-
dent when we turn to the task of testing the validity of syllogisms.
To explain the order of the premises that is required to put any syllogism into
standard form, we need the logical names of the premises of the syllogism, and the
names of the terms of the syllogism, and we must understand why those names—
very useful and very important—are assigned to them. This is the next essential
step in our analysis of categorical syllogisms. In this chapter, for the sake of brevi-
ty, we will refer to categorical syllogisms simply as “syllogisms,”.
A. Terms of the Syllogism: Major, Minor, and Middle
The three categorical propositions in our example argument above contain exact-
ly three terms: heroes, soldiers, and cowards. To identify the terms by name, we look
to the conclusion of the syllogism, which of course contains exactly two terms.
The conclusion in our sample is an O proposition, “Some soldiers are not heroes.”
The term that occurs as the predicate of the conclusion (“heroes,” in this case) is
called the major term of the syllogism. The term that occurs as the subject of the
conclusion (“soldiers,” in this case) is called the minor term of the syllogism. The
third term of the syllogism (“cowards,” in this case), which never occurs in the
conclusion but always appears in both premises, is called the middle term.
The premises of a syllogism also have names. Each premise is named after
the term that appears both in it and in the conclusion. The major term and the
minor term must each occur in a different premise. The premise containing the
major term is called the major premise. In the example, “heroes” is the major
term, so the premise containing “heroes”—“No heroes are cowards”—is the
major premise. It is the major premise not because it appears first, but only be-
cause it is the premise that contains the major term; it would be the major
premise no matter in what order the premises were written.
The premise containing the minor term is called the minor premise. In the
example, “soldiers” is the minor term, so the premise containing “soldiers”—
“Some soldiers are cowards”—is the minor premise. It is the minor premise not
because of its position, but because it is the premise that contains the minor term.
Categorical Syllogisms
The Parts of a Standard-Form Categorical Syllogism
o v e r v i e w
Major Term
The predicate term of the conclusion.
Minor Term
The subject term of the conclusion.
Middle Term
The term that appears in both premises but not in the
conclusion.
Major Premise
The premise containing the major term.
Minor Premise
The premise containing the minor term.
Major premise
In a standard-form
categorical syllogism,
the premise that
contains the major term.
Middle term
In a standard-form
categorical syllogism
(which must contain
exactly three terms), the
term that appears in
both premises but does
not appear in the
conclusion.
Major term
The term that occurs as
the predicate term of the
conclusion in a
standard-form
categorical syllogism.
Minor term
The term that occurs as
the subject term of the
conclusion in a
standard-form
categorical syllogism.
Minor premise
In a standard-form
categorical syllogism,
the premise that
contains the minor term.
212

A syllogism is in standard form, we said, when its premises are arranged in a
specified standard order. Now we can state that order: In a standard-form syllo-
gism, the major premise is always stated first, the minor premise second, and the conclu-
sion last. The reason for the importance of this order will soon become clear.
B. The Mood of the Syllogism
Every syllogism has a mood. The mood of a syllogism is determined by the types
(A, E, I, or O) of standard-form categorical propositions it contains. The mood of
the syllogism is therefore represented by three letters, and those three letters are
always given in standard-form order. That is, the first letter names the type of the
syllogism’s major premise; the second letter names the type of the syllogism’s
minor premise; the third letter names the type of the syllogism’s conclusion. In
our example syllogism, the major premise (“No heroes are cowards”) is an E
proposition; the minor premise (“Some soldiers are cowards”) is an I proposition;
the conclusion (“Some soldiers are not heroes”) is an O proposition. Therefore
the mood of this syllogism is EIO.
C. The Figure of the Syllogism
The mood of a standard-form syllogism is not enough, by itself, to characterize
its logical form. This can be shown by comparing two syllogisms, A and B, with
the same mood, which are logically very different.
Categorical Syllogisms
Mood
A characterization of
categorical syllogisms,
determined by the forms
of the standard-form
categorical propositions it
contains. Since there are
just four forms of
propositions, A, E, I, and
O, and each syllogism
contains exactly three
such propositions, there
are exactly 64 moods,
each mood identified by
the three letters of its
constituent propositions,
AAA, AAI, AAE, and so
on, to OOO.
All great scientists are college graduates.
Some professional athletes are college graduates.
Therefore some professional athletes are great scientists.
All artists are egotists.
Some artists are paupers.
Therefore some paupers are egotists.
Major Term
Middle Term
Major Term
Middle Term
Middle Term
Middle Term
Major Term
Minor Term
Major Term
Minor Term
Minor Term
Minor Term
Both of these are of mood AII, but one of them is valid and the other is not.
The difference in their forms can be shown most clearly if we display their log-
ical “skeletons” by abbreviating the minor terms as S (subject of the conclusion),
the major terms as P (predicate of the conclusion), and the middle terms as M.
Using the three-dot symbol “ ” for “therefore,” we get these skeletons:
‹
A.
B.
A. All P is M.
Some S is M.
Some S is P.
‹
B. All M is P.
Some M is S.
Some S is P.
‹
213

Categorical Syllogisms
These are very different. In the one labeled A, the middle term, M, is the predi-
cate term of both premises; but in the one labeled B, the middle term, M, is the
subject term of both premises. Syllogism B will be seen to be a valid argument;
syllogism A, on the other hand, is invalid.
These examples show that although the form of a syllogism is partially de-
scribed by its mood (AII in both of these cases), syllogisms that have the same
mood may differ importantly in their forms, depending on the relative positions
of their middle terms. To describe the form of a syllogism completely we must
state its mood (the three letters of its three propositions) and its figure—where by
figure we mean the position of the middle term in its premises.
Syllogisms can have four—and only four—possible different figures:
1. The middle term may be the subject term of the major premise and the
predicate term of the minor premise; or
2. The middle term may be the predicate term of both premises; or
3. The middle term may be the subject term of both premises; or
4. The middle term may be the predicate term of the major premise and
the subject term of the minor premise.
These different possible positions of the middle term constitute the first,
second, third, and fourth figures, respectively. Every syllogism must have one
or another of these four figures. The characters of these figures may be visual-
ized more readily when the figures are schematized as in the following array,
in which reference to mood is suppressed and the quantifiers and copulas are
not shown—but the relative positions of the terms of the syllogism are
brought out:
M — P
S — M
First Figure
P — M
S — M
M — P
M — S
M — S
P — M
Second Figure
Third Figure
Fourth Figure
S — P
∴
S — P
∴
S — P
∴
S — P
∴
Any standard-form syllogism is completely described when we specify its
mood and its figure. The syllogism we have been using as an example is in the
second figure; “cowards,” the middle term, is the predicate term of both premis-
es. Its mood, as we pointed out, is EIO. So it is completely described as being a
syllogism of the form EIO–2. It is a valid syllogism, as we noted; every valid syl-
logistic form, as we shall see, has it own name. The name of this form, EIO–2, is
Festino. We say of this syllogism that it is “in Festino.”
Here is another example:
No M is P.
All S is M.
No S is P.
‹
Figure
The position of the
middle term in the
premises of a standard-
form categorical
syllogism.
214

Categorical Syllogisms
This syllogism is in the first figure (its middle term is the subject of the major
premise and the predicate of the minor premise); its mood is EAE. So we may
characterize it completely as EAE–1, a form whose unique name is Celarent. Any
syllogism of this form is “in Celarent,” just as any syllogism of the earlier form is
“in Festino.” Because Celarent (EAE–1) and Festino (EIO–2) are known to be valid
forms, we may conclude that whenever we encounter an argument in one of
these forms, it too is valid.
With these analytical tools we can identify every possible categorical syllo-
gism by mood and figure. If we were to list all the possible moods, beginning
with AAA, AAE, AAI, AAO, AEA, AEE, . . ., and so on, continuing until every
possibility had been named, we would eventually (upon reaching OOO) have
enumerated sixty-four possible moods. Each mood can occur in each of the four
figures; 4 × 64 = 256. It is certain, therefore, that there are exactly 256 distinct
forms that standard-form syllogisms may assume.
Of these 256 possible forms, as we shall see, only a few are valid forms. Each
of those valid forms has a unique name, as will be explained.
EXERCISES
Rewrite each of the following syllogisms in standard form, and name its mood
and figure. (Procedure: first, identify the conclusion; second, note its predicate
term, which is the major term of the syllogism; third, identify the major prem-
ise, which is the premise containing the major term; fourth, verify that the other
premise is the minor premise by checking to see that it contains the minor term,
which is the subject term of the conclusion; fifth, rewrite the argument in stan-
dard form—major premise first, minor premise second, conclusion last; sixth,
name the mood and figure of the syllogism.)
EXAMPLE
SOLUTION
Step 1.
The conclusion is “No warships are commercial vessels.”
Step 2.
“Commercial vessels” is the predicate term of this conclusion
and is therefore the major term of the syllogism.
Step 3.
The major premise, the premise that contains this term, is “No
nuclear-powered submarines are commercial vessels.”
Step 4.
The remaining premise, “All nuclear-powered submarines are
warships,” is indeed the minor premise, because it does contain
the subject term of the conclusion, “warships.”
1. No nuclear-powered submarines are commercial vessels, so no war-
ships are commercial vessels, because all nuclear-powered submarines
are warships.
215

Step 5.
In standard form this syllogism is written thus:
No nuclear-powered submarines are commercial vessels.
All nuclear-powered submarines are warships.
Therefore no warships are commercial vessels.
Step 6.
The three propositions in this syllogism are, in order, E, A, and E.
The middle term, “nuclear-powered submarines,” is the subject
term of both premises, so the syllogism is in the third figure. The
mood and figure of the syllogism therefore are EAE–3.
Categorical Syllogisms
2. Some evergreens are objects of worship, because all fir trees are ever-
greens, and some objects of worship are fir trees.
3. All artificial satellites are important scientific achievements; therefore
some important scientific achievements are not U.S. inventions, inas-
much as some artificial satellites are not U.S. inventions.
4. No television stars are certified public accountants, but all certified
public accountants are people of good business sense; it follows that no
television stars are people of good business sense.
*5. Some conservatives are not advocates of high tariff rates, because all
advocates of high tariff rates are Republicans, and some Republicans
are not conservatives.
6. All CD players are delicate mechanisms, but no delicate mechanisms are
suitable toys for children; consequently, no CD players are suitable toys
for children.
7. All juvenile delinquents are maladjusted individuals, and some juvenile
delinquents are products of broken homes; hence some maladjusted in-
dividuals are products of broken homes.
8. No stubborn individuals who never admit a mistake are good teachers,
so, because some well-informed people are stubborn individuals who
never admit a mistake, some good teachers are not well-informed people.
9. All proteins are organic compounds, hence all enzymes are proteins, as
all enzymes are organic compounds.
*10. No sports cars are vehicles intended to be driven at moderate speeds,
but all automobiles designed for family use are vehicles intended to be
driven at moderate speeds, from which it follows that no sports cars are
automobiles designed for family use.
2
The Formal Nature of Syllogistic Argument
In all deductive logic we aim to discriminate valid arguments from invalid ones;
in classical logic this becomes the task of discriminating valid syllogisms from
invalid ones. It is reasonable to assume that the constituent propositions of a
syllogism are all contingent—that is, that no one of those propositions is neces-
216

Categorical Syllogisms
sarily true, or necessarily false. Under this assumption, the validity or invalidity
of any syllogism depends entirely on its form. Validity and invalidity are com-
pletely independent of the specific content of the argument or its subject matter.
Thus any syllogism of the form AAA–1
All M is P.
All S is M.
All S is P.
is valid, regardless of its subject matter. The name of this syllogism’s form is
Barbara; no matter what terms are substituted for the letters S, P, and M, the result-
ing argument, “in Barbara,” will always be valid. If we substitute “Athenians” and
“humans” for S and P, and “Greeks” for M, we obtain this valid argument:
All Greeks are humans.
All Athenians are Greeks.
All Athenians are humans.
If we substitute the terms “soaps,” “water-soluble substances,” and “sodium
salts” for the letters S, P, and M in the same form, we obtain
All sodium salts are water-soluble substances.
All soaps are sodium salts.
Therefore all soaps are water-soluble substances.
which also is valid.
A valid syllogism is valid in virtue of its form alone, and so we call it formally
valid. We assume throughout that its constituent propositions are themselves con-
tingent, that is, neither logically true (e.g., “All easy chairs are chairs”) nor logically
false (e.g., “Some easy chairs are not chairs”). The reason for the assumption is this:
If it contained either a logically false premise or a logically true conclusion, then the
argument would be valid regardless of its syllogistic form—valid in that it would be
logically impossible for its premises to be true and its conclusion false. (We also as-
sume that the only logical relations among the terms of the syllogism are those as-
serted or entailed by its premises. The point of these restrictions is to limit our
considerations in this chapter and the next to syllogistic arguments alone and to ex-
clude other kinds of arguments whose validity turns on more complex logical con-
siderations that are not appropriate to introduce at this place.)
If any syllogism is valid in virtue of its form alone, any other syllogism having that
same form will also be valid; and if a syllogism is invalid, any other syllogism having that
same form will also be invalid. The common recognition of this fact is attested to by the
frequent use of logical analogies in argumentation. Suppose that we are presented
with the argument
All liberals are proponents of national health insurance.
Some members of the administration are proponents of national health insurance.
Therefore some members of the administration are liberals.
and felt (justifiably) that, regardless of the truth or falsehood of its constituent
propositions, the argument is invalid. The best way to expose its fallacious character
‹
‹
217

Categorical Syllogisms
is to construct another argument that has exactly the same form but whose in-
validity is immediately apparent. We might seek to expose the given argument
by replying: You might as well argue that
All rabbits are very fast runners.
Some horses are very fast runners.
Therefore some horses are rabbits.
We might continue: You cannot seriously defend this argument, because here there
is no question about the facts. The premises are known to be true and the conclusion
is known to be false. Your argument is of the same pattern as this analogous one
about horses and rabbits. This one is invalid—so your argument is invalid.
This is an excellent method of arguing; the logical analogy is one of the most
powerful weapons that can be used in debate.
Underlying the method of logical analogy is the fact that the validity or inva-
lidity of such arguments as the categorical syllogism is a purely formal matter.
Any fallacious argument can be proved to be invalid by finding a second argu-
ment that has exactly the same form and is known to be invalid by the fact that
its premises are known to be true while its conclusion is known to be false. (It
should be remembered that an invalid argument may very well have a true con-
clusion—that an argument is invalid simply means that its conclusion is not log-
ically implied or necessitated by its premises.)
This method of testing the validity of arguments has serious limitations,
however. Sometimes a logical analogy is difficult to “think up” on the spur of the
moment. There are far too many invalid forms of syllogistic argument (well over
two hundred!) for us to prepare and remember refuting analogies of each of
them in advance. Moreover, although being able to think of a logical analogy
with true premises and a false conclusion proves its form to be invalid, not being
able to think of one does not prove the form valid, for it may merely reflect the
limitations of our thinking. There may be an invalidating analogy even though
we are not able to think of it. A more effective method of establishing the formal
validity or invalidity of syllogisms is required. The explanation of effective meth-
ods of testing syllogisms is the object of the remaining sections of this chapter.
EXERCISES
Refute, by the method of constructing logical analogies, any of the following
arguments that are invalid:
EXAMPLE
1. All business executives are active opponents of increased corporation
taxes, for all active opponents of increased corporation taxes are mem-
bers of the chamber of commerce, and all members of the chamber of
commerce are business executives.
218

Categorical Syllogisms
SOLUTION
One possible refuting analogy is this: All bipeds are astronauts, for all astro-
nauts are humans and all humans are bipeds.
2. No medicines that can be purchased without a doctor’s prescription are
habit-forming drugs, so some narcotics are not habit-forming drugs, be-
cause some narcotics are medicines that can be purchased without a
doctor’s prescription.
3. No Republicans are Democrats, so some Democrats are wealthy stock-
brokers, because some wealthy stockbrokers are not Republicans.
4. No college graduates are persons having an IQ of less than 70, but all
persons who have an IQ of less than 70 are morons, so no college gradu-
ates are morons.
*5. All fireproof buildings are structures that can be insured at special rates,
so some structures that can be insured at special rates are not wooden
houses, because no wooden houses are fireproof buildings.
6. All blue-chip securities are safe investments, so some stocks that pay a
generous dividend are safe investments, because some blue-chip securi-
ties are stocks that pay a generous dividend.
7. Some pediatricians are not specialists in surgery, so some general practi-
tioners are not pediatricians, because some general practitioners are not
specialists in surgery.
8. No intellectuals are successful politicians, because no shy and retiring
people are successful politicians, and some intellectuals are shy and re-
tiring people.
9. All trade union executives are labor leaders, so some labor leaders are
conservatives in politics, because some conservatives in politics are
trade union executives.
*10. All new automobiles are economical means of transportation, and all
new automobiles are status symbols; therefore some economical means
of transportation are status symbols.
3
Venn Diagram Technique 
for Testing Syllogisms
We explained the use of two-circle Venn diagrams to represent standard-form
categorical propositions. In order to test a categorical syllogism using Venn dia-
grams, one must first represent both of its premises in one diagram. That re-
quires drawing three
overlapping circles, for the two premises of a
standard-form syllogism contain three different terms—minor term, major
term, and middle term—which we abbreviate as S, P, and M, respectively. We
first draw two circles, just as we did to diagram a single proposition, and then
219

Categorical Syllogisms
we draw a third circle beneath, overlapping both of the first two. We label the
three circles S, P, and M, in that order. Just as one circle labeled S diagrammed
both the class S and the class , and as two overlapping circles labeled S and P
diagrammed four classes (SP, S , P, and 
), three overlapping circles, labeled
S, P, and M, diagram eight classes: S
, SP
, P
, S M, SPM, PM, 
M,
and 
. These are represented by the eight parts into which the three circles
divide the plane, as shown in Figure 1.
S
 ¯P
 ¯M
 ¯
S
 ¯
  P
 ¯
S
 ¯
P
 ¯
M
 ¯
S
 ¯
M
 ¯
P
 ¯
  M
 ¯
S
 ¯
  P
 ¯
S
 ¯
P
 ¯
S
 ¯
S
P
M
SPM
SPM
SPM
SPM
SPM
SPM
SPM
SPM
Figure 1
Figure 1 can be interpreted, for example, in terms of the various different
classes determined by the class of all Swedes (S), the class of all peasants (P), and
the class of all musicians (M). SPM is the product of these three classes, which is
the class of all Swedish peasant musicians. SP
is the product of the first two
and the complement of the third, which is the class of all Swedish peasants who
are not musicians. S M is the product of the first and third and the complement
of the second: the class of all Swedish musicians who are not peasants. S
is
the product of the first and the complements of the others: the class of all Swedes
who are neither peasants nor musicians. Next, PM is the product of the second
and third classes with the complements of the first: the class of all peasant musi-
cians who are not Swedes. P
is the product of the second class with the com-
plements of the other two: the class of all peasants who are neither Swedes nor
musicians. 
M is the product of the third class and the complements of the first
two: the class of all musicians who are neither Swedes nor peasants. Finally,
is the product of the complements of the three original classes: the class of
all things that are neither Swedes nor peasants nor musicians.
If we focus our attention on just the two circles labeled P and M, it is clear
that by shading out, or by inserting an x, we can diagram any standard-form cat-
egorical proposition whose two terms are P and M, regardless of which is the
subject term and which is the predicate. Thus, to diagram the proposition “All M
is P” 
, we shade out all of M that is not contained in (or overlapped by)
P. This area, it is seen, includes both the portions labeled S M and 
M. The di-
agram then becomes Figure 2.
S
 ¯
  P
 ¯
P
 ¯
(MP
 ¯ = 0)
S
 ¯P
 ¯M
 ¯
S
 ¯
  P
 ¯
M
 ¯
S
 ¯
S
 ¯
P
 ¯
  M
 ¯
P
 ¯
M
 ¯
220

Categorical Syllogisms
If we focus our attention on just the two circles S and M, by shading out, or by
inserting an x, we can diagram any standard-form categorical proposition whose
terms are S and M, regardless of the order in which they appear in it. To diagram
the proposition “All S is M” 
we shade out all of S that is not contained
in (or overlapped by) M. This area, it is seen, includes both the portions labeled
S
and SP
. The diagram for this proposition will appear as Figure 3.
M
 ¯
P
 ¯
  M
 ¯
(SM
 ¯ = 0)
M
P
S
Figure 2
M
P
S
Figure 3
The advantage of using three overlapping circles is that it allows us to dia-
gram two propositions together—on the condition, of course, that only three dif-
ferent terms occur in them. Thus diagramming both “All M is P” and “All S is
M” at the same time gives us Figure 4.
M
P
S
Figure 4
This is the diagram for both premises of the syllogism AAA–1:
All M is P.
All S is M.
All S is P.
‹
221

Categorical Syllogisms
Mammals
Dogs
Cats
Figure 5
In this diagram, where the class of all cats corresponds to S, the class of all dogs
corresponds to P, and the class of all mammals corresponds to M, the portions
corresponding to S
, SP
, and P
, have been shaded out. But the conclu-
sion has not been diagrammed, because the part S M has been left unshaded,
and to diagram the conclusion both S
and S M must be shaded. Thus we
see that diagramming both the premises of a syllogism of form AAA–2 does not
suffice to diagram its conclusion, which proves that the conclusion says some-
thing more than is said by the premises, which shows that the premises do not
imply the conclusion. An argument whose premises do not imply its conclusion
is invalid, so our diagram proves that the given syllogism is invalid. (It proves
more: that any syllogism of the form AAA–2 is invalid.)
When we use a Venn diagram to test a syllogism with one universal premise
and one particular premise, it is important to diagram the universal premise first.
Thus, in testing the AII–3 syllogism,
All artists are egotists.
Some artists are paupers.
Therefore some paupers are egotists.
P
 ¯
P
 ¯
  M
 ¯
P
 ¯
M
 ¯
S
 ¯
M
 ¯
P
 ¯
  M
 ¯
This syllogism is valid if and only if the two premises imply or entail the conclu-
sion—that is, if together they say what is said by the conclusion. Consequently,
diagramming the premises of a valid argument should suffice to diagram its
conclusion also, with no further marking of the circles needed. To diagram the
conclusion “All S is P” is to shade out both the portion labeled S
and the por-
tion labeled S M. Inspecting the diagram that represents the two premises, we
see that it also diagrams the conclusion (this is true even though the region SP
has been shaded, because the only region in class S that can still have members
lies within class P—hence, “All S is P”). From this we can conclude that AAA–1
is a valid syllogism.
Let us now apply the Venn diagram test to an obviously invalid syllogism,
one containing three A propositions in the second figure:
All dogs are mammals.
All cats are mammals.
Therefore all cats are dogs.
Diagramming both premises gives us Figure 5.
M
 ¯
P
 ¯
P
 ¯
  M
 ¯
222

Categorical Syllogisms
we should diagram the universal premise, “All artists are egotists,” before
inserting an x to diagram the particular premise, “Some artists are paupers.”
Properly diagrammed, the syllogism looks like Figure 6.
Paupers
Egotists
Artists 
x
Figure 6
Had we tried to diagram the particular premise first, before the region S M
was shaded out along with 
M in diagramming the universal premise, we
would not have known whether to insert an x in SPM or in S M or in both. Had
we put it in S M or on the line separating it from SPM, the subsequent shading
of S M would have obscured the information the diagram was intended to ex-
hibit. Now that the information contained in the premises has been inserted into
the diagram, we can examine it to see whether the conclusion already has been
diagrammed. If the conclusion, “Some paupers are egotists,” has been dia-
grammed, there will be an x somewhere in the overlapping part of the circles la-
beled “Paupers” and “Egotists.” This overlapping part consists of both of the
regions SP
and SPM, which together constitute SP. There is an x in the region
SPM, so there is an x in the overlapping part SP. What the conclusion of the syl-
logism says has already been diagrammed by the diagramming of its premises;
therefore the syllogism is valid.
Let us consider still another example, the discussion of which will bring out
another important point about the use of Venn diagrams. Let’s say we are testing
the argument
All great scientists are college graduates.
Some professional athletes are college graduates.
Therefore some professional athletes are great scientists.
After diagramming the universal premise first (Figure 7) by shading out both re-
gions SP
and P
,
M
 ¯
S
 ¯
M
 ¯
M
 ¯
P
 ¯
P
 ¯
P
 ¯
S
 ¯
  P
 ¯
P
 ¯
SPM
Professional
athletes
Great
scientists
College
graduates
SPM
Figure 7
223

Categorical Syllogisms
we may still be puzzled about where to put the x needed in order to diagram
the particular premise. That premise is “Some professional athletes are college
graduates,” so an x must be inserted somewhere in the overlapping part of the
two circles labeled “Professional athletes” and “College graduates.” That over-
lapping part, however, contains two regions, SPM and S M. In which of these
should we put an x? The premises do not tell us, and if we make an arbitrary
decision to place it in one rather than the other, we would be inserting more in-
formation into the diagram than the premises warrant—which would spoil the
diagram’s use as a test for validity. Placing x’s in each of them would also go
beyond what the premises assert. Yet by placing an x on the line that divides
the overlapping region SM into the two parts SPM and S M, we can diagram
exactly what the second premise asserts without adding anything to it. Placing
an x on the line between two regions indicates that there is something that be-
longs in one of them, but does not indicate which one. The completed diagram
of both premises thus looks like Figure 8.
P
 ¯
P
 ¯
Professional
athletes
Great
scientists
College
graduates
x
Figure 8
When we inspect this diagram of the premises to see whether the conclu-
sion of the syllogism has already been diagrammed in it, we find that it has
not. For the conclusion, “Some professional athletes are great scientists,” to be
diagrammed, an x must appear in the overlapping part of the two upper cir-
cles, either in SP
or in SPM. The first of these is shaded out and certainly
contains no x. The diagram does not show an x in SPM either. True, there must
be a member of either SPM or S M, but the diagram does not tell us that it is in
the former rather than the latter and so, for all the premises tell us, the conclu-
sion may be false. We do not know that the conclusion is false, only that it is
not asserted or implied by the premises. The latter is enough, however, to let
us know that the argument is invalid. The diagram suffices to show not only
that the given syllogism is invalid, but that all syllogisms of the form AII–2 are
invalid.
The general technique of using Venn diagrams to test the validity of any
standard-form syllogism may be summarized as follows. First, label the circles of
a three-circle Venn diagram with the syllogism’s three terms. Next, diagram both
premises, diagramming the universal one first if there is one universal and one
particular, and being careful, in diagramming a particular proposition, to put an
P
 ¯
M
 ¯
224

Categorical Syllogisms
x on a line if the premises do not determine on which side of the line it should go.
Finally, inspect the diagram to see whether the diagram of the premises con-
tains a diagram of the conclusion: If it does, the syllogism is valid; if it does not,
the syllogism is invalid.
What is the theoretical rationale for using Venn diagrams to distinguish
valid from invalid syllogisms? The answer to this question divides into two
parts. The first part has to do with the formal nature of syllogistic argument as
explained in Section 2. It was shown there that one legitimate test of the validi-
ty or invalidity of a syllogism is to establish the validity or invalidity of a differ-
ent syllogism that has exactly the same form. This technique is basic to the use
of Venn diagrams.
The explanation of how the diagrams serve this purpose constitutes the sec-
ond part of the answer to our question. Ordinarily, a syllogism will be about
classes of objects that are not all present, such as the class of all musicians, or
great scientists, or sodium salts. The relations of inclusion or exclusion among
such classes may be reasoned about and may be empirically discoverable in the
course of scientific investigation. But they certainly are not open to direct inspec-
tion, because not all members of the classes involved are ever present at one time
to be inspected. We can, however, examine situations of our own making, in
which the only classes concerned contain by their very definitions only things
that are present and open to direct inspection. We can argue syllogistically about
such situations of our own making. Venn diagrams are devices for expressing
standard-form categorical propositions, but they also are situations of our own
making, patterns of graphite or ink on paper, or lines of chalk on blackboards.
The propositions they express can be interpreted as referring to the diagrams
themselves. An example can help to make this clear. Suppose we have a particu-
lar syllogism whose terms denote various kinds of people who are successful, in-
terested in their work, and able to concentrate, and who may be scattered widely
over all parts of the world:
All successful people are people who are keenly interested in their work.
No people who are keenly interested in their work are people whose attention is
easily distracted when they are working.
Therefore no people whose attention is easily distracted when they are working are
successful people.
Its form is AEE–4, and it may be schematized as
All P is M.
No M is S.
No S is P.
We may test it by constructing the Venn diagram shown in Figure 9, in which re-
gions SP
and P
are shaded out to express the first premise, and S M and
SPM are shaded out to express the second premise.
Examining Figure 9, we find that SP (which consists of the regions SPM and
SP
) has been shaded out, so the syllogism’s conclusion has already been
M
 ¯
P
 ¯
M
 ¯
S
 ¯
M
 ¯
‹
225

Categorical Syllogisms
Visual Logic
Where do I place the x in a Venn diagram?
In the Venn diagram representing a categorical syllogism, the three terms of
the syllogism (minor, major, and middle) are represented by three interlocking
circles labeled S, P, and M (the choice of S and P reflects the fact that the minor
and major term of a syllogism correspond to the Subject and Predicate terms
of its conclusion).
When one of the premises of a syllogism calls for an x to be placed on a line in
such a Venn diagram, we may ask: Which line? And why? Answer: The x is al-
ways placed on the line of the circle designating the class not mentioned in that
premise.
Example: Suppose you are given as premise, “Some S is M.” You may
not be able to determine whether the x representing that “some” is a P or
is not a P—so the x goes on the line of the P circle, thus:
Another example: Suppose you are given as premise, “Some M is not
P.” You may not be able to determine whether the M that is not P is an S
or is not an S—so the x goes on the line of the S circle, thus:
S
P
M
Diagram of three circles, S, P, and M,
with nothing else showing
S
P
M
x
Diagram of three circles with x on
the P circle
Diagram of three circles with x
on the S circle
S
P
M
x
226

Categorical Syllogisms
diagrammed. How does this tell us that the given syllogism is valid? This syllo-
gism concerns large classes of remote objects: There are many people whose
attention is easily distracted when they are working, and they are scattered far
and wide. However, we can construct a syllogism of the same form that involves
objects that are immediately present and directly available for our inspection.
These objects are the points within the unshaded portions of the circles labeled S,
P, and M in our Venn diagram.
Here is the new syllogism:
All points within the unshaded part of the circle labeled P are points within the
unshaded part of the circle labeled M.
No points within the unshaded part of the circle labeled M are points within the
unshaded part of the circle labeled S.
Therefore no points within the unshaded part of the circle labeled S are points
within the unshaded part of the circle labeled P.
People whose
attention is
easily distracted
when they
are working
Successful
people
People who are
keenly interested
in their work
M
P
S
Figure 9
This new syllogism refers to nothing remote; it is about the parts of a situa-
tion we ourselves have created: the Venn diagram we have drawn. All the parts
and all the possibilities of inclusion and exclusion among these classes are im-
mediately present to us and directly open to inspection. We can literally see all
the possibilities here, and know that because all the points of P are also points
of M, and because M and S have no points in common, S and P cannot possibly
have any points in common. Because the new syllogism refers only to classes of
points in the diagram, it can be literally seen to be valid by looking at the things
it talks about. The original syllogism about classes of people has exactly the
same form as this second one, so we are assured by the formal nature of syllo-
gistic argument that the original syllogism is also valid. The explanation is ex-
actly the same for Venn diagram proofs of the invalidity of invalid syllogisms;
there, too, we test the original syllogism indirectly by testing directly a second
syllogism that has exactly the same form and referring to the diagram that ex-
hibits that form.
227

Categorical Syllogisms
John Venn
B
orn in Hull, Yorkshire, England, the son and grandson of Church of
England evangelicals, John Venn (1834–1923) earned his degree in math-
ematics at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge University, in 1857—
whereupon he became a Fellow of that College, remaining closely associated
with it all his life. He was ordained a priest in 1859 but, coming to question his
faith, he soon returned to Cambridge to teach logic and probability theory.
It is the diagrams named after him that assure John Venn a special place in
the history of logic. The idea that logical relations might be represented visual-
ly with diagrams had been pursued in some degree by the German philoso-
pher Gottfried Leibniz in the seventeenth century, and then again by the
prolific Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler in the eighteenth century. But it
was Venn who developed the system of visual representation so that it could
be used readily and effectively in logic. His diagrams reinforce our under-
standing of the relations among propositions, and they provide a reliable and
simple method for determining the validity or invalidity of syllogisms.
Consider a circle as the visual representation of a set, or a class of things.
Two intersecting circles represent the relations of two sets; three intersecting
circles can thus represent the three categories (or terms) of the categorical syl-
logism. Venn had studied the work of George Boole, from which he advanced.
With the Boolean interpretation of propositions, all of the 256 possible syllogis-
tic forms—combinations of syllogistic moods and figures—can be represented
on a simple, three-circle Venn diagram. It is a device as powerful as it is
elegant.
Venn had some influence also on the development of statistics, and the
theory of probability. He rejected the long-standing notion that the probability
of an event is to be understood as the degree of “rational belief” in its occur-
rence. He insisted instead upon the objectivity of what came to be called the
frequency theory of probability, thus making the determination of the probabili-
ty of an event an empirical matter. He remained active as teacher, inventor,
and historian of his College until his death in 1923, but his great book was
Symbolic Logic (1881), in which the analysis of categorical propositions was
refined, and the force of categorical arguments made visually vivid. His drive
for clarity and simplicity establishes John Venn as a great and permanent
friend of the student of logic. 
Biography
EXERCISES
A. Write out each of the following syllogistic forms, using S and P as the subject
and predicate terms of the conclusion, and M as the middle term. (Refer to the
chart of the four syllogistic figures, if necessary, at the beginning of Section 5.)
Then test the validity of each syllogistic form using a Venn diagram.
228

Categorical Syllogisms
SOLUTION
We are told that this syllogism is in the first figure, and therefore the middle
term, M, is the subject term of the major premise and the predicate term of the
minor premise. The conclusion of the syllogism is an E proposition and there-
fore reads: No S is P. The first (major) premise (which contains the predicate
term of the conclusion) is an A proposition, and therefore reads: All M is P. The
second (minor) premise (which contains the subject term of the conclusion) is
an E proposition and therefore reads: No S is M. This syllogism therefore reads
as follows:
All M is P.
No S is M.
Therefore no S is P.
Tested by means of a Venn diagram, as in Figure 10, this syllogism is shown to
be invalid.
M
P
S
2. EIO–2
3. OAO–3
4. AOO–4
*5. EIO–4
6. OAO–2
7. AOO–1
8. EAE–3
9. EIO–3
*10. IAI–4
11. AOO–3
12. EAE–1
13. IAI–1
14. OAO–4
*15. EIO–1
B. Put each of the following syllogisms into standard form, name its mood and
figure, and test its validity using a Venn diagram:
*1. Some reformers are fanatics, so some idealists are fanatics, because all
reformers are idealists.
2. Some philosophers are mathematicians; hence some scientists are
philosophers, because all scientists are mathematicians.
3. Some mammals are not horses, for no horses are centaurs, and all
centaurs are mammals.
4. Some neurotics are not parasites, but all criminals are parasites; it fol-
lows that some neurotics are not criminals.
1. AEE–1
EXAMPLE
Figure 10
229

Categorical Syllogisms
*5. All underwater craft are submarines; therefore no submarines are pleas-
ure vessels, because no pleasure vessels are underwater craft.
6. No criminals were pioneers, for all criminals are unsavory persons, and
no pioneers were unsavory persons.
7. No musicians are astronauts; all musicians are baseball fans; conse-
quently, no astronauts are baseball fans.
8. Some Christians are not Methodists, for some Christians are not Protes-
tants, and some Protestants are not Methodists.
9. No people whose primary interest is in winning elections are true liber-
als, and all active politicians are people whose primary interest is in win-
ning elections, which entails that no true liberals are active politicians.
*10. No weaklings are labor leaders, because no weaklings are true liberals,
and all labor leaders are true liberals.
4
Syllogistic Rules and Syllogistic Fallacies
A syllogism may fail to establish its conclusion in many different ways. To help
avoid common errors we set forth rules—six of them—to guide the reasoner;
any given standard-form syllogism can be evaluated by observing whether any
one of these rules has been violated. Mastering the rules by which syllogisms
may be evaluated also enriches our understanding of the syllogism itself; it
helps us to see how syllogisms work and to see why they fail to work if the rules
are broken.
A violation of any one of these rules is a mistake, and it renders the syllo-
gism invalid. Because it is a mistake of that special kind, we call it a fallacy; and
because it is a mistake in the form of the argument, we call it a formal fallacy (to
be contrasted with informal fallacies). In reasoning with syllogisms, one must
scrupulously avoid the fallacies that violations of the rules invariably yield.
Each of these formal fallacies has a traditional name, explained below.
Rule 1. Avoid four terms.
A valid standard-form categorical syllogism must contain exactly three terms, each of
which is used in the same sense throughout the argument.
In every categorical syllogism, the conclusion asserts a relationship between
two terms, the subject (minor term) and the predicate (major term). Such a
conclusion can be justified only if the premises assert the relationship of each
of those two terms to the same third term (middle term). If the premises fail to
do this consistently, the needed connection of the two terms in the conclusion
cannot be established, and the argument fails. So every valid categorical syllo-
gism must involve three terms—no more and no less. If more than three terms
230

Categorical Syllogisms
are involved, the syllogism is invalid. The fallacy thus committed is called the
fallacy of four terms.
The mistake that commonly underlies this fallacy is equivocation: using one
word or phrase with two different meanings. Most often it is the middle term
whose meaning is thus shifted, in one direction to connect it with the minor term,
in a different direction to connect it with the major term. In doing this the two
terms of the conclusion are connected with two different terms (rather than with
the same middle term), and so the relationship asserted by the conclusion is not es-
tablished. Because it is the middle term that is most often manipulated, this fallacy
is sometimes called “the fallacy of the ambiguous middle.” However, this name is
not generally applicable, because one (or more) of the other terms may have its
meaning shifted as well. Ambiguities may result in as many as five or six different
terms being involved, but the mistake retains its traditional name: the fallacy of
four terms.
When the expression categorical syllogism was defined at the beginning of
this chapter, we noted that by its nature every syllogism must have three and
only three terms. (The term syllogism is sometimes defined more broadly than it
has been in this text. The informal fallacy of equivocation may arise in many
different argumentative contexts, of course.) So this rule (“Avoid four terms”)
may be regarded as a reminder to make sure that the argument being ap-
praised really is a categorical syllogism.
Rule 2. Distribute the middle term in at least one premise.
A term is “distributed” in a proposition when the proposition refers to all members of
the class designated by that term. If the middle term is not distributed in at least one
premise, the connection required by the conclusion cannot be made.
Historian Barbara Tuchman observed that many early critics of anarchism
relied on the following “unconscious syllogism”:
All Russians were revolutionists.
All anarchists were revolutionists.
Therefore, all anarchists were Russians.1
This syllogism is plainly invalid. Its mistake is that it asserts a connection be-
tween anarchists and Russians by relying on the links between each of those
classes and the class of revolutionists—but revolutionists is an undistributed
term in both of the premises. The first premise does not refer to all revolutionists,
and neither does the second. “Revolutionists” is the middle term in this argu-
ment, and if the middle term is not distributed in at least one premise of a syllo-
gism, that syllogism cannot be valid. The fallacy this syllogism commits is called
the fallacy of the undistributed middle.
What underlies this rule is the need to link the minor and the major terms. If
they are to be linked by the middle term, either the subject or the predicate of the
Fallacy of the
undistributed middle
The formal fallacy that is
committed when the
middle term of a
syllogism is not
distributed in at least
one premise.
Fallacy of four terms
The formal fallacy that is
committed when a
syllogism is constructed
with more than three
terms.
231

Categorical Syllogisms
conclusion must be related to the whole of the class designated by the middle
term. If that is not so, it is possible that each of the terms in the conclusion may be
connected to a different part of the middle term, and not necessarily connected
with each other.
This is precisely what happens in the syllogism given in the preceding exam-
ple. The Russians are included in a part of the class of revolutionists (by the first
premise), and the anarchists are included in a part of the class of revolutionists
(by the second premise)—but different parts of this class (the middle term of the
syllogism) may be involved, and so the middle term does not successfully link
the minor and major terms of the syllogism. In a valid syllogism, the middle term
must be distributed in at least one premise.
Rule 3. Any term distributed in the conclusion must be distributed in the premises.
To refer to all members of a class is to say more about that class than is said when
only some of its members are referred to. Therefore, when the conclusion of a syllo-
gism distributes a term that was undistributed in the premises, it says more about
that term than the premises did. But a valid argument is one whose premises logical-
ly entail its conclusion, and for that to be true the conclusion must not assert any
more than is asserted in the premises. A term that is distributed in the conclusion
but is not distributed in the premises is therefore a sure mark that the conclusion has
gone beyond its premises and has reached too far. This is called the fallacy of illicit
process.
The conclusion may overreach with respect to either the minor term (its sub-
ject) or the major term (its predicate). So there are two different forms of illicit
process, and different names have been given to the two formal fallacies 
involved. They are
Illicit process of the major term (an illicit major).
Illicit process of the minor term (an illicit minor).
To illustrate an illicit process of the major term, consider this syllogism:
All dogs are mammals.
No cats are dogs.
Therefore no cats are mammals.
The reasoning is obviously bad, but where is the mistake? The mistake is in the
conclusion’s assertion about all mammals, saying that all of them fall outside the
class of cats. Bear in mind that an A proposition distributes its subject term but
does not distribute its predicate term. Hence the premises make no assertion
about all mammals—so the conclusion illicitly goes beyond what the premises
assert. Because “mammals” is the major term in this syllogism, the fallacy here is
that of an illicit major.
To illustrate the illicit process of the minor term, consider this syllogism:
All traditionally religious people are fundamentalists.
All traditionally religious people are opponents of abortion.
Therefore all opponents of abortion are fundamentalists.
Fallacy of illicit
process
The formal fallacy that is
committed when a term
that is distributed in the
conclusion is not
distributed in the
corresponding premise.
232

Categorical Syllogisms
Again we sense quickly that something is wrong with this argument, and what is
wrong is this: The conclusion makes an assertion about all opponents of abortion,
but the premises make no such assertion; they say nothing about all abortion op-
ponents. So the conclusion here goes illicitly beyond what the premises warrant.
In this case “opponents of abortion” is the minor term, so the fallacy is that of an
illicit minor.
Rule 4. Avoid two negative premises.
Any negative proposition (E or O) denies class inclusion; it asserts that some or all of
one class is excluded from the whole of the other class. Two premises asserting
such exclusion cannot yield the linkage that the conclusion asserts, and therefore
cannot yield a valid argument. The mistake is named the fallacy of exclusive
premises.
Understanding the mistake identified here requires some reflection. Suppose we
label the minor, major, and middle terms of the syllogism S, P, and M, respective-
ly. What can two negative premises tell us about the relations of these three
terms? They can tell us that S (the subject of the conclusion) is wholly or partial-
ly excluded from all or part of M (the middle term), and that P (the predicate of
the conclusion) is wholly or partially excluded from all or part of M. However,
any one of these relations may very well be established no matter how S and P
are related. The negative premises cannot tell us that S and P are related by inclu-
sion or by exclusion, partial or complete. Two negative premises (where M is a
term in each) simply cannot justify the assertion of any relationship whatever be-
tween S and P. Therefore, if both premises of a syllogism are negative, the argu-
ment must be invalid.
Rule 5. If either premise is negative, the conclusion must be negative.
If the conclusion is affirmative—that is, if it asserts that one of the two classes, S or P,
is wholly or partly contained in the other—it can only be inferred from premises that as-
sert the existence of a third class that contains the first and is itself contained in the
second. However, class inclusion can be stated only by affirmative propositions.
Therefore, an affirmative conclusion can follow validly only from two affirmative premis-
es. The mistake here is called the fallacy of drawing an affirmative conclusion
from a negative premise.
If an affirmative conclusion requires two affirmative premises, as has just been
shown, we can know with certainty that if either of the premises is negative, the
conclusion must also be negative, or the argument is not valid.
Unlike some of the fallacies identified here, this fallacy is not common, be-
cause any argument that draws an affirmative conclusion from negative premis-
es will be instantly recognized as highly implausible. Even an illustration of the
mistake will appear strained:
No poets are accountants.
Some artists are poets.
Therefore some artists are accountants.
Fallacy of exclusive
premises
The formal fallacy that is
committed when both
premises in a syllogism
are negative
propositions (E or O).
233

Categorical Syllogisms
Immediately it will be seen that the exclusion of poets and accountants, asserted
by the first premise of this syllogism, cannot justify any valid inference regarding
the inclusion of artists and accountants.
Rule 6. From two universal premises no particular conclusion may be drawn.
In the Boolean interpretation of categorical propositions, universal propositions 
(A and E) have no existential import, but particular propositions (I and O) do have
such import. Wherever the Boolean interpretation is supposed, as in this text, a rule is
needed that precludes passage from premises that have no existential import to a
conclusion that does have such import.
This final rule is not needed in the traditional or Aristotelian account of the cat-
egorical syllogism, because that traditional account paid no attention to the
problem of existential import. However, when existential import is carefully
considered, it will be clear that if the premises of an argument do not assert the
existence of anything at all, the conclusion will be unwarranted when, from it,
the existence of some thing may be inferred. The mistake is called the
existential fallacy.
Here is an example of a syllogism that commits this fallacy:
All household pets are domestic animals.
No unicorns are domestic animals.
Therefore some unicorns are not household pets.
If the conclusion of this argument were the universal proposition, “No uni-
corns are household pets,” the syllogism would be perfectly valid for all. And
because, under the traditional interpretation, existential import may be in-
ferred from universal as well as from particular propositions, it would not be
problematic (in that traditional view) to say that the conclusion in the example
given here is simply a “weaker” version of the conclusion we all agree is
validly drawn.
In our Boolean view, however, the conclusion of the example (“Some uni-
corns are not household pets”), because it is a particular proposition, is not just
“weaker,” it is very different. It is an O proposition, a particular proposition, and
thus has an existential import that the E proposition (“No unicorns are house-
hold pets”) cannot have. Reasoning that is acceptable under the traditional view
is therefore unacceptable under the Boolean view because, from the Boolean per-
spective, that reasoning commits the existential fallacy—a mistake that cannot be
made under the traditional interpretation.
Another interesting consequence of the difference between the traditional
and the Boolean interpretation of categorical propositions is this: In the tradition-
al view there is a need for a rule that states the converse of Rule 5 (“If either
premise is negative, the conclusion must be negative”). The converse states sim-
Existential fallacy
The formal fallacy that is
committed when, in a
standard-form
categorical syllogism, a
particular conclusion is
inferred from two
universal premises.
234

Categorical Syllogisms
Syllogistic Rules and Fallacies
o v e r v i e w
Rule
Associated Fallacy
1. Avoid four terms.
Four terms
2. Distribute the middle term in 
at least one premise.
Undistributed middle
3. Any term distributed in the
conclusion must be distributed in 
the premises.
Illicit process of the major term (illicit
major); illicit process of the minor term
(illicit minor)
4. Avoid two negative premises.
Exclusive premises
5. If either premise is negative, the
conclusion must be negative.
Drawing an affirmative conclusion from
a negative premise
6. No particular conclusion may be
drawn from two universal
premises.
Existential fallacy
ply that “If the conclusion of a valid syllogism is negative, at least one premise
must be negative.” That is indisputable, because if the conclusion is negative, it
denies inclusion. But affirmative premises assert inclusion; therefore affirmative
premises cannot entail a negative conclusion. This corollary is unnecessary in the
Boolean interpretation because the rule precluding the existential fallacy (Rule 6)
will, in the presence of the other rules, suffice to invalidate any syllogism with af-
firmative premises and a negative conclusion.
The six rules given here are intended to apply only to standard-form categor-
ical syllogisms. In this realm they provide an adequate test for the validity of any
argument. If a standard-form categorical syllogism violates any one of these
rules, it is invalid; if it conforms to all of these rules, it is valid.
235

Categorical Syllogisms
Flowchart for Applying the Six Syllogistic Rules
The following chart captures the process for working through the six rules of
validity for categorical syllogisms:
NO
NO
NO
NO
YES
YES
NO
NO
YES
YES
YES
YES
Does the 
argument have exactly 
three terms used consistently 
throughout?
Is the middle
term distributed
at least once?
Is the major term
distributed in the
conclusion?
Is the major term
distributed in the
major premise?
Is the minor term
distributed in the 
conclusion?
Is the minor term
distributed in the 
minor premise?
Identify the 
premises and the 
conclusion.
                Fallacy of Four Terms. 
          STOP. No other fallacy 
     can be committed. The 
argument is INVALID.
Fallacy of
Illicit Minor.
STOP. The argument
is INVALID.
Fallacy of
Illicit Major.
STOP. The argument
is INVALID.
Fallacy of
Undistributed Middle.
STOP. The argument
is INVALID.
236

Categorical Syllogisms
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
YES
YES
YES
Are there two
negative premises?
Is there an
affirmative conclusion?
Is there a
negative premise?
Is there a
particular conclusion?
Is there a
particular premise?
No formal fallacies
have been committed.
The argument is
VALID.
Fallacy of
Exclusive Premises.
STOP. The argument
is INVALID.
 Fallacy of Affirmative
Conclusion from a 
Negative Premise.
STOP. The argument
is INVALID.
Existential Fallacy.
STOP. The argument
is INVALID.
EXERCISES
A. Identify the rule that is broken by invalid syllogisms of the following forms,
and name the fallacy that each commits:
EXAMPLE
1.
AAA–2
Adapted from Daniel E. Flage, Essentials of Logic, 2e (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall, 1995)
237

Categorical Syllogisms
SOLUTION
Any syllogism in the second figure has the middle term as predicate of both
the major and the minor premise. Thus any syllogism consisting of three A
propositions, in the second figure, must read: All P is M; all S is M; therefore
all S is P. Since M is not distributed in either of the premises in that form, it
cannot validly be inferred from such premises that all S is P. Thus every syllo-
gism of the form AAA–2 violates the rule that the middle term must be dis-
tributed in at least one premise, thereby committing the fallacy of the
undistributed middle.
B. Identify the rule that is broken by each invalid syllogism you can find in the
following exercises, and name the fallacy that is committed:
EXAMPLE
2. EAA–1
3. IAO–3
4. OEO–4
*5. AAA–3
6. IAI–2
7. OAA–3
8. EAO–4
9. OAI–3
*10. IEO–1
11. EAO–3
12. AII–2
13. EEE–1
14. OAO–2
*15. IAA–3
SOLUTION
In this syllogism, “textbooks” is the major term (the predicate of the conclu-
sion) and “reference books” is the minor term (the subject of the conclusion).
“Books intended for careful study” is therefore the middle term, and it ap-
pears as the predicate of both premises. In neither of the premises is this mid-
dle term distributed, so the syllogism violates the rule that the middle term
must be distributed in at least one premise, thereby committing the fallacy of
the undistributed middle.
1. All textbooks are books intended for careful study.
Some reference books are books intended for careful study.
Therefore some reference books are textbooks.
2. All criminal actions are wicked deeds.
All prosecutions for murder are criminal actions.
Therefore all prosecutions for murder are wicked deeds.
3. No tragic actors are idiots.
Some comedians are not idiots.
Therefore some comedians are not tragic actors.
238

Categorical Syllogisms
4. Some parrots are not pests.
All parrots are pets.
Therefore no pets are pests.
*5. All perpetual motion devices are 100 percent efficient machines.
All 100 percent efficient machines are machines with frictionless bearings.
Therefore some machines with frictionless bearings are perpetual
motion devices.
6. Some good actors are not powerful athletes.
All professional wrestlers are powerful athletes.
Therefore all professional wrestlers are good actors.
7. Some diamonds are precious stones.
Some carbon compounds are not diamonds.
Therefore some carbon compounds are not precious stones.
8. Some diamonds are not precious stones.
Some carbon compounds are diamonds.
Therefore some carbon compounds are not precious stones.
9. All people who are most hungry are people who eat most.
All people who eat least are people who are most hungry.
Therefore all people who eat least are people who eat most.
*10. Some spaniels are not good hunters.
All spaniels are gentle dogs.
Therefore no gentle dogs are good hunters.
C. Identify the rule that is broken by any of the following syllogisms that are in-
valid, and name the fallacy that is committed:
EXAMPLE
1. All chocolate éclairs are fattening foods, because all chocolate éclairs are
rich desserts, and some fattening foods are not rich desserts.
SOLUTION
In this syllogism the conclusion is affirmative (“all chocolate éclairs are fatten-
ing foods”), while one of the premises is negative (“some fattening foods are
not rich desserts”). The syllogism therefore is invalid, violating the rule that if
either premise is negative the conclusion must also be negative, thereby com-
mitting the fallacy of drawing an affirmative conclusion from a negative
premise.
239

Categorical Syllogisms
5
Exposition of the Fifteen Valid Forms 
of the Categorical Syllogism
The mood of a syllogism is its character as determined by the forms (A, E, I, or O)
of the three propositions it contains. There are sixty-four possible moods of the
categorical syllogism—that is, sixty-four possible sets of three propositions:
AAA, AAI, AAE, and so on, to . . . EOO, OOO.
The figure of a syllogism is its logical shape, as determined by the position of
the middle term in its premises. So there are four possible figures, which can be
most clearly grasped if one has in mind a chart, or an iconic representation, of the
four possibilities, as exhibited in the Overview table:
2. All inventors are people who see new patterns in familiar things, so all
inventors are eccentrics, because all eccentrics are people who see new
patterns in familiar things.
3. Some snakes are not dangerous animals, but all snakes are reptiles,
therefore some dangerous animals are not reptiles.
4. Some foods that contain iron are toxic substances, for all fish containing
mercury are foods that contain iron, and all fish containing mercury are
toxic substances.
*5. All opponents of basic economic and political changes are outspoken
critics of the liberal leaders of Congress, and all right-wing extremists
are opponents of basic economic and political changes. It follows that all
outspoken critics of the liberal leaders of Congress are right-wing 
extremists.
6. No writers of lewd and sensational articles are honest and decent citi-
zens, but some journalists are not writers of lewd and sensational arti-
cles; consequently, some journalists are honest and decent citizens.
7. All supporters of popular government are democrats, so all supporters
of popular government are opponents of the Republican Party, inas-
much as all Democrats are opponents of the Republican Party.
8. No coal-tar derivatives are nourishing foods, because all artificial dyes
are coal-tar derivatives, and no artificial dyes are nourishing foods.
9. No coal-tar derivatives are nourishing foods, because no coal-tar deriva-
tives are natural grain products, and all natural grain products are nour-
ishing foods.
*10. All people who live in London are people who drink tea, and all people
who drink tea are people who like it. We may conclude, then, that all
people who live in London are people who like it.
240

Categorical Syllogisms
It will be seen that:
•
In the first figure the middle term is the subject of the major premise and the
predicate of the minor premise;
•
In the second figure the middle term is the predicate of both premises;
•
In the third figure the middle term is the subject of both premises;
•
In the fourth figure the middle term is the predicate of the major premise
and the subject of the minor premise.
Each of the sixty-four moods can appear in each of the four figures. The mood
and figure of a given syllogism, taken together, uniquely determine the logical
form of that syllogism. Therefore there are (as noted earlier) exactly 256 (that is,
64 × 4) possible forms of the standard-form categorical syllogism.
The vast majority of these forms are not valid. We can eliminate every form
that violates one or more of the syllogistic rules set forth in the preceding section.
The forms that remain after this elimination are the only valid forms of the cate-
gorical syllogism. Of the 256 possible forms, there are exactly fifteen forms that
cannot be eliminated and thus are valid. It should be borne in mind that we adopt
here the Boolean interpretation of categorical propositions, according to which
universal propositions (A and E propositions) do not have existential import. The
classical interpretation of categorical propositions, according to which all the
classes to which propositions refer do have members, makes acceptable some in-
ferences that are found here to be invalid. Under that older interpretation, for ex-
ample, it is plausible to infer the subaltern from its corresponding superaltern—to
The Four Figures
o v e r v i e w
First 
Figure
Second 
Figure
Third 
Figure
Fourth 
Figure
Schematic
Representation 
Description
The middle 
term is the
subject of the
major premise
and the
predicate of the
minor premise.
The middle
term is the
predicate of
both the 
major and
minor
premises.
The middle
term is the
subject of 
both the 
major and
minor
premises.
The middle
term is the
predicate of
the major
premise and
the subject of
the minor
premise.
M
S
∴S
P
P
M
–
–
–
P
S
M
M
∴S
P
–
–
–
P
S
M
M
∴S
P
–
–
–
M
S
P
M
∴S
P
–
–
–
241

infer an I proposition from its corresponding A proposition, and an O proposition
from its corresponding E proposition. This makes plausible the claim that there
are other valid syllogisms (so-called “weakened syllogisms”) that are not consid-
ered valid here.
To advance the mastery of syllogistics, classical logicians gave a unique
name to every valid syllogism, each characterized completely by mood and fig-
ure. Understanding this small set of valid forms, and knowing the name of
each, is very useful when putting syllogistic reasoning to work. Each name,
carefully devised, contained three vowels representing (in standard-form
order: major premise, minor premise, conclusion) the mood of the syllogism
named. Where there are valid syllogisms of a given mood but in different fig-
ures, a unique name was assigned to each. Thus, for example, a syllogism of
the mood EAE in the first figure was named Celarent, whereas a syllogism of
the mood EAE in the second figure, also valid, was named Cesare. The princi-
ples that governed the construction of those traditional names, the selection
and placement of consonants as well as vowels, were quite sophisticated. Some
of these conventions relate to the place of the weakened syllogisms noted just
above and are therefore not acceptable in the Boolean interpretation we adopt.
Some other conventions remain acceptable. For example, the letter s that fol-
lows the vowel e indicates that when that E proposition is converted simpliciter,
or simply (as all E propositions will convert), then that syllogism reduces to, or
is transformed into, another syllogism of the same mood in the first figure,
which is viewed as the most basic figure. To illustrate, Festino, in the second fig-
ure, reduces, when its major premise is converted simply, to Ferio; and Cesare,
in the second figure, reduces to Celarent, and so on. The possibility of these and
other reductions explains why the names of groups of syllogisms begin with
the same consonant. The intricate details of the classical naming system need
not be fully recounted here.
These names had (and still have) a very practical purpose: If one knows that
only certain combinations of mood and figure are valid, and can recognize by
name those valid arguments, the merit of any syllogism in a given figure, or of a
given mood, can be determined almost immediately. For example, the mood
AOO is valid only in the second figure. That unique form (AOO–2) is known as
Baroko. Here is an example of Baroko:
All good mathematicians have creative intellects.
Some scholars do not have creative intellects.
Therefore some scholars are not good mathematicians.
With practice one comes to recognize the cadence of the different valid forms.
One who is familiar with Baroko and able to discern it readily may be confident
that a syllogism of this mood presented in any other figure may be rejected as
invalid.
Categorical Syllogisms
242

Categorical Syllogisms
The standard form of the categorical syllogism is the key to the system. A neat
and efficient method of identifying the few valid syllogisms from the many possi-
ble syllogisms is at hand, but it depends on the assumption that the propositions
of the syllogism in question are in (or can be put into) standard order—major
premise, minor premise, then conclusion. The unique identification of each valid
syllogism relies on the specification of its mood, and its mood is determined by
the letters characterizing its three constituent propositions in that standard order.
If the premises of a valid syllogism were to be set forth in a different order, then
that syllogism would remain valid, of course; the Venn diagram technique can
prove this. However, much would be lost. Our ability to identify syllogisms
uniquely, and with that identification our ability to comprehend the forms of
those syllogisms fully and to test their validity crisply, all rely on their being in
standard form.*
Classical logicians studied these forms closely, and they became fully famil-
iar with their structure and their logical “feel.” This elegant system, finely honed,
enabled reasoners confronting syllogisms in speech or in texts to recognize im-
mediately those that were valid, and to detect with confidence those that were
not. For centuries it was common practice to defend the solidity of reasoning in
progress by giving the names of the forms of the valid syllogisms being relied on.
The ability to provide these identifications even in the midst of heated oral dis-
putes was considered a mark of learning and acumen, and it gave evidence that
the chain of deductive reasoning being relied on was indeed unbroken. Once the
theory of the syllogism has been fully mastered, this practical skill can be devel-
oped with profit and pleasure.
Syllogistic reasoning was so very widely employed, and so highly regarded
as the most essential tool of scholarly argument, that the logical treatises of its
original and greatest master, Aristotle, were venerated for more than a thousand
years. His analytical account of the syllogism still carries the simple name that
conveys respect and awe: the Organon, the Instrument.
Valid syllogisms are powerful weapons in controversy, but the effectiveness of
those weapons depends, of course, on the truth of the premises. Agreat theologian,
defiant in battling scholars who resisted his reform of the catholic Church, wrote:
“They may attack me with an army of six hundred syllogisms. . .”2
As students of this remarkable logical system, our proficiency in syllogistics
may be only moderate—but we will nevertheless find it useful to have before us
a synoptic account of all the valid syllogisms. There are fifteen valid syllogisms
under the Boolean interpretation. In the older tradition, in which reasoning from
universal premises to particular conclusions was believed to be correct, the num-
ber of valid syllogisms (each uniquely named) was of course more than fifteen.
To illustrate, if an I proposition may be inferred from its corresponding A propo-
sition (as we think mistaken), the valid syllogism known as Barbara (AAA–1) will
*The burdensome consequences of ignoring standard form have been eloquently underscored by Keith
Burgess-Jackson in his essay, “Why Standard Form Matters,” October 2003.
243

EXERCISES
At the conclusion of Section 3, in exercise group B, ten syllogisms were to be
tested using Venn diagrams. Of these ten syllogisms, numbers 1, 4, 6, 9, and 10
are valid. What is the name of each of these five valid syllogisms?
EXAMPLE
Number 1 is IAI–3 (Disamis).
Categorical Syllogisms
The Fifteen Valid Forms of the Standard-Form
Categorical Syllogism
In the first figure (in which the middle term is the subject of the major premise
and the predicate of the minor premise):
o v e r v i e w
9. AII–3
Datisi
10. IAI–3
Disamis
11. EIO–3
Ferison
12. OAO–3
Bokardo
5. AEE–2
Camestres
6. EAE–2
Cesare
7. AOO–2
Baroko
8. EIO–2
Festino
13. AEE–4
Camenes
14. IAI–4
Dimaris
15. EIO–4
Fresison
1. AAA–1
Barbara
2. EAE–1
Celarent
3. AII–1
Darii
4. EIO–1
Ferio
In the second figure (in which the middle term is the predicate of both 
premises):
In the third figure (in which the middle term is the subject of both premises):
In the fourth figure (in which the middle term is the predicate of the major
premise and the subject of the minor premise):
have a putatively valid “weakened” sister, Barbari (AAI–1); and if an O proposi-
tion may be inferred from its corresponding E proposition (as we think mistak-
en), the valid syllogism known as Camestres (AEE–2) will have a putatively valid
“weakened” brother, Camestrop (AEO–2).
These fifteen valid syllogisms may be divided by figure into four groups:
244

Categorical Syllogisms
Appendix: Deduction of the Fifteen Valid Forms
of the Categorical Syllogism
In Section 5 the fifteen valid forms of the categorical syllogism were identified
and precisely characterized. The unique name of each syllogism is also given
there—a name assigned in view of its unique combination of mood and figure.
The summary account of these fifteen syllogisms appears in the Overview imme-
diately preceding.
It is possible to prove that these, and only these, are the valid forms of the cat-
egorical syllogism. This proof—the deduction of the valid forms of the categorical syl-
logism—is presented as an appendix, rather than in the body of the chapter,
because mastering it is not essential for the student of logic. However, under-
standing it can give one a deeper appreciation of the system of syllogistics. For
those who derive satisfaction from the intricacies of analytical syllogistics, think-
ing through this deduction will be a pleasing, if somewhat arduous challenge.
We emphasize that if the chief aims of study are to recognize, understand,
and apply the valid forms of the syllogism, as exhibited in Section 5, this appen-
dix may be bypassed.
The deduction of the fifteen valid syllogisms is not easy to follow. Those who
pursue it must keep two things very clearly in mind: (1) The rules of the syllogism,
six basic rules set forth in Section 4, are the essential tools of the deduction; and
(2) the four figures of the syllogism, as depicted in the Overview in Section 5
(p. 235) are referred to repeatedly as the rules are invoked.
We have seen that there are 256 possible forms of the syllogism, sixty-four
moods (or combinations of the four categorical propositions) in each of the four
figures. The deduction of the fifteen valid syllogisms proceeds by eliminating the
syllogisms that violate one of the basic rules and that thus cannot be valid.
The conclusion of every syllogism is a categorical proposition, either A, or E,
or I, or O. We begin by dividing all the possible syllogistic forms into four
groups, each group having a conclusion with a different form (A, E, I, or O).
Every syllogism must of course fall into one of these four groups. Taking each of
the four groups in turn, we ask what characteristics a valid syllogism with such a
conclusion must possess. That is, we ask what forms are excluded by one or more
of the syllogistic rules if the conclusion is an A proposition, and if the conclusion
is an E proposition, and so on.
After excluding all those invalid syllogisms, only the valid syllogisms re-
main. To assist in visualization, we note in the margin as we proceed the moods
and figures, and the names, of the fifteen valid categorical syllogisms.
Case 1. If the conclusion of the syllogism is an A proposition
In this case, neither premise can be an E or an O proposition, because if either
premise is negative, the conclusion must be negative (Rule 5). Therefore the two
premises must be I or A propositions. The minor premise cannot be an I propo-
sition because the minor term (the subject of the conclusion, which is an A) is
distributed in the conclusion, and therefore if the minor premise were an I
245

Categorical Syllogisms
proposition, a term would be distributed in the conclusion that is not distrib-
uted in the premises, violating Rule 3. The two premises, major and minor, can-
not be I and A, because if they were, the middle term of the syllogism would not
be distributed in either premise, violating Rule 2. So the two premises (if the
conclusion is an A) must both be A as well, which means that the only possible
valid mood is AAA. But in the second figure AAA again results in the middle
term being distributed in neither premise; and in both the third figure and the
fourth figure AAA results in a term being distributed in the conclusion that is
not distributed in the premise in which it appears. Therefore, if the conclusion
of the syllogism is an A proposition, the only valid form it can take is AAA in
the first figure. This valid form, AAA–1, is the syllogism traditionally given the
name Barbara.
Summary of Case 1: If the syllogism has an A conclusion, there is only one
possibly valid form: AAA–1—Barbara.
Case 2. If the conclusion of the syllogism is an E proposition
Both the subject and the predicate of an E proposition are distributed, and
therefore all three terms in the premises of a syllogism having such a conclu-
sion must be distributed, and this is possible only if one of the premises is also
an E. Both premises cannot be E propositions, because two negative premises
are never allowed (Rule 4), and the other premise cannot be an O proposition
because then both premises would also be negative. Nor can the other premise
be an I proposition, for if it were, a term distributed in the conclusion would
then not be distributed in the premises, violating Rule 3. So the other premise
must be an A, and the two premises must be either AE or EA. The only possi-
ble moods (if the conclusion of the syllogism is an E proposition) are therefore
AEE and EAE.
If the mood is AEE, it cannot be either in the first figure or in the third figure,
because in either of those cases a term distributed in the conclusion would then
not be distributed in the premises. Therefore, the mood AEE is possibly valid
only in the second figure, AEE–2 (traditionally called Camestres), or in the fourth
figure, AEE–4 (traditionally called Camenes). If the mood is EAE, it cannot be in
the third figure or in the fourth figure, because again that would mean that a
term distributed in the conclusion would not be distributed in the premises,
which leaves as valid only the first figure, EAE–1 (traditionally called Celarent),
and the second figure, EAE–2 (traditionally called Cesare.)
Summary of Case 2: If the syllogism has an E conclusion, there are only four
possibly valid forms: AEE–2, AEE–4, EAE–1, and EAE–2—Camestres, Camenes,
Celarent, and Cesare, respectively.
Case 3. If the conclusion is an I proposition
In this case, neither premise can be an E or an O, because if either premise is
negative, the conclusion must be negative (Rule 5). The two premises cannot
both be A, because a syllogism with a particular conclusion cannot have two
universal premises (Rule 6). Neither can both premises be I, because the middle
Barbara
The traditional name for
the valid syllogism with
the mood and figure
AAA–1
Camestres
The traditional name for
the valid syllogism with
the mood and figure
AEE–2
Camenes
The traditional name for
the valid syllogism with
the mood and figure
AEE–4
Cesare
The traditional name for
the valid syllogism with
the mood and figure
EAE–2
Celarent
The traditional name for
the valid syllogism with
the mood and figure
EAE–1
246

Categorical Syllogisms
term must be distributed in at least one premise (Rule 2). So the premises must
be either AI or IA, and therefore the only possible moods with an I conclusion
are AII and IAI.
AII is not possibly valid in the second figure or in the fourth figure because
the middle term must be distributed in at least one premise. The only valid forms
remaining for the mood AII, therefore, are AII–1 (traditionally called Darii) and
AII–3 (traditionally called Datisi). If the mood is IAI, it cannot be IAI–1 or IAI–2,
because they also would violate the rule that requires the middle term to be dis-
tributed in at least one premise. This leaves as valid only IAI–3 (traditionally
called Disamis), and IAI–4 (traditionally called Dimaris).
Summary of Case 3: If the syllogism has an I conclusion, there are only four
possibly valid forms: AII–1, AII–3, IAI–3, and IAI–4—Darii, Datisi, Disamis, and
Dimaris, respectively.
Case 4. If the conclusion is an O proposition
In this case, the major premise cannot be an I proposition, because any term dis-
tributed in the conclusion must be distributed in the premises. So the major
premise must be either an A or an E or an O proposition.
Suppose the major premise is an A. In that case, the minor premise cannot be
either an A or an E, because two universal premises are not permitted when the
conclusion (an O) is particular. Neither can the minor premise then be an I, be-
cause if it were, either the middle term would not be distributed at all (a viola-
tion of Rule 2), or a term distributed in the conclusion would not be distributed
in the premises. So, if the major premise is an A, the minor premise has to be an
O, yielding the mood AOO. In the fourth figure, AOO cannot possibly be valid,
because in that case the middle term would not be distributed, and in the first
figure and the third figure AOO cannot possibly be valid either, because that
would result in terms being distributed in the conclusion that were not distrib-
uted in the premises. For the mood AOO, the only possibly valid form remain-
ing, if the major premise is an A, is therefore in the second figure, AOO–2
(traditionally called Baroko).
Now suppose (if the conclusion is an O) that the major premise is an E. In that
case, the minor premise cannot be either an E or an O, because two negative
premises are not permitted. Nor can the minor premise be an A, because two uni-
versal premises are precluded if the conclusion is particular (Rule 6). This leaves
only the mood EIO—and this mood is valid in all four figures, traditionally
known as Ferio (EIO–1), Festino (EIO–2), Ferison (EIO–3), and Fresison (EIO–4).
Finally, suppose (if the conclusion is an O) that the major premise is also an
O proposition. Then, again, the minor premise cannot be an E or an O, because
two negative premises are forbidden. The minor premise cannot be an I, be-
cause then the middle term would not be distributed, or a term that is distrib-
uted in the conclusion would not be distributed in the premises. Therefore, if
the major premise is an O, the minor premise must be an A, and the mood must
be OAO. But OAO–1 is eliminated, because in that case the middle term would
not be distributed. OAO–2 and OAO–4 are also eliminated, because in both a
Datisi
The traditional name for
the valid syllogism with
the mood and figure
AII–3
Darii
The traditional name for
the valid syllogism with
the mood and figure
AII–1
Disamis
The traditional name for
the valid syllogism with
the mood and figure
IAI–3
Dimaris
The traditional name for
the valid syllogism with
the mood and figure
IAI–4
Ferio
The traditional name for
the valid syllogism with
the mood and figure
EIO–1
Festino
The traditional name for
the valid syllogism with
the mood and figure
EIO–2
Ferison
The traditional name for
the valid syllogism with
the mood and figure
EIO–3
Fresison
The traditional name for
the valid syllogism with
the mood and figure
EIO–4
Baroko
The traditional name for
the valid syllogism with
the mood and figure
AOO–2
247

Categorical Syllogisms
term distributed in the conclusion would then not be distributed in the premis-
es. This leaves as valid only OAO–3 (traditionally known as Bokardo).
Summary of Case 4: If the syllogism has an O conclusion, there are only six
possibly valid forms: AOO–2, EIO–1, EIO–2, EIO–3, EIO–4, and OAO–3—
Baroko, Ferio, Festino, Ferison, Fresison, and Bokardo.
This analysis has demonstrated, by elimination, that there are exactly fifteen
valid forms of the categorical syllogism: one if the conclusion is an A proposi-
tion, four if the conclusion is an E proposition, four if the conclusion is an I
proposition, and six if the conclusion is an O proposition. Of these fifteen valid
forms, four are in the first figure, four are in the second figure, four are in the
third figure, and three are in the fourth figure. This completes the deduction of
the fifteen valid forms of the standard-form categorical syllogism.
2. In what mood or moods, if any, can a first-figure standard-form categor-
ical syllogism with a particular conclusion be valid?
3. In what figure or figures, if any, can the premises of a valid standard-
form categorical syllogism distribute both the major and minor terms?
4. In what figure or figures, if any, can a valid standard-form categorical
syllogism have two particular premises?
*5. In what figure or figures, if any, can a valid standard-form categorical
syllogism have only one term distributed, and that one only once?
6. In what mood or moods, if any, can a valid standard-form categorical
syllogism have just two terms distributed, each one twice?
7. In what mood or moods, if any, can a valid standard-form categorical
syllogism have two affirmative premises and a negative conclusion?
8. In what figure or figures, if any, can a valid standard-form categorical
syllogism have a particular premise and a universal conclusion?
9. In what mood or moods, if any, can a second-figure standard-form cate-
gorical syllogism with a universal conclusion be valid?
Bokardo
The traditional name for
the valid syllogism with
the mood and figure
OAO–3
EXERCISES
For students who enjoy the complexities of analytical syllogistics, here follow
some theoretical questions whose answers can all be derived from the systemat-
ic application of the six rules of the syllogism set forth in Section 4. Answering
these questions will be much easier if you have fully grasped the deduction of
the fifteen valid syllogistic forms presented in this appendix.
EXAMPLE
1. Can any standard-form categorical syllogism be valid that contains ex-
actly three terms, each of which is distributed in both of its occurrences?
SOLUTION
No, such a syllogism cannot be valid. If each of the three terms were distrib-
uted in both of its occurrences, all three of the syllogism's propositions would
have to be E propositions, and the mood of the syllogism would thus be EEE,
which violates Rule 4, which forbids two negative premises.
248

Categorical Syllogisms
chapter
Summary
In this chapter we have examined the standard-form categorical syllogism: its el-
ements, its forms, its validity, and the rules governing its proper use.
In Section 1, the major, minor, and middle terms of a syllogism were identified:

Major term: the predicate of the conclusion

Minor term: the subject of the conclusion

Middle term: the third term appearing in both premises but not in the 
conclusion.
We identified major and minor premises as those containing the major and
minor terms, respectively. We specified that a categorical syllogism is in standard
form when its propositions appear in precisely this order: major premise first,
minor premise second, and conclusion last.
We also explained in Section 1 how the mood and figure of a syllogism are
determined.
The mood of a syllogism is determined by the three letters identifying the
forms of its three propositions, A, E, I, or O. There are sixty-four possible differ-
ent moods.
The figure of a syllogism is determined by the position of the middle term in
its premises. The four possible figures are described and named thus:

First figure: The middle term is the subject term of the major premise and
the predicate term of the minor premise.
Schematically: M–P, S–M, therefore S–P.

Second figure: The middle term is the predicate term of both premises.
Schematically: P–M, S–M, therefore S–P.

Third figure: The middle term is the subject term of both premises.
Schematically: M–P, M–S, therefore S–P.

Fourth figure: The middle term is the predicate term of the major premise
and the subject term of the minor premise.
Schematically: P–M, M–S, therefore S–P.
In Section 2, we explained how the mood and figure of a standard-form cate-
gorical syllogism jointly determine its logical form. Because each of the sixty-
four moods may appear in all four figures, there are exactly 256 standard-form
categorical syllogisms, of which only a few are valid.
In Section 3, we explained the Venn diagram technique for testing the validi-
ty of syllogisms, using overlapping circles appropriately marked or shaded to
exhibit the meaning of the premises.
*10. In what figure or figures, if any, can a valid standard-form categorical
syllogism have its middle term distributed in both premises?
11. Can a valid standard-form categorical syllogism have a term distributed
in a premise that appears undistributed in the conclusion?
249

Categorical Syllogisms
In Section 4, we explained the six essential rules for standard-form syllo-
gisms and named the fallacy that results when each of these rules is broken:

Rule 1. A standard-form categorical syllogism must contain exactly three
terms, each of which is used in the same sense throughout the argument.
Violation: Fallacy of four terms.

Rule 2. In a valid standard-form categorical syllogism, the middle term
must be distributed in at least one premise.
Violation: Fallacy of undistributed middle.

Rule 3. In a valid standard-form categorical syllogism, if either term is dis-
tributed in the conclusion, then it must be distributed in the premises.
Violation: Fallacy of the illicit major, or fallacy of the illicit minor.

Rule 4. No standard-form categorical syllogism having two negative prem-
ises is valid.
Violation: Fallacy of exclusive premises.

Rule 5. If either premise of a valid standard-form categorical syllogism is
negative, the conclusion must be negative.
Violation: Fallacy of drawing an affirmative conclusion from a negative premise.

Rule 6. No valid standard-form categorical syllogism with a particular con-
clusion can have two universal premises.
Violation: Existential fallacy.
In Section 5, we presented an exposition of the fifteen valid forms of the cat-
egorical syllogism, identifying their moods and figures, and explaining their tra-
ditional Latin names:
AAA–1 (Barbara); EAE–1 (Celarent); AII–1 (Darii); EIO–1 (Ferio); AEE–2
(Camestres); EAE–2 (Cesare); AOO–2 (Baroko); EIO–2 (Festino); AII–3 (Datisi);
IAI–3 (Disamis); EIO–3 (Ferison); OAO–3 (Bokardo); AEE–4 (Camenes); IAI–4
(Dimaris); EIO–4 (Fresison).
In the Appendix for this chapter (which may be bypassed), we presented the
deduction of the fifteen valid forms of the categorical syllogism, demonstrating,
through a process of elimination, that only those fifteen forms can avoid all vio-
lations of the six basic rules of the syllogism.
END NOTES
1Barbara Tuchman, The Proud Tower (New York: Macmillan, 1966.)
2Erasmus, The Praise of Folly, 1511.
For additional exercises and tutorials about concepts covered in this
chapter, log in to MyLogicLab at www.mylogiclab.com and select your
current textbook.
250

Categorical Syllogisms
Every standard-form categorical syllogism has exactly three terms, to wit:
The major term is the predicate term of the conclusion (P).
The minor term is the subject term of the conclusion (S).
The middle term is the term appearing in both premises but not in the conclusion (M).
The premise in which the major term appears is the major premise.
The premise in which the minor term appears is the minor premise.
A syllogism is in standard form when its three propositions are in exactly this order: 
major premise, minor premise, conclusion.
Every proposition in a categorical syllogism must be one of the following four:
An A proposition—universal affirmative
(e.g., All politicians are liars.)
An E proposition—universal negative
(e.g., No politicians are liars.)
An I proposition—particular affirmative
(e.g., Some politicians are liars.)
An O proposition—particular negative
(e.g., Some politicians are not liars.)
The mood of a syllogism is determined by the types of its three propositions, AAA, EIO, etc.
The figure of a standard-form syllogism is determined by the position of its middle term:
M
P
P
M
M
P
P
M
S
M
S
M
M
S
M
S
first figure
second figure
third figure
fourth figure
1st:
Middle term is the subject of the major premise and the predicate of the minor premise.
2nd: Middle term is the predicate of both premises.
3rd:
Middle term is the subject of both premises.
4th:
Middle term is the predicate of the major premise and the subject of the minor premises.
Any syllogistic form is completely determined by the combination of its mood and figure. 
There are exactly 15 valid forms of the categorical syllogism, each with a unique name:
In the first figure:
In the second figure:
In the third figure:
In the fourth figure:
AAA–1 Barbara
AEE–2
Camestres
AII–3
Datisi
AEE–4
Camenes
EAE–1
Celarent
EAE–2
Cesare
IAI–3
Disamis
IAI–4
Dimaris
AII–1
Darii
AOO–2
Baroko
EIO–3
Ferison
EIO–4
Fresison
EIO–1
Ferio
EIO–2
Festino
OAO–3
Bokardo
Rules governing every valid categorical syllogism:
1.
The syllogism must contain exactly three terms, used consistently.
2.
The middle term of the syllogism must be distributed in at least one premise.*
3.
If either term is distributed in the conclusion, it must be distributed in the premises.*
4.
A valid syllogism cannot have two negative premises.
5.
If either premise of the syllogism is negative, the conclusion must be negative.
6.
From two universal premises no particular conclusion may be drawn.
*(Note: A term is distributed when the proposition in which the term appears refers to all members of the class to which the
term refers. Thus, in the proposition “All humans are mortal” the term “humans” is distributed, but the term “mortal” is not.)
Logic Overview—Syllogistic Terms
Logic Overview—Valid Forms of the Categorical Syllogism 
251

Categorical Syllogisms
SECTION 1
Exercises
5.
STEP 1:
The conclusion is: Some conservatives are not advocates of high tariff rates.
STEP 2:
Major term: advocates of high tariff rates.
STEP 3:
Major premise: All advocates of high tariff rates are Republicans.
STEP 4:
Minor premise: Some Republicans are not conservatives.
STEP 5:
This syllogism, written in standard form:
All advocates of high tariff rates are Republicans.
Some Republicans are not conservatives.
Therefore some conservatives are not advocates of high tariff rates.
STEP 6:
The three propositions of this syllogism are, in order: A, O, O. The middle
term, “Republicans,” is the predicate term of the major premise and the
subject term of the minor premise, so the syllogism is in the fourth figure.
Thus its mood and figure are AOO–4.
10.
STEP 1:
The conclusion is: No sports cars are automobiles designed for family use.
STEP 2:
Major term: Automobiles designed for family use.
STEP 3:
Major premise: All automobiles designed for family use are vehicles
intended to be driven at moderate speeds.
STEP 4:
Minor premise: No sports cars are vehicles intended to be driven at moder-
ate speeds.
STEP 5:
This syllogism, written in standard form:
All automobiles designed for family use are vehicles intended to be driven
at moderate speeds.
No sports cars are vehicles intended to be driven at moderate speeds.
Therefore no sports cars are automobiles designed for family use.
STEP 6:
The three propositions of this syllogism are, in order, A, E, E. The middle
term, “vehicles intended to be driven at moderate speeds,” is the predicate
term of both the major and the minor premise, so the syllogism is in the
second figure. Thus its mood and figure are AEE–2.
SECTION 2
Exercises
5.
One possible refuting analogy is this: All unicorns are mammals, so some mammals 
are not animals, because no animals are unicorns.
10.
One possible refuting analogy is this: All square circles are circles, and all square cir-
cles are squares; therefore some circles are squares.
SECTION 3
Exercises
A. 
S 
P
M
     No P is M.
 
Some M is S.
 
 
Some S is not P.
Valid
(EIO-4, Fresison)
x
5.
Valid
(IAI-4, Dimaris)
S 
P
M
x
       Some P is M.
 
All M is S.
 
 
Some S is P.
10.
SOLUTIONS TO SELECTED EXERCISES
252

Categorical Syllogisms
S 
P
M
x
       No M is P.
 
Some S is M.
 
 
Some S is not P.
Valid
(EIO-1, Ferio)
15.
I 
F
R
     Some reformers are fanatics.
 
All reformers are idealists.
 
 
Some idealists are fanatics.
IAI-3
Valid
(Disamis)
x
B. 
1.
     No pleasure vessels are underwater craft.
 
All underwater craft are submarines.
 
 
No submarines are pleasure vessels.
EAE-4
Invalid
S 
P
U
5.
10.
All labor leaders are true liberals.
No weaklings are true liberals.
∴No weaklings are labor leaders.
SECTION 4
Exercises
A. 
5.
Commits the fallacy of the illicit minor. Breaks Rule 3.
10.
Commits the fallacy of the illicit major. Breaks Rule 3.
15.
Commits the fallacy of the illicit minor. Breaks Rule 3.
B. 
5.
Commits the existential fallacy. Breaks Rule 6.
10.
Commits the fallacy of the illicit minor. Breaks Rule 3.
C. 
5.
Commits the fallacy of the illicit minor. Breaks Rule 3.
10.
Commits the fallacy of four terms. (There is an equivocation on the term “people
who like it,” which has a very different meaning in the conclusion from the one it has
in the premise.) Breaks Rule 1.
CHAPTER APPENDIX
Exercises
5.
Plainly this is possible in the first figure, where AII–1, which is valid, has only one term
distributed, and that term only once. It also is possible in the third figure, where AII–3
(as well as IAI–3) are valid and also have only one term distributed, and distributed only
once. It also is possible in the fourth figure, where IAI–4, which is valid, has only one
term distributed, and distributed only once. But where the middle term is the predicate
term of both premises, in the second figure, it is not possible. Consider: To avoid break-
ing Rule 2, which requires that the middle term be distributed in at least one premise,
one of the premises in this figure must be negative. But then, by Rule 5, the conclusion
253

Categorical Syllogisms
would have to be negative and would distribute its predicate. Thus, if only one term can
be distributed only once, in the second figure that would have to be in the conclusion;
but if the distributed term can be distributed only once, that would break Rule 3, because
if it is distributed in the conclusion it must be distributed in the premises.
10.
None. If the middle term were distributed in both premises, then, in the first figure,
the minor premise would have to be negative, whence (by Rule 5) the conclusion
would have to be negative, so by Rule 3 the major premise would have to be nega-
tive, in violation of Rule 4. In the second figure, both premises would have to be neg-
ative, in violation of Rule 4. In the third figure both premises would have to be uni-
versal, so the minor premise would have to be negative by Rule 3, and by Rule 5 the
conclusion would be negative—so by Rule 3 the major premise would also have to
be negative, in violation of Rule 4. In the fourth figure the major premise would have
to be negative. Therefore (by Rule 5) the conclusion would have to be negative (E or O)
and it would distribute its major term, which means (by Rule 3) that the major
premise would also have to distribute its major term and would therefore be universal
(an E proposition). The minor premise also must be universal, since it distributes the
middle term, and by Rule 4 it cannot be negative, so it must be the A proposition
All M is S. Now Rule 6 precludes the possibility of an O proposition in the conclusion,
and Rule 3 precludes the possibility of an E.
254

Reduction to standard
form The translation of
syllogistic arguments in
any form into the
standard form in which
they can be tested for
validity; also called
translation to standard
form.
Syllogistic argument
Any argument that either
is a standard-form
categorical syllogism or
can be reformulated as a
standard-form
categorical syllogism
without any change of
meaning.
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
1
Syllogistic Arguments
2
Reducing the Number of Terms to Three
3
Translating Categorical Propositions into Standard Form
4
Uniform Translation
5
Enthymemes
6
Sorites
7
Disjunctive and Hypothetical Syllogisms
8
The Dilemma
1
Syllogistic Arguments
In ordinary discourse the arguments we encounter rarely appear as neatly pack-
aged, standard-form categorical syllogisms. So the syllogistic arguments that
arise in everyday speech cannot always be readily tested. They can be tested,
however, if we put them into standard form—and we can generally do that by re-
formulating their constituent propositions. The term syllogistic argument refers
to any argument that either is a standard-form categorical syllogism or can be
reformulated as a standard-form categorical syllogism without any loss or change
of meaning.
We want to be able to test the validity of syllogistic arguments. If they are fal-
lacious or misleading, that will be most easily detected, as Immanuel Kant point-
ed out, when they are set out in correct syllogistic form. The process of
reformulation is therefore important, because the effective tests—Venn diagrams
and the rules for categorical syllogisms—cannot be applied directly until the syl-
logism is in standard form. Putting it into standard form is called reduction (or
translation) to standard form. When we reformulate (or reduce) a loosely put ar-
gument that appears in ordinary language into a classical syllogism, the result-
ing argument is called a standard-form translation of the original argument.
Effecting this reformulation can present some difficulties.
We already know the tests for validity (Venn diagrams and the rules for syl-
logisms). What we need, to evaluate syllogistic arguments using these tests, are
techniques for translating syllogistic arguments from their loose forms into stan-
dard form. With these techniques in hand, we can first translate the argument
into standard form, and then test that argument using the Venn diagram method
or the syllogistic rules.
To describe the various techniques for reduction to standard form, we begin
by noting the kinds of problems that create the need for them—that is, by noting
different ways in which a syllogistic argument in ordinary language may deviate
From Chapter 7 of Introduction to Logic, Fourteenth Edition. Irving M. Copi, Carl Cohen, Kenneth McMahon. 
Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Prentice Hall. All rights reserved.
This asset is
intentionally omitted
from this text. It may
be accessed at
www.mcescher.com.
(Belvedere by 
M.C. Escher)

from a standard-form categorical argument. Understanding those deviations, we
can proceed to counteract them.
First deviation. The premises and conclusion of an argument in ordinary lan-
guage may appear in an order that is not the order of the standard-form
syllogism. This difficulty is easily remedied by reordering the premises: The
major premise is put first, the minor premise second, and the conclusion
third. (Recall that the major premise is the premise that contains the term
that is the predicate term of the conclusion, whereas the minor premise con-
tains the term that is the subject term of the conclusion.)
Second deviation. A standard-form categorical syllogism always has exactly
three terms. The premises of an argument in ordinary language may appear
to involve more than three terms—but that appearance may be deceptive. If
the number of terms can be reduced to three without loss of meaning, the
reduction to standard form may be successful.
Third deviation. The component propositions of a syllogistic argument in ordi-
nary language may not all be standard-form propositions. This deviation is very
common, but if the components can be converted into standard-form propo-
sitions without loss of meaning, the reduction to standard form may be suc-
cessful.
To cope with the second and third of these deviant patterns, there are known
techniques, which will now be explained.
2
Reducing the Number of Terms to Three
A valid syllogism must have exactly three terms. If more than three terms seem
to be involved in an argument of apparently syllogistic form, it may be possible
to translate the argument into a standard-form categorical syllogism that is
equivalent to it but that contains only three terms and is perfectly valid. How can
that be done?
One way is by eliminating synonyms. A synonym of one of the terms in the syl-
logism is not really a fourth term, but only another way of referring to one of the
three classes involved. So we begin by eliminating synonyms, if any appear. For
example, the following syllogistic argument appears to contain six terms:
No wealthy persons are vagrants.
All lawyers are rich people.
Therefore no attorneys are tramps.
However, “wealthy” and “rich” are synonyms, as are “lawyer” and “attor-
ney,” and also “vagrant” and “tramp.” If the synonyms are eliminated, the argu-
ment becomes
No wealthy persons are vagrants.
All lawyers are wealthy persons.
Therefore no lawyers are vagrants.
This argument in standard form, EAE–1 (Celarent), is plainly valid.
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
256

A second way to reduce the number of terms to three is by eliminating class
complements. We illustrate this using the following syllogistic argument, whose
propositions are standard-form categorical propositions:
All mammals are warm-blooded animals.
No lizards are warm-blooded animals.
Therefore all lizards are nonmammals.
On the surface, this argument appears to be invalid, because it seems to have
four terms—and it also draws an affirmative conclusion from a negative prem-
ise, which breaks one of the rules of the syllogism.
This argument, however, is perfectly valid when it is translated into standard
form. We can reduce the number of terms to three, because two of the terms in it
(“mammals” and “nonmammals”) are complements of one another. So, by
obverting the conclusion (to obvert a proposition, we change its quality and
replace the predicate term by its complement), we get “No lizards are mammals.”
Using this valid immediate inference, we derive the following standard-form
translation of the original argument:
All mammals are warm-blooded animals.
No lizards are warm-blooded animals.
Therefore no lizards are mammals.
which is logically equivalent to the original because it has identically the same
premises and a logically equivalent conclusion. This standard-form translation
conforms to all the syllogistic rules and thus is known to be valid. Its form is
AEE–2 (Camestres).
There may be more than one translation of a syllogistic argument into
standard form, but if any one of those translations yields a valid syllogism, all
the others must be valid as well. Thus, for example, the preceding illustrative
argument can also be reduced to standard form in a different (but logically
equivalent) way. This time we leave the conclusion unchanged and work with
the premises. We take the contrapositive of the first premise, and we obvert
the second premise. We then get:
All non(warm-blooded animals) are nonmammals.
All lizards are non(warm-blooded animals).
Therefore all lizards are nonmammals.
This is also a valid translation; its form is AAA–1 (Barbara), and it conforms to all
the rules of the syllogism.
Any syllogistic argument that appears to contain four terms can be reduced
to standard form (that is, can be translated into a logically equivalent standard-
form categorical syllogism) if one of its terms is the complement of one of the
other three. Likewise, reduction from an argument with five terms is possible if
two of its terms are complements of other terms in the argument; and even argu-
ments with as many as six terms may be reduced to standard form if three of
those terms are complements of other terms in the argument. The key to such
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
257

reductions is to use the valid immediate inferences: conversion, obversion, and
contraposition.
More than one immediate inference may be needed to reduce the argument
to standard form. Consider this example:
No nonresidents are citizens.
All noncitizens are nonvoters.
Therefore all voters are residents.
The argument has six terms, but it is valid, and that can be shown by reduc-
ing it to standard form, which can be done in more than one way. Perhaps the
most natural reduction is to convert and then obvert the first premise. This
yields “All citizens are residents.” Then take the contrapositive of the second
premise, which yields “All voters are citizens.” The argument is then in stan-
dard form:
All citizens are residents.
All voters are citizens.
Therefore all voters are residents.
The middle term (“citizens”) is the subject term of the major premise and the
predicate term of the minor premise, so the syllogism is in the first figure. Its
three propositions are universal affirmatives. This is a syllogism in Barbara,
AAA–1, and it is plainly valid.
EXERCISES
Translate the following syllogistic arguments into standard form, and test their
validity by using either Venn diagrams or syllogistic rules.
EXAMPLE
1. Some preachers are persons of unfailing vigor. No preachers are nonin-
tellectuals. Therefore some intellectuals are persons of unfailing vigor.
SOLUTION
This argument may be translated into: Some preachers are persons of unfailing
vigor. (Some P is V.) All preachers are intellectuals. (By obversion: All P is I.)
Therefore some intellectuals are persons of unfailing vigor. (Some I is V.) Shown
on a Venn diagram, this syllogism is seen to be valid:
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
P
V
I 
x
258

2. Some metals are rare and costly substances, but no welder’s materials
are nonmetals; hence some welder’s materials are rare and costly
substances.
3. Some Asian nations were nonbelligerents, because all belligerents were
allies either of Germany or Britain, and some Asian nations were not al-
lies of either Germany or Britain.
4. Some nondrinkers are athletes, because no drinkers are persons in per-
fect physical condition, and some people in perfect physical condition
are not nonathletes.
*5. All things inflammable are unsafe things, so all things that are safe are
nonexplosives, because all explosives are flammable things.
6. All worldly goods are changeable things, for no worldly goods are
things immaterial, and no material things are unchangeable things.
7. All those who are neither members nor guests of members are those
who are excluded; therefore no nonconformists are either members or
guests of members, for all those who are included are conformists.
8. All mortals are imperfect beings, and no humans are immortals, whence
it follows that all perfect beings are nonhumans.
9. All things present are nonirritants; therefore no irritants are invisible
objects, because all visible objects are absent things.
*10. All useful things are objects no more than six feet long, because all diffi-
cult things to store are useless things, and no objects over six feet long
are easy things to store.
3
Translating Categorical Propositions 
into Standard Form
It was noted in Section 1 that syllogistic arguments in ordinary language may
deviate from standard-form categorical syllogisms not only because they may
appear to contain more than three terms (as discussed in Section 2), but also be-
cause the component propositions of the syllogism in ordinary language may
not all be standard-form propositions. A, E, I, and O propositions are clearly
somewhat stilted, and many syllogistic arguments in everyday life contain non-
standard-form propositions. To reduce these arguments to standard form re-
quires that their constituent propositions be translated into standard form.
It would be very convenient if there were some neat list of rules that we
could use to effect such translations. Unfortunately, ordinary language is too
rich and too multiform to permit the compilation of such a set of rules. Different
sorts of transformation are called for in different settings, and to know what is
called for we must, in every case, understand fully the given nonstandard-form
proposition that needs to be reformulated. If we understand the proposition, we
can reformulate it without losing or changing its meaning.
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
259

Unit class
A class with only one
member.
Singular proposition
A proposition that
asserts that a particular
individual has (or does
not have) some
specified attribute.
Although no complete set of rules can be given, we can describe a number
of well-tested methods for translating nonstandard propositions of different
sorts. These methods—nine of them will be presented in this section—must be
regarded as guides rather than rules; they are techniques with which nonstan-
dard-form propositions of certain describable kinds can be reformulated
into standard-form propositions that may serve as constituents of syllogistic
arguments.
I. Singular Propositions. Some propositions affirm or deny that a specific
individual or object belongs to a given class—for example, “Socrates is a
philosopher,” and “This table is not an antique.” These are called singular
propositions. Such propositions do not affirm or deny the inclusion of one
class in another (as standard-form propositions do), but we can nevertheless
interpret a singular proposition as a proposition dealing with classes and
their interrelations. We do this in the following way.
To every individual object there corresponds a unique unit class (one-
membered class) whose only member is that object itself. Then, to assert
that an object s belongs to a class P is logically equivalent to asserting that
the unit class S containing just that object s is wholly included in the class
P. And to assert that an object s does not belong to a class P is logically
equivalent to asserting that the unit class S containing just that object s is
wholly excluded from the class P.
It is customary to make this interpretation automatically, without any
notational adjustment. Thus it is customary to take any affirmative singu-
lar proposition of the form “s is P” as if it were already expressed as the
logically equivalent A proposition, “All S is P,” and we similarly under-
stand any negative singular proposition, “s is not P,” as an alternative for-
mulation of the logically equivalent E proposition, “No S is P”—in each
case understanding S to designate the unit class whose only member is the
object s. Thus no explicit translations are provided for singular proposi-
tions; traditionally they have been classified as A and E propositions as
they stand. As Kant remarked, “Logicians are justified in saying that, in the
employment of judgments in syllogisms, singular judgments can be treat-
ed like those that are universal.”1
The situation, however, is not quite so simple. Bear in mind that partic-
ular propositions have existential import, but universal propositions do
not. Using this Boolean interpretation, we find that if singular propositions
are treated mechanically as A and E propositions in syllogistic arguments,
and we check the validity of those arguments using Venn diagrams or
rules, serious difficulties arise.
In some cases, obviously valid two-premise arguments containing
singular propositions translate into valid categorical syllogisms, such
as when
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
260

Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
s is M.
goes into the invalid
All S is M.
s is H.
AAI–3 categorical syllogism
All S is H.
∴Some H is M.
∴Some H is M.
All H is M.
goes into the obviously valid
All H is M.
s is an H.
AII–1 categorical syllogism in Darii
Some S is H.
∴s is an M.
∴Some S is M.
s is M.
goes into the invalid
Some S is M.
s is H.
III–3 categorical syllogism
Some S is H.
∴Some H is M.
∴Some H is M.
In other cases, however, obviously valid two-premise arguments con-
taining singular propositions translate into categorical syllogisms that are
invalid, such as when
which commits the existential fallacy, violating Rule 6.
On the other hand, if we translate singular propositions into particular
propositions, there is the same kind of difficulty. In some cases, obviously
valid two-premise arguments containing singular propositions translate
into valid categorical syllogisms, such as when
In other cases, however, obviously valid two-premise arguments con-
taining singular propositions translate into categorical syllogisms that are
invalid, such as when
which commits the fallacy of the undistributed middle, violating Rule 2.
The difficulty arises from the fact that a singular proposition contains
more information than is contained in any single one of the four standard-
form categorical propositions. If “s is P” is construed as “All S is P,” then
what is lost is the existential import of the singular proposition, the fact
that S is not empty. But if “s is P” is construed as “Some S is P,” then what
is lost is the universal aspect of the singular proposition, which distributes
its subject term, the fact that all S is P.
All H is M.
goes into the obviously valid
All H is M.
s is an H.
AAA–1 categorical syllogism in Barbara
All S is H.
∴s is an M.
∴Αll S is M.
261

The solution to the difficulty is to construe singular propositions as
conjunctions of standard-form categorical propositions. An affirmative
singular proposition is equivalent to the conjunction of the related A
and I categorical propositions. Thus “s is P” is equivalent to “All S is P”
and “Some S is P.” A negative singular proposition is equivalent to the
conjunction of the related E and O categorical propositions. Thus “s
is not P” is equivalent to “No S is P” and “Some S is not P.” Venn dia-
grams for affirmative and negative singular propositions are shown in
Figure 1.
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
S
x
x
P
S
P
 s is P
s is not P
Figure 1
In applying the syllogistic rules to evaluate a syllogistic argument con-
taining singular propositions, we must take account of all the information
contained in those singular propositions, both distribution and existential
import.
If we keep in mind the existential import of singular propositions
when we invoke the syllogistic rules or apply Venn diagrams to test the va-
lidity of syllogistic arguments, it is acceptable practice to regard singular
propositions as universal (A or E) propositions.
II. Categorical Propositions That Have Adjectives or Adjectival Phrases
as Predicates, Rather than Substantives or Class Terms. For example,
“Some flowers are beautiful” and “No warships are available for active
duty” are categorical propositions, yet they must be translated into stan-
dard-form categorical propositions; they deviate from standard form
only in that their predicates, “beautiful” and “available for active duty,”
designate attributes rather than classes. However, every attribute
determines a class, the class of things having that attribute, so every such
proposition corresponds to a logically equivalent proposition that is in
standard form. The two examples cited correspond to the I and E
propositions “Some flowers are beautiful things” and “No warships are
things available for active duty.” When a categorical proposition is in
standard form except that it has an adjectival predicate instead of a
predicate term, the translation into standard form is made by replacing
the adjectival predicate with a term designating the class of all objects of
which the adjective may truly be predicated.
262

III. Categorical Propositions Whose Main Verbs Are Other than the Stan-
dard-Form Copula “To Be.” Examples of this very common type are
“All people seek recognition” and “Some people drink Greek wine.”
The usual method of translating such a statement into standard form is
to regard all of it, except the subject term and the quantifier, as naming a
class-defining characteristic. Those words can then be replaced by a
term designating the class determined by that class-defining characteris-
tic and may be linked to the subject with a standard copula. Thus the
two examples given translate into the standard-form categorical propo-
sitions, “All people are seekers of recognition” and “Some people are
Greek-wine drinkers.”
IV. Statements in Which the Standard-Form Ingredients Are All Present But
Not Arranged in Standard-Form Order. Two examples are “Racehorses
are all thoroughbreds” and “All is well that ends well.” In such cases, we
first decide which is the subject term and then rearrange the words to
express a standard-form categorical proposition. Such translations are
usually quite straightforward. It is clear that the two preceding statements
translate into the A propositions “All racehorses are thoroughbreds” and
“All things that end well are things that are well.”
V. Categorical Propositions Whose Quantities Are Indicated by Words
Other than the Standard-Form Quantifiers “All,” “No,” and “Some.”
Statements beginning with the words “every” and “any” are easily trans-
lated. The propositions “Every dog has its day” and “Any contribution
will be appreciated” reduce to “All dogs are creatures that have their
days” and “All contributions are things that are appreciated.” Similar to
“every” and “any” are “everything” and “anything.” Paralleling these,
but clearly restricted to classes of persons, are “everyone,” “anyone,”
“whoever,” “whosoever,” “who,” “one who,” and the like. These should
present no difficulty.
The grammatical particles “a” and “an” may also serve to indicate
quantity, but whether they are being used to mean “all” or “some” de-
pends largely on the context. Thus “A bat is a mammal” and “An ele-
phant is a pachyderm” are reasonably interpreted as meaning “All bats
are mammals” and “All elephants are pachyderms.” But “A bat flew in
the window” and “An elephant escaped” quite clearly do not refer to all
bats or all elephants; they are properly reduced to “Some bats are crea-
tures that flew in the window” and “Some elephants are creatures that
escaped.”
The particle “the” may be used to refer either to a particular individ-
ual or to all the members of a class. There is little danger of ambiguity
here, for such a statement as “The whale is a mammal” translates in al-
most any context into the A proposition “All whales are mammals,”
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
263

Exclusive
propositions
Propositions that assert
that the predicate
applies exclusively to the
subject named.
Example: “None but
generals wear stars”
asserts that the
predicate, “wearing
stars,” applies only to
generals.
whereas the singular proposition “The first president was a military
hero” is already in standard form as an A proposition (a singular propo-
sition having existential import), as discussed in the first subparagraph
of this section.
In some contexts the article “the” is deliberately omitted to achieve de-
sired ambiguity. When United Nations Resolution 242 was adopted, calling
for the return of “territory” captured by Israel in the Six-Day War in 1967, it
was formally agreed that the English version of the Resolution would be
authoritative, because the Resolution when expressed in French would require
the definite article (le territoire), of which the English translation is “the ter-
ritory,” meaning all the territory captured, which is precisely what the
agreed-upon English version carefully refrains from saying. The omission
of the definite article in English can be logically significant.
Although affirmative statements beginning with “every” and “any” are
translated into “All S is P,” negative statements beginning with “not every”
and “not any” are quite different. Their translations are much less obvious
and require great care. Thus, for example, “Not every S is P” means that
some S is not P, whereas “Not any S is P” means that no S is P.
VI. Exclusive Propositions. Categorical propositions involving the words
“only” or “none but” are often called exclusive propositions, because in
general they assert that the predicate applies exclusively to the subject
named. Examples of such usages are “Only citizens can vote” and “None
but the brave deserve the fair.” The first translates into the standard-form
categorical proposition, “All those who can vote are citizens,” and the sec-
ond into the standard-form categorical proposition, “All those who de-
serve the fair are those who are brave.” Propositions beginning with
“only” or “none but” usually translate into A propositions using this gen-
eral rule: Reverse the subject and the predicate, and replace the “only”
with “all.” Thus “Only S is P” and “None but S’s are P’s” are usually un-
derstood to express “All P is S.”
There are some contexts in which “only” and “none but” are used to
convey some further meaning. “Only S is P” or “None but S’s are P’s” may
suggest either that “All S is P” or that “Some S is P.” This is not always the
case, however. Where context helps to determine meaning, attention must
be paid to it, of course. But in the absence of such additional information,
the translations first suggested are adequate.
VII. Categorical Propositions That Contain No Words to Indicate Quantity.
Two examples are “Dogs are carnivorous” and “Children are present.”
Where there is no quantifier, what the sentence is intended to express may
be doubtful. We may be able to determine its meaning only by examining
the context in which it occurs, and that examination usually will clear up
our doubts. In the first example it is very probable that “Dogs are carnivo-
rous” refers to all dogs, and is to be translated as “All dogs are carnivores.”
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
264

Exceptive proposition
A proposition that
asserts that all members
of some class, with the
exception of the
members of one of its
subclasses, are
members of some other
class. Exceptive
propositions are in reality
compound, because
they assert both a
relation of class
inclusion, and a relation
of class  exclusion.
Example: “All persons
except employees are
eligible” is an exceptive
proposition in which it is
asserted both that “All
nonemployees are
eligible” and that “No
employees are eligible.”
In the second example, on the other hand, it is plain that only some chil-
dren are referred to, and thus the standard-form translation of “Children
are present” is “Some children are beings who are present.”
VIII. Propositions That Do Not Resemble Standard-Form Categorical Proposi-
tions But Can Be Translated into Standard Form. Some examples are “Not
all children believe in Santa Claus,” “There are white elephants,” “There are
no pink elephants,” and “Nothing is both round and square.” On reflection,
these propositions will be seen to be logically equivalent to, and therefore to
translate into, the following standard-form propositions: “Some children are
not believers in Santa Claus,” “Some elephants are white things,” “No
elephants are pink things,” and “No round objects are square objects.” 
IX. Exceptive Propositions. Some examples of exceptive propositions are
“All except employees are eligible,” “All but employees are eligible,” and
“Employees alone are not eligible.” Translating exceptive propositions into
standard form is somewhat complicated, because propositions of this kind
(much like singular propositions) make two assertions rather than one.
Each of the logically equivalent examples just given asserts not merely that
all nonemployees are eligible but also (in the usual context) that no employees
are eligible. Where “employees” is abbreviated to S and “eligible persons”
to P, these two propositions can be written as “All non-S is P” and “No S is
P.” These are clearly independent and together assert that S and P are
complementary classes.
Each of these exceptive propositions is compound and therefore cannot
be translated into a single standard-form categorical proposition. Rather,
each must be translated into an explicit conjunction of two standard-form
categoricals. Thus the three illustrative propositions about eligibility trans-
late identically into “All nonemployees are eligible persons, and no
employees are eligible persons.”
It should be noted that some arguments depend for their validity on
numerical or quasi-numerical information that cannot be put into standard
form. Such arguments may have constituent propositions that mention
quantity more specifically than standard-form propositions do, usually by
the use of quantifiers such as “one,” “two,” “three,” “many,” “a few,”
“most,” and so on. When such specific quantitative information is critical
to the validity of the argument in which it is mentioned, the argument it-
self is asyllogistic and therefore requires a more complicated analysis than
that provided by the simple theory of the categorical syllogism. Yet some
quasi-numerical quantifiers occur in arguments that do lend themselves to
syllogistic analysis. These include “almost all,” “not quite all,” “all but a
few,” and “almost everyone.” Propositions in which these phrases appear
as quantifiers may be treated like the explicitly exceptive propositions just
described. Thus the following exceptive propositions with quasi-numerical
quantifiers are also compound: “Almost all students were at the dance,”
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
265

“Not quite all students were at the dance,” “All but a few students were at
the dance,” and “Only some students were at the dance.” Each of these
affirms that some students were at the dance and denies that all students were at
the dance. The quasi-numerical information they present is irrelevant from
the point of view of syllogistic inference, and all are translated as “Some
students are persons who were at the dance, and some students are not
persons who were at the dance.”
Because exceptive propositions are not categorical propositions but
conjunctions, arguments containing them are not syllogistic arguments as
we are using that term. But they may nevertheless be susceptible to syllo-
gistic analysis and appraisal. How an argument containing an exceptive
proposition should be tested depends on the exceptive proposition’s posi-
tion in the argument. If it is a premise, then the argument may have to be
given two separate tests. For example, consider the argument:
Everyone who saw the game was at the dance.
Not quite all the students were at the dance.
So some students didn’t see the game.
Its first premise and its conclusion are categorical propositions, which
are easily translated into standard form. Its second premise, however, is an
exceptive proposition, not simple but compound. To discover whether its
premises imply its conclusion, first test the syllogism composed of the first
premise of the given argument, the first half of its second premise, and its
conclusion. In standard form, we have
All persons who saw the game are persons who were at the dance.
Some students are persons who were at the dance.
Therefore some students are not persons who saw the game.
The standard-form categorical syllogism is of form AIO–2 and commits
the fallacy of the undistributed middle, violating Rule 2. However, the orig-
inal argument is not yet proved to be invalid, because the syllogism just
tested contains only part of the premises of the original argument. We now
have to test the categorical syllogism composed of the first premise and the
conclusion of the original argument together with the second half of the
second premise. In standard form we then get a very different argument:
All persons who saw the game are persons who were at the dance.
Some students are not persons who were at the dance.
Therefore some students are not persons who saw the game.
This is a standard-form categorical syllogism in Baroko, AOO–2, and it
is easily shown to be valid. Hence the original argument is valid, because
the conclusion is the same, and the premises of the original argument
include the premises of this valid standard-form syllogism. Thus, to test the
validity of an argument, one of whose premises is an exceptive proposition,
may require testing two different standard-form categorical syllogisms.
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
266

If the premises of an argument are both categorical propositions, and
its conclusion is exceptive, then we know it to be invalid, for although the
two categorical premises may imply one or the other half of the compound
conclusion, they cannot imply them both. Finally, if an argument contains
exceptive propositions as both premises and conclusion, all possible syllo-
gisms constructible out of the original argument may have to be tested to
determine its validity. Enough has been explained to enable the student to
cope with such situations.
It is important to acquire facility in translating the many varieties of non-
standard-form propositions into standard form, because the tests of validity
that we have developed—Venn diagrams and the syllogistic rules—can be
applied directly only to standard-form categorical syllogisms.
EXERCISES
Translate the following into standard-form categorical propositions:
EXAMPLE
1. Roses are fragrant.
SOLUTION
Standard-form translation: All roses are fragrant things.
2. Orchids are not fragrant.
3. Many a person has lived to regret a misspent youth.
4. Not everyone worth meeting is worth having as a friend.
*5. If it’s a Junko, it’s the best that money can buy.
6. If it isn’t a real beer, it isn’t a Bud.
7. Nothing is both safe and exciting.
8. Only brave people have ever won the Congressional Medal of Honor.
9. Good counselors are not universally appreciated.
*10. He sees not his shadow who faces the sun.
11. To hear her sing is an inspiration.
12. He who takes the sword shall perish by the sword.
13. Only members can use the front door.
14. Nobody doesn’t like Sara Lee.
*15. The Young Turks support no candidate of the Old Guard.
16. All styles are good, except the tiresome.
17. They also serve who only stand and wait.
18. Happy indeed is she who knows her own limitations.
19. A thing of beauty is a joy forever.
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
267

Uniform translation
Techniques (often
requiring the use of
auxiliary symbols)
making possible the
reformulation of a
syllogistic argument into
standard form, so that it
may be accurately
tested.
Parameter
An auxiliary symbol or
phrase that is
introduced in translating
statements uniformly,
helping to express a
syllogism with exactly
three terms, so that it
may be accurately
tested.
*20. He prayeth well who loveth well.
21. All that glitters is not gold.
22. None think the great unhappy but the great.
23. He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
24. Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.
*25. A soft answer turneth away wrath.
4
Uniform Translation
For a syllogistic argument to be testable, it must be expressed in propositions
that together contain exactly three terms. Sometimes this aim is difficult to
accomplish and requires a more subtle approach than those suggested in the pre-
ceding sections. Consider the proposition, “The poor always you have with
you.” It clearly does not assert that all the poor are with you, or even that some
(particular) poor are always with you. There are alternative methods of reducing
this proposition to standard form, but one perfectly natural route is by way of
the key word “always.” This word means “at all times” and suggests the stan-
dard-form categorical proposition, “All times are times when you have the poor
with you.” The word “times,” which appears in both the subject and the predi-
cate terms, may be regarded as a parameter, an auxiliary symbol that is helpful
in expressing the original assertion in standard form.
Care should be taken not to introduce and use parameters in a mechanical,
unthinking fashion. One must be guided always by an understanding of the
proposition to be translated. Thus the proposition, “Smith always wins at bil-
liards,” pretty clearly does not assert that Smith is incessantly, at all times, win-
ning at billiards! It is more reasonable to interpret it as meaning that Smith wins
at billiards whenever he plays. And so understood, it translates directly into “All
times when Smith plays billiards are times when Smith wins at billiards.”
Not all parameters need be temporal. To translate some propositions into
standard form, the words “places” and “cases” can be introduced as parame-
ters. Thus “Where there is no vision the people perish” and “Jones loses a sale
whenever he is late” translate into “All places where there is no vision are
places where the people perish” and “All cases in which Jones is late are cases in
which Jones loses a sale.”
The introduction of parameters often is requisite for the uniform translation
of all three constituent propositions of a syllogistic argument into standard form.
Because a categorical syllogism contains exactly three terms, to test a syllogistic
argument we must translate its constituent propositions into standard-form cat-
egorical propositions that contain just three terms. The elimination of synonyms
and the applications of conversion, obversion, and contraposition have already
been discussed in Section 2. However, for many syllogistic arguments, the num-
ber of terms cannot be reduced to three either by eliminating synonyms or by ap-
plying conversion, obversion, or contraposition. Here uniform translation
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
268

requires the introduction of a parameter—the same parameter—into all three of
the constituent propositions. Consider the following argument:
Soiled paper plates are scattered only where careless people have picnicked.
There are soiled paper plates scattered about here.
Therefore careless people must have been picnicking here.
This argument is perfectly valid, but before it can be proved valid by our
diagrams or rules, its premises and conclusion must be translated into standard-
form categorical propositions involving only three terms. The second premise
and the conclusion may be translated most naturally into “Some soiled paper
plates are things that are scattered about here” and “Some careless people are
those who have been picnicking here,” but these two statements contain four dif-
ferent terms. To reduce the argument to standard form, we begin with the first
premise, which requires a parameter for its standard-form expression, and then
we use the same parameter in translating the second premise and the conclusion
into standard form. The word “where” in the first premise suggests that the
parameter “places” can be used. If this parameter is used to obtain uniform stan-
dard-form translations of all three propositions, the argument translates into:
All places where soiled paper plates are scattered are places where careless people
have picnicked.
This place is a place where soiled paper plates are scattered.
Therefore this place is a place where careless people have picnicked.
This standard-form categorical syllogism is in Barbara with mood and figure
AAA–1 and has already been proved valid.
The notion of standardizing expressions through the use of a parameter is
not an altogether easy one to grasp, but some syllogistic arguments cannot be
translated into standard-form categorical syllogisms by any other method.
Another example may help to make clear the technique involved. Let us take
the argument:
The hounds bay wherever a fox has passed, so the fox must have taken another path,
because the hounds are quiet.
First, we must understand what is asserted in the given argument. We may
take the statement that the hounds are quiet as asserting that the hounds are not
baying here and now. This step is part of the necessary process of eliminating syn-
onyms, because the first assertion makes explicit reference to the baying of
hounds. And in the same manner we may understand the conclusion that the fox
must have taken another path as asserting that the fox did not pass here. The word
“wherever” in the first assertion should suggest that the parameter “places” can
be used in its translation. The standard-form translation thus arrived at is
All places where a fox has passed are places where the hounds bay.
This place is not a place where the hounds bay.
Therefore this place is not a place where a fox has passed.
This standard-form categorical syllogism is in Camestres, with mood and figure
AEE–2, and its validity is easy to establish.
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
269

EXERCISES
A. Translate the following propositions into standard form, using parameters
where necessary.
EXAMPLE
1. He groans whenever he is reminded of his loss.
SOLUTION
Standard-form translation: All times when he is reminded of his loss are
times when he groans.
2. She never drives her car to work.
3. He walks where he chooses.
4. He always orders the most expensive item on the menu.
*5. She does not give her opinion unless she is asked to do so.
6. She tries to sell life insurance wherever she may happen to be.
7. His face gets red when he gets angry.
8. If he is asked to say a few words, he talks for hours.
9. Error of opinion may be tolerated where reason is left free to combat it.
*10. People are never so likely to settle a question rightly as when they dis-
cuss it freely.
B. For each of the following arguments,
a. Translate the argument into standard form.
b. Name the mood and figure of its standard-form translation.
c. Test its validity using a Venn diagram. If it is valid, give its traditional
name.
d. If it is invalid, name the fallacy it commits.
EXAMPLE
1. Since all knowledge comes from sensory impressions and since there’s
no sensory impression of substance itself, it follows logically that there
is no knowledge of substance.
—Robert M. Pirsig, Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance
(New York: Bantam, 1975)
SOLUTION
a. Standard-form translation:
No things derived from sensory impressions are items of knowledge of substance
itself.
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
270

All items of knowledge are things derived from sensory impressions.
Therefore, no items of knowledge are items of knowledge of substance itself.
b. Mood and figure: EAE–1
c. Valid; Celarent
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
D
S
K 
2. . . . no names come in contradictory pairs; but all predicables come in
contradictory pairs; therefore no name is a predicable.
—Peter Thomas Geach, Reference and Generality
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1980)
3. Barcelona Traction was unable to pay interest on its debts; bankrupt
companies are unable to pay interest on their debts; therefore, Barcelona
Traction must be bankrupt.
—John Brooks, “Annals of Finance,” The New Yorker, 28 May 1979
4. Extremism in defense of liberty, or virtue, or whatever is always a vice—
because extremism is but another name for fanaticism which is a vice by
definition.
—Irving Kristol, “The Environmentalist Crusade,” 
The Wall Street Journal, 16 December 1974
*5. All syllogisms having two negative premises are invalid. Some valid
syllogisms are sound. Therefore some unsound arguments are syllo-
gisms having two negative premises.
6. Not all is gold that glitters, for some base metals glitter, and gold is not a
base metal.
7. Where there’s smoke there’s fire, so there’s no fire in the basement,
because there’s no smoke there.
8. It seems that mercy cannot be attributed to God. For mercy is a kind of
sorrow, as Damascene says. But there is no sorrow in God; and therefore
there is no mercy in Him.
—Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologiae, I, question 21, art. 3
9. . . . because intense heat is nothing else but a particular kind of painful
sensation; and pain cannot exist but in a perceiving being; it follows that
no intense heat can really exist in an unperceiving corporeal substance.
—George Berkeley, Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous, 
in Opposition to Sceptics and Atheists, 1713
271

*10. Only those who ignore the facts are likely to be mistaken. No one who is
truly objective is likely to be mistaken. Hence no one who ignores the
facts is truly objective.
11. All bridge players are people. All people think. Therefore all bridge
players think.
—Oswald and James Jacoby, “Jacoby on Bridge,” 
Syndicated Column, 5 November 1966
12. Whenever I’m in trouble, I pray. And since I’m always in trouble, there
is not a day when I don’t pray.
—Isaac Bashevis Singer, interview in The New York Times
13. The after-image is not in physical space. The brain-process is. So the
after-image is not a brain-process.
—J. J. C. Smart, “Sensations and Brain Processes,” 
Philosophical Review, April 1959
14. It must have rained lately, because the fish are not biting, and fish never
bite after a rain.
*15. . . . it is obvious that irrationals are uninteresting to engineers, since
they are concerned only with approximations, and all approximations
are rational.
—G. H. Hardy, A Mathematician’s Apology
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1940)
16. Since to fight against neighbors is an evil, and to fight against the The-
bans is to fight against neighbors, it is clear that to fight against the The-
bans is an evil.
—Aristotle, Prior Analytics
17. According to Aristotle, none of the products of Nature are due to
chance. His proof is this: That which is due to chance does not reappear
constantly nor frequently, but all products of Nature reappear either
constantly or at least frequently.
—Moses Maimonides, The Guide for the Perplexed, 1180
18. Not all who have jobs are temperate in their drinking. Only debtors
drink to excess. So not all the unemployed are in debt.
19. It will be a good game tomorrow, for the conference title is at stake, and
no title contest is ever dull.
*20. Bill didn’t go to work this morning, because he wore a sweater, and he
never wears a sweater to work.
21. Cynthia must have complimented Henry, because he is cheerful when-
ever Cynthia compliments him, and he’s cheerful now.
22. There must be a strike at the factory, for there is a picket line there, and
pickets are present only at strikes.
23. Epidemiology is not merely the study of epidemics of infectious disease;
it is the broad examination of the rates and patterns of disease in the
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
272

community. By almost any standard drug abuse can be regarded as a
disease; accordingly it can be profitably investigated by the methods of
epidemiology.
—“Science and the Citizen,” Scientific American, February 1975
24. Since morals, therefore, have an influence on the actions and affections, it
follows, that they cannot be deriv’d from reason; and that because reason
alone, as we have already prov’d, can never have any such influence.
—David Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature, 1739
*25. All valid syllogisms distribute their middle terms in at least one prem-
ise, so this syllogism must be valid, for it distributes its middle term in
at least one premise.
26. No valid syllogisms have two negative premises. No syllogisms on this
page are invalid. Therefore no syllogisms on this page have two negative
premises.
27. Good poll numbers raise money. Good press gets you good poll numbers.
Good press gets you money.
—an advisor to Elizabeth Dole, during her campaign for the Republican 
presidential nomination, quoted in The New York Times, 15 April 2000
28. There are plants growing here, and since vegetation requires water,
water must be present.
29. No one present is out of work. No members are absent. Therefore all
members are employed.
*30. The competition is stiff, for there is a great deal of money involved, and
there is never easy competition where much money is at stake.
31. There are handsome men, but only man is vile, so it is false that nothing
is both vile and handsome.
32. What is simple cannot be separated from itself. The soul is simple; there-
fore, it cannot be separated from itself.
—Duns Scotus, Oxford Commentary on the Sentences of Peter Lombard, 1302
33. Although he complains whenever he is sick, his health is excellent, so he
won’t complain.
34. We. . . define a metaphysical sentence as a sentence which purports to
express a genuine proposition, but does, in fact, express neither a
tautology nor an empirical hypothesis. And as tautologies and empirical
hypotheses form the entire class of significant propositions, we are
justified in concluding that all metaphysical assertions are nonsensical.
—Alfred J. Ayer, Language, Truth, and Logic, 1936
*35. This syllogism is valid, for all invalid syllogisms commit an illicit
process, and this syllogism commits no illicit process.
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
273

Enthymeme
An argument that is
stated incompletely, the
unstated part of it being
taken for granted. An
enthymeme may be of
the first, second, or third
order, depending upon
whether the unstated
proposition is the major
premise, the minor
premise, or the
conclusion of the
argument.
5
Enthymemes
Syllogistic arguments occur frequently, but their premises and conclusions are
not always stated explicitly. Often only part of the argument is expressed, the rest
being “understood.” Thus one may justify the conclusion that “Jones is a citizen”
by mentioning only the one premise, “Jones is a native-born American.” As stat-
ed, the argument is incomplete, but the missing premise is easily supplied from
knowledge of the Constitution of the United States. If the missing premise were
stated, the completed argument would appear as
All native-born Americans are citizens.
Jones is a native-born American.
Therefore Jones is a citizen.
Stated in full, the argument is a categorical syllogism of form AAA–1, Barbara,
and is perfectly valid. An argument that is stated incompletely, part being “un-
derstood” or only “in the mind,” is called an enthymeme. An incompletely stat-
ed argument is characterized as being enthymematic.
In everyday discourse, and even in science, many inferences are expressed
enthymematically. The reason is easy to understand. A large body of proposi-
tions can be presumed to be common knowledge, and many speakers and writ-
ers save themselves trouble by not repeating well-known and perhaps trivially
true propositions that their hearers or readers can perfectly well be expected to
supply for themselves. Moreover, it is not at all unusual for an argument to be
rhetorically more powerful and persuasive when stated enthymematically than
when enunciated in complete detail. As Aristotle wrote in his Rhetoric, “Speeches
that . . . rely on enthymemes excite the louder applause.”
Because an enthymeme is incomplete, its omitted parts must be taken into
account when testing its validity. Without the missing premise, the inference is
invalid. However, when the unexpressed premise is easily supplied, in all fair-
ness it ought to be included as part of the argument when one is appraising it. In
such a case, one assumes that the maker of the argument did have more in mind
than was stated explicitly. In most cases there is no difficulty in supplying the
tacit premise that the speaker (or writer) intended but did not express. Thus, for
example, as he explains the solution to the mystery in “The Adventure of Silver
Blaze,” Sherlock Holmes formulates an argument of which one critical premise is
left unstated yet is very plainly supposed:
A dog was kept in the stalls, and yet, though someone had been in and fetched out a
horse, the dog had not barked. . . . Obviously the visitor was someone whom the dog
knew well.
We all understand very well what is tacit here, that the dog would have barked
had the visitor been a stranger. In fairness to the author, Arthur Conan Doyle,
that premise must be seen as part of Holmes’s argument.
In supplying a suppressed premise, a cardinal principle is that the proposi-
tion must be one that speakers can safely presume their hearers to accept as true.
Thus it would be foolish to suggest taking the conclusion itself as a suppressed
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
274

premise, for if the arguer could have expected the auditors to accept that propo-
sition as a premise, without proof, it would have been idle to present it to them
as the conclusion of an argument.
Any kind of argument can be expressed enthymematically, but the kinds of
enthymemes that have been most extensively studied are incompletely ex-
pressed syllogistic arguments. We confine our attention to these in the remainder
of this section. Enthymemes traditionally have been divided into different orders,
according to which part of the syllogism is left unexpressed. A first-order en-
thymeme is one in which the syllogism’s major premise is not stated. The pre-
ceding example is of the first order. A second-order enthymeme is one in which
only the major premise and the conclusion are stated, the minor premise being
suppressed. An example of this type is “All students are opposed to the new reg-
ulations, so all sophomores are opposed to them.” Here the minor premise is eas-
ily supplied, being the obviously true proposition, “All sophomores are
students.” A third-order enthymeme is one in which both premises are stated,
but the conclusion is left unexpressed. An example of this type is the following:
Our ideas reach no farther than our experience: we have no experience of divine 
attributes and operations: I need not conclude my syllogism: you can draw the 
inference yourself.2
Two steps are involved in testing an enthymeme for validity: The first is to
supply the missing part of the argument, the second is to test the resulting syllo-
gism. Formulating the unstated proposition fairly may require sensitivity to the
context and an understanding of the intentions of the speaker. Consider the fol-
lowing argument: “No true Christian is vain, but some churchgoers are vain.” It
is the conclusion that remains unstated, so this is plainly a third-order syllogism.
What is the intended conclusion? If the speaker intends to imply only that “Some
churchgoers are not true Christians,” the argument is valid (EIO–2, Festino).
However, if the speaker’s intention is to establish that “Some true Christians are
not churchgoers,” the enthymeme is invalid (IEO–2), because in that case the fal-
lacy of illicit process of the major term is committed.
Usually, the context indicates unambiguously what the unstated proposition is.
For example, in a U.S. Supreme Court opinion in which federal legislation regulat-
ing intrastate violence motivated by gender (the Violence Against Women Act) was
held unconstitutional, the critical argument of the majority was expressed thus:
Gender-motivated crimes of violence are not, in any sense of the phrase, economic
activity. . . . Thus far in our nation’s history our cases have upheld Commerce Clause
regulation of intrastate activity only where that activity is economic in nature.3
The proposition that is understood but not stated in this argument is as-
suredly its conclusion: that gender-motivated crimes of violence may not be reg-
ulated by Congress under the long-existing precedent of Supreme Court cases.
To test this third-order enthymeme, we reformulate the argument so that its
premises and (tacit) conclusion are in standard form. The major premise (the
premise containing the predicate of the conclusion) is stated first; then mood and
figure are identified:
Third-order
enthymeme
An incompletely stated
syllogism in which the
proposition that is taken
for granted but not
stated is the conclusion.
Second-order
enthymeme
An incompletely stated
syllogism in which the
proposition that is taken
for granted but not
stated is the minor
premise.
First-order
enthymeme
An incompletely stated
syllogism in which the
proposition that is taken
for granted but not
stated is the major
premise.
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
275

Major premise: All activities that may be regulated by Congress under the prece-
dent of Supreme Court cases are economic activities.
Minor premise: No intrastate gender-motivated crimes of violence are economic
activities.
Conclusion (unstated but clearly indicated by the context): No intrastate gender-
motivated crimes of violence are activities that may be regulated by Congress under
the precedent of Supreme Court cases.
The mood of this syllogism is AEE; it is in the second figure because the middle
term is the predicate of both premises. Its form is therefore Camestres, a valid syl-
logistic argument.
In some cases a third-order enthymeme may seem to be invalid without re-
gard to context—for example, when both premises are negative, or when both
premises are particular propositions, or when their common term is undistrib-
uted. In such cases, no syllogistic conclusion could follow validly, and hence
such enthymemes are invalid in any context.
If it is one of the premises of the argument that is missing, it may be possible
to make the argument valid only by adding a premise that is highly implausible—
and pointing this out is certainly a legitimate criticism of an enthymematic argu-
ment. An even more crushing criticism, of course, would be to show that no
additional premise, however implausible, can transform the enthymeme into a
valid categorical syllogism.
The difference between enthymemes and normal syllogisms is essentially
rhetorical, not logical. No new logical principles need be introduced in dealing
with enthymemes, and they must be tested, ultimately, by the same methods that
apply to standard-form categorical syllogisms.
EXERCISES
For each of the following enthymematic arguments:
a. Formulate the plausible premise or conclusion, if any, that is missing
but understood.
b. Write the argument in standard form, including the missing premise or
conclusion needed to make the completed argument valid—if possible—
using parameters if necessary.
c. Name the order of the enthymeme.
d. If the argument is not valid even with the understood premise included,
name the fallacy that it commits.
EXAMPLE
1. Transgenic animals are manmade and as such are patentable.
—Alan E. Smith, cited in Genetic Engineering
(San Diego, CA: Greenhaven Press, 1990)
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
276

SOLUTION
a. The premise understood but not stated here is that whatever is man-
made is patentable.
b. Standard-form translation:
All manmade things are patentable things.
All transgenic animals are manmade things.
Therefore, all transgenic animals are patentable things.
c. The enthymeme is first-order, because the premise taken as understood
is the major premise of the completed argument.
d. This is a valid syllogism of the form AAA–1, Barbara.
2. Abraham Beame. . . campaigned for mayor—as has been mentioned in
recent weeks more often and with more irony than he might have
wished—on the slogan “If you don’t know the buck, you don’t know
the job—and Abe knows the buck.”
—The New Yorker, 26 August 1974
3. Although these textbooks purport to be a universal guide to learning of
great worth and importance—there is a single clue that points to anoth-
er direction. In the six years I taught in city and country schools, no one
ever stole a textbook.
—W. Ron Jones, Changing Education, Winter 1974
4. As a matter of fact, man, like woman, is flesh, therefore passive, the
plaything of his hormones and of the species, the restless prey of his
desires.
—Simone de Beauvoir, The Second Sex, 1949
*5. You never lose respect for a man who is a vicious competitor, and you
never hate a man you respect.
—Pancho Gonzalez, former U.S. tennis champion
6. . . . I am an Idealist, since I believe that all that exists is spiritual.
—John McTaggart Ellis McTaggart, Philosophical Studies, 1922
7. And why not become a perfect anthropomorphite? Why not assert the
deity or deities to be corporeal, and to have eyes, a nose, mouth, ears,
etc.? Epicurus maintained that no man had ever seen reason but in a
human figure; therefore, the gods must have a human figure. And this
argument, which is deservedly so much ridiculed by Cicero, becomes,
according to you, solid and philosophical.
—David Hume, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, part V, 1779
8. Small countries tend to remember history especially well, since it often
turns out badly for them.
—Marc Falcoff, “Semper Fidel,” The New Republic, 3 July 1989
9. It must have rained lately, because the fish just aren’t biting.
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
277

*10. It is not likely that the lies, misstatements, and omissions in President
Carter’s book are the result of ignorance. They must be the result, there-
fore, of malevolence.
—Facts and Logic about the Middle East, www.factsandlogic.org (2007)
11. No enthymemes are complete, so this argument is incomplete.
12. The chairman of the Student Conduct Legislative Council [at Stanford]
argued that free speech rights extend only to victimized minorities,
since the white majority does not need such protections.
—Nat Hentoff, “Stanford and the Speech Police,” 
The Washington Post, 30 July 1990
13. Only demonstrative proof should be able to make you abandon the the-
ory of the Creation; but such a proof does not exist in Nature.
—Moses Maimonides, The Guide for the Perplexed, 1180
14. It is probably true that the least destructive nuclear weapons are the
most dangerous, because they make it easier for a nuclear war to begin.
—Freeman Dyson, “Reflections: Weapons and Hope,” 
The New Yorker, 6 February 1984
*15. Man tends to increase at a greater rate than his means of subsistence;
consequently he is occasionally subject to a severe struggle for existence.
—Charles Darwin, The Descent of Man, 1871
16. No internal combustion engines are free from pollution; but no internal
combustion engine is completely efficient. You may draw your own
conclusion.
17. A nation without a conscience is a nation without a soul. A nation with-
out a soul is a nation that cannot live.
—Winston Churchill
18. Liberty means responsibility. That is why most men dread it.
—George Bernard Shaw, Maxims for Revolutionists, 1903
19. Who controls the past controls the future. Who controls the present con-
trols the past.
—George Orwell, 1984
*20. Productivity is desirable because it betters the condition of the vast ma-
jority of the people.
—Stephen Miller, “Adam Smith and the Commercial Republic,” 
The Public Interest, Fall 1980
21. Advertisements perform a vital function in almost any society, for they
help to bring buyers and sellers together.
—Burton M. Leiser, Liberty, Justice, and Morals, 1986
22. Logic is a matter of profound human importance precisely because it is
empirically founded and experimentally applied.
—John Dewey, Reconstruction in Philosophy, 1920
23. Iphigeneia at Aulis is a tragedy because it demonstrates inexorably how
human character, with its itch to be admired, combines with the malice
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
278

of heaven to produce wars which no one in his right mind would want
and which turn out to be utterly disastrous for everybody.
—George E. Dimock, Jr., Introduction to Iphigeneia at Aulis by Euripides, 1992
24. . . . the law does not expressly permit suicide, and what it does not ex-
pressly permit it forbids.
—Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics
*25. The man who says that all things come to pass by necessity cannot
criticize one who denies that all things come to pass by necessity: for
he admits that this too happens of necessity.
—Epicurus, Fragment XL, Vatican Collection
6
Sorites
Sometimes a single categorical syllogism will not suffice to account for our
ability to draw a desired conclusion from a group of premises. Thus, from the
premises
All diplomats are tactful.
Some government officials are diplomats.
All government officials are people in public life.
one cannot draw the conclusion
Some people in public life are tactful.
using a single syllogistic inference. Yet the indicated conclusion is entailed by the
stated premises. To derive it requires two syllogisms rather than one. A stepwise
process of argumentation must be resorted to, in which each step is a separate
categorical syllogism. When stated explicitly, the required argument is
All diplomats are tactful individuals.
Some government officials are diplomats.
Therefore some government officials are tactful individuals.
All government officials are people in public life.
Therefore some people in public life are tactful individuals.
This argument is not a syllogism but a chain of categorical syllogisms, con-
nected by the conclusion of the first, which is a premise of the second. This chain
has only two links, but more extended arguments may consist of a greater num-
ber. Because a chain is no stronger than its weakest link, an argument of this type
is valid if, and only if, all of its constituent syllogisms are valid.
Where such an argument is expressed enthymematically, with only the
premises and the final conclusion stated, it is called a sorites (pronounced 
so--rı-’-te-z—from the Greek, soros, meaning “heap or pile”; a sorites is a pile of syl-
logisms). Sorites may have three, four, or any number of premises. Some are very
lengthy indeed. The following example is drawn from the Monadology of the
philosopher Gottfried Leibniz:
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
Sorites
An argument whose
conclusion is inferred
from its premises by a
chain of syllogistic
inferences in which the
conclusion of each
inference serves as a
premise for the next,
and the conclusion of
the last syllogism is the
conclusion of the entire
argument.
279

The human soul is a thing whose activity is thinking. A thing whose activity is thinking
is one whose activity is immediately apprehended, and without any representation of
parts therein. A thing whose activity is immediately apprehended without any represen-
tation of parts therein is a thing whose activity does not contain parts. A thing whose
activity does not contain parts is one whose activity is not motion. A thing whose activ-
ity is not motion is not a body. What is not a body is not in space. What is not in space
is insusceptible of motion. What is insusceptible of motion is indissoluble (for dissolu-
tion is a movement of parts). What is indissoluble is incorruptible. What is incorruptible
is immortal. Therefore the human soul is immortal.
This sorites contains ten premises! Any sorites may be tested by making its
intermediate conclusions or steps explicit, then testing separately the various
categorical syllogisms thus obtained. If we ignore the possibility that an equivo-
cation is present, then the validity of Leibniz’s sorites is easily verified.
It is convenient to note here, in connection with the exercises at the end of
this section, that a sorites is in standard form when all of its propositions are
in standard form, when each term occurs exactly twice, and when every
proposition (except the last) has a term in common with the proposition that
immediately follows it. Thus one standard-form translation of Lewis Carroll’s
sorites
(1) Everyone who is sane can do Logic.
(2) No lunatics are fit to serve on a jury.
(3) None of your sons can do Logic.
Therefore none of your sons is fit to serve on a jury.
is
(2’) All persons fit to serve on a jury are sane persons.
(1’) All sane persons are persons who can do Logic.
(3’) No sons of yours are persons who can do Logic.
Therefore no sons of yours are persons fit to serve on a jury.
One can test it by stating the suppressed subconclusion explicitly and then test-
ing the resulting categorical syllogisms.
EXERCISES
A. Translate the propositions of the following sorites into standard form, and
test the validity of each sorites.4
EXAMPLE
1. (1) Babies are illogical.
(2) Nobody is despised who can manage a crocodile.
(3) Illogical persons are despised.
Therefore babies cannot manage crocodiles.
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
280

Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
SOLUTION
Standard-form translation:
(1’) All babies are illogical persons.
(3’) All illogical persons are despised persons.
(2’) No persons who can manage crocodiles are despised persons.
Therefore, no babies are persons who can manage crocodiles.
This sorites consists of two syllogisms, as follows:
All I is D.
No M is D.
All B is I.
All B is D.
Therefore all B is D.
Therefore no B is M.
I
D
B 
D
M
B 
Valid, Barbara
Valid, Cesare
2. (1) No experienced person is incompetent.
(2) Jenkins is always blundering.
(3) No competent person is always blundering.
Therefore Jenkins is inexperienced.
3. (1) The only books in this library that I do not recommend for reading are un-
healthy in tone.
(2) The bound books are all well written.
(3) All the romances are healthy in tone.
(4) I do not recommend that you read any of the unbound books.
Therefore all the romances in this library are well written.
4. (1) Only profound scholars can be dons at Oxford.
(2) No insensitive souls are great lovers of music.
(3) No one whose soul is not sensitive can be a Don Juan.
(4) There are no profound scholars who are not great lovers of music.
Therefore all Oxford dons are Don Juans.
*5. (1) No interesting poems are unpopular among people of real taste.
(2) No modern poetry is free from affectation.
(3) All your poems are on the subject of soap bubbles.
(4) No affected poetry is popular among people of real taste.
(5) Only a modern poem would be on the subject of soap bubbles.
Therefore all your poems are uninteresting.
281

Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
6. (1) None but writers are poets.
(2) Only military officers are astronauts.
(3) Whoever contributes to the new magazine is a poet.
(4) Nobody is both a military officer and a writer.
Therefore not one astronaut is a contributor to the new magazine.
B. Each of the following sets of propositions can serve as premises for a valid
sorites. For each, find the conclusion and establish that the argument is valid.
*1. (1) No one reads the Times unless he is well educated.
(2) No hedgehogs can read.
(3) Those who cannot read are not well educated.
2. (1) All puddings are nice.
(2) This dish is a pudding.
(3) No nice things are wholesome.
3. (1) The only articles of food that my doctor allows me are such as are not very
rich.
(2) Nothing that agrees with me is unsuitable for supper.
(3) Wedding cake is always very rich.
(4) My doctor allows me all articles of food that are suitable for supper.
4. (1) All my daughters are slim.
(2) No child of mine is healthy who takes no exercise.
(3) All gluttons who are children of mine are fat.
(4) No son of mine takes any exercise.
*5. (1) When I work a logic example without grumbling, you may be sure it is one
that I can understand.
(2) These sorites are not arranged in regular order, like the examples I am used to.
(3) No easy example ever makes my head ache.
(4) I can’t understand examples that are not arranged in regular order, like those I
am used to.
(5) I never grumble at an example, unless it gives me a headache.
7
Disjunctive and Hypothetical Syllogisms
Propositions are categorical when they affirm or deny the inclusion or exclusion
of categories or classes. Syllogisms, arguments consisting of two premises and a
conclusion, are called categorical when the propositions they contain are cate-
gorical. Up to this point our analysis has been of categorical syllogisms only.
However, a syllogism may contain propositions that are not categorical. Such
cases are not called categorical syllogisms but are instead named on the basis of
the kind of propositions they contain. Here we look briefly at some other kinds
of propositions and the syllogisms to which they give rise.
282

The categorical propositions with which we are familiar are simple in the
sense that they have a single component, which affirms or denies some class re-
lation. In contrast, some propositions are compound, in that they contain more
than one component, each of which is itself some other proposition.
Consider first the disjunctive (or alternative) proposition. An example is “She
was driven either by stupidity or by arrogance.” Its two components are “she
was driven by stupidity” and “she was driven by arrogance.” The disjunctive
proposition contains those two component propositions, which are called its
disjuncts. The disjunctive proposition does not categorically affirm the truth of ei-
ther one of its disjuncts, but says that at least one of them is true, allowing for the
possibility that both may be true.
If we have a disjunction as one premise, and as another premise the denial or
contradictory of one of its two disjuncts, then we can validly infer that the other
disjunct in that disjunction is true. Any argument of this form is a valid
disjunctive syllogism. A letter writer, critical of a woman nominated for high of-
fice by President George W. Bush, wrote:
In trying to cover up her own illegal alien peccadillo or stonewall her way out of it, she
was driven either by stupidity or arrogance. She’s obviously not stupid; her plight must
result, then, from her arrogance.5
As we use the term in this section, not every disjunctive syllogism is valid. The
argument
She was either arrogant or stupid.
She was arrogant.
Therefore she was not stupid.
is an example of what may be called an invalid disjunctive syllogism. We readily
see that, even if the premises were true, she may have been arrogant and stupid.
The truth of one disjunct of a disjunction does not imply the falsehood of the
other disjunct, because both disjuncts of a disjunction can be true. We have a
valid disjunctive syllogism, therefore, only where the categorical premise contra-
dicts one disjunct of the disjunctive premise and the conclusion affirms the other
disjunct of the disjunctive premise.
An objection might be raised at this point, based on such an argument as the
following:
Either Smith is in New York or Smith is in Paris.
Smith is in New York.
Therefore Smith is not in Paris.
Here the categorical premise affirms one disjunct of the stated disjunction,
and the conclusion contradicts the other disjunct, yet the conclusion seems to
follow validly. Closer analysis shows, however, that the stated disjunction
plays no role in the argument. The conclusion follows enthymematically from
the second, categorical premise, with the unexpressed additional premise
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
Disjunctive Syllogism
A syllogism in which one
of the premises is a
disjunction, the other
premise is the denial or
the contradictory of one
of the two disjuncts in
the first premise, and the
conclusion is the
statement that the other
disjunct in that first
premise is true. 
283

being the obviously true proposition that “Smith cannot be both in New York
and in Paris,” which can be stated in disjunctive form as
Either Smith is not in New York or Smith is not in Paris.
When this tacit premise is supplied and the superfluous original disjunction
is discarded, the resulting argument is easily seen to be a valid disjunctive syllo-
gism. The apparent exception is not really an exception, and the objection is
groundless.
The second kind of compound proposition we consider is the conditional (or
hypothetical) proposition, an example of which is “If the first native is a politician,
then the first native lies.” A conditional proposition contains two component
propositions: The one following the “if” is the antecedent, and the one following
the “then” is the consequent. A syllogism that contains conditional propositions
exclusively is called a pure hypothetical syllogism; for example,
If the first native is a politician, then he lies.
If he lies, then he denies being a politician.
Therefore if the first native is a politician, then he denies being a politician.
In this argument it can be observed that the first premise and the conclusion
have the same antecedent, that the second premise and the conclusion have the
same consequent, and that the consequent of the first premise is the same as the
antecedent of the second premise. It should be clear that any pure hypothetical
syllogism whose premises and conclusion have their component parts so related
is a valid argument.
A syllogism that has one conditional premise and one categorical premise is
called a mixed hypothetical syllogism. Two valid forms of the mixed hypotheti-
cal syllogism have been given special names. The first is illustrated by
If the second native told the truth, then only one native is a politician.
The second native told the truth.
Therefore only one native is a politician.
Here the categorical premise affirms the antecedent of the conditional prem-
ise, and the conclusion affirms its consequent. Any argument of this form is valid
and is said to be in the affirmative mood or modus ponens (from the Latin ponere,
meaning “to affirm”). One must not confuse the valid form modus ponens with
the clearly invalid form displayed by the following argument:
If Bacon wrote Hamlet, then Bacon was a great writer.
Bacon was a great writer.
Therefore Bacon wrote Hamlet.
This argument differs from modus ponens in that its categorical premise af-
firms the consequent, rather than the antecedent, of the conditional premise.
Any argument of this form is said to commit the fallacy of affirming the
consequent.
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
Pure hypothetical
syllogism
A syllogism that contains
only hypothetical
propositions.
Modus ponens
A mixed hypothetical
syllogism in which the
first premise is a
conditional proposition,
the second premise
affirms the antecedent of
that conditional, and the
conclusion affirms the
consequent of that
conditional. 
Mixed hypothetical
syllogism
A syllogism that contains
one conditional (or
hypothetical) premise,
and one categorical
premise.
Fallacy of affirming
the consequent
A fallacy in which, from
the truth of the
consequent of a
conditional proposition,
the conclusion is
reached that the
antecedent of that
conditional is true.
284

The other valid form of mixed hypothetical syllogism is illustrated by:
If the one-eyed prisoner saw two red hats, then he could tell the color of the hat on his
own head.
The one-eyed prisoner could not tell the color of the hat on his own head.
Therefore the one-eyed prisoner did not see two red hats.
Here the categorical premise denies the consequent of the conditional prem-
ise, and the conclusion denies its antecedent. Any argument of this form is valid
and is said to be in the form modus tollens (from the Latin tollere, meaning “to
deny”). One must not confuse the valid form modus tollens with the clearly in-
valid form displayed by the following argument:
If Carl embezzled the college funds, then Carl is guilty of a felony.
Carl did not embezzle the college funds.
Therefore Carl is not guilty of a felony.
This argument differs from modus tollens in that its categorical premise denies the
antecedent, rather than the consequent, of the conditional premise. Any argu-
ment of this form is said to commit the fallacy of denying the antecedent.
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
Modus tollens
A mixed hypothetical
syllogism in which the
first premise is a
conditional proposition,
the second premise is
the denial of the
consequent of that
conditional, and the
conclusion is the denial
of the antecedent of that
conditional.
Principal Kinds of Syllogisms
1. Categorical syllogisms, which contain only categorical propositions affirming
or denying the inclusion or exclusion of categories. Example:
All M is P.
All S is M.
Therefore all S is P.
2. Disjunctive syllogisms, which contain a compound, disjunctive (or alternative)
premise asserting the truth of at least one of two alternatives, and a premise that
asserts the falsity of one of those alternatives. Example:
Either P is true or Q is true.
P is not true.
Therefore Q is true.
3. Hypothetical syllogisms, which contain one or more compound, hypothetical
(or conditional) propositions, each affirming that if one of its components (the
antecedent) is true then the other of its components (the consequent) is true.
Two subtypes are distinguished:
A. Pure hypothetical syllogisms contain conditional propositions only.
Example:
If P is true, then Q is true.
If Q is true, then R is true.
Therefore if P is true, then R is true.
o v e r v i e w
Fallacy of denying the
antecedent A fallacy in
which, from the negation
of the antecedent of a
conditional proposition,
the conclusion is
reached that the
consequent of that
conditional is false.
285

EXERCISES
Identify the form of each of the following arguments and state whether the
argument is valid or invalid:
EXAMPLE
1. If a man could not have done otherwise than he in fact did, then he is
not responsible for his action. But if determinism is true, it is true of
every action that the agent could not have done otherwise. Therefore, if
determinism is true, no one is ever responsible for what he does.
—Winston Nesbit and Stewart Candlish, “Determinism and the Ability 
to Do Otherwise,” Mind, July 1978
SOLUTION
This is a pure hypothetical syllogism. Valid.
2. Men, it is assumed, act in economic matters only in response to pecu-
niary compensation or to force. Force in the modern society is largely,
although by no means completely, obsolete. So only pecuniary compen-
sation remains of importance.
—John Kenneth Galbraith, The New Industrial State
(Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1967)
3. If each man had a definite set of rules of conduct by which he regulated
his life he would be no better than a machine. But there are no such
rules, so men cannot be machines.
—A. M. Turing, “Computing Machinery and Intelligence,” 
Mind, volume 59, 1950
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
B. Mixed hypothetical syllogisms contain both a conditional premise and a
categorical premise.
If the categorical premise affirms the truth of the antecedent of the con-
ditional premise, and the consequent of that conditional premise is the con-
clusion of the argument, the form is valid and is called modus ponens.
Example:
If P is true, then Q is true.
P is true.
Therefore Q is true.
If the categorical premise affirms the falsity of the consequent of the con-
ditional premise, and the falsity of the antecedent of that conditional prem-
ise is the conclusion of the argument, the form is valid and is called modus
tollens. Example:
If P is true, then Q is true.
Q is false.
Therefore P is false.
286

4. If the second native told the truth, then the first native denied being a
politician. If the third native told the truth, then the first native denied
being a politician. Therefore if the second native told the truth, then the
third native told the truth.
*5. If the one-eyed prisoner does not know the color of the hat on his own
head, then the blind prisoner cannot have on a red hat. The one-eyed
prisoner does not know the color of the hat on his own head. Therefore
the blind prisoner cannot have on a red hat.
6. If all three prisoners have on white hats, then the one-eyed prisoner
does not know the color of the hat on his own head. The one-eyed pris-
oner does not know the color of the hat on his own head. Therefore all
three prisoners have on white hats.
7. The stranger is either a knave or a fool. The stranger is a knave. There-
fore the stranger is no fool.
8. If the first native is a politician, then the third native tells the truth. If the
third native tells the truth, then the third native is not a politician.
Therefore if the first native is a politician, then the third native is not a
politician.
9. Mankind, he said, judging by their neglect of him, have never, as I
think, at all understood the power of Love. For if they had understood
him they would surely have built noble temples and altars, and offered
solemn sacrifices in his honor; but this is not done.
—Plato, Symposium
*10. I have already said that he must have gone to King’s Pyland or to
Capleton. He is not at King’s Pyland, therefore he is at Capleton.
—Arthur Conan Doyle, The Adventure of Silver Blaze
11. If then, it is agreed that things are either the result of coincidence or for
an end, and that these cannot be the result of coincidence or spontaneity,
it follows that they must be for an end.
—Aristotle, Physics
12. There is no case known (neither is it, indeed, possible) in which a thing
is found to be the efficient cause of itself; for in such a case it would be
prior to itself, which is impossible.
—Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologiae, I, question 2, article 3
13. Either wealth is an evil or wealth is a good; but wealth is not an evil;
therefore wealth is a good.
—Sextus Empiricus, Against the Logicians, second century CE
14. I do know that this pencil exists; but I could not know this, if Hume’s
principles were true; therefore, Hume’s principles, one or both of them,
are false.
—G. E. Moore, Some Main Problems of Philosophy
(New York: Allen & Unwin, 1953)
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
287

*15. It is clear that we mean something, and something different in each
case, by such words [as substance, cause, change, etc.]. If we did not we
could not use them consistently, and it is obvious that on the whole we
do consistently apply and withhold such names.
—C. D. Broad, Scientific Thought, 1923
16. If number were an idea, then arithmetic would be psychology. But arith-
metic is no more psychology than, say, astronomy is. Astronomy is con-
cerned, not with ideas of the planets, but with the planets themselves,
and by the same token the objects of arithmetic are not ideas either.
—Gottlob Frege, The Foundations of Arithmetic, 1893
17. . . . If a mental state is to be identical with a physical state, the two must
share all properties in common. But there is one property, spatial localiz-
ability, that is not so shared; that is, physical states and events are locat-
ed in space, whereas mental events and states are not. Hence, mental
events and states are different from physical ones.
—Jaegwon Kim, “On the Psycho-Physical Identity Theory,” 
American Philosophical Quarterly, 1966
18. When we regard a man as morally responsible for an act, we regard him
as a legitimate object of moral praise or blame in respect of it. But it
seems plain that a man cannot be a legitimate object of moral praise or
blame for an act unless in willing the act he is in some important sense a
“free” agent. Evidently free will in some sense, therefore, is a precondi-
tion of moral responsibility.
—C. Arthur Campbell, In Defence of Free Will, 1938
19. In spite of the popularity of the finite-world picture, however, it is open
to a devastating objection. In being finite the world must have a limiting
boundary, such as Aristotle’s outermost sphere. That is impossible, be-
cause a boundary can only separate one part of space from another. This
objection was put forward by the Greeks, reappeared in the scientific
skepticism of the early Renaissance and probably occurs to any school-
child who thinks about it today. If one accepts the objection, one must
conclude that the universe is infinite.
—J. J. Callahan, “The Curvature of Space in a Finite Universe,” 
Scientific American, August 1976
*20. Total pacifism might be a good principle if everyone were to follow it.
But not everyone does, so it isn’t.
—Gilbert Harman, The Nature Of Morality, 1977
8
The Dilemma
The dilemma is a common form of argument in ordinary language. It is, in
essence, an argumentative device in which syllogisms on the same topic are com-
bined, sometimes with devastating effect. Each of the constituent syllogisms may
be quite ordinary, and therefore the dilemma is not of special importance from a
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
Dilemma
A common form of
argument in ordinary
discourse in which it is
claimed that a choice
must be made between
two alternatives, both of
which are (usually) bad.
288

strictly logical point of view. The premises of the syllogisms so combined are
formulated disjunctively, and devised in a way designed to trap the opponent by
forcing him to accept one or the other of the disjuncts. Thus the opponent is
forced to accept the truth of the conclusion of one or the other of the syllogisms
combined. When this is done successfully, the dilemma can prove to be a power-
ful instrument of persuasion.
People often say somewhat loosely that a person is “in” a dilemma (or “im-
paled on the horns of a dilemma”) when that person must choose between two
alternatives, both of which are bad or unpleasant. The dilemma is a form of argu-
ment intended to put one’s opponent in just that kind of position. In debate, one
uses a dilemma to offer alternative positions to one’s adversary, from which a
choice must be made, and then to prove that no matter which choice is made, the
adversary is committed to an unacceptable conclusion.
The distinguished physicist Richard Feynman, recounting his experiences in
the 1986 investigation of the catastrophic explosion of the Challenger space shut-
tle, was caustic in his criticism of mismanagement by administrators in the Na-
tional Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). He said:
Every time we talked to higher-level managers, they kept saying they didn’t know any-
thing about the problems below them. . . . Either the group at the top didn’t know, in
which case they should have known, or they did know, in which case they were lying
to us.6
An attack of this kind is designed to push the adversaries (in this case the NASA
administrators) into a corner and there annihilate them. The only explicitly stat-
ed premise of the argument is a disjunction, but one of the disjuncts must obvi-
ously be true: Either they knew or they didn’t know about the problems below
them. And whichever disjunct is chosen, the result for the adversary is very bad.
The conclusion of a dilemma can itself be a disjunction (for example, “Either the
NASA administrators did not know what they should have known, or they
lied”) in which case we call the dilemma a complex dilemma. But the conclu-
sion may also be a categorical proposition, in which case we call it a simple
dilemma.
A dilemma need not always have an unpleasant conclusion. An example of
one with a happy conclusion is provided by the following simple dilemma:
If the blest in heaven have no desires, they will be perfectly content; so they will be also
if their desires are fully gratified; but either they will have no desires, or have them fully
gratified; therefore they will be perfectly content.
The premises of a dilemma need not be stated in any special order; the dis-
junctive premise that offers the alternatives may either precede or follow the
other. The consequences of those alternatives may be stated in a conjunctive
proposition or in two separate propositions. An argument in dilemma form is
often expressed enthymematically; that is, its conclusion generally is thought to
be so obvious that it scarcely needs to be spelled out. This is well illustrated in a
passage from a letter of President Abraham Lincoln, defending the Emancipation
Proclamation that freed the slaves of the Confederacy:
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
Complex dilemma
An argument consisting
of (a) a disjunction,
(b) two conditional
premises linked by a
conjunction, and (c) a
conclusion that is not a
single categorical
proposition (as in a
simple dilemma) but a
disjunction, a pair of
(usually undesirable)
alternatives.
Simple dilemma
An argument designed
to push the adversary to
choose between two
alternatives, the (usually
undesirable) conclusion
in either case being a
single categorical
proposition.
289

But the proclamation, as law, either is valid, or is not valid. If it is not valid, it needs no
retraction, If it is valid, it cannot be retracted, any more than the dead can be brought
to life.7
Three ways of evading or refuting the conclusion of a dilemma have been
given special names, two of them relating to the fact that a dilemma has two (or
more) “horns.” These three ways of defeating a dilemma are known as “going
(or escaping) between the horns,” “taking (or grasping) it by the horns,” and “re-
butting it by means of a counterdilemma.” Note that these are not ways to prove
the dilemma invalid; rather, they are ways in which one seeks to avoid its conclu-
sion without challenging the formal validity of the argument.
One escapes between the horns of a dilemma by rejecting its disjunctive
premise. This method is often the easiest way to evade the conclusion of a dilem-
ma, for unless one half of the disjunction is the explicit contradictory of the other,
the disjunction may very well be false. For example, one justification sometimes
offered for giving grades to students is that recognizing good work will stimu-
late the students to study harder. Students may criticize this theory using the fol-
lowing dilemma:
If students are fond of learning, they need no stimulus, and if they dislike learning, no
stimulus will be of any avail. But any student either is fond of learning or dislikes it.
Therefore a stimulus is either needless or of no avail.
This argument is formally valid, but one can evade its conclusion by going be-
tween the horns. The disjunctive premise is false, for students have all kinds of
attitudes toward learning: Some may be fond of it, many dislike it, and many
are indifferent. For that third group a stimulus may be both needed and of
some avail. Going between the horns does not prove the conclusion to be false
but shows merely that the argument does not provide adequate grounds for ac-
cepting that conclusion.
When the disjunctive premise is unassailable, as when the alternatives ex-
haust the possibilities, it is impossible to escape between the horns. Another
method of evading the conclusion must be sought. One such method is to grasp
the dilemma by the horns, which involves rejecting the premise that is a conjunc-
tion. To deny a conjunction, we need only deny one of its parts. When we grasp
the dilemma by the horns, we attempt to show that at least one of the condition-
als is false. The dilemma just above, attacking the use of grades in school, relies
on the conditional “If students are fond of learning, they need no stimulus.” The
proponent of grading may grasp this dilemma by the horns and argue that even
students who are fond of learning may sometimes need stimulus, and that the
additional stimulus provided by grades promotes careful study by even the most
diligent students. There may be good response to this, of course—but the origi-
nal dilemma has been grasped firmly by the horns.
Rebutting a dilemma by means of a counterdilemma is the most ingenious
method of all, but it is seldom cogent, for reasons that will appear presently. To
rebut a given dilemma in this way, one constructs another dilemma whose con-
clusion is opposed to the conclusion of the original. Any counterdilemma may
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
290

be used in rebuttal, but ideally it should be built up out of the same ingredients
(categorical propositions) that the original dilemma contained.
A classical example of this elegant kind of rebuttal concerns the legendary
argument of an Athenian mother attempting to persuade her son not to enter
politics:
If you say what is just, men will hate you; and if you say what is unjust, the gods will
hate you; but you must either say the one or the other; therefore you will be hated.
Her son rebutted that dilemma with the following one:
If I say what is just, the gods will love me; and if I say what is unjust, men will love me.
I must say either the one or the other. Therefore I shall be loved!
In public discussion, where the dilemma is one of the strongest weapons of
controversy, the use of a rebuttal of this kind, which derives an opposite conclu-
sion from almost the same premises, is a mark of great rhetorical skill. If we
examine the dilemma and rebutting counterdilemma more closely, we see that
their conclusions are not as opposed as they might at first have seemed.
The conclusion of the first dilemma is that the son will be hated (by men or by
the gods), whereas that of the rebutting dilemma is that the son will be loved (by
the gods or by men). However, these two conclusions are perfectly compatible.
The rebutting counterdilemma serves merely to establish a conclusion different
from that of the original. Both conclusions may very well be true together, so no
refutation has been accomplished. But in the heat of controversy analysis is un-
welcome, and if such a rebuttal occurred in a public debate, the average audience
might agree that the rebuttal was an effective reply to the original argument.
That this sort of rebuttal does not refute the argument but only directs atten-
tion to a different aspect of the same situation is perhaps more clearly shown in
the case of the following dilemma, advanced by an “optimist”:
If I work, I earn money, and if I am idle, I enjoy myself. Either I work or I am idle. There-
fore either I earn money or I enjoy myself.
A “pessimist” might offer the following counterdilemma:
If I work, I don’t enjoy myself, and if I am idle, I don’t earn money. Either I work or I am
idle. Therefore either I don’t earn money or I don’t enjoy myself.
These conclusions represent merely different ways of viewing the same facts;
they do not constitute a disagreement over what the facts are.
No discussion of dilemmas would be complete unless it mentioned the cele-
brated lawsuit between Protagoras and Euathlus. Protagoras, a teacher who
lived in Greece during the fifth century BCE, specialized in teaching the art of
pleading before juries. Euathlus wanted to become a lawyer, but not being able
to pay the required tuition, he made an arrangement according to which Pro-
tagoras would teach him but not receive payment until Euathlus won his first
case. When Euathlus finished his course of study, he delayed going into practice.
Tired of waiting for his money, Protagoras brought suit against his former pupil
for the tuition money that was owed. Unmindful of the adage that the lawyer
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
291

who tries his own case has a fool for a client, Euathlus decided to plead his own
case in court. When the trial began, Protagoras presented his side of the case in a
crushing dilemma:
If Euathlus loses this case, then he must pay me (by the judgment of the court); if he
wins this case, then he must pay me (by the terms of the contract). He must either
lose or win this case. Therefore Euathlus must pay me.
The situation looked bad for Euathlus, but he had learned well the art of rhetoric.
He offered the court the following counterdilemma in rebuttal:
If I win this case, I shall not have to pay Protagoras (by the judgment of the court); if I
lose this case, I shall not have to pay Protagoras (by the terms of the contract, for then
I shall not yet have won my first case). I must either win or lose this case. Therefore I
do not have to pay Protagoras!8
Had you been the judge, how would you have decided?
Note that the conclusion of Euathlus’s rebutting dilemma is not compatible
with the conclusion of Protagoras’s original dilemma. One conclusion is the ex-
plicit denial of the other. However, it is rare that a counterdilemma stands in this
relation to the dilemma against which it is directed. When it does, the premises
involved are themselves inconsistent, and it is this implicit contradiction that the
two dilemmas make explicit.
EXERCISES
Discuss the various arguments that might be offered to refute each of the following:
EXAMPLE
1. If we interfere with the publication of false and harmful doctrines, we
shall be guilty of suppressing the liberties of others, whereas if we do
not interfere with the publication of such doctrines, we run the risk of
losing our own liberties. We must either interfere or not interfere with
the publication of false and harmful doctrines. Hence we must either be
guilty of suppressing the liberties of others or else run the risk of losing
our own liberties.
SOLUTION
It is impossible to go between the horns. It is possible to grasp it by either
horn, arguing either (a) that liberties do not properly include the right to
publish false and harmful doctrines or (b) that we run no risk of losing our
own liberties if we vigorously oppose false and harmful doctrines with true
and helpful ones. It could plausibly be rebutted (but not refuted) by the use
of its ingredients to prove that “we must either be guiltless of suppressing the
liberties of others or else run no risk of losing our own liberties.”
2. If you tell me what I already understand, you do not enlarge my under-
standing, whereas if you tell me something that I do not understand,
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
292

then your remarks are unintelligible to me. Whatever you tell me must
be either something I already understand or something that I do not un-
derstand. Hence whatever you say either does not enlarge my under-
standing or else is unintelligible to me.
3. If the conclusion of a deductive argument goes beyond the premises,
then the argument is invalid, while if the conclusion of a deductive ar-
gument does not go beyond the premises, then the argument brings
nothing new to light. The conclusion of a deductive argument must ei-
ther go beyond the premises or not go beyond them. Therefore either
deductive arguments are invalid or they bring nothing new to light.
4. If a deductive argument is invalid, it is without value, whereas a deduc-
tive argument that brings nothing new to light is also without value. Ei-
ther deductive arguments are invalid or they bring nothing new to light.
Therefore deductive arguments are without value.
*5. If the general had been loyal, he would have obeyed his orders, and if
he had been intelligent, he would have understood them. The general
either disobeyed his orders or else did not understand them. Therefore
the general must have been either disloyal or unintelligent.
6. If he was disloyal, then his dismissal was justified, and if he was unin-
telligent, then his dismissal was justified. He was either disloyal or un-
intelligent. Therefore his dismissal was justified.
7. If the several nations keep the peace, the United Nations is unnecessary,
while if the several nations go to war, the United Nations will have been
unsuccessful in its purpose of preventing war. Now, either the several
nations keep the peace or they go to war. Hence the United Nations is
unnecessary or unsuccessful.
8. If people are good, laws are not needed to prevent wrongdoing, whereas
if people are bad, laws will not succeed in preventing wrongdoing. People
are either good or bad. Therefore either laws are not needed to prevent
wrongdoing or laws will not succeed in preventing wrongdoing.
9. Archbishop Morton, Chancellor under Henry VII, was famous for his
method of extracting “contributions” to the king’s purse. A person who
lived extravagantly was forced to make a large contribution, because it
was obvious that he could afford it. Someone who lived modestly was
forced to make a large contribution because it was clear that he must
have saved a lot of money on living expenses. Whichever way he turned
he was said to be “caught on Morton’s fork.”
—Dorothy Hayden, Winning Declarer Play (New York: Harper & Row, 1969)
*10. All political action aims at either preservation or change. When desiring
to preserve, we wish to prevent a change to the worse; when desiring to
change, we wish to bring about something better. All political action is
then guided by some thought of better and worse.
—Leo Strauss, What Is Political Philosophy?, 1959
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
293

11. If a thing moves, it moves either in the place where it is or in that where
it is not; but it moves neither in the place where it is (for it remains
therein) nor in that where it is not (for it does not exist therein); there-
fore nothing moves.
—Sextus Empiricus, Against the Physicists
12. And what a life should I lead, at my age, wandering from city to city,
ever changing my place of exile, and always being driven out! For I am
quite sure that wherever I go, there, as here, the young men will flock to
me; and if I drive them away, their elders will drive me out at their re-
quest; and if I let them come, their fathers and friends will drive me out
for their sakes.
—Plato, Apology
13. If Socrates died, he died either when he was living or when he was
dead. But he did not die while living; for assuredly he was living, and as
living he had not died. Nor did he die when he was dead, for then he
would be twice dead. Therefore Socrates did not die.
—Sextus Empiricus, Against the Physicists
14. Inevitably, the use of the placebo involved built-in contradictions. A
good patient–doctor relationship is essential to the process, but what
happens to that relationship when one of the partners conceals impor-
tant information from the other? If the doctor tells the truth, he destroys
the base on which the placebo rests. If he doesn’t tell the truth, he jeop-
ardizes a relationship built on trust.
—Norman Cousins, Anatomy of an Illness
*15. The decision of the Supreme Court in U.S. v. Nixon (1974), handed
down the first day of the Judiciary Committee’s final debate, was criti-
cal. If the President defied the order, he would be impeached. If he
obeyed the order, it was increasingly apparent, he would be impeached
on the evidence.
—Victoria Schuck, “Watergate,” The Key Reporter, Winter 1975–1976
16. If we are to have peace, we must not encourage the competitive spirit,
whereas if we are to make progress, we must encourage the competitive
spirit. We must either encourage or not encourage the competitive spir-
it. Therefore we shall either have no peace or make no progress.
17. The argument under the present head may be put into a very concise
form, which appears altogether conclusive. Either the mode in which
the federal government is to be constructed will render it sufficiently
dependent on the people, or it will not. On the first supposition, it will
be restrained by that dependence from forming schemes obnoxious to
their constituents. On the other supposition, it will not possess the confi-
dence of the people, and its schemes of usurpation will be easily defeated
by the State governments, who will be supported by the people.
—James Madison, The Federalist Papers, no. 46, 1788
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
294

Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
18. . . . a man cannot enquire either about that which he knows, or about
that which he does not know; for if he knows, he has no need to en-
quire; and if not, he cannot; for he does not know the very subject about
which he is to enquire.
—Plato, Meno
19. We tell clients to try to go through the entire first interview without
even mentioning money. If you ask for a salary that is too high, the em-
ployer concludes that he can’t afford you. If you ask for one that is too
low, you’re essentially saying, “I’m not competent enough to handle the
job that you’re offering.”
—James Challenger, “What to Do—and Not to Do—When Job Hunting,” 
U.S. News & World Report, 6 August 1984
*20. “Pascal’s wager” is justifiably famous in the history of religion and also
of betting. Pascal was arguing that agnostics—people unsure of God’s
existence—are best off betting that He does exist. If He does but you end
up living as an unbeliever, then you could be condemned to spend eter-
nity in the flames of Hell. If, on the other hand, He doesn’t exist but you
live as a believer, you suffer no corresponding penalty for being in error.
Obviously, then, bettors on God start out with a big edge.
—Daniel Seligman, “Keeping Up,” Fortune, 7 January 1985
chapter
Summary
In this chapter we have examined syllogistic argument as it is used in ordinary
language, exhibiting the different guises in which syllogisms appear and show-
ing how they may be best understood, used, and evaluated.
In Section 1, we explained the need for techniques to translate syllogistic ar-
guments of any form into standard form, and we identified the ways in which
syllogistic arguments may deviate from standard-form categorical syllogisms.
In Section 2, we explained how syllogisms in ordinary language appearing to
have more than three terms may sometimes have the number of terms in them
appropriately reduced to three—by elimination of synonyms, and by elimination
of complementary classes.
In Section 3, we explained how the propositions of a syllogistic argument,
when not in standard form, may be translated into standard form to allow the
syllogism to be tested either by Venn diagrams or by use of the rules governing
syllogisms. Nonstandard propositions of nine different kinds were examined,
and the methods for translating each kind were explained and illustrated:
1. Singular propositions
2. Propositions having adjectives as predicates
3. Propositions having main verbs other than the copula “to be”
4. Statements having standard-form ingredients, but not in standard-form order
295

Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
5. Propositions having quantifiers other than “all,” “no,” and “some”
6. Exclusive propositions, using “only” or “none but”
7. Propositions without words indicating quantity
8. Propositions not resembling standard-form propositions at all
9. Exceptive propositions, using “all except” or similar expressions
In Section 4, we explained how the uniform translation of propositions into
standard form, essential for testing, may be assisted by the use of parameters.
In Sections 5 and 6, we explained enthymemes (syllogistic arguments in
which one of the constituent propositions has been suppressed), and sorites
(in which a chain of syllogisms may be compressed into a cluster of linked
propositions).
In Section 7, we explained syllogisms other than categorical: disjunctive syl-
logisms and hypothetical syllogisms, so called because they contain disjunctive
or hypothetical premises.
In Section 8, we discussed the rhetorical use of dilemmas, disjunctive argu-
ments that give to the adversary a choice of alternatives neither of which is ac-
ceptable. We explained and illustrated the three possible patterns of rhetorical
response: going between the horns of the dilemma, grasping the dilemma by its
horns, or devising a counterdilemma.
For additional exercises and tutorials about concepts covered in this
chapter, log in to MyLogicLab at www.mylogiclab.com and select your
current textbook.
END NOTES
1Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, 1787, The Analytic of Concepts, chap. 1, sec. 2. More than a cen-
tury later, Bertrand Russell presented a very different interpretation of singular propositions and univer-
sal propositions, and he later argued (in My Philosophical Development, 1959) that logic “cannot get far”
until the two forms are seen to be “completely different,” because the one (the singular) attributes a pred-
icate to a named subject, while the other (the universal) expresses a relation between two predicates. Rus-
sell’s interpretation had by that time become central to the theory of quantification in modern symbolic
logic, discussed at length in Chapter 10; Kant’s observation pertained to the use of singular propositions
in traditional syllogisms, which he knew to be very powerful logical instruments.
2David Hume, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, part 2 (1779).
3U.S. v. Morrison, 529 U.S. 598 (2000).
4All the exercises in Section 6, except 4 and 6 under A, are taken, with little or no modification, from
Lewis Carroll’s Symbolic Logic (New York: C. N. Potter, 1977).
5Peter Bertocci, “Plight Must Come from Arrogance,” Ann Arbor (MI) News, 19 January 2001.
6James Gleick, Genius: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman (New York: Pantheon Books, 1992).
7Letter to James C. Conkling, 26 August 1863.
8E. P. Northrop, Riddles in Mathematics: A Book of Paradoxes (Melbourne, FL: Krieger Publishing, 1975).
296

Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
SECTION 2
Exercises
5.
Where
E  explosives
F  flammable things (note that “flammable” 
and “inflammable” are synonyms!)
S  safe things
This syllogism translates into standard form thus:
All E is F.
No F is S.
Therefore no S is E.
Exhibited in a Venn diagram, this syllogism 
(in Camenes) is shown to be valid.
10.
Where
O  objects over six feet long
D  difficult things to store
U  useful things
This syllogism translates into standard form thus:
All O is D.
No D is U.
Therefore no U is O.
Exhibited in a Venn diagram, this syllogism (in Camenes) is shown to be
valid.
SECTION 3
Exercises
5.
All Junkos are the best things that money can buy.
10.
No people who face the sun are people who see their own shadows.
15.
No candidates of the Old Guard are persons supported by the Young Turks. 
(Or: No Young Turks are supporters of candidates of the Old Guard.)
20.
All people who love well are people who pray well.
25.
All soft answers are things that turn away wrath.
SECTION 4
Exercises
A.
5.
All cases in which she gives her opinion are cases in which she is asked to
give her opinion.
10.
No times when people do not discuss questions freely are times when peo-
ple are most likely to settle questions rightly.
B.
5.
No syllogisms having two negative premises are valid syllogisms.
Some valid syllogisms are not unsound arguments.
∴Some unsound arguments are syllogisms having two negative premises.
SOLUTIONS TO SELECTED EXERCISES
F
E
S 
D
O
U 
V
x
N
U 
Invalid
(exclusive premises)
EOI–4
10.
No persons who are truly objective are persons likely to be mistaken.
All persons likely to be mistaken are persons who ignore the facts.
∴No persons who ignore the facts are persons who are truly objective.
297

Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
L
O
I 
EAE–4
Invalid 
(illicit minor)
A
E
I 
AEE–4
Valid
Camenes
S
W
M 
EAE–2
EIO–2
Valid
Cesare 
Festino
x
15.
All things interesting to engineers are approximations.
No approximations are irrationals.
∴No irrationals are things interesting to engineers.
20.
No times when Bill goes to work are times when Bill wears a sweater.
This morning was a time when Bill wore a sweater.
∴This morning was not a time when Bill went to work.
25.
All valid syllogisms are syllogisms that distribute their middle terms in at
least one premise.
This syllogism is a syllogism that distributes its middle term in at least one
premise.
∴This syllogism is a valid syllogism.
D
V
T
AAA–2
AII–2
Invalid 
(undistributed middle)
x
30.
All situations in which much money is involved are situations in which com-
petition 
is stiff.
This situation is a situation in which much money is involved.
∴This situation is a situation in which competition is stiff.
298

Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
35.
All invalid syllogisms are syllogisms that commit an illicit process.
This syllogism is not a syllogism that commits an illicit process.
∴This syllogism is not an invalid syllogism.
C
I
T 
AEE–2
AOO–2
Valid
Camestres 
Baroko
x
R
N
V 
SECTION 5
Exercises
5.
a. Unstated conclusion: Those persons who are vicious competitors you do 
not hate.
b. Standard-form translation: 
All persons whom you respect are persons whom you do not hate. 
All persons who are vicious competitors are persons whom you respect. 
∴All persons who are vicious competitors are persons whom you do not hate. 
c. Third-order enthymeme. 
d. Valid (in Barbara).
10.
a. Unstated premise: All lies, misstatements, and omissions that are not the
result of ignorance are the result of malevolence. 
b. Standard-form translation: 
All lies, misstatements, and omissions that are not the result of ignorance
are lies, misstatements, and omissions that are the result of malevolence. 
All lies, misstatements, and omissions in Carter's book are lies, misstate-
ments, and omissions that are not the result of ignorance. 
∴All lies, misstatements, and omissions in Carter's book are lies, misstate-
ments, and omissions that are the result of malevolence.
c. First-order enthymeme. 
d. Valid (in Barbara). 
NOTE: The author of the passage intends to present a valid disjunctive syl-
logism in the form of an enthymeme. The assumed disjunctive premise is
disputable, of course.
M
C
T 
AAA–1
AII–1
Valid
Barbara 
Darii
x
299

Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
15.
a. Unstated premise: Species that tend to increase at a greater rate than their
means of subsistence are occasionally subject to a severe struggle for exis-
tence. 
b. Standard-form translation: 
All species that tend to increase at a greater rate than their means of subsis-
tence are species that are occasionally subject to a severe struggle for existence. 
Man is a species that tends to increase at a greater rate than his means of 
subsistence.
∴Man is a species that is occasionally subject to a severe struggle for exis-
tence. 
c. First-order enthymeme. 
d. Valid (in Barbara or Darii).
I
S
M 
x
B
D
P
20.
a. Unstated premise: All that betters the condition of the vast majority of the
people is desirable. 
b. Standard-form translation: 
All things that better the condition of the vast majority of the people are
things that are desirable. 
All productivity is a thing that betters the condition of the vast majority of
the people.
∴All productivity is a thing that is desirable. 
c. First-order enthymeme. 
d. Valid (in Barbara).
N
M
C 
25.
a. Unstated premise:  The man who says that all things come to pass by neces-
sity  cannot criticize those who, by his own admission, do what they do by
necessity. 
b. Standard-form translation: 
All people who are admitted to do what they do by necessity by the man
who says that all things come to pass by necessity are people who cannot be
criticized by the man who says that all things come to pass by necessity. 
300

SECTION 6
Exercises
A.
5.
(1) All interesting poems are poems that are popular among people of real
taste.
(4) No affected poems are poems that are popular among people of real
taste.
(2) All modern poems are affected poems.
(5) All poems on the subject of soap bubbles are modern poems.
(3) All poems of yours are poems on the subject of soap bubbles.
∴No poems of yours are interesting poems.
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
All people who deny that all things come to pass by necessity are people
who are admitted to do what they do by necessity by the man who says that
all things come to pass by necessity. 
∴All people who deny that all things come to pass by necessity are people
who cannot be criticized by the man who says that all things come to pass
by necessity. 
c. First-order enthymeme. 
d. Valid (in Barbara).
A
C
D
A 
I
P
 
All I is P.
 
No A is P.
 
 
No A is I.
Valid
Camestres
M
I
A
 
No A is I.
 
All M is A.
 
 
No M is I.
Valid
Celarent
S 
I
M
 
No M is I.
 
All S is M.
 
 
No S is I.
Valid
Celarent
Y
I
S
 
No S is I.
 
All Y is S.
 
 
No Y is I.
Valid
Celarent
Valid
B.
1.
(1) All those who read The Times are those who are well educated.
(3) No creatures who cannot read are those who are well educated.
(2) All hedgehogs are creatures who cannot read.
∴No hedgehogs are those who read The Times.
301

5.
(2) These sorites are examples not arranged in regular order, like the exam-
ples I am used to.
(4) No examples not arranged in regular order, like the examples I am used
to, are examples I can understand.
(1) All examples I do not grumble at are examples I can understand.
(5) All examples that do not give me a headache are examples I do not
grumble at.
(3) All easy examples are examples that do not give me a headache.
∴These sorites are not easy examples.
Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
 
All H is G.
 
No S is G.
 
 
No S is H.
Valid
Camestres
S 
H
G
S 
E
H
 
All E is H.
 
No S is H.
 
 
No S is E.
Valid
Camestres
Valid
S 
U
N
 
No N is U.
 
All S is N.
 
 
No S is U.
Valid
Celarent
S 
G
U
 
All G is U.
 
No S is U.
 
 
No S is G.
Valid
Camestres
C 
T
W
 
All T is W.
 
No C is W.
 
 
No C is T.
Valid
Camestres
H
T
C
 
No C is T.
 
All H is C.
 
 
No H is T.
Valid
Celarent
Valid
SECTION 7
Exercises
5.
Mixed hypothetical syllogism, modus ponens. Valid.
10.
Disjunctive syllogism. Valid.
15.
Mixed hypothetical syllogism, modus tollens. Valid.
20.
Two arguments are present here: The first is a pure hypothetical syllogism,
the second is a mixed hypothetical syllogism of form modus tollens. Both are
valid.
SECTION 8
Exercises
5.
Very easy to go between the horns here. Plausible to grasp by either horn.
10.
Impossible to go between the horns. It is plausible to grasp it by either horn,
arguing either (a) that when desiring to preserve we may be motivated sim-
ply by inertia and seek to rest in the status quo, even while admitting that a
change would not be worse and might even be better—but just “not worth
the trouble of changing” or (b) that when desiring to change we may be
motivated simply by boredom with the status quo, and seek a change even
while admitting that a change might not be better and might even be
302

Syllogisms in Ordinary Language
worse—but “let’s have a little variety.” These are psychological rather than
political or moral considerations, but the original dilemma appears to be
itself psychological. The usual rebutting counterdilemma could be used here:
When desiring to preserve, we do not wish to bring about something better;
when desiring to change, we do not wish to prevent a change to the worse.
It is a question, however, how plausible this is.
15.
There were in theory a number of ways to go between the horns here:
Between defiance and obedience to the Court decision there are many
degrees of partial compliance that fall short of full obedience but do not con-
stitute outright defiance. Either horn could be grasped, at least in theory: An
emergency situation in the international sphere might prevent defiance from
being followed by impeachment; and it is logically possible that the evi-
dence produced by obedience to the order might not have been sufficient to
persuade the Congress to impeach.
20.
This is a rather informal version of Pascal’s argument, which has been much dis-
cussed for more than three hundred years. If it is interpreted as having the dis-
junctive premise that either God exists or God does not exist, then it is obviously
impossible to go between the horns. But each of the horns can be grasped to
refute the given argument. It might be argued that if you live a life of conspicu-
ous virtue even though you are not a believer, you will be condemned to
spend eternity in the flames of Hell. Or it might be argued that if you live as a
believer you will suffer the loss of all those earthly pleasures that you might
otherwise have enjoyed, and that that is a very grave penalty indeed.
303

This page intentionally left blank 

Symbolic Logic
1
Modern Logic and Its Symbolic Language
2
The Symbols for Conjunction, Negation, and Disjunction
3
Conditional Statements and Material Implication
4
Argument Forms and Refutation by Logical Analogy
5
The Precise Meaning of “Invalid” and “Valid”
6
Testing Argument Validity Using Truth Tables
7
Some Common Argument Forms
8
Statement Forms and Material Equivalence
9
Logical Equivalence
10
The Three “Laws of Thought”
1
Modern Logic and Its Symbolic Language
To have a full understanding of deductive reasoning we need a general theory of
deduction. A general theory of deduction will have two objectives: (1) to explain
the relations between premises and conclusions in deductive arguments, and 
(2) to provide techniques for discriminating between valid and invalid deduc-
tions. Two great bodies of logical theory have sought to achieve these ends. The
first is called classical (or Aristotelian) logic. The second, called modern, symbolic,
or mathematical logic, is this chapter.
Although these two great bodies of theory have similar aims, they proceed in
very different ways. Modern logic does not build on the system of syllogisms. It
does not begin with the analysis of categorical propositions. It does seek to dis-
criminate valid from invalid arguments, although it does so using very different
concepts and techniques. Therefore we must now begin afresh, developing a
modern logical system that deals with some of the very same issues dealt with by
traditional logic—and does so even more effectively.
Modern logic begins by first identifying the fundamental logical connectives
on which deductive arguments depend. Using these connectives, a general ac-
count of such arguments is given, and methods for testing the validity of argu-
ments are developed.
This analysis of deduction requires an artificial symbolic language. In a
natural language—English or any other—there are peculiarities that make
exact logical analysis difficult: Words may be vague or equivocal, the
construction of arguments may be ambiguous, metaphors and idioms may
confuse or mislead, emotional appeals may distract. These difficulties can be
largely overcome with an artificial language in which logical relations can be
From Chapter 8 of Introduction to Logic, Fourteenth Edition. Irving M. Copi, Carl Cohen, Kenneth McMahon. 
Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Prentice Hall. All rights reserved.
This asset is
intentionally omitted
from this text. It may
be accessed at
www.mcescher.com.
(Belvedere by 
M.C. Escher)

formulated with precision. The most fundamental elements of this modern
symbolic language will be introduced in this chapter.
Symbols greatly facilitate our thinking about arguments. They enable us to
get to the heart of an argument, exhibiting its essential nature and putting
aside what is not essential. Moreover, with symbols we can perform, almost
mechanically, with the eye, some logical operations which might otherwise
demand great effort. It may seem paradoxical, but a symbolic language there-
fore helps us to accomplish some intellectual tasks without having to think too
much. The Indo-Arabic numerals we use today (1, 2, 3, . . .) illustrate the ad-
vantages of an improved symbolic language. They replaced cumbersome
Roman numerals (I, II, III, . . .), which are very difficult to manipulate. To mul-
tiply 113 by 9 is easy; to multiply CXIII by IX is not so easy. Even the Romans,
some scholars contend, were obliged to find ways to symbolize numbers more
efficiently.
Classical logicians did understand the enormous value of symbols in analy-
sis. Aristotle used symbols as variables in his own analyses, and the refined sys-
tem of Aristotelian syllogistics uses symbols in very sophisticated ways.
However, much real progress has been made, mainly during the twentieth century,
in devising and using logical symbols more effectively.
The modern symbolism with which deduction is analyzed differs greatly
from the classical. The relations of classes of things are not central for modern lo-
gicians as they were for Aristotle and his followers. Instead, logicians look now
to the internal structure of propositions and arguments, and to the logical links—
very few in number—that are critical in all deductive argument. Modern sym-
bolic logic is therefore not encumbered, as Aristotelian logic was, by the need to
transform deductive arguments into syllogistic form.
The system of modern logic we now begin to explore is in some ways less el-
egant than analytical syllogistics, but it is more powerful. There are forms of de-
ductive argument that syllogistics cannot adequately address. Using the
approach taken by modern logic, with its more versatile symbolic language, we
can pursue the aims of deductive analysis directly and we can penetrate more
deeply. The logical symbols we shall now explore permit more complete and
more efficient achievement of the central aim of deductive logic: discriminating
between valid and invalid arguments.
2
The Symbols for Conjunction, Negation, 
and Disjunction
In this chapter we shall be concerned with relatively simple arguments such as:
The blind prisoner has a red hat or the blind prisoner has a white hat.
The blind prisoner does not have a red hat.
Therefore the blind prisoner has a white hat.
and
Symbolic Logic
306

If Mr. Robinson is the brakeman’s next-door neighbor, then Mr. Robinson lives
halfway between Detroit and Chicago.
Mr. Robinson does not live halfway between Detroit and Chicago.
Therefore Mr. Robinson is not the brakeman’s next-door neighbor.
Every argument of this general type contains at least one compound state-
ment. In studying such arguments we divide all statements into two general cat-
egories: simple and compound. A simple statement does not contain any other
statement as a component. For example, “Charlie is neat” is a simple statement.
A compound statement does contain another statement as a component. For ex-
ample, “Charlie is neat and Charlie is sweet” is a compound statement, because
it contains two simple statements as components. Of course, the components of a
compound statement may themselves be compound. In formulating definitions
and principles in logic, one must be very precise. What appears simple often
proves more complicated than had been supposed. The notion of a “component
of a statement” is a good illustration of this need for caution.
One might suppose that a component of a statement is simply a part of a
statement that is itself a statement. But this account does not define the term with
enough precision, because one statement may be a part of a larger statement and
yet not be a component of it in the strict sense. For example, consider the state-
ment: “The man who shot Lincoln was an actor.” Plainly the last four words of
this statement are a part of it, and could indeed be regarded as a statement; it is
either true or it is false that Lincoln was an actor. But the statement that “Lincoln
was an actor,” although undoubtedly a part of the larger statement, is not a
component of that larger statement.
We can explain this by noting that, for part of a statement to be a component of
that statement, two conditions must be satisfied: (1) The part must be a statement
in its own right; and (2) if the part is replaced in the larger statement by any other
statement, the result of that replacement must be meaningful—it must make
sense.
The first of these conditions is satisfied in the Lincoln example, but the sec-
ond is not. Suppose the part “Lincoln was an actor” is replaced by “there are
lions in Africa.” The result of this replacement is nonsense: “The man who shot
there are lions in Africa.” The term component is not a difficult one to under-
stand, but—like all logical terms—it must be defined accurately and applied
carefully.
A. Conjunction
There are several types of compound statements, each requiring its own logical
notation. The first type of compound statement we consider is the conjunction.
We can form the conjunction of two statements by placing the word “and” be-
tween them; the two statements so combined are called conjuncts. Thus the com-
pound statement, “Charlie is neat and Charlie is sweet,” is a conjunction whose
first conjunct is “Charlie is neat” and whose second conjunct is “Charlie is
sweet.”
Symbolic Logic
Compound statement
A statement that
contains two or more
statements as
components.
Conjunction
A truth-functional
connective meaning
“and,” symbolized by
the dot, •. A statement
of the form p • q is true
if and only if p is true
and q is true.
Simple statement
A statement that does
not contain any other
statement as a
component.
Conjunct
Each one of
the component
statements connected in
a conjunctive statement
Component
A part of a compound
statement that is itself a
statement, and is of
such a nature that, if
replaced in the larger
statement by any other
statement, the result will
be meaningful.
307

The word “and” is a short and convenient word, but it has other uses besides
connecting statements. For example, the statement, “Lincoln and Grant were
contemporaries,” is not a conjunction, but a simple statement expressing a rela-
tionship. To have a unique symbol whose only function is to connect statements
conjunctively, we introduce the dot “ ” as our symbol for conjunction. Thus the
previous conjunction can be written as “Charlie is neat 
Charlie is sweet.” More
generally, where p and q are any two statements whatever, their conjunction is
written 
In some books, other symbols are used to express conjunction, such
as “ ” or “&”.
We know that every statement is either true or false. Therefore we say that
every statement has a truth value, where the truth value of a true statement is
true, and the truth value of a false statement is false. Using this concept, we can
divide compound statements into two distinct categories, according to whether
the truth value of the compound statement is determined wholly by the truth
values of its components, or is determined by anything other than the truth val-
ues of its components.
We apply this distinction to conjunctions. The truth value of the conjunction
of two statements is determined wholly and entirely by the truth values of its
two conjuncts. If both its conjuncts are true, the conjunction is true; otherwise it
is false. For this reason a conjunction is said to be a truth-functional compound
statement, and its conjuncts are said to be truth-functional components of it.
Not every compound statement is truth-functional. For example, the truth
value of the compound statement, “Othello believes that Desdemona loves Cas-
sio,” is not in any way determined by the truth value of its component simple
statement, “Desdemona loves Cassio,” because it could be true that Othello be-
lieves that Desdemona loves Cassio, regardless of whether she does or not. So
the component, “Desdemona loves Cassio,” is not a truth-functional component
of the statement, “Othello believes that Desdemona loves Cassio,” and the state-
ment itself is not a truth-functional compound statement.
For our present purposes we define a component of a compound statement
as being a truth-functional component if, when the component is replaced in the
compound by any different statements having the same truth value as each
other, the different compound statements produced by those replacements also
have the same truth values as each other. Now a compound statement is defined
as being a truth-functional compound statement if all of its components are
truth-functional components of it.1
We shall be concerned only with those compound statements that are truth-
functionally compound. In the remainder of this text, therefore, we shall use the
term simple statement to refer to any statement that is not truth-functionally
compound.
A conjunction is a truth-functional compound statement, so our dot symbol
is a truth-functional connective. Given any two statements, p and q, there are
only four possible sets of truth values they can have. These four possible cases,
and the truth value of the conjunction in each, can be displayed as follows:
 ¿
p# q.
#
#
Symbolic Logic
Dot The symbol for
conjunction, •, meaning
“and.”
Truth value The status
of any statement as true
or false (T or F).
Truth-functional
component
Any component of a
compound statement
whose replacement
there by any other
statement having the
same truth value would
leave the truth value of
the compound
statement unchanged.
Truth-functional
compound statement
A compound statement
whose truth value is
determined wholly by
the truth values of its
components.
Truth-functional
connective Any logical
connective (e.g.,
conjunction, disjunction,
material implication and
material equivalence)
between the
components of a truth-
functionally compound
statement.
308

Where p is true and q is true, 
is true.
Where p is true and q is false, 
is false.
Where p is false and q is true, 
is false.
Where p is false and q is false, 
is false.
If we represent the truth values “true” and “false” by the capital letters T and
F, the determination of the truth value of a conjunction by the truth values of its
conjuncts can be represented more compactly and more clearly by means of a
truth table:
p# q
p# q
p# q
p# q
Symbolic Logic
This truth table can be taken as defining the dot symbol, because it explains
what truth values are assumed by 
in every possible case.
We abbreviate simple statements by capital letters, generally using for this
purpose a letter that will help us remember which statement it abbreviates. Thus
we may abbreviate “Charlie is neat and Charlie is sweet” as 
Some conjunc-
tions, both of whose conjuncts have the same subject term—for example, “Byron
was a great poet and Byron was a great adventurer”—are more briefly and per-
haps more naturally stated in English by placing the “and” between the predi-
cate terms and not repeating the subject term, as in “Byron was a great poet and
a great adventurer.” For our purposes, we regard the latter as formulating the
same statement as the former and symbolize either one as 
If both conjuncts
of a conjunction have the same predicate term, as in “Lewis was a famous explor-
er and Clark was a famous explorer,” the conjunction is usually abbreviated in
English by placing the “and” between the subject terms and not repeating the
predicate, as in “Lewis and Clark were famous explorers.” Either formulation is
symbolized as 
As shown by the truth table defining the dot symbol, a conjunction is true if
and only if both of its conjuncts are true. The word “and” has another use in
which it does not merely signify (truth-functional) conjunction, but has the sense
of “and subsequently,” meaning temporal succession. Thus the statement, “Jones
entered the country at New York and went straight to Chicago,” is significant
and might be true, whereas “Jones went straight to Chicago and entered the
country at New York” is hardly intelligible. There is quite a difference between
“He took off his shoes and got into bed” and “He got into bed and took off his
shoes.”* Such examples show the desirability of having a special symbol with an
exclusively truth-functional conjunctive use.
L# C.
P# A.
N# S.
p# q
*In The Victoria Advocate, Victoria, Texas, 27 October 1990, appeared the following report: “Ramiro Ramirez
Garza, of the 2700 block of Leary Lane, was arrested by police as he was threatening to commit suicide and
flee to Mexico.”
p
q
p q
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
#
Truth table An array on
which all possible truth
values of compound
statements are
displayed, through the
display of all possible
combinations of the
truth values of their
simple components. A
truth table may be used
to define truth-functional
connectives; it may also
be used to test the
validity of many
deductive arguments.
309

Note that the English words “but,” “yet,” “also,” “still,” “although,” “howev-
er,” “moreover,” “nevertheless,” and so on, and even the comma and the semicolon,
can also be used to conjoin two statements into a single compound statement, and
in their conjunctive sense they can all be represented by the dot symbol.
B. Negation
The negation (or contradictory or denial) of a statement in English is often
formed by the insertion of a “not” in the original statement. Alternatively, one
can express the negation of a statement in English by prefixing to it the phrase “it
is false that” or “it is not the case that.” It is customary to use the symbol “
”,
called a curl or a tilde, to form the negation of a statement. (Again, some books
use the symbol “-” for negation.) Thus, where M symbolizes the statement “All
humans are mortal,” the various statements “Not all humans are mortal,” “Some
humans are not mortal,” “It is false that all humans are mortal,” and “It is not the
case that all humans are mortal” are all symbolized as 
More generally,
where p is any statement whatever, its negation is written 
Some logicians
treat the curl as another connective, but since it does not actually connect two or
more units, it is sufficient to note that it performs an operation—reversing truth
value—on a single unit, and thus may be referred to as an operator. It is a truth-
functional operator, of course. The negation of any true statement is false, and the
negation of any false statement is true. This fact can be presented very simply
and clearly by means of a truth table:
'p.
'M.
'
Symbolic Logic
This truth table may be regarded as the definition of the negation “
” symbol.
C. Disjunction
The disjunction (or alternation) of two statements is formed in English by insert-
ing the word “or” between them. The two component statements so combined
are called disjuncts (or alternatives).
The English word “or” is ambiguous, having two related but distinguishable
meanings. One of them is exemplified in the statement, “Premiums will be
waived in the event of sickness or unemployment.” The intention here is obvi-
ously that premiums are waived not only for sick persons and for unemployed
persons, but also for persons who are both sick and unemployed. This sense of
the word “or” is called weak or inclusive. An inclusive disjunction is true if one
or the other or both disjuncts are true; only if both disjuncts are false is their in-
clusive disjunction false. The inclusive “or” has the sense of “either, possibly
both.” Where precision is at a premium, as in contracts and other legal docu-
ments, this sense is often made explicit by the use of the phrase “and/or.”
The word “or” is also used in a strong or exclusive sense, in which the mean-
ing is not “at least one” but “at least one and at most one.” Where a restaurant
'
p
p
T
F
F
T

Negation
Denial; symbolized by
the tilde or curl. p
simply means “it is not
the case that p,” and
may be read as “not-p.”
Curl or tilde
The symbol for negation,
. It appears
immediately before (to
the left of) what is
negated or denied.
Disjunction
A truth-functional
connective meaning
“or”; components so
connected are called
disjuncts. There are two
types of disjunction:
inclusive and exclusive.
Inclusive disjunction
A truth-functional
connective between two
components called
disjuncts. A compound
statement asserting
inclusive disjunction is
true when at least one of
the disjuncts (that is,
one or both) is true.
Normally called simply
“disjunction,” it is also
called “weak disjunction”
and is symbolized by the
wedge, .
¡
310

Symbolic Logic
lists “salad or dessert” on its dinner menu, it is clearly meant that, for the stated
price of the meal, the diner may have one or the other but not both. Where preci-
sion is at a premium and the exclusive sense of “or” is intended, the phrase “but
not both” is often added.
We interpret the inclusive disjunction of two statements as an assertion that
at least one of the statements is true, and we interpret their exclusive disjunc-
tion as an assertion that at least one of the statements is true but not both are
true. Note that the two kinds of disjunction have a part of their meanings in
common. This partial common meaning, that at least one of the disjuncts is
true, is the whole meaning of the inclusive “or” and a part of the meaning of
the exclusive “or.”
Although disjunctions are stated ambiguously in English, they are unam-
biguous in Latin. Latin has two different words corresponding to the two differ-
ent senses of the English word “or.” The Latin word vel signifies weak or
inclusive disjunction, and the Latin word aut corresponds to the word “or” in its
strong or exclusive sense. It is customary to use the initial letter of the word vel to
stand for “or” in its weak, inclusive sense. Where p and q are any two statements
whatever, their weak or inclusive disjunction is written 
Our symbol for in-
clusive disjunction, called a wedge (or, less frequently, a vee) is also a truth-func-
tional connective. A weak disjunction is false only if both of its disjuncts are false.
We may regard the wedge as being defined by the following truth table:
p ¡ q.
The first specimen argument presented in this section was a disjunctive syllo-
gism. (A syllogism is a deductive argument consisting of two premises and a con-
clusion.)
The blind prisoner has a red hat or the blind prisoner has a white hat.
The blind prisoner does not have a red hat.
Therefore the blind prisoner has a white hat.
Its form is characterized by saying that its first premise is a disjunction; its
second premise is the negation of the first disjunct of the first premise; and its
conclusion is the same as the second disjunct of the first premise. It is evident
that the disjunctive syllogism, so defined, is valid on either interpretation of the
word “or”—that is, regardless of whether an inclusive or exclusive disjunction is
intended. The typical valid argument that has a disjunction for a premise is, like
the disjunctive syllogism, valid on either interpretation of the word “or,” so a
simplification may be effected by translating the English word “or” into our log-
ical symbol “ ”—regardless of which meaning of the English word “or” is intended.
Only a close examination of the context, or an explicit questioning of the speaker
or writer, can reveal which sense of “or” is intended. This problem, often impos-
¡
p
q
p
q
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
¡
Exclusive disjunction
or strong disjunction
A logical relation
meaning “or” that may
connect two component
statements. A
compound statement
asserting exclusive
disjunction says that at
least one of the
disjuncts is true and that
at least one of the
disjuncts is false. It is
contrasted with an
“inclusive” (or “weak”)
disjunction, which says
that at least one of the
disjuncts is true and that
they may both be true.
Wedge
The symbol for weak
(inclusive) disjunction, .
Any statement of the
form p
q is true if p is
true, or if q is true, or if
both p and q are true.
¡
¡
311

Symbolic Logic
sible to resolve, can be avoided if we agree to treat any occurrence of the word
“or” as inclusive. On the other hand, if it is stated explicitly that the disjunction is
intended to be exclusive—by means of the added phrase “but not both,” for ex-
ample—we have the symbolic machinery to formulate that additional sense, as
will be shown directly.
Where both disjuncts have either the same subject term or the same predicate
term, it is often natural to compress the formulation of their disjunction in Eng-
lish by placing the “or” so that there is no need to repeat the common part of the
two disjuncts. Thus, “Either Smith is the owner or Smith is the manager” might
equally well be stated as “Smith is either the owner or the manager,” and either
one is properly symbolized as 
And “Either Red is guilty or Butch is
guilty” may be stated as “Either Red or Butch is guilty”; either one may be sym-
bolized as 
The word “unless” is often used to form the disjunction of two statements.
Thus, “You will do poorly on the exam unless you study” is correctly symbolized
as 
because that disjunction asserts that one of the disjuncts is true, and
hence that if one of them is false, the other must be true. Of course, you may
study and do poorly on the exam.
The word “unless” is sometimes used to convey more information; it may
mean (depending on context) that one or the other proposition is true but that
not both are true. That is, “unless” may be intended as an exclusive disjunction.
Thus it was noted by Ted Turner that global warming will put New York under
water in one hundred years and “will be the biggest catastrophe the world has
ever seen—unless we have nuclear war.” Here the speaker did mean that at
least one of the two disjuncts is true, but of course they cannot both be true.
Other uses of “unless” are ambiguous. When we say, “The picnic will be held
unless it rains,” we surely do mean that the picnic will be held if it does not
rain. Do we mean that it will not be held if it does rain? That may be uncertain.
It is wise policy to treat every disjunction as weak or inclusive unless it is cer-
tain that an exclusive disjunction is meant. “Unless” is best symbolized simply
with the wedge 
D. Punctuation
In English, punctuation is absolutely required if complicated statements are to
be clear. Many different punctuation marks are used, without which many sen-
tences would be highly ambiguous. For example, quite different meanings attach
to “The teacher says John is a fool” when it is given different punctuations: “The
teacher,” says John, “is a fool”; or “The teacher says ‘John is a fool.’” Punctuation
is equally necessary in mathematics. In the absence of a special convention, no
number is uniquely denoted by 
although when it is made clear how
its constituents are to be grouped, it denotes either 11 or 16: the first when punc-
tuated 
the second when punctuated 
To avoid ambigui-
ty, and to make meaning clear, punctuation marks in mathematics appear in the
form of parentheses, ( ), which are used to group individual symbols; brackets,
2 * (3 + 5).
(2 * 3) + 5,
2 * 3 + 5,
(¡).
P ¡ S,
R ¡ B.
O ¡ M.
Punctuation
The parentheses,
brackets, and braces
used in mathematics
and logic to eliminate
ambiguity.
312

Symbolic Logic
[ ], which are used to group expressions that include parentheses; and braces, { },
which are used to group expressions that include brackets.
In the language of symbolic logic those same punctuation marks—parenthe-
ses, brackets, and braces—are equally essential, because in logic compound
statements are themselves often compounded together into more complicated
ones. Thus 
is ambiguous: it might mean the conjunction of p with the
disjunction of q with r, or it might mean the disjunction whose first disjunct is the
conjunction of p and q and whose second disjunct is r. We distinguish between
these two different senses by punctuating the given formula as 
or else
as 
That the different ways of punctuating the original formula do
make a difference can be seen by considering the case in which p is false and q
and r are both true. In this case the second punctuated formula is true (because
its second disjunct is true), whereas the first one is false (because its first conjunct
is false). Here the difference in punctuation makes all the difference between
truth and falsehood, for different punctuations can assign different truth values
to the ambiguous 
The word “either” has a variety of different meanings and uses in English. It
has conjunctive force in the sentence, “There is danger on either side.” More
often it is used to introduce the first disjunct in a disjunction, as in “Either the
blind prisoner has a red hat or the blind prisoner has a white hat.” There it con-
tributes to the rhetorical balance of the sentence, but it does not affect its mean-
ing. Perhaps the most important use of the word “either” is to punctuate a
compound statement. Thus the sentence
The organization will meet on Thursday and Anand will be elected or the election will
be postponed.
is ambiguous. This ambiguity can be resolved in one direction by placing the
word “either” at its beginning, or in the other direction by inserting the word “ei-
ther” before the name “Anand.” Such punctuation is effected in our symbolic
language by parentheses. The ambiguous formula 
discussed in the pre-
ceding paragraph corresponds to the ambiguous sentence just examined. The
two different punctuations of the formula correspond to the two different punc-
tuations of the sentence effected by the two different insertions of the word
“either.”
The negation of a disjunction is often formed by use of the phrase
“neither–nor.” Thus the statement, “Either Fillmore or Harding was the greatest
U.S. president,” can be contradicted by the statement, “Neither Fillmore nor
Harding was the greatest U.S. president.” The disjunction would be symbolized
as 
and its negation as either 
or as 
(The logical
equivalence of these two symbolic formulas will be discussed in Section 9.) It
should be clear that to deny a disjunction , which states that one or another state-
ment is true, requires that both statements be stated to be false.
The word “both” in English has a very important role in logical punctuation,
and it deserves the most careful attention. When we say “Both Jamal and Derek are
not . . .” we are saying, as noted just above, that “Neither Jamal nor Derek is . . .”;
('F)# ('H).
'(F ¡ H)
F ¡ H,
p# q ¡ r
p# q ¡ r.
(p# q) ¡ r.
p# (q ¡ r)
p# q ¡ r
313

Symbolic Logic
we are applying the negation to each of them. But when we say “Jamal and Derek
are not both . . .” we are saying something very different; we are applying the
negation to the pair of them taken together, saying that “it is not the case that
they are both . . . .” This difference is very substantial. Entirely different mean-
ings arise when the word “both” is placed differently in the English sentence.
Consider the great difference between the meanings of
Jamal and Derek will not both be elected.
and
Jamal and Derek will both not be elected.
The first denies the conjunction 
and may be symbolized as 
The
second says that each one of the two will not be elected, and is symbolized as
Merely changing the position of the two words “both” and “not” al-
ters the logical force of what is asserted.
Of course, the word “both” does not always have this role; sometimes we use
it only to add emphasis. When we say that “Both Lewis and Clark were great ex-
plorers,” we use the word only to state more emphatically what is said by “Lewis
and Clark were great explorers.” When the task is logical analysis, the punctua-
tional role of “both” must be very carefully determined.
In the interest of brevity—that is, to decrease the number of parentheses
required—it is convenient to establish the convention that, in any formula, the
negation symbol will be understood to apply to the smallest statement that the
punctuation permits. Without this convention, the formula 
is ambigu-
ous, meaning either  
or 
By our convention we take it to mean
the first of these alternatives, for the curl can (and therefore by our convention
does) apply to the first component, p, rather than to the larger formula, 
Given a set of punctuation marks for our symbolic language, it is possible to
write not just conjunctions, negations, and weak disjunctions in that language,
but exclusive disjunctions as well. The exclusive disjunction of p and q asserts
that at least one of them is true but not both are true, which is written as
Another way of expressing the exclusive disjunction is “ ”.
The truth value of any compound statement constructed from simple state-
ments using only the curl and the truth-functional connectives—dot and
wedge—is completely determined by the truth or falsehood of its component
simple statements. If we know the truth values of simple statements, the truth
value of any truth-functional compound of them is easily calculated. In working
with such compound statements we always begin with their inmost components
and work outward. For example, if A and B are true statements and X and Y are
false statements, we calculate the truth value of the compound statement
as follows: Because X is false, the conjunction 
is
false, and so its negation 
is true. B is true, so its negation 
is false, and
because Y is also false, the disjunction of Y with 
is false. The brack-
eted formula 
is the conjunction of a true with a false state-
ment and is therefore false. Hence its negation, which is the entire statement, is
['(A# X)# (Y ¡ 'B)]
Y ¡ 'B,
'B,
'B
'(A# X)
A# X
'['(A# X)# (Y ¡ 'B)]
¡
(p ¡ q)# '(p# q).
p ¡ q.
'(p ¡ q).
('p) ¡ q,
'p ¡ q
'(J)# '(D).
'(J# D).
J# D
314

Symbolic Logic
true. Such a stepwise procedure always enables us to determine the truth value
of a compound statement from the truth values of its components.
In some circumstances we may be able to determine the truth value of a
truth-functional compound statement even if we cannot determine the truth or
falsehood of one of its component simple statements. We may do this by first cal-
culating the truth value of the compound statement on the assumption that a
given simple component is true, and then by calculating the truth value of the
compound statement on the assumption that the same simple component is
false. If both calculations yield the same truth value for the compound statement
in question, we have determined the truth value of the compound statement
without having to determine the truth value of its unknown component, because
we know that the truth value of any component cannot be other than true or
false. Truth tables allow us to expand this method to cases with more than one
undetermined component.
Punctuation in Symbolic Notation
The statement
I will study hard and pass the exam or fail 
is ambiguous. It could mean “I will study hard and pass the exam or I will fail
the exam” or “I will study hard and I will either pass the exam or fail it.”
The symbolic notation
is similarly ambiguous. Parentheses resolve the ambiguity. In place of “I will
study hard and pass the exam or I will fail the exam,” we get
and in place of “I will study hard and I will either pass the exam or fail it,” 
we get
S# (P ¡ F)
(S# P) ¡ F
S# P ¡ F
o v e r v i e w
EXERCISES
A. Using the truth-table definitions of the dot, the wedge, and the curl, deter-
mine which of the following statements are true:
*1. Rome is the capital of Italy
Rome is the capital of Spain.
2.
(London is the capital of England 
Stockholm is the capital of
Norway).
3.
London is the capital of England 
Stockholm is the capital of Norway.
4.
(Rome is the capital of Spain
Paris is the capital of France).
¡
'
# '
'
#
'
¡
315

Symbolic Logic
*5.
Rome is the capital of Spain
Paris is the capital of France.
6. London is the capital of England
London is the capital of England.
7. Stockholm is the capital of Norway
Stockholm is the capital of
Norway.
8. (Paris is the capital of France Rome is the capital of Spain)
(Paris is
the capital of France
Rome is the capital of Spain).
9. (London is the capital of England
Stockholm is the capital of Nor-
way)
Rome is the capital of Italy
Stockholm is the capital of
Norway).
*10. Rome is the capital of Spain
(Paris is the capital of France 
Rome is
the capital of Spain).
11. Rome is the capital of Italy
(Paris is the capital of France
Rome is
the capital of Spain).
12.
Paris is the capital of France
Stockholm is the capital of Norway).
13.
Rome is the capital of Spain
Paris is the capital of
France)
Paris is the capital of France
Stockholm is the capital
of Norway)].
14.
London is the capital of England Rome is the capital of
Spain)
(Rome is the capital of Spain
Rome is the capital of Spain)].
*15.
(Stockholm is the capital of Norway
Paris is the capital of
France)
London is the capital of England Rome is the capital of
Spain)].
16. Rome is the capital of Spain
London is the capital of England
London is the capital of England).
17. Paris is the capital of France
(Paris is the capital of France Rome is
the capital of Spain).
18. London is the capital of England
(Rome is the capital of Italy Rome
is the capital of Italy).
19. (Stockholm is the capital of Norway
Paris is the capital of
France)
Stockholm is the capital of Norway
London is the cap-
ital of England).
*20. (Paris is the capital of France
Rome is the capital of Spain)
Paris is the capital of France
Rome is the capital of Spain).
21.
(Rome is the capital of Spain 
Stockholm is the capital of
Norway)
Paris is the capital of France
Rome is the capital 
of Spain)].
22.
(London is the capital of England 
Paris is the capital of
France)
Stockholm is the capital of Norway
Paris is the capi-
tal of France)].
23.
Paris is the capital of France
Rome is the capital of Italy)
Rome is the capital of Italy
Stockholm is the capital of Norway)].
¡
'('
#
¡
'[('
¡ '
¡ '('
#
'['
¡ '
¡ '('
#
'['
# '
¡    '('
¡ '
# '
¡ '('
¡ '
#
# '
#
# '
¡
¡ ('
#
¡ '('
¡
'['
'#
# '
#
'['('
¡
¡ '('
¡ '
'['('
'#
'('
¡
# '
#
¡ '
# '
('#
¡
# '
¡
#
# '
¡ '
¡ '
'
316

Symbolic Logic
24.
Rome is the capital of Spain
Stockholm is the capital of Norway)
Stockholm is the capital of Norway
Paris is the capital of
France)].
*25.
London is the capital of England 
Paris is the capital of France)
Paris is the capital of France 
Rome is the capital of Spain)].
B. If A, B, and C are true statements and X, Y, and Z are false statements, which
of the following are true?
#
¡ '('
#
'[('
¡
'('
#
¡
'[('
* 1.
2. 'B ¡ X
'A ¡ B
21.
22.
23.
24.
*25.
C. Using the letters E, I, J, L, and S to abbreviate the simple statements,
“Egypt’s food shortage worsens,” “Iran raises the price of oil,” “Jordan requests
more U.S. aid,” “Libya raises the price of oil,” and “Saudi Arabia buys five hun-
dred more warplanes,” symbolize these statements.
*1. Iran raises the price of oil but Libya does not raise the price of oil.
2. Either Iran or Libya raises the price of oil.
3. Iran and Libya both raise the price of oil.
4. Iran and Libya do not both raise the price of oil.
*5. Iran and Libya both do not raise the price of oil.
6. Iran or Libya raises the price of oil but they do not both do so.
7. Saudi Arabia buys five hundred more warplanes and either Iran raises
the price of oil or Jordan requests more U.S. aid.
8. Either Saudi Arabia buys five hundred more warplanes and Iran raises
the price of oil or Jordan requests more U.S. aid.
'{'[(B# 'C) ¡ (Y# 'Z)]# [('B ¡ X) ¡ (B ¡ 'Y)]}
'{[('A# B)# ('X# Z)]# '[(A# 'B) ¡ '('Y# 'Z)]}
[A# (B ¡ C)]# '[(A# B) ¡ (A# C)]
[X ¡ (Y# Z)] ¡ '[(X ¡ Y)# (X ¡ Z)]
[A ¡ (B ¡ C)]# '[(A ¡ B) ¡ C]
3.
4. 'Z ¡ X
'Y ¡ C
* 5.
6. (B# C) ¡ (Y# Z)
(A# X) ¡ (B# Y)
7.
8. '(A# B) ¡ (X# Y)
'(C# Y) ¡ (A# Z)
9.
*10. '(X# 'Y) ¡ (B# 'C)
'(X# Z) ¡ (B# C)
11.
12. (B ¡ C)# (Y ¡ Z)
(A ¡ X)# (Y ¡ B)
13.
14. '(A ¡ Y)# (B ¡ X)
(X ¡ Y)# (X ¡ Z)
*15.
16. '(A ¡ C) ¡ '(X# 'Y)
'(X ¡ Z)# ('X ¡ Z)
17.
18. '[(A ¡ 'C) ¡ (C ¡ 'A)]
'(B ¡ Z)# '(X ¡ 'Y)
19.
*20. '[(A# B) ¡ '(B# A)]
'[(B# C)# '(C# B)]
317

Symbolic Logic
9. It is not the case that Egypt’s food shortage worsens, and Jordan re-
quests more U.S. aid.
*10. It is not the case that either Egypt’s food shortage worsens or Jordan re-
quests more U.S. aid.
11. Either it is not the case that Egypt’s food shortage worsens or Jordan re-
quests more U.S. aid.
12. It is not the case that both Egypt’s food shortage worsens and Jordan re-
quests more U.S. aid.
13. Jordan requests more U.S. aid unless Saudi Arabia buys five hundred
more warplanes.
14. Unless Egypt’s food shortage worsens, Libya raises the price of oil.
*15. Iran won’t raise the price of oil unless Libya does so.
16. Unless both Iran and Libya raise the price of oil neither of them does.
17. Libya raises the price of oil and Egypt’s food shortage worsens.
18. It is not the case that neither Iran nor Libya raises the price of oil.
19. Egypt’s food shortage worsens and Jordan requests more U.S. aid, un-
less both Iran and Libya do not raise the price of oil.
*20. Either Iran raises the price of oil and Egypt’s food shortage worsens, or
it is not the case both that Jordan requests more U.S. aid and that Saudi
Arabia buys five hundred more warplanes.
21. Either Egypt’s food shortage worsens and Saudi Arabia buys five hun-
dred more warplanes, or either Jordan requests more U.S. aid or Libya
raises the price of oil.
22. Saudi Arabia buys five hundred more warplanes, and either Jordan re-
quests more U.S. aid or both Libya and Iran raise the price of oil.
23. Either Egypt’s food shortage worsens or Jordan requests more U.S. aid,
but neither Libya nor Iran raises the price of oil.
24. Egypt’s food shortage worsens, but Saudi Arabia buys five hundred
more warplanes and Libya raises the price of oil.
*25. Libya raises the price of oil and Egypt’s food shortage worsens; howev-
er, Saudi Arabia buys five hundred more warplanes and Jordan requests
more U.S. aid.
3
Conditional Statements 
and Material Implication
Where two statements are combined by placing the word “if” before the first and
inserting the word “then” between them, the resulting compound statement is a
conditional statement (also called a hypothetical, an implication, or an implicative
statement). In a conditional statement the component statement that follows the
“if” is called the antecedent (or the implicans or—rarely—the protasis), and the
component statement that follows the “then” is the consequent (or the implicate
Conditional statement
A hypothetical
statement; a compound
proposition or statement
of the form “If p then q.”
Antecedent
In a conditional
statement 
(“If ... then ...”), the
component that
immediately follows the
“if.” Sometimes called
the implicans or the
protasis.
Consequent
In a conditional
statement 
(“If ... then ...”), the
component that
immediately follows the
“then.” Sometimes
called the implicate, or
the apodosis.
318

Symbolic Logic
or—rarely—the apodosis). For example, “If Mr. Jones is the brakeman’s next-door
neighbor, then Mr. Jones earns exactly three times as much as the brakeman” is a
conditional statement in which “Mr. Jones is the brakeman’s next-door neigh-
bor” is the antecedent and “Mr. Jones earns exactly three times as much as the
brakeman” is the consequent.
A conditional statement asserts that in any case in which its antecedent is
true, its consequent is also true. It does not assert that its antecedent is true, but
only that if its antecedent is true, then its consequent is also true. It does not as-
sert that its consequent is true, but only that its consequent is true if its an-
tecedent is true. The essential meaning of a conditional statement is the
relationship asserted to hold between the antecedent and the consequent, in that
order. To understand the meaning of a conditional statement, then, we must un-
derstand what the relationship of implication is.
Implication plausibly appears to have more than one meaning. We found it
useful to distinguish different senses of the word “or” before introducing a spe-
cial logical symbol to correspond exactly to a single one of the meanings of the
English word. Had we not done so, the ambiguity of the English would have in-
fected our logical symbolism and prevented it from achieving the clarity and
precision aimed at. It will be equally useful to distinguish the different senses of
“implies” or “if–then” before we introduce a special logical symbol in this con-
nection.
Consider the following four conditional statements, each of which seems to
assert a different type of implication, and to each of which corresponds a differ-
ent sense of “if–then”:
A. If all humans are mortal and Socrates is a human, then Socrates is mortal.
B.
If Leslie is a bachelor, then Leslie is unmarried.
C. If this piece of blue litmus paper is placed in acid, then this piece of blue litmus
paper will turn red.
D. If State loses the homecoming game, then I’ll eat my hat.
Even a casual inspection of these four conditional statements reveals that they
are of quite different types. The consequent of A follows logically from its an-
tecedent, whereas the consequent of B follows from its antecedent by the very
definition of the term bachelor, which means “unmarried man.” The consequent
of C does not follow from its antecedent either by logic alone or by the definition
of its terms; the connection must be discovered empirically, because the implica-
tion stated here is causal. Finally, the consequent of D does not follow from its
antecedent either by logic or by definition, nor is there any causal law involved.
Statement D reports a decision of the speaker to behave in the specified way
under the specified circumstances.
These four conditional statements are different in that each asserts a different
type of implication between its antecedent and its consequent. But they are not
completely different; all assert types of implication. Is there any identifiable com-
mon meaning, any partial meaning that is common to these admittedly different
Implication
The relation that holds
between the antecedent
and the consequent of a
true conditional or
hypothetical statement.
319

Symbolic Logic
types of implication, although perhaps not the whole or complete meaning of
any one of them?
The search for a common partial meaning takes on added significance when
we recall our procedure in working out a symbolic representation for the English
word “or.” In that case, we proceeded as follows: First, we emphasized the differ-
ence between the two senses of the word, contrasting inclusive with exclusive
disjunction. The inclusive disjunction of two statements was observed to mean
that at least one of the statements is true, and the exclusive disjunction of two
statements was observed to mean that at least one of the statements is true but
not both are true. Second, we noted that these two types of disjunction had a
common partial meaning. This partial common meaning—that at least one of the
disjuncts is true—was seen to be the whole meaning of the weak, inclusive “or,”
and a part of the meaning of the strong, exclusive “or.” We then introduced the
special symbol “ ” to represent this common partial meaning (which is the en-
tire meaning of “or” in its inclusive sense). Third, we noted that the symbol rep-
resenting the common partial meaning is an adequate translation of either sense
of the word “or” for the purpose of retaining the disjunctive syllogism as a valid
form of argument. It was admitted that translating an exclusive “or” into the
symbol “ ” ignores and loses part of the word’s meaning. The part of its mean-
ing that is preserved by this translation is all that is needed for the disjunctive
syllogism to remain a valid form of argument. Because the disjunctive syllogism
is typical of arguments involving disjunction, with which we are concerned here,
this partial translation of the word “or,” which may abstract from its “full” or
“complete” meaning in some cases, is wholly adequate for our present purposes.
Now we wish to proceed in the same way, this time in connection with the
English phrase “if–then.” The first part is already accomplished: We have al-
ready emphasized the differences among four senses of the “if–then” phrase
corresponding to four different types of implication. We are now ready for the
second step, which is to discover a sense that is at least a part of the meaning of
all four types of implication.
We approach this problem by asking: What circumstances suffice to establish
the falsehood of a given conditional statement? Under what circumstances
should we agree that the conditional statement
If this piece of blue litmus paper is placed in that acid solution, then this piece of blue
litmus paper will turn red.
is false? It is important to realize that this conditional does not assert that any
blue litmus paper is actually placed in the solution, or that any litmus paper ac-
tually turns red. It asserts merely that if this piece of blue litmus paper is placed
in the solution, then this piece of blue litmus paper will turn red. It is proved false
if this piece of blue litmus paper is actually placed in the solution and does not
turn red. The acid test, so to speak, of the falsehood of a conditional statement is
available when its antecedent is true, because if its consequent is false while its
antecedent is true, the conditional itself is thereby proved false.
Any conditional statement, “If p then q,” is known to be false if the conjunc-
tion 
is known to be true—that is, if its antecedent is true and its consequent
p# 'q
 ¡
 ¡
320

Symbolic Logic
is false. For a conditional to be true, then, the indicated conjunction must be false;
that is, its negation 
must be true. In other words, for any conditional,
“If p then q,” to be true, the statement 
which is the negation of the con-
junction of its antecedent with the negation of its consequent, must also be true.
We may then regard 
as a part of the meaning of “If p then q.”
Every conditional statement means to deny that its antecedent is true and its
consequent false, but this need not be the whole of its meaning. A conditional
such as A on earlier page also asserts a logical connection between its antecedent
and consequent, as B asserts a definitional connection, C a causal connection,
and D a decisional connection. No matter what type of implication is asserted by
a conditional statement, part of its meaning is the negation of the conjunction of
its antecedent with the negation of its consequent.
We now introduce a special symbol to represent this common partial mean-
ing of the “if–then” phrase. We define the new symbol “
”, called a horseshoe
(other systems employ the symbol “
” to express this relation), by taking 
as an abbreviation of 
The exact significance of the 
symbol can be in-
dicated by means of a truth table:
)
'(p# 'q).
p ) q
:
 )
'(p# 'q)
'(p# 'q),
'(p# 'q)
Here the first two columns are the guide columns; they simply lay out all
possible combinations of truth and falsehood for p and q. The third column is
filled in by reference to the second, the fourth by reference to the first and third,
and the fifth by reference to the fourth; the sixth is identical to the fifth by
definition.
The symbol 
is not to be regarded as denoting the meaning of “if–then,” or
standing for the relation of implication. That would be impossible, for there is no
single meaning of “if–then”; there are several meanings. There is no unique rela-
tion of implication to be thus represented; there are several different implication
relations. Nor is the symbol 
to be regarded as somehow standing for all the
meanings of “if–then.” These are all different, and any attempt to abbreviate all
of them by a single logical symbol would render that symbol ambiguous—as
ambiguous as the English phrase “if–then” or the English word “implication.”
The symbol 
is completely unambiguous. What 
abbreviates is 
whose meaning is included in the meanings of each of the various kinds of impli-
cations considered but does not constitute the entire meaning of any of them.
We can regard the symbol 
as representing another kind of implication,
and it will be expedient to do so, because a convenient way to read 
is “If p,
then q.” But it is not the same kind of implication as any of those mentioned ear-
lier. It is called material implication by logicians. In giving it a special name, we
p ) q
)
'(p# 'q),
p ) q
)
)
)
p
q
q
p
q
(p
q)
p
q
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
T

# 

# 

Horseshoe
The symbol for material
implication, .
Material implication
A truth-functional
relation (symbolized by
the horseshoe, ) that
may connect two
statements. The
statement “p materially
implies q” is true when
either p is false, or q is
true.
321

Symbolic Logic
admit that it is a special notion, not to be confused with other, more usual, types
of implication.
Not all conditional statements in English need assert one of the four types of
implication previously considered. Material implication constitutes a fifth type
that may be asserted in ordinary discourse. Consider the remark, “If Hitler was a
military genius, then I’m a monkey’s uncle.” It is quite clear that it does not as-
sert logical, definitional, or causal implication. It cannot represent a decisional
implication, because it scarcely lies in the speaker’s power to make the conse-
quent true. No “real connection,” whether logical, definitional, or causal, obtains
between antecedent and consequent here. A conditional of this sort is often used
as an emphatic or humorous method of denying its antecedent. The consequent
of such a conditional is usually a statement that is obviously or ludicrously false.
And because no true conditional can have both its antecedent true and its conse-
quent false, to affirm such a conditional amounts to denying that its antecedent is
true. The full meaning of the present conditional seems to be the denial that
“Hitler was a military genius” is true when “I’m a monkey’s uncle” is false. Be-
cause the latter is so obviously false, the conditional must be understood to deny
the former.
The point here is that no “real connection” between antecedent and conse-
quent is suggested by a material implication. All it asserts is that it is not the case
that the antecedent is true when the consequent is false. Note that the material
implication symbol is a truth-functional connective, like the symbols for conjunc-
tion and disjunction. As such, it is defined by the following truth table:
As thus defined by the truth table, the symbol 
has some features that may
at first appear odd: The assertion that a false antecedent materially implies a true
consequent is true; and the assertion that a false antecedent materially implies a
false consequent is also true. This apparent strangeness can be dissipated in part
by the following considerations. Because the number 2 is smaller than the num-
ber 4 (a fact notated symbolically as 
), it follows that any number smaller
than 2 is smaller than 4. The conditional formula
is true for any number x whatsoever. If we focus on the numbers 1, 3, and 4, and
replace the number variable x in the preceding conditional formula by each of
them in turn, we can make the following observations. In
both antecedent and consequent are true, and of course the conditional is true. In
If 3 6 2, then 3 6 4.
If 1 6 2, then 1 6 4.
If x 6 2, then x 6 4.
2 6 4
)
p
q
p
q
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T

322

Visual Logic
Material Implication
This proposition, in the form 
is a material implication. A material im-
plication is true when the antecedent (the “if” clause) is false. Therefore a ma-
terial implication is true when the antecedent is false and the consequent is
also false, as in this illustrative proposition.
This proposition, in the similar form 
is also a material implication. A
material implication is true when the antecedent (the “if” clause) is false.
Therefore a material implication is true when the antecedent is false and the
consequent is true, as in this illustrative proposition.
A material implication is false only if the antecedent is true and the consequent is
false. Therefore a material implication is true whenever the antecedent is false,
whether the consequent is false or true.
G ) R,
G ) F,
Symbolic Logic
Source: Photodisc/Getty Images
Source: Photodisc/Getty Images
“If the moon is made of green cheese, then the Earth is round.”
Source: Photodisc/Getty Images
“If the moon is made of green cheese, then the Earth is flat.”
© Bettmann/CORBIS All Rights Reserved
Photodisc/Getty Images
Photodisc/Getty Images
Photodisc/Getty Images
Source: Photodisc/Getty Images
323

Symbolic Logic
the antecedent is false and the consequent is true, and of course the conditional is
again true. In
both antecedent and consequent are false, but the conditional remains true.
These last two cases correspond to the third and fourth rows of the table defining
the symbol 
So it is not particularly remarkable or surprising that a condition-
al should be true when the antecedent is false and the consequent is true, or
when antecedent and consequent are both false. Of course, there is no number
that is smaller than 2 but not smaller than 4; that is, there is no true conditional
statement with a true antecedent and a false consequent. This is exactly what the
defining truth table for 
lays down.
Now we propose to translate any occurrence of the “if–then” phrase into our
logical symbol 
This proposal means that in translating conditional statements
into our symbolism, we treat them all as merely material implications. Of course,
most conditional statements assert more than that a merely material implication
holds between their antecedents and consequents. So our proposal amounts to
suggesting that we ignore, or put aside, or “abstract from,” part of the meaning
of a conditional statement when we translate it into our symbolic language. How
can this proposal be justified?
The previous proposal to translate both inclusive and exclusive disjunctions
by means of the symbol 
was justified on the grounds that the validity of the
disjunctive syllogism was preserved even if the additional meaning that attaches
to the exclusive “or” was ignored. Our present proposal to translate all condi-
tional statements into the merely material implication symbolized by 
may be
justified in exactly the same way. Many arguments contain conditional state-
ments of various kinds, but the validity of all valid arguments of the general type
with which we will be concerned is preserved even if the additional meanings of
their conditional statements are ignored. This remains to be proved, of course,
and will occupy our attention in the next section.
Conditional statements can be formulated in a variety of ways. The
statement
If he has a good lawyer, then he will be acquitted.
can equally well be stated without the use of the word “then” as
If he has a good lawyer, he will be acquitted.
The order of the antecedent and consequent can be reversed, provided that the
“if” still directly precedes the antecedent, as
He will be acquitted if he has a good lawyer.
It should be clear that, in any of the examples just given, the word “if” can be re-
placed by such phrases as “in case,” “provided that,” “given that,” or “on condi-
tion that,” without any change in meaning. Minor adjustments in the phrasings
)
¡
).
)
).
If 4 6 2, then 4 6 4.
324

Symbolic Logic
of antecedent and consequent permit such alternative phrasings of the same con-
ditional as
That he has a good lawyer implies that he will be acquitted.
or
His having a good lawyer entails his acquittal.
A shift from active to passive voice may accompany a reversal of order of an-
tecedent and consequent, yielding the logically equivalent
His being acquitted is implied (or entailed) by his having a good lawyer.
Other variations are possible:
There is no way he won’t be acquitted if he has a good lawyer.
Any of these is symbolized as 
The notions of necessary and sufficient conditions provide other formula-
tions of conditional statements. For any specified event, many circumstances are
necessary for it to occur. Thus, for a normal car to run, it is necessary that there be
fuel in its tank, that its spark plugs be properly adjusted, that its oil pump be
working, and so on. So if the event occurs, every one of the conditions necessary
for its occurrence must have been fulfilled. Hence to say
That there is fuel in its tank is a necessary condition for the car to run.
can equally well be stated as
The car runs only if there is fuel in its tank.
which is another way of saying that
If the car runs then there is fuel in its tank.
Any of these is symbolized as 
Usually “q is a necessary condition for p” is
symbolized as 
Likewise, “p only if q” is also symbolized as 
For a specified situation there may be many alternative circumstances, any
one of which is sufficient to produce that situation. For a purse to contain more
than a dollar, for example, it is sufficient for it to contain five quarters, or eleven
dimes, or twenty-one nickels, and so on. If any one of these circumstances ob-
tains, the specified situation will be realized. Hence, to say “That the purse con-
tains five quarters is a sufficient condition for it to contain more than a dollar” is
to say “If the purse contains five quarters then it contains more than a dollar.” In
general, “p is a sufficient condition for q” is symbolized as 
To illustrate: Recruiters for the Wall Street investment firm Goldman Sachs
(where annual bonuses are commonly in the millions) grill potential employees
repeatedly. Those who survive the grilling are invited to the firm’s offices for a
full day of interviews, culminating in a dinner with senior Goldman Sachs exec-
utives. As reported recently, “Agile brains and near-perfect grades are necessary
but not sufficient conditions for being hired. Just as important is fitting in.”2
p ) q.
p ) q.
p ) q.
R ) F.
L ) A.
325

Symbolic Logic
If p is a sufficient condition for q, we have 
and q must be a necessary
condition for p. If p is a necessary condition for q, we have 
and q must be a
sufficient condition for p. Hence, if p is necessary and sufficient for q, then q is
sufficient and necessary for p.
Not every statement containing the word “if” is a conditional. None of the
following statements is a conditional: “There is food in the refrigerator if you
want some,” “Your table is ready, if you please,” “There is a message for you if
you’re interested,” “The meeting will be held even if no permit is obtained.” The
presence or absence of particular words is never decisive. In every case, one must
understand what a given sentence means, and then restate that meaning in a
symbolic formula.
EXERCISES
A. If A, B, and C are true statements and X, Y, and Z are false statements, deter-
mine which of the following are true, using the truth tables for the horseshoe,
the dot, the wedge, and the curl.
q ) p,
p ) q,
17.
18.
19.
*20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
*25.
B. Symbolize the following, using capital letters to abbreviate the simple state-
ments involved.
*1. If Argentina mobilizes, then if Brazil protests to the UN, then Chile will
call for a meeting of all the Latin American states.
2. If Argentina mobilizes, then either Brazil will protest to the UN or Chile
will call for a meeting of all the Latin American states.
[A ) (X# Y)] ) [(A ) X) ¡ (A ) Y)]
[(A# X) ) Y] ) [(A ) X)# (A ) Y)]
{[(X ) Y) ) Z] ) [Z ) (X ) Y)]} ) [(X ) Z) ) Y]
{[A ) (B ) C)] ) [(A# B) ) C]} ) [(Y ) B) ) (C ) Z)]
[(A# X) ¡ ('A# 'X)] ) [(A ) X)# (X ) A)]
[(A# X) ) Y] ) [(X ) A) ) (A ) Y)]
[(A# X) ) C] ) [(A ) X) ) C]
[(A# X) ) C] ) [(A ) C) ) X]
[(A ) Y) ) B] ) Z
*1.
2. A ) X
A ) B
3.
4. Y ) Z
B ) Y
*5.
6. (X ) Y) ) Z
(A ) B) ) Z
7.
8. (X ) Y) ) C
(A ) B) ) C
9.
*10. X ) (Y ) Z)
A ) (B ) Z)
11.
12. [(A ) X) ) Y] ) Z
[(A ) B) ) C] ) Z
13.
14. [A ) (B ) Y)] ) X
[A ) (X ) Y)] ) C
*15.
16. [(Y ) B) ) Y] ) Y
[(X ) Z) ) C] ) Y
326

Symbolic Logic
3. If Argentina mobilizes, then Brazil will protest to the UN and Chile will
call for a meeting of all the Latin American states.
4. If Argentina mobilizes, then Brazil will protest to the UN, and Chile will
call for a meeting of all the Latin American states.
5. If Argentina mobilizes and Brazil protests to the UN, then Chile will call
for a meeting of all the Latin American states.
*6. If either Argentina mobilizes or Brazil protests to the UN, then Chile
will call for a meeting of all the Latin American states.
7. Either Argentina will mobilize or if Brazil protests to the UN, then Chile
will call for a meeting of all the Latin American states.
8. If Argentina does not mobilize, then either Brazil will not protest to the
UN or Chile will not call for a meeting of all the Latin American states.
9. If Argentina does not mobilize, then neither will Brazil protest to the
UN nor will Chile call for a meeting of all the Latin American states.
*10. It is not the case that if Argentina mobilizes, then both Brazil will protest
to the UN, and Chile will call for a meeting of all the Latin American
states.
11. If it is not the case that Argentina mobilizes, then Brazil will not protest
to the UN, and Chile will call for a meeting of all the Latin American
states.
12. Brazil will protest to the UN if Argentina mobilizes.
13. Brazil will protest to the UN only if Argentina mobilizes.
14. Chile will call for a meeting of all the Latin American states only if both
Argentina mobilizes and Brazil protests to the UN.
*15. Brazil will protest to the UN only if either Argentina mobilizes or Chile
calls for a meeting of all the Latin American states.
16. Argentina will mobilize if either Brazil protests to the UN or Chile calls
for a meeting of all the Latin American states.
17. Brazil will protest to the UN unless Chile calls for a meeting of all the
Latin American states.
18. If Argentina mobilizes, then Brazil will protest to the UN unless Chile
calls for a meeting of all the Latin American states.
19. Brazil will not protest to the UN unless Argentina mobilizes.
*20. Unless Chile calls for a meeting of all the Latin American states, Brazil
will protest to the UN.
21. Argentina’s mobilizing is a sufficient condition for Brazil to protest to
the UN.
22. Argentina’s mobilizing is a necessary condition for Chile to call for a
meeting of all the Latin American states.
23. If Argentina mobilizes and Brazil protests to the UN, then both Chile
and the Dominican Republic will call for a meeting of all the Latin
American states.
327

Symbolic Logic
24. If Argentina mobilizes and Brazil protests to the UN, then either Chile
or the Dominican Republic will call for a meeting of all the Latin Ameri-
can states.
*25. If neither Chile nor the Dominican Republic calls for a meeting of all the
Latin American states, then Brazil will not protest to the UN unless
Argentina mobilizes.
4
Argument Forms and Refutation 
by Logical Analogy
The central task of deductive logic, we have said, is discriminating valid argu-
ments from invalid ones. If the premises of a valid argument are true, its conclu-
sion must be true. If the conclusion of a valid argument is false, at least one of the
premises must be false. In short, the premises of a valid argument give incontro-
vertible proof of the conclusion drawn.
This informal account of validity must now be made more precise. To do this
we introduce the concept of an argument form. Consider the following two argu-
ments, which plainly have the same logical form. Suppose we are presented with
the first of these arguments:
If Bacon wrote the plays attributed to Shakespeare, then Bacon was a great writer.
Bacon was a great writer.
Therefore Bacon wrote the plays attributed to Shakespeare.
We may agree with the premises but disagree with the conclusion, judging
the argument to be invalid. One way of proving invalidity is by the method of
logical analogy. “You might as well argue,” we could retort, “that
If Washington was assassinated, then Washington is dead.
Washington is dead.
Therefore Washington was assassinated.
You cannot seriously defend this argument,” we would continue, “because
here the premises are known to be true and the conclusion is known to be false.
This argument is obviously invalid; your argument is of the same form, so yours
is also invalid.” This type of refutation is very effective.
This method of refutation by logical analogy points the way to an excellent
general technique for testing arguments. To prove the invalidity of an argument,
it suffices to formulate another argument that (1) has exactly the same form as
the first and (2) has true premises and a false conclusion. This method is based on
the fact that validity and invalidity are purely formal characteristics of argu-
ments, which is to say that any two arguments that have exactly the same form
are either both valid or both invalid, regardless of any differences in the subject
matter with which they are concerned. Here we assume that the simple state-
ments involved are neither logically true (e.g., “All chairs are chairs”) nor logical-
Refutation by logical
analogy
A method that shows
the invalidity of an
argument by presenting
another argument that
has the same form, but
whose premises are
known to be true and
whose conclusion is
known to be false.
328

Symbolic Logic
B
G
A
D
G
and
D
B
A
‹
‹
)
)
ly false (e.g., “Some chairs are nonchairs”). We also assume that the only logical
relations among the simple statements involved are those asserted or entailed by
the premises. The point of these restrictions is to limit our considerations, in this
chapter and the next, to truth-functional arguments alone, and to exclude other
kinds of arguments whose validity turns on more complex logical considerations
that are not appropriately introduced at this point.
A given argument exhibits its form very clearly when the simple statements
that appear in it are abbreviated by capital letters. Thus we may abbreviate the
statements, “Bacon wrote the plays attributed to Shakespeare,” “Bacon was a
great writer,” “Washington was assassinated,” and “Washington is dead,” by the
letters B, G, A, and D, respectively, and using the familiar three-dot symbol “
”
for “therefore,” we may symbolize the two preceding arguments as
 ‹
So written, their common form is easily seen.
To discuss forms of arguments rather than particular arguments having
those forms, we need some method of symbolizing argument forms themselves.
To achieve such a method, we introduce the notion of a variable. In the preced-
ing sections we used capital letters to symbolize particular simple statements. To
avoid confusion, we use small, or lowercase, letters from the middle part of the
alphabet, p, q, r, s, . . ., as statement variables. A statement variable, as we shall
use the term, is simply a letter for which, or in place of which, a statement may
be substituted. Compound statements as well as simple statements may be sub-
stituted for statement variables.
We define an argument form as any array of symbols containing statement
variables but no statements, such that when statements are substituted for the
statement variables—the same statement being substituted for the same state-
ment variable throughout—the result is an argument. For definiteness, we estab-
lish the convention that in any argument form, p shall be the first statement
variable that occurs in it, and as other variables are introduced, they shall be la-
beled q, r, and s. Thus the expression
p
q
q
p
is an argument form, for when the statements B and G are substituted for the
statement variables p and q, respectively, the result is the first argument in this
section. If the statements A and D are substituted for the variables p and q, the re-
sult is the second argument. Any argument that results from the substitution of
statements for statement variables in an argument form is called a substitution
instance of that argument form. Any substitution instance of an argument form
may be said to have that form, and any argument that has a certain form is said
to be a substitution instance of that form.
‹
)
Variable or statement
variable
A place-holder; a letter
(by convention, any of
the lower case letters,
beginning with p, q, etc.)
for which a statement
may be substituted.
Argument form
An array of symbols
exhibiting logical
structure; it contains no
statements but it
contains statement
variables. These
variables are arranged in
such a way that when
statements are
consistently substituted
for the statement
variables, the result is an
argument.
Substitution instance
Any argument that
results from the
substitution of
statements for the
statement variables of a
given argument form.
329

Symbolic Logic
For any argument there are usually several argument forms that have the
given argument as a substitution instance. For example, the first argument of this
section,
B
G
G
B
is a substitution instance of each of the four argument forms
‹
)
Thus we obtain the given argument by substituting B for p and G for q in the first
argument form; by substituting B for p and G for both q and r in the second; B for
both p and s and G for both q and r in the third; and 
for p, G for q, and B for
r in the fourth. Of these four argument forms, the first corresponds more closely
to the structure of the given argument than do the others. It does so because the
given argument results from the first argument form by substituting a different
simple statement for each different statement variable in it. We call the first argu-
ment form the specific form of the given argument. Our definition of the specific
form of a given argument is the following: If an argument is produced by substi-
tuting consistently a different simple statement for each different statement vari-
able in an argument form, that argument form is the specific form of the given
argument. For any given argument, there is a unique argument form that is the
specific form of that argument.
EXERCISES
Here follow a group of arguments (Group A, lettered a–o) and a group of argu-
ment forms (Group B, numbered 1–24). For each of the arguments (in Group A),
indicate which of the argument forms (in Group B), if any, have the given
argument as a substitution instance. In addition, for each given argument (in 
Group A), indicate which of the argument forms (in Group B), if any, is the 
specific form of that argument.
EXAMPLES
Argument a in Group A: Examining all the argument forms in Group B,
we find that the only one of which Argument a is a substitution instance is
Number 3. Number 3 is also the specific form of Argument a.
Argument j in Group A: Examining all the argument forms in Group B,
we find that Argument j is a substitution instance of both Number 6 and Num-
ber 23. But only Number 23 is the specific form of Argument j.
Argument m in Group A: Examining all the argument forms in Group B,
we find that Argument m is a substitution instance of both Number 3 and
Number 24. But there is no argument form in Group B that is the specific form
of Argument m.
B ) G
p
q
p
q
p
q
p
q
r
r
q
p
p
s
r
‹
‹
‹
‹
)
)
)
Specific form
When referring to a
given argument, the
argument form from
which the argument
results when a different
simple statement is
substituted consistently
for each different
statement variable in
that form.
330

Symbolic Logic
Group A—Arguments
a.
b.
c. E
‹ E ¡ F
‹ C ) (C# D)
C ) D
‹ A
A# B
Group B—Argument Forms
*1.
2.
3.
‹ p
p# q
‹ 'p ) 'q
p ) q
‹ 'q ) 'p
p ) q
d.
*e. I
J
f.
‹ L ¡ N
K ¡ M
(K ) L)# (M ) N)
‹ I# J
‹ 'G
'H
G ) H
g.
h.
i.
‹ V ) T
U ) V
T ) U
‹ R ¡ S
Q ) S
Q ) R
‹ 'P
'O
O ) P
j.
k.
‹ (A ) B) ¡ C
A ) B
‹ (W# X) ) [(W# X)# (Y# Z)]
(W# X) ) (Y# Z)
l.
m.
‹ G ) (G# H)
[G ) (G# H)]# [H ) (H# G)]
‹ D ¡ E
(D ¡ E)# 'F
n.
*o.
‹ K ) L
(K ) L)# (M ) N)
‹ '(I# J)
'(I ¡ J)
(I ¡ J) ¡ (I# J)
4. p
*5. p
6.
‹ p ) (p# q)
p ) q
‹ p ) q
‹ p ¡ q
7.
8.
9.
‹ 'p
'q
p ) q
‹ 'q
'p
p ) q
‹ (p ) q)# (q ) p)
(p ¡ q) ) (p# q)
*10. p
q
11.
12.
‹ r ) p
q ) r
p ) q
‹ q ¡ r
p ) r
p ) q
‹ p# q
13.
14.
*15.
‹ (p ¡ q) ) r
q ) (p ) r)
p ) (q ) r)
‹ 'p
(q ¡ r) ) 'p
p ) (q# r)
‹ p ) r
p ) q
p ) (q ) r)
16.
17.
18.
‹ p ) s
q ) (r ) s)
p ) (q ) r)
‹ 'p ¡ 's
'q ¡ 's
(p ) q)# (r ) s)
‹ q ¡ s
p ¡ r
(p ) q)# (r ) s)
19.
*20.
‹ p ) s
p ) (r ) s)
(p ) q)# [(p# q) ) r]
‹ p ) s
(q ) r) ) s
p ) (q ) r)
21.
22.
‹ p ¡ q
(p# q)
(p ¡ q) ) (p# q)
‹ '(p# q)
'(p ¡ q)
(p ) q) ) (p# q)
23.
24.
‹ p ) q
(p ) q)# (r ) s)
‹ (p# q) ) [(p# q)# (r# s)]
(p# q) ) (r# s)
331

Symbolic Logic
5
The Precise Meaning of “Invalid” 
and “Valid”
We are now in a position to address with precision the central questions of de-
ductive logic:
1. What precisely is meant by saying that an argument form is invalid, or
valid?
2. How do we decide whether a deductive argument form is invalid, or
valid?
The first of these questions is answered in this section, the second in the follow-
ing section.
One can proceed by relying upon the technique of refutation by logical anal-
ogy. The term invalid as applied to argument forms may be defined as follows:
An argument form is invalid if and only if it has at least one substitution instance with
true premises and a false conclusion. If the specific form of a given argument has
any substitution instance whose premises are true and whose conclusion is false,
then the given argument is invalid. This fact—that any argument whose specific
form is an invalid argument form is an invalid argument—provides the basis for
refutation by logical analogy. A given argument is proved invalid if a refuting
analogy can be found for it.
“Thinking up” refuting analogies may not always be easy. Happily, it is not
necessary, because for arguments of this type there is a simpler, purely mechani-
cal test based on the same principle. Given any argument, we can test the specif-
ic form of that argument, because its invalidity would determine the invalidity of
the argument.
The test described above can also be used to show validity. Any argument
form that is not invalid must be valid. Hence an argument form is valid if and only
if it has no substitution instances with true premises and a false conclusion. Because va-
lidity is a formal notion, an argument is valid if and only if the specific form of
that argument is a valid argument form.
6
Testing Argument Validity 
Using Truth Tables
Knowing exactly what it means to say that an argument is valid, or invalid, we
can now devise a method for testing the validity of every truth-functional argu-
ment. Our method, using a truth table, is very simple and very powerful. It is
simply an application of the analysis of argument forms just given.
To test an argument form, we examine all possible substitution instances of
it to see if any one of them has true premises and a false conclusion. Of course,
any argument form has an infinite number of substitution instances, but we
need not worry about having to examine them one at a time. We are interested
only in the truth or falsehood of their premises and conclusions, so we need
Invalid
Not valid; characterizing
a deductive argument
that fails to provide
conclusive grounds for
the truth of its
conclusion. Every
deductive argument is
either valid or invalid.
Valid
A deductive argument is
said to be valid when its
premises, if they were all
true, would provide
conclusive grounds for
the truth of its
conclusion. Validity is a
formal characteristic; it
applies only to
arguments, as
distinguished from truth,
which applies to
propositions.
332

consider only the truth values involved. The arguments that concern us here
contain only simple statements and compound statements that are built up out
of simple statements using the curl and the truth-functional connectives sym-
bolized by the dot, wedge, and horseshoe. Hence we obtain all possible substi-
tution instances whose premises and conclusions have different truth values by
examining all possible different arrangements of truth values for the state-
ments that can be substituted for the different statement variables in the argu-
ment form to be tested.
When an argument form contains just two different statement variables, p
and q, all of its substitution instances are the result of either substituting true
statements for both p and q, or a true statement for p and a false one for q, or a
false one for p and a true one for q, or false statements for both p and q. These dif-
ferent cases are assembled most conveniently in the form of a truth table. To de-
cide the validity of the argument form
q
we can construct the following truth table:
‹ p
p ) q
Symbolic Logic
p
q
p
q
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T

Each row of this table represents a whole class of substitution instances. The T’s
and F’s in the two initial or guide columns represent the truth values of the state-
ments substituted for the variables p and q in the argument form. We fill in the
third column by referring to the initial or guide columns and the definition of the
horseshoe symbol. The third column heading is the first “premise” of the argu-
ment form, the second column is the second “premise” and the first column is
the “conclusion.” In examining this truth table, we find that in the third row
there are T’s under both premises and an F under the conclusion, which indicates
that there is at least one substitution instance of this argument form that has true
premises and a false conclusion. This row suffices to show that the argument
form is invalid. Any argument of this specific form (that is, any argument the
specific argument form of which is the given argument form) is said to commit
the fallacy of affirming the consequent, since its second premise affirms the con-
sequent of its conditional first premise.
Truth tables, although simple in concept, are powerful tools. In using them to
establish the validity or the invalidity of an argument form, it is critically impor-
tant that the table first be constructed correctly. To construct the truth table cor-
rectly, there must be a guide column for each statement variable in the argument
form—p, q, r, and so on. The array must exhibit all the possible combinations of
333

Symbolic Logic
the truth and falsity of all these variables, so there must be a number of horizon-
tal rows sufficient to do this: four rows if there are two variables, eight rows if
there are three variables, and so on. There must be a vertical column for each of
the premises and for the conclusion, as well as a column for each of the symbolic
expressions out of which the premises and conclusion are built. The construction
of a truth table in this fashion is essentially a mechanical task; it requires only
careful counting and the careful placement of T’s and F’s in the appropriate
columns, all governed by our understanding of the curl and the several truth-
functional connectives—the dot, the wedge, the horseshoe—and the circum-
stances under which each truth-functional compound is true and the
circumstances under which it is false.
Once the table has been constructed and the completed array is before us, it
is essential to read it correctly, that is, to use it correctly to make the appraisal
of the argument form in question. We must note carefully which columns are
those representing the premises of the argument being tested, and which col-
umn represents the conclusion of that argument. In testing the argument just
above, which we found to be invalid, we noted that it was the second and third
columns of the truth table that represented the premises, while the conclusion
was represented by the first (leftmost) column. Depending on which argument
form we are testing, and the order in which we have placed the columns as the
table was built, it is possible for the premises and the conclusion to appear in
any order at the top of the table. Their position to the right or to the left is not
significant; we, who use the table, must understand which column represents
what, and we must understand what we are in search of. Is there any one case,
we ask ourselves, any single row in which all the premises are true and the conclu-
sion false? If there is such a row, the argument form is invalid; if there is no such
row, the argument form must be valid. After the full array has been neatly and
accurately set forth, great care in reading the truth table accurately is of the ut-
most importance.
7
Some Common Argument Forms
A. Common Valid Forms
Some valid argument forms are exceedingly common and may be intuitively un-
derstood. These may now be precisely identified. They should be recognized
wherever they appear, and they may be called by their widely accepted names:
(1) Disjunctive Syllogism, (2) Modus Ponens, (3) Modus Tollens, and 
(4) Hypothetical Syllogism.
Disjunctive Syllogism
One of the simplest argument forms relies on the fact that in every true disjunc-
tion, at least one of the disjuncts must be true. Therefore, if one of them is false,
the other must be true. Arguments in this form are exceedingly common. When a
334

Symbolic Logic
candidate for a high appointed office was forced to withdraw her candidacy be-
cause of a tax violation involving one of her employees, a critic wrote: “In trying
to cover up her own illegal alien peccadillo, or stonewall her way out of it, she
was driven either by stupidity or arrogance. She’s obviously not stupid; her
plight must result, then, from her arrogance.”3
We symbolize the disjunctive syllogism as
and to show its validity we construct the following truth table:
‹ q
'p
p ¡ q
Here, too, the initial or guide columns exhibit all possible different truth val-
ues of statements that may be substituted for the variables p and q. We fill in the
third column by referring to the first two, and the fourth by reference to the first
alone. Now the third row is the only one in which T’s appear under both premis-
es (the third and fourth columns), and there a T also appears under the conclu-
sion (the second column). The truth table thus shows that the argument form has
no substitution instance having true premises and a false conclusion, and there-
by proves the validity of the argument form being tested. As used in this chapter,
the term disjunctive syllogism is the name of an elementary argument form,
here proved valid. This form is always valid, of course, and therefore, in modern
logic, disjunctive syllogism always refers to an elementary argument form that is
valid. In traditional logic, however, the term disjunctive syllogism is used more
broadly, to refer to any syllogism that contains a disjunctive premise; some such
syllogisms may of course be invalid. One must be clear whether the expression is
being used in the broader or the narrower sense. Here we use it in the narrower
sense.
Here, as always, it is essential that the truth table be read accurately; the col-
umn representing the conclusion (second from the left) and the columns repre-
senting the premises (third and fourth from the left) must be carefully identified.
Only by using those three columns correctly can we reliably determine the valid-
ity (or invalidity) of the argument form in question. Note that the very same
truth table could be used to test the validity of a very different argument form,
one whose premises are represented by the second and third columns and whose
conclusion is represented by the fourth column. That argument form, as we can
see from the top row of the table, is invalid. The truth-table technique provides a
completely mechanical method for testing the validity of any argument of the
general type considered here.
p
q
p
q
p
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
'
¡
Disjunctive Syllogism
A valid argument form in
which one premise is a
disjunction, another
premise is the denial of
one of the two disjuncts,
and the conclusion is
the truth of the other
disjunct. Symbolized as:
p
q, p, therefore q.
¡
335

Symbolic Logic
We are now in a position to justify our proposal to translate any occurrence
of the “if–then” phrase into our material implication symbol, 
. In Section 3, the
claim was made that all valid arguments of the general type with which we are
concerned here that involve “if–then” statements remain valid when those state-
ments are interpreted as affirming merely material implications. Truth tables can
be used to substantiate this claim, and will justify our translation of “if–then”
into the horseshoe symbol.
Modus Ponens
The simplest type of intuitively valid argument involving a conditional state-
ment is illustrated by the argument:
If the second native told the truth, then only one native is a politician.
The second native told the truth.
Therefore only one native is a politician.
The specific form of this argument, known as Modus Ponens (“the method of
putting, or affirming”), is
p
and is proved valid by the following truth table:
‹ q
p ) q
 )
p
q
p
q
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
)
Here the two premises are represented by the third and first columns, and the
conclusion is represented by the second. Only the first row represents substitu-
tion instances in which both premises are true, and the T in the second column
shows that in these arguments the conclusion is true also. This truth table estab-
lishes the validity of any argument of the form modus ponens.
Modus Tollens
If a conditional statement is true, then if the consequent is false, the antecedent
must also be false. The argument form that relies on this is very commonly used
to establish the falsehood of some proposition under attack. To illustrate: A dis-
tinguished rabbi, insisting that the Book of Genesis was never meant to be a sci-
entific treatise, presented this crisp argument:
A literal reading of Genesis would lead one to conclude that the world is less than 6,000
years old and that the Grand Canyon could have been carved by the global flood 4,500
years ago. Since this is impossible, a literal reading of Genesis must be wrong.4
The argument may be symbolized as
q
‹ 'p
'
p ) q
Modus Ponens
An elementary valid
argument form
according to which, if
the truth of a
hypothetical premise is
assumed, and the truth
of the antecedent of that
premise is also
assumed, we may
conclude that the
consequent of that
premise is true.
Symbolized as: p  q,
p, therefore q.
Modus Tollens
An elementary valid
argument form
according to which, if
the truth of a
hypothetical premise is
assumed, and the falsity
of the consequent of
that premise is also
assumed, we may
conclude that the
antecedent of that
premise is false.
Symbolized as p  q,
q, therefore p.
336

Symbolic Logic
The validity of this argument form, called modus tollens (“the method of taking
away, or denying”), may be shown by the following truth table:
p
q
p
q
q
p
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
'
'
)
Here again, there is no substitution instance, no line, on which the premises,
and 
are both true and the conclusion, 
is false.
Hypothetical Syllogism
Another common type of intuitively valid argument contains only conditional
statements. Here is an example:
If the first native is a politician, then the first native lies.
If the first native lies, then the first native denies being a politician.
Therefore if the first native is a politician, then the first native denies being a
politician.
The specific form of this argument is
This argument, called a Hypothetical Syllogism (or a Pure Hypothetical Syllo-
gism), contains three distinct statement variables, so the truth table must have
three initial (or guide) columns and requires eight rows to list all possible substitu-
tion instances. Besides the initial columns, three additional columns are needed:
two for the premises, the third for the conclusion. The table is
‹ p ) r
q ) r
p ) q
'p,
'q,
p ) q
In constructing it, we fill in the fourth column by looking back to the first and
second, the fifth by reference to the second and third, and the sixth by reference
to the first and third. Examining the completed table, we observe that the prem-
ises are true only in the first, fifth, seventh, and eighth rows, and that in all of
these the conclusion is also true. This truth table establishes the validity of the
p
q
r
p
q
q
r
p
r
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
T
)
)
)
Hypothetical
Syllogism
A syllogism that contains
a hypothetical
proposition as a
premise. If the syllogism
contains hypothetical
propositions exclusively,
it is called a “pure”
hypothetical syllogism; if
the syllogism contains
one conditional and one
categorical premise, it is
called a “mixed”
hypothetical syllogism.
337

Symbolic Logic
argument form and proves that the hypothetical syllogism remains valid when
its conditional statements are translated by means of the horseshoe symbol.
Enough examples have been provided to illustrate the proper use of the
truth-table technique for testing arguments, and perhaps enough have been
given to show that the validity of any valid argument involving conditional
statements is preserved when its conditionals are translated into merely material
implications. Any doubts that remain can be allayed by the reader’s translating
and testing similar examples.
The arguments that concern us here contain only simple statements and
compound statements that are built up out of simple statements using the curl
and the truth-functional connectives symbolized by the dot, wedge, and horse-
shoe. As more complicated argument forms are considered, larger truth tables
are required to test them, because a separate initial or guide column is required
for each different statement variable in the argument form. Only two are re-
quired for a form with just two variables, and that table will have four rows. But
three initial columns are required for a form with three variables, such as the hy-
pothetical syllogism, and such truth tables have eight rows. To test the validity of
an argument form, such as that of the Constructive Dilemma,
which contains four distinct statement variables, a truth table with four initial
columns and sixteen rows is required. In general, to test an argument form con-
taining n distinct statement variables we need a truth table with nn initial columns
and 2n rows.
B. Common Invalid Forms
Two invalid argument forms deserve special notice because they superficially re-
semble valid forms and therefore often tempt careless writers or readers. The
fallacy of affirming the consequent is symbolized as
q
Although the shape of this form is something like that of modus ponens, the
two argument forms are very different, and this form is not valid. It is well illus-
trated in a “bogus syllogism” about the dictatorial president of Iraq, the late Sad-
dam Hussein. Here is that syllogism, as recounted by Orlando Patterson 
(Mr. Patterson’s wording of the syllogism is very slightly different but has exact-
ly the same logical force). Its invalidity does indeed render it bogus: “If one is a
terrorist one is a tyrant who hates freedom. Saddam Hussein is a tyrant who
hates freedom. Therefore Saddam Hussein is a terrorist.”5 Let us suppose that
the hypothetical first premise is true and that the second premise describing Sad-
dam Hussein is also true. But that second premise affirms (about Saddam Hus-
sein as one tyrant) only the consequent of the preceding hypothetical. The
argument plainly commits the fallacy of affirming the consequent.
‹ p
p ) q
‹ q ¡ s
p ¡ r
(p ) q)# (r ) s)
338

Symbolic Logic
Another invalid form, called the fallacy of denying the antecedent, has a shape
somewhat like that of modus tollens and may be symbolized as
p
An example of this fallacy is the campaign slogan used by a candidate for mayor
of New York City some years ago: “If you don’t know the buck, you don’t know
the job—and Abe knows the buck.” The unstated conclusion to which the voter
was deliberately tempted was that “Abe knows the job”—a proposition that
does not follow from the stated premises.
Both of these common fallacies may readily be shown to be invalid by means
of truth tables. In each case there is one line of the truth table in which the prem-
ises of these fallacious arguments are all true, but the conclusion is false.
C. Substitution Instances and Specific Forms
A given argument can be a substitution instance of several different argument
forms, as we noted earlier when defining argument form. Hence the valid disjunc-
tive syllogism, which may be symbolized as
R
is a substitution instance of the valid argument form
p
and is also a substitution instance of the invalid argument form
p
q
It is obvious, in this last form, that from two premises, p and q, we cannot
validly infer r. So it is clear that a valid argument can be asubstitution instance of
a valid argument form and of an invalid argument form. Therefore, in determin-
ing whether any given argument is valid, we must look to the specific form of the ar-
gument in question. Only the specific form of the argument reveals the full logical
structure of that argument, and because it does, we know that if the specific form
of an argument is valid, the argument itself must be valid.
In the illustration just given, we see an argument 
and
two argument forms of which that argument could be a substitution instance.
The first of these argument forms 
is valid, and because that
form is the specific form of the given argument, its validity establishes that the
given argument is valid. The second of these argument forms is invalid, but be-
cause it is not the specific form of the given argument, it cannot be used to show
that the given argument is invalid.
This point should be emphasized: An argument form that is valid can have
only valid arguments as substitution instances. That is, all of the substitution
instances of a valid form must be valid. This is proved by the truth-table proof of
(p ¡ q, 'p, ‹ q)
(R ¡ W, 'R, ‹ W),
‹ r
‹ q
'
p ¡ q
‹ W
'
R ¡ W
‹ 'q
'
p ) q
339

Symbolic Logic
validity for the valid argument form, which shows that there is no possible sub-
stitution instance of a valid form that has true premises and a false conclusion.
EXERCISES
A. Use truth tables to prove the validity or invalidity of each of the argument
forms in Section 4, Group B, see earlier page.
B. Use truth tables to determine the validity or invalidity of each of the follow-
ing arguments:
*1.
2.
‹ C ¡ D
C# D
(C ¡ D) ) (C# D)
‹ A# B
A ¡ B
(A ¡ B) ) (A# B)
3.
4.
‹ '(G ¡ H)
'(G# H)
(G ¡ H) ) (G# H)
‹ E ¡ F
F ) E
E ) F
*5.
6.
K
‹ 'L
K ¡ L
‹ '(I# J)
'(I ¡ J)
(I ¡ J) ) (I# J)
7.
M
8.
‹ (O ¡ P) ) (O# P)
Q ) (O# P)
(O ¡ P) ) Q
‹ '(N# 'N)
M ¡ (N# 'N)
9.
10.
‹ 'U
(V# W) ) 'U
U ) (V ¡ W)
‹ (R# S) ) (R ¡ S)
T ) (R# S)
(R ¡ S) ) T
C. Use truth tables to determine the validity or invalidity of the following
arguments:
*1. If Angola achieves stability, then both Botswana and Chad will adopt
more liberal policies. But Botswana will not adopt a more liberal policy.
Therefore Angola will not achieve stability.
2. If Denmark refuses to join the European Community, then, if Estonia re-
mains in the Russian sphere of influence, then Finland will reject a free-
trade policy. Estonia will remain in the Russian sphere of influence. So if
Denmark refuses to join the European Community, then Finland will re-
ject a free-trade policy.
3. If Greece strengthens its democratic institutions, then Hungary will pur-
sue a more independent policy. If Greece strengthens its democratic in-
stitutions, then the Italian government will feel less threatened. Hence,
if Hungary pursues a more independent policy, the Italian government
will feel less threatened.
4. If Japan continues to increase the export of automobiles, then either
Korea or Laos will suffer economic decline. Korea will not suffer eco-
nomic decline. It follows that if Japan continues to increase the export of
automobiles, then Laos will suffer economic decline.
340

Symbolic Logic
* 5. If Montana suffers a severe drought, then, if Nevada has its normal light
rainfall, Oregon’s water supply will be greatly reduced. Nevada does
have its normal light rainfall. So if Oregon’s water supply is greatly re-
duced, then Montana suffers a severe drought.
6. If equality of opportunity is to be achieved, then those people previous-
ly disadvantaged should now be given special opportunities. If those
people previously disadvantaged should now be given special opportu-
nities, then some people receive preferential treatment. If some people
receive preferential treatment, then equality of opportunity is not to be
achieved. Therefore equality of opportunity is not to be achieved.
7. If terrorists’ demands are met, then lawlessness will be rewarded. If terror-
ists’ demands are not met, then innocent hostages will be murdered. So ei-
ther lawlessness will be rewarded or innocent hostages will be murdered.
8. If people are entirely rational, then either all of a person’s actions can be
predicted in advance or the universe is essentially deterministic. Not all
of a person’s actions can be predicted in advance. Thus, if the universe
is not essentially deterministic, then people are not entirely rational.
9. If oil consumption continues to grow, then either oil imports will in-
crease or domestic oil reserves will be depleted. If oil imports increase
and domestic oil reserves are depleted, then the nation eventually will
go bankrupt. Therefore, if oil consumption continues to grow, then the
nation eventually will go bankrupt.
*10. If oil consumption continues to grow, then oil imports will increase and
domestic oil reserves will be depleted. If either oil imports increase or
domestic oil reserves are depleted, then the nation will soon be bank-
rupt. Therefore, if oil consumption continues to grow, then the nation
will soon be bankrupt.
8
Statement Forms and Material Equivalence
A. Statement Forms and Statements
We now make explicit a notion that was tacitly assumed in the preceding sec-
tion, the notion of a statement form. There is an exact parallel between the rela-
tion of argument to argument form, on the one hand, and the relation of
statement to statement form, on the other. The definition of a statement form
makes this evident: A statement form is any sequence of symbols containing
statement variables but no statements, such that when statements are substitut-
ed for the statement variables—the same statement being substituted for the
same statement variable throughout—the result is a statement. Thus 
is a
statement form, because when statements are substituted for the variables p and
q, a statement results. The resulting statement is a disjunction, so 
is called
a disjunctive statement form. Analogously, 
and 
are respectively
called conjunctive and conditional statement forms, and 
is called a negation
statement form or a denial statement form. Just as any argument of a certain form is
'p
p ) q
p# q
p ¡ q
p ¡ q
Statement form
A sequence of symbols
containing no
statements, but
containing statement
variables connected in
such a way that when
statements are
consistently substituted
for the statement
variables, the result is a
statement.
Disjunctive statement
form A statement form
symbolized as p
q; its
substitution instances
are disjunctive
statements.
¡
341

Charles Sanders Peirce
V
iewed by many as the most original and creative of American logicians—
Bertrand Russell called him “certainly the greatest American thinker
ever”— Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914) made contributions of such
complexity and variety to the fields of logic and mathematics that it is not easy to
summarize them. For him, what we call logic was the formal branch of the theo-
ry of signs, semiotics—a study of which he was the founder.
The son of a professor of mathematics and astronomy at Harvard,
Peirce was fascinated by logic from the time that he read Whateley’s
Elements of Logic at the age of 12. He received his BA and MA from Har-
vard, but was despised by one of his instructors, Charles William Eliot,
who—as President of Harvard for forty years—made it virtually impossi-
ble for Peirce to obtain the academic employment that he sought.
It was in the United States Coast Survey that Peirce was chiefly em-
ployed until, at the age of 40, he was appointed lecturer in logic at the re-
cently established Johns Hopkins University. This position he held for five
years, but he lost it as a consequence of assorted marital and sexual scan-
dals in which he became involved. Academic employment was from that
time denied him everywhere. Peirce was an odd man, with an odd manner;
he was not very likeable, or sociable, or cooperative; his conduct was often
irresponsible. Probably he suffered from some serious psychological disabilities.
As a thinker, however, he was productive in science and mathematics and
philosophy, as well as in logic. He wrote prolifically; some of his writings have
not yet been published. He defended the frequency theory of probability, con-
tending that science can achieve no more than statistical probabilities—never
certainties. He worked on infinitesimals and on the theory of mathematical
continua. He developed the logic of relations (“If X is taller than Y, and Y is
taller than Z, then X is taller than Z”). He refined quantification theory. He cre-
ated a three-value logic in which “undetermined” was the third value. He im-
proved truth tables. He devised symbols for new logical operations. He was
one of the first to see that Boolean calculations could be carried out in the ma-
terial world using electrical switches. Some scholars who much later partici-
pated in the design and construction of the first electronic computers credited
their insights to the suggestiveness of Peirce’s writings. The American logician
C. I. Lewis wrote that “the contributions of C. S. Peirce to symbolic logic are
more numerous and varied than those of any other writer.”
In philosophy Peirce is most famous as the founder, with John Dewey, of
the American movement we call pragmatism, which was for him essentially a
theory of truth: A proposition is true if it works satisfactorily, and the meaning
of a proposition is to be found in the practical consequences of accepting it. He
reported that he learned philosophy, when he was a college student, by read-
ing every day a few pages of Immanuel Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason, a work
he studied regularly for ten years.
Peirce was a man of most peculiar habits. He spent his inheritance on land
and a large house in eastern Pennsylvania that he could not afford to maintain.
Biography
Symbolic Logic
Charles Sanders Peirce
(1839–1914) 
A great American logi-
cian, philosopher, mathe-
matician, and scientist.
Source: Photodisc/
Getty Images
Photodisc/Getty Images
342

Symbolic Logic
p
p
p
p
T
F
T
F
T
T
¡ '
'
Specific form
When referring to a
given statement, the
statement form from
which the statement
results when a different
simple statement is
substituted consistently
for each different
statement variable in
that form.
Tautology A statement
form all of whose
substitution instances
must be true.
He lived beyond his means; he relied upon his friends to pay his debts and his
taxes. During the last years of his life he could not afford to heat his home in
winter, and lived largely on old bread donated by a local baker. In that big
house in Milford, Pennsylvania, he died in 1914 at the age of 74.
said to be a substitution instance of that argument form, so any statement of a
certain form is said to be a substitution instance of that statement form. Just as we
distinguished the specific form of a given argument, so we distinguish the
specific form of a given statement as that statement form from which the state-
ment results by substituting consistently a different simple statement for each
different statement variable. Thus 
is the specific form of the statement,
“The blind prisoner has a red hat or the blind prisoner has a white hat.”
B. Tautologous, Contradictory, 
and Contingent Statement Forms
The statement, “Lincoln was assassinated” (symbolized as L), and the statement,
“Either Lincoln was assassinated or else he wasn’t” (symbolized as 
), are
both obviously true. But, we would say, they are true “in different ways” or have
“different kinds” of truth. Similarly, the statement, “Washington was assassinat-
ed” (symbolized as W), and the statement “Washington was both assassinated
and not assassinated” (symbolized as 
), are both plainly false—but they
also are false “in different ways” or have “different kinds” of falsehood. These
differences in the “kinds” of truth or of falsehood are important and very great.
That the statement L is true, and that the statement W is false, are historical
facts—facts about the way events did happen. There is no logical necessity about
them. Events might have occurred differently, and therefore the truth values of such
statements as L and W must be discovered by an empirical study of history. But the
statement 
although true, is not a truth of history. There is logical necessity
here: Events could not have been such as to make it false, and its truth can be known
independently of any particular empirical investigation. The statement 
is a
logical truth, a formal truth, true in virtue of its form alone. It is a substitution in-
stance of a statement form all of whose substitution instances are true statements.
A statement form that has only true substitution instances is called a
tautologous statement form, or a tautology. To show that the statement form
is a tautology, we construct the following truth table:
p ¡ 'p
L ¡ 'L
L ¡ 'L,
W# 'W
L ¡ 'L
p ¡ q
There is only one initial or guide column to this truth table, because the form we
are considering contains only one statement variable. Consequently, there are
343

only two rows, which represent all possible substitution instances. There are
only T’s in the column under the statement form in question, and this fact shows
that all of its substitution instances are true. Any statement that is a substitution
instance of a tautologous statement form is true in virtue of its form, and is itself
said to be tautologous, or a tautology.
A statement form that has only false substitution instances is said to be self-
contradictory, or a contradiction, and is logically false. The statement form 
is self-contradictory, because only F’s occur under it in its truth table, signifying
that all of its substitution instances are false. Any statement, such as 
which is a substitution instance of a self-contradictory statement form, is false in
virtue of its form and is itself said to be self-contradictory, or a contradiction.
Statement forms that have both true and false statements among their substitu-
tion instances are called contingent statement forms. Any statement whose specif-
ic form is contingent is called a contingent statement. (It will be recalled that we are
assuming here that no simple statements are either logically true or logically false.
Only contingent simple statements are admitted here.) Thus p, 
and
are all contingent statement forms, and such statements as 
and 
are contingent statements, because their truth values are
dependent, or contingent, on their contents rather than on their forms alone.
Not all statement forms are so obviously tautological or self-contradictory or
contingent as the simple examples cited. For example, the statement form
is not at all obvious, though its truth table will show it to be a
tautology. It even has a special name, Peirce’s Law.
C. Material Equivalence
Material equivalence is a truth-functional connective, just as disjunction and ma-
terial implication are truth-functional connectives. The truth value of any state-
ment formed by linking two statements with a truth-functional connective, as
explained earlier, depends on (is a function of) the truth or falsity of the state-
ments it connects. Thus, we say that the disjunction of A and B is true if either A
is true or B is true or if they are both true. Material equivalence is the truth-func-
tional connective that asserts that the statements it connects have the same truth
value. Two statements that are equivalent in truth value, therefore, are material-
ly equivalent. One straightforward definition is this: Two statements are
materially equivalent when they are both true, or both false.
Just as the symbol for disjunction is the wedge, and the symbol for material im-
plication is the horseshoe, there is also a special symbol for material equivalence,
the three-bar sign or tribar, “
”. (Some systems employ the symbol “
”). And
just as we gave truth-table definitions for the wedge and the horseshoe, we can do
so for the three-bar sign. Here is the truth table for material equivalence, 
:
K
4
 K
[(p ) q) ) p] ) p
L ) W
L ¡ W,
L# W,
L, 'L,
p ) q
p ¡ q,
p# q,
'p,
W# 'W,
p# 'p
p
q
p
q
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
K
Contradiction
A statement form all of
whose substitution
instances are false.
Contingent
Being neither
tautologous nor self-
contradictory. A
contingent statement
may be true or false; a
contingent statement
form has some true and
some false substitution
instances.
Material equivalence
A truth-functional
relation (symbolized by
the three-bar sign, )
that may connect two
statements. Two
statements are
materially equivalent
when they are both true,
or when the are both
false—that is, when they
have the same truth
value. Materially
equivalent statements
always materially imply
one another.
Symbolic Logic
344

Symbolic Logic
Any two true statements materially imply one another; that is a consequence
of the meaning of material implication. And any two false statements also mate-
rially imply one another. Therefore any two statements that are materially equiv-
alent must imply one another, because they are either both true or both false.
Since any two statements, A and B, that are materially equivalent imply one
another, we may infer from their material equivalence that B is true if A is true,
and also that B is true only if A is true. The converse also holds: A is true if B is
true, and A is true only if B is true. Because both of these relations are entailed by
material equivalence, we can read the three-bar sign, 
to say “if and only if.”
In everyday discourse we use this logical relation only occasionally. I will go
to the championship game, one may say, if and only if I can acquire a ticket. I will
go if I do acquire a ticket, but I can go only if I acquire a ticket. So my going to the
game, and my acquiring a ticket to the game, are materially equivalent.
Every implication is a conditional statement, as we noted earlier. Two state-
ments, A and B, that are materially equivalent entail the truth of the conditional
and also entail the truth of the conditional 
Because the implication
goes both ways when material equivalence holds, a statement of the form 
is often called a biconditional.
There are four truth-functional connectives on which deductive arguments
commonly depend: conjunction, disjunction, material implication, and material
equivalence. Our discussion of the four is now complete.
A K B
B ) A.
A ) B,
K ,
The Four Truth-Functional Connectives
NOTE: “Not” is not a connective, but is a truth-functional operator, so it is omitted here.
o v e r v i e w
Truth-
Functional
Connective
Symbol 
(Name of
Symbol)
Proposition
Type
Names of 
Components of
Propositions 
of That Type
Example
And
(dot)
#
Conjunction
Conjuncts
Carol is mean and Bob sings the
blues. C# B
Or
(wedge)
¡
Disjunction
Disjuncts
Carol is mean or Tyrell is a
music lover. C ¡ T
If–then
(horseshoe)
)
Conditional
Antecedent, 
Consequent
If Bob sings the blues, then
Myrna gets moody. B ) M
If and only if
(tribar)
K
Biconditional
Components
Myrna gets moody if and only
if Bob sings the blues. M K B
D. Arguments, Conditional Statements, and Tautologies
To every argument there corresponds a conditional statement whose antecedent
is the conjunction of the argument’s premises and whose consequent is the argu-
ment’s conclusion. Thus, an argument having the form of modus ponens,
345

Symbolic Logic
p
may be expressed as a conditional statement of the form 
If the
argument expressed as a conditional has a valid argument form, then its conclu-
sion must in every case follow from its premises, and therefore the conditional
statement of it may be shown on a truth table to be a tautology. That is, the state-
ment that the conjunction of the premises implies the conclusion will (if the argu-
ment is valid) have all and only true instances.
Truth tables are powerful devices for the evaluation of arguments. An argu-
ment form is valid if and only if its truth table has a T under the conclusion in
every row in which there are T’s under all of its premises. This follows from the
precise meaning of validity. Now, if the conditional statement expressing that ar-
gument form is made the heading of one column of the truth table, an F can
occur in that column only in a row in which there are T’s under all the premises
and an F under the conclusion. But there will be no such row if the argument is
valid. Hence only T’s will occur under a conditional statement that corresponds
to a valid argument, and that conditional statement must be a tautology. We may
therefore say that an argument form is valid if, and only if, its expression in the
form of a conditional statement (of which the antecedent is the conjunction of the
premises of the given argument form, and the consequent is the conclusion of the
given argument form) is a tautology.
For every invalid argument of the truth-functional variety, however, the cor-
responding conditional statement will not be a tautology. The statement that the
conjunction of its premises implies its conclusion is (for an invalid argument) ei-
ther contingent or contradictory.
EXERCISES
A. For each statement in the left-hand column, indicate which, if any, of the
statement forms in the right-hand column have the given statement as a substi-
tution instance, and indicate which, if any, is the specific form of the given
statement.
[(p ) q)# p] ) q.
‹ q
p ) q
1.
2.
3.
4.
* 5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
*10.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j. p ) (q ¡ 'r)
(p# q) ¡ (r# s)
[(p ) q) ) p] ) p
[(p ) q) ) r] ) s
(p ) q) ¡ (r# s)
p K q
p# 'q
p ¡ q
p ) q
p# q
Z K ' 'Z
[(X ) Y) ) X] ) X
V ) (W ¡ 'W)
(R ) S) ¡ (T# 'U)
(O ¡ P) ) (P# Q)
(K# L) ¡ (M# N)
H ) (I# J)
'E ) (F# G)
C# 'D
A ¡ B
346

Symbolic Logic
B. Use truth tables to characterize the following statement forms as tautolo-
gous, self-contradictory, or contingent.
9
Logical Equivalence
At this point we introduce a new relation, important and very useful, but not a
connective, and somewhat more complicated than any of the truth-functional
connectives just discussed.
Statements are materially equivalent when they have the same truth value.
Because two materially equivalent statements are either both true, or both false,
we can readily see that they must (materially) imply one another, because a false
antecedent (materially) implies any statement, and a true consequent is (materi-
ally) implied by any statement. We may therefore read the three-bar sign, 
as
“if and only if.”
However, statements that are merely materially equivalent most certainly
cannot be substituted for one another. Knowing that they are materially equiva-
lent, we know only that their truth values are the same. The statements, “Jupiter
 K,
*1.
2. p ) [(p ) q) ) q]
[p ) (p ) q)] ) q
3.
4. p ) ['p ) (q ¡ 'q)]
(p# q)# (p ) 'q)
*5.
6. (p ) p) ) (q# 'q)
p ) [p ) (q# 'q)]
7.
8.
9.
*10.
C. Use truth tables to decide which of the following biconditionals are
tautologies.
{[(p ) q)# (r ) s)]# (q ¡ s)} ) (p ¡ r)
{[(p ) q)# (r ) s)]# (p ¡ r)} ) (q ¡ s)
[p ) (q ) p)] ) [(q ) q) ) '(r ) r)]
[p ) (q ) r)] ) [(p ) q) ) (p ) r)]
*1.
2. (p ) q) K ('p ) 'q)
(p ) q) K ('q ) 'p)
3.
4. [p ) (q ) r)] K [q ) (p ) r)]
[(p ) q) ) r] K [(q ) p) ) r]
*5.
6. p K [p ¡ (p# q)]
p K [p# (p ¡ q)]
7.
8. p K [p# (q ) p)]
p K [p# (p ) q)]
9.
*10. (p ) q) K [(p ¡ q) K q]
p K [p ¡ (p ) q)]
11.
12. p K [p# (q# 'q)]
p K [p ¡ (q# 'q)]
13.
14. p K [p ¡ (q ¡ 'q)]
p K [p# (q ¡ 'q)]
*15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
*20. [(p ) q)# (q ) p)] K [(p# q) ¡ ('p# 'q)]
[(p# q) ) r] K [p ) (q ) r)]
[p ¡ (q# r)] K [(p ¡ q)# (p ¡ r)]
[p ¡ (q# r)] K [(p# q) ¡ (p# r)]
[p# (q ¡ r)] K [(p ¡ q)# (p ¡ r)]
[p# (q ¡ r)] K [(p# q)# (p# r)]
347

Symbolic Logic
is larger than the Earth” and “Tokyo is the capital of Japan,” are materially equiv-
alent because they are both true, but we obviously cannot replace one with the
other. Similarly, the statements, “All spiders are poisonous” and “No spiders are
poisonous,” are materially equivalent simply because they are both false, but
they certainly cannot replace one another!
There are many circumstances, however, in which we must express the rela-
tionship that does permit mutual replacement. Two statements can be equivalent
in a sense much stronger than that of material equivalence. They may be equiva-
lent in the sense that any proposition that incorporates one of them could just as
well incorporate the other. If there is no possible case in which one of these state-
ments is true while the other is false, those statements are logically equivalent.
Of course, any two statements that are logically equivalent are materially
equivalent as well, for they obviously have the same truth value. Indeed, if two
statements are logically equivalent, they are materially equivalent under all cir-
cumstances—and this explains the short but powerful definition of logical
equivalence: Two statements are logically equivalent if the statement of their material
equivalence is a tautology. That is, the statement that they have the same truth
value is itself necessarily true. This is why, to express this very strong logical re-
lationship, we use the three-bar symbol with a small T immediately above it,
indicating that the logical relationship is of such a nature that the material equiv-
alence of the two statements is a tautology. Because material equivalence is a bi-
conditional (the two statements implying one another), we may think of this
symbol of logical equivalence,
as expressing a tautological biconditional.
Some simple logical equivalences that are very commonly used will make
this relation, and its great power, very clear. It is a commonplace that p and 
mean the same thing; “he is aware of that difficulty” and “he is not unaware of
that difficulty” are two statements with the same content. In substance, either of
these expressions may be replaced by the other because they both say the same
thing. This principle of double negation, whose truth is obvious to all, may be
exhibited in a truth table, where the material equivalence of two statement forms
is shown to be a tautology:
' 'p
KT ,
KT ,
This truth table proves that p and 
are logically equivalent. This very useful
logical equivalence, double negation, is symbolized as
The difference between material equivalence on the one hand and logical equiva-
lence on the other hand is very great and very important. The former is a truth-
functional connective,
which may be true or false depending only on the
truth or falsity of the elements it connects. But the latter, logical equivalence,
is not a mere connective, and it expresses a relation between two statements that
is not truth-functional. Two statements are logically equivalent only when it is
KT ,
K ,
p K
T ' 'p
' 'p
p
p
p
p
p
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
' '
K
T
' '
'
Logical equivalence
When referring to truth-
functional compound
propositions, the
relationship that holds
between two
propositions when the
statement of their
material equivalence is a
tautology. A very strong
relation; statements that
are logically equivalent
must have the same
meaning, and may
therefore replace one
another wherever they
occur.
Double negation
An expression of the
logical equivalence of
any symbol and the
negation of the negation
of that symbol.
Symbolized as 
p
p.
K
T
348

Symbolic Logic
absolutely impossible for them to have different truth values. However, if they
always have the same truth value, logically equivalent statements may be substi-
tuted for one another in any truth-functional context without changing the truth
value of that context. By contrast, two statements are materially equivalent if
they merely happen to have the same truth value, even if there are no factual con-
nections between them. Statements that are merely materially equivalent certain-
ly may not be substituted for one another!
There are two well-known logical equivalences (that is, logically true bicon-
ditionals) of great importance because they express the interrelations among
conjunction and disjunction, and their negations. Let us examine these two logi-
cal equivalences more closely.
First, what will serve to deny that a disjunction is true? Any disjunction
asserts no more than that at least one of its two disjuncts is true. One can-
not contradict it by asserting that at least one is false; one must (to deny it) assert
that both disjuncts are false. Therefore, asserting the negation of the disjunction
is logically equivalent to asserting the conjunction of the negations of p and
of q. To show this in a truth table, we may formulate the biconditional,
place it at the top of its own column, and examine its truth
value under all circumstances, that is, in each row.
'(p ¡ q) K ('p# 'q),
(p ¡ q)
p ¡ q
p
q
p
q
(p
q)
p
q
p
q
(p
q)
(
p
q)
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
# '
'
K
T
¡
'
# '
'
'
'
¡
'
¡
Of course we see that, whatever the truth values of p and of q, this bicondi-
tional must always be true. It is a tautology. Because the statement of that mate-
rial equivalence is a tautology, we conclude that its two component statements
are logically equivalent. We have proved that
Similarly, asserting the conjunction of p and q asserts that both are true, so to
contradict this assertion we need merely assert that at least one is false. Thus, as-
serting the negation of the conjunction 
is logically equivalent to asserting
the disjunction of the negations of p and of q. In symbols, the biconditional,
may be shown, in a truth table, to be a tautology. Such a
table proves that
These two tautologous biconditionals, or logical equivalences, are known as De
Morgan’s theorems, because they were formally stated by the mathematician
and logician Augustus De Morgan (1806–1871). De Morgan’s theorems can be
formulated in English thus:
a.
The negation of the disjunction of two statements is logically equivalent to the
conjunction of the negations of the two statements;
( p# q) K
T (p ¡ q)
'(p# q) K ('p ¡ 'q)
(p# q)
( p ¡ q) K
T (p# q)
De Morgan’s
theorems
Two expressions of
logical equivalence. The
first states that the
negation of a disjunction
is logically equivalent to
the conjunction of the
negations of its
disjuncts: (p
q)
(p • q).
The second states that
the negation of a
conjunction is logically
equivalent to the
disjunction of the
negations of its
conjuncts: (p • q)
(p
q).
¡
K
T
K
T
¡
349

Symbolic Logic
and
b.
The negation of the conjunction of two statements is logically equivalent to the
disjunction of the negations of the two statements.
These theorems of De Morgan are exceedingly useful.
Another important logical equivalence is very helpful when we seek to ma-
nipulate truth-functional connectives. Material implication, 
, was defined (in
Section 3) as an abbreviated way of saying 
That is, “p materially im-
plies q” simply means, by definition, that it is not the case that p is true while q is
false. In this definition we see that the definiens, 
is the denial of a con-
junction. And by De Morgan’s theorem we know that any such denial is logical-
ly equivalent to the disjunction of the denials of the conjuncts; that is, we know
that 
is logically equivalent to 
and this expression in turn,
applying the principle of double negation, is logically equivalent to 
Log-
ically equivalent expressions mean the same thing, and therefore the original
definiens of the horseshoe, 
may be replaced with no change of meaning
by the simpler expression 
This gives us a very useful definition of mate-
rial implication: 
is logically equivalent to
In symbols we write:
This definition of material implication is widely relied on in the formulation
of logical statements and the analysis of arguments. Manipulation is often essen-
tial, and manipulation is more efficient when the statements we are working
with have the same central connective. With the simple definition of the horse-
shoe we have just established, 

T
statements in which the horse-
shoe is the connective can be conveniently replaced by statements in which the
wedge is the connective; and likewise, statements in disjunctive form may be
readily replaced by statements in implicative form. When we seek to present a
formal proof of the validity of deductive arguments, replacements of this kind
are very useful indeed.
Before going on to the methods of testing for validity and invalidity in the
next section, it is worthwhile to pause for a more thorough consideration of the
meaning of material implication. Implication is central in argument but, as we
noted earlier, the word “implies” is highly ambiguous. Material implication, on
which we rely in this analysis, is only one sense of that word, although it is a very
important sense, of course. The definition of material implication explained just
above makes it clear that when we say, in this important sense, that “p implies q,”
we are saying no more than that “either q is true or p is false.”
Asserting the “if–then” relation in this sense has consequences that may
seem paradoxical. For in this sense we can say, correctly, “If a statement is true,
then it is implied by any statement whatever.” Because it is true that the earth is
round, it follows that “The moon is made of green cheese implies that the earth is
round.” This appears to be very curious, especially because it also follows that
“The moon is not made of green cheese implies that the earth is round.” Our pre-
cise understanding of material implication also entitles us to say, correctly, “If a
statement is false, then it implies any statement whatever.” Because it is false that
('p ¡ q),
(p ) q)
(p  q) K
T (p ¡ q)
'p ¡ q.
p ) q
'p ¡ q.
'(p# 'q),
'p ¡ q.
('p ¡ ' 'q);
'(p# 'q)
'(p# 'q),
'(p# 'q).
 )
350

Symbolic Logic
the moon is made of green cheese, it follows that “The moon is made of green
cheese implies that the earth is round,” and this is the more curious when we re-
alize that it also follows that “The moon is made of green cheese implies that the
earth is not round.”
Why do these true statements seem so curious? It is because we recognize that
the shape of the earth and the cheesiness of the moon are utterly irrelevant to each
other. As we normally use the word “implies,” a statement cannot imply some other
statement, false or true, to which it is utterly irrelevant. That is the case when “im-
plies” is used in most of its everyday senses. And yet those “paradoxical” statements
in the preceding paragraph are indeed true, and not really problematic at all, because
they use the word “implies” in the logical sense of “material implication.” The pre-
cise meaning of material implication we have made very clear; we understand that
to say p materially implies q is only to say that either p is false or q is true.
What needs to be borne in mind is this: Meaning—subject matter—is strictly
irrelevant to material implication. Material implication is a truth function. Only the
truth and falsity of the antecedent and the consequent, not their content, are rel-
evant here. There is nothing paradoxical in stating that any disjunction is true
that contains one true disjunct. Well, when we say that “The moon is made of
green cheese (materially) implies that the earth is round,” we know that to be
logically equivalent to saying “Either the moon is not made of green cheese or
the earth is round”—a disjunction that is most certainly true. And any disjunc-
tion we may confront in which “The moon is not made of green cheese” is the
first disjunct will certainly be true, no matter what the second disjunct asserts.
So, yes, “The moon is made of green cheese (materially) implies that the earth is
square” because that is logically equivalent to “The moon is not made of green
cheese or the earth is square.” A false statement materially implies any statement
whatever. A true statement is materially implied by any statement whatever.
Every occurrence of “if–then” should be treated, we have said, as a material
implication, and represented with the horseshoe, 
The justification of this prac-
tice, its logical expediency, is the fact that doing so preserves the validity of all
valid arguments of the type with which we are concerned in this part of our log-
ical studies. Other symbolizations have been proposed, adequate to other types
of implication, but they belong to more advanced parts of logic, beyond the
scope of this text.
10
The Three “Laws of Thought”
Some early thinkers, after having defined logic as “the science of the laws of
thought,” went on to assert that there are exactly three basic laws of thought, laws
so fundamental that obedience to them is both the necessary and the sufficient
condition of correct thinking. These three have traditionally been called:

The principle of identity. This principle asserts that if any statement is true,
then it is true. Using our notation we may rephrase it by saying that the prin-
ciple of identity asserts that every statement of the form 
must be true,
that every such statement is a tautology.
p ) p
 ).
Principle of identity
The principle that
asserts that if any
statement is true then it
is true.
351

Symbolic Logic

The principle of noncontradiction. This principle asserts that no statement
can be both true and false. Using our notation we may rephrase it by saying
that the principle of noncontradiction asserts that every statement of the
form 
must be false, that every such statement is self-contradictory.

The principle of excluded middle. This principle asserts that every statement
is either true or false. Using our notation we may rephrase it by saying that the
principle of excluded middle asserts that every statement of the form 
must be true, that every such statement is a tautology.
It is obvious that these three principles are indeed true—logically true—but
the claim that they deserve privileged status as the most fundamental laws of
thought is doubtful. The first (identity) and the third (excluded middle) are tau-
tologies, but there are many other tautologous forms whose truth is equally cer-
tain. The second (noncontradiction) is by no means the only self-contradictory
form of statement.
We do use these principles in completing truth tables. In the initial columns
of each row of a table we place either a T or an F, being guided by the principle
of excluded middle. Nowhere do we put both T and F, being guided by the prin-
ciple of noncontradiction. Once having put a T under a symbol in a given row,
being guided by the principle of identity, when we encounter that symbol in
other columns of that row, we regard it as still being assigned a T. So we could re-
gard the three laws of thought as principles governing the construction of truth
tables.
Nevertheless, in regarding the entire system of deductive logic, these three
principles are no more important or fruitful than many others. Indeed, there are
tautologies that are more fruitful than they for purposes of deduction, and in that
sense more important than these three, such as De Morgan’s theorems, which are
more applicable in a system of natural deduction than these more abstract prin-
ciples. Nonetheless, these principles are useful in guiding informal argumenta-
tion, in which axiomatic deductive systems seldom obtain. A more extended
treatment of this point lies beyond the scope of this text.6
Some thinkers, believing themselves to have devised a new and different
logic, have claimed that these three principles are in fact not true, and that obedi-
ence to them has been needlessly confining. But these criticisms have been based
on misunderstandings.
The principle of identity has been attacked on the ground that things change,
and are always changing. Thus, for example, statements that were true of the
United States when it consisted of the thirteen original states are no longer true
of the United States today, which has fifty states. But this does not undermine the
principle of identity. The sentence, “There are only thirteen states in the United
States,” is incomplete, an elliptical formulation of the statement that “There were
only thirteen states in the United States in 1790”—and that statement is as true
today as it was in 1790. When we confine our attention to complete, nonelliptical
formulations of propositions, we see that their truth (or falsity) does not change
over time. The principle of identity is true, and it does not interfere with our
recognition of continuing change.
p ¡ 'p
p# 'p
Principle of
noncontradiction
The principle that
asserts that no
statement can be both
true and false.
Principle of excluded
middle
The principle that
asserts that any
statement is either true
or false.
352

Symbolic Logic
The principle of noncontradiction has been attacked by Hegelians and Marxists
on the grounds that genuine contradiction is everywhere pervasive, that the world
is replete with the inevitable conflict of contradictory forces. That there are conflict-
ing forces in the real word is true, of course—but to call these conflicting forces “con-
tradictory” is a loose and misleading use of that term. Labor unions and the private
owners of industrial plants may indeed find themselves in conflict—but neither the
owner nor the union is the “negation” or the “denial” or the “contradictory” of the
other. The principle of noncontradiction, understood in the straightforward sense in
which it is intended by logicians, is unobjectionable and perfectly true.
The principle of excluded middle has been the object of much criticism, be-
cause it leads to a “two-valued orientation,” which implies that things in the
world must be either “white or black,” and which thereby hinders the realization
of compromise and less-than-absolute gradations. This objection also arises from
misunderstanding. Of course the statement “This is black” cannot be jointly true
with the statement “This is white”—where “this” refers to exactly the same
thing. However, although these two statements cannot both be true, they can
both be false. “This” may be neither black nor white; the two statements are
contraries, not contradictories. The contradictory of the statement “This is white”
is the statement “It is not the case that this is white” and (if “white” is used in
precisely the same sense in both of these statements) one of them must be true
and the other false. The principle of excluded middle is inescapable.
All three of these “laws of thought” are unobjectionable—so long as they are
applied to statements containing unambiguous, nonelliptical, and precise terms.
Plato appealed explicitly to the principle of noncontradiction in Book IV of his
Republic (at numbers 436 and 439); Aristotle discussed all three of these princi-
ples in Books IV and XI of his Metaphysics. Of the principle of noncontradiction,
Aristotle wrote: “That the same attribute cannot at the same time belong and not
belong to the same subject and in the same respect” is a principle “which every-
one must have who understands anything that is,” and which “everyone must
already have when he comes to a special study.” It is, he concluded, “the most
certain of all principles.” The “laws of thought” may not deserve the honorific
status assigned to them by some philosophers, but they are indubitably true.
chapter 
Summary
This chapter has presented the fundamental concepts of modern symbolic logic.
In Section 1, we explained the general approach of modern symbolic logic
and its need for an artificial symbolic language.
In Section 2, we introduced and defined the symbols for negation (the curl: );
and for the truth-functional connectives of conjunction (the dot: ) and disjunc-
tion (the wedge: ). We also explained logical punctuation.
In Section 3, we discussed the different senses of implication and defined the
truth-functional connective material implication (the horseshoe: 
).
In Section 4, we explained the formal structure of arguments, defined argument
forms, and explained other concepts essential in analyzing deductive arguments.
)
¡
#
'
353

In Section 5, we gave a precise account of valid and invalid argument
forms.
In Section 6, we explained the truth-table method of testing the validity of ar-
gument forms.
In Section 7, we identified and described a few very common argument
forms, some valid and some invalid.
In Section 8, we explained the formal structure of statements and defined es-
sential terms for dealing with statement forms. We introduced tautologous, con-
tradictory, and contingent statement forms, and defined a fourth truth-functional
connective, material equivalence (three bars:
).
In Section 9, we introduced and defined a powerful new relation, logical
equivalence, using the symbol
We explained why statements that are logical-
ly equivalent may be substituted for one another, while statements that are mere-
ly materially equivalent cannot replace one another. We introduced several
logical equivalences of special importance: De Morgan’s theorems, the principle
of double negation, and the definition of material implication.
In Section 10, we discussed certain logical equivalences that have been
thought by many to be fundamental in all reasoning: the principle of identity, the
principle of noncontradiction, and the principle of excluded middle.
END NOTES
1Somewhat more complicated definitions have been proposed by David H. Sanford in “What Is a Truth
Functional Component?” Logique et Analyse 14 (1970): 483–486.
2“The Firm,” The New Yorker, 8 March 1999.
3Peter J. Bertocci, “Chavez’ Plight Must Come from Arrogance,” The New York Times, 19 January 2001.
4Rabbi Ammiel Hirsch, “Grand Canyon,” The New York Times, 10 October 2005.
5Orlando Patterson, “The Speech Misheard Round the World,” The New York Times, 22 January 2005.
6For further discussion of these matters, the interested reader can consult I. M. Copi and J. A. Gould, edi-
tors, Readings on Logic, 2nd edition (New York: Macmillan, 1972), part 2; and I. M. Copi and J. A. Gould,
editors, Contemporary Philosophical Logic (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1978), part 8.
KT .
K
For additional exercises and tutorials about concepts covered in this
chapter, log in to MyLogicLab at www.mylogiclab.com and select your
current textbook.
Symbolic Logic
354

Symbolic Logic
SECTION 2
Exercises 
A. 
1. True.
5. True.
10. True.
15. False. 20. True.
25. False.
B. 
1. True.
5. False. 10. True.
15. True.
20. False. 25. False.
C. 
1. I • ~L
5. ~I • ~L
10. ~(E
J)
^
SOLUTIONS TO SELECTED EXERCISES
15. ~I
L
20. (I • E)
~(J • S)
25. (L • E) • (S • J)
SECTION 3
Exercises 
A. 
1. True.
5. False.
10. True.
15. False. 20. False.
25. True.
B. 
1. True.
5. False.
10. False. 15. True.
20. False.
25. True.
C. 
1. A  (B  C)
5. (A • B)  C
10. ~[A  (B • C)]
15. B  (A
C)
20. B
C
25. (~C • ~D)  (~B
A)
SECTION 4
Exercises 
A. 
e. 10 is the specific form of e.
o. 3 has o as a substitution instance, and 24 is the specific form of o.
SECTION 7
Exercises 
A. 
1.
¡
¡
¡
¡
¡
p
q
p  q
q
p
q  p
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
Valid
5.
10.
p
q
p  q
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
Invalid (shown by second row)
p
q
p • q
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
Valid
355

15.
p
q
r
q  r
p 
(q  r)
p  r
q 
( p  r)
p
q
^
( p
q)
r
^
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
T
Invalid (shown by fourth and sixth rows)
20.
p
q
r
s
p • q p  q
( p • q) 
 r
r  s
p 
(r  s)
( p  q) • 
[(p • q)  r] p  s
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
Valid
Symbolic Logic
356

B. 
1.
(A
B)  (A • B)
(p
q)  (p • q)
A
B
has the specific
p
q
∴A • B
form
∴p • q
^
^
^
^
p
q
p
q
^
p • q
( p
q)  ( p • q)
^
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
Valid
5.
(I
J)  (I • J)
(p
q)  (p • q)
~(I
J)
has the specific
~(p
q)
∴~(I • J)
form
∴~(p • q)
^
^
^
^
p
q
p
q
^
p • q
( p
q)  ( p • q)
^
~( p
q)
^
~( p • q)
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
Valid (Note: Fallacy of denying the antecedent is not committed here!)
p
q
r
q
r
^
p  (q
r)
^
q • r
p
(q • r)  p
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
T
T
Invalid (shown by second and third rows)
10.
U  (V
W)
p  (q
r)
(V • W)  ~U
has the specific
(q • r)  ~p
∴~U
form
∴~p
^
^
Symbolic Logic
357

C. 
1.
A  (B • C)
p  (q • r)
~B
has the specific
~q
∴~A
form
∴~p
p
q
r
q • r
p  (q • r)
~q
~p
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
Valid
5.
M  (N  O)
p  (q  r)
N
has the specific
q
∴O  M
form
∴r  p
p
q
r
q  r
p  (q  r)
r  p
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
Invalid (shown by fifth row)
Symbolic Logic
358

10.
G  (I • D)
p  (q • r)
(I
D)  B
has the specific
(q
r)  s
∴G  B
form
∴p  s
^
^
p
q
r
s
q • r p  (q • r)
q
r
^
(q
r)  s
^
p  s
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
F
T
T
Valid
Symbolic Logic
359

SECTION 8
Exercises 
A. 
1.
c is the specific form of 1.
5.
c has 5 as a substitution instance, and i is the specific form of 5.
10.
e has 10 as a substitution instance.
B. 
1.
p
q
p  q
p  ( p  q) [ p  ( p  q)]  q
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
Contingent
5.
p
q
~q
q • ~q
p  (q • ~q) p  [ p  (q • ~q)]
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
Contingent
Symbolic Logic
360

10.
p q
r
s
p  q
r  s
( p  q) •
(r  s)
q
s
^
[( p  q) • (r  s)] • 
(q
s)
^
p
r
^
{[( p  q) • (r  s)] • 
(q
s)}  ( p
r)
^
^
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
Contingent
C. 
1.
p
q
p  q
~q
~p
~q  ~p
( p  q) 
(~q  ~p)
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
Tautology
Symbolic Logic
361

5.
p
q
p
q
^
p • ( p
q)
^
p  [ p • ( p
q)]
^
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
T
Tautology
10.
p
q
p  q p
q
^
( p
q)  q
^
( p  q)  [( p
q)  q]
^
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
Tautology
15.
p
q
r
q
r
^
p • (q
r)
^
p • q p • r
(p • q) 
(p • r)
^
[p • (q
r)] 
[(p • q) 
(p • r)]
^
^
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
Tautology
Symbolic Logic
362

20.
p
q p  q q  p
( p  q) •
(q  p)
p • q ~p ~q ~p • ~q
( p • q) 
(~p • ~q)
^
[( p  q) • (q  p)] 
[( p • q) 
(~p • ~ q)]
^
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
T
T
Tautology
Symbolic Logic
363

This page intentionally left blank 

Methods of Deduction
1
Formal Proof of Validity
2
The Elementary Valid Argument Forms
3
Formal Proofs of Validity Exhibited
4
Constructing Formal Proofs of Validity
5
Constructing More Extended Formal Proofs
6
Expanding the Rules of Inference: Replacement Rules
7
The System of Natural Deduction
8
Constructing Formal Proofs Using the Nineteen Rules of Inference
9
Proof of Invalidity
10
Inconsistency
11
Indirect Proof of Validity
12
Shorter Truth-Table Technique
1
Formal Proof of Validity
In theory, truth tables are adequate to test the validity of any argument of the gen-
eral type we have considered. In practice, however, they become unwieldy as the
number of component statements increases. A more efficient method of establish-
ing the validity of an extended argument is to deduce its conclusion from its prem-
ises by a sequence of elementary arguments, each of which is known to be valid.
This technique accords fairly well with ordinary methods of argumentation.
Consider, for example, the following argument:
If Anderson was nominated, then she went to Boston.
If she went to Boston, then she campaigned there.
If she campaigned there, she met Douglas.
Anderson did not meet Douglas.
Either Anderson was nominated or someone more eligible was selected.
Therefore someone more eligible was selected.
The validity of this argument may be intuitively obvious, but let us consider the
matter of proof. The discussion will be facilitated by translating the argument
into symbolism as
To establish the validity of this argument by means of a truth table requires a
table with thirty-two rows, because five different simple statements are involved.
Instead, we can prove the argument valid by deducing its conclusion using a
‹ E
A ¡ E
'D
C ) D
B ) C
A ) B
From Chapter 9 of Introduction to Logic, Fourteenth Edition. Irving M. Copi, Carl Cohen, Kenneth McMahon. 
Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Prentice Hall. All rights reserved.
This asset is
intentionally omitted
from this text. It may
be accessed at
www.mcescher.com.
(Belvedere by 
M.C. Escher)

sequence of just four elementary valid arguments. From the first two premises,
and 
, we validly infer that 
using a Hypothetical Syllogism.
From 
and the third premise, 
, we validly infer that 
as another
Hypothetical Syllogism. From 
and the fourth premise, 
, we validly infer
that 
by Modus Tollens. From 
and the fifth premise, 
, as a Disjunctive
Syllogism we validly infer E, the conclusion of the original argument. That the
conclusion can be deduced from the five premises of the original argument by
four elementary valid arguments proves the original argument to be valid. Here
the elementary valid argument forms Hypothetical Syllogism (H.S.), Modus Tollens
(M.T.), and Disjunctive Syllogism (D.S.) are used as rules of inference whose
application allows conclusions to be validly inferred or deduced from premises.
This method of deriving the conclusion of a deductive argument—using rules
of inference successively to prove the validity of the argument—is as reliable as the
truth-table method, if the rules are used with meticulous care. However, it improves
on the truth-table method in two ways: It is vastly more efficient, as has just been
shown; and it enables us to follow the flow of the reasoning process from the prem-
ises to the conclusion and is therefore much more intuitive and more illuminating.
The method is often called natural deduction. Using natural deduction, we can
provide a formal proof of the validity of any argument that is valid.
Aformal proof of validity is given by writing the premises and the statements that
we deduce from them in a single column, and setting off in another column, to the
right of each such statement, its “justification,” or the reason we give for including
it in the proof. It is convenient to list all the premises first and to write the conclu-
sion either on a separate line, or slightly to one side and separated by a diagonal
line from the premises. If all the statements in the column are numbered, the “justi-
fication” for each statement consists of the numbers of the preceding statements
from which it is inferred, together with the abbreviation for the rule of inference by
which it follows from them. The formal proof of the example argument is written as
A ¡ E
'A
'A
'D
A ) D
A ) D
C ) D
A ) C
A ) C
B ) C
A ) B
Methods of Deduction
Rules of inference
The rules that permit
valid inferences from
statements assumed as
premises. Twenty-three
rules of inference are set
forth in this text: nine
elementary valid
argument forms, ten
logical equivalences
whose members may
replace one another,
and four rules governing
instantiation and
generalization in
quantified logic.
1.
2.
3.
4.
D
5.
6.
1, 2, H.S.
7.
6, 3, H.S.
8.
A
7, 4, M.T.
9. E
5, 8, D.S.
'
A ) D
A ) C
‹ E
A ¡ E
'
C ) D
B ) C
A ) B
Elementary valid
argument
Any one of a set of
specified deductive
arguments that serve as
rules of inference and
that may therefore be
used in constructing a
formal proof of validity.
Formal proof of validity
A sequence of
statements each of
which is either a premise
of a given argument, or
follows from the
preceding statements of
the sequence by one of
the rules of inference, or
by logical equivalence,
where the last statement
in the sequence is the
conclusion of the
argument whose validity
is proved.
Natural deduction
A method of proving the
validity of a deductive
argument by using the
rules of inference.
We define a formal proof of validity of a given argument as a sequence of statements,
each of which either is a premise of that argument or follows from preceding statements of
the sequence by an elementary valid argument or by a logical equivalence, such that the last
statement in the sequence is the conclusion of the argument whose validity is being proved.
We define an elementary valid argument as any argument that is a substitution in-
stance of an elementary valid argument form. Note that any substitution instance of an el-
ementary valid argument form is an elementary valid argument. Thus the argument
366

is an elementary valid argument because it is a substitution instance of the
elementary valid argument form Modus Ponens (M.P.). It results from
by substituting 
for p and 
for q, and it is therefore of that form
even though Modus Ponens is not the specific form of the given argument.
Modus Ponens is a very elementary valid argument form indeed, but what
other valid argument forms are considered to be rules of inference? We begin
with a list of just nine rules of inference that can be used in constructing formal
proofs of validity. With their aid, formal proofs of validity can be constructed for
a wide range of more complicated arguments. The names provided are for the
most part standard, and the use of their abbreviations permits formal proofs to
be set down with a minimum of writing.
C K (D ¡ E)
A# B
‹ q
p
p ) q
‹ C K (D ¡ E)
A# B
(A# B) ) [C K (D ¡ E)]
Methods of Deduction
Kurt Gödel
T
he Institute for Advanced Study was founded in Princeton, NJ,
in 1930. Two of its first members were Albert Einstein and John
von Neumann; a third early member was the powerful Austrian
logician, Kurt Gödel (1906–1978), who by 1931, at the age of 25, had
published his two “Incompleteness Theorems.” He became the enfant
terrible in the world of formal logic.
To understand Gödel’s impact in the logical world one must bear in
mind the great project that for decades had been the program of modern
logicians: to prove that all mathematics is founded upon logic and can be
derived from a few basic logical axioms. Russell and Whitehead had
sought to culminate this undertaking with Principia Mathematica (1910–13).
Success would require that the logical system devised be both consistent
and complete. But Gödel demonstrated, in a paper entitled “On Formally
Undecidable Propositions of Principia Mathematica and Related Systems,”
that any axiomatic system powerful enough to describe the arithmetic of the natu-
ral numbers, if it is internally consistent, cannot be complete. Moreover (as von
Neumann had also seen), the consistency of the axioms cannot be established with-
in the system itself. If, in any such axiomatized system, there must always be at
least one true but unprovable statement, the search for some set of logical axioms
that would be sufficient to ground all of mathematics was doomed. Proving this,
Kurt Gödel became one of the most respected logicians of the twentieth century.
Gödel was born in the city of Brno, in what was then Austria-Hungary. As a
boy his insatiable curiosity led to his nickname, Herr Warum—”Mr. Why.” Ex-
celling both in languages and in mathematics in his early schooling, he moved
to Vienna at the age of 18, where he associated closely with a number of Jewish
Biography
© Bettmann/CORBIS 
All Rights Reserved
367

2
The Elementary Valid Argument Forms
Our object is to build a set of logical rules—rules of inference—with which we can
prove the validity of deductive arguments if they are valid. We began with a few ele-
mentary valid argument forms that have already been introduced—Modus Ponens, for
example, and Disjunctive Syllogism. These are indeed simple and common, but we
need a set of rules that is more powerful. The rules of inference may be thought of as a
logical toolbox, from which the tools may be taken, as needed, to prove validity. What
else is needed for our toolbox? How shall we expand the list of rules of inference?
The needed rules of inference consist of two sets, each set containing rules of
a different kind. The first is a set of elementary valid argument forms. The second
set consists of a small group of elementary logical equivalences. In this section we
discuss only the elementary valid argument forms.
To this point we have become acquainted with four elementary valid argument
forms:
Methods of Deduction
philosophers and mathematicians. In 1933, after the publication of his incomplete-
ness papers, Gödel visited the U.S. for the first time; he lectured at the Institute for
Advanced Study and befriended Albert Einstein there. That same year Hitler
came to power in Germany. When Austria was absorbed by Nazi Germany in
1938, Gödel’s circumstances in Vienna were fraught with danger; he planned a cir-
cuitous escape to America by way of the Trans-Siberian railway and Japan. When
the Second World War began, in September of 1939, Gödel fled. Before the end of
that year he was safe in Princeton, where he continued his work as a distinguished
member of the faculty at the Institute for Advanced Study. Albert Einstein, who
had become his regular companion, confided to friends that he continued to
visit the Institute chiefly “to have the privilege of walking home with Gödel.”
Kurt Gödel was one of the many superb scholars—physicists, philoso-
phers, logicians, mathematicians, literary figures, and thinkers of every sort—
who enriched American intellectual life as a consequence of Hitler’s obsessive
determination to kill or expel all European Jews. The horrors of Nazi oppres-
sion proved a warped blessing to the United States. Gödel proudly became an
American citizen in 1947. He made a close study of the Constitution of the
United States, and here he remained until his death, in
Princeton, in 1978. 
1. Modus Ponens (M.P.)
‹ q
p
p ) q
2. Modus Tollens (M.T.) 
‹ 'p
'q
p ) q
3. Hypothetical Syllogism (H.S.)
‹ p ) r
q ) r
p ) q
4. Disjunctive Syllogism (D.S.)
‹ q
'p
p ¡ q
368

7. Simplification (Simp.)
‹ p
p# q
6. Absorption (Abs.)
‹ p ) (p# q)
p ) q
5. Rule 5 is called Constructive Dilemma (C.D.). It is symbolized as
‹ q ¡ s
p ¡ r
(p ) q)# (r ) s)
Constructive dilemma
(C.D.)
A rule of inference; one
of nine elementary valid
argument forms.
Constructive dilemma
permits the inference
that if 
is
true, and 
is also
true, then 
must be
true.
q ¡ s
p ¡ r
(p ) q)# (r ) s)
Methods of Deduction
For an effective logical toolbox we need to add five more. Let us examine these
additional argument forms—each of which is valid and can be readily proved
valid using a truth table.
A dilemma is an argument in which one of two alternatives must be chosen. In
this argument form the alternatives are the antecedents of the two conditional
propositions 
and 
. We know from Modus Ponens that if we are given
and p, we may infer q; and if we are given 
and r, we may infer s.
Therefore if we are given both 
, and 
, and either p or r (that is, either of
the antecedents), we may infer validly either q or s (that is, one or the other of the
consequents). Constructive Dilemma is, in effect, a combination of two argu-
ments in Modus Ponens form, and it is most certainly valid, as a truth table can
make evident. We add Constructive Dilemma (C.D.) to our tool box.
r ) s
p ) q
r ) s
p ) q
r ) s
p ) q
Any proposition p always implies itself, of course. Therefore, if we know that 
,
we may validly infer that p implies both itself and q. That is all that Absorption says.
Why (one may ask) do we need so elementary a rule? The need for it will become
clearer as we go on; in short, we need it because it will be very convenient, even es-
sential at times, to carry the p across the horseshoe. In effect, Absorption makes the
principle of identity, one of the basic logical principles, always available for our use.
We add Absorption (Abs.) to our logical toolbox.
The next two elementary valid argument forms are intuitively very easy to
grasp if we understand the logical connectives explained earlier.
p ) q
Simplification says only that if two propositions, p and q, are true when they are
conjoined 
, we may validly infer that one of them, p, is true by itself. We
simplify the expression before us; we “pull” p from the conjunction and stand it
on its own. Because we are given that 
, we know that both p and q must be
true; we may therefore know with certainty that p is true.
What about q? Isn’t q true for exactly the same reason? Yes, it is. Then why
does the elementary argument form, Simplification, conclude only that p is true?
The reason is that we want to keep our toolbox uncluttered. The rules of inference
p# q
(p# q)
369

9. Addition (Add.)
‹ p ¡ q
p
8. Conjunction (Conj.)
‹ p# q
q
p
must always be applied exactly as they appear. We surely need a rule that will en-
able us to take conjunctions apart, but we do not need two such rules; one will
suffice. When we may need to “pull” some q from a conjunction we will be able
to put it where p is now, and then use only the one rule, Simplification, which we
add to our toolbox.
Methods of Deduction
Conjunction says only that if two propositions, p and q, are known to be true, we
can put them together into one conjunctive expression, 
. We may conjoin
them. If they are true separately, they must also be true when they are conjoined.
In this case the order presents no problem, because we may always treat the one
we seek to put on the left as p, and the other as q. That joint truth is what a con-
junction asserts. We add Conjunction (Conj.) to our logical toolbox.
The last of the nine elementary valid argument forms is also a straightfor-
ward consequence of the meaning of the logical connectives—in this case, 
disjunction.
p# q
Any disjunction must be true if either of its disjuncts is true. That is, 
is true
if p is true, or if q is true, or if they are both true. That is what disjunction means.
It obviously follows from this that if we know that some proposition, p, is true,
we also know that either it is true or some other—any other!—proposition is
true. So we can construct a disjunction, 
, using the one proposition known
to be true as p, and adding to it (in the logical, disjunctive sense) any proposition
we care to. We call this logical addition. The additional proposition, q, is not con-
joined to p; it is used with p to build a disjunction that we may know with cer-
tainty to be true because one of the disjuncts, p, is known to be true. The
disjunction we thus build will be true no matter what that added proposition
asserts—no matter how absurd or wildly false it may be! We know that Michigan
is north of Florida. Therefore we know that either Michigan is north of Florida or
the moon is made of green cheese! Indeed, we know that either Michigan is north
of Florida or
. The truth or falsity of the added proposition does not af-
fect the truth of the disjunction we build, because that disjunction is made cer-
tainly true by the truth of the disjunct with which we began. Therefore, if we are
given p as true, we may validly infer for any q whatever that 
. This principle,
Addition (Add.), we add to our logical toolbox.
p ¡ q
2 + 2 = 5
p ¡ q
p ¡ q
370

Our set of nine elementary valid argument forms is now complete.
All nine of these argument forms are very plainly valid. Any one of them whose
validity we may doubt can be readily proved to be valid using a truth table. Each of
them is simple and intuitively clear; as a set we will find them powerful as we go on
to construct formal proofs for the validity of more extended arguments.
Methods of Deduction
Rules of Inference:
Elementary Valid Argument Forms
o v e r v i e w
Name
Abbreviation
Form
1. Modus Ponens
M.P.
‹ q
p
p ) q
2. Modus Tollens
M.T.
‹ 'p
'q
p ) q
3. Hypothetical Syllogism
H.S.
‹ p ) r
q ) r
p ) q
4. Disjunctive Syllogism
D.S.
‹ q
'p
p ¡ q
5. Constructive Dilemma
C.D.
‹ q ¡ s
p ¡ r
(p ) q)# (r ) s)
6. Absorption
Abs.
‹ p ) (p# q)
p ) q
7. Simplification
Simp.
‹ p
p# q
8. Conjunction
Conj.
‹ p# q
q
p
9. Addition
Add.
‹ p ¡ q
p
Two features of these elementary argument forms must be emphasized. First,
they must be applied with exactitude. An argument that one proves valid using
Modus Ponens must have that exact form: 
, p, therefore q. Each statement
variable must be replaced by some statement (simple or compound) consistently
and accurately. Thus, for example, if we are given 
and
, we may infer 
by Modus Ponens. But we may not infer 
by
Modus Ponens, even though it may be true. The elementary argument form must
be fitted precisely to the argument with which we are working. No shortcut—no
(K ¡ J)
(J ¡ K)
(C ¡ D)
(C ¡ D) ) (J ¡ K)
p ) q
371

fudging of any kind—is permitted, because we seek to know with certainty that
the outcome of our reasoning is valid, and that can be known only if we can
demonstrate that every link in the chain of our reasoning is absolutely solid.
Second, these elementary valid argument forms must be applied to the entire
lines of the larger argument with which we are working. Thus, for example, if we
are given 
, we cannot validly infer X by Simplification. X is one of
the conjuncts of a conjunction, but that conjunction is part of a more complex ex-
pression. X may not be true even if that more complex expression is true. We may
only infer that if X and Y are both true, then Z is true. Simplification applies only
to the entire line, which must be a conjunction; its conclusion is the left side (and
only the left side) of that conjunction. So, from this same line, 
,
we may validly infer 
by Simplification. But we may not infer T by
Simplification, even though it may be true.
Formal proofs in deductive logic have crushing power, but they possess that
power only because, when they are correct, there can be not the slightest doubt of the
validity of each inference drawn. The tiniest gap destroys the power of the whole.
The nine elementary valid argument forms we have given should be com-
mitted to memory. They must be always readily in mind as we go on to construct
formal proofs. Only if we comprehend these elementary argument forms fully,
and can apply them immediately and accurately, may we expect to succeed in
devising formal proofs of the validity of more extended arguments.
EXERCISES
Here follows a set of twenty elementary valid arguments. They are valid because
each of them is exactly in the form of one of the nine elementary valid argument
forms. For each of them, state the rule of inference by which its conclusion fol-
lows from its premise or premises.
EXAMPLE
1.
SOLUTION
Absorption. If (
) replaces p, and C replaces q, this argument is seen to be
exactly in the form 
, therefore 
.
p ) (p# q)
p ) q
A# B
‹ (A# B) ) [(A# B)# C]
(A# B) ) C
(X# Y) ) Z
[(X# Y) ) Z)]# T
[(X# Y) ) Z]# T
Methods of Deduction
*1.
2.
‹ D ¡ E
(D ¡ E)# (F ¡ G)
‹ (A# B) ) [(A# B)# C]
(A# B) ) C
3.
4.
‹ '(J# K)
'(J# K)# (L ) 'M)
‹ (H ) I) ¡ (H ) 'I)
H ) I
*5.
6.
‹ '(X ¡ Y)
' '(Z# 'A)
(X ¡ Y) ) '(Z# 'A)
‹ (O# P) ¡ (O# R)
N ¡ Q
[N ) (O# P)]# [Q ) (O# R)]
372

3
Formal Proofs of Validity Exhibited
We have defined a formal proof of validity for a given argument as a sequence of
statements, each of which either is a premise of that argument or follows from
preceding statements of the sequence by an elementary valid argument or by a
logical equivalence, such that the last statement in the sequence is the conclusion
of the argument whose validity is being proved. Our task will be to build such
sequences, to prove the validity of arguments with which we are confronted.
Doing this can be a challenge. Before attempting to construct such sequences,
it will be helpful to become familiar with the look and character of formal proofs.
In this section we examine a number of complete formal proofs, to see how they
work and to get a “feel” for constructing them.
Our first step is not to devise such proofs, but to understand and appreciate
them. A sequence of statements is put before us in each case. Every statement in
that sequence will either be a premise or follow from preceding statements in the
sequence using one of the elementary valid argument forms—just as in the illus-
tration that was presented in Section 1. When we confront such a proof, but the
rule of inference that justifies each step in the proof is not given, we know (having
been told that these are completed proofs) that every line in the proof that is not
Methods of Deduction
7.
8.
‹ D ¡ E
'(B# C)
'(B# C) ) (D ¡ E)
‹ (U# V) ¡ (U# W)
'(S K T)
(S K T) ¡ [(U# V) ¡ (U# W)]
9.
*10.
‹ (I K H) ) (H ) I)
'(H# 'I) ) (H ) I)
(I K H) ) '(H# 'I)
‹ (F K G) ) (G ) F)
'(G# 'F) ) (G ) F)
(F K G) ) '(G# 'F)
11.
12.
‹ C ¡ D
'[E ) (F K 'G)]
[E ) (F K 'G)] ¡ (C ¡ D)
‹ C ¡ D
A ) B
(A ) B) ) (C ¡ D)
13.
14.
‹ '(C ¡ D)
'[L ) (M ) N)]
'[L ) (M ) N)] ) '(C ¡ D)
‹ '(C ¡ D)
'[(J ¡ K) ) (J# K)]
(C ¡ D) ) [(J ¡ K) ) (J# K)]
*15.
16.
‹ [Q ) (O ¡ R)]# [N ) (O ¡ P)]
N ) (O ¡ P)
Q ) (O ¡ R)
‹ [(J ) K)# (K ) L)]# (L ) M)
L ) M
(J ) K)# (K ) L)
17.
‹ (S ) T) ) [(S ) T)# (U ) V)]
(S ) T) ) (U ) V)
18.
‹ [(W# 'X) K (Y ) Z)] ¡ (X K 'Z)
(W# 'X) K (Y ) Z)
19.
*20.
‹ (C ¡ D) ) '(C ¡ D)
[(O ) P) ) Q] ) '(C ¡ D)
(C ¡ D) ) [(O ) P) ) Q]
‹ C ¡ D
(H# 'I) ¡ (I# 'H)
[(H# 'I) ) C]# [(I# 'H) ) D]
373

itself a premise can be deduced from the preceding lines. To understand those
deductions, the nine elementary valid argument forms must be kept in mind.
Let us look at some proofs that exhibit this admirable solidity. Our first
example is Exercise 1.
EXAMPLE 1
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
The first two lines of this proof are seen to be premises, because they appear be-
fore the “therefore” symbol (
); what appears immediately to the right of that
symbol is the conclusion of this argument, 
. The very last line of the sequence
is (as it must be if the formal proof is correct) that same conclusion, 
. What
about the steps between the premises and the conclusion? Line 3, A, we can de-
duce from line 1, 
, by Simplification. So to the right of line 3, we put, the line
number from which it comes and the rule by which it is inferred from that line, “1,
Simp.” Line 4 is 
. How can that be inferred from the lines above it? We
cannot infer it from line 2 by Simplification. But we can infer it from line 3, A, by
Addition. Addition tells us that if p is true, then 
is true, whatever q may be.
Using that logical pattern precisely, we may infer from A that 
is true. To the
right of line 4 we therefore put “3, Add.” Line 5 is D. D appears in line 2 as the
consequent of a conditional statement, 
. We proved on line 4 that
is true; now, using Modus Ponens, we combine this with the conditional on
line 2 to prove D. To the right of line 5 we therefore write “2, 4, M.P.” A has been
proved true (on line 3) and D has been proved true (on line 5). We may therefore
validly conjoin them, which is what line 6 asserts: 
. To the right of line 6 we
therefore write “3, 5, Conj.” This line, 
, is the conclusion of the argument, and
it is therefore the last statement in the sequence of statements that constitutes this
proof. The proof, which had been presented to us complete, has thus been
“fleshed out” by specifying the justification of each step within it.
In this example, and the exercises that follow, every line of each proof can be
justified by using one of the elementary valid argument forms in our logical tool-
box. No other inferences of any kind are permitted, however plausible they may
seem. When we had occasion to refer to an argument form that has two premises
(e.g., M.P. or D.S.), we indicated first, in the justification, the numbers of the lines
used, in the order in which they appear in the elementary valid form. Thus, line 5 in
Example 1 is justified by 2, 4, M.P.
To become proficient in the construction of formal proofs, we must become
fully familiar with the shape and rhythm of the nine elementary argument
forms—the first nine of the rules of inference that we will be using extensively.
A# D
A# D
A ¡ C
(A ¡ C) ) D
A ¡ C
p ¡ q
A ¡ C
A# B
A# D
A# D
‹
A# D
D
A ¡ C
A
‹ A# D
(A ¡ C) ) D
A# B
Methods of Deduction
374

EXERCISES
Each of the following exercises presents a flawless formal proof of validity for
the indicated argument. For each, state the justification for each numbered line
that is not a premise.
Methods of Deduction
1. 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
2. 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6. H
G ¡ H
E ¡ F
‹ H
'G
(E ) G)# (F ) H)
(E ¡ F)# (G ¡ H)
A# D
D
A ¡ C
A
‹ A# D
(A ¡ C) ) D
A# B
3. 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
4. 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7. 'N
N ) (N# P)
N ) P
N ) (N# O)
‹ 'N
'(N# P)
(N# O) ) P
N ) O
K ¡ M
(I ) K)# (L ) M)
I ) K
‹ K ¡ M
I ¡ L
L ) M
J ) K
I ) J
*5. 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
6. 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8. X
Z ¡ X
W ) Y
W ) (W# X)
‹ X
'Z
(W# X) ) Y
(W ) Y) ) (Z ¡ X)
W ) X
R ¡ U
Q ¡ T
(Q ) R)# (T ) U)
T ) U
‹ R ¡ U
'S
S ¡ (Q ¡ T)
'S ) (T ) U)
Q ) R
7. 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
8. 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9. 'H
H ) 'G
'F
' 'G
'I ¡ 'H
‹ 'H
'I
('I ¡ 'H) ) ' 'G
'F ) (H ) 'G)
F ) 'G
D K E
A ) (D K E)
C ¡ B
C
A ¡ B
A
‹ D K E
A# D
(C ¡ B) ) [A ) (D K E)]
(A ¡ B) ) C
375

4
Constructing Formal Proofs of Validity
Now we turn to one of the central tasks of deductive logic: proving formally that
valid arguments really are valid. In the preceding sections we examined formal
proofs that needed only to be supplemented by the justifications of the steps taken.
From this point, however, we will confront arguments whose formal proofs must
be constructed. This is an easy task for many arguments, a more challenging task
for some. Whether the proof needed is short and simple, or long and complex, the
rules of inference are in every case our instruments. Success requires mastery of
these rules. Having the list of rules before one will probably not be sufficient. One
must be able to call on the rules “from within” as the proofs are being devised. The
ability to do this will grow rapidly with practice, and yields many satisfactions.
Let us begin by constructing proofs for simple arguments. The only rules
needed (or available for our use) are the nine elementary valid argument forms
with which we have been working. This limitation we will later overcome, but
even with only these nine rules in our logical toolbox, very many arguments can
be formally proved valid. We begin with arguments that require, in addition to
the premises, no more than two additional statements.
We will look first at two examples.
In the first example consider the argument:
1.
2.
The conclusion of this argument 
is a conjunction; we see immediate-
ly that the second conjunct, B, is readily at hand as a premise in line 2. All that is
now needed is the statement of the disjunction, 
, which may then be con-
joined with B to complete the proof. 
is easily obtained from the premise
(A ¡ C)
(A ¡ C)
(A ¡ C)# B
‹ (A ¡ C)# B
B
A
Methods of Deduction
*10. 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10. (M K 'Q) ¡ (N K O)
[(R K S) ) (N K O)]
[(P ) 'Q) ) (M K 'Q)]#
(R K S) ) (N K O)
(R K S) ) (L ) M)
[(P ) 'Q) ¡ (R K S)]# (N ¡ O)
‹ (M K 'Q) ¡ (N K O)
N ¡ O
(P ) 'Q) ¡ (R K S)
(N ¡ O)} ) [(R K S) ) (L ) M)]
{[(P ) 'Q) ¡ (R K S)]#
(P ) 'Q) ) (M K 'Q)
(L ) M) ) (N K O)
9. 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10. 'L ¡ 'J
'L
' 'K
' 'K# ' 'J
'I
I ) (I*J)
‹ 'L ¡ 'J
'(I# J)
L ) 'K
I ¡ (' 'K# ' 'J)
I ) J
376

A, in line 1; we simply add C using the rule Addition, which tells us that to any
given p with a truth value of true we may add (disjunctively) any q whatever. In
this example we have been told that A is true, so we may infer by this rule that
must be true. The third line of this proof is “3. 
, 1, Add.” In line 4 we
can conjoin this disjunction (line 3) with the premise B (line 2): “4. 
, 3,
2, Conj.” This final line of the sequence is the conclusion of the argument being
proved. The formal proof is complete.
Here is a second example of an argument whose formal proof requires only
two additional lines in the sequence:
1.
2.
The conclusion of this argument, E, is the consequent of the conditional state-
ment 
, which is given as the first premise. We know that we will be able to
infer the truth of E by Modus Ponens if we can establish the truth of D. We can es-
tablish the truth of D, of course, by Simplification from the second premise, 
.
So the complete formal proof consists of the following four lines:
D# F
D ) E
‹ E
D# F
D ) E
(A ¡ C)# B
A ¡ C
A ¡ C
Methods of Deduction
1. D ) E
2. D# F
> ‹ E
3. D
2, Simp.
4. E
1, 3, M.P.
In each of these examples, and in all the exercises immediately following, a for-
mal proof for each argument may be constructed by adding just two additional
statements. This will be an easy task if the nine elementary valid argument forms are
clearly in mind. Remember that the final line in the sequence of each proof is al-
ways the conclusion of the argument being proved.
EXERCISES
1.
2.
‹ E
D# F
D ) E
‹ (A ¡ C)# B
B
A
3.
4.
‹ K ¡ L
J
J ) K
‹ (G# H) ¡ I
H
G
*5.
6.
‹ P# R
R
P# Q
‹ N
'M# 'O
M ¡ N
7.
8.
‹ W ¡ X
'V
V ¡ W
‹ 'S
'T# 'U
S ) T
377

5
Constructing More Extended Formal Proofs
Arguments whose formal proof requires only two additional statements are
quite simple. We now advance to construct formal proofs of the validity of more
complex arguments. However, the process will be the same: The target for the
final statement of the sequence will always be the conclusion of the argument,
and the rules of inference will always be our only logical tools.
Methods of Deduction
9.
‹ Y# Z
Y
Y ) Z
*10.
‹ A ) C
(A# B) ) C
A ) B
11.
‹ D ) F
(E ) F)# (F ) D)
D ) E
12.
‹ H ¡ J
G
(G ) H)# (I ) J)
13.
‹ 'K
K ) L
'(K# L)
14.
‹ M ) O
N ) O
(M ) N)# (M ) O)
*15.
‹ Q ¡ S
(P ¡ R)# (Q ¡ R)
(P ) Q)# (R ) S)
16.
‹ U ¡ V
T
(T ) U)# (T ) V)
17.
‹ Y
W
(W ¡ X) ) Y
18.
‹ Z ) (B# C)
Z ) A
(Z# A) ) (B# C)
19.
‹ F ) 'G
[D ) (D# E)] ) (F ) 'G)
D ) E
*20.
‹ J ¡ 'H
'('H ¡ I)
('H ¡ I) ¡ J
21.
‹ '(K ) L)
'M# '(L ) K)
(K ) L) ) M
22.
‹ P ) (P ) Q)
[P ) (N ) O)]# [N ) (P ) Q)]
(N ) O) ) (P ) Q)
23.
‹ [R ) (R# S)]# [S ) (S# R)]
S ) (S# R)
R ) S
24.
‹ (U ¡ V) ¡ (T ¡ V)
(T ¡ U)# (U ¡ V)
[T ) (U ¡ V)]# [U ) (T ¡ V)]
*25.
‹ '(W# X)
'[(W# X)# (Y# Z)]
(W# X) ) (Y# Z)
26.
‹ B ¡ D
C ) D
A ¡ C
A ) B
27.
‹ I ) H
'(E# F)
I ) G
(E# F) ¡ (G ) H)
28.
‹ L ) J
'J
K ¡ (L ) J)
J ¡ 'K
29.
‹ N ¡ P
(N ) P) ) (M ¡ O)
N ) P
(M ) N)# (O ) P)
*30.
‹ Q ) R
(R ¡ S) ) (T# U)
(T# U) ) R
Q ) (R ¡ S)
378

Let us look closely at an example—the first exercise of Set A below, an argu-
ment whose proof requires three additional statements:
1.
2.
In devising the proof of this argument (as in most cases), we need some plan
of action, some strategy with which we can progress, using our rules, toward the
conclusion sought. Here that conclusion is 
. We ask ourselves: Where in the
premises does B appear? Only as the antecedent of the hypothetical 
,
which is a component of the first premise. How might 
be derived? Using
Modus Tollens, we can infer it from 
if we can establish that hypothetical
separately and morever establish 
. Both of those needed steps can be readily
accomplished. 
is inferred from line 2 by Simplification:
'A
'A
B ) A
'B
(B ) A)
'B
‹ 'B
'A# C
A ¡ (B ) A)
Methods of Deduction
5.
4, 3, M.T.
'B
3.
2, Simp.
'A
We can then apply 
to line 1, using Disjunctive Syllogism to infer 
:
(B ) A)
'A
4.
1, 3, D.S.
(B ) A)
The strategy used in this argument is readily devised. In the case of some
proofs, devising the needed strategy will not be so simple, but it is usually help-
ful to ask: What statement(s) will enable one to infer the conclusion? What state-
ment(s) will enable one to infer that? One continues to move backward from the
conclusion toward the premises given.
EXERCISES
A. For each of the following arguments, it is possible to provide a formal proof
of validity by adding just three statements to the premises. Writing these out,
carefully and accurately, will strengthen your command of the rules of infer-
ence, a needed preparation for the construction of proofs that are more extend-
ed and more complex.
The proof may then be completed using Modus Tollens on lines 4 and 3:
1.
‹ 'B
'A# C
A ¡ (B ) A)
2.
‹ F
D
(D ¡ E) ) (F# G)
3.
‹ I ¡ J
H# (I ¡ J)
(H ) I)# (H ) J)
4.
‹ K ) [(K# L)# M]
K ) L
(K# L) ) M
*5.
‹ P
N# O
N ) [(N# O) ) P]
6.
‹ Q# 'R
'S
R ) S
Q ) R
379

Formal proofs most often require more than two or three lines to be added to
the premises. Some are very lengthy. Whatever their length, however, the same
process and the same strategic techniques are called for in devising the needed
proofs. In this section we rely entirely on the nine elementary valid argument
forms that serve as our rules of inference.
As we begin to construct longer and more complicated proofs, let us look
closely at an example of such proofs. It is not difficult, but it is more extended
than those we have worked with so far.
1.
2.
3.
The strategy needed for the proof of this argument is not hard to see: To obtain C
we must break apart the premise in line 2; to do that we will need 
; to establish
we will need to apply Modus Tollens to line 1 using 
. Therefore we continue
the sequence with the fourth line of the proof by applying Simplification to line 3:
'B
'A
'A
‹ C
'B# 'E
A ¡ (C# D)
A ) B
Methods of Deduction
Using line 4 we can obtain 
from line 1:
'A
1.
2.
3.
4.
3, Simp.
'B
> ‹ C
'B# 'E
A ¡ (C# D)
A ) B
5.
1, 4, M.T.
'A
7.
‹ 'T
'V# 'W
V ¡ 'U
T ) U
8.
‹ Y# 'Z
'X
Z ) X
'X ) Y
9.
‹ D
A
C ¡ D
(A ¡ B) ) 'C
*10.
‹ G
'E
F ¡ (E ¡ G)
E ¡ 'F
11.
‹ I
'K
K ¡ H
(H ) I)# (J ) K)
12.
‹ M ) O
'L
'L ) (N ) O)
L ¡ (M ) N)
13.
‹ Q ¡ S
P ¡ R
R ) S
(P ) Q)# (Q ) P)
14.
‹ X ¡ Y
T
(U ) X)# (W ) Y)
(T ) U)# (V ) W)
*15.
‹ (Z# A) ) (A# B)
(B# A) ) (A# B)
B ) A
(Z# A) ) B
380

Methods of Deduction
6.
2, 5, D.S.
C# D
7. C
6, Simp.
With
established we can break line 2 apart, as we had planned, using D.S.:
'A
The conclusion may be pulled readily from the sixth line by Simplification.
Seven lines (including the premises) are required for this formal proof. Some
proofs require very many more lines than this, but the object and the method re-
main always the same.
It sometimes happens, as one is devising a formal proof, that a statement is
correctly inferred and added to the numbered sequence but turns out not to be
needed; a solid proof may be given without using that statement. In such a case
it is usually best to rewrite the proof, eliminating the unneeded statement. How-
ever, if the unneeded statement is retained, and the proof remains accurately
constructed using other statements correctly inferred, the inclusion of the un-
needed statement (although perhaps inelegant) does not render the proof incor-
rect. Logicians tend to prefer shorter proofs, proofs that move to the conclusion
as directly as the rules of inference permit. But if, as one is constructing a more
complicated proof, it becomes apparent that some much earlier statement(s) has
been needlessly inferred, it may be more efficient to allow such statement(s) to
remain in place, using (as one goes forward) the more extended numbering that
that inclusion makes necessary. Logical solidity is the critical objective. A solid for-
mal proof, one in which each step is correctly derived and the conclusion is correctly
linked to the premises by an unbroken chain of arguments using the rules of inference
correctly, remains a proof—even if it is not as crisp and elegant as some other
proof that could be devised.
EXERCISES
B. For each of the following arguments, a formal proof of validity can be con-
structed without great difficulty, although some of the proofs may require a se-
quence of eight or nine lines (including premises) for their completion.
1.
‹ C
'B# 'E
A ¡ (C# D)
A ) B
2.
‹ G ¡ K
(F ¡ J)# (H ¡ L)
J ) K
(F ) G)# (H ) I)
3.
‹ 'O
'M
N ) M
('M# 'N) ) (O ) N)
4.
‹ O
K
(M ¡ N) ) (O# P)
(K ¡ L) ) (M ¡ N)
*5.
‹ R ¡ V
Q ¡ U
(U ) V)# (W ) X)
(Q ) R)# (S ) T)
6.
‹ W ) Z
(W# Y) ) Z
(W# X) ) Y
W ) X
381

In the study of logic, our aim is to evaluate arguments in a natural language,
such as English. When an argument in everyday discourse confronts us, we can
prove it to be valid (if it really is valid) by first translating the statements (from
English, or from any other natural language) into our symbolic language, and then
constructing a formal proof of that symbolic translation. The symbolic version of
the argument may reveal that the argument is, in fact, more simple (or possibly
more complex) than one had supposed on first hearing or reading it. Consider the
following example (the first in the set of exercises that immediately follow):
1. If either Gertrude or Herbert wins, then both Jens and Kenneth lose.
Gertrude wins. Therefore Jens loses. (G—Gertrude wins; H—Herbert
wins; J—Jens loses; K—Kenneth loses.)
Abbreviations for each statement are provided in this context because, without
them, those involved in the discussion of these arguments would be likely to em-
ploy various abbreviations, making communication difficult. Using the abbrevi-
ations suggested greatly facilitates discussion.
Translated from the English into symbolic notation, this first argument appears as
Methods of Deduction
1.
2. G
> ‹ J
(G ¡ H) ) (J# K)
The rest of the formal proof of this argument is short and straightforward:
3.
2, Add.
4.
1, 3, M.P.
5. J
4, Simp.
J# K
G ¡ H
EXERCISES
C. Each of the following arguments in English may be similarly translated, and
for each, a formal proof of validity (using only the nine elementary valid argu-
ment forms as rules of inference) may be constructed. These proofs vary in
length, some requiring a sequence of thirteen statements (including the premis-
es) to complete the formal proofs. The suggested abbreviations should be used
for the sake of clarity. Bear in mind that, as one proceeds to produce a formal
proof of an argument presented in a natural language, it is of the utmost impor-
tance that the translation into symbolic notation of the statements appearing discur-
sively in the argument be perfectly accurate; if it is not, one will be working with an
7.
‹ (A# B) ¡ (C# D)
A ¡ C
C ) D
A ) B
8.
‹ I
E
(G ¡ H) ) I
(E ¡ F) ) (G# H)
9.
‹ M
'K
(L# 'J) ) (M# 'J)
K ¡ L
J ) K
*10.
‹ R
'Q
Q ¡ N
(P ¡ Q) ) R
(N ¡ O) ) P
382

argument that is different from the original one, and in that case any proof de-
vised will be useless, being not applicable to the original argument.
1. If either Gertrude or Herbert wins, then both Jens and Kenneth lose.
Gertrude wins. Therefore Jens loses. (G—Gertrude wins; H—Herbert
wins; J—Jens loses; K—Kenneth loses.)
2. If Adriana joins, then the club’s social prestige will rise; and if Boris
joins, then the club’s financial position will be more secure. Either Adriana
or Boris will join. If the club’s social prestige rises, then Boris will join;
and if the club’s financial position becomes more secure, then Wilson
will join. Therefore either Boris or Wilson will join. (A—Adriana joins;
S—The club’s social prestige rises; B—Boris joins; F—The club’s financial
position is more secure; W—Wilson joins.)
3. If Brown received the message, then she took the plane; and if she took
the plane, then she will not be late for the meeting. If the message was
incorrectly addressed, then Brown will be late for the meeting. Either
Brown received the message or the message was incorrectly addressed.
Therefore either Brown took the plane or she will be late for the meeting.
(R—Brown received the message; P—Brown took the plane; L—Brown
will be late for the meeting; T—The message was incorrectly addressed.)
4. If Nihar buys the lot, then an office building will be constructed; whereas
if Payton buys the lot, then it will be quickly sold again. If Rivers buys
the lot, then a store will be constructed; and if a store is constructed, then
Thompson will offer to lease it. Either Nihar or Rivers will buy the lot.
Therefore either an office building or a store will be constructed. (N—Nihar
buys the lot; O—An office building will be constructed; P—Payton buys
the lot; Q—The lot will be quickly sold again; R—Rivers buys the lot;
S—A store will be constructed; T—Thompson will offer to lease the store.)
*5. If rain continues, then the river rises. If rain continues and the river rises,
then the bridge will wash out. If the continuation of rain would cause the
bridge to wash out, then a single road is not sufficient for the town. Either
a single road is sufficient for the town or the traffic engineers have made a
mistake. Therefore the traffic engineers have made a mistake. (C—Rain
continues; R—The river rises; B—The bridge washes out; S—A single road
is sufficient for the town; M—The traffic engineers have made a mistake.)
6. If Jonas goes to the meeting, then a complete report will be made; but if
Jonas does not go to the meeting, then a special election will be required.
If a complete report is made, then an investigation will be launched. If
Jonas’s going to the meeting implies that a complete report will be made,
and the making of a complete report implies that an investigation will be
launched, then either Jonas goes to the meeting and an investigation is
launched or Jonas does not go to the meeting and no investigation is
launched. If Jonas goes to the meeting and an investigation is launched,
then some members will have to stand trial. But if Jonas does not go to
the meeting and no investigation is launched, then the organization will
Methods of Deduction
383

disintegrate very rapidly. Therefore either some members will have to
stand trial or the organization will disintegrate very rapidly. (J—Jonas
goes to the meeting; R—A complete report is made; E—A special election
is required; I—An investigation is launched; T—Some members have to
stand trial; D—The organization disintegrates very rapidly.)
7. If Ann is present, then Bill is present. If Ann and Bill are both present, then
either Charles or Doris will be elected. If either Charles or Doris is elected,
then Elmer does not really dominate the club. If Ann’s presence implies
that Elmer does not really dominate the club, then Florence will be the new
president. So Florence will be the new president. (A—Ann is present;
B—Bill is present; C—Charles will be elected; D—Doris will be elected;
E—Elmer really dominates the club; F—Florence will be the new president.)
8. If Mr. Jones is the manager’s next-door neighbor, then Mr. Jones’s annual
earnings are exactly divisible by 3. If Mr. Jones’s annual earnings are exactly
divisible by 3, then $40,000 is exactly divisible by 3. But $40,000 is not exact-
ly divisible by 3. If Mr. Robinson is the manager’s next-door neighbor, then
Mr. Robinson lives halfway between Detroit and Chicago. If Mr. Robinson
lives in Detroit, then he does not live halfway between Detroit and Chicago.
Mr. Robinson lives in Detroit. If Mr. Jones is not the manager’s next-door
neighbor, then either Mr. Robinson or Mr. Smith is the manager’s next-
door neighbor. Therefore Mr. Smith is the manager’s next-door neighbor.
(J—Mr. Jones is the manager’s next-door neighbor; E—Mr. Jones’s annual
earnings are exactly divisible by 3; T—$40,000 is exactly divisible by 3;
R—Mr. Robinson is the manager’s next-door neighbor; H—Mr. Robinson
lives halfway between Detroit and Chicago; D—Mr. Robinson lives in
Detroit; S—Mr. Smith is the manager’s next-door neighbor.)
9. If Mr. Smith is the manager’s next-door neighbor, then Mr. Smith lives
halfway between Detroit and Chicago. If Mr. Smith lives halfway between
Detroit and Chicago, then he does not live in Chicago. Mr. Smith is the
manager’s next-door neighbor. If Mr. Robinson lives in Detroit, then he
does not live in Chicago. Mr. Robinson lives in Detroit. Mr. Smith lives in
Chicago or else either Mr. Robinson or Mr. Jones lives in Chicago. If Mr.
Jones lives in Chicago, then the manager is Jones. Therefore the manager
is Jones. (S—Mr. Smith is the manager’s next-door neighbor; W—Mr. Smith
lives halfway between Detroit and Chicago; L—Mr. Smith lives in Chicago;
D—Mr. Robinson lives in Detroit; I—Mr. Robinson lives in Chicago;
C—Mr. Jones lives in Chicago; B—The manager is Jones.)
10. If Smith once beat the editor at billiards, then Smith is not the editor.
Smith once beat the editor at billiards. If the manager is Jones, then Jones
is not the editor. The manager is Jones. If Smith is not the editor and
Jones is not the editor, then Robinson is the editor. If the manager is Jones
and Robinson is the editor, then Smith is the publisher. Therefore Smith
is the publisher. (O—Smith once beat the editor at billiards; M—Smith is
the editor; B—The manager is Jones; N—Jones is the editor; F—Robinson
is the editor; G—Smith is the publisher.)
Methods of Deduction
384

6
Expanding the Rules of Inference:
Replacement Rules
The nine elementary valid argument forms with which we have been working
are powerful tools of inference, but they are not powerful enough. There are very
many valid truth-functional arguments whose validity cannot be proved using
only the nine rules thus far developed. We need to expand the set of rules, to in-
crease the power of our logical toolbox.
To illustrate the problem, consider the following simple argument, which is
plainly valid:
If you travel directly from Chicago to Los Angeles, you must cross the Mississippi
River. If you travel only along the Atlantic seaboard, you will not cross the Mississippi
River. Therefore if you travel directly from Chicago to Los Angeles, you will not travel
only along the Atlantic seaboard.
Translated into symbolic notation, this argument appears as
This conclusion certainly does follow from the given premises. But, try as we
may, there is no way to prove that it is valid using only the elementary valid ar-
gument forms. Our logical toolbox is not fully adequate.
What is missing? Chiefly, what is missing is the ability to replace one state-
ment by another that is logically equivalent to it. We need to be able to put, in
place of any given statement, any other statement whose meaning is exactly the
same as that of the statement being replaced. We need rules that identify legiti-
mate replacements precisely.
Such rules are available to us. Recall that the only compound statements that
concern us here are truth-functional compound statements, and in a truth-functional
compound statement, if we replace any component by another statement having the
same truth value, the truth value of the compound statement remains unchanged.
Therefore we may accept as an additional principle of inference what may be called
the general rule of replacement—a rule that permits us to infer from any statement
the result of replacing any component of that statement by any other statement that
is logically equivalent to the component replaced.
The correctness of such replacements is intuitively obvious. To illustrate, the
principle of Double Negation (D.N.) asserts that p is logically equivalent to 
Using the rule of replacement we may say, correctly, that from the statement
, any one of the following statements may be validly inferred:
When we put any one of these in place of 
, we do no more than ex-
change one statement for another that is its logical equivalent.
This rule of replacement is a powerful enrichment of our rules of inference. In its
general form, however, its application is problematic because its content is not
A ) ' 'B
A ) ' ' ' 'B.
' '(A ) ' 'B), and even
' 'A ) ' 'B,
A ) B,
A ) ' 'B
' 'p.
> ‹ D ) 'A
A ) 'C
D ) C
Methods of Deduction
Rule of replacement
A rule that permits us to
infer from any statement
the result of replacing
any component of that
statement by any other
statement that is
logically equivalent to
the component
replaced.
385

definite; we are not always sure what statements are indeed logically equivalent to
some other statements, and thus (if we have the rule only in its general form) we
may be unsure whether that rule applies in a given case. To overcome this problem
in a way that makes the rule of replacement applicable with indubitable accuracy, we
make the rule definite by listing ten specific logical equivalences to which the rule of re-
placement may certainly be applied. Each of these equivalences—they are all logical-
ly true biconditionals—will serve as a separate rule of inference. We list the ten logical
equivalences here, as ten rules, and we number them consecutively to follow the
first nine rules of inference already set forth in the preceding sections of this chapter.
Methods of Deduction
Augustus De Morgan
A
ugustus De Morgan (1806–1871), an influential deductive logician,
and John Stuart Mill, an influential inductive logician, were strict
contemporaries—born in the same year and dying two years apart.
Oddly, both their fathers were employed by the East India Company. De
Morgan was born in India; when the family returned to England he proved to
be a very precocious student in languages and in mathematics. At Cambridge
University De Morgan received the Bachelor of Arts degree.
In those days one could be a candidate for the Master of Arts degree
at Cambridge, and for a Fellowship there, only if one signed an oath ac-
cepting the doctrines of the Church of England. Such theological tests for
academic degrees were abolished in Cambridge and Oxford late in the
nineteenth century, but that was too late for De Morgan, whose religious
views and moral integrity obliged him to refuse to sign such an oath. He
therefore had to leave Cambridge. He continued his work in London; at
the age of 22 he was appointed professor of mathematics at University
College, London, an institution founded with a commitment to religious
neutrality. He opened his professorship there with a famous lecture on
the nature of the study of mathematics, its difficulties and its potential.
De Morgan’s papers in logic and mathematics, written during his long ac-
ademic career in London, often became the focus of discussion among the
scholars of the London Mathematical Society, of which he was the first president.
In his text Formal Logic (1847), De Morgan noted a great deficiency of classical
logic. The Aristotelians say that from two particular propositions, “Some Ps are
As” and “Some Ps are Bs,” nothing can be validly deduced about the relations of
As and Bs. They say that in a valid syllogism the middle term must be
distributed—that it must be taken universally in at least one of the premises to
effect the link that makes the deduction possible. De Morgan pointed out that
this is not correct if we know that “Most Ps are As” and “Most Ps are Bs.” With
some quantitative premises we can deduce a connection between As and Bs.
Suppose, for example, a ship had been sunk on which there were 1,000 passen-
gers, of whom 700 drowned. If we know that 500 passengers were in their cabins
at the time of the tragedy, it follows of necessity that at least 200 passengers
were drowned in their cabins. This he called the numerically definite syllogism.
Biography
Alfred Eisenstaedt/Time
& Life Pictures/Getty
Images/Time Life
Pictures
386

Methods of Deduction
The Rules of Replacement: 
Logically Equivalent Expressions
Any of the following logically equivalent expressions may replace each other
wherever they occur.
o v e r v i e w
Name
Abbreviation
Form
10. De Morgan’s theorems
De M.

T

T
11. Commutation
Com.

T

T
12. Association
Assoc.

T

T
13. Distribution
Dist.

T

T
14. Double Negation
D.N.

T
15. Transposition
Trans.

T
16. Material Implication
Impl.

T
17. Material Equivalence
Equiv.

T

T
18. Exportation
Exp.

T
19. Tautology
Taut.

T

T (p# p)
p
(p ¡ p)
p
[p ) (q ) r)]
[(p# q) ) r]
[(p# q) ¡ ('p# 'q)]
(p K q)
[(p ) q)# (q ) p)]
(p K q)
('p ¡ q)
(p ) q)
('q ) 'p)
(p ) q)
' 'p
p
[(p ¡ q)# (p ¡ r)]
[p ¡ (q# r)]
[(p# q) ¡ (p# r)]
[p# (q ¡ r)]
[(p# q)# r]
[p# (q# r)]
[(p ¡ q) ¡ r]
[p ¡ (q ¡ r)]
(q# p)
(p# q)
(q ¡ p)
(p ¡ q)
('p# 'q)
'(p ¡ q)
('p ¡ 'q)
'(p# q)
De Morgan also advanced the field called the logic of relatives. Identity and
difference are relations to which logicians have given great attention, but there
are other relations, such as equality, affinity, and especially equivalence, that
also deserve the logician’s attention, as De Morgan showed.
Two logical equivalences, widely useful and intuitively clear, received
from De Morgan their time-honored formulation and carry his name: 
De Morgan’s Theorems, which remain a permanent and prominent instrument
in deductive reasoning. 
387

De Morgan’s theorems have two variants. One variant asserts that when we
deny that two propositions are both true, that is logically equivalent to asserting
that either one of them is false, or the other one is false, or they are both false.
(The negation of a conjunction is logically equivalent to the disjunction of the
negations of the conjuncts.) The second variant of De Morgan’s theorems asserts
that when we deny that either of two propositions is true, that is logically equiv-
alent to asserting that both of them are false. (The negation of a disjunction is log-
ically equivalent to the conjunction of the negations of the disjuncts.)
These two biconditionals are tautologies, of course. That is, the expression of
the material equivalence of the two sides of each is always true, and thus can have
no false substitution instance. All ten of the logical equivalences now being rec-
ognized as rules of inference are tautological biconditionals in exactly this sense.
Methods of Deduction
10. De Morgan’s Theorems
(De M.)

T

T A 'p# 'qB
' Ap ¡ qB
A 'p ¡ 'qB
' Ap# qB
11. Commutation
(Com.)

T

T Aq# pB
Ap# qB
Aq ¡ pB
Ap ¡ qB
These two equivalences simply assert that the order of statement of the elements
of a conjunction, or of a disjunction, does not matter. We are always permitted to
turn them around, to commute them, because, whichever order happens to ap-
pear, the meanings remain exactly the same.
Recall that Rule 7, Simplification, permitted us to pull p from the conjunction
, but not q. Now, with Commutation, we can always replace 
with 
—
so that, with Simplification and Commutation both at hand, we can readily es-
tablish the truth of each of the conjuncts in any conjunction we know to be true.
q# p
p# q
p# q
12. Association
(Assoc.)

T

T C Ap# qB # rD
Cp# Aq# rB D
C Ap ¡ qB ¡ rD
Cp ¡ Aq ¡ rB D
These two equivalences do no more than allow us to group statements differently. If
we know three different statements to be true, to assert that p is true along with q
Let us now examine each of these ten logical equivalences. We will use them
frequently and will rely on them in constructing formal proofs of validity, and
therefore we must grasp their force as deeply, and control them as fully, as we do
the nine elementary valid argument forms. We take these ten in order, giving for
each the name, the abbreviation commonly used for it, and its exact logical form(s).
388

Of all the rules permitting replacement, this one may be the least obvious—but it too
is a tautology, of course. It also has two variants. The first variant asserts merely that
the conjunction of one statement with the disjunction of two other statements is logi-
cally equivalent to a disjunction whose first disjunct is the conjunction of the first
statement with the second and whose second disjunct is the conjunction of the first
statement with the third. The second variant asserts merely that the disjunction of one
statement with the conjunction of two others is logically equivalent to the conjunction
of the disjunction of the first and the second and the disjunction of the first and the
third. The rule is named Distribution because it distributes the first element of the three,
exhibiting its logical connections with each of the other two statements separately.
Methods of Deduction
13. Distribution
(Dist.)

T

T C Ap ¡ qB # Ap ¡ rB D
Cp ¡ Aq# rB D
C Ap# qB ¡ Ap# rB D
Cp# Aq ¡ rB D
14. Double Negation
(D.N.)

T ' 'p
p
15. Transposition
(Trans.)

T A 'q ) 'pB
Ap ) qB
Intuitively clear to everyone, this rule simply asserts that any statement is logi-
cally equivalent to the negation of the negation of that statement.
This logical equivalence permits us to turn any conditional statement around. We
know that if any conditional statement is true, then if its consequent is false its an-
tecedent must also be false. Therefore any conditional statement is logically equiva-
lent to the conditional statement asserting that the negation of its consequent implies
the negation of its antecedent. Clearly, Transposition, in the form of a logical equiva-
lence, expresses the logical force of the elementary argument form modus tollens.
16. Material Implication
(Impl.)

T A 'p ¡ qB
Ap ) qB
This logical equivalence does no more than formulate the definition of material
implication as a replacement that can serve as a rule of inference. There we saw
that 
simply means that either the antecedent, p, is false or the consequent,
q, is true.
As we go on to construct formal proofs, this definition of material implica-
tion will become very important, because it is often easier to manipulate or com-
bine two statements if they have the same basic form—that is, if they are both in
disjunctive form, or if they are both in implicative form. If one is in disjunctive
p ) q
and r clumped, is logically equivalent to asserting that p and q clumped is true
along with r. Equivalence also holds if the three are grouped as disjuncts: p or the
disjunction of 
, is a grouping logically equivalent to the disjunction 
, or r.
p ¡ q
q ¡ r
389

form and the other is in implicative form, we can, using this rule, transform one
of them into the form of the other. This will be very convenient.
Methods of Deduction
The two variants of this rule simply assert the two essential meanings of material
equivalence. There we explained that two statements are materially equivalent if
they both have the same truth value; therefore (first variant) the assertion of their
material equivalence (with the tribar, 
) is logically equivalent to asserting that
they are both true, or that they are both false. We also explained at that point that if
two statements are both true, they must materially imply one another, and like-
wise if they are both false, they must materially imply one another; therefore (sec-
ond variant) the statement that they are materially equivalent is logically
equivalent to the statement that they imply one another.
K
This replacement rule states a logical biconditional that is intuitively clear upon
reflection: If one asserts that two propositions conjoined are known to imply a
third, that is logically equivalent to asserting that if one of those two propositions
is known to be true, then the truth of the other must imply the truth of the third.
Like all the others, this logical equivalence may be readily confirmed using a
truth table.
The two variants of this last rule are patently obvious but very useful. They say
simply that any statement is logically equivalent to the disjunction of itself with it-
self, and that any statement is logically equivalent to the conjunction of itself with
itself. It sometimes happens that, as the outcome of a series of inferences, we learn
that either the proposition we seek to establish is true or that it is true. From this
disjunction we may readily infer (using this rule) that the proposition in question
is true. The same applies to the conjunction of a statement with itself.
It should be noted that the word “tautology” is used in three different senses.
It can mean (1) a statement form all of whose substitution instances are true; in this
sense the statement form 
is a tautology. It can mean (2) a
statement—for example, 
whose specific form is a tautol-
ogy in sense (1). It can also mean (3) the particular logical equivalence we have just
introduced, number 19 in our list of rules of inference.
(A ) B) ) [A ) (A ) B)]
(p ) q) ) [p ) (p ) q)]
19. Tautology
(Taut.)

T

T Ap# pB
p
Ap ¡ pB
p
17. Material Equivalence
(Equiv.)

T

T C Ap ) qB # Aq ) pB D
Ap K qB
C Ap# qB ¡ A 'p# 'qB D
Ap K qB
18. Exportation
(Exp.)

T Cp ) Aq ) rB D
C Ap# qB ) rD
390

As we look back on these ten rules, we should be clear about what it is they
make possible. They are not rules of “substitution” as that term is correctly used;
we substitute statements for statement variables, as when we say that 
is a
substitution instance of the expression 
. In such operations we may substi-
tute any statement for any statement variable so long as it is substituted for every
other occurrence of that statement variable. But when these listed rules of re-
placement are applied, we exchange, or replace, a component of one statement
only by a statement that we know (by one of these ten rules) to be logically equivalent to
that component. For example, by transposition we may replace 
by
. These rules permit us to replace one occurrence of that component
without having to replace any other occurrence of it.
EXERCISES
The following set of arguments involves, in each case, one step only, in which
one of the ten logical equivalences set forth in this section has been employed.
Here are two examples, the first two in the exercise set immediately following.
EXAMPLE 1
SOLUTION
The conclusion of this simple argument is exactly like its premise, except for
the fact that the second conjunct in the premise, 
, has been replaced
by the logically equivalent expression 
. That replacement is plain-
ly justified by the rule we call Transposition (Trans.):

T
EXAMPLE 2
SOLUTION
In this case the conclusion differs from the premise only in the fact that the
conditional statement 
has been replaced, as first conjunct, by the dis-
junctive statement 
. The rule permitting such a replacement, Material
Implication (Impl.), has the form

T A ' p ¡ qB
Ap ) qB
('E ¡ F)
(E ) F)
('E ¡ F)# (G ) 'H)
(E ) F)# (G ) 'H)
('q ) 'p)
(p ) q)
('D ) 'C)
(C ) D)
‹ (A ) B)# ('D ) 'C)
(A ) B)# (C ) D)
'B ) 'A
A ) B
p ) q
A ) B
Methods of Deduction
391

For each of the following one-step arguments, state the one rule of inference
by which its conclusion follows from its premise.
Methods of Deduction
*This kind of completeness of a set of rules can be proved. One method of proving such completeness may
be found in I. M. Copi, Symbolic Logic, 5th edition (New York: Macmillan, 1979).
1.
‹ (A ) B)# ('D ) 'C)
(A ) B)# (C ) D)
2.
‹ ('E ¡ F)# (G ) 'H)
(E ) F)# (G ) 'H)
3.
‹ [(I# J) ) K]# (J ) 'I)
[I ) (J ) K)]# (J ) 'I)
4.
‹ L ) (M ¡ N)
[L ) (M ¡ N)] ¡ [L ) (M ¡ N)]
*5.
‹ O ) (P K Q)
O ) [(P ) Q)# (Q ) P)]
6.
‹ ('R# 'S) ) ('R ¡ 'S)
'(R ¡ S) ) ('R ¡ 'S)
7.
‹ (T ¡ 'U)# [W ) ('V ) 'T)]
(T ¡ 'U)# [(W# 'V) ) 'T]
8.
‹ [(X ¡ Y)# 'X] ¡ [(X ¡ Y)# 'Y]
(X ¡ Y)# ('X ¡ 'Y)
9.
‹ Z ) (' 'A ) B)
Z ) (A ) B)
*10.
‹ [(C# D)# 'E]# [(C# D)# 'E]
[C# (D# 'E)]# [(C# D)# 'E]
11.
‹ (F ) G)# (F ) G)
('F ¡ G)# (F ) G)
12.
‹ (H ) 'I) ) (J ) I)
(H ) 'I) ) ('I ) 'J)
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
‹ ['E ¡ (F ) G)]# ['E ¡ (F ) G)]
['E ¡ (' 'F ) G)]# ['E ¡ (F ) G)]
‹ ('A# B) K (C ¡ D)
[('A# B)# (C ¡ D)] ¡ ['('A# B)# '(C ¡ D)]
‹ {[V ) '(W ¡ X)]# [V ) '(W ¡ X)]} ) (Y ¡ Z)
[V ) '(W ¡ X)] ) (Y ¡ Z)
‹ (R ¡ 'S)# ('T ¡ U)
[(R ¡ 'S)# 'T] ¡ [(R ¡ 'S)# U]
‹ ['O ¡ (P ¡ 'Q)]# ['O ¡ (P ¡ 'Q)]
[('O ¡ P) ¡ 'Q]# ['O ¡ (P ¡ 'Q)]
‹ ('K ) L) ) '(M# N)
('K ) L) ) ('M ¡ 'N)
19.
‹ H# [(I ¡ J) ¡ (K ) 'L)]
[H# (I ¡ J)] ¡ [H# (K ) 'L)]
*20.
‹ '(M# N) ) (O ) ' 'P)
('M ¡ 'N) ) (O ) ' 'P)
7
The System of Natural Deduction
The nineteen rules of inference that have been set forth (nine elementary ar-
gument forms and ten logical equivalences) are all the rules that are needed in
truth-functional logic. Together they constitute a system of natural deduction
that is compact and readily mastered, but nonetheless complete.* This means that,
using this set of rules, one can construct a formal proof of validity for any valid
truth-functional argument.1
392

Two seeming flaws of this list of nineteen rules deserve attention. First, the set
is somewhat redundant, in the sense that these nineteen do not constitute the mini-
mum that would suffice for the construction of formal proofs of validity for ex-
tended arguments. To illustrate this we might note that Modus Tollens could be
dropped from the list without any real weakening of our proof apparatus, because
any line that depends on that rule can be justified by appealing instead to other
rules in our list. Suppose, for example, we know that 
is true, and that
is
true, and suppose we want to deduce that
is true. Modus Tollens allows us to do
that directly. If Modus Tollens were not included in the list of rules, we would still
have no trouble deducing
from 
and
; we would simply need to in-
sert the intermediate line, 
, which follows from 
by Transposition
(Trans.), then obtain
from 
by Modus Ponens (M.P.). We keep Modus
Tollens in the list because it is such a commonly used and intuitively obvious rule
of inference. Others among the nineteen rules are redundant in this sense.
Second, the list of nineteen rules may also be said to be deficient in one sense.
Because the set of rules is short, there are some arguments that, although they are
simple and intuitively valid, require several steps to prove. To illustrate this
point, consider the argument
which is obviously valid. Its form, equally valid, is
However, this elementary argument form has not been included as a rule of in-
ference. No single rule of inference will serve in this case, so we must construct
the proof using two rules of inference, commuting the first premise, and then ap-
plying Disjunctive Syllogism, thus:
   > ‹ p
'q
p ¡ q
   > ‹ A
'B
A ¡ B
'D ) 'A
'A
A ) D
'D ) 'A
'D
A ) D
'A
'A
'D
A ) D
Methods of Deduction
1.
2.
3.
1, Com.
4. A
3, 2, D.S.
B ¡ A
> ‹ A
'B
A ¡ B
One may complain that the system is in this way clumsy, at times obliging a
slow and tortuous path to a proof that ought to be easy and direct. There is good
reason for this clumsiness. We certainly want a set of rules that is complete, as this
set is; but we also want a set of rules that is short and easily mastered. We could
add rules to our set—additional equivalences, or additional valid argument
forms—but with each such addition our logical toolbox would become more con-
gested and more difficult to command. We could delete some rules (e.g., Modus
Tollens, as noted above), but with each such deletion the set, although smaller,
would become even more clumsy, requiring extended proofs for very simple
393

arguments. Long experience has taught that this set of nineteen rules serves as an
ideal compromise: a list of rules of inference that is short enough to master fully,
yet long enough to do all that one may need to do with reasonable efficiency.
There is an important difference between the first nine and the last ten rules of
inference. The first nine rules can be applied only to whole lines of a proof. Thus, in a for-
mal proof of validity, the statement A can be inferred from the statement 
by
Simplification only if 
constitutes a whole line. It is obvious that A cannot be
inferred validly either from 
or from 
, because the latter two
statements can be true while A is false. And the statement 
does not follow
from the statement 
by Simplification or by any other rule of inference.
It does not follow at all, for if A is true and B and C are both false, 
is
true but 
is false. Again, although 
follows from A by Addition, we
cannot infer 
from 
by Addition or by any other rule of infer-
ence. For if A and C are both false and B is true, 
is true but 
is
false. On the other hand, any of the last ten rules can be applied either to whole lines or
to parts of lines. Not only can the statement 
be inferred from the whole
line 
by Exportation, but from the line 
we can infer
by Exportation. By replacement, logically equivalent expres-
sions can replace each other wherever they occur, even where they do not consti-
tute whole lines of a proof. But the first nine rules of inference can be used only
with whole lines of a proof serving as premises.
The notion of formal proof is an effective notion, which means that it can be de-
cided quite mechanically, in a finite number of steps, whether or not a given se-
quence of statements constitutes a formal proof (with reference to a given list of
rules of inference). No thinking is required, either in the sense of thinking about
what the statements in the sequence “mean” or in the sense of using logical intu-
ition to check any step’s validity. Only two things are required. The first is the
ability to see that a statement occurring in one place is precisely the same as a
statement occurring in another, for we must be able to check that some state-
ments in the proof are premises of the argument being proved valid and that the
last statement in the proof is the conclusion of that argument. The second thing that
is required is the ability to see whether a given statement has a certain pattern—
that is, to see if it is a substitution instance of a given statement form.
Thus, any question about whether the numbered sequence of statements on
earlier page is a formal proof of validity can easily be settled in a completely mechan-
ical fashion. That lines 1 and 2 are the premises and line 4 is the conclusion of the
given argument is obvious on inspection. That 3 follows from preceding lines by
one of the given rules of inference can be decided in a finite number of steps—
even where the notation “1, Com.” is not written at the side. The explanatory no-
tation in the second column is a help and should always be included, but it is not,
strictly speaking, a necessary part of the proof itself. At every line, there are only
finitely many preceding lines and only finitely many rules of inference or refer-
ence forms to be consulted. Although it is time-consuming, it can be verified by
inspection and comparison of shapes that 3 does not follow from 1 and 2 by
[A ) (B ) C)] ¡ D
[(A# B) ) C] ¡ D
(A# B) ) C
A ) (B ) C)
(A ¡ B) ) C
A ) C
A ) C
(A ¡ B) ) C
A ¡ B
A ) C
(A# B) ) C
(A# B) ) C
A ) C
C ) (A# B)
(A# B) ) C
A# B
A# B
Methods of Deduction
394

Modus Ponens, or by Modus Tollens, or by a Hypothetical Syllogism . . . and so on,
until in following this procedure we come to the question of whether 3 follows
from 1 by the principle of Commutation, and there we see, simply by looking at
the forms, that it does. In the same way, the legitimacy of any statement in any for-
mal proof can be tested in a finite number of steps, none of which involves any-
thing more than comparing forms or shapes.
To preserve this effectiveness, we require that only one step be taken at a
time. One might be tempted to shorten a proof by combining steps, but the space
and time saved are negligible. More important is the effectiveness we achieve by
taking each step by means of one single rule of inference.
Although a formal proof of validity is effective in the sense that it can be me-
chanically decided, of any given sequence, whether it is a proof, constructing a
formal proof is not an effective procedure. In this respect, formal proofs differ
from truth tables. The making of truth tables is completely mechanical: given any
argument of the sort with which we are now concerned, we can always construct
a truth table to test its validity by following the simple rules of procedure set
forth earlier in this chapter. But we have no effective or mechanical rules for the
construction of formal proofs. Here we must think, or “figure out,” where to
begin and how to proceed. Nevertheless, proving an argument valid by con-
structing a formal proof of its validity is much easier than the purely mechanical
construction of a truth table with perhaps hundreds or even thousands of rows.
Although we have no purely mechanical rules for constructing formal
proofs, some rough-and-ready rules of thumb or hints on procedure may be sug-
gested. The first is simply to begin deducing conclusions from the given premis-
es by the given rules of inference. As more and more of these subconclusions
become available as premises for further deductions, the greater is the likelihood
of being able to see how to deduce the conclusion of the argument to be proved
valid. Another hint is to try to eliminate statements that occur in the premises but
not in the conclusion. Such elimination can proceed, of course, only in accor-
dance with the rules of inference, but the rules contain many techniques for elim-
inating statements. Simplification is such a rule, whereby the right-hand
conjunct can be dropped from a whole line that is a conjunction. Commutation is
a rule that permits switching the left-hand conjunct of a conjunction over to the
right-hand side, from which it can be dropped by Simplification. The “middle”
term q can be eliminated by a Hypothetical Syllogism given two statements of
the patterns 
and 
. Distribution is a useful rule for transforming a dis-
junction of the pattern 
into the conjunction 
, whose
right-hand conjunct can then be eliminated by Simplification. Another rule of
thumb is to introduce by means of Addition a statement that occurs in the con-
clusion but not in any premise. Yet another method, often very productive, is to
work backward from the conclusion by looking for some statement or statements
from which it can be deduced, and then trying to deduce those intermediate
statements from the premises. There is, however, no substitute for practice as a
method of acquiring facility in the construction of formal proofs.
(p ¡ q)# (p ¡ r)
p ¡ (q# r)
q ) r
p ) q
Methods of Deduction
395

8
Constructing Formal Proofs Using the
Nineteen Rules of Inference
Having now a set of nineteen rules at our disposition, rather than just nine, the
task of constructing formal proofs becomes somewhat more complicated. The
objective remains the same, of course, but the process of devising the proof in-
volves inspection of a larger intellectual toolbox. The unbroken logical chain that
we devise, leading ultimately to the conclusion, may now include steps justified
by either an elementary valid argument form or a logical equivalence. Any given
proof is likely to employ rules of both kinds. The balance or order of their use is
determined only by the logical need encountered as we implement the strategy
that leads to the consummation of the proof.
Following is a set of flawless formal proofs, each of which relies on rules of
both kinds. To become accustomed to the use of the full set of rules, we examine
each of these proofs to determine what rule has been used to justify each step in
that proof, noting that justification to the right of each line. We begin with two
examples.
EXAMPLE 1
1.
2.
3.
4.
5. A ) 'C
B ) 'C
' 'B ) 'C
‹ A ) 'C
C ) 'B
A ) B
Methods of Deduction
The Rules of Inference
Nineteen rules of inference are specified for use in constructing formal proofs of
validity. They are as follows:
o v e r v i e w
Elementary Valid Argument Forms
Logically Equivalent Expressions
1. Modus Ponens (M.P.)
10. De Morgan’s theorems (De M.)

T

T
2. Modus Tollens (M.T.)
11. Commutation (Com.)

T

T (q# p)
(p# q)
(q ¡ p)
(p ¡ q)
p ) q, 'q, ‹ 'p
('p# 'q)
'(p ¡ q)
('p ¡ 'q)
'(p# q)
p ) q, p, ‹ q
396

Methods of Deduction
3. Hypothetical Syllogism (H.S.)
12. Association (Assoc.)

T

T
4. Disjunctive Syllogism (D.S.)
13. Distribution (Dist.)

T

T
5. Constructive Dilemma (C.D.)
14. Double Negation (D.N.)

T
6. Absorption (Abs.)
15. Transposition (Trans.)

T
7. Simplification (Simp.)
16. Material Implication (Impl.)

T
8. Conjunction (Conj.)
17. Material Equivalence (Equiv.)

T

T
9. Addition (Add.)
18. Exportation (Exp.)

T
19. Tautology (Taut.)

T

T (p# p)
p
(p ¡ p)
p
[p ) (q ) r)]
[(p# q) ) r]
p, ‹ p ¡ q
[(p# q) ¡ ('p# 'q)]
(p K q)
[(p ) q)# (q ) p)]
(p K q)
p, q, ‹ p# q
('p ¡ q)
(p ) q)
p# q, ‹ p
('q ) 'p)
(p ) q)
p ) q, ‹ p ) (p# q)
' 'p
p
(p ) q)# (r ) s), p ¡ r, ‹ q ¡ s
[(p ¡ q)# (p ¡ r)]
[p ¡ (q# r)]
[(p# q) ¡ (p# r)]
[p# (q ¡ r)]
p ¡ q, 'p, ‹ q
[(p# q)# r]
[p# (q# r)]
[(p ¡ q) ¡ r]
[p ¡ (q ¡ r)]
p ) q, q ) r, ‹ p ) r
SOLUTION
Line 3 is simply line 2 transposed; we write beside line 3: 2, Trans.
Line 4 is simply line 3 with 
replaced by B, so we write beside line 4: 3,
D.N.
Line 5 applies the Hypothetical Syllogism argument form to lines 1 and 4. We
write beside line 5: 1, 4, H.S.
' 'B
397

EXAMPLE 2
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
SOLUTION
Line 3 merely commutes 
from line 1; we write: 1, Com.
Line 4 applies Exportation to line 3; we write: 3, Exp.
Line 5 applies Hypothetical Syllogism to lines 4 and 2; we write: 4, 2, H.S.
EXERCISES
A. For each numbered line that is not a premise in each of the formal proofs
that follow, state the rule of inference that justifies it.
(D# E)
E ) G
E ) (D ) F)
(E# D) ) F
‹ E ) G
(D ) F) ) G
(D# E) ) F
Methods of Deduction
1. 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
2. 1.
2.
3.
4.
5. E ) G
E ) (D ) F)
(E# D) ) F
‹ E ) G
(D ) F) ) G
(D# E) ) F
A ) 'C
B ) 'C
' 'B ) C
‹ A ) 'C
C ) 'B
A ) B
3. 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
4. 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7. 'M
'M# 'N
'(M ¡ N)
'(O# P)
'O ¡ 'P
‹ 'M
'O
(M ¡ N) ) (O# P)
J# K
(J# K)# L
J# (K# L)
H ¡ I
I ¡ H
‹ J# K
I
(H ¡ I) ) [J# (K# L)]
*5. 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
6. 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9. W K X
(W# X) ¡ ('W# 'X)
(T# U) ¡ (T# V)
[(T# V) ) ('W# 'X)]
[(T# U) ) (W# X)]#
(T# V) ) ('W# 'X)
(T# U) ) (W# X)
‹ W K X
(T# V) ) '(W ¡ X)
T ) [U ) (W# X)]
T# (U ¡ V)
R ) S
'R ¡ S
Q ¡ ('R ¡ S)
'Q
'Q ¡ 'Q
('Q ¡ 'Q)# ('Q ¡ R)
('Q ¡ R)# ('Q ¡ 'Q)
‹ R ) S
'Q ¡ (R# 'Q)
(Q ¡ 'R) ¡ S
398

We now advance to the construction of formal proofs using the full set of
rules of inference. We begin with simple arguments whose proofs require only
two statements added to the premises. Each of those statements, of course, may
be justified by either an elementary valid argument form or by one of the rules
of replacement. We begin with two examples, the first two exercises of Set B,
immediately following.
EXAMPLE 1
1.
‹ 'A
A ) 'A
Methods of Deduction
7. 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
'Y
Y ) (R ¡ S)
(Y# Y) ) (R ¡ S)
Y ) [Y ) (R ¡ S)]
'(R ¡ S)
'R# 'S
(R# S) ¡ ('R# 'S)
‹ 'Y
'(R# S)
R K S
Z ) [Y ) (R ¡ S)]
Y ) Z
9. 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12. D ) G
'F ) G
' 'F ¡ G
F ¡ G
(F ¡ G)# (F ¡ H)
D ) 'F
D ) (D# E)
D ) E
(D ) E)# (E ) D)
‹ D ) G
D K E
F ¡ (G# H)
(D# E) ) 'F
8. 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11. 'A# 'C
'(A# C)
'A ¡ 'C
(A# C) ¡ ('A# 'C)
A K C
(A ) C)# (C ) A)
A ) C
‹ 'A# 'C
A ) 'C
C ) A
B ) C
A ) B
*10. 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12. '(M# 'L)
'M ¡ ' 'L
'M ¡ L
L ¡ 'M
(K# J) ¡ (K# I)
(K# I) ¡ (K# J)
K# (I ¡ J)
(I ¡ J)# K
[(K# I) ) 'M]
[(K# J) ) L]#
[K ) (I ) 'M)]
[(K# J) ) L]#
‹ '(M# 'L)
[K ) (I ) 'M)]
['L ) '(K# J)]#
(I ¡ ' 'J)# K
399

SOLUTION
The first step in this proof, obviously, must manipulate the single premise.
What can we do with it that will be helpful? If we apply Material Implication
(Impl.), we will obtain a statement, 
, to which we can apply the
valid argument form Tautology (Taut.), and that will yield the conclusion we
seek. So the proof is
'A ¡ 'A
Methods of Deduction
1.
2.
1, Impl.
3.
2, Taut.
'A
'A ¡ 'A
‹ 'A
A ) 'A
EXAMPLE 2
1.
SOLUTION
In this proof we need only rearrange the statements, whose conjunction is
given as true. In the first step we can commute the main conjunction of the
first premise, which will yield 
. Then we need only regroup the
three statements by Association. So the proof is
(C# D)# B
‹ C# (D# B)
B# (C# D)
In this proof, as in all formal proofs, the last line of the sequence we construct
is the conclusion we are aiming to deduce.
EXERCISES
B. For each of the following arguments, adding just two statements to the
premises will produce a formal proof of its validity. Construct a formal proof for
each of these arguments.
In these formal proofs, and in all the proofs to follow in later sections, note
to the right of each line the rule of inference that justifies that line of the proof. It
is most convenient if the justification specifies first the number of the line (or lines)
being used, and then the name (abbreviated) of the rule of inference that has
been applied to those numbered lines.
1.
2.
1, Com.
3.
2, Assoc.
C# (D# B)
(C# D)# B
‹ C# (D# B)
B# (C# D)
400

Methods of Deduction
1.
2.
‹ C# (D# B)
B# (C# D)
‹ 'A
A ) 'A
3.
4.
‹ H ¡ I
H ¡ (I# J)
‹ (E ¡ F)# (E ¡ G)
E
*5.
6.
‹ (N# O) ) [N# (O# P)]
(N# O) ) P
‹ (K# L) ) M
'K ¡ (L ) M)
7.
8.
‹ 'U
V
U ) 'V
‹ Q ) (S ) T)
Q ) (Q# R)
Q ) [R ) (S ) T)]
9.
*10.
‹ Z ) B
'A ¡ B
Z ) A
‹ W ) Y
'Y ) 'X
W ) X
11.
12.
‹ 'F# 'G
'(F# G)
F K G
‹ C ) ' 'E
'E ) D
C ) 'D
13.
14.
‹ M
L ¡ N
(L ) M)# (N ) M)
‹ H ) K
I ) (J ) K)
H ) (I# J)
*15.
16.
‹ U# V
'S ¡ 'T
(S# T) ¡ (U# V)
‹ Q ¡ R
P ¡ O
(O ¡ P) ) (Q ¡ R)
17.
18.
‹ '(A ¡ B)
'C# 'D
(A ¡ B) ) (C ¡ D)
‹ W ) Z
(X ) Y) ) Z
(W# X) ) Y
19.
*20.
‹ 'I
'[(J ¡ K) ¡ L]
I ) [J ¡ (K ¡ L)]
‹ G# H
F# E
(E# F) ) (G# H)
21.
22.
‹ 'R ¡ 'T
' '('Q ¡ 'S)
('Q ) 'R)# ('S ) 'T)
‹ N ¡ P
M ¡ O
(M ) N)# ('O ¡ P)
23.
24.
‹ (Y# Z) ¡ ('Y# 'Z)
(Y ) Z)# (Z ) Y)
‹ '(W K X)
(W K X) ) (U K V)
'[(U ) V)# (V ) U)]
*25.
26.
‹ F# I
(G ¡ H)# (E ¡ F)
[(E ¡ F)# (G ¡ H)] ) (F# I)
‹ [(A ¡ B)# C] ¡ [(A ¡ B)# D]
C ¡ D
A ¡ B
27.
28.
‹ (P ) Q) ) Q
(R ¡ S) ) [(T K U) ) Q]
(P ) Q) ) [(R ¡ S)# (T K U)]
‹ '(J# K)
'(L# M)# '(N# O)
(J# K) ) [(L# M) ¡ (N# O)]
401

As we advance to arguments whose formal proofs require three lines added
to the premises, it becomes important to devise a strategy for determining the
needed sequence. Most such arguments remain fairly simple, but the path to the
proof may sometimes be less than obvious. Again we begin with two examples,
the first two exercises of Set C, which follows the examples.
EXAMPLE 1
1.
SOLUTION
We have only one premise with which to work. It is often fruitful to convert
conditional statements into disjunctive statements. Doing that with line 1
(using Impl.) will yield 
as the first of the disjuncts; that component may
be readily replaced with A; then, applying the argument form Tautology will
give us what we aim for. The proof is
' 'A
‹ A
'A ) A
Methods of Deduction
EXAMPLE 2
1.
SOLUTION
The single premise in this argument contains the statement D. We need a
proof whose conclusion is 
, and therefore we must somehow eliminate
that D. How can we do that? We can break apart the statement 
by dis-
tributing the statement 
. Distribution asserts, in one of its variants, that 

T
. Applied to line 1, that replacement will yield
. These two expressions are just conjoined, so by simpli-
fication we may extract 
. This statement may be replaced, using
Impl., by 
, which is the conclusion sought. The proof is
B ) C
('B ¡ C)
('B ¡ C)# ('B ¡ D)
[(p ¡ q)# (p ¡ r)]
[p ¡ (q# r)]
'B
(C# D)
B ) C
‹ B ) C
'B ¡ (C# D)
1.
2.
1, Impl.
3.
2, D.N.
4. A
3, Taut.
A ¡ A
' 'A ¡ A
  ‹ A
'A ) A
29.
*30.
‹ '(D# E)
(D# E) ) (B K 'C)
'[(B ) 'C)# ('C ) B)]
‹ [V# (W ¡ X)] ) ('W K A)
'(Y ) Z) ¡ ('W K A)
[V# (W ¡ X)] ) (Y ) Z)
402

EXERCISES
C. For each of the following arguments, a formal proof may be constructed
by adding just three statements to the premises. Construct a formal proof of
validity for each of them.
Methods of Deduction
1.
2.
1, Dist.
3.
2, Simp.
4.
3, Impl.
B ) C
'B ¡ C
('B ¡ C)# ('B ¡ D)
‹ B ) C
'B ¡ (C# D)
1.
2.
‹ B ) C
'B ¡ (C# D)
‹ A
'A ) A
3.
4.
‹ J# (I# H)
H# (I# J)
‹ E ¡ G
E ¡ (F# G)
*5.
6.
‹ 'O
P ) 'P
O ) P
‹ (N ¡ K) ¡ (L ¡ M)
[(K ¡ L) ¡ M] ¡ N
7.
8.
‹ 'T
'(U ¡ V)
T ) U
‹ Q ) S
Q ) R
Q ) (R ) S)
9.
‹ W# Y
'W ¡ 'X
W# (X ¡ Y)
Formal proofs of validity sometimes require many steps or lines in the need-
ed sequence. We will find that certain patterns of inference are encountered repeat-
edly in longer proofs. It is wise to become familiar with these recurring patterns.
This may be nicely illustrated using the first two exercises of Set D, which
follows immediately below. First, suppose that a given statement, A, is known to
be false. The next stage of the proof may require that we prove that some differ-
ent statement, say B, is implied by the truth of the statement that we know is
*10.
‹ Z ¡ B
'A
(Z ¡ A) ¡ B
11.
‹ E
D ¡ C
(C ¡ D) ) (E# F)
12.
‹ (G# H) ¡ ('G# 'H)
H ) G
G ) H
13.
‹ J ¡ L
I ¡ (K# M)
(I ) J)# (K ) L)
*15.
‹ T ¡ U
R# (S ¡ T)
[R ) (S ) T)]# [(R# T) ) U]
14.
‹ N ) Q
('P ) 'O) ) Q
(N# O) ) P
403

false. This can be easily proved, and the pattern is not uncommon. Put formally,
how may we infer 
from 
? Let us examine the argument.
EXAMPLE 1
1.
SOLUTION
If
is known to be true, as here, then A must be false. A false statement
materially implies any other statement. So 
must be true, whatever B
may assert, if we know that
is true. In this case,
is given as prem-
ise; we only need to add the desired B and then apply Implication. The
proof of the argument (or the proof segment, when it is a part of some
longer proof) is
'A
'A
A ) B
'A
‹ A ) B
'A
'A
A ) B
Methods of Deduction
EXAMPLE 2
1.
This pattern arises very frequently. The truth of some statement C is known. In
this case it is given as a premise; in some longer proof we might have estab-
lished its truth at some other point in the sequence. We know that a true state-
ment is materially implied by any statement whatever. Therefore any statement
we choose, D, must imply C. Put formally, how may we infer 
from C?
SOLUTION
D does not appear in the premise but it does appear in the conclusion, so
we must somehow get D into the sequence of steps. We could simply add
D, but that won’t succeed—because after commuting that disjunction, and
replacing it, using Impl., with a conditional, we wind up with 
,
which is certainly not the conclusion we were after. We want 
. To ob-
tain this needed result we must, in the very first step, add
rather than
D. This we certainly may do, because Addition permits us to add disjunc-
tively any statement whatever to a statement we know to be true. Then, ap-
plying Com. and Impl. will give us what we seek. The formal proof of the
argument in this case (or the proof segment, when it occurs as part of a
longer proof) is
'D
D ) C
'D ) C
D ) C
‹ D ) C
C
1.
2.
1, Add.
3.
2, Impl.
A ) B
'A ¡ B
‹ A ) B
'A
404

EXERCISES
D. Each of the exercises immediately below exhibits a commonly recurring pat-
tern. Constructing the formal proof in each case will take some ingenuity, and
(in a few cases) the proof will require eight or nine lines. However, most of
these proofs will present little difficulty, and devising the strategies needed to
produce them is excellent practice. Construct a formal proof for each of the fol-
lowing arguments.
Methods of Deduction
1.
2.
1, Add.
3.
2, Com.
4.
3, Impl.
D ) C
'D ¡ C
C ¡ 'D
‹ D ) C
C
1.
‹ A ) B
'A
2.
‹ D ) C
C
3.
‹ F ) (E ) G)
E ) (F ) G)
4.
‹ H ) I
H ) (I# J)
*5.
‹ K ) (L ¡ M)
K ) L
6.
‹ (N# P) ) O
N ) O
7.
‹ Q ) S
(Q ¡ R) ) S
8.
‹ T ) (U# V)
T ) V
T ) U
9.
‹ (W ¡ Y) ) X
Y ) X
W ) X
*10.
‹ A
Z ¡ A
Z ) A
When, after substantial practice, one has become well familiar with the nine-
teen rules of inference, and is comfortable in applying them, it is time to tackle
formal proofs that are longer and more convoluted. The three sets of exercises
that follow will present some challenges, but devising these formal proofs will be
a source of genuine satisfaction. The great mathematician, G. H. Hardy, long ago
observed that there is a natural and widespread thirst for intellectual “kick”—
and that “nothing else has quite the kick” that solving logical problems has.
Arguments in a natural language, as in the last two sets, need no further ex-
planation. After translating them into symbolic notation, using the suggested ab-
breviations, the procedure for constructing the proofs is no different from that
used when we begin with an argument formulated in symbols. Before adventur-
ing further in the realm of logical proofs, it will be helpful to examine, from Exer-
cise Set E, two examples of the kinds of formal proofs we will be dealing with
from this point forward.
The arguments presented in all these sets of exercises are valid. Therefore,
because the system of nineteen rules we have devised is known to be complete,
405

we may be certain that a formal proof for each one of those arguments can be
constructed. Nevertheless, the path from the premises to the conclusion may be
far from obvious. In each case, some plan of action must be devised as one goes
forward.
We illustrate the need for a plan of attack, and the way in which such a plan
may be devised, by examining very closely two of the exercises—the first and the
last—in Set E.
EXAMPLE 1
1.
SOLUTION
In this argument the conclusion unites a statement that appears in the second
premise, C, with a statement that appears in the first premise,
. How shall
we effect that unification? The first premise is a conditional whose consequent,
, is also the consequent of the conclusion. The second premise contains the
negation of the antecedent of the first premise,
. If we can manipulate the
second premise to emerge with 
, we can achieve the needed unification
with H.S. We can do that. If we apply De M. to the second premise we will get
a disjunction that, when replaced by a conditional using Impl., will be one
short step away from the conditional needed. The formal proof is
C ) A
'A
'B
'B
‹ C ) 'B
'(C# 'A)
A ) 'B
Methods of Deduction
1.
2.
3.
2, De M.
4.
3, Impl.
5.
4, D.N.
6.
5, 1, H.S.
C ) 'B
C ) A
C ) ' 'A
'C ¡ ' 'A
‹ C ) 'B
'(C# 'A)
A ) 'B
Note that in this proof, as in many, a somewhat different sequence can be
devised that leads to the same successful result. Line 3 is a needed first step.
But we could have kept the disjunction on line 4, at that point only replacing
by A:
' 'A
4.
3, D.N.
Replacement of this by a conditional is then needed.
5.
4, Impl.
H.S. then again concludes the proof:
6.
5, 1, H.S.
C ) 'B
C ) A
'C ¡ A
The difference between the two sequences, in this case, is chiefly one of
order. Sometimes there are alternative proofs using quite different strategies
altogether.
406

Let us examine, as our final explication of the detail of formal proofs, one of
the longer arguments in Set E, exercise 20, in which devising the strategy
needed is more challenging.
EXAMPLE 2
1.
2.
3.
The conclusion we seek, 
, appears only in the second of the three premises,
and even there it is buried in a longer compound statement. How may we
prove it? We notice that the consequent of the second premise 
is a
conditional that, if replaced by a disjunction, yields 
, which in turn
yields 
independently, by Taut. Might we obtain 
by M.P.? For
that we need
. R appears in the first premise, as part of a disjunction; if we
can obtain the negation of that disjunction, we may derive 
. To obtain the
negation of that disjunction we need the negation of the consequent of the
first premise, so M.T. may be applied. It can be seen that the negation of that
consequent 
should be available, because the third premise asserts 
,
and if 
is true, then 
surely is false. How may we show this? We look
at the negation that we seek: 
. This is logically equivalent to
. We can establish 
simply by adding 
to 
. All the
elements of the plan are before us; we need only put them into a logical se-
quence that is watertight. This is not at all difficult once the strategy has been
devised. We begin by building the negation of the consequent of the first
premise, then derive the negation of the antecedent of that premise, then ob-
tain 
. With 
we establish 
by M.P., and the conclusion we
want to prove is at hand. The actual lines of the formal proof are
(V ) 'V)
'R
'R
'T
'U
'T ¡ 'U
'T ¡ 'U
'(T# U)
(T# U)
'T
'T
(T# U)
'R
'R
(V ) 'V)
'V
'V ¡ 'V
(V ) 'V)
'V
‹ 'V
'T
'R ) (V ) 'V)
(R ¡ S) ) (T# U)
Methods of Deduction
1.
2.
3.
4.
3, Add.
5.
4, De M.
6.
1, 5, M.T.
7.
6, De M.
8.
7, Simp.
9.
2, 8, M.P.
10.
9, Impl.
11.
10, Taut. Q.E.D.
'V
'V ¡ 'V
V ) 'V
'R
'R# 'S
'(R ¡ S)
'(T# U)
'T ¡ 'U
‹ 'V
'T
'R ) (V ) 'V)
(R ¡ S) ) (T# U)
At the conclusion of a proof it is traditional practice to place the letters
Q.E.D.—a minor exhibition of pride in the form of an acronym for the Latin
expression, Quod erat demonstrandum—”What was to be demonstrated.”
407

EXERCISES
E. Construct a formal proof of validity for each of the following arguments:
Methods of Deduction
F. Construct a formal proof of validity for each of the following arguments, in
each case using the suggested notation:
*1. Either the manager didn’t notice the change or else he approves of it. He
noticed it all right. So he must approve of it. (N, A)
2. The oxygen in the tube either combined with the filament to form an
oxide or else it vanished completely. The oxygen in the tube could not
have vanished completely. Therefore the oxygen in the tube combined
with the filament to form an oxide. (C, V)
3. If a political leader who sees her former opinions to be wrong does not
alter her course, she is guilty of deceit; and if she does alter her course,
1.
‹ C ) 'B
'(C# 'A)
A ) 'B
2.
‹ 'D
'(E ¡ F)
(D# 'E) ) F
3.
‹ I ¡ 'H
'(G# H)
(G ) 'H) ) I
4.
‹ 'J
L
(J ¡ K) ) 'L
*5.
‹ 'Q ¡ P
Q ) [(O# M)# N]
[(M# N)# O] ) P
6.
‹ T ) U
(R ¡ S) ) (U ¡ 'T)
R ¡ (S# 'T)
7.
‹ W
'('X# V)
('V ) W)# (X ) W)
8.
‹ A ¡ C
(B ¡ Z)# Y
[(Y# Z) ) A]# [(Y# B) ) C]
9.
‹ G ) E
'(F# 'D) ) 'G
'D ) ('E ) 'F)
*10.
‹ (L# K) ) J
L ) [I ¡ (J ¡ H)]
[H ¡ (I ¡ J)] ) (K ) J)
11.
‹ M ) O
M ) (N ) O)
M ) N
12.
‹ Q ¡ S
(R ) S)# (R ¡ P)
(P ) Q)# (P ¡ R)
13.
‹ T ) W
(U ¡ V) ) W
T ) (U# V)
14.
‹ '(X# Y)
'(X ¡ Y)
(X ¡ Y) ) (X# Y)
*15.
‹ A ) A
(A ) A) ) (Z ) Z)
(Z ) Z) ) (A ) A)
16.
‹ D
B# (C ¡ E)
'B ¡ [(C ) D)# (E ) D)]
17.
‹ F ) (F# I)
(G ) H) ) [(H ) G) ) I]
'F ¡ '['(G# H)# (G ¡ H)]
18.
‹ (L# J) K J
J ) L
J ¡ ('J# K)
19.
‹ Q
'(M# O) ) Q
'N ¡ 'P
(M ) N)# (O ) P)
*20.
‹ 'V
'T
'R ) (V ) 'V)
(R ¡ S) ) (T# U)
408

she is open to a charge of inconsistency. She either alters her course or
she doesn’t. Therefore either she is guilty of deceit or else she is open to
a charge of inconsistency. (A, D, I)
4. It is not the case that she either forgot or wasn’t able to finish. Therefore
she was able to finish. (F, A)
*5. If the litmus paper turns red, then the solution is acid. Hence if the lit-
mus paper turns red, then either the solution is acid or something is
wrong somewhere. (R, A, W)
6. She can have many friends only if she respects them as individuals. If
she respects them as individuals, then she cannot expect them all to be-
have alike. She does have many friends. Therefore she does not expect
them all to behave alike. (F, R, E)
7. If the victim had money in his pockets, then robbery wasn’t the motive
for the crime. But robbery or vengeance was the motive for the crime.
The victim had money in his pockets. Therefore vengeance must have
been the motive for the crime. (M, R, V)
8. Napoleon is to be condemned if he usurped power that was not right-
fully his own. Either Napoleon was a legitimate monarch or else he
usurped power that was not rightfully his own. Napoleon was not a le-
gitimate monarch. So Napoleon is to be condemned. (C, U, L)
9. If we extend further credit on the Wilkins account, they will have a
moral obligation to accept our bid on their next project. We can figure a
more generous margin of profit in preparing our estimates if they have a
moral obligation to accept our bid on their next project. Figuring a more
generous margin of profit in preparing our estimates will cause our gen-
eral financial condition to improve considerably. Hence a considerable
improvement in our general financial condition will follow from our
extension of further credit on the Wilkins account. (C, M, P, I)
*10. If the laws are good and their enforcement is strict, then crime will di-
minish. If strict enforcement of laws will make crime diminish, then our
problem is a practical one. The laws are good. Therefore our problem is
a practical one. (G, S, D, P)
11. Had Roman citizenship guaranteed civil liberties, then Roman citizens
would have enjoyed religious freedom. Had Roman citizens enjoyed
religious freedom, there would have been no persecution of the early
Christians. But the early Christians were persecuted. Hence Roman citi-
zenship could not have guaranteed civil liberties. (G, F, P)
12. If the first disjunct of a disjunction is true, the disjunction as a whole is
true. Therefore if both the first and second disjuncts of the disjunction
are true, then the disjunction as a whole is true. (F, W, S)
13. If the new courthouse is to be conveniently located, it will have to be situ-
ated in the heart of the city; and if it is to be adequate to its function, it will
have to be built large enough to house all the city offices. If the new court-
house is situated in the heart of the city and is built large enough to house
all the city offices, then its cost will run to over $10 million. Its cost cannot
Methods of Deduction
409

exceed $10 million. Therefore either the new courthouse will have an in-
convenient location or it will be inadequate to its function. (C, H, A, L, O)
14. Jalana will come if she gets the message, provided that she is still inter-
ested. Although she didn’t come, she is still interested. Therefore she
didn’t get the message. (C, M, I)
*15. If the Mosaic account of the cosmogony (the account of the creation in
Genesis) is strictly correct, the sun was not created until the fourth day.
And if the sun was not created until the fourth day, it could not have
been the cause of the alternation of day and night for the first three
days. But either the word “day” is used in Scripture in a different sense
from that in which it is commonly accepted now or else the sun must
have been the cause of the alternation of day and night for the first three
days. Hence it follows that either the Mosaic account of the cosmogony
is not strictly correct or else the word “day” is used in Scripture in a dif-
ferent sense from that in which it is commonly accepted now. (M, C, A, D)
16. If the teller or the cashier had pushed the alarm button, the vault would
have locked automatically, and the police would have arrived within
three minutes. Had the police arrived within three minutes, the robbers’
car would have been overtaken. But the robbers’ car was not overtaken.
Therefore the teller did not push the alarm button. (T, C, V, P, O)
17. If people are always guided by their sense of duty, they must forgo the
enjoyment of many pleasures; and if they are always guided by their de-
sire for pleasure, they must often neglect their duty. People are either al-
ways guided by their sense of duty or always guided by their desire for
pleasure. If people are always guided by their sense of duty, they do not
often neglect their duty; and if they are always guided by their desire
for pleasure, they do not forgo the enjoyment of many pleasures. There-
fore people must forgo the enjoyment of many pleasures if and only if
they do not often neglect their duty. (D, F, P, N)
18. Although world population is increasing, agricultural production is de-
clining and manufacturing output remains constant. If agricultural pro-
duction declines and world population increases, then either new food
sources will become available or else there will be a radical redistribu-
tion of food resources in the world unless human nutritional require-
ments diminish. No new food sources will become available, yet neither
will family planning be encouraged nor will human nutritional require-
ments diminish. Therefore there will be a radical redistribution of food
resources in the world. (W, A, M, N, R, H, P)
19. Either the robber came in the door, or else the crime was an inside one
and one of the servants is implicated. The robber could come in the door
only if the latch had been raised from the inside; but one of the servants
is surely implicated if the latch was raised from the inside. Therefore
one of the servants is implicated. (D, I, S, L)
*20. If I pay my tuition, I won’t have any money left. I’ll buy a computer
only if I have money. I won’t learn to program computers unless I buy a
Methods of Deduction
410

computer. But if I don’t pay tuition, I can’t enroll in classes; and if I
don’t enroll in classes I certainly won’t buy a computer. I must either
pay my tuition or not pay my tuition. So I surely will not learn to pro-
gram computers! (P, M, C, L, E)
G. The five arguments that follow are also valid, and a proof of the validity of
each of them is called for. However, these proofs will be somewhat more diffi-
cult to construct than those in earlier exercises, and students who find them-
selves stymied from time to time ought not become discouraged. What may
appear difficult on first appraisal may come to seem much less difficult with
continuing efforts. Familiarity with the nineteen rules of inference, and repeated
practice in applying those rules, are the keys to the construction of these proofs.
1. If you study the humanities, then you will develop an understanding of
people, and if you study the sciences, then you will develop an under-
standing of the world about you. So if you study either the humanities
or the sciences, then you will develop an understanding either of people
or of the world about you. (H, P, S, W)
2. If you study the humanities, then you will develop an understanding of
people, and if you study the sciences then you will develop an under-
standing of the world about you. So if you study both the humanities
and the sciences, you will develop an understanding both of people and
of the world about you. (H, P, S, W)
3. If you have free will, then your actions are not determined by any an-
tecedent events. If you have free will, then if your actions are not deter-
mined by any antecedent events, then your actions cannot be predicted.
If your actions are not determined by any antecedent events, then if
your actions cannot be predicted then the consequences of your actions
cannot be predicted. Therefore if you have free will, then the conse-
quences of your actions cannot be predicted. (F, A, P, C)
4. Socrates was a great philosopher. Therefore either Socrates was happily
married or else he wasn’t. (G, H)
5. If either Socrates was happily married or else he wasn’t, then Socrates was
a great philosopher. Therefore Socrates was a great philosopher. (H, G)
9
Proof of Invalidity
For an invalid argument there is, of course, no formal proof of validity. However,
if we fail to discover a formal proof of validity for a given argument, this fail-
ure does not prove that the argument is invalid and that no such proof can be
constructed. It may mean only that we have not tried hard enough. Our inability
to find a proof of validity may be caused by the fact that the argument is not
valid, but it may be caused instead by our own lack of ingenuity—as a conse-
quence of the noneffective character of the process of proof construction. Not
being able to construct a formal proof of its validity does not prove an argument
to be invalid. What does constitute a proof that a given argument is invalid?
Methods of Deduction
411

The method about to be described is closely related to the truth-table
method, although it is a great deal shorter. It will be helpful to recall how an in-
valid argument form is proved invalid by a truth table. If a single case (row) can
be found in which truth values are assigned to the statement variables in such a
way that the premises are made true and the conclusion false, then the argument
form is invalid. If we can somehow make an assignment of truth values to the
simple component statements of an argument that will make its premises true
and its conclusion false, then making that assignment will suffice to prove the ar-
gument invalid. To make such an assignment is, in effect, what the truth table
does. If we can make such an assignment of truth values without actually con-
structing the whole truth table, much work will be eliminated.
Consider this argument:
If the governor favors public housing, then she is in favor of restricting the scope of
private enterprise.
If the governor were a socialist, then she would be in favor of restricting the scope
of private enterprise.
Therefore if the governor favors public housing, then she is a socialist.
It is symbolized as
and we can prove it invalid without having to construct a complete truth table.
First we ask, “What assignment of truth values is required to make the conclu-
sion false?” It is clear that a conditional is false only if its antecedent is true and
its consequent false. Hence assigning the truth value true to F and false to S will
make the conclusion 
false. Now if the truth value  true is assigned to R,
both premises are made true, because a conditional is true whenever its conse-
quent is true. We can say, then, that if the truth value  true is assigned to F and to
R, and the truth value false is assigned to S, the argument will have true premis-
es and a false conclusion and is thus proved to be invalid.
This method of proving invalidity is an alternative to the truth-table method
of proof. The two methods are closely related, however, and the essential connec-
tion between them should be noticed. In effect, what we did when we made the
indicated assignment of truth values was to construct one row of the given argu-
ment’s truth table. The relationship can perhaps be seen more clearly when the
truth-value assignments are written out horizontally:
F ) S
‹ F ) S
S ) R
F ) R
Methods of Deduction
F
R
S
True
True
False
True
True
False
F ) S
S ) R
F ) R
In this configuration they constitute one row (the second) of the truth table for
the given argument. An argument is proved invalid by displaying at least one row of
its truth table in which all its premises are true but its conclusion is false. Consequent-
ly, we need not examine all rows of its truth table to discover an argument’s inva-
lidity: discovering a single row in which its premises are all true and its
412

conclusion false will suffice. This method of proving invalidity is a method of
constructing such a row without having to construct the entire truth table.*
The present method is shorter than writing out an entire truth table, and the
amount of time and work saved is exponentially greater for arguments involving
a greater number of component simple statements. For arguments with a consid-
erable number of premises, or with premises of considerable complexity, the
needed assignment of truth values may not be so easy to make. There is no me-
chanical method of proceeding, but some hints may prove helpful.
It is most efficient to proceed by assigning those values seen immediately to
be essential if invalidity is to be proved. Thus, any premise that simply asserts
the truth of some statement S suggests the immediate assignment of T to S (or F
if the falsehood of S was asserted as premise), because we know that all the
premises must be made true. The same principle applies to the statements in the
conclusion, except that the assignments of truth values there must make the con-
clusion false. Thus a conclusion of the form 
suggests the immediate as-
signment of T to A and F to B, and a conclusion in the form 
suggests the
immediate assignment of F to A and F to B, because only those assignments
could result in a proof of invalidity.
Whether one ought to begin by seeking to make the premises true or by seek-
ing to make the conclusion false depends on the structure of the propositions;
usually it is best to begin wherever assignments can be made with greatest confi-
dence. Of course, there will be many circumstances in which the first assign-
ments have to be arbitrary and tentative. A certain amount of trial and error is
likely to be needed. Even so, this method of proving invalidity is almost always
shorter and easier than writing out a complete truth table.
A ¡ B
A ) B
Methods of Deduction
*The whole truth table (were we to construct it) would of course test the validity of the specific form of the
argument in question. If it can be shown that the specific form of an argument is invalid, we may infer that
the argument having that specific form is an invalid argument. The method described here differs only in
that truth values here are assigned directly to premises and conclusion; nonetheless, the relation between
this method and the truth-table method is very close.
EXERCISES
Prove the invalidity of each of the following by the method of assigning truth
values.
*1.
‹ B ¡ C
A ¡ D
C ) D
A ) B
2.
‹ G
H ) G
('E# 'F) ) (G# H)
'(E# F)
3.
‹ 'J ) K
'('I# 'L)
'('K# L)
I ¡ 'J
4.
‹ 'M
'(R ¡ P)
Q ) R
N ) (P ¡ Q)
M ) (N ¡ O)
413

Methods of Deduction
10
Inconsistency
An argument is proved invalid if truth values can be assigned to make all of its
premises true and its conclusion false. If a deductive argument is not invalid, it
must be valid. So, if truth values cannot be assigned to make the premises true
and the conclusion false, then the argument must be valid. This follows from the
definition of validity, but it has this curious consequence: Any argument whose
premises are inconsistent must be valid.
In the following argument, for example, the premises appear to be totally
irrelevant to the conclusion:
If the airplane had engine trouble, it would have landed at Bend.
If the airplane did not have engine trouble, it would have landed at Creswell.
The airplane did not land at either Bend or Creswell.
Therefore the airplane must have landed in Denver.
Here is its symbolic translation:
Any attempt to assign truth values to its component simple statements in such a
way as to make the conclusion false and the premises all true is doomed to fail-
ure. Even if we ignore the conclusion and attend only to the premises, we find
that there is no way to assign truth values to their components such that the
premises will all be true. No truth-value assignment can make them all true be-
cause they are inconsistent with one another. Their conjunction is self-contradictory,
‹ D
'(B ¡ C)
'A ) C
A ) B
*5.
‹ S K U
'(T# X)
T ) (V# W)
V ) (W ) X)
S ) (T ) U)
6.
‹ B ¡ C
'A
C K (A ¡ B)
B K (C ¡ A)
A K (B ¡ C)
7.
‹ D ) (G ¡ I)
'J
(I ) G)# ('H ) 'G)
'E ) (I ¡ J)
G ) (H ¡ I)
D ) (E ¡ F)
8.
‹ K ) R
(R ¡ 'P) ¡ 'M
('P ¡ Q)# 'Q
O ) (P ¡ 'N)
(L ) N) ¡ 'K
K ) (L# M)
9.
‹ X# Z
(U ¡ S)# (V ¡ Z)
X ) ('Y ) 'X)
(V ) 'S)# ('V ) 'Y)
'U ) (W# X)
(U ¡ V) ¡ (S ¡ T)
(U# T) ¡ ('T# 'U)
(S ) T)# (T ) S)
*10.
‹ E K F
(B ) H)# ('H ) D)
I K 'D
(I ) G)# (H ) J)
G ) 'H
F ¡ C
(D ) B)# (E ) A)
A ) (B ) 'C)
414

being a substitution instance of a self-contradictory statement form. If we were to
construct a truth table for this argument, we would find that in every row at least
one of the premises is false. Because there is no row in which the premises are all
true, there is no row in which the premises are all true and the conclusion false.
Hence the truth table for this argument would establish that it is in fact valid. Of
course, we can also provide a formal proof of its validity:
Methods of Deduction
1.
2.
3.
4.
3, De M.
5.
4, Simp.
6.
1, 5, M.T.
7. C
2, 6, M.P.
8.
4, Com.
9.
8, Simp.
10.
7, Add.
11. D
10, 9, D.S.
C ¡ D
'C
'C# 'B
'A
'B
'B# 'C
'(B ¡ C)> ‹ D
'A ) C
A ) B
In this proof, lines 1 through 9 are devoted to making explicit the inconsistency
that is implicitly contained in the premises. That inconsistency emerges clearly in
line 7 (which asserts C) and line 9 (which asserts
). Once this explicit contradic-
tion has been expressed, the conclusion follows swiftly using Add. and D.S.
Thus we see that if a set of premises is inconsistent, those premises will validly
yield any conclusion, no matter how irrelevant. The essence of the matter is more
simply shown with the following outrageous argument, whose openly inconsis-
tent premises allow us to infer—validly!—an irrelevant and absurd conclusion.
Today is Sunday.
Today is not Sunday.
Therefore the moon is made of green cheese.
In symbols we have
1. S
2.
The rest of the formal proof of its validity is almost immediately obvious:
'S> ‹ M
'C
3.
1, Add.
4. M
3, 2, D.S.
S ¡ M
Of course, an argument that is valid because its premises are inconsistent cannot pos-
sibly be sound—for if the premises are inconsistent with each other, they cannot possi-
bly be all true. By such an argument, therefore, it is not possible to establish any
conclusion to be true, because we know that at least one of the premises must be false.
How can such meager premises make any argument in which they occur
valid? The premises of a valid argument imply its conclusion not merely in the
sense of “material” implication, but logically, or strictly. In a valid argument it is
logically impossible for the premises to be true when the conclusion is false—
and this is the situation that obtains when it is logically impossible for the prem-
415

ises to be true, putting the conclusion aside. What we have shown is this: Any ar-
gument with inconsistent premises is valid, regardless of what its conclusion may be. Its
validity may be established by a truth table, or as we saw above, by a formal
proof in which the contradiction is first formally expressed (for example, S and
), the desired conclusion is then added to one side of the contradiction (for ex-
ample, 
), and that desired conclusion (for example, M) is then inferred by
Disjunctive Syllogism using the other side of the contradiction (for example, 
).
This discussion helps to explain why consistency is prized so highly. One
reason is that two inconsistent statements cannot both be true. In a courtroom,
therefore, cross-examination often aims to bring a hostile witness to contradict
himself. If a witness makes inconsistent assertions, not all that he says can be
true, and his credibility is seriously undermined. When it has been once estab-
lished that a witness has lied under oath (or is perhaps thoroughly confused), no
testimony of that witness can be fully trusted. Lawyers say: Falsus in unum, falsus
in omnibus—”untrustworthy in one thing, untrustworthy in all.”
Another, deeper reason why inconsistency is so repugnant is that—as we
have seen—any and every conclusion follows logically from inconsistent state-
ments taken as premises. Inconsistent statements are not “meaningless”; their
trouble is just the opposite—they mean too much. They mean everything, in the
sense of implying everything, and if everything is asserted, half of what is asserted
is surely false, because every statement has a denial.
We are thus provided with an answer to the old riddle: What happens when
an irresistible force meets an immovable object? The situation described by the
riddle involves a contradiction. An irresistible force can meet an immovable ob-
ject only if both exist; there must be an irresistible force and there must also be an
immovable object. But if there is an irresistible force, there can be no immovable
object. Let us make the contradiction explicit: There is an immovable object, and
there is no immovable object. From these inconsistent premises, any conclusion
may validly be inferred. So the correct answer to the question, “What happens
when an irresistible force meets an immovable object?” is “Everything!”
Inconsistency, devastating when found among the premises of an argument,
can be highly amusing. Everett Dirksen, leader of the Republican Party in the
U.S. Senate for a decade in the twentieth century, enjoyed describing himself as
“a man of fixed and unbending principles, the first of which is to be flexible at all
times.”2 When an internal contradiction, not recognized by a speaker, yields un-
seen absurdity, we call the statement an “Irish bull.” Writes the schoolboy, for ex-
ample, “The climate of the Australian interior is so bad that the inhabitants don’t
live there anymore.” Yogi Berra, famous for his Irish bulls, observed that a cer-
tain restaurant, once very popular, had become “so crowded that nobody goes
there anymore.” He also said, “When you see a fork in the road, take it.”
As a matter of logic, in an internally inconsistent set, not all the propositions
can be true. But human beings are not always logical and do utter, and some-
times may even believe, two propositions that contradict one another. This may
seem difficult to do, but we are told by Lewis Carroll, a very reliable authority in
such matters, that the White Queen in Alice in Wonderland made a regular prac-
tice of believing six impossible things before breakfast!
'S
S ¡ M
'S
Methods of Deduction
416

EXERCISES
For each of the following, either construct a formal proof of validity or prove
invalidity by the method of assigning truth values to the simple statements
involved.
Methods of Deduction
*1.
‹ (A# C) ) (B ¡ D)
(A ) B)# (C ) D)
2.
‹ (E ¡ G) ) (F# H)
(E ) F)# (G ) H)
3.
‹ I ) L
(J# K) ) L
I ) (J ¡ K)
4.
‹ M ) P
(N ¡ O) ) P
M ) (N# O)
*5.
‹ X ) C
B
(Z ) A) ) (B ) C)
[(X# Y)# Z] ) A
6.
‹ D ) I
H
(F ) G) ) (H ) I)
[(D ¡ E)# F] ) G
7.
‹ 'J
'(J ) 'L)
'(K ) 'N)
N ) 'M
(J# K) ) (L ) M)
8.
‹ 'O
'(O ) Q)
'(P ) 'S)
S ) 'R
(O# P) ) (Q ) R)
9.
‹ X
'Y ) ('Z ) X)
(T ) U) ) 'Y
(T ) W) ) (Y K Z)
U ) (W# X)
T ) (U# V)
*10.
‹ E
'F ) ('G ) E)
A ) (B ) 'F)
(A ) D) ) (F K G)
B ) (D# E)
A ) (B# C)
B. For each of the following, either construct a formal proof of validity or prove
invalidity by the method of assigning truth values to the simple statements in-
volved. In each case, use the notation in parentheses.
*1. If the linguistics investigators are correct, then if more than one di-
alect was present in ancient Greece, then different tribes came down
at different times from the north. If different tribes came down at dif-
ferent times from the north, they must have come from the Danube
River valley. But archaeological excavations would have revealed
traces of different tribes there if different tribes had come down at dif-
ferent times from the north, and archaeological excavations have re-
vealed no such traces there. Hence if more than one dialect was
present in ancient Greece, then the linguistics investigators are not
correct. (C, M, D, V, A)
2. If there are the ordinary symptoms of a cold and the patient has a high
temperature, then if there are tiny spots on his skin, he has measles. Of
course the patient cannot have measles if his record shows that he has
417

had them before. The patient does have a high temperature and his
record shows that he has had measles before. Besides the ordinary
symptoms of a cold, there are tiny spots on his skin. I conclude that the
patient has a viral infection. (O, T, S, M, R, V)
3. If God were willing to prevent evil, but unable to do so, he would be
impotent; if he were able to prevent evil, but unwilling to do so, he
would be malevolent. Evil can exist only if God is either unwilling or
unable to prevent it. There is evil. If God exists, he is neither impotent
nor malevolent. Therefore God does not exist. (W, A, I, M, E, G)
4. If I buy a new car this spring or have my old car fixed, then I’ll get up to
Canada this summer and stop off in Duluth. I’ll visit my parents if I stop
off in Duluth. If I visit my parents, they’ll insist on my spending the sum-
mer with them. If they insist on my spending the summer with them, I’ll
be there till autumn. But if I stay there till autumn, then I won’t get to
Canada after all! So I won’t have my old car fixed. (N, F, C, D, V, I, A)
*5. If Salome is intelligent and studies hard, then she will get good grades
and pass her courses. If Salome studies hard but lacks intelligence, then
her efforts will be appreciated; and if her efforts are appreciated, then
she will pass her courses. If Salome is intelligent, then she studies hard.
Therefore Salome will pass her courses. (I, S, G, P, A)
6. If there is a single norm for greatness of poetry, then Milton and Edgar
Guest cannot both be great poets. If either Pope or Dryden is regarded as a
great poet, then Wordsworth is certainly no great poet; but if Wordsworth
is no great poet, then neither is Keats nor Shelley. But after all, even though
Edgar Guest is not, Dryden and Keats are both great poets. Hence there is
no single norm for greatness of poetry. (N, M, G, P, D, W, K, S)
7. If the butler were present, he would have been seen; and if he had been
seen, he would have been questioned. If he had been questioned, he
would have replied; and if he had replied, he would have been heard.
But the butler was not heard. If the butler was neither seen nor heard,
then he must have been on duty; and if he was on duty, he must have
been present. Therefore the butler was questioned. (P, S, Q, R, H, D)
8. If the butler told the truth, then the window was closed when he entered
the room; and if the gardener told the truth, then the automatic sprinkler
system was not operating on the evening of the murder. If the butler and
the gardener are both lying, then a conspiracy must exist to protect someone
in the house and there would have been a little pool of water on the floor
just inside the window. We know that the window could not have been
closed when the butler entered the room. There was a little pool of water on
the floor just inside the window. So if there is a conspiracy to protect some-
one in the house, then the gardener did not tell the truth. (B, W, G, S, C, P)
9. Their chief would leave the country if she feared capture, and she would
not leave the country unless she feared capture. If she feared capture and
left the country, then the enemy’s espionage network would be demoral-
Methods of Deduction
418

ized and powerless to harm us. If she did not fear capture and remained
in the country, it would mean that she was ignorant of our own agents’
work. If she is really ignorant of our agents’ work, then our agents can
consolidate their positions within the enemy’s organization; and if our
agents can consolidate their positions there, they will render the enemy’s
espionage network powerless to harm us. Therefore the enemy’s espi-
onage network will be powerless to harm us. (L, F, D, P, I, C)
*10. If the investigators of extrasensory perception are regarded as honest,
then considerable evidence for extrasensory perception must be admitted;
and the doctrine of clairvoyance must be considered seriously if extrasen-
sory perception is tentatively accepted as a fact. If considerable evidence
for extrasensory perception is admitted, then it must be tentatively ac-
cepted as a fact and an effort must be made to explain it. The doctrine of
clairvoyance must be considered seriously if we are prepared to take seri-
ously that class of phenomena called occult; and if we are prepared to
take seriously that class of phenomena called occult, a new respect must
be paid to mediums. If we pursue the matter further, then if a new respect
must be paid to mediums, we must take seriously their claims to commu-
nicate with the dead. We do pursue the matter further, but still we are
practically committed to believing in ghosts if we take seriously the medi-
ums’ claims to communicate with the dead. Hence if the investigators of
extrasensory perception are regarded as honest, we are practically com-
mitted to believing in ghosts. (H, A, C, F, E, O, M, P, D, G)
11. If we buy a lot, then we will build a house. If we buy a lot, then if we
build a house we will buy furniture. If we build a house, then if we buy
furniture we will buy dishes. Therefore if we buy a lot, we will buy
dishes. (L, H, F, D)
12. If your prices are low, then your sales will be high, and if you sell quali-
ty merchandise, then your customers will be satisfied. So if your prices
are low and you sell quality merchandise, then your sales will be high
and your customers satisfied. (L, H, Q, S)
13. If your prices are low, then your sales will be high, and if you sell quali-
ty merchandise, then your customers will be satisfied. So if either your
prices are low or you sell quality merchandise, then either your sales
will be high or your customers will be satisfied. (L, H, Q, S)
14. If Jordan joins the alliance, then either Algeria or Syria boycotts it. If
Kuwait joins the alliance, then either Syria or Iraq boycotts it. Syria does
not boycott it. Therefore if neither Algeria nor Iraq boycotts it, then nei-
ther Jordan nor Kuwait joins the alliance. (J, A, S, K, I)
*15. If either Jordan or Algeria joins the alliance, then if either Syria or
Kuwait boycotts it, then although Iraq does not boycott it, Yemen boy-
cotts it. If either Iraq or Morocco does not boycott it, then Egypt will join
the alliance. Therefore if Jordan joins the alliance, then if Syria boycotts
it, then Egypt will join the alliance. (J, A, S, K, I, Y, M, E)
Methods of Deduction
419

C. If any truth-functional argument is valid, we have the tools to prove it valid;
and if it is invalid, we have the tools to prove it invalid. Prove each of the fol-
lowing arguments valid or invalid. These proofs will be more difficult to con-
struct than in preceding exercises, but they will offer greater satisfaction.
1. If the president cuts Social Security benefit payments, he will lose the
support of the senior citizens; and if he cuts defense spending, he will
lose the support of the conservatives. If the president loses the support
of either the senior citizens or the conservatives, then his influence in
the Senate will diminish. But his influence in the Senate will not dimin-
ish. Therefore the president will not cut either Social Security benefits or
defense spending. (B, S, D, C, I)
2. If inflation continues, then interest rates will remain high. If inflation
continues, then if interest rates remain high then business activity will
decrease. If interest rates remain high, then if business activity decreases
then unemployment will rise. So if unemployment rises, then inflation
will continue. (I, H, D, U)
3. If taxes are reduced, then inflation will rise, but if the budget is bal-
anced, then unemployment will increase. If the president keeps his cam-
paign promises, then either taxes are reduced or the budget is balanced.
Therefore if the president keeps his campaign promises, then either in-
flation will rise or unemployment will increase. (T, I, B, U, K)
4. Weather predicting is an exact science. Therefore either it will rain to-
morrow or it won’t. (W, R)
5. If either it will rain tomorrow or it won’t rain tomorrow, then weather
predicting is an exact science. Therefore weather predicting is an exact
science. (R, W)
11
Indirect Proof of Validity
Contradictory statements cannot both be true. Therefore, a statement added to
the premises that makes it possible to deduce a contradiction must entail a false-
hood. This gives rise to another method of proving validity. Suppose we assume
(for the purposes of the proof only) the denial of what is to be proved. Suppose,
using that assumption, we can derive a contradiction. That contradiction will
show that when we denied what was to be proved we were brought to absurdi-
ty. We will have established the desired conclusion indirectly, with a proof by
reductio ad absurdum.
An indirect proof of validity is written out by stating as an additional assumed
premise the negation of the conclusion. If we can derive an explicit contradiction
from the set of premises thus augmented, the argument with which we began
must be valid. The method is illustrated with the following argument:
1.
2.
3.
‹ E
D ¡ A
(B ¡ D) ) E
A ) (B# C)
Methods of Deduction
420

In the very next line we make explicit our assumption (for the purpose of the in-
direct proof) of the denial of the conclusion.
Methods of Deduction
With the now enlarged set of premises we can, using the established rules of in-
ference, bring out an explicit contradiction, thus:
4.
I.P. (Indirect Proof)
'E
The last line of the proof is an explicit contradiction, which is a demonstration of
the absurdity to which we were led by assuming 
in line 4. This contradiction,
formally and explicitly expressed in the last line, exhibits the absurdity and com-
pletes the proof.
This method of indirect proof strengthens our machinery for testing argu-
ments by making it possible, in some circumstances, to prove validity more quick-
ly than would be possible without it. We can illustrate this by first constructing a
direct formal proof of the validity of an argument, and then demonstrating the va-
lidity of that same argument using an indirect proof. In the following example,
the proof without the reductio ad absurdum is on the left and requires fifteen steps;
the proof using the reductio ad absurdum is on the right and requires only eight
steps. An exclamation point (!) is used to indicate that a given step is derived after
the assumption advancing the indirect proof had been made.
'E
5.
2, 4, M.T.
6.
5, De M.
7.
6, Com.
8.
7, Simp.
9. A
3, 8, D.S.
10.
1, 9, M.P.
11. B
10, Simp.
12.
6, Simp.
13.
11, 12, Conj.
B# 'B
'B
B# C
'D
'D# 'B
'B# 'D
'(B ¡ D)
1.
2.
3.
4.
2, 3, M.T.
!4 
I.P. (Indirect Proof)
5.
4, De M.
!5 
4, D.N.
6.
5, Simp.
!6 
1, 5, C.D.
7.
1, Simp.
!7 L
2, 6, M.P.
8.
7, 6, M.T.
!8 
7, 3, Conj.
9.
1, Com.
10.
9, Simp.
11.
5, Com.
12.
11, Simp.
13.
10, 12, M.T.
14.
8, 13, Conj.
15.
14, De M.
'(H ¡ J)
'H# 'J
'J
'K
'K# 'I
J ) K
(J ) K)# (H ) I)
L# 'L
'H
H ) I
I ¡ K
'I
H ¡ J
'I# 'K
' '(H ¡ J)
'(I ¡ K)
‹ '(H ¡ J)
'L
(I ¡ K) ) L
(H ) I)# (J ) K)
421

Methods of Deduction
EXERCISES
A. For each of the following arguments, construct an indirect proof of validity.
1. 1.
2.
‹ C
A ) C
A ¡ (B# C)
2. 1.
‹ 'G
(G ¡ H) ) 'G
3. 1.
2.
‹ G
('G ¡ H) ) (D# F)
(D ¡ E) ) (F ) G)
4. 1.
2.
3.
‹ 'R
(R ¡ T) ) (M# U)
(O ¡ Q) ) ('R# S)
(M ¡ N) ) (O# P)
*5. 1.
2.
‹ 'D ¡ 'Z
Z ) (Y ) 'Z)
D ) (Z ) Y)
6. 1.
2.
3.
‹ 'O
(Q ¡ Z) ) '(O# E)
(E ¡ L) ) (Q ¡ 'D)
(O ¡ P) ) (D# E)
7. 1.
2.
3.
‹  Q
(F ¡ H)
(E ¡ H) ) Q
(F ¡ G) ) (D# E)
8. 1.
2.
‹  B ) T
U ) '(G ¡ 'G)
B ) [(O ¡ 'O) ) (T ¡ U)]
B. For each of the following two arguments, construct an indirect proof of validity.
1. If a sharp fall in the prime rate of interest produces a rally in the stock
market, then inflation is sure to come soon. But if a drop in the money
supply produces a sharp fall in the prime rate of interest, then early in-
flation is equally certain. So inflation will soon be upon us. (F, R, I, D)
2. If precipitation levels remain unchanged and global warming intensi-
fies, ocean levels will rise and some ocean ports will be inundated. But
ocean ports will not be inundated if global warming intensifies. There-
fore either precipitation levels will not remain unchanged or global
warming will not intensify. (L, G, O, P)
C. For the following argument, construct both (a) a direct formal proof of validity
and (b) an indirect proof of validity. Compare the lengths of the two proofs.
1.
2.
3.
4.
12
Shorter Truth-Table Technique
There is still another method of testing the validity of arguments. We have
seen how an argument may be proved invalid by assigning truth values to its
component simple statements in such a way as to make all its premises true
‹ 'B# C
V# X
(Z ) 'B)# ('A ) C)
('W ) Z)# (Y ) 'A)
(V ) 'W)# (X ) Y)
422

Methods of Deduction
and its conclusion false. It is of course impossible to make such assignments
if the argument is valid. So we can prove the validity of an argument by
showing that no such set of truth values can be assigned. We do this by
showing that its premises can be made true, and its conclusion false, only by
assigning truth values inconsistently—that is, only with an assignment of val-
ues such that some component statement is assigned both a T and an F. In
other words, if the truth value T is assigned to each premise of a valid
argument, and the truth value F is assigned to its conclusion, this will neces-
sitate assigning both T and F to some component statement—which is,
of course, a contradiction. Here again we use the general method of reductio
ad absurdum.
For example, we can very quickly prove the validity of the argument
by first assigning T to each premise and F to the conclusion. But assigning F
to the conclusion requires that T be assigned to A and F be assigned to G.
Because T is assigned to A, the antecedent of the first premise is true, and
because the premise as a whole has been assigned T, its consequent must 
be true also—so T must be assigned to both C and D. Because T is assigned 
to D, the antecedent of the second premise is true, and because the premise 
as a whole has been assigned T, its consequent must also be true, so T
must be assigned to G. But we have already been forced to assign F to G, in
order to make the conclusion false. Hence the argument would be invalid
only if the statement G were both false and true, which is obviously im-
possible. Proving the validity of an argument with this “shorter truth-table
technique” is one version of the use of reductio ad absurdum, reducing to 
the absurd—but instead of using the rules of inference, it uses truth-value 
assignments.
This reductio ad absurdum method of assigning truth values is often the
quickest method of testing arguments, but it is more readily applied in some
arguments than in others, depending on the kinds of propositions involved.
Its easiest application is when F is assigned to a disjunction (in which case
both of the disjuncts must be assigned F) or T to a conjunction (in which case
both of the conjuncts must be assigned T). When assignments to simple state-
ments are thus forced, the absurdity (if there is one) is quickly exposed. But
where the method calls for T to be assigned to a disjunction, we cannot be sure
which disjunct is true; and where F must be assigned to a conjunction, we can-
not be sure which conjunct is false; in such cases we must make various “trial
assignments,” which slows the process and diminishes the advantage of this
method. However, it remains the case that the reductio ad absurdum method of
proof is often the most efficient means in testing the validity of a deductive
argument.
‹ A ) G
(D ¡ E) ) G
(A ¡ B) ) (C# D)
423

Methods of Deduction
chapter  
Summary
In this chapter we explained various methods with which the validity or inva-
lidity of deductive arguments may be proved.
In Section 1 we introduced and explained the notion of a formal proof of va-
lidity, and we listed the first nine rules of inference with which formal proofs
may be constructed.
In Section 2 we examined in detail the elementary valid argument forms that
constitute the first nine rules of inference, and illustrated their use in simple ar-
guments.
In Section 3 we illustrated the ways in which the elementary valid argument
forms can be used to build formal proofs of validty.
In Section 4 we began the process of constructing formal proofs of validity,
using only the first nine rules of inference.
In Section 5 we illustrated the ways in which the first nine rules of inference
can be used to construct more extended formal proofs of validity.
In Section 6 we introduced the general rule of replacement, and expanded
the rules of inference by adding ten logical equivalences, each of which permits
the replacement of one logical expression by another having exactly the same
meaning.
In Section 7 we discussed the features of the system of natural deduction that
contains nineteen rules of inference.
In Section 8 we began the enterprise of building formal proofs of validity
using all nineteen rules of inference: nine elementary valid argument forms, and
ten logical equivalences permitting replacement.
In Section 9 we explained the method of proving invalidity when deductive
arguments are not valid.
In Section 10 we discussed inconsistency, explaining why any argument with
inconsistent premises cannot be sound, but will be valid.
In Section 11 we explained and illustrated indirect proof of validity.
In Section 12 we explained and illustrated the shorter truth-table technique
for proving validity.
END NOTES
1See also John A. Winnie, “The Completeness of Copi’s System of Natural Deduction,” Notre Dame Jour-
nal of Formal Logic 11 (July 1970), pages 379–382.
2Recounted by George Will, in Newsweek, 27 October 2003.
424

Methods of Deduction
SOLUTIONS TO SELECTED EXERCISES
SECTION 2
Exercises
1. Absorption (Abs.)
5. Constructive Dilemma (C.D.)
10. Hypothetical Syllogism (H.S.)
15. Conjunction (Conj.)
20. Hypothetical Syllogism (H.S.)
SECTION 3
Exercises
1. 3. 1, Simp.
4. 3, Add.
5. 2, 4, M.P.
6. 3, 5, Conj.
5. 5. 2, 4, M.P.
6. 1, 5, Conj.
7. 3, 4, D.S.
8. 6, 7, C.D.
10. 6. 4, 5, Conj.
7. 3, 6, M.P.
8. 7, 1, H.S.
9. 2, 8, Conj.
10. 9, 4, C.D.
SECTION 4
Exercises
5. 1. M ∨N
2. ~M • ~O
∴N
3. ~M
2, Simp.
4. N
1, 3, D.S.
15. 1. (P  Q) • (R  S)
2. (P ∨R) • (Q ∨R)
∴Q ∨S
3. P ∨R
2, Simp.
4. Q ∨S
1, 3, C.D.
25. 1. (W • X)  (Y • Z)
2. ~[(W • X) • (Y • Z)]
∴~(W • X)
3. (W • X)  [(W • X)
• (Y • Z)]
1, Abs.
4. ~(W • X)
3, 2, M.T.
10. 1. A  B
2. (A • B)  C
∴A  C
3. A  (A • B)
1, Abs.
4. A  C
3, 2, H.S.
20. 1. (~H ∨I) ∨J
2. ~(~H ∨I)
∴J ∨~H
3. J
1, 2, D.S.
4. J ∨~H
3, Add.
30. 1. Q  (R ∨S)
2. (T • U)  R
3. (R ∨S)  (T • U)
∴Q  R
4. Q  (T • U)
1, 3, H.S.
5. Q  R
4, 2, H.S.
SECTION 5
Exercises
A.
5. 1. N  [(N • O)  P]
2. N • O
∴P
3. N
2, Simp.
4. (N • O)  P
1, 3, M.P.
5. P
4, 2, M.P.
10. 1. E ∨~F
2. F ∨(E ∨G)
3. ~E
∴G
4. ~F
1, 3, D.S.
5. E ∨G
2, 4, D.S.
6. G
5, 3, D.S.
15. 1. (Z • A)  B
2. B  A
3. (B • A)  (A • B)
∴(Z • A)  (A • B)
4. B  (B • A)
2, Abs.
5. B  (A • B)
4, 3, H.S.
6. (Z • A)  (A • B)
1, 5, H.S.
425

Methods of Deduction
B.
5. 1. (Q  R) • (S  T)
2. (U  V) • (W  X)
3. Q ∨U
∴R ∨V
4. Q  R
1, Simp.
5. U  V
2, Simp.
6. (Q  R) • (U  V)
4, 5, Conj.
7. R ∨V
6, 3, C.D.
10.
1. (N ∨O)  P
2. (P ∨Q)  R
3. Q ∨N
4. ~Q
∴R
5. N
3, 4, D.S.
6. N ∨O
5, Add.
7. P
1, 6, M.P.
8. P ∨Q
7, Add.
9. R
2, 8, M.P.
C.
5. 1. C  R
2. (C • R)  B
3. (C  B)  ~S
4. S ∨M
∴M
5. C  (C • R)
1, Abs.
6. C  B
5, 2, H.S.
7. ~S
3, 6, M.P.
8. M
4, 7, D.S.
10.
1. O  ~M
2. O
3. B  ~N
4. B
5. (~M • ~N)  F
6. (B • F)  G
∴G
7. ~M
1, 2, M.P.
8. ~N
3, 4, M.P.
9. ~M • ~N
7, 8, Conj.
10. F
5, 9, M.P.
11. B • F
4, 10, Conj.
12. G
6, 11, M.P.
SECTION 6
Exercises
5. Material Equivalence (Equiv.)
10. Association (Assoc.)
15. Distribution (Dist.)
20. De Morgan’s Theorem (De M.)
SECTION 8
Exercises
A.
5. 3. 2, Dist.
4. 3, Com.
5. 4, Simp.
6. 5, Taut. 
7. 1, Assoc.
8. 7, 6, D.S. 
9. 8, Impl
10.
3. 2, Trans.
4. 3, Exp.
5. 1, D.N.
6. 5, Com.
7. 6, Dist.
8. 7, Com. 
9. 4, 8, C.D.
10. 9, Com.
11. 10, D.N.
12. 11, De M.
B.
5.
1. ~K ∨(L  M)
∴(K • L)  M
2. K  (L  M)
1, Impl.
3. (K • L)  M
2, Exp.
10. 1. Z  A
2. ~A ∨B
∴Z  B
3. A  B
2, Impl.
4. Z  B
1, 3, H.S.
15.
1. (O ∨P)  (Q ∨R)
2. P ∨O
∴Q ∨R
3. O ∨P
2, Com.
4. Q ∨R
1, 3, M.P.
20. 1. I  [J ∨(K ∨L)]
2. ~[(J ∨K) ∨L]
∴~I
3. ~[J ∨(K ∨L)]
2, Assoc.
4. ~I
1, 3, M.T.
426

Methods of Deduction
25.
1. A ∨B
2. C ∨D
∴[(A ∨B) • C] ∨[(A ∨B) • D]
3. (A ∨B) • (C ∨D)
1, 2, Conj.
4. [(A ∨B) • C] ∨
[(A ∨B) • D]
3, Dist.
30. 1. ~[(B  ~C) • (~C  B)]
2. (D • E)  (B  ~C)
∴~(D • E)
3. ~(B  ~C)
1, Equiv.
4. ~(D • E)
2, 3, M.T.
C.
5.
1. [(K ∨L) ∨M] ∨N
∴(N ∨K) ∨(L ∨M)
2. [K ∨(L ∨M)] ∨N
1, Assoc.
3. N ∨[K ∨(L ∨M)]
2, Com.
4. (N ∨K) ∨(L ∨M)
3, Assoc.
10. 1. (Z ∨A) ∨B
2. ~A
∴Z ∨B
3. (A ∨Z) ∨B
1, Com.
4. A ∨(Z ∨B)
3, Assoc.
5. Z ∨B
4, 2, D.S.
15.
1. [R  (S  T)] • [(R • T)  U]
2. R • (S ∨T)
∴T ∨U
3. (R • S) ∨(R • T)
2, Dist.
4. [(R • S)  T] • 
[(R • T)  U]
1, Exp.
5. T ∨U
4, 3, C.D.
D.
5.
1. K  L
∴K  (L ∨M)
2. ~K ∨L
1, Impl.
3. (~K ∨L) ∨M
2, Add.
4. ~K ∨(L ∨M)
3, Assoc.
5. K  (L ∨M)
4, Impl.
10. 1. Z  A
2. Z ∨A
∴A
3. A ∨Z
2, Com.
4. ~~A ∨Z
3, D.N.
5. ~A  Z
4, Impl.
6. ~A  A
5, 1, H.S.
7. ~~A ∨A
6, Impl.
8. A ∨A
7, D.N.
9. A
8, Taut.
1.
1. A  ~B
2. ~(C • ~A)
∴C  ~B
3. ~C ∨~~A
2, De M.
4. C  ~~A
3, Impl.
5. C  A
4, D.N.
6. C  ~B
5, 1, H.S.
5. 1. [(M • N) • O]  P
2. Q  [(O • M) • N]
∴~Q ∨P
3. [O • (M • N)]  P
1, Com.
4. [(O • M) • N]  P
3, Assoc.
5. Q  P
2, 4, H.S.
6. ~Q ∨P
5, Impl.
E.
10.
1. [H ∨(I ∨J)]  (K  J)
2. L  [I ∨(J ∨H)]
∴(L • K)  J
3. [(I ∨J) ∨H]  (K  J)
1, Com.
4. [I ∨(J ∨H)]  (K  J)
3, Assoc.
5. L  (K  J)
2, 4 H.S.
6. (L • K)  J
5, Exp.
15.
1. (Z  Z)  (A  A)
2. (A  A)  (Z  Z)
∴A  A
427

Methods of Deduction
3. [(Z  Z)  (A  A)] ∨~A
1, Add.
4. ~A ∨[(Z  Z)  (A  A)]
3, Com.
5. A  [(Z  Z)  (A  A)]
4, Impl.
6. A  {A • [(Z  Z)  (A  A)]}
5, Abs.
7. ~A ∨{A • [(Z  Z)  (A  A)]}
6, Impl.
8. (~A ∨A) • {~A ∨[(Z  Z)  (A  A)]}
7, Dist.
9. ~A ∨A
8, Simp.
10. A  A
9, Impl.
20.
1. (R ∨S)  (T • U)
2. ~R  (V  ~V)
3. ~T
∴~V
4. ~T ∨~U
3, Add.
5. ~(T • U)
4, De M.
6. ~(R ∨S)
1, 5, M.T.
7. ~R • ~S
6, De M.
8. ~R
7, Simp.
9. V  ~V
2, 8, M.P.
10. ~V ∨~V
9, Impl.
11. ~V
10, Taut.
F.
1.
1. ~N ∨A
2. N
∴A
3. N  A
1, Impl.
4. A
3, 2, M.P.
5. 1. R  A
∴R  (A ∨W)
2. ~R ∨A
1, Impl.
3. (~R ∨A) ∨W
2, Add.
4. ~R ∨(A ∨W)
3, Assoc.
5. R  (A ∨W)
4, Impl.
10.
1. (G • S)  D
2. (S  D)  P
3. G
∴P
4. G  (S  D)
1, Exp.
5. S  D
4, 3, M.P.
6. P
2, 5, M.P.
15. 1. M  ~C
2. ~C  ~A
3. D ∨A
∴~M ∨D
4. M  ~A
1, 2, H.S.
5. A ∨D
3, Com.
6. ~~A ∨D
5, D.N.
7. ~A  D
6, Impl.
8. M  D
4, 7, H.S.
9. ~M ∨D
8, Impl.
20.
1. P  ~M
2. C  M
3. ~L ∨C
4. (~P  ~E) • (~E  ~C)
5. P ∨~P
∴~L
6. (~E  ~C) • (~P  ~E)
4, Com.
7. ~P  ~E
4, Simp.
8. ~E  ~C
6, Simp.
9. ~P  ~C
7, 8, H.S.
10. ~M  ~C
2, Trans.
11. P  ~C
1, 10, H.S.
12. (P  ~C) • (~P  ~C)
11, 9, Conj.
13. ~C ∨~C
12, 5, C.D.
14. ~C
13, Taut.
15. C ∨~L
3, Com.
16. ~L
15, 14, D.S.
428

Methods of Deduction
G.
5.
1. (H ∨~H)  G
∴G
2. [(H ∨~H)  G] ∨~H
1, Add.
3. ~H ∨[(H ∨~H)  G]
2, Com.
4. H  [(H ∨~H)  G]
3, Impl.
5. H  {H • [(H ∨~H)  G]}
4, Abs.
6. ~H ∨{H • [(H ∨~H)  G]}
5, Impl.
7. (~H ∨H) • {~H ∨[(H ∨~H)  G]}
6, Dist.
8. ~H ∨H
7, Simp.
9. H ∨~H
8, Com.
10. G
1, 9, M.P.
SECTION 10
Exercises
A.
1.
1. (A  B) • (C  D)
∴(A • C)  (B ∨D)
2. A  B
1, Simp.
3. ~A ∨B
2, Impl.
4. (~A ∨B) ∨D
3, Add.
5. ~A ∨(B ∨D)
4, Assoc.
6. [~A ∨(B ∨D)] ∨~C
5, Add.
7. ~C ∨[~A ∨(B ∨D)]
6, Com.
8. (~C ∨~A) ∨(B ∨D)
7, Assoc.
9. (~A ∨~C) ∨(B ∨D)
8, Com.
10.
~(A • C) ∨(B ∨D)
9, De M.
11. (A • C)  (B ∨D)
10, Impl.
5.
X Y Z A B C
t
f
t
f
t
f
10.
A B C D E F G
f
f
t
t
f
t
t
or
f
f
t
f
f
t
t
or
f
f
f
t
f
t
t
or
f
f
f
f
f
t
t
SECTION 9
Exercises
A
B
C D
f
f
f
t
1.
10.
5.
S T U V W X
t
f
f
t
t
t
A B C D E F G H
I
J
t
t
f
t
f
t
f
t
f
t
or
f
t
t
t
f
t
f
t
f
t
or
f
t
f
t
f
t
f
t
f
t
or any of thirteen other truth-value assignments.
429

Methods of Deduction
B.
1.
1. C  (M  D)
2. D  V
3. (D  A) • ~A
∴M  ~C
4. D  A
3, Simp.
5. ~A • (D  A)
3, Com.
6. ~A
5, Simp.
7. ~D
4, 6, M.T.
8. (C • M)  D
1, Exp.
9. ~(C • M)
8, 7, M.T.
10. ~C ∨~M
9, De M.
11. ~M ∨~C
10, Com.
12. M  ~C
11, Impl.
5.
(I • S)  (G • P)
[(S • ~I)  A] • (A  P)
I  S
∴P
proved invalid by
or
10.
(H  A) • (F  C)
A  (F • E)
(O  C) • (O  M)
P  (M  D)
P • (D  G)
∴H  G
proved invalid by
15.
1. (J ∨A)  [(S ∨K)  (~I • Y)]
2. (~I ∨~M)  E
∴J  (S  E)
3. ~(J ∨A) ∨[(S ∨K)  (~I • Y)]
1, Impl.
4. [(S ∨K)  (~I • Y)] ∨~(J ∨A)
3, Com.
5. [(S ∨K)  (~I • Y)] ∨(~J • ~A)
4, De M.
6. {[(S ∨K)  (~I • Y)] ∨~J} •
{[(S ∨K)  (~I • Y)] ∨~A}
5, Dist.
7. [(S ∨K)  (~I • Y)] ∨~J
6, Simp.
8. [~(S ∨K) ∨(~I • Y)] ∨~J
7, Impl.
9. ~(S ∨K) ∨[(~I • Y) ∨~J]
8, Assoc.
10. [(~I • Y) ∨~J] ∨~(S ∨K)
9, Com.
11. [(~I • Y) ∨~J] ∨(~S • ~K)
10, De M.
12. {[(~I • Y) ∨~J] ∨~S} •
{[(~I • Y) ∨~J] ∨~K}
11, Dist.
13. [(~I • Y) ∨~J] ∨~S
12, Simp.
14. (~I • Y) ∨(~J ∨~S)
13, Assoc.
15. (~J ∨~S) ∨(~I • Y)
14, Com.
16. [(~J ∨~S) ∨~I] • [(~J ∨~S) ∨Y]
15, Dist.
17. (~J ∨~S) ∨~I
16, Simp.
18. [(~J ∨~S) ∨~I] ∨~M
17, Add.
19. (~J ∨~S) ∨(~I ∨~M)
18, Assoc.
20. ~(J • S) ∨(~I ∨~M)
19, De M.
21. (J • S)  (~I ∨~M)
20, Impl.
22. (J • S)  E
21, 2, H.S.
23. J  (S  E)
22, Exp.
H A C F E O M P D G
t
t
t
t
t
f
f
t
f
f
I
S G P A
f
f
t
f
f
f
f
f
f
f
430

Methods of Deduction
5. 1. (R ∨~R)  W
∴W
2. [(R ∨~R)  W] ∨~R
1, Add.
3. ~R ∨[(R ∨~R)  W]
2, Com.
4. R  [(R ∨~R)  W]
3, Impl.
5. R  {R • [(R ∨~R)  W]}
4, Abs.
6. ~R ∨{R • [(R ∨~R)  W]}
5, Impl.
7. (~R ∨R) • {~R ∨[(R ∨~R)  W]}
6, Dist.
8. ~R ∨R
7, Simp.
9. R ∨~R
8, Com.
10. W
1, 9, M.P.
SECTION 11
Exercises
A.
5. 1. D  (Z  Y)
!8. Z  Y
1, 7, M.P.
2. Z  (Y  ~Z)
!9. Z • D
6, Com.
∴~D ∨~Z
!10. Z
9, Simp.
!3. ~(~D ∨~Z)
I.P. (Indirect Proof)
!11. Y  ~ Z
2, 10, M.P.
!4. ~~D • ~~Z
3, De M.
!12. Y
8, 10, M.P.
!5. D • ~~Z
4, D.N.
!13. ~ Z
11, 12, M.P.
!6. D • Z
5, D.N.
!14. Z •~ Z
10, 13, Conj.
!7. D
6, Simp.
C.
431

This page intentionally left blank 

Quantification Theory
1
The Need for Quantification
2
Singular Propositions
3
Universal and Existential Quantifiers
4
Traditional Subject–Predicate Propositions
5
Proving Validity
6
Proving Invalidity
7
Asyllogistic Inference
1
The Need for Quantification
Many valid deductive arguments cannot be tested using the logical techniques of
the preceding two chapters. Therefore we must now enhance our analytical
tools. We do this with quantification, a twentieth-century development chiefly
credited to Gottlob Frege (1848–1945), a great German logician and the founder
of modern logic. His discovery of quantification has been called the deepest sin-
gle technical advance ever made in logic.
Gottlob Frege
O
ne of the founders of modern symbolic logic, and also of analytic
philosophy, Gottlob Frege (1848–1925) began as a mathematician.
He came to believe that mathematics grows out of logic, and
sought to devise the symbolic language with which this could be
shown. 
Frege was born in Wismar, a Hanseatic seaport in Germany east
of Hamburg, the son of creative schoolmasters. His interest in the
logic of language was first stimulated by his father’s textbook
designed to teach German teenagers the deep structure of their lan-
guage. Frege studied mathematics and physics at the University of
Jena, becoming a close friend of his teachers there. The great center for
the study of mathematics in those days was the University of
Göttingen, where Frege continued his studies, obtaining his doctorate
in geometry in 1873.
It was logic, however, that became his consuming interest. His
great work is called Concept Script [Begriffsschrift]: A Formal Language
for Pure Thought, Modeled on that of Arithmetic (1879). The problem he
confronted can be seen in this way: Logicians had long dealt with the basic
connectives by which propositions are tied together—and, or, if...then, —but
Biography
From Chapter 10 of Introduction to Logic, Fourteenth Edition. Irving M. Copi, Carl Cohen, Kenneth McMahon. 
Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Prentice Hall. All rights reserved.
Pictorial Press Ltd/Alamy Images
This asset is
intentionally omitted
from this text. It may
be accessed at
www.mcescher.com.
(Belvedere by 
M.C. Escher)

they had not yet devised the language with which to express fully, and to
manipulate, expressions involving the concepts “some” and “all.” Propositions
having forms like “Some women overcome every hurdle,” and “Some hurdles
are overcome by every woman,” as they might occur in argument, did not
yield to the logical language then at hand. A new way to express these con-
cepts accurately, a new Begriffsschrift, had to be invented.
Frege did this. Within this new formal language his development of
quantification, explained and applied in this chapter, became a turning point in
modern logic. Virtually all twentieth-century logicians were influenced by
Frege’s work. His larger objective was to show how logic provides the most
fundamental principles of all inference, an enterprise later advanced by
Bertrand Russell, with whom he corresponded. In Frege’s Foundations of
Arithmetic (1884) he sought to explain these connections in non-symbolic
terms; later, in his Basic Laws of Arithmetic (1893 and 1903), he advanced the
great project by building upon symbolic axioms derived from his earlier
Concept Script.
Is the quality of a logician’s work to be judged in the light of his
character and political views? Bitter and introverted, Frege hated Catholics,
hated the French, hated socialists, and above all hated the Jews, whose 
total expulsion from Germany he actually helped to plan. In his diary 
he made it clear that Adolf Hitler was his hero. Frege died in 1925, a 
loyal Nazi.
Quantification Theory
To understand how quantification increases the power of logical analysis, we
must recognize the limitations of the methods we have developed so far. The
preceding chapters have shown that we can test deductive arguments effective-
ly—but only arguments of one certain type, those whose validity depends entire-
ly on the ways in which simple statements are truth-functionally combined into
compound statements. Applying elementary argument forms and the rule of re-
placement, we draw inferences that permit us to discriminate valid from invalid
arguments of that type. This we have done extensively.
When we confront arguments built of propositions that are not compound,
however, those techniques are not adequate; they cannot reach the critical ele-
ments in the reasoning process. Consider, for example, the ancient argument
All humans are mortal.
Socrates is human.
Therefore Socrates is mortal.*
*It was to arguments of this type that the classical or Aristotelian logic was primarily devoted. Those tradition-
al methods, however, do not possess the generality or power of the newer symbolic logic and cannot be ex-
tended to cover all deductive arguments of the kinds we are likely to confront.
434

This argument is obviously valid. However, using the methods so far intro-
duced we can only symbolize it as
and on this analysis it appears not to be valid. What is wrong here? The difficul-
ty arises from the fact that the validity of this argument, which is intuitively
clear, depends on the inner logical structure of its premises, and that inner struc-
ture cannot be revealed by the system we have developed thus far for symboliz-
ing statements. The symbolization immediately above, plainly too blunt, is the
best we can do without quantifiers. That is because the propositions in this valid
argument are not compound, and the techniques presented thus far, which are
designed to deal with compound statements, cannot deal adequately with non-
compound statements. A method is needed with which noncompound state-
ments can be described and symbolized in such a way that their inner logical
structure will be revealed. The theory of quantification provides that method.
Quantification enables us to interpret noncompound premises as compound
statements, without loss of meaning. With that interpretation we can then use all
the elementary argument forms and the rule of replacement (as we have done with
compound statements), drawing inferences and proving validity or invalidity—
after which the compound conclusion reached may be transformed (again using
quantification) back into the noncompound form with which we began. This tech-
nique adds very greatly to the power of our analytical machinery.
The methods of deduction developed earlier remain fundamental; quanti-
fiers do not alter the rules of inference in any way. What has gone before may be
called the logic of propositions. We now proceed, using some additional symbol-
ization, to apply these rules of inference more widely, in what is called the logic of
predicates. The inner structure of propositions—the relations of subjects and
predicates—is brought to the surface and made accessible by quantifiers. Intro-
ducing this symbolization is the next essential step.
2
Singular Propositions
We begin with the simplest kind of noncompound statement, illustrated by the
second premise of the illustrative argument above, “Socrates is human.” State-
ments of this kind have traditionally been called singular propositions. An
affirmative singular proposition asserts that a particular individual has some
specified attribute. “Socrates” is the subject term in the present example (as ordi-
nary grammar and traditional logic both agree), and “human” is the predicate
term. The subject term denotes a particular individual; the predicate term desig-
nates some attribute that individual is said to have.
The same subject term, obviously, can occur in different singular proposi-
tions. One may assert that “Socrates is mortal,” or “Socrates is fat,” or “Socrates
is wise,” or “Socrates is beautiful.” Of these assertions, some are true (the first
and the third), and some are false (the second and fourth). Similarly, the very
‹ M
H
A
Quantification Theory
Quantification
A method for describing
and symbolizing
noncompound
statements by reference
to their inner logical
structure; the modern
theory used in the
analysis of what were
traditionally called A, E,
I, and O propositions.
Affirmative singular
proposition
A proposition in which it
is asserted that a
particular individual has
some specified attribute.
435

same predicate term can occur in different singular propositions. The term
human is a predicate that appears in each of the following: “Aristotle is human,”
“Brazil is human,” “Chicago is human,” and “O’Keeffe is human”—of which the
first and fourth are true, while the second and third are false.
An “individual” in this symbolism can refer not only to persons, but to any
individual thing, such as a country, a book, a city, or anything of which an
attribute (such as “human” or “heavy”) can be predicated. Attributes do not have
to be adjectives (such as “mortal” or “wise”) as in our examples thus far, but can
also be nouns (such as “a human”). In grammar the distinction between adjective
and noun is important, of course, but in this context it is not significant. We do
not need to distinguish between “Socrates is mortal” and “Socrates is a mortal.”
Predicates can also be verbs, as in “Aristotle writes,” which can be expressed al-
ternatively as “Aristotle is a writer.” The critical first step is to distinguish be-
tween the subject and the predicate terms, between the individuals and the
attributes they may be said to have. We next introduce two different kinds of
symbols for referring to individuals and to attributes.
To denote individuals we use (following a very widely adopted convention)
small, or lowercase, letters, from a through w. These symbols are individual
constants. In any particular context in which they may occur, each will desig-
nate one particular individual throughout the whole of that context. It is usual-
ly convenient to denote an individual by the first letter of its (or his or her)
name. We may use the letter s to denote Socrates, a to denote Aristotle, b to denote
Brazil, c to denote Chicago, and so forth.
Capital letters are used to symbolize attributes that individuals may have,
and again it is convenient to use the first letter of the attribute referred to: H for
human, M for mortal, F for fat, W for wise, and so forth.
Singular propositions can now be symbolized. By writing an attribute
symbol immediately to the left of an individual symbol, we symbolize the singular
proposition affirming that the individual named has the attribute specified. Thus
the singular proposition, “Socrates is human,” will be symbolized simply as Hs.
Of course, Ha symbolizes “Aristotle is human,” Hb symbolizes “Brazil is
human,” Hc symbolizes “Chicago is human,” and so forth.
It is important to note the pattern that is common to these terms. Each begins
with the same attribute symbol, H, and is followed by a symbol for some individ-
ual, s or a or b or c, and so forth. We could write the pattern as “H—”, where the
dash to the right of the predicate symbol is a place marker for some individual
symbol. This pattern we symbolize as Hx. We use Hx [sometimes written as H(x)]
to symbolize the common pattern of all singular propositions that attribute
“being human” to some individual. The letter x is called an individual
variable—it is simply a place marker, indicating where the various individual
letters a through w (the individual constants) may be written. When one of those
constants does appear in place of x, we have a singular proposition. The letter x
is available to serve as the variable because, by convention, a through w are the
only letters we allow to serve as individual constants.
Let us examine the symbol Hx more closely. It is called a propositional function.
We define a propositional function as an expression that (1) contains an individ-
Quantification Theory
Individual constant
A symbol (by
convention, normally a
lower case letter, a
through w) used in
logical notation to
denote an individual.
Individual variable
A symbol (by
convention, normally the
lower case x or y) that
serves as a placeholder
for an individual
constant. 
Propositional function
In quantification theory,
an expression that
contains an individual
variable and becomes a
statement when that
variable is replaced with
an individual constant. A
propositional function
can also become a
statement by the
process of
generalization.
436

ual variable and (2) becomes a statement when an individual constant is substitut-
ed for the individual variable.* So a propositional function is not itself a proposi-
tion, although it can become one by substitution. Individual constants may be
thought of as the proper names of individuals. Any singular proposition is a sub-
stitution instance of a propositional function; it is the result of substituting some in-
dividual constant for the individual variable in that propositional function.
A propositional function normally has some true substitution instances and
some false substitution instances. If H symbolizes human, s symbolizes Socrates,
and c symbolizes Chicago, then Hs is true and Hc is false. With the substitution
made, what confronts us is a proposition; before the substitution is made, we
have only the propositional function. There are an unlimited number of such
propositional functions, of course: Hx, and Mx, and Bx, and Fx, and Wx, and so
on. We call these propositional functions simple predicates, to distinguish them
from more complex propositional functions to be introduced in following sec-
tions. A simple predicate is a propositional function that has some true and some
false substitution instances, each of which is an affirmative singular proposition.
3
Universal and Existential Quantifiers
A singular proposition affirms that some individual thing has a given predicate,
so it is the substitution instance of some propositional function. If the predicate is
M for mortal, or B for beautiful, we have the simple predicates Mx or Bx, which
assert humanity or beauty of nothing in particular. If we substitute Socrates for
the variable x, we get singular propositions, “Socrates is mortal,” or “Socrates is
beautiful.” But we might wish to assert that the attribute in question is possessed
by more than a single individual. We might wish to say that “Everything is mor-
tal,” or that “Something is beautiful.” These expressions contain predicate terms,
but they are not singular propositions because they do not refer specifically to
any particular individuals. These are general propositions.
Let us look closely at the first of these general propositions, “Everything is
mortal.” It may be expressed in various ways that are logically equivalent. We
could express it by saying “All things are mortal.” We could express it by saying:
Given any individual thing whatever, it is mortal.
In this latter formulation the word “it” is a pronoun that refers back to the word
“thing” that precedes it. We can use the letter x, our individual variable, in place
of both the pronoun and its antecedent. So we can rewrite the first general
proposition as
Given any x, x is mortal.
Alternatively, using the notation for predicates we introduced in the preceding
section, we may write
Given any x, Mx.
Quantification Theory
Simple predicate
In quantification theory,
a propositional function
having some true and
some false substitution
instances, each of which
is an affirmative singular
proposition.
*Some writers regard “propositional functions” as the meanings of such expressions, but here we define
them to be the expressions themselves.
437

We know that Mx is a propositional function, not a proposition. But here, in
this last formulation, we have an expression that contains Mx, and that clearly is
a proposition. The phrase “Given any x” is customarily symbolized by “(x)”,
which is called the universal quantifier. That first general proposition may now
be completely symbolized as
(x) Mx
which says “Everything is mortal.”
This analysis shows that we can convert a propositional function into a
proposition not only by substitution, but also by generalization, or quantification.
Quantification Theory
Universal quantifier In
quantification theory, a
symbol, (x), used before
a propositional function
to assert that the
predicate following the
symbol is true of
everything. Thus “(x) Fx”
means “Given any x, F is
true of it.”
Alfred North Whitehead
A
lfred North Whitehead was born in 1861 in Ramsgate, Kent, England,
the son of an Anglican minister. After graduating from a prestigious
“public” school, he studied mathematics at Trinity College,
Cambridge, eventually becoming a Fellow of that College. The famous econo-
mist, John Maynard Keynes, was one of his students in mathematics
there. Another of his students, Bertrand Russell, was later to become his
collaborator and co-author.
Together, Whitehead and Russell produced, after the labor of a
decade, the highly influential treatise, Principia Mathematica, in three vol-
umes: 1910, 1912, and 1913. In this work the derivation of mathematics
from basic logical principles, earlier attempted by Gottlob Frege in Ger-
many, was at last carried out. That joint product is one of the most signif-
icant achievements of twentieth-century logic.
The friendship of Whitehead and Russell was split sharply by politi-
cal differences. Whitehead had three sons, one of whom was killed in the
First World War. Russell was a pacifist who actively objected to British
participation in the war. The two authors were divided deeply and per-
manently. When a new edition of Principia Mathematica was published in
1927, Whitehead refused to contribute to it.
After a full career teaching mathematics and logic at Cambridge University,
and then in London, Whitehead turned to the development of metaphysical and
historical themes. In 1924 he was invited to Harvard to teach philosophy; he did
so, and spent the remainder of his life in America. Science and the Modern World
(1925) was his penetrating account of the role of science and mathematics in the
rise of Western civilization. Process and Reality (1929) presented his metaphysical
views, in which, in the tradition of the ancient philosopher Heraclitus, “all things
flow,” and nothing is stable. Truths, he therefore thought, could be no more than
half-truths. But it is as creative logician, and as Russell’s collaborator in the writ-
ing of Principia Mathematica, that he is best known. Whitehead died in
Cambridge, Massachusetts, in 1947. 
Biography
© Hulton-Deutsch Collection/
CORBIS All Rights Reserved
438

Consider now the second general proposition we had entertained: “Some-
thing is beautiful.” This may also be expressed as
There is at least one thing that is beautiful.
In this latter formulation, the word “that” is a relative pronoun referring to the
word “thing.” Using our individual variable x once again in place of both the
pronoun “that” and its antecedent “thing,” we may rewrite the second general
proposition as
There is at least one x such that x is beautiful.
Or, using the notation for predicates, we may write
There is at least one x such that Bx.
Once again we see that, although Bx is a propositional function and not a
proposition, we have here an expression that contains Bx that is a proposition.
The phrase “there is at least one x such that” is customarily symbolized as “
”;
the 
is called the existential quantifier. Thus the second general proposition
may be completely symbolized as
which says “Something is beautiful.”
Thus we see that propositions may be formed from propositional functions
either by instantiation, that is, by substituting an individual constant for its indi-
vidual variable, or by generalization, that is, by placing a universal or existential
quantifier before the propositional function.
Now consider: The universal quantification of a propositional function,
(x)Mx, is true if and only if all the substitution instances of the function are true;
that is what universality means here. It is also clear that the existential quantifica-
tion of a propositional function, 
, is true if and only if its propositional
function has at least one true substitution instance. To understand quantified
propositions and how they relate to one another, we will show how the tradition-
al square of opposition can be represented in terms of quantified propositions. To
do this, for the rest of this section we will assume (what no one will deny) that
there exists at least one individual. Under this very weak assumption, every
propositional function must have at least one substitution instance, an instance
that may or may not be true. But it is certain that, under this assumption, if the
universal quantification of a propositional function is true, then the existential
quantification of it must also be true. That is, if every x is M, then, if there exists
at least one thing, that thing is M.
Up to this point, only affirmative singular propositions have been given as
substitution instances of propositional functions. Mx (x is mortal) is a proposi-
tional function. Ms is an instance of it, an affirmative singular proposition that
says “Socrates is mortal.” But not all propositions are affirmative. One may deny
that Socrates is mortal, saying ~Ms, “Socrates is not mortal.” If Ms is a substitu-
tion instance of Mx, then ~Ms may be regarded as a substitution instance of the
(x)Mx
(x)Bx

x
Quantification Theory
Existential quantifier
In quantification theory,
a symbol, , used
before a propositional
function to assert that
the function has one or
more true substitution
instances. Thus “
”
means “there exists an x
such that F is true of it.”
(x)Fx

Generalization
In quantification theory,
the process of forming a
proposition from a
propositional function by
placing a universal
quantifier or an
existential quantifier
before it.
Instantiation
In quantification theory,
the process of
substituting an individual
constant for an
individual variable,
thereby converting a
propositional function
into a proposition.
439

propositional function ~Mx. Thus we may enlarge our conception of proposi-
tional functions, beyond the simple predicates introduced in the preceding sec-
tion, to permit them to contain the negation symbol, “~”.
With the negation symbol at our disposal, we may now enrich our under-
standing of quantification as follows. We begin with the general proposition
Nothing is perfect.
which we can paraphrase as
Everything is imperfect.
which in turn may be written as
Given any individual thing whatever, it is not perfect.
which can be rewritten as
Given any x, x is not perfect.
If P symbolizes the attribute of being perfect, we can use the notation just devel-
oped (the quantifier and the negation sign) to express this proposition (“Nothing
is perfect.”) as (x)~Px.
Now we are in a position to list and illustrate a series of important connec-
tions between universal and existential quantification.
First, the (universal) general proposition “Everything is mortal” is denied by
the (existential) general proposition “Something is not mortal.” Using symbols,
we may say that (x)Mx is denied by 
. Because each of these is the denial
of the other, we may certainly say (prefacing the one with a negation symbol)
that the biconditional

T
is necessarily, logically true.
Second, “Everything is mortal” expresses exactly what is expressed by
“There is nothing that is not mortal”—which may be formulated as another bi-
conditional, also logically true:

T
Third, it is clear that the (universal) general proposition, “Nothing is mortal,” is
denied by the (existential) general proposition, “Something is mortal.” In symbols
we say that (x)~Mx is denied by 
. And because each of these is the denial
of the other, we may certainly say (again prefacing the one with a negation sym-
bol) that the biconditional

T
is necessarily, logically true.
(x)Mx
'(x)'Mx
(x)Mx
'(x)'Mx
(x)Mx
(x)'Mx
'(x)Mx
(x)'Mx
Quantification Theory
440

Fourth, “Everything is not mortal” expresses exactly what is expressed by
“There is nothing that is mortal”—which may be formulated as a logically true
biconditional:

T
These four logically true biconditionals set forth the interrelations of universal
and existential quantifiers. We may replace any proposition in which the quanti-
fier is prefaced by a negation sign (using these logically true biconditionals) with
another logically equivalent proposition in which the quantifier is not prefaced
by a negation sign. We list these four biconditionals again, now replacing the il-
lustrative predicate M (for mortal) with the symbol 
(the Greek letter phi),
which will stand for any simple predicate whatsoever.
£
'(x)Mx
(x)'Mx
Quantification Theory
Contradictories
Contrad    ictories
Contraries
Subcontraries
(x)Φx
(x)Φx
(∃x)Φx
(∃x)Φx
Figure 1
Continuing to assume the existence of at least one individual, we can say,
referring to this square, that:
1. The two top propositions are contraries; that is, they may both be false
but they cannot both be true.
2. The two bottom propositions are subcontraries; that is, they may both be
true but they cannot both be false.
3. Propositions that are at opposite ends of the diagonals are
contradictories, of which one must be true and the other must be false.
4. On each side of the square, the truth of the lower proposition is implied
by the truth of the proposition directly above it.

T

T

T

T
Graphically, the general connections between universal and existential quantifi-
cation can be described in terms of the square array shown in Figure 1.
['(x)£x]
[(x)'£x]
['(x)'£x]
[(x)£x]
['(x)'£x]
[(x)£x]
['(x)£x]
[(x)'£x]
441

4
Traditional Subject–Predicate Propositions
Using the existential and universal quantifiers, and with an understanding of the
square of opposition in Figure 1, we are now in a position to analyze (and to use
accurately in reasoning) the four types of general propositions that have been
traditionally emphasized in the study of logic. The standard illustrations of these
four types are the following:
Quantification Theory
All humans are mortal. (universal affirmative: A)
No humans are mortal. (universal negative: E)
Some humans are mortal. (particular affirmative: I)
Some humans are not mortal. (particular negative: O)
Each of these types is commonly referred to by its letter: the two affirmative
propositions, A and I (from the Latin affirmo, “I affirm”); and the two negative
propositions, E and O (from the Latin nego, “I deny”).
In symbolizing these propositions by means of quantifiers, we are led to a
further enlargement of our conception of a propositional function. Turning first
to the A proposition, “All humans are mortal,” we proceed by means of succes-
sive paraphrasings, beginning with
Given any individual thing whatever, if it is human then it is mortal.
The two instances of the pronoun “it” clearly refer to their common antecedent,
the word “thing.” As in the early part of the preceding section, because those
three words have the same (indefinite) reference, they can be replaced by the let-
ter x and the proposition rewritten as
Given any x, if x is human then x is mortal.
Now using our previously introduced notation for “if–then,” we can rewrite the
preceding as
Given any x, x is human
is mortal.
Finally, using our now-familiar notation for propositional functions and quanti-
fiers, the original A proposition is expressed as
In our symbolic translation, the A proposition appears as the universal quantifica-
tion of a new kind of propositional function. The expression 
is a propo-
sitional function that has as its substitution instances neither affirmative nor
negative singular propositions, but conditional statements whose antecedents
and consequents are singular propositions that have the same subject term.
Among the substitution instances of the propositional function 
are the
conditional statements 
, 
, 
, 
, and so on.
There are also propositional functions whose substitution instances are con-
junctions of singular propositions that have the same subject terms. Thus the con-
junctions 
, 
, 
, 
, and so on, are substitution instances
Hd# Md
Hc# Mc
Hb# Mb
Ha# Ma
Hd ) Md
Hc ) Mc
Hb ) Mb
Ha ) Ma
Hx ) Mx
Hx ) Mx
(x)(Hx ) Mx)
) x
442

of the propositional function 
. There are also propositional functions such
as 
, whose substitution instances are disjunctions such as 
and
. In fact, any truth-functionally compound statement whose simple com-
ponent statements are singular propositions that all have the same subject term
may be regarded as a substitution instance of a propositional function containing
some or all of the various truth-functional connectives and operators (dot, wedge,
horseshoe, three-bar equivalence, and curl), in addition to the simple predicates
Ax, Bx, Cx, Dx, . . . . In our translation of the A proposition as 
, the
parentheses serve as punctuation marks. They indicate that the universal quanti-
fier (x) “applies to” or “has within its scope” the entire (complex) propositional
function 
.
Before going on to discuss the other traditional forms of categorical proposi-
tions, it should be observed that our symbolic formula 
translates
not only the standard-form proposition, “All H’s are M’s,” but any other English
sentence that has the same meaning. When, for example, a character in Henrik
Ibsen’s play, Love’s Comedy, says, “A friend married is a friend lost,” that is just
another way of saying, “All friends who marry are friends who are lost.” There
are many ways, in English, of saying the same thing.
Here is a list, not exhaustive, of different ways in which we commonly ex-
press universal affirmative propositions in English:
H’s are M’s.
An H is an M.
Every H is M.
Each H is M.
Any H is M.
No H’s are not M.
Everything that is H is M.
Anything that is H is M.
If anything is H, it is M.
If something is H, it is M.
Whatever is H is M.
H’s are all M’s.
Nothing is an H unless it is an M.
Nothing is an H but not an M.
To evaluate an argument we must understand the language in which the
propositions of that argument are expressed. Some English idioms are a little
misleading, using a temporal term when no reference to time is intended. Thus
the proposition, “H’s are always M’s,” is ordinarily understood to mean simply
that all H’s are M’s. Again, the same meaning may be expressed using abstract
nouns: “Humanity implies (or entails) mortality” is correctly symbolized as an
A proposition. That the language of symbolic logic has a single expression for
the common meaning of a considerable number of English sentences may be
regarded as an advantage of symbolic logic over English for cognitive or
(x)(Hx ) Mx)
Hx ) Mx
(x)(Hx ) Mx)
Wb ¡ Bb
Wa ¡ Ba
Wx ¡ Bx
Hx# Mx
Quantification Theory
443

informative purposes—although admittedly a disadvantage from the point of
view of rhetorical power or poetic expressiveness.
Quantification Theory
Quantification of the A Proposition
The A proposition, “All humans are mortal,” asserts that if anything is a human,
then it is mortal. In other words, for any given thing x, if x is a human, then x is mor-
tal. Substituting the horseshoe symbol for “if–then,” we get
Given any x, x is a human 
is mortal.
In the notation for propositional functions and quantifiers this becomes
(x) [Hx ) Mx]
) x
Quantification of the E Proposition
The E proposition, “No humans are mortals,” asserts that if anything is human,
then it is not mortal. In other words, for any given thing x, if x is a human, then x is
not mortal. Substituting the horseshoe symbol for “if–then,” we get:
Given any x, x is a human 
is not mortal.
In the notation for propositional functions and quantifiers, this becomes
This symbolic translation expresses not only the traditional E form in English,
but also such diverse ways of saying the same thing as “There are no H’s that are
M,” “Nothing is both an H and an M,” and “H’s are never M.”
(x) [Hx ) 'Mx]
) x
Quantification of the I Proposition
The I proposition, “Some humans are mortal,” asserts that there is at least one thing
that is a human and is mortal. In other words, there is at least one x such that x is a
human and x is mortal. Substituting the dot symbol for conjunction, we get
There is at least one x such that x is a human 
is mortal.
In the notation for propositional functions and quantifiers, this becomes
(x) [Hx# Mx]
# x
Quantification of the O Proposition
The O proposition, “Some humans are not mortal,” asserts that there is at least
one thing that is a human and is not mortal. In other words, there is at least one x
such that x is human and x is not mortal. Substituting the dot symbol for conjunc-
tion we get
There is at least one x such that x is a human 
is not mortal.
In the notation for propositional functions and quantifiers, this becomes
(x) [Hx# 'Mx]
# x
444

Where the Greek letters phi
and psi
are used to represent any predi-
cates whatever, the four general subject–predicate propositions of traditional
logic may be represented in a square array as shown in Figure 2.
(°)
(£)
Quantification Theory
Contradictories
Contrad    ictories
A
E
I
O
(x) (Φx ⊃ x)
(x) (Φx ⊃ x)
(∃x) (Φx •  x)
(∃x) (Φx •  x)
Figure 2
Thus far we have worked under the weak assumption that there exists at least
one individual. Under this assumption, we expect an I proposition to follow from
its corresponding A proposition, and an O from its corresponding E. But in fact our
new formulation of universal categorical propositions as conditionals neatly incor-
porates the Boolean interpretation so that, say, an A proposition may very well be
true while its corresponding I proposition is false. This we will now explain.
Where 
is a propositional function that has no true substitution instances,
then no matter what kinds of substitution instances the propositional function 
may have, the universal quantification of the (complex) propositional function
will be true. For example, consider the propositional function, “x is a
centaur,” which we abbreviate as Cx. Because there are no centaurs, every substitu-
tion instance of Cx is false, that is, Ca, Cb, Cc, . . . are all false. Hence every substitu-
tion instance of the complex propositional function 
will be a conditional
statement whose antecedent is false. The substitution instances 
, 
,
, . . . are therefore all true, because any conditional statement asserting a
material implication must be true if its antecedent is false. Because all its substitu-
tion instances are true, the universal quantification of the propositional function
, which is the A proposition 
, is true. But the corresponding I
proposition 
is false, because the propositional function 
has no
true substitution instances. That 
has no true substitution instances follows
from the fact that Cx has no true substitution instances. The various substitution
instances of 
are 
, 
, 
, . . . each of which is a conjunction
whose first conjunct is false, because Ca, Cb, Cc, . . . are all false. Because all its
substitution instances are false, the existential quantification of the propositional
Cc# Bc
Cb# Bb
Ca# Ba
Cx# Bx
Cx# Bx
Cx# Bx
(x)(Cx# Bx)
(x)(Cx ) Bx)
Cx ) Bx
Cc ) Bc
Cb ) Bb
Ca ) Ba
Cx ) Bx
£x ) °x
°x
£x
445

function 
, which is the I proposition 
, is false. Hence an A
proposition may be true while its corresponding I proposition is false.
This analysis shows also why an E proposition may be true while its corre-
sponding O proposition is false. If we replace the propositional function Bx by the
propositional function ~Bx in the preceding discussion, then 
may
be true while 
will be false because, of course, there are no centaurs.
The key to the matter is this: A propositions and E propositions do not assert
or suppose that anything exists; they assert only that (if one thing then another) is
the case. But I propositions and O propositions do suppose that some things
exist; they assert that (this and the other) is the case. The existential quantifier in I
and O propositions makes a critical difference. It would plainly be a mistake to
infer the existence of anything from a proposition that does not assert or suppose
the existence of anything.
If we make the general assumption that there exists at least one individual,
then 
does imply 
. But the latter is not an I proposi-
tion. The I proposition, “Some centaurs are beautiful,” is symbolized as
, which says that there is at least one centaur that is beautiful. But
what is symbolized as 
can be rendered in English as “There is at
least one thing such that, if it is a centaur, then it is beautiful.” It does not say
that there is a centaur, but only that there is an individual that either is not a
centaur or is beautiful. This proposition would be false in only two possible
cases: first, if there were no individuals at all; and second, if all individuals
were centaurs and none of them were beautiful. We rule out the first case by
making the explicit (and obviously true) assumption that there is at least one
individual in the universe; and the second case is so extremely implausible that
any proposition of the form 
is bound to be quite trivial, in con-
trast to the significant I form 
. The foregoing should make clear
that, although in English the A and I propositions “All humans are mortal”
and “Some humans are mortal” differ only in their initial words, “all” and
“some,” their difference in meaning is not confined to the matter of universal
versus existential quantification, but goes deeper than that. The propositional
functions quantified to yield A and I propositions are not just differently quan-
tified; they are different propositional functions, one containing “
”, the
other “ ”. In other words, A and I propositions are not as much alike as they
appear in English. Their differences are brought out very clearly in the notation
of propositional functions and quantifiers.
For purposes of logical manipulation we can work best with formulas in
which the negation sign, if one appears at all, applies only to simple predicates. So
we will want to replace formulas in ways that have this result. This we can do quite
readily. We know from the rule of replacement that we are always entitled to
replace an expression by another that is logically equivalent to it; and we have at our
disposal four logical equivalences (listed in Section 3) in which each of the propo-
sitions in which the quantifier is negated is shown equivalent to another proposi-
tion in which the negation sign applies directly to the predicates. Using the rules of
inference with which we have long been familiar, we can shift negation signs so
#
)
(x)(£x# °x)
(x)(£x ) °x)
(x)(Cx ) Bx)
(x)(Cx# Bx)
(x)(Cx ) Bx)
(x)(Cx ) Bx)
(x)(Cx# 'Bx)
(x)(Cx ) 'Bx)
(x)(Cx# Bx)
Cx# Bx
Quantification Theory
446

that, in the end, they no longer apply to compound expressions but apply only to
simple predicates. Thus, for example, the formula
can be successively rewritten. First, when we apply the fourth logical equiva-
lence given on earlier page, it is transformed into
Then when we apply De Morgan’s theorem, it becomes
Next, the principle of Double Negation gives us
And finally, when we invoke the definition of Material Implication, the original
formula is rewritten as the A proposition
We call a formula in which negation signs apply only to simple predicates a
normal-form formula.
Before turning to the topic of inferences involving noncompound statements,
the reader should acquire some practice in translating noncompound statements
from English into logical symbolism. The English language has so many irregu-
lar and idiomatic constructions that there can be no simple rules for translating
an English sentence into logical notation. What is required in each case is that the
meaning of the sentence be understood and then restated in terms of proposi-
tional functions and quantifiers.
EXERCISES
A. Translate each of the following into the logical notation of propositional
functions and quantifiers, in each case using the abbreviations suggested and
making each formula begin with a quantifier, not with a negation symbol.
EXAMPLE
1. No beast is without some touch of pity. (Bx: x is a beast; Px: x has some
touch of pity.)
SOLUTION
2. Sparrows are not mammals. (Sx: x is a sparrow; Mx: x is a mammal.)
3. Reporters are present. (Rx: x is a reporter; Px: x is present.)
4. Nurses are always considerate. (Nx: x is a nurse; Cx: x is considerate.)
*5. Diplomats are not always rich. (Dx: x is a diplomat; Rx: x is rich.)
6. “To swim is to be a penguin.” (Sx: x swims; Px: x is a penguin.)
—Christina Slagar, curator, Monterey Bay Aquarium, 17 January 2003
(x)(Bx ) Px)
(x)(Fx ) Gx)
(x)('Fx ∨ Gx)
(x)('Fx ∨ ' 'Gx)
(x)'(Fx# 'Gx)
'(x)(Fx# 'Gx)
Quantification Theory
Normal-form formula
A formula in which
negation signs apply to
simple predicates only.
447

7. No boy scout ever cheats. (Bx: x is a boy scout; Cx: x cheats.)
8. Only licensed physicians can charge for medical treatment. (Lx: x is a
licensed physician; Cx: x can charge for medical treatment.)
9. Snake bites are sometimes fatal. (Sx: x is a snake bite; Fx: x is fatal.)
*10. The common cold is never fatal. (Cx: x is a common cold; Fx: x is fatal.)
11. A child pointed his finger at the emperor. (Cx: x is a child; Px: x pointed
his finger at the emperor.)
12. Not all children pointed their fingers at the emperor. (Cx: x is a child; 
Px: x pointed his finger at the emperor.)
13. All that glitters is not gold. (Gx: x glitters; Ax: x is gold.)
14. None but the brave deserve the fair. (Bx: x is brave; Dx: x deserves the fair.)
*15. Only citizens of the United States can vote in U.S. elections. (Cx: x is a
citizen of the United States; Vx: x can vote in U.S. elections.)
16. Citizens of the United States can vote only in U.S. elections. (Ex: x is an
election in which citizens of the United States can vote; Ux: x is a U.S.
election.)
17. Not every applicant was hired. (Ax: x is an applicant; Hx: x was hired.)
18. Not any applicant was hired. (Ax: x is an applicant; Hx: x was hired.)
19. Nothing of importance was said. (Lx: x is of importance; Sx: x was said.)
*20. They have the right to criticize who have a heart to help. (Cx: x has the
right to criticize; Hx: x has a heart to help.)
B. Translate each of the following into the logical notation of propositional
functions and quantifiers, in each case making the formula begin with a quanti-
fier, not with a negation symbol.
1. Nothing is attained in war except by calculation.
—Napoleon Bonaparte
2. No one doesn’t believe in laws of nature.
—Donna Haraway, The Chronicle of Higher Education, 28 June 1996
3. He only earns his freedom and existence who daily conquers them anew.
—Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Faust, Part II
4. No man is thoroughly miserable unless he be condemned to live in Ireland.
—Jonathan Swift
*5. Not everything good is safe, and not everything dangerous is bad.
—David Brooks, in The Weekly Standard, 18 August 1997
6. There isn’t any business we can’t improve.
—Advertising slogan, Ernst and Young, Accountants
Quantification Theory
448

7. A problem well stated is a problem half solved.
—Charles Kettering, former research director for General Motors
8. There’s not a single witch or wizard who went bad who wasn’t in
Slytherin.
—J. K. Rowling, in Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone
9. Everybody doesn’t like something, but nobody doesn’t like Willie Nelson.
—Steve Dollar, Cox News Service
*10. No man but a blockhead ever wrote except for money.
—Samuel Johnson
C. For each of the following, find a normal-form formula that is logically equiv-
alent to the given one:
*1.
2.
3.
4.
*5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
*10.
11.
12. '(x)['('Wx ∨ Xx)]
'(x)['('Ux# 'Vx)]
'(x)['(Sx# 'Tx)]
'(x)['('Qx ¡ Rx)]
'(x)['(Ox ¡ 'Px)]
'(x)['(Mx ¡ Nx)]
'(x)('Kx ¡ 'Lx)
'(x)('Ix ¡ Jx)
'(x)(Gx# 'Hx)
'(x)(Ex# Fx)
'(x)(Cx ) 'Dx)
'(x)(Ax ) Bx)
Quantification Theory
John von Neumann
L
ogic is absolutely central in the design of computers. John von
Neumann  (1903–1957), a Hungarian-American mathematician and logi-
cian, helped to bring logic into all our lives through his work on the
intellectual architecture of computers.
Von Neumann’s intellect was utterly remarkable; he inspired awe among his
colleagues, who regarded him as among the greatest mathematicians of modern
history. As a very young boy in Hungary, under the direction of private tutors, he
had mastered arithmetic, algebra, analytic geometry and  trigonometry. He taught
Biography
449

Quantification Theory
himself calculus. He exhibited prodigious skills in learning languages,
including classical Greek and Latin, and in memorizing vast bodies of
material. The speed and depth of his mental calculations, even as a
youth, were staggering.
At the age of 22 he received his Ph.D. in mathematics in Hun-
gary, and that same year his diploma in chemical engineering in
Switzerland. He lectured at the University of Berlin, and then in
Hanover. When his father died, in 1929, the family emigrated to
the United States, where von Neumann anglicized his first name
(from Janos to John). He was invited to Princeton University and
became one of the first four professors selected, in 1933, for the
Institute for Advanced Study there (two of the others being Al-
bert Einstein and Kurt Gödel). Von Neumann remained a mathe-
matics professor at the Institute until his early death from cancer
in 1957. He lived an active social life in Princeton. He loved good
clothes and fine cars; he loved eating, and drinking, and telling
jokes. He threw great parties and enjoyed the good life. He was warmly
liked and enormously admired by his friends and colleagues.
Von Neumann’s contributions in logic began with his work on the axioma-
tization of set theory. The advance of the theory of sets was dealt a blow when
Gödel proved that axiomatic systems are necessarily incomplete, in the sense
that they cannot prove every truth that is expressible in their own language.
Von Neumann wrote to Gödel, calling to his attention that it can also be
proved that it is impossible for the usual axiomatic systems to demonstrate
their own consistency; this became what is now called Gödel’s second incom-
pleteness theorem.
As a theoretical mathematician von Neumann contributed significantly
to the development of the atomic bomb during the Second World War. Dur-
ing that war the first general-purpose electronic computer, ENIAC (Elec-
tronic Numerical Integrator and Computer) was designed at the University
of Pennsylvania. Logicians (including the distinguished Michigan logician,
Arthur Burks) were its creators. As the war ended, a second and more ad-
vanced computer project was undertaken there: EDVAC (Electronic Discrete
Variable Automatic Computer). John von Neumann was called in to assist
in its development. He did so, summarizing and improving all logical com-
puter design, and writing, in 1945, the First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC.
That computer (physically huge, although exceedingly weak in comparison
to electronic computers now commonly at hand) was actually built. It was
completed at the U.S Army’s Ballistic Research Laboratory in Maryland in
1949, and ran successfully, day and night, for about ten years, from 1951 to
1961. John von Neumann, as logician, had played a key role in the birth of
the computer age. His very last work, written while he was in the hospital
in 1956, and published posthumously, was entitled: The Computer and the
Brain. 
© Bettmann/CORBIS
All Rights Reserved.
450

Quantification Theory
5
Proving Validity
To construct formal proofs of validity for arguments whose validity turns on the
inner structures of noncompound statements that occur in them, we must ex-
pand our list of rules of inference. Only four additional rules are required, and
they will be introduced in connection with arguments for which they are needed.
Consider the first argument we discussed in this chapter: “All humans are
mortal. Socrates is human. Therefore Socrates is mortal.” It is symbolized as
The first premise affirms the truth of the universal quantification of the proposi-
tional function 
. Because the universal quantification of a propositional
function is true if and only if all of its substitution instances are true, from the first
premise we can infer any desired substitution instance of the propositional func-
tion 
. In particular, we can infer the substitution instance 
.
Hs ) Ms
Hx ) Mx
Hx ) Mx
‹ Ms
Hs
(x)(Hx ) Mx)
Bertrand Russell
B
ertrand Arthur William, Lord Russell, The Right Honourable The Earl
Russell (1872–1970), was one of the most remarkable thinkers of recent
centuries. His grandfather had been England’s Prime Minister, befriend-
ed by Queen Victoria; his parents, religious skeptics who endorsed free love,
died by the time he was four. Placed then in the custody of his grandparents,
he encountered early in life the most prominent thinkers and writers of those
days.
Independently wealthy, Russell studied mathematics at Trini-
ty College, Cambridge, becoming eventually a Fellow of that Col-
lege. His sexual and familial adventures were many and daring;
he later ran a progressive school in which nudity for all was the
rule. He married four times: in 1894, then in 1921, then again in
1936, and finally—at last happily at the age of 80—in 1952. The
radical sexual freedom that he professed he practiced unrelenting-
ly and without shame.
In the very early years of the twentieth century, inspired by
Frege, Russell  developed his own logicism—the view that math-
ematics grows out of logic —which he first formulated in The
Principles of Mathematics in 1903. Collaborating closely with the
mathematician, Alfred North Whitehead, he pursued tenaciously
the project of proving that this derivation could indeed be carried
out, overcoming the problems that Frege’s work had failed to
Biography
451

Quantification Theory
solve. Ten years of arduous labor resulted in their publication of one of the
towering works of modern logic: Principia Mathematica (3 volumes: 1910,
1912, 1913).
Russell was a pacifist; he was dismissed from Trinity College and went to
prison for his activism against British participation in the First World War. But
he campaigned actively against Hitler in the Second World War, and came to
believe that although war is indeed always a very great evil, there are times
when it is the lesser of the evils we confront. He campaigned against the bru-
tality of the Stalinist regime in the Soviet Union in the years following WWII,
and then again, engaging in deliberate, orderly civil disobedience, against
America’s involvement in the Vietnam War. 
He taught at the City College of New York, and at the University of Chica-
go, and at the University of California at Los Angeles—but even in America he
was often hounded because of his radical opinions on matters of sex, very pub-
licly expressed. He is famous for the clarity and beauty of his prose, nowhere
more evident than in his History of Western Philosophy (1945), which became a
world-wide best seller. In 1950 he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature.
Over the years Russell had many very distinguished students whom he ad-
mired and who carried on his work. Among them were the philosopher, Lud-
wig Wittgenstein, at Trinity College, Cambridge, and later the logician, Irving
Copi, at the University of Chicago.
Colorful, prolific, creative, passionate and courageous, Bertrand Russell
was not only one of the great modern logicians; he was one of the most ex-
traordinary intellectual figures of his time. 
From that and the second premise Hs, the conclusion Ms follows directly by
Modus Ponens.
If we add to our list of rules of inference the principle that any substitution in-
stance of a propositional function can validly be inferred from its universal
quantification, then we can give a formal proof of the validity of the given argu-
ment by reference to the expanded list of elementary valid argument forms. This
new rule of inference is the principle of Universal Instantiation* and is abbrevi-
ated as U.I. Using the Greek letter nu ( ) to represent any individual symbol
whatever, we state the new rule as
ν
U.I.:
(where 
is any individual symbol)
ν
‹ £ν
(x)(£x)
*This rule, and the three following, are variants of rules for natural deduction that were devised independ-
ently by Gerhard Gentzen and Stanislaw Jaskowski in 1934.
Universal Instantiation
(U.I.) In quantification
theory, a rule of
inference that permits
the valid inference of any
substitution instance of
a propositional function
from the universal
quantification of the
propositional function.
452

Quantification Theory
A formal proof of validity may now be written as
1.
2.
3.
1, U.I.
4.
3, 2, M.P.
Ms
Hs ) Ms
‹ Ms
Hs
(x)(Hx ) Mx)
The addition of U.I. strengthens our proof apparatus considerably, but more is
required. The need for additional rules governing quantification arises in con-
nection with arguments such as “All humans are mortal. All Greeks are human.
Therefore all Greeks are mortal.” The symbolic translation of this argument is
Here both the premises and the conclusion are general propositions rather than
singular ones, universal quantifications of propositional functions rather than
substitution instances of them. From the two premises, by U.I., we may validly
infer the following pairs of conditional statements:
and by successive uses of the principle of the Hypothetical Syllogism we may
validly infer the conclusions:
If a, b, c, d, . . . were all the individuals that exist, it would follow that from the
truth of the premises one could validly infer the truth of all substitution in-
stances of the propositional function 
. The universal quantification of
a propositional function is true if and only if all its substitution instances are
true, so we can go on to infer the truth of 
, which is the conclusion
of the given argument.
The preceding paragraph may be thought of as containing an informal proof
of the validity of the given argument, in which the principle of the hypothetical
syllogism and two principles governing quantification are appealed to. But it de-
scribes indefinitely long sequences of statements: the lists of all substitution in-
stances of the two propositional functions quantified universally in the premises,
(x)(Gx ) Mx)
Gx ) Mx
Ga ) Ma, Gb ) Mb, Gc ) Mc, Gd ) Md, Á
b Ga ) Ha
Ha ) Mar b Gb ) Hb
Hb ) Mbr b Gc ) Hc
Hc ) Mcr b Gd ) Hd
Hd ) Mdr Á
‹ (x)(Gx ) Mx)
(x)(Gx ) Hx)
(x)(Hx ) Mx)
453

From the premises we have deduced the statement 
, which in effect, be-
cause y denotes “any arbitrarily selected individual,” asserts the truth of any sub-
stitution instance of the propositional function 
. Because any
substitution instance is true, all substitution instances must be true, and hence
the universal quantification of that propositional function is true also. We may
add this principle to our list of rules of inference, stating it as follows: From the
substitution instance of a propositional function with respect to the name of any arbitrarily
Gx ) Mx
Gy ) My
and the list of all substitution instances of the propositional function whose uni-
versal quantification is the conclusion. A formal proof cannot contain such indef-
initely, perhaps even infinitely, long sequences of statements, so some method
must be sought for expressing those indefinitely long sequences in some finite,
definite fashion.
A method for doing this is suggested by a common technique of elementary
mathematics. A geometer, seeking to prove that all triangles possess a certain at-
tribute, may begin with the words “Let ABC be any arbitrarily selected triangle.”
Then the geometer begins to reason about the triangle ABC and establishes that it
has the attribute in question. From this she concludes that all triangles have that
attribute. Now what justifies her final conclusion? Granted of the particular tri-
angle ABC that it has the attribute, why does it follow that all triangles do? The
answer to this question is easily given. If no assumption other than its triangular-
ity is made about the triangle ABC, then the symbol “ABC” can be taken as de-
noting any triangle one pleases. Then the geometer’s argument establishes that
any triangle has the attribute in question, and if any triangle has it, then all trian-
gles do. We now introduce a notation analogous to the geometer’s in talking
about “any arbitrarily selected triangle ABC.” This will avoid the pretense of list-
ing an indefinite or infinite number of substitution instances of a propositional
function, for instead we shall talk about any substitution instance of the proposi-
tional function.
We shall use the (hitherto unused) lowercase letter y to denote any arbitrari-
ly selected individual. We shall use it in a way similar to that in which the
geometer used the letters ABC. Because the truth of any substitution instance of a
propositional function follows from its universal quantification, we can infer the
substitution instance that results from replacing x by y, where y denotes “any ar-
bitrarily selected” individual. Thus we may begin our formal proof of the validi-
ty of the given argument as follows:
Quantification Theory
1.
2.
3.
1, U.I.
4.
2, U.I.
5.
4, 3, H.S.
Gy ) My
Gy ) Hy
Hy ) My
‹ (x)(Gx ) Mx)
(x)(Gx ) Hx)
(x)(Hx ) Mx)
454

Quantification Theory
selected individual, one can validly infer the universal quantification of that proposition-
al function. This new principle permits us to generalize, that is, to go from a special
substitution instance to a generalized or universally quantified expression, so we
refer to it as the principle of Universal Generalization and abbreviate it as U.G.
It is stated as
Universal
Generalization (U.G.)
In quantification theory,
a rule of inference that
permits the valid
inference of a
generalized, or
universally quantified,
expression from an
expression that is given
as true of any arbitrarily
selected individual.
6.
5, U.G.
(x)(Gx ) Mx)
U.G.:
(where y denotes “any arbitrarily selected individual”)
‹ (x)(£x)
£y
The sixth and final line of the formal proof already begun may now be written
(and justified) as
Let us review the preceding discussion. In the geometer’s proof, the only as-
sumption made about ABC is that it is a triangle; hence what is proved true of
ABC is proved true of any triangle. In our proof, the only assumption made about
y is that it is an individual; hence what is proved true of y is proved true of any in-
dividual. The symbol y is an individual symbol, but it is a very special one. Typ-
ically it is introduced into a proof by using U.I., and only the presence of y
permits the use of U.G.
Here is another valid argument, the demonstration of whose validity re-
quires the use of U.G. as well as U.I.: “No humans are perfect. All Greeks are hu-
mans. Therefore no Greeks are perfect.* The formal proof of its validity is:
1.
2.
3.
1, U.I.
4.
2, U.I.
5.
4, 3, H.S.
6.
5, U.G.
(x)(Gx ) 'Px)
Gy ) 'Py
Gy ) Hy
Hy ) 'Py
‹ (x)(Gx ) 'Px)
(x)(Gx ) Hx)
(x)(Hx ) 'Px)
There may seem to be some artificiality about the preceding. It may be argued
that distinguishing carefully between 
and 
, so that they are not treat-
ed as identical but must be inferred from each other by U.I. and U.G., is to insist
on a distinction without a difference. But there certainly is a formal difference
£y
(x)(£x)
*This is an appropriate point to observe that, for arguments of some kinds, the traditional syllogistic analy-
sis can establish validity as efficiently as modern quantified logic. A classical logician would quickly iden-
tify this syllogism as having the mood EAE in the first figure—necessarily of the form Celarent, and
therefore immediately seen to be valid.
455

Quantification Theory
between them. The statement 
is a noncompound statement,
whereas 
is compound, being a conditional. From the two noncom-
pound statements 
and 
, no relevant inference can be
drawn by means of the original list of nineteen rules of inference. But from the
compound statements 
and 
, the indicated conclusion
follows by a Hypothetical Syllogism. The principle of U.I. is used to
get from noncompound statements, to which our earlier rules of inference do
not usefully apply, to compound statements, to which they can be applied to de-
rive the desired conclusion. The quantification principles thus augment our log-
ical apparatus to make it capable of validating arguments essentially involving
noncompound (generalized) propositions as well as the other (simpler) kind of
argument. On the other hand, in spite of this formal difference, there must be a
logical equivalence between 
and 
, or the rules U.I. and U.G. would
not be valid. Both the difference and the logical equivalence are important for
our purpose of validating arguments by reference to a list of rules of inference.
The addition of U.I. and U.G. to our list strengthens it considerably.
The list must be expanded further when we turn to arguments that involve
existential propositions. A convenient example with which to begin is “All crim-
inals are vicious. Some humans are criminals. Therefore some humans are vi-
cious.” It is symbolized as
The existential quantification of a propositional function is true if and only if
the function has at least one true substitution instance. Hence whatever attribute
may be designated by 
, 
says that there is at least one individual that
has the attribute 
. If an individual constant (other than the special symbol y) is
used nowhere earlier in the context, we may use it to denote either the individual
that has the attribute 
, or some one of the individuals that have 
if there are
several. Knowing that there is such an individual, say, a, we know that 
is a
true substitution instance of the propositional function 
. Hence we add to our
list of rules of inference this principle: From the existential quantification of a propo-
sitional function, we may infer the truth of its substitution instance with respect to any
individual constant (other than y) that occurs nowhere earlier in that context. The new
rule of inference is the principle of Existential Instantiation and is abbreviated
as “E.I.” It is stated as:
£x
£a
£
£
£
(x)(£x)
£
‹ (x)(Hx# Vx)
(x)(Hx# Cx)
(x)(Cx ) Vx)
£y
(x)(£x)
Gy ) My
Hy ) My
Gy ) Hy
(x)(Hx ) Mx)
(x)(Gx ) Hx)
Hy ) My
(x)(Hx ) Mx)
Existential
Instantiation (E.I.)
In quantification theory,
a rule of inference that
says that we may (with
some restrictions) validly
infer from the existential
quantification of a
propositional function
the truth of its
substitution instance
with respect to any
individual constant that
does not occur earlier in
that context.
E.I.:
[where 
is any individual constant (other than y) 
having no previous occurrence in the context]
‹ £ν
ν
(x)(£x)
Granted the additional rule of inference E.I., we may begin a demonstration
of the validity of the stated argument:
456

Quantification Theory
1.
2.
3.
2, E.I.
4.
1, U.I.
5.
3, Com.
6.
5, Simp.
7.
4, 6, M.P.
8.
3, Simp.
9.
8, 7, Conj.
Ha# Va
Ha
Va
Ca
Ca# Ha
Ca ) Va
Ha# Ca
‹ (x)(Hx# Vx)
(x)(Hx# Cx)
(x)(Cx ) Vx)
Thus far we have deduced 
, which is a substitution instance of the
propositional function whose existential quantification is asserted by the conclu-
sion. Because the existential quantification of a propositional function is true if
and only if it has at least one true substitution instance, we add to our list of rules
of inference the principle that from any true substitution instance of a propositional
function we may validly infer the existential quantification of that propositional
function. This fourth and final rule of inference is the principle of Existential
Generalization, abbreviated as E.G. and stated as
Ha# Va
E.G.:
(where 
is any individual symbol)
‹ (x)(£x)
ν
£ν
Existential
Generalization (E.G.)
In quantification theory,
a rule of inference that
says that from any true
substitution instance of
a propositional function
we may validly infer the
existential quantification
of the function.
The need for the indicated restriction on the use of E.I. can be seen by con-
sidering the obviously invalid argument, “Some alligators are kept in captivity.
Some birds are kept in captivity. Therefore some alligators are birds.” If we
failed to heed the restriction on E.I. that a substitution instance of a proposition-
al function inferred by E.I. from the existential quantification of that proposi-
tional function can contain only an individual symbol (other than y) that has no
previous occurrence in the context, then we might proceed to construct a “proof” of
validity for this invalid argument. Such an erroneous “proof” might proceed as
follows:
The tenth and final line of the demonstration already begun may now be
written (and justified) as
10.
9, E.G.
(x)(Hx# Vx)
1.
.
2.
3.
1, E.I.
4.
2, E.I. (wrong!)
5.
3, Simp.
6.
4, Simp.
7.
5, 6, Conj.
8.
7, E.G.
(x)(Ax# Bx)
Aa# Ba
Ba
Aa
Ba# Ca
Aa# Ca
‹ (x)(Ax# Bx)
(x)(Bx# Cx)
(x)(Ax# Cx)
457

Quantification Theory
The error in this “proof” occurs at line 4. From the second premise 
,
we know that there is at least one thing that is both a bird and kept in captivity. If
we were free to assign it the name a in line 4, we could, of course, assert 
.
But we are not free to make any such assignment of a, for it has already been pre-
empted in line 3 to serve as the name for an alligator that is kept in captivity. To
avoid errors of this sort, we must obey the indicated restriction whenever we use
E.I. The preceding discussion should make clear that in any demonstration re-
quiring the use of both E.I. and U.I., E.I. should always be used first.
For more complicated modes of argumentation, especially those that in-
volve relations, certain additional restrictions must be placed on our four
quantification rules. But for arguments of the present sort, traditionally
called categorical syllogisms, the present restrictions are sufficient to prevent
mistakes.
Ba# Ca
(x)(Bx# Cx)
Rules of Inference: Quantification
o v e r v i e w
Name
Abbreviation
Form
Effect
Universal
Instantiation
U.I.
(where is 
any individual 
symbol)
ν
‹ £ν
(x)(£x)
Any substitution instance of
a propositional function can
be validly inferred from its
universal quantification.
Universal
Generalization
U.G.
(where y
denotes “any
arbitrarily
selected 
individual”)
‹ (x)(£x)
£y
From the substitution
instance of a propositional
function with respect to the
name of any arbitrarily
selected individual, one may
validly infer the universal
quantification of that
propositional function.
Existential
Instantiation
E.I.
(where is 
any individual
constant, other
than y, having 
no previous
occurrence in 
the context)
ν
‹ £ν
(x)(£x)
From the existential
quantification of a
propositional function, we
may infer the truth of its
substitution instance with
respect to any individual
constant (other than y) that
occurs nowhere earlier in the
context.
Existential
Generalization
E.G.
(where is 
any individual
symbol)
ν
‹ (x)(£x)
£ν
From any true substitution
instance of a propositional
function, we may validly
infer the existential
quantification of that
propositional function.
458

EXERCISES
A. Construct a formal proof of validity for each of the following arguments:
EXAMPLE
1.
‹ (x)(Cx# 'Bx)
(x)(Cx# Ax)
(x)(Ax ) 'Bx)
Quantification Theory
SOLUTION
The conclusion of this argument is an existentially quantified statement.
Plainly, the last step will therefore be the application of E.G. To obtain the line
needed, we will first have to instantiate the premises, applying E.I. to the sec-
ond premise and U.I. to the first premise. The restriction on the use of E.I.
makes it essential that we apply E.I. before we apply U.I., so that we may use
the same individual constant, say a, for both. The proof looks like this:
1.
2.
3.
2, E.I.
4.
1, U.I.
5.
3, Com.
6.
5, Simp.
7.
4, 6, M.P.
8.
3, Simp.
9.
8, 7, Conj.
10.
9, E.G.
(x)(Cx# 'Bx)
Ca# 'Ba
Ca
'Ba
Aa
Aa# Ca
Aa ) 'Ba
Ca# Aa
‹ (x)(Cx# 'Bx)
(x)(Cx# Ax)
(x)(Ax ) 'Bx)
1. (x)(Ax ) 'Bx)
2.
4.
6.
8.
*10.
‹ (x)(Dx# 'Bx)
(x)(Cx# Dx)
(x)(Bx ) 'Cx)
‹ (x)(Xx ) 'Vx)
(x)(Wx ) 'Xx)
(x)(Vx ) Wx)
‹ (x)(Rx# 'Qx)
(x)(Px ) Rx)
(x)(Px# 'Qx)
‹ (x)(Lx# Kx)
(x)(Jx ) Lx)
(x)(Jx# Kx)
‹ (x)(Fx ) 'Dx)
(x)(Fx ) Ex)
(x)(Dx ) 'Ex)
3.
*5.
7.
9.
11.
‹ (x)(Gx# 'Fx)
(x)(Fx# 'Gx)
(x)(Fx ) Gx)
‹ (x)(Ax# Yx)
(x)(Zx ) Ax)
(x)(Yx# Zx)
‹ (x)(Ux# 'Tx)
(x)(Sx# Ux)
(x)(Sx ) 'Tx)
‹ (x)(Ox# Nx)
(x)(Mx# Ox)
(x)(Mx ) Nx)
‹ (x)(Ix ) 'Gx)
(x)(Ix ) 'Hx)
(x)(Gx ) Hx)
459

Quantification Theory
B. Construct a formal proof of validity for each of the following arguments, in
each case using the suggested notations:
*1. No athletes are bookworms. Carol is a bookworm. Therefore Carol is
not an athlete. (Ax, Bx, c)
2. All dancers are exuberant. Some fencers are not exuberant. Therefore
some fencers are not dancers. (Dx, Ex, Fx)
3. No gamblers are happy. Some idealists are happy. Therefore some ideal-
ists are not gamblers. (Gx, Hx, Ix)
4. All jesters are knaves. No knaves are lucky. Therefore no jesters are
lucky. (Jx, Kx, Lx)
*5. All mountaineers are neighborly. Some outlaws are mountaineers.
Therefore some outlaws are neighborly. (Mx, Nx, Ox)
6. Only pacifists are Quakers. There are religious Quakers. Therefore paci-
fists are sometimes religious. (Px, Qx, Rx)
7. To be a swindler is to be a thief. None but the underprivileged are
thieves. Therefore swindlers are always underprivileged. (Sx, Tx, Ux)
8. No violinists are not wealthy. There are no wealthy xylophonists. There-
fore violinists are never xylophonists. (Vx, Wx, Xx)
9. None but the brave deserve the fair. Only soldiers are brave. Therefore
the fair are deserved only by soldiers. (Dx: x deserves the fair; Bx: x is
brave; Sx: x is a soldier)
*10. Everyone that asketh receiveth. Simon receiveth not. Therefore Simon
asketh not. (Ax, Rx, s)
6
Proving Invalidity
To prove the invalidity of an argument involving quantifiers, we can use the
method of refutation by logical analogy. For example, the argument, “All conser-
vatives are opponents of the administration; some delegates are opponents of the
administration; therefore some delegates are conservatives,” is proved invalid by
the analogy, “All cats are animals; some dogs are animals; therefore some dogs
are cats,” which is obviously invalid, because its premises are known to be true
and its conclusion is known to be false. Such analogies, however, are not always
easy to devise. Some more effective method of proving invalidity is desirable.
We have developed a method of proving invalidity for arguments involving
truth-functional compound statements. That method consisted of making truth-
value assignments to the component simple statements in arguments, in such a
way as to make the premises true and the conclusions false. That method can be
adapted for arguments involving quantifiers. The adaptation involves our gener-
al assumption that there is at least one individual. For an argument involving
quantifiers to be valid, it must be impossible for its premises to be true and its
conclusion false as long as there is at least one individual.
460

The general assumption that there is at least one individual is satisfied if
there is exactly one individual, or if there are exactly two individuals, or exactly
three individuals, or . . . .
If any one of these assumptions about the exact number of individuals is
made, there is an equivalence between general propositions and truth-functional
compounds of singular propositions. If there is exactly one individual, say a,
then

T

T
If there are exactly two individuals, say a and b, then

T

T
If there are exactly three individuals, say a, b, and c, then

T

T
In general, if there are exactly n individuals, say a, b, c, . . . . n, then

T

T
These biconditionals are true as a consequence of our definitions of the universal
and existential quantifiers. No use is made here of the four quantification rules
explained in Section 5.
An argument involving quantifiers is valid if, and only if, it is valid no matter
how many individuals there are, provided there is at least one. So an argument
involving quantifiers is proved invalid if there is a possible universe or model
containing at least one individual such that the argument’s premises are true and
its conclusion false of that model. Consider the argument, “All mercenaries are un-
dependable. No guerrillas are mercenaries. Therefore no guerrillas are unde-
pendable.” It may be symbolized as
If there is exactly one individual, say a, this argument is logically equivalent to
The latter can be proved invalid by assigning the truth value true to Ga and Ua
and false to Ma. (This assignment of truth values is a shorthand way of describing
the model in question as containing only the one individual, a, which is a guerril-
la and undependable but is not a mercenary.) Hence the original argument is not
valid for a model containing exactly one individual, and it is therefore invalid.
Similarly, we can prove the invalidity of the first argument mentioned in this
‹ Ga ) 'Ua
Ga ) 'Ma
Ma ) Ua
‹ (x)(Gx ) 'Ux)
(x)(Gx ) 'Mx)
(x)(Mx ) Ux)
[£a ¡ £b ¡ £c ¡ ... ¡ £n]
[£a# £b# £c# ...# £n] and (x)(£x)
(x)(£x)
[£a ¡ £b ¡ £c]
[£a# £b# £c] and (x)(£x)
(x)(£x)
[£a ¡ £b]
[£a# £b] and (x)(£x)
(x)(£x)
(x)(£x)
£a
(x)(£x)
Quantification Theory
461

section by describing a model containing exactly one individual, a, so that Aa
and Da are assigned the value true and Ca is assigned the value false.*
Some arguments, for example,
may be valid for any model in which there is exactly one individual, but invalid
for a model containing two or more individuals. Such arguments must also
count as invalid, because a valid argument must be valid regardless of how
many individuals there are, so long as there is at least one. Another example of
this kind of argument is “All collies are affectionate. Some collies are watchdogs.
Therefore all watchdogs are affectionate.” Its symbolic translation is
For a model containing exactly one individual, a, it is logically equivalent to
which is valid. But for a model containing two individuals, a and b, it is logically
equivalent to
which is proved invalid by assigning true to Ca, Aa, Wa, Wb, and false to Cb and
Ab. Hence the original argument is not valid for a model containing exactly two
individuals, and it is therefore invalid. For any invalid argument of this general
type, it is possible to describe a model containing some definite number of indi-
viduals for which its logically equivalent truth-functional argument can be
proved invalid by the method of assigning truth values.
It should be emphasized again: In moving from a given argument involving
general propositions to a truth-functional argument (one that is logically equiva-
lent to the given argument for a specified model), no use is made of our four
quantification rules. Instead, each statement of the truth-functional argument is
logically equivalent to the corresponding general proposition of the given argu-
ment, and that logical equivalence is shown by the biconditionals formulated
earlier in this section, whose logical truth for the model in question follows from
the very definitions of the universal and existential quantifiers.
‹ (Wa ) Aa)# (Wb ) Ab)
(Ca# Wa) ¡ (Cb# Wb)
(Ca ) Aa)# (Cb ) Ab)
‹ Wa ) Aa
Ca# Wa
Ca ) Aa
‹ (x)(Wx ) Ax)
(x)(Cx# Wx)
(x)(Cx ) Ax)
‹ (x)Fx
(x)Fx
Quantification Theory
*Here we assume that the simple predicates Ax, Bx, Cx, Dx, . . ., occurring in our propositions are neither
necessary, that is, logically true of all individuals (for example, x is identical with itself), nor impossible,
that is, logically false of all individuals (for example, x is different from itself). We also assume that the
only logical relations among the simple predicates involved are those asserted or logically implied by the
premises. The point of these restrictions is to permit us to assign truth values arbitrarily to the substitution
instances of these simple predicates without any inconsistency—for of course, a correct description of any
model must be consistent.
462

The procedure for proving the invalidity of an argument containing general
propositions is the following. First, consider a one-element model containing only
the individual a. Then, write out the logically equivalent truth-functional
argument for that model, which is obtained by moving from each general propo-
sition (quantified propositional function) of the original argument to the substitu-
tion instance of that propositional function with respect to a. If the
truth-functional argument can be proved invalid by assigning truth values to its
component simple statements, that suffices to prove the original argument in-
valid. If that cannot be done, next consider a two-element model containing the
individuals a and b. In order to obtain the logically equivalent truth-functional ar-
gument for this larger model, one can simply join each original substitution in-
stance with respect to a to a new substitution instance of the same propositional
function with respect to b. This “joining” must be in accord with the logical equiv-
alences stated earlier in this section; that is, where the original argument contains
a universally quantified propositional function, 
, the new substitution in-
stance 
is combined with the first substitution instance 
by conjunction (“ ”);
but where the original argument contains an existentially quantified propositional
function, 
, the new substitution instance 
is combined with the first
substitution instance 
by disjunction (“ ”). The preceding example illustrates
this procedure. If the new truth-functional argument can be proved invalid by
assigning truth values to its component simple statements, that suffices to prove
the original argument invalid. If that cannot be done, next consider a three-
element model containing the individuals a, b, and c. And so on. None of the exer-
cises in this text requires a model containing more than three elements.
EXERCISES
In the following exercises, no model containing more than two elements is re-
quired.
A. Prove the invalidity of the following:
EXAMPLE
1.
SOLUTION
We first construct a model (or possible universe, represented below by a rec-
tangular box) containing exactly one individual, a. We then exhibit the logi-
cally equivalent propositions in that model. Thus,
(x)(Ax# Bx)
(x)(Cx# Bx)
‹ (x)(Cx ) 'Ax)
s 
logically
equivalent
in  a to  c
Aa# Ba
Ca# Ba
‹ Ca ) 'Aa
‹ (x)(Cx ) 'Ax)
(x)(Cx# Bx)
(x)(Ax# Bx)
¡
£a
£b
(x)(£x)
#
£a
£b
(x)(£x)
Quantification Theory
463

Quantification Theory
Because the argument has been proved invalid in this model, the argu-
ment has been proved invalid.
1.
3.
*5.
7.
9.
‹ (x)(Ax# 'Yx)
(x)(Ax# Zx)
(x)(Yx# Zx)
‹ (x)(Ux# 'Sx)
(x)(Tx ) Ux)
(x)(Sx ) 'Tx)
‹ (x)(Ox ) Nx)
(x)(Mx# Ox)
(x)(Mx# Nx)
‹ (x)(Ix ) Hx)
(x)(Gx ) Ix)
(x)(Gx ) Hx)
‹ (x)(Cx ) 'Ax)
(x)(Cx# Bx)
(x)(Ax# Bx)
We may prove the argument invalid in this model by assigning truth val-
ues as follows:
Aa
Ba
Ca
T
T
T
2.
4.
6.
8.
*10.
‹ (x)(Dx ) Bx)
(x)(Dx ) 'Cx)
(x)(Bx# 'Cx)
‹ (x)(Xx# ' Vx)
(x)(Wx# 'Xx)
(x)(Vx# 'Wx)
‹ (x)(Rx ) 'Qx)
(x)(Px ) 'Rx)
(x)(Px ) 'Qx)
‹ (x)(Lx# Jx)
(x)(Kx# Lx)
(x)(Jx# Kx)
‹ (x)(Fx ) 'Dx)
(x)(Ex ) Fx)
(x)(Dx ) 'Ex)
B. Prove the invalidity of the following, in each case using the suggested notation:
*1. All anarchists are bearded. All communists are bearded. Therefore all
anarchists are communists. (Ax, Bx, Cx)
2. No diplomats are extremists. Some fanatics are extremists. Therefore
some diplomats are not fanatics. (Dx, Ex, Fx)
3. All generals are handsome. Some intellectuals are handsome. Therefore
some generals are intellectuals. (Gx, Hx, Ix)
4. Some journalists are not kibitzers. Some kibitzers are not lucky. There-
fore some journalists are not lucky. (Jx, Kx, Lx)
*5. Some malcontents are noisy. Some officials are not noisy. Therefore no
officials are malcontents. (Mx, Nx, Ox)
6. Some physicians are quacks. Some quacks are not responsible. Therefore
some physicians are not responsible. (Px, Qx, Rx)
7. Some politicians are leaders. Some leaders are not orators. Therefore
some orators are not politicians. (Px, Lx, Ox)
8. None but the brave deserve the fair. Every soldier is brave. Therefore
none but soldiers deserve the fair. (Dx: x deserves the fair; Bx: x is brave;
Sx: x is a soldier)
9. If anything is metallic, then it is breakable. There are breakable orna-
ments. Therefore there are metallic ornaments. (Mx, Bx, Ox)
464

Quantification Theory
Asyllogistic argument
An argument in which
one or more of the
component propositions
is of a form more
complicated than the
form of the A, E, I, and
O propositions of the
categorical syllogism,
and whose analysis
therefore requires logical
tools more powerful
than those provided by
Aristotelian logic.
*10. Only students are members. Only members are welcome. Therefore all
students are welcome. (Sx, Mx, Wx)
7
Asyllogistic Inference
All the arguments considered in the preceding two sections were of the form tra-
ditionally called categorical syllogisms. These consist of two premises and a con-
clusion, each of which is analyzable either as a singular proposition or as one of
the A, E, I, or O varieties. We turn now to the problem of evaluating somewhat
more complicated arguments. These require no greater logical apparatus than
has already been developed, yet they are asyllogistic arguments; that is, they
cannot be reduced to standard-form categorical syllogisms, and therefore evalu-
ating them requires a more powerful logic than was traditionally used in testing
categorical syllogisms.
In this section we are still concerned with general propositions, formed by
quantifying propositional functions that contain only a single individual vari-
able. In the categorical syllogism, the only kinds of propositional functions quan-
tified were of the forms 
, 
, 
, and 
. Now we
shall be quantifying propositional functions with more complicated internal
structures. An example will help make this clear. Consider the argument
Hotels are both expensive and depressing.
Some hotels are shabby.
Therefore some expensive things are shabby.
This argument, for all its obvious validity, is not amenable to the traditional sort
of analysis. True enough, it could be expressed in terms of A and I propositions
by using the symbols Hx, Bx, Sx, and Ex to abbreviate the propositional functions
“x is a hotel,” “x is both expensive and depressing,” “x is shabby,” and “x is ex-
pensive,” respectively.* Using these abbreviations, we might propose to symbol-
ize the given argument as
Forcing the argument into the straitjacket of the traditional A and I forms in this
way obscures its validity. The argument just given in symbols is invalid, al-
though the original argument is perfectly valid. A notation restricted to categori-
cal propositions here obscures the logical connection between Bx and Ex. A more
adequate analysis is obtained by using Hx, Sx, and Ex, as explained, plus Dx as
an abbreviation for “x is depressing.” By using these symbols, the original argu-
ment can be translated as
1.
2.
‹ (x)(Ex# Sx)
(x)(Hx# Sx)
(x)[Hx ) (Ex# Dx)]
‹ (x)(Ex# Sx)
(x)(Hx# Sx)
(x)(Hx ) Bx)
£x# '°x
£x# °x
£x ) '°x
£x ) °x
*This would, however, violate the restriction stated in the last footnote.
465

Quantification Theory
In symbolizing general propositions that result from quantifying more com-
plicated propositional functions, care must be taken not to be misled by the de-
ceptiveness of ordinary English. One cannot translate from English into our
logical notation by following any formal or mechanical rules. In every case, one
must understand the meaning of the English sentence, and then symbolize that meaning
in terms of propositional functions and quantifiers.
Three locutions of ordinary English that are sometimes troublesome are the
following. First, note that a statement such as “All athletes are either very strong
or very quick” is not a disjunction, although it contains the connective “or.” It
definitely does not have the same meaning as “Either all athletes are very strong
or all athletes are very quick.” The former is properly symbolized—using obvi-
ous abbreviations—as
whereas the latter is symbolized as
Second, note that a statement such as “Oysters and clams are delicious,” while it
can be stated as the conjunction of two general propositions—“Oysters are deli-
cious and clams are delicious”—also can be stated as a single noncompound gen-
eral proposition, in which case the word “and” is properly symbolized by the “ ”
rather than by the “ ”. The stated proposition is symbolized as
not as
For to say that oysters and clams are delicious is to say that anything is delicious
that is either an oyster or a clam, not to say that anything is delicious that is both an
oyster and a clam.
Third, what are called exceptive propositions require very careful attention.
Such propositions—for example, “All except previous winners are eligible”—
may be treated as the conjunction of two general propositions. Using the exam-
ple just given, we might reasonably understand the proposition to assert both
that previous winners are not eligible, and that those who are not previous win-
ners are eligible. It is symbolized as:
(x)(Px ) 'Ex)# (x)('Px ) Ex)
(x)[(Ox# Cx) ) Dx]
(x)[(Ox ¡ Cx) ) Dx]
#
¡
(x)(Ax ) Sx) ¡ (x)(Ax ) Qx)
(x)[Ax ) (Sx ¡ Qx)]
3.
2, E.I.
4.
1, U.I.
5. 
3, Simp.
6. 
4, 5, M.P.
7. 
6, Simp.
8. 
3, Com.
9. 
8, Simp.
10. 
7, 9, Conj.
11. 
10, E.G.
(x)(Ex# Sx)
Ew# Sw
Sw
Sw# Hw
Ew
Ew# Dw
Hw
Hw ) (Ew# Dw)
Hw# Sw
Thus symbolized, a demonstration of its validity is easily constructed. One such
demonstration proceeds as follows:
466

Quantification Theory
The same exceptive proposition may also be translated as a noncompound gen-
eral proposition that is the universal quantification of a propositional function
containing the symbol for material equivalence “ ” (a biconditional), and sym-
bolized thus:
which can also be rendered in English as “Anyone is eligible if and only if that
person is not a previous winner.” Exceptive propositions are most conveniently
regarded as quantified biconditionals.
Whether a proposition is in fact exceptive is sometimes difficult to deter-
mine. A recent controversy requiring resolution by a federal court panel illus-
trates this contextual difficulty. The Census Act, a law that establishes the rules
for the conduct of the national census every ten years, contains the following
passage:
Sec. 195. Except for the determination of population for purposes of apportionment of
Representatives in Congress among the several States, the Secretary [of Commerce]
shall, if he considers it feasible, authorize the use of the statistical method known as
“sampling” in carrying out the provisions of this title.
For the 2000 census, which did determine population for the purposes of appor-
tionment, the Census Bureau sought to use the sampling technique, and was
sued by the House of Representatives, which claimed that the passage quoted
here prohibits sampling in such a census. The Bureau defended its plan, contend-
ing that the passage authorizes the use of sampling in some contexts, but in ap-
portionment contexts leaves the matter undetermined. Which interpretation of
that exceptive provision in the statute is correct?
The court found the House position correct, writing:
Consider the directive “except for my grandmother’s wedding dress, you shall take the
contents of my closet to the cleaners.” It is . . . likely that the granddaughter would be
upset if the recipient of her directive were to take the wedding dress to the cleaners
and subsequently argue that she had left this decision to his discretion. The reason for
this result . . . is because of our background knowledge concerning wedding dresses:
We know they are extraordinarily fragile and of deep sentimental value to family mem-
bers. We therefore would not expect that a decision to take [that] dress to the cleaners
would be purely discretionary.
The apportionment of Congressional representatives among the states is the wed-
ding dress in the closet. . . . The apportionment function is the “sole constitutional
function of the decennial enumeration.” The manner in which it is conducted may im-
pact not only the distribution of representatives among the states, but also the balance
of political power within the House. . . . This court finds that the Census Act prohibits
the use of statistical sampling to determine the population for the purpose of appor-
tionment of representatives among the states. . . .*
The exceptive proposition in this statute is thus to be understood as asserting
the conjunction of two propositions: (1) that the use of sampling is not permit-
ted in the context of apportionment, and (2) that in all other contexts sampling
(x)(Ex K 'Px)
K
*Decided by a specially appointed Voting Rights Act panel of three judges on 24 August 1998.
467

Quantification Theory
is discretionary. A controversial sentence in exceptive form must be interpreted
in its context.
In Section 5, our list of rules of inference was expanded by four, and we
showed that the expanded list was sufficient to demonstrate the validity of cate-
gorical syllogisms when they are valid. We have just seen that the same expand-
ed list suffices to establish the validity of asyllogistic arguments of the type
described. Now we may observe that, just as the expanded list was sufficient to
establish validity in asyllogistic arguments, so also the method of proving syllo-
gisms invalid (explained in Section 6) by describing possible nonempty univers-
es, or models, is sufficient to prove the invalidity of asyllogistic arguments of the
present type as well. The following asyllogistic argument,
Managers and superintendents are either competent workers or relatives of the
owner.
Anyone who dares to complain must be either a superintendent or a relative of the
owner.
Managers and foremen alone are competent workers.
Someone did dare to complain.
Therefore some superintendent is a relative of the owner.
may be symbolized as
and we can prove it invalid by describing a possible universe or model contain-
ing the single individual a and assigning the truth value true to Ca, Da, Fa, Ra,
and the truth value false to Sa.
EXERCISES
A. Translate the following statements into logical symbolism, in each case using
the abbreviations suggested:
EXAMPLE
1. Apples and oranges are delicious and nutritious. (Ax, Ox, Dx, Nx)
SOLUTION
The meaning of this proposition clearly is that if anything is either an apple or
an orange it is both delicious and nutritious. Hence it is symbolized as
2. Some foods are edible only if they are cooked. (Fx, Ex, Cx)
3. No car is safe unless it has good brakes. (Cx, Sx, Bx)
(x)[(Ax ¡ Ox) ) (Dx# Nx)]
‹ (x)(Sx# Rx)
(x)Dx
(x)[(Mx ¡ Fx) K Cx]
(x)[Dx ) (Sx ¡ Rx)]
(x)[(Mx ¡ Sx) ) (Cx ¡ Rx)]
468

Quantification Theory
4. Any tall man is attractive if he is dark and handsome. (Tx, Mx, Ax, Dx,
Hx)
*5. A gladiator wins if and only if he is lucky. (Gx, Wx, Lx)
6. A boxer who wins if and only if he is lucky is not skillful. (Bx, Wx, Lx,
Sx)
7. Not all people who are wealthy are both educated and cultured. (Px,
Wx, Ex, Cx)
8. Not all tools that are cheap are either soft or breakable. (Tx, Cx, Sx, Bx)
9. Any person is a coward who deserts. (Px, Cx, Dx)
*10. To achieve success, one must work hard if one goes into business, or
study continuously if one enters a profession. (Ax: x achieves success;
Wx: x works hard; Bx: x goes into business; Sx: x studies continuously;
Px: x enters a profession)
11. An old European joke goes like this: In America, everything is permitted
that is not forbidden. In Germany, everything is forbidden that is not
permitted. In France, everything is permitted even if it’s forbidden. In
Russia, everything is forbidden even if it’s permitted. (Ax: x is in America;
Gx: x is in Germany; Fx: x is in France; Rx: x is in Russia; Px: x is permit-
ted; Nx: x is forbidden)
B. For each of the following, either construct a formal proof of validity or prove
it invalid. If it is to be proved invalid, a model containing as many as three ele-
ments may be required.
*1.
2.
3.
4.
*5.
6.
‹ (x)(Zx# 'Bx)
(x)[Wx ) Yx) ) (Bx ) Ax)]
(x)[Xx# (Zx# 'Ax)]
(x)[Wx ) (Xx ) Yx)]
‹ (x)(Ux# Vx)
(x)(Vx# 'Tx)
(x)(Ux# 'Sx)
(x)(Sx# Tx)
‹ (x)[(Mx ∨ Ox) ) Rx]
(x)[(Ox# Px) ) (Qx ∨ Rx)]
(x)[(Mx# Nx) ) (Ox ∨ Px)]
‹ (x)(Kx# Lx)
(x)[(Ix# Jx)# 'Lx]
(x){[Ix ) (Jx# 'Kx)]# [Jx ) (Ix ) Kx)]}
‹ (x)(Ex ) Hx)
(x){(Ex# Fx)# [(Ex ∨ Fx) ) (Gx# Hx)]}
‹ (x)(Bx ) Cx)
(x)[(Ax ∨ Bx) ) (Cx# Dx)]
469

Quantification Theory
7.
8.
‹ (x)(Jx ¡ Kx)
(x)[(Jx ¡ 'Jx) ) (Ix ) Hx)]
(x)['Kx ) (Hx ¡ Ix)]
(x)[(Hx# Ix) ) Jx]
(x)(Hx ) Ix)
‹ (x)(Gx# 'Fx)
(x)(Gx ) Cx)
(x)[Ex# '(Dx ) Cx)]
(x)[(Cx# Dx) ) Fx]
(x)[Cx# '(Dx ) Ex)]
9.
*10.
‹ (x)(Ux# 'Vx)
(x)('Wx ) Xx)
(x)(Tx# 'Xx)
(x)(Sx# 'Wx)
(x)[(Sx ¡ Tx) ) '(Ux ¡ Vx)]
‹ (x)(Nx ) Rx)
(x)(Lx# 'Mx)
(x){[(Ox ) Qx)# 'Rx] ) Mx}
(x)(Mx# 'Lx)
(x){(Lx ¡ Mx) ) {[(Nx# Ox) ¡ Px] ) Qx}}
C. For each of the following, either construct a formal proof of its validity or
prove it invalid, in each case using the suggested notation:
*1. Acids and bases are chemicals. Vinegar is an acid. Therefore vinegar is a
chemical. (Ax, Bx, Cx, Vx)
2. Teachers are either enthusiastic or unsuccessful. Teachers are not all un-
successful. Therefore there are enthusiastic teachers. (Tx, Ex, Ux)
3. Argon compounds and sodium compounds are either oily or volatile.
Not all sodium compounds are oily. Therefore some argon compounds
are volatile. (Ax, Sx, Ox, Vx)
4. No employee who is either slovenly or discourteous can be promoted.
Therefore no discourteous employee can be promoted. (Ex, Sx, Dx, Px)
*5. No employer who is either inconsiderate or tyrannical can be successful.
Some employers are inconsiderate. There are tyrannical employers.
Therefore no employer can be successful. (Ex, Ix, Tx, Sx)
6. There is nothing made of gold that is not expensive. No weapons are
made of silver. Not all weapons are expensive. Therefore not everything
is made of gold or silver. (Gx, Ex, Wx, Sx)
7. There is nothing made of tin that is not cheap. No rings are made of
lead. Not everything is either tin or lead. Therefore not all rings are
cheap. (Tx, Cx, Rx, Lx)
8. Some prize fighters are aggressive but not intelligent. All prize fighters
wear gloves. Prize fighters are not all aggressive. Any slugger is aggres-
sive. Therefore not every slugger wears gloves. (Px, Ax, Ix, Gx, Sx)
9. Some photographers are skillful but not imaginative. Only artists are
photographers. Photographers are not all skillful. Any journeyman is
skillful. Therefore not every artist is a journeyman. (Px, Sx, Ix, Ax, Jx)
*10. A book is interesting only if it is well written. A book is well written
only if it is interesting. Therefore any book is both interesting and well
written if it is either interesting or well written. (Bx, Ix, Wx)
470

Quantification Theory
D. Do the same (as in Set C) for each of the following:
*1. All citizens who are not traitors are present. All officials are citizens. Some
officials are not present. Therefore there are traitors. (Cx, Tx, Px, Ox)
2. Doctors and lawyers are professional people. Professional people and
executives are respected. Therefore doctors are respected. (Dx, Lx, Px,
Ex, Rx)
3. Only lawyers and politicians are members. Some members are not col-
lege graduates. Therefore some lawyers are not college graduates. (Lx,
Px, Mx, Cx)
4. All cut-rate items are either shopworn or out of date. Nothing shop-
worn is worth buying. Some cut-rate items are worth buying. Therefore
some cut-rate items are out of date. (Cx, Sx, Ox, Wx)
*5. Some diamonds are used for adornment. Only things worn as jewels or
applied as cosmetics are used for adornment. Diamonds are never ap-
plied as cosmetics. Nothing worn as a jewel is properly used if it has an
industrial application. Some diamonds have industrial applications.
Therefore some diamonds are not properly used. (Dx, Ax, Jx, Cx, Px, Ix)
6. No candidate who is either endorsed by labor or opposed by the Tribune
can carry the farm vote. No one can be elected who does not carry the
farm vote. Therefore no candidate endorsed by labor can be elected. (Cx,
Lx, Ox, Fx, Ex)
7. No metal is friable that has been properly tempered. No brass is proper-
ly tempered unless it is given an oil immersion. Some of the ashtrays on
the shelf are brass. Everything on the shelf is friable. Brass is a metal.
Therefore some of the ashtrays were not given an oil immersion. (Mx: x
is metal; Fx: x is friable; Tx: x is properly tempered; Bx: x is brass; Ox: x
is given an oil immersion; Ax: x is an ashtray; Sx: x is on the shelf)
8. Anyone on the committee who knew the nominee would vote for the
nominee if free to do so. Everyone on the committee was free to vote for
the nominee except those who were either instructed not to by the party
caucus or had pledged support to someone else. Everyone on the com-
mittee knew the nominee. No one who knew the nominee had pledged
support to anyone else. Not everyone on the committee voted for the
nominee. Therefore the party caucus had instructed some members of
the committee not to vote for the nominee. (Cx: x is on the committee;
Kx: x knows the nominee; Vx: x votes for the nominee; Fx: x is free to
vote for the nominee; Ix: x is instructed by the party caucus not to vote
for the nominee; Px: x had pledged support to someone else)
9. All logicians are deep thinkers and effective writers. To write effectively,
one must be economical if one’s audience is general, and comprehensive
if one’s audience is technical. No deep thinker has a technical audience
if he has the ability to reach a general audience. Some logicians are com-
prehensive rather than economical. Therefore not all logicians have the
ability to reach a general audience. (Lx: x is a logician; Dx: x is a deep
471

Quantification Theory
thinker; Wx: x is an effective writer; Ex: x is economical; Gx: x’s audience
is general; Cx: x is comprehensive; Tx: x’s audience is technical; Ax: x
has the ability to reach a general audience)
*10. Some criminal robbed the Russell mansion. Whoever robbed the Russell
mansion either had an accomplice among the servants or had to break in.
To break in, one would either have to smash the door or pick the lock.
Only an expert locksmith could have picked the lock. Had anyone
smashed the door, he would have been heard. Nobody was heard. If the
criminal who robbed the Russell mansion managed to fool the guard, he
must have been a convincing actor. No one could rob the Russell mansion
unless he fooled the guard. No criminal could be both an expert lock-
smith and a convincing actor. Therefore some criminal had an accomplice
among the servants. (Cx: x is a criminal; Rx: x robbed the Russell mansion;
Sx: x had an accomplice among the servants; Bx: x broke in; Dx: x
smashed the door; Px: x picked the lock; Lx: x is an expert locksmith; Hx: x
was heard; Fx: x fooled the guard; Ax: x is a convincing actor)
11. If anything is expensive it is both valuable and rare. Whatever is valu-
able is both desirable and expensive. Therefore if anything is either
valuable or expensive then it must be both valuable and expensive. (Ex:
x is expensive; Vx: x is valuable; Rx: x is rare; Dx: x is desirable)
12. Figs and grapes are healthful. Nothing healthful is either illaudable or
jejune. Some grapes are jejune and knurly. Some figs are not knurly.
Therefore some figs are illaudable. (Fx: x is a fig; Gx: x is a grape; Hx: x is
healthful; Ix: x is illaudable; Jx: x is jejune; Kx: x is knurly)
13. Figs and grapes are healthful. Nothing healthful is both illaudable and
jejune. Some grapes are jejune and knurly. Some figs are not knurly.
Therefore some figs are not illaudable. (Fx: x is a fig; Gx: x is a grape; Hx:
x is healthful; Ix: x is illaudable; Jx: x is jejune; Kx: x is knurly)
14. Gold is valuable. Rings are ornaments. Therefore gold rings are valuable
ornaments. (Gx: x is gold; Vx: x is valuable; Rx: x is a ring; Ox: x is an
ornament)
*15. Oranges are sweet. Lemons are tart. Therefore oranges and lemons are
sweet or tart. (Ox: x is an orange; Sx: x is sweet; Lx: x is a lemon; Tx: x is tart)
16. Socrates is mortal. Therefore everything is either mortal or not mortal.
(s: Socrates; Mx: x is mortal)
chapter 
Summary
In Section 1, we explained that the analytical techniques are not adequate to deal
with arguments whose validity depends on the inner logical structure of non-
compound propositions. We described quantification as a theory that, with some
additional symbolization, enables us to exhibit this inner structure and thereby
greatly enhances our analytical powers.
472

Quantification Theory
In Section 2, we explained singular propositions and introduced the symbols
for an individual variable x, for individual constants (lowercase letters a through
w), and for attributes (capital letters). We introduced the concept of a proposi-
tional function, an expression that contains an individual variable and becomes a
statement when an individual constant is substituted for the individual variable.
A proposition may thus be obtained from a propositional function by the process
of instantiation.
In Section 3, we explained how propositions also can be obtained from
propositional functions by means of generalization, that is, using quantifiers
such as “everything,” “nothing,” and “some.” We introduced the universal
quantifier (x), meaning “given any x,” and the existential quantifier 
, mean-
ing “there is at least one x such that.” On a square of opposition, we showed the
relations between universal and existential quantification.
In Section 4, we showed how each of the four main types of general proposi-
tions,

A: universal affirmative propositions

E: universal negative propositions

I: particular affirmative propositions

O: particular negative propositions
is correctly symbolized by propositional functions and quantifiers. We also ex-
plained the modern interpretation of the relations of A, E, I, and O propositions.
In Section 5, we expanded the list of rules of inference, adding four
additional rules:

Universal Instantiation, U.I.

Universal Generalization, U.G.

Existential Instantiation, E.I.

Existential Generalization, E.G.
and showed how, by using these and the other nineteen rules set forth earlier, we
can construct a formal proof of validity of deductive arguments that depend on
the inner structure of noncompound propositions.
In Section 6, we explained how the method of refutation by logical analogy can
be used to prove the invalidity of arguments involving quantifiers by creating a
model, or possible universe, containing exactly one, or exactly two, or exactly three
(etc.) individuals and the restatement of the constituent propositions of an argu-
ment in that possible universe. An argument involving quantifiers is proved invalid
if we can exhibit a possible universe containing at least one individual, such that the
argument’s premises are true and its conclusion is false in that universe.
In Section 7, we explained how we can symbolize and evaluate asyllogistic
arguments, those containing propositions not reducible to A, E, I, and O propo-
sitions, or singular propositions. We noted the complexity of exceptive proposi-
tions and other propositions whose logical meaning must first be understood
and then rendered accurately with propositional functions and quantifiers.
(x)
473

JENNA’S WORLD
Jenna is a college sophomore, and she is not
happy. She signed up for Logic thinking that the
course catalog said Logging.
1. Which of the following propositions is in-
dicated by the following Venn diagram?
(More than one may be correct.)
A. No spiders are things that Jenna hates.
B. Some spiders are things that Jenna
hates.
C. All spiders are things that Jenna hates.
D. If Jenna does not hate something, then
that thing is not a spider.
E. If Jenna hates something, then it is a
spider.
Things that
Jenna hates
Gross, this thing is
full of spiders!
Spiders
kickball
culottes
Cheese
ex-boyfriends
The Volturi
Logs
I have
an axe.
I want to be
a lumberjack.
Quantification Theory
How I Remember A, E, I, and O
Propositions by Jenna
A – ALL of some kind of thing is some other
kind of thing. (This one actually starts with A!)
E – EXACTLY ZERO of some kind of thing is
some other kind of thing!
I – INTERESTINGLY, some of some kind of
thing is some other kind of thing, but I’m not
telling you which ones!
O – OMG! You know how we’ve been think-
ing that some kind of thing was some other
kind of thing? Turns out some of it is NOT!
2. Identify each as an A, E, I, or O proposi-
tion, and write out in words the statement
represented in each case:
X
Good ways to
tell someone you
love them
Venn
diagrams
Things that remind
Jenna of the
Olympics
Venn
diagrams
World logging
champions
Philosophy
majors
People who sleep
all night and
work all day
Lumberjacks
X
LOGIC IN THE REAL WORLD
474

3. Put this syllogism into standard form,
being sure to translate each proposition
into a categorical statement:
Obviously, some girls wish that their col-
leges offered courses on logging. Of all of
the people who want to be lumberjacks,
some are girls. Some people who want to
be lumberjacks wish their colleges offered
courses on logging.
4. Is the syllogism presented in Exercise 3
valid? If so, what is its name?
A. Barbara
B. Cesare
C. Ferison
D. The syllogism is not valid.
5. Translate this sorites into standard form,
being sure to translate each proposition
into a categorical statement:
All the dining hall employees totally
smell like cheese. Everyone who has
found Jenna’s framed portrait of Joe
Biden a little off-putting is someone
who has been allowed into her dorm
room. No dining hall employees have
found Jenna’s framed portrait of Joe
Biden a little off-putting, since no one
who smells like cheese is allowed in
Jenna’s dorm room.
6. Write the sorites above as two syllogisms
(symbolizing each term with a capital let-
ter), and give the name of each syllogism.
Why can’t
the name of
my syllogism
be Jenna?
Symbolize each of the following using cap-
ital letters to abbreviate the simple state-
ments involved and using the horseshoe,
the dot, the wedge, and the curl.
7. Jenna will fail logic unless she masters en-
thymemes or if she spends too much time
thinking about Robert Pattinson.
8. If a spider crawls in Jenna’s bed while she
is sleeping, she will either sleep through it
or else wake up, scream, and then call her
parents in the middle of the night.
9. If it is the case that if Jenna fails logic, her
parents will take away her credit card, then
Jenna will either study harder or hire a
tutor, but if it is not the case that if Jenna
fails logic her parents will take away her
credit card, then Jenna will skip class and
stare at her belly button instead.
10. If 
is it true that 
I do NNN
like this at all.
' ' 'B ) ' 'A?
'A ) B,
I tried to join some
sororities, but they
said no. Oh, sororities
again. Whatever.
Quantification Theory
LOGIC IN THE REAL WORLD 
475

Ux means “x is unwelcome in a lunch box”?
(More than one answer may be correct.)
A.
B.
C.
D.
Solutions
1. C and D only. From the Venn diagram, we
can see that the area for spiders that is not
in the overlap is shaded; therefore, there
are NO spiders that are not things that
Jenna hates. That is, Jenna hates all spiders.
From that statement, the contrapositive fol-
lows: If all spiders are things that Jenna
hates, then if something is a thing Jenna
does not hate, that thing is not a spider.
2. I–Some lumberjacks are people who sleep
all night and work all day.
E–No philosophy majors are world log-
ging champions.
A–All Venn diagrams are things that re-
mind Jenna of the Olympics.
O–Some Venn diagrams are not good ways
to tell someone you love them.
3. As a syllogism composed of categorical
propositions, Jenna’s argument is:
Some people who want to be lumberjacks
are students who wish that their colleges
offered courses on logging.
Some girls are people who want to be lum-
berjacks. 
Therefore, some girls are students who wish
that their colleges offered courses on logging.
4. The argument is not valid. You can deter-
mine this by noting that it is not one of the
fifteen valid forms of the standard-form cat-
egorical syllogism, or you may simply use
common sense: Imagine that there are 1,000
people who want to be lumberjacks. It is
possible, from the argument, that 10 of them
are girls, or all of them are girls (we just
know that there are some). We also know
that some of the people who want to be lum-
berjacks (maybe 10 of them, maybe 1,000 of
them) wish that their colleges offered cours-
es on logging. So, while it is certainly possi-
ble that some girls are students who wish
that their colleges offered courses on log-
(x)('Sx ) 'Ux)
(x)(Rx ) Ux)
(Ex)(Rx # Ex)
(Ex)(Rx # Ux)
TXT MSGS FROM JENNA TO HER BF
1:05
if u rlly luv me, u will plan 2 help me
w/these proofs
1:11
either u dont plan 2 help me w/these
proofs or u have been kidnapped! 
2:44
if u rlly luv me, u have been kid-
napped!!! OMG!
7:50
I L U. 
7:52
I dont know what that means. 
11. Jenna’s first three text messages form a
valid argument; adding just one statement
to the premises will produce a formal
proof of its validity. If L = you really love
me, H = you will plan to help me with
these proofs, and K = you have been kid-
napped, write the statements in logic nota-
tion, add the missing components to the
proof, and name the rules of inference that
have been applied. Disregard “OMG!”
12. An asyllogistic inference can be made from
the two premises shown above. Which  of
the following would be an appropriate con-
clusion, if Ex means “x has eight legs” and
(x)(Sx    Bx)
(  x)(Sx • Rx)
U
is a spider
   both has 8 legs
and is unwelcome
in a lunch box
  is radioactive
E
I will make
an asyllogistic
inference!
It will have
spiders.
Quantification Theory
476

LOGIC IN THE REAL WORLD 
ging, it is also perfectly possible that, out of
1,000 people who want to be lumberjacks, 10
of them are girls, and a different 10 of them
are students who wish that their colleges of-
fered courses on logging. There is no guar-
antee of an overlap.
5. Here is the sorites in standard  form (the
numbers show the position of each state-
ment in the original sorites):
(1) All people who work in the dining
hall are people who smell like cheese.
(4) No one who smells like cheese is al-
lowed in Jenna’s dorm room.
(2) All people who have found Jenna’s
framed portrait of Joe Biden a little off-
putting are people who have been al-
lowed into her dorm room.
(3) Therefore, no dining hall employees are
people who have found Jenna’s framed
portrait of Joe Biden a little off-putting.
6. All D is S.
No S is A.
Therefore, no D is A.
Camenes
No D is A.
All O is A.
Therefore, no D is O.
Cesare
7. If M = Jenna masters enthymemes, R = Jenna
spends too much time thinking about Robert
Pattinson, and F = Jenna will fail logic:
8. If C = A spider crawls in Jenna’s bed while
she is sleeping, L = Jenna will sleep
through it, W = Jenna will wake up, S =
Jenna will scream, and P = Jenna will call
her parents in the middle of the night:
9. If F = Jenna fails logic, P = Jenna’s parents
will take away her credit card, S = Jenna
will study harder, H = Jenna will hire a
tutor, K = Jenna will skip class, and B =
Jenna will stare at her belly button:
10. Yes. If 
then it is true, from contra-
position, that 
Three negatives is
'B ) A.
'A ) B,
(F ) P) ) (S ∨ H) # '(F ) P) ) (K # B)
C ) [L ∨ (W # S # P)]
('M ∨ R) ) F
Quantification Theory
the same as one negative (that is, since a
double negative is a positive, three nega-
tives is really one positive and one nega-
tive, and hence, a negative) and two
negatives is the same as zero negatives, so
is equivalent to 
11. Jenna’s original argument may be written:
As a correct proof:
1.
2.
3.
2, Implication
4.
1, 3, Hypothetical Syllogism
12. A and B only. Consider conclusion A,
placed correctly below Jenna’s premises:
All spiders both have eight
legs and are unwelcome in
a lunch box.
Some spiders are radioac-
tive.
Therefore, some things
that are radioactive are un-
welcome in a lunch box.
This is plainly true, and since Bx included
both Ex and Ux, it is clear that Ex can serve
just as well as Ux in the conclusion, so B is
also true:
All spiders both have eight
legs and are unwelcome in
a lunch box.
Some spiders are radioac-
tive.
Therefore, some things
that are radioactive have
eight legs.
However, choices C and D state, unjustifi-
ably, that ALL x that are radioactive are un-
welcome in a lunch box, and that anything
that is not a spider is not unwelcome in a
lunch box—that is, that anything other
than a spider would be totally fine in a
lunch box. These conclusions are not im-
plied by the argument.
‹ (Ex)(Rx # Ex)
(Ex)(Sx # Rx)
(x)(Sx ) Bx)
‹ (Ex)(Rx # Ux)
(Ex)(Sx # Rx)
(x)(Sx ) Bx)
L ) K
H ) K
‹ L ) K
'H ∨ K
L ) H
‹ L ) K
'H ∨ K
L ) H
'B ) A.
' ' 'B ) ' 'A
477

Quantification Theory
SOLUTIONS TO SELECTED EXERCISES
Logic Overview—Quantification Rules 
UI:
Universal Instantiation
(x)(x)
v
(where v is any individual symbol)
UG:
Universal Generalization 
y
(where y denotes “any arbitrarily 
(x)(x)
selected individual”)
EI:
Existential Instantiation
(∃x)(x)
v
[where v is any individual constant (other than y) 
having no previous occurrence in the context]
EG:
Existential Generalization
v
(where v is any individual symbol)
(∃x)(x)
Truth-Functional
Symbol 
Connective
(Name of Symbol)
And
• (dot)
Or
∨(wedge)
If . . . then
 (horseshoe)
If and only if
 (tribar)
The Four Truth-Functional Connectives
SECTION 4
Exercises
 
 
A. 
5. (∃x)(Dx • ~Rx)
10. (x)(Cx  ~Fx)
15. (x)(Vx  Cx)
20. (x)(Cx  Hx)
B. 
5. [(∃x)(Gx • ~Sx)] • [(∃x)(Dx • ~Bx)]
10. (x)(~Bx  ~Wx)
C. 
1. (∃x)(Ax • ~Bx)
5. (∃x)(Ix • ~Jx)
10. (∃x)(Sx • ~Tx)
SECTION 5
Exercises
 
A. 
5. 1. (x)(Mx  Nx)
2. (∃x)(Mx • Ox)
∴(∃x)(Ox • Nx)
3. Ma • Oa
2, E.I.
4. Ma  Na
1, U.I.
5. Ma
3, Simp.
6. Na
4, 5, M.P.
7. Oa • Ma
3, Com.
8. Oa
7, Simp.
9. Oa • Na
8, 6, Conj.
10. (∃x)(Ox • Nx)
9, E.G.
478

Quantification Theory
10. 1. (x)(Bx  ~Cx)
2. (∃x)(Cx • Dx)
∴(∃x)(Dx • ~Bx)
3. Ca • Da
2, E.I.
4. Ba  ~Ca
1, U.I.
5. Ca
3, Simp.
6. ~~Ca
5, D.N.
7. ~Ba
4, 6, M.T.
8. Da • Ca
3, Com.
9. Da
8, Simp.
10. Da • ~Ba
9, 7, Conj.
11. (∃x)(Dx • ~Bx)
10, E.G.
B. 
1. 1. (x)(Ax  ~Bx)
2. Bc
∴~Ac
3. Ac  ~Bc
1, U.I.
4. ~~Bc
2, D.N.
5. ~Ac
3, 4, M.T.
5. 1. (x)(Mx  Nx)
2. (∃x)(Ox • Mx)
∴(∃x)(Ox • Nx)
3. Oa • Ma
2, E.I.
4. Ma  Na
1, U.I.
5. Oa
3, Simp.
6. Ma • Oa
3, Com.
7. Ma
6, Simp.
8. Na
4, 7, M.P.
9. Oa • Na
5, 8, Conj.
10. (∃x)(Ox • Nx)
9, E.G.
10. 1. (x)(Ax  Rx)
2. ~Rs
∴~As
3. As  Rs
1, U.I.
4. ~As
3, 2, M.T.
SECTION 6
Exercises 
A. 
5.
(∃x)(Mx • Nx)
logically
(Ma • Na) ∨(Mb • Nb)
(∃x)(Mx • Ox)
equivalent
(Ma • Oa) ∨(Mb • Ob)
∴(x)(Ox  Nx)
in a, b to
∴(Oa  Na) • (Ob • Nb)
proved invalid by
or any of several other truth-value assignments.
10.
(∃x)(Bx • ~Cx)
logically
(Ba • ~Ca) ∨(Bb • ~Cb)
(x)(Dx  ~Cx)
equivalent
(Da  ~Ca) • (Db  ~Cb)
∴(x)(Dx  Bx)
in a, b to
∴(Da  Ba) • (Db  Bb)
proved invalid by
Ba
Bb
Ca
Cb
Da
Db
f
t
f
f
t
t
Ma Mb Na
Nb
Oa Ob
t
t
t
f
t
t
{
{
{
{
479

Quantification Theory
B. 
1.
(x)(Ax  Bx)
logically
Aa  Ba
(x)(Cx  Bx)
equivalent
Ca  Ba
∴(x)(Ax  Cx)
in a to
∴Aa  Ca
proved invalid by
5.
(∃x)(Mx • Nx)
logically
(Ma • Na) ∨(Mb • Nb)
(∃x)(Ox • ~Nx)
equivalent
(Oa • ~Na) ∨(Ob • Nb)
∴(x)(Ox  ~Mx)
in a, b to
∴(Oa  ~Ma) • (Ob  ~Mb)
proved invalid by
or any of several other truth-value assignments.
10.
(x)(Mx  Sx)
logically
Ma  Sa
(x)(Wx  Mx)
equivalent
Wa  Ma
∴(x)(Sx  Wx)
in a to
∴Sa  Wa
proved invalid by
Ma Sa
Wa
t
t
f
Ma Mb Na
Nb
Oa Ob
t
t
t
f
t
t
Aa
Ba
Ca
t
t
f
SECTION 7
Exercises 
A. 
5. (x)Gx  (Wx  Lx)
10. (x){Ax  [(Bx  Wx) • (Px  Sx)]}
B. 
1. 1. (x)[(Ax ∨Bx)  (Cx • Dx)]
∴(x)(Bx  Cx)
2. (Ay ∨By)  (Cy • Dy)
1, U.I.
3. ~(Ay ∨By) ∨(Cy • Dy)
2, Impl.
4. [~(Ay ∨By) ∨Cy] • [~(Ay ∨By) ∨Dy]
3, Dist.
5. ~(Ay ∨By) ∨Cy
4, Simp.
6. Cy ∨~(Ay ∨By)
5, Com.
7. Cy ∨(~Ay • ~By)
6, De M.
8. (Cy ∨~Ay) • (Cy ∨~By)
7, Dist.
9. (Cy ∨~By) • (Cy ∨~Ay)
8, Com.
10. Cy ∨~By
9, Simp.
11. ~By ∨Cy
10, Com.
12. By  Cy
11, Impl.
13. (x)(Bx  Cx)
12, U.G.
5.
(∃x)(Sx • Tx)
logically
(Sa • Ta) ∨(Sb • Tb) ∨(Sc • Tc)
(∃x)(Ux • ~Sx)
equivalent
(Ua • ~Sa) ∨(Ub • ~Sb) ∨(Uc • ~Sc)
(∃x)(Vx • ~Tx)
in a, b, c
(Va • ~Ta) ∨(Vb • ~Tb) ∨(Vc • ~Tc)
∴(∃x)(Ux • Vx)
to
∴(Ua • Va) ∨(Ub • ~Vb) ∨(Uc • Vc)
{
{
{
{
{
{
{
{
480

Quantification Theory
proved invalid by
or any of several other truth-value assignments.
10.
logically equivalent in  a, b to
(x)[(Sx ∨Tx)  ~(Ux ∨Vx)]
[(Sa ∨Ta)  ~(Ua ∨Va) • 
(∃x)(Sx • ~Wx)
[(Sb ∨Tb)  ~(Ub ∨Vb)]
(∃x)(Tx • ~Xx)
(x)(~Wx  Xx)
∴(∃x)(Ux • ~Vx)
and proved invalid by
or any of several other truth-value assignments.
Sa Sb Ta Tb Ua Ub Va Vb Wa Wb Xa Xb
t
t
t
t
f
f
f
f
f
t
t
f
Sa Sb Sc Ta Tb Tc Ua Ub Uc Va Vb Vc
t
f
t
t
t
f
f
t
f
t
f
t
(Sa • ~Wa) ∨(Sb • ~Wb)
(Ta • ~Xa) ∨(Tb • ~Xb)
(~Wa  Xa) • (~Wb  Xb)
∴(Ua • ~Va) ∨(Ub • ~Vb)
C. 
1. 1. (x)[(Ax ∨Bx)  Cx]
2. (x)(Vx  Ax)
∴(x)(Vx  Cx)
3. (Ay ∨By)  Cy
1, U.I.
4. Vy  Ay
2, U.I.
5. ~Vy ∨Ay
4, Impl.
6. (~Vy ∨Ay) ∨By
5, Add.
7. ~Vy ∨(Ay ∨By)
6, Assoc.
8. Vy  (Ay ∨By)
7, Impl.
9. Vy  Cy
8, 3, H.S.
10. (x)(Vx  Cx)
9, U.G.
5.
(x){[Ex • (Ix ∨Tx)]  ~Sx}
(∃x)(Ex • Ix)
(∃x)(Ex • Tx)
∴(x)(Ex  ~Sx)
This argument is logically equivalent in  a, b to
{[Ea • (Ia ∨Ta)]  ~Sa} • {[Eb • (Ib ∨Tb)]  ~Sb}
(Ea • Ia) ∨(Eb • Ib)
(Ea • Ta) ∨(Eb • Tb)
∴(Ea  ~Sa) • (Eb  ~Sb)
which is proved invalid by
or
Ea Eb Ia
Ib
Ta Tb Sa Sb
t
t
t
f
t
f
f
t
t
t
f
t
f
t
t
f
f
v
481

Quantification Theory
10. 1. (x)[Bx  (Ix  Wx)]
2. (x)[Bx  (Wx  Ix)]
∴(x){Bx  [(Ix ∨Wx)  (Ix • Wx)]}
3. By  (Iy  Wy)
1, U.I.
4. By  (Wy  Iy)
2, U.I.
5. [By  (Iy  Wy)] • [By  (Wy  Iy)]
3, 4, Conj.
6. [~By ∨(Iy  Wy)] • [~By ∨(Wy  Iy)]
5, Impl.
7. ~By ∨[(Iy  Wy) • (Wy  Iy)]
6, Dist.
8. ~By ∨(Iy  Wy)
7, Equiv.
9. ~By ∨[(Iy • Wy) ∨(~Iy • ~Wy)]
8, Equiv.
10. ~By ∨[(~Iy • ~Wy) ∨(Iy • Wy)]
9, Com.
11. ~By ∨[~(Iy ∨Wy) ∨(Iy • Wy)]
10, De M.
12. By  [(Iy ∨Wy)  (Iy • Wy)]
11, Impl.
13. (x){Bx  [(Ix ∨Wx)  (Ix • Wx)]}
12, U.G.
D. 
1. 1. (x)[(Cx • ~Tx)  Px]
2. (x)(Ox  Cx)
3. (∃x)(Ox • ~Px)
∴(∃x)(Tx)
4. Oa • ~Pa
3, E.I.
5. Oa  Ca
2, U.I.
6. (Ca • ~Ta)  Pa
1, U.I.
7. Oa
4, Simp.
8. Ca
5, 7, M.P.
9. ~Pa • Oa
4, Com.
10. ~Pa
9, Simp.
11. Ca  (~Ta  Pa)
6, Exp.
12. ~Ta  Pa
11, 8, M.P.
13. ~~Ta
12, 10, M.T.
14. Ta
13, D.N.
15. (∃x)(Tx)
14, E.G.
5.
(∃x)(Dx • Ax)
(x)[Ax  (Jx ∨Cx)]
(x)(Dx  ~Cx)
(x)[(Jx • Ix)  ~Px]
(∃x)(Dx • Ix)
∴(∃x)(Dx • ~Px)
This argument is logically equivalent in  a, b to
(Da • Aa) ∨(Db • Ab)
[Aa  (Ja ∨Ca)] • [Ab  (Jb ∨Cb)]
(Da  ~Ca) • (Db  ~Cb)
[(Ja • Ia)  ~Pa] • [(Jb • Ib)  ~Pb]
(Da • Ia) ∨(Db • Ib)
∴(Da • ~Pa) ∨(Db • ~Pb)
proved invalid by
or 
10. 1. (∃x)(Cx • Rx)
2. (x)[Rx  (Sx ∨Bx)]
3. (x)[Bx  (Dx ∨Px)]
4. (x)(Px  Lx)
Da Db Aa Ab Ja Jb Ca Cb Ia
Ib Pa Pb
t
t
t
f
t
f
f
f
f
t
t
t
t
t
f
t
f
t
f
f
t
f
t
t
482

Quantification Theory
5. (x)(Dx  Hx)
6. (x)(~Hx)
7. (x){[(Cx • Rx) • Fx]  Ax}
8. (x)(Rx  Fx)
9. (x)[Cx  ~(Lx • Ax)]
∴(∃x)(Cx • Sx)
10. Ca • Ra
1, E.I.
11. Ra • Ca
10, Com.
12. Ra
11, Simp.
13. Ra  Fa
8, U.I.
14. Fa
13, 12, M.P.
15. (Ca • Ra) • Fa
10, 14, Conj.
16. [(Ca • Ra) • Fa]  Aa
7, U.I.
17. Aa
16, 15, M.P.
18. Ca  ~(La • Aa)
9, U.I.
19. Ca
10, Simp.
20. ~(La • Aa)
18, 19, M.P.
21. ~La ∨~Aa
20, De M.
22. ~Aa ∨~La
21, Com.
23. Aa  ~La
22, Impl.
24. ~La
23, 17, M.P.
25. Pa  La
4, U.I.
26. ~Pa
25, 24, M.T.
27. Da  Ha
5, U.I.
28. ~Ha
6, U.I.
29. ~Da
27, 28, M.T.
30. ~Da • ~Pa
29, 26, Conj.
31. ~(Da ∨Pa)
30, De M.
32. Ba  (Da ∨Pa)
3, U.I.
33. ~Ba
32, 31, M.T.
34. Ra  (Sa ∨Ba)
2, U.I.
35. Sa ∨Ba
34, 12, M.P.
36. Ba ∨Sa
35, Com.
37. Sa
36, 33, D.S.
38. Ca • Sa
19, 37, Conj.
39. (∃x)(Cx • Sx)
38, E.G.
15. 1. (x)(Ox  Sx)
2. (x)(Lx  Tx)
∴(x)[(Ox ∨Lx)  (Sx ∨Tx)]
3. Oy  Sy
1, U.I.
4. Ly  Ty
2, U.I.
5. ~Oy ∨Sy
3, Impl.
6. (~Oy ∨Sy) ∨Ty
5, Add.
7. ~Oy ∨(Sy ∨Ty)
6, Assoc.
8. (Sy ∨Ty) ∨~Oy
7, Com.
9. ~Ly ∨Ty
4, Impl.
10. (~Ly ∨Ty) ∨Sy
9, Add.
11. ~Ly ∨(Ty ∨Sy)
10, Assoc.
12. ~Ly ∨(Sy ∨Ty)
11, Com.
13. (Sy ∨Ty) ∨~Ly
12, Com.
14. [(Sy ∨Ty) ∨~Oy] • [(Sy ∨Ty) ∨~Ly]
8, 13, Conj.
15. (Sy ∨Ty) ∨(~Oy • ~Ly)
14, Dist.
16. (~Oy • ~Ly) ∨(Sy ∨Ty)
15, Com.
17. ~(Oy ∨Ly) ∨(Sy ∨Ty)
16, De M.
18. (Oy ∨Ly)  (Sy ∨Ty)
17, Impl.
19. (x)[(Ox ∨Lx)  (Sx ∨Tx)]
18, U.G.
483

This page intentionally left blank 

Analogical Reasoning
From Chapter 11 of Introduction to Logic, Fourteenth Edition. Irving M. Copi, Carl Cohen, Kenneth McMahon. 
Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Prentice Hall. All rights reserved.

Analogical Reasoning
1
Induction and Deduction Revisited
2
Argument by Analogy
3
Appraising Analogical Arguments
4
Refutation by Logical Analogy
1
Induction and Deduction Revisited
Arguments are built on premises that are believed, or assumed, to be true. Some
premises we establish by deductive arguments that have preceded, but very
many of the premises on which we must rely cannot be established by deduc-
tion. Our reasoning process usually begins with the accepted truth of some “mat-
ters of fact,” in David Hume’s phrase. To establish matters of fact we must rely
on reasoning that is inductive.
Induction thus provides the starting points—the foundation—for the reason-
ing that concerns us most. We reason to establish truths in our everyday lives, to
learn facts about our society, to understand the natural world. Deduction is cer-
tainly powerful in enabling us to move from known (or assumed) propositions
to other propositions that those premises entail, but in the search for truths with
which our reasoning must begin, it is insufficient.
The inductive arguments with which we establish matters of fact differ fun-
damentally from the deductive arguments that we discuss in another section in
this chapter. One essential contrast between the two families of argument lies in
the relation of the premises to the conclusion in the arguments of the two great
families. In deductive arguments, the claim is made that conclusions follow with
certainty from their premises. That claim is appropriate because any deductive
argument, if it is good, brings to light in its conclusion what was already buried
in its premises. The relation between premises and conclusion, in deduction, is
one of logical necessity. In every deductive argument, if it is valid and if its prem-
ises are true, its conclusion must be true.
In inductive arguments—the concern of this chapter—the relation between
premises and conclusion is not one of logical necessity. The claim of certainty is
not made. The terms valid and invalid simply do not apply. This does not mean
that inductive arguments are always weak; sometimes they are very strong in-
deed, and fully deserve our confidence. Scientists now assert without reservation
(for example) that smoking is a cause of cancer. This is true, but it is a truth that
cannot be known with the demonstrative certainty of a valid syllogism. If p or q is
true, and not p is true, we may conclude that q must be the case, beyond all doubt.
It is a truth we establish as an inescapable consequence of the relations of the con-
cepts involved. Empirical truths—about the consequences of smoking, or the
causes of cancer, and all others of that sort—cannot satisfy the standard of
This asset is
intentionally omitted
from this text. It may
be accessed at
www.mcescher.com.
(Relativity by 
M.C. Escher)
486

deductive certainty. By that standard, as one distinguished medical investigator
observes, “No one will ever be able to prove that smoking causes cancer, or that
anything causes anything.”1
In the realm of induction, as we seek new knowledge of facts about the
world, nothing is beyond all doubt. We must rely on arguments that support
their conclusions only as probable, or probably true. Some such arguments are of
only moderate worth; others are very powerful, as we shall see. The strengths
and weaknesses of inductive arguments, and the techniques for the evaluation of
such arguments, are the focus of this chapter.
Arguments grounded on analogies, aiming to establish particular conclu-
sions, are examined first, in this chapter. Arguments that go beyond particulars,
aiming to establish generally applicable causal laws, are also examined in this
chapter. We shall also explore the uses of hypotheses and their confirmation in
developing scientific theories, and we will analyze the concept of probability itself,
the conceptual instrument with which inductive conclusions are commonly
expressed.
2
Argument by Analogy
The most common type of inductive argument relies on analogy. If I report that I
got very good service from a computer of a certain make and model, you may
infer that a new computer of the same make and model will serve you well. That
conclusion has some degree of probability, but the argument is far from com-
pelling. When a new book is called to my attention and I infer that I will enjoy
reading it because I have read and enjoyed other books by the same author, I may
have my confidence in that author strengthened when I read the book—or I may
be disappointed. Analogy is the common ground of our everyday inferences
from past experience to what the future will hold.
Here follow two more analogical arguments, carefully formulated. The first
concludes, on the basis of what we commonly think to be prudent and fair, that it
would be prudent and fair to adopt now a major change in public policy:
Some people look on preemployment testing of teachers as unfair—a kind of double
jeopardy. “Teachers are already college graduates,” they say. “Why should they be
tested?” That’s easy. Lawyers are college graduates and graduates of professional
school, too, but they have to take a bar exam. And a number of other professions ask
prospective members to prove that they know their stuff by taking and passing
examinations: accountants, actuaries, doctors, architects. There is no reason why
teachers shouldn’t be required to do this too.2
The second illustration is an argument—entirely plausible when first pre-
sented two centuries ago—whose conclusion is very probably false:
We may observe a very great similitude between this earth which we inhabit, and the
other planets, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury. They all revolve around the
sun, as the earth does, although at different distances and in different periods. They
borrow all their light from the sun, as the earth does. Several of them are known to
revolve around their axis like the earth, and by that means, must have a like succession
Analogical Reasoning
487

Analogical Reasoning
of day and night. Some of them have moons, that serve to give them light in the
absence of the sun, as our moon does to us. They are all, in their motions, subject to
the same law of gravitation, as the earth is. From all this similitude, it is not
unreasonable to think that those planets may, like our earth, be the habitation of various
orders of living creatures. There is some probability in this conclusion from analogy.3
Neither these arguments, nor those everyday inferences we draw about com-
puters and books and the like, are demonstratively valid. Their conclusions are
not claimed to follow from their premises with logical necessity, and they obvi-
ously do not follow with certainty. What is appropriate for judging the employa-
bility of lawyers and doctors may not be appropriate for judging the
employability of teachers. The earth is very likely to be the only inhabited planet
in our solar system. Your new computer may prove unsuitable for the work you
do, and I may find my favorite author’s latest book intolerably dull. In all such
arguments it is plainly possible—logically possible—that although the premises
are true, the conclusions are false. Arguments by analogy are not to be classified
as either valid or invalid; probability is all that is claimed for them.
In addition to their use in arguments, analogies are very often used nonargu-
mentatively, for the purpose of lively description. The literary uses of analogy in
metaphor and simile are tremendously helpful to the writer who strives to create
a vivid picture in the reader’s mind. In the continuing controversy in the United
States over immigration, for example, one writer expressed his views with a
forceful analogy:
I’m a third-generation American. I don’t know all the legal details about how my
grandparents got here. But I do know that they worked very hard, paid their taxes, and
raised a son who served his country. Americans being against immigration is like a
house being against its bricks.4
Analogy is also used in explanation, when something that may not be famil-
iar to the reader is made somewhat more intelligible by being compared to some-
thing else, presumably more familiar, to which it has certain similarities. When
Eric Lander, the director of the Genome Center at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, sought to explain the huge eventual impact of the Human Genome
Project, analogy was one of the devices he used to enhance the understanding of
those unfamiliar with genetic research:
The genome project is wholly analogous to the creation of the periodic table in chemistry.
Just as Mendeleev’s arrangement of the chemical elements in the periodic table made
coherent a previously unrelated mass of data, so the tens of thousands of genes in
present-day organisms will all turn out to be made from combinations of a much smaller
number of simpler genetic modules or elements, the primordial genes, so to speak.5
Analogies—But No Arguments
Nonargumentative analogies are commonly encountered in the writing of 
high-school students—and some of these are quite funny. We pause for a chuckle:
1. She grew on him like she was a colony of E. coli and he was room-temperature
Canadian beef.
488

The use of analogies in description and explanation is not the same as their
use in argument, though in some cases it may not be easy to decide which use is
intended. But whether used argumentatively or otherwise, analogy is not diffi-
cult to define. To draw an analogy between two or more entities is to indicate one
or more respects in which they are similar.
This definition explains what an analogy is, but there is still the problem of
characterizing an argument by analogy. Let us analyze the structure of a particu-
lar analogical argument, using a very simple example. Consider the argument
that a new car whose purchase I am now contemplating will be very satisfactory
because my old car, of the same make and model, has long given very satisfactory
service. The two entities that are said to be similar are two cars. Three points of
analogy are involved, three respects in which the two entities are said to resem-
ble each other: first, in being cars; second, in being of the same make and model;
and third, in serving me well.
The three points of analogy do not play identical roles in the argument, how-
ever. The first two occur in the premises, whereas the third occurs both in the
premises and in the conclusion. The given argument may be described as having
premises that assert, first, that two things are similar in two respects, and second,
that one of those things has a further characteristic, from which the conclusion is
drawn that the other thing also has that further characteristic.
Analogical argument is one of the most fundamental tools of appellate
courts. The inference in a particular case before a court may be shown to be very
much like some other inference drawn previously, and if it was clearly correct in
that earlier case, it is held to be correct in this one too. In 2004, the U.S. Supreme
Court decided unanimously a case requiring the interpretation of the Sixth
2. McMurphy fell 12 stories, hitting the pavement like a Hefty bag filled with
vegetable soup.
3. Her hair glistened in the rain, like a nose hair after a sneeze.
4. Even in his last years, Grandpappy had a mind like a steel trap, only one
that had been left out so long it had rusted shut.
5. He was deeply in love. When she spoke he thought he heard bells, like a
garbage truck backing up.
6. She had a deep, throaty, genuine laugh, like that sound a dog makes just
before it throws up.
7. His thoughts tumbled in his head, making and breaking alliances like un-
derpants in a dryer without Cling Free.
8. The hailstones leaped from the pavement, just like maggots when you fry
them in hot grease.
9. The ballerina rose gracefully en pointe and extended one slender leg behind
her, like a dog at a fire hydrant.
10. She walked into my office like a centipede with 98 missing legs.
Analogy
A parallel drawn
between two (or more)
entities by indicating one
or more respects in
which they are similar.
Analogical Reasoning
489

Analogical Reasoning
Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, which gives to every criminal defendant
the right “to be confronted with the witnesses against him.” Does this forbid the
use, at a defendant’s trial, of testimony from a witness who is not available for
cross-examination, even if the trial judge believes that testimony to be reliable?
Yes, said Justice Antonin Scalia, delivering the opinion of the Court, it does. The
right to cross-examine adverse witnesses was firmly established in the English
common law at the time our Constitution was adopted. Justice Scalia’s subse-
quent analogy epitomizes the argument of the Court:
Admitting statements deemed reliable by a judge is fundamentally at odds with the
right of confrontation. Dispensing with confrontation because testimony is obviously
reliable is akin to dispensing with a jury trial because a defendant is obviously guilty.
This is not what the Sixth Amendment prescribes.”6
Analogical argument is also common in political controversy. Sometimes the
analogy is effective, sometimes it is far-fetched. The threat of global warming,
and the need of our country to respond concretely to that threat, was argued
heatedly before the Congress of the United States, in 2007, by former presidential
candidate Al Gore, who described the danger as a “planetary emergency.”
Against those who thought him to be exaggerating the dangers, he then argued:
The planet has a fever. If your baby has a fever you go to the doctor. If the doctor says
you need to intervene here, you don’t say “I read a science-fiction novel that says it’s
not a problem.” You take action.7
Not every analogical argument need concern exactly two things or exactly
three different characteristics, of course. Thus the argument presented earlier,
suggesting that other planets in our solar system may well be inhabited, draws
analogies among six things (the then-known planets) in some eight respects.
Apart from these numerical differences, however, all analogical arguments have
the same general structure or pattern. Every analogical argument proceeds from
the similarity of two or more things in one or more respects to the similarity of those
things in some further respect. Schematically, where a, b, c, and d are any entities
and P, Q, and R are any attributes or “respects,” an analogical argument may be
represented as having the form
a, b, c, d all have the attributes P and Q.
a, b, c all have the attribute R.
Therefore d probably has the attribute R.
In identifying, and especially in appraising, analogical arguments, it may be
found helpful to recast them into this form.
EXERCISES
All of the following passages contain analogies. Distinguish those passages that
contain analogical arguments from those that make nonargumentative uses of
analogy.
Analogical argument
A kind of inductive
argument in which, from
the fact that two entities
are alike in some
respect(s), it is
concluded that they are
also alike in some other
respect(s).
490

EXAMPLE
1. A Man ought no more to value himself for being wiser than a Woman, if
he owes his Advantage to a better Education, than he ought to boast of
his Courage for beating a Man when his hands were bound.
—Mary Astell, An Essay in Defence of the Female Sex, 1721
SOLUTION
This is an analogical argument. The analogy drawn here is between beating a
man when his hands are bound and being wiser than a woman as a conse-
quence of a better education, one party having an enormous advantage in
both cases. In the first case, it is plain that one with such an advantage ought
not to boast of his courage; in the second case (this argument concludes), it is
equally inappropriate for one with such an advantage to boast of his relative
wisdom.
2. “I’m not anti-Semitic, I’m just anti-Zionist” is the equivalent of “I’m not
anti-American, I just think the United States shouldn’t exist.”
—Benjamin Netanyahu, A Place Among the Nations, 
(New York: Bantam Books, 1993)
3. Instead of investing in the future, we throw money away on absurd lux-
uries, finance corrupt and hostile oil-rich countries, pollute our atmos-
phere and increase our trade deficit. Sort of like driving a Hummer to
the shopping mall.
—Eric Buckvar, “A Wasteful Society,” The New York Times, 23 March 2007
4. The British are less rigid about punctuation and related matters, such as
footnote and bibliographic form, than Americans are. An English-
woman lecturing Americans on semicolons is a little like an American
lecturing the French on sauces.
—Louis Menand, “Bad Comma,” The New Yorker, 28 June 2004
5. Studies show that girls get better grades in high school and college than
boys—yet only about 35 percent of National Merit Scholarship winners
are girls. The Executive Director of FairTest contends that the “inequity
is due solely to gender bias in the test used to select eligible students.”
But the spokeswoman for the National Merit Scholarship Corporation,
Elaine Detweiler, replies “We don’t really know why girls do worse on
the exams. To blame the test for the difference between how boys and
girls perform is like blaming a yardstick that boys are taller than girls.”
—“Merit Test Defended,” The Los Angeles Times, 26 May 1993
6. The famous chemist and biologist Justus von Liebig dismissed the germ
theory with a shrug of the shoulders, regarding Pasteur’s view that mi-
crobes could cause fermentation as ridiculous and naive as the opinion
of a child “who would explain the rapidity of the Rhine current by at-
tributing it to the violent movement of the many millwheels at Maintz.”
—René Dubos, Pasteur and Modern Science (New York: Da Capo Press, 1988)
Analogical Reasoning
491

Analogical Reasoning
7. Talking about Christianity without saying anything about sin is like dis-
cussing gardening without saying anything about weeds.
—The Rev. Lord Soper, quoted in The New York Times, 24 December 1998
8. Men and women may have different reproductive strategies, but neither
can be considered inferior or superior to the other, any more than a
bird’s wings can be considered superior or inferior to a fish’s fins.
—David M. Buss, “Where Is Fancy Bred? In the Genes or in the Head?” 
The New York Times, 1 June 1999
9. “This is a matter of national spirit,” said Marjorie Wilson, coordinator of
the Kangaroo Protection Cooperative, an Australian wildlife group. “We
believe here that we have enough meat in this country to satisfy people
without them having to eat their national symbol. You Americans don’t
cook your bald eagles, do you?”
—“Battling over a National Symbol,” The New York Times, 10 July 1995
10. One sure thing is that melting sea ice cannot be implicated in the coastal
flooding that many global warming models have projected. Just as melt-
ing ice cubes do not cause a glass of water to overflow, melting sea ice
does not increase oceanic volume. Any future rise in sea level would re-
sult from glaciers melting on land.
—Walter Gibbs, “Research Predicts Summer Doom for Northern Icecap,” 
The New York Times, 11 July 2000
11. Thomas Henry Huxley, Charles Darwin’s nineteenth-century disciple,
presented this analogy: “Consciousness would appear to be related to
the mechanism of the body simply as a collateral product of its working
and to be completely without any power of modifying that working, as
the steam whistle which accompanies the work of a locomotive is with-
out influence upon its machinery.”
12. The Elgin Marbles—17 figures and 56 panels that once decorated the
Parthenon, on the Acropolis in Athens—were taken from the Parthenon
in 1801 by Thomas Bruce, the seventh Earl of Elgin, and brought to the
British Museum, in London. The Greeks say that he stole them; the
British say that they were properly acquired, by purchase. Some Britons
urged that the Marbles be returned to Greece in time for the Olympic
Games to be held in Athens in 2004. Said one of the leaders of the Labor
Party: “The Parthenon without the Elgin Marbles is like a smile missing
a tooth.”
13. The Feminists decided to examine the institution of marriage as it is set
up by law in order to find out whether or not it did operate in women’s
favor. It became increasingly clear to us that the institution of marriage
“protects” women in the same way that the institution of slavery was
said to “protect” blacks—that is, that the word “protection” in this case
is simply a euphemism for oppression.
—Sheila Cronan, “Marriage,” in Anne Koedt, Ellen Levine, and Anita Rapone,
eds., Radical Feminism (New York: Quadrangle Books, 1976)
492

14. Wittgenstein used to compare thinking with swimming: just as in swim-
ming our bodies have a natural tendency to float on the surface so that
it requires great physical exertion to plunge to the bottom, so in think-
ing it requires great mental exertion to force our minds away from the
superficial, down into the depth of a philosophical problem.
—George Pitcher, The Philosophy of Wittgenstein (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 1964)
15. A person without a goal is like a computer without a program. And
that’s an ugly piece of furniture.
—Steve Danish, “Getting a Life,” The New York Times, March 1998
16. The quest for usable energy from fusion involves the use of interlocked
magnetic fields to contain very hot (180 million degrees Fahrenheit) and
highly compressed (to a density 20 times that of lead) electrically
charged plasma (a kind of gas) within a vacuum chamber. The plasma
must never touch the solid walls of its container, for if it does it instantly
loses its heat and can never be coaxed into undergoing fusion. One sci-
entific report put the problem this way:
Everything depends on keeping the plasma’s magnetic bottle tightly
stoppered . . . [but] confining a dollop of super-hot compressed plasma
has proved to be harder than compressing and shaping a blob of jelly
using only rubber bands. Each clever idea of the plasma physicists for
solving this problem has been matched by a new challenge.
—Malcolm W. Browne, “Reviving the Quest to Tame the Energy of the Stars,”
The New York Times, 8 June 1999
17. It is important that we make clear at this point what definition is and
what can be attained by means of it. It seems frequently to be credited
with a creative power; but all it accomplishes is that something is
marked out in sharp relief and designated by a name. Just as the geogra-
pher does not create a sea when he draws boundary lines and says: the
part of the ocean’s surface bounded by these lines I am going to call the
Yellow Sea, so too the mathematician cannot really create anything by
his defining.
—Gottlob Frege, The Basic Laws of Arithmetic, 1893
18. Children in school are like children at the doctor’s. He can talk himself
blue in the face about how much good his medicine is going to do them;
all they think of is how much it will hurt or how bad it will taste. Given
their own way, they would have none of it.
So the valiant and resolute band of travelers I thought I was leading
toward a much hoped-for destination turned out instead to be more like
convicts in a chain gang, forced under threat of punishment to move
along a rough path leading nobody knew where and down which they
could see hardly more than a few steps ahead. School feels like this to
children: it is a place where they make you go and where they tell you
to do things and where they try to make your life unpleasant if you
don’t do them or don’t do them right.
—John Holt, How Children Fail (New York: Delta/Lawrence, 1964)
Analogical Reasoning
493

Analogical Reasoning
19. I simply can’t imagine the world will ever be normal again for us. I do
talk about “after the war,” but it’s as if I were talking about a castle in
the air, something that can never come true.
I see the eight of us in the Annex as if we were a patch of blue sky
surrounded by menacing black clouds. The perfectly round spot on
which we’re standing is still safe, but the clouds are moving in on us,
and the ring between us and the approaching danger is being pulled
tighter and tighter. We’re surrounded by darkness and danger, and in
our desperate search for a way out we keep bumping into each other.
We look at the fighting down below and the peace and beauty up above.
In the meantime, we’ve been cut off by the dark mass of clouds, so that
we can go neither up nor down. It looms before us like an impenetrable
wall, trying to crush us, but not yet able to. I can only cry out and im-
plore, “Oh, ring, ring, open wide and let us out!”
—Anne Frank, from The Diary of a Young Girl, 8 November 1943
20. Unfortunately, the diary [of H. L. Mencken] reveals a man who was
shockingly anti-Semitic and racist, to the point where his stature as a
giant of American letters may be in danger. . . . I would draw a compari-
son with Richard Wagner, a virulent anti-Semite. One can still listen to
Wagner’s operas and appreciate their artistic beauty. The work is sepa-
rated from the man. Or is it?
—Gwinn Owens, “Mencken—Getting a Bum Rap?” The New York Times, 
13 December 1989
3
Appraising Analogical Arguments
Some analogical arguments are much more cogent than others. Although no ar-
gument by analogy can be deductively valid, some such arguments yield conclu-
sions that are very probably true, whereas others are very weak indeed.
Analogical arguments are evaluated as better or worse depending on the degree
of probability with which, relying on the premises they put forward, their con-
clusions may be affirmed.
Two commonplace examples will help to exhibit the features of analogical ar-
guments that make them better or worse. Suppose you choose to purchase a
given pair of shoes because other pairs like it have given you satisfaction in the
past; and suppose you select a dog of a given breed because other dogs of that
same breed have exhibited the characteristics that you prize. In both cases,
analogical arguments have been relied on. To appraise the strength of these
sample arguments, and indeed of all analogical arguments, six criteria may be
distinguished.
1. Number of entities. If my past experience with shoes of a certain kind
is limited to only one pair that I wore and liked, I will be disappointed
although not surprised by an apparently similar pair that I find flawed
494

in unexpected ways. But if I have repeatedly purchased shoes just like
those, I may reasonably suppose that the next pair will be as good as the
ones worn earlier. Several experiences of the same kind with an item of
just that sort will support the conclusion—that the purchase will be sat-
isfying—much more than will a single instance. Each instance may be
thought of as an additional entity, and the number of entities is the first
criterion in evaluating an analogical argument.
As a general rule, the larger the number of entities—that is, cases in our
experience—the stronger the argument. However, there is no simple ratio
between that number and the probability of the conclusion. Six happy
experiences with golden retrievers, intelligent and sweet-tempered
dogs, will lead one to conclude that the next golden retriever will also
be intelligent and sweet-tempered. However, the conclusion of an ana-
logical argument that has six instances in its premises will not be exactly
three times as probable as a similar argument that has two such in-
stances in its premises. Increasing the number of entities is important,
but so are other factors.
2. Variety of the instances in the premises. If my previous purchases of
those good shoes had been from both a department store and a specialty
store, and had been made both in New York and in California, by both
mail order and direct sale, I may be confident that it is the shoes them-
selves and not their seller that accounts for my satisfaction. If my previ-
ous golden retrievers were both males and females, acquired both as
puppies from breeders and as adults from the humane society, I may be
more confident that it is their breed—not their sex or age or source—
that accounts for my earlier satisfaction.
We understand this criterion intuitively: The more dissimilar the in-
stances mentioned only in the premises of an analogical argument, the stronger
is the argument.
3. Number of similar respects. Among the instances in the premises there
may have been various similarities: perhaps the shoes were of the same
style, had the same price, were made of the same sort of leather; per-
haps the dogs were of the same breed, came from the same breeder at
the same age, and so on. All the respects in which the instances in the
premises are like one another, and like the instance in the conclusion, in-
crease the probability that the instance in the conclusion will have that
further attribute at which the argument is aimed—giving great satisfac-
tion in the case of the new shoes, being of a sweet disposition in the case
of a new dog.
This criterion also is rooted in common sense: The greater the number
of respects in which the entity in the conclusion is similar to the entities in the
premises, the more probable is that conclusion. Again, of course, there is no
simple way to decide when the number of similar respects identified is
sufficient.
Analogical Reasoning
495

4. Relevance. As important as the number of respects shared is the kind
of respects in which the instances in the premises are like the instance in
the conclusion. If the new pair of shoes, like the previous pairs, is pur-
chased on a Tuesday, that is a likeness that will have no bearing on the
satisfaction they give; but if the new pair, like all the previous pairs, had
the same manufacturer, that will count heavily. Respects add to the force of
the argument when they are relevant (as style of shoe, and price, and mate-
rial surely are)—and a single highly relevant factor contributes more to the
argument than a host of irrelevant similarities.
There will sometimes be disagreement about which attributes really
are relevant in establishing the likelihood of our conclusion, but the
meaning of relevance itself is not in dispute. One attribute is relevant to
another when it is connected to that other, when there is some kind of
causal relation between them. That is why identifying causal connections
of one kind or another is critical in analogical arguments, and why es-
tablishing such connections is often crucial in determining the admissi-
bility of evidence, as relevant or irrelevant, in a court of law.
Analogical arguments can be probable whether they go from cause
to effect or from effect to cause. They can even be probable when the at-
tribute in the premise is neither the cause nor the effect of the conclu-
sion’s attribute, provided both are the effect of the same cause. A doctor,
noting the presence of a certain symptom in her patient, may predict an-
other symptom accurately not because either symptom is the cause of
the other, but because they are jointly caused by the same disorder. The
color of a manufactured product is most often irrelevant to function, but
it may serve as a relevant respect in an argument when that color is very
unusual, and shared by the entities in the premises and the conclusion.
The color itself may contribute nothing to the function of the product,
but it may serve in argument if it is known to be an attribute of the man-
ufacturing process of a unique producer.
The causal connections that are the key to the evaluation of analogi-
cal arguments can be discovered only empirically, by observation and
experiment. The general theory of empirical investigation is the central
concern of inductive logic.
5. Disanalogies. A disanalogy is a point of difference, a respect in which
the case we are reasoning about in our conclusion is distinguishable
from the cases on which the argument is based. Returning to the exam-
ple of the shoes, if the pair we plan to buy looks like those we had
owned earlier, but is in fact much cheaper and made by a different com-
pany, those disanalogies will give us reason to doubt the satisfaction
they will provide.
What was said earlier about relevance is also important here. Dis-
analogies undermine analogical arguments when the points of difference
Analogical Reasoning
Disanalogy
In an analogical
argument, a point of
difference between the
cases cited in the
premises and the case
mentioned in the
conclusion.
496

identified are relevant—causally connected to the outcome we are seek-
ing. Investors often purchase shares of a stock mutual fund on the basis
of its successful “track record,” reasoning that because earlier purchases
resulted in capital appreciation, a future purchase will do so as well.
However, if we learn that the person who managed the fund during the
period of its profitability has just been replaced, we confront a disanalo-
gy that substantially reduces the strength of that analogical argument.
Disanalogies weaken analogical arguments. They are therefore com-
monly employed in attacking an analogical argument. As critics, we
may try to show that the case in the conclusion is different in important
ways from the earlier cases, and that what was true of them is not like-
ly to be true of the present case. In the law, where the uses of analogy
are pervasive, some earlier case or cases are often offered to a court as a
precedent for deciding the case at hand. The argument is analogical.
Opposing counsel will seek to distinguish the case at hand from the ear-
lier cases; that is, counsel will seek to show that because there is some
critical difference between the facts in the case at hand and the facts in
those earlier cases, the latter do not serve as good precedents in the
present matter. If the differences are great—if the disanalogy is indeed
critical—that may demolish the analogical argument that had been put
forward.
Because disanalogies are the primary weapon against an analogical
argument, whatever can ward off any potential disanalogies will
strengthen the argument. This explains why variety among the in-
stances in the premises adds force to an argument. The more the in-
stances in the premises vary from one to another, the less likely it is that
a critic will be able to point to some disanalogy between all of them and
the conclusion that will weaken the argument. To illustrate, suppose
that Kim Kumar comes to a university as a first-year student; ten others
from her secondary school have successfully completed studies at the
same university. We may argue analogically that in view of her second-
ary school preparation, she is likely to succeed as well. If all those other
students from her school were similar to one another in some respect
that bears on college study but differ from Kim in that respect, that dis-
analogy will undermine the argument for Kim’s success. However, if we
learn that the ten successful predecessors varied among themselves in
many ways—in economic background, in family relations, in religious
affiliation, and so on—those differences among them ward off such po-
tential disanalogies. The argument for Kim’s success is fortified—as we
saw earlier—if the other students from her school serving as instances
in the premises of the argument do not resemble each other closely, but
exhibit substantial variety.
A confusion must be avoided: The principle that disanalogies weak-
en analogical arguments is to be contrasted with the principle that dif-
Analogical Reasoning
497

Analogical Reasoning
ferences among the premises strengthen such arguments. In the former,
the differences are between the instances in the premises and the instance
in the conclusion; in the latter, differences are among the instances in the
premises only. A disanalogy is a difference between the cases with
which we have experience and the case about which a conclusion is
being drawn. That conclusion (we may say in presenting the disanalogy
as refutation) is not warranted, because circumstances in the critical case
are not similar to circumstances in earlier cases. We say that the analogy
is “strained” or that it “does not hold.” But when we point to dissimilar-
ities among the premises we are strengthening the argument by saying,
in effect, that the analogy has wide force, that it holds in cases like these
and in other cases, and that therefore the respects in which the instances
in the premises vary are not relevant to the matter with which the con-
clusion is concerned.
In summary, disanalogies undermine an analogical argument; dis-
similarities among the premises reinforce it. Both considerations are tied
to the question of relevance: Disanalogies tend to show that there are
relevant respects in which the case in the conclusion differs from those
in the premises; dissimilarities among the premises tend to show that
other factors, which might have been thought causally relevant to the
attribute of interest, are not really relevant at all.
Note that the very first criterion identified, pertaining to the number
of entities among which the analogy is said to hold, is also linked to rel-
evance. The greater the number of instances appealed to, the greater is
the number of dissimilarities likely to obtain among them. Increasing
the number of entities is therefore desirable, but as the number of enti-
ties increases, the impact of each additional case is reduced. The dissim-
ilarity it may provide is more likely to have been provided by earlier
instances, in which case it will add little or nothing to the protection of
the conclusion from damaging disanalogies.
6. Claim that the conclusion makes. Every argument makes the claim
that its premises give reasons to accept its conclusion. It is easy to see
that the more one claims, the greater the burden of sustaining that
claim, and that is obviously true for every analogical argument. The
modesty of the conclusion relative to the premises is critical in determining
the merit of the inference.
If my friend gets 30 miles to the gallon from his new car, I may infer
that, were I to acquire a car of the same make and model, I would get at
least 20 miles to the gallon; that conclusion is modest and therefore very
probable. Were my conclusion much bolder—say, that I would get at
least 29 miles to the gallon—it would be less well supported by the evi-
dence I have. The more modest the claim, the less burden is placed on the
premises and the stronger the argument; the bolder the claim, the greater is the
burden on the premises and the weaker the argument.
498

An analogical argument is strengthened by reducing the claim made
on the basis of the premises affirmed, or by retaining the claim un-
changed while supporting it with additional or more powerful premis-
es. Likewise, an analogical argument is weakened if its conclusion is
made bolder while its premises remain unchanged, or if the claim re-
mains unchanged while the evidence in its support is found to exhibit
greater frailty.
EXERCISES
A. For each of the following arguments by analogy, six additional premises are
suggested. For each of these alternative premises, decide whether its addition
would make the conclusion of the resulting argument more or less probable.
Identify the criterion of appraisal that justifies this judgment, and explain how
that criterion applies to the given case.
EXAMPLE
1.
An investor has purchased one hundred shares of oil stock every De-
cember for the past five years. In every case the value of the stock has
appreciated by about 15 percent a year, and it has paid regular divi-
dends of about 8 percent a year on the price at which she bought it.
This December she decides to buy another hundred shares of oil
stock, reasoning that she will probably receive modest earnings while
watching the value of her new purchase increase over the years.
a.
Suppose that she had always purchased stock in eastern oil com-
panies before, and plans to purchase stock in an eastern oil com-
pany this year, too.
b.
Suppose that she had purchased oil stocks every December for
the past fifteen years, instead of for only five years.
c.
Suppose that the oil stocks previously purchased had gone up by
30 percent a year, instead of only by 15 percent.
d.
Suppose that her previous purchases of oil stock had been in for-
eign companies as well as in eastern, southern, and western U.S.
oil companies.
e.
Suppose she learns that OPEC has decided to meet every month
instead of every six months.
f.
Suppose she discovers that tobacco stocks have just raised their
dividend payments.
SOLUTION
a.
More probable. Number of similar respects. The change provides an
additional respect in which the instance in the conclusion is the
same as those in the premises.
Analogical Reasoning
499

Analogical Reasoning
b.
More probable. Number of entities. With this change the number of
entities in the premisses is substantially increased.
c.
More probable. Claim made by the conclusion. With this change in
the premises, the conclusion, although unchanged, is now, rela-
tively speaking, substantially more modest.
d.
More probable. Variety among the premises. With this change, the dis-
similarity among the instances in the premises is clearly established.
e.
Less probable. Disanalogy. With this change in the premises, a sig-
nificant difference between the instance in the conclusion and the
instances in the premises is introduced.
f.
Neither. Relevance. It is unlikely that the dividends paid by tobac-
co companies would have any impact on the profitability of oil
companies or the price of their shares.
2.
A faithful alumnus, heartened by State’s winning its last four football
games, decides to bet his money that State will win its next game, too.
a.
Suppose that since the last game, State’s outstanding quarterback
was injured in practice and hospitalized for the remainder of the
season.
b.
Suppose that two of the last four games were played away, and
that two of them were home games.
c.
Suppose that, just before the game, it is announced that a member
of State’s Chemistry Department has been awarded a Nobel Prize.
d.
Suppose that State had won its last six games rather than only
four of them.
e.
Suppose that it has rained hard during each of the four preceding
games, and that rain is forecast for next Saturday's game too.
f.
Suppose that each of the last four games was won by a margin of
at least four touchdowns.
3.
Although she was bored by the last few foreign films she saw, Char-
lene agrees to go to see another one this evening, fully expecting to be
bored again.
a.
Suppose that Charlene also was bored by the last few American
movies she saw.
b.
Suppose that the star of this evening’s film has recently been
accused of bigamy.
c.
Suppose that the last few foreign films that Charlene saw were
Italian, and that tonight’s film is Italian as well.
d.
Suppose that Charlene was so bored by the other foreign films
that she actually fell asleep during the performance.
e.
Suppose that the last few foreign films she saw included an
Italian, a French, an English, and a Swedish film.
f.
Suppose that tonight’s film is a mystery, whereas all of those she
saw before were comedies.
500

4.
Bill has taken three history courses and found them very stimulating
and valuable, so he signs up for another one, confidently expecting
that it too will be worthwhile.
a.
Suppose that his previous history courses were in ancient histo-
ry, modern European history, and U.S. history.
b.
Suppose that his previous history courses had all been taught by
the same professor scheduled to teach the present one.
c.
Suppose that his previous history courses had all been taught by 
Professor Smith, and the present one is taught by Professor Jones.
d.
Suppose that Bill had found his three previous history courses to
be the most exciting intellectual experiences of his life.
e.
Suppose that his previous history courses had all met at 9 A.M.,
and that the present one is also scheduled to meet at 9 A.M.
f.
Suppose that, in addition to the three history courses he took pre-
viously, Bill had also taken and enjoyed courses in anthropology,
economics, political science, and sociology.
5.
Dr. Brown has stayed at the Queen’s Hotel every fall for the past six
years on her annual visit to New York, and she has been quite satis-
fied with her accommodations there. On her visit to New York this
fall, Dr. Brown goes again to the Queen’s Hotel, confidently expect-
ing to enjoy her stay there again.
a.
Suppose that when she stayed at the Queen’s Hotel before, she
had occupied a single room twice, shared a double room twice,
and twice occupied a suite.
b.
Suppose that last spring a new manager had been put in charge
of the Queen’s Hotel.
c.
Suppose that she had occupied a suite on all of her previous trips
and is assigned a suite this time as well.
d.
Suppose that on her previous trips she had come to New York by
train, but this time she flew.
e.
Suppose that, when she stayed at the Queen’s Hotel before, her
quarters had been the most luxurious she had ever known.
f.
Suppose that she had stayed at the Queen’s Hotel three times a
year for the past six years.
B. Analyze the structure of the analogical arguments in the following passages,
and evaluate them in terms of the six criteria that have been explained:
1. If you cut up a large diamond into little bits, it will entirely lose the
value it had as a whole; as an army divided up into small bodies of sol-
diers loses all its strength. So a great intellect sinks to the level of an or-
dinary one, as soon as it is interrupted and disturbed, its attention
distracted and drawn off from the matter in hand: for its superiority de-
pends upon its power of concentration—of bringing all its strength to
bear upon one theme, in the same way as a concave mirror collects into
one point all the rays of light that strike upon it.
—Arthur Schopenhauer, “On Noise,” 1851
Analogical Reasoning
501

Analogical Reasoning
2. It would be the height of hypocrisy if Pete Rose, one of baseball’s star
players, were allowed back into baseball and elected to the Hall of Fame
after finally admitting that he placed bets on his team and other teams
and lied about it. In coming to a decision about Rose, the Baseball Com-
missioner should remember that Olympic athletes who have been
caught using performance-enhancing drugs are stripped permanently of
their titles and medals.
—Frank Ulrich, The New York Times, 8 January 2004
3. Look round the world: contemplate the whole and every part of it: you
will find it to be nothing but one great machine, subdivided into an infi-
nite number of lesser machines, which again admit of subdivisions, to a
degree beyond what human senses and faculties can trace and explain.
All these various machines, and even their most minute parts, are ad-
justed to each other with an accuracy which ravishes into admiration all
men who have ever contemplated them. The curious adapting of means
to ends, throughout all nature, resembles exactly, though it much ex-
ceeds, the production of human contrivance, of human design, thought,
wisdom, and intelligence. Since therefore the effects resemble each
other, we are led to infer, by all the rules of analogy, that the causes also
resemble; and that the Author of Nature is somewhat similar to the
mind of men; though possessed of much larger faculties, proportioned
to the grandeur of the work, which he has executed. By this argument a
posteriori, and by this argument alone, do we prove at once the existence
of a Deity, and his similarity to human mind and intelligence.
—David Hume, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, 1779
4. The philosopher Metrodorus of Chios, who lived in the fourth century
BCE, was greatly interested in the heavenly bodies. He wrote: “To con-
sider the Earth as the only populated world in infinite space is as absurd
as to assert that in an entire field of millet, only one grain will grow.”
5. To the casual observer porpoises and sharks are kinds of fish. They are
streamlined, good swimmers, and live in the sea. To the zoologist who
examines these animals more closely, the shark has gills, cold blood,
and scales; the porpoise has lungs, warm blood, and hair. The por-
poise is fundamentally more like man than like the shark and belongs,
with man, to the mammals—a group that nurses its young with milk.
Having decided that the porpoise is a mammal, the zoologist can,
without further examination, predict that the animal will have a four-
chambered heart, bones of a particular type, and a certain general pat-
tern of nerves and blood vessels. Without using a microscope the
zoologist can say with reasonable confidence that the red blood cells in
the blood of the porpoise will lack nuclei. This ability to generalize
about animal structure depends upon a system for organizing the vast
amount of knowledge about animals.
—Ralph Buchsbaum, Animals without Backbones
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1961)
502

6. The body is the substance of the soul; the soul is the functioning of the
body. . . . The relationship of the soul to its substance is like that of
sharpness to a knife, while the relationship of the body to its functioning
is like that of a knife to sharpness. What is called sharpness is not the
same as the knife, and what is called the knife is not the same as sharp-
ness. Nevertheless, there can be no knife if the sharpness is discarded,
nor sharpness if the knife is discarded. I have never heard of sharpness
surviving if the knife is destroyed, so how can it be admitted that the
soul can remain if the body is annihilated?
—Fan Chen, Essay on the Extinction of the Soul, in Fung Yu-Lan, 
A History of Chinese Philosophy, 1934
7. If a single cell, under appropriate conditions, becomes a person in the
space of a few years, there can surely be no difficulty in understanding
how, under appropriate conditions, a cell may, in the course of untold
millions of years, give origin to the human race.
—Herbert Spencer, Principles of Biology, 1864
8. An electron is no more (and no less) hypothetical than a star. Nowadays
we count electrons one by one in a Geiger counter, as we count the stars
one by one on a photographic plate. In what sense can an electron be
called more unobservable than a star? I am not sure whether I ought to
say that I have seen an electron; but I have just the same doubt whether
I have seen a star. If I have seen one, I have seen the other. I have seen a
small disc of light surrounded by diffraction rings which has not the
least resemblance to what a star is supposed to be; but the name “star”
is given to the object in the physical world which some hundreds of
years ago started a chain of causation which has resulted in this particu-
lar light-pattern. Similarly in a Wilson expansion chamber I have seen a
trail not in the least resembling what an electron is supposed to be; but
the name “electron” is given to the object in the physical world which
has caused this trail to appear. How can it possibly be maintained that a
hypothesis is introduced in one case and not in the other?
—Arthur Eddington, New Pathways in Science, 1939
9. Just as the bottom of a bucket containing water is pressed more heavily
by the weight of the water when it is full than when it is half empty, and
the more heavily the deeper the water is, similarly the high places of the
earth, such as the summits of mountains, are less heavily pressed than
the lowlands are by the weight of the mass of the air. This is because
there is more air above the lowlands than above the mountain tops; for
all the air along a mountain side presses upon the lowlands but not
upon the summit, being above the one but below the other.
—Blaise Pascal, Treatise on the Weight of the Mass of the Air, 1653
10. Suppose that someone tells me that he has had a tooth extracted with-
out an anaesthetic, and I express my sympathy, and suppose that I am
then asked, “How do you know that it hurt him?” I might reasonably
reply, “Well, I know that it would hurt me. I have been to the dentist
Analogical Reasoning
503

Analogical Reasoning
and know how painful it is to have a tooth stopped [filled] without an
anaesthetic, let alone taken out. And he has the same sort of nervous
system as I have. I infer, therefore, that in these conditions he felt con-
siderable pain, just as I should myself.”
—Alfred J. Ayer, “One’s Knowledge of Other Minds,” Theoria, 1953
11. Now if we survey the universe, so far as it falls under our knowledge, it
bears a great resemblance to an animal or organized body and seems ac-
tuated with a like principle of life and motion. A continual circulation of
matter in it produces no disorder: a continual waste in every part is in-
cessantly repaired; the closest sympathy is perceived throughout the en-
tire system: and each part or member, in performing its proper offices,
operates both to its own preservation and to that of the whole. The
world, therefore, I infer, is an animal, and the Deity is the soul of the
world, actuating it, and actuated by it.
—David Hume, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, 1779
12. One cannot require that everything shall be defined, any more than one
can require that a chemist shall decompose every substance. What is
simple cannot be decomposed, and what is logically simple cannot have
a proper definition.
—Gottlob Frege, “On Concept and Object,” 1892
13. Most endangered or threatened species in the United States find suit-
able habitat on private land, and the destruction of habitat is widely rec-
ognized as the leading cause of extinctions. For these reasons, protecting
wildlife without regulating the use of private land has been compared
by biologists to playing the piano with just the black keys.
—John H. Cushman, Jr., “Environmentalists Gain a Victory,” 
The New York Times, 30 June 1995
14. Opposing legislation that would restrict handgun ownership in the Unit-
ed Kingdom, the husband of Queen Elizabeth II reasoned as follows:
Look, if a cricketer, for instance, suddenly decided to go into a school and batter a
lot of people to death with a cricket bat, which he could do very easily, are you
going to ban cricket bats?
—Prince Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh, in an interview on the BBC, 
19 December 1996
15. . . . The simplest form of the theological argument from design [was]
once well known under the name “Paley’s watch.” Paley’s form of it
was just this: “If we found by chance a watch or other piece of intricate
mechanism we should infer that it had been made by someone. But all
around us we do find intricate pieces of natural mechanism, and the
processes of the universe are seen to move together in complex rela-
tions; we should therefore infer that these too have a Maker.”
B. A. D. Williams, “Metaphysical Arguments,” in D. F. Pears, ed., 
The Nature of Metaphysics (New York: Macmillan, 1957)
504

4
Refutation by Logical Analogy
“You should say what you mean,” [said the March Hare, reproving Alice sharply.]
“I do,” Alice hastily replied; “at least—at least I mean what I say—that’s the same
thing, you know.”
“Not the same thing a bit!” said the Hatter. “Why, you might just as well say that ‘I
see what I eat’ is the same thing as ‘I eat what I see’!”
“You might just as well say,” added the March Hare, “that ‘I like what I get’ is the
same thing as ‘I get what I like’!”
“You might just as well say,” added the Dormouse, which seemed to be talking in
its sleep, “that ‘I breathe when I sleep’ is the same thing as ‘I sleep when I breathe’!”
“It is the same thing with you,” said the Hatter, and here the conversation dropped.
—Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland
The Hare, the Hatter, and the Dormouse all seek to refute Alice’s claim—that
meaning what you say is the same as saying what you mean—by using a logical
analogy. The form of an argument, as distinct from its particular content, is the
most important aspect of that argument from a logical point of view. Therefore,
we often seek to demonstrate the weakness of a given argument by stating an-
other argument, known to be erroneous, that has the same logical form.
In the realm of deduction, a refuting analogy for a given argument is an argu-
ment that has the same form as the given argument but whose premises are
known to be true and whose conclusion is known to be false. The refuting analo-
gy is therefore known to be invalid, and the argument under attack, because it has
the same form, is thus shown to be invalid as well. This is the same principle that
underlies the testing of categorical syllogisms, and it also underlies the repeated
emphasis on the centrality of logical form.
In the realm of inductive argument, our present concern, the technique of
refutation by logical analogy, can also be used to great effect. Scientific, political, or
economic arguments, not purporting to be deductive, may be countered by pre-
senting other arguments that have very similar designs and whose conclusions
are known to be false or are generally believed to be improbable. Inductive argu-
ments differ fundamentally from deductive arguments in the character of the
support claimed to be given to the conclusion by the premises. All arguments,
however, inductive as well as deductive, may be said to have some underlying
form or pattern. If, when confronted by an inductive argument we wish to at-
tack, we can present another inductive argument that has essentially the same
form but is clearly flawed and whose conclusion is very doubtful, we throw sim-
ilar doubt on the conclusion of the argument being examined.
Consider the following illustration. In two highly controversial cases before
the U.S. Supreme Court in 2007,8 the central issue was the constitutionality of the
consideration of race by school boards in the assignment of students to public
schools. In an editorial, the New York Times supported the race-conscious systems
as fair, and called the objections to it “an assault on local school control.” A
Analogical Reasoning
505

Analogical Reasoning
prominent critic of the race-based systems wrote a critical response to that edito-
rial, within which appeared the following passage:
You argue that the race-based system “is applied to students of all races” and “does
not advantage or disadvantage any particular racial group.” But, of course, the same
argument might have been made in defense of miscegenation statutes, which forbade
blacks from marrying whites as well as whites from marrying blacks.9
The technique of refutation by logical analogy is here very keenly exemplified; the
focus is on the form of the two arguments. The argument under attack has the same
form as that of another argument whose unsatisfactoriness is now universally un-
derstood. We surely would not say that miscegenation statutes are acceptable be-
cause they apply equally to all races. Some policies involving the use of race by the
state are not acceptable (the critic argues) even when it is true that no particular
racial group is disadvantaged by that use. By highlighting such unacceptability in
some well-known settings (regulations governing marriage), he strikes a sharp
blow against the argument in this setting that relies on the claim that no particular
racial group is disadvantaged by the race-based policy under attack.
The presentation of a refutation by logical analogy is often signaled by the
appearance of some revealing phrase: “You might just as well say,” or some other
words having that sense. In the example just given, the telltale phrase is “the
same argument might have been made. . . .” In another context, the argument
that because Islamic culture had been brought to the country of Chad from with-
out, it is no more than an Islamic overlay, is attacked with the refuting analogy of
a scholar who introduces the refutation with a slightly different set of words:
“One could as sensibly say that France has only a Christian overlay.”10
When the point of the refuting analogy is manifest, no introductory phrases
may be needed. The former governor of Mississippi, Kirk Fordice, argued that “It
is a simple fact that the United States is a Christian nation” because “Christianity
is the predominant religion in America.” Journalist Michael Kinsley, with whom
Fordice was debating on television, responded with these telling analogies:
“Women are a majority in this country. Does that make us a female country? Or
does it make us a white country because most people in this country are white?”11
A careless effort to refute an argument with an analogy can backfire when
the allegedly refuting argument differs importantly from the target argument in
ways that tend to reinforce the one that is under attack. This is illustrated by a re-
cent exchange on the highly controversial topic of global warming. Newspaper
columnist John Tierney raised some serious questions about the wisdom of im-
mediate large-scale efforts to combat an apparent but uncertain climate trend.12
A critic, Ray Sten, responded in this way:
John Tierney suggests that we not worry much about climate change because its
consequences are uncertain and far in the future, and in the meantime somebody may
discover a technological quick fix. That’s like telling a smoker not to worry because it’s
not certain whether he’ll develop cancer, and besides, a cure may have been found by
then. Call me a worry wart, but I’d quit smoking.13
The immediate and large-scale steps whose wisdom Tierney questions are
thus likened to quitting smoking. There is, however, an important contrast
506

between those two. Quitting has no economic costs (and even some economic
benefits), while industrial changes designed to cut greenhouse gases by reducing
the use of fossil fuels will probably be very costly. In presenting an analogy in-
tended to refute Tierney, Mr. Sten (whose position on global warming may well
be correct) undermines his cause by indirectly calling attention to the costs of the
change he seeks to advance.
Here is a letter to the editor from Jeff Weaver, published in The Ann Arbor
(MI.) News in July 2005:
I find it amusing that anyone would be offended by the name or appearance of a team
mascot. But apparently there are people who are devastated that there are schools
with team names such as the Hurons, Chippewas, Braves, Chiefs, Seminoles, etc.
I sympathize with their plight. I would also suggest that we change the name of
the Pioneers of Ann Arbor Pioneer High School. My forefathers were pioneers and I’m
sure they would be devastated that a school adopted their name as a team mascot.
That name and mascot are a direct slap against my people.
While we are at it, we had better change the names of the Cowboys, Fighting
Irish, Celtics, Hoosiers, Sooners, Boilermakers, Packers, Aggies, Oilers, Mountaineers,
Friars, Patriots, Volunteers and Tar Heels, to name a few, because I’m sure those
names are equally demeaning and degrading to those groups as well. . . .
And here is a rather amusing one from Justice Antonin Scalia:
Justice Scalia argues that we should never, ever, use the word “choate.” Scalia wrote:
“There is no such word as choate. Choate is to inchoate as sult is to insult.”14
To conclude, here is a letter signed by a scientist from Woods Hole Oceanograph-
ic Institution, responding to the claim that there is “plentiful” water on the moon.
No one except William S. Marshall has claimed “large quantities of water” or “plen-
tiful lunar water.” The chief scientist of the recent lunar mission described the target
crater as “probably a little wetter than the Atacama desert in Chile.” It’s as if Martians
had targeted the right South African mine, observed a diamond, and then proclaimed
that “diamonds are plentiful on Earth.”15
Refutation by analogy, when well designed, can be exceedingly effective. If the
argument presented as a refuting analogy is plainly rotten, and it does indeed
have the same form as that of the argument under attack, that target argument
must be seriously wounded.
EXERCISES
Each of the following is intended to be a refutation by logical analogy. Identify
the argument being refuted in each and the refuting analogy, and decide
whether they do indeed have the same argument form.
1. Steve Brill, founder of Court TV, has no doubt that cameras belong in
the courtroom, and answers some critics in the following way: “Some
lawyers and judges say that TV coverage makes the system look bad.
They confuse the messenger with the message. If press coverage of
something makes it look bad, that is a reason to have the press coverage.
Analogical Reasoning
507

Analogical Reasoning
That criticism is like saying that because journalists were allowed to be
with the troops in Vietnam, the Vietnam War was ruined.”
—Steve Brill, “Trial: A Starting Place for Reform,”
The Ann Arbor (Mich.) News, 12 June 1995
2. The whole history of bolshevism, both before and after the October revo-
lution, is full of instances of maneuvering, temporizing and compromis-
ing with other parties, bourgeois parties included! To carry on a war for
the overthrow of the international bourgeoisie, a war which is a hundred
times more difficult, prolonged and complicated than the most stubborn
of ordinary wars between states, and to refuse beforehand to maneuver,
to utilize the conflict of interests (even though temporary) among one’s
enemies, to refuse to temporize and compromise with possible (even
though transitory, unstable, vacillating and conditional) allies—is this
not ridiculous in the extreme? Is it not as though, when making a diffi-
cult ascent of an unexplored and hitherto inaccessible mountain, we
were to refuse beforehand ever to move in zigzags, ever to retrace our
steps, ever to abandon the course once selected to try others?
—V. I. Lenin, “Left Wing” Communism: An Infantile Disorder, 1920
3. The distinguished naturalist E. O. Wilson argues that humans are no more
than a biological species of a certain physical composition, and that the
human mind can have no characteristics attributable to nonphysical caus-
es. This claim can no longer be disputed. “Virtually all contemporary sci-
entists and philosophers expert on the subject agree [he writes] that the
mind, which comprises consciousness and rational process, is the brain at
work. . . . The brain and its satellite glands have now been probed to the
point where no particular site remains that can reasonably be supposed to
harbor a nonphysical mind.16 Stephen Barr presented the following coun-
terargument in the form of a logical analogy: “This [Wilson’s argument
quoted above] is on a par with Nikita Khrushchev's announcement [aim-
ing to support atheism] that Yuri Gagarin, the first human visitor to space,
had failed to locate God. Does Wilson suppose that if there were an imma-
terial component to the mind it would show up in a brain scan?”17
4. The argument against new highways is given forceful statement by
three distinguished urban planners: the authors write: “The only long
term solutions to traffic are public transit and coordinated land use.”
New highways, they argue, bring “induced traffic.” So building more
highways will only cause more traffic congestion, not less.18
A highly critical reviewer responds to this argument as follows:
“This is nonsense. . . . Long lines at a grocery store would not prompt
anyone to say, “Well, we can’t build any more grocery stores. That
would only bring out more customers.” Building more highways
wouldn’t lure cars. The cars come anyway.”19
5. America’s supply of timber has been increasing for decades, and the na-
tion’s forests have three times more wood today than in 1920. “We’re
not running out of wood, so why do we worry so much about recycling
508

paper?” asks Jerry Taylor, the director of natural research studies at the
Cato Institute. “Paper is an agricultural product, made from trees
grown specifically for paper production. Acting to conserve trees by
recycling paper is like acting to conserve cornstalks by cutting back on
corn consumption.”
—John Tierney, “Recycling Is Garbage,” The New York Times Magazine, 
30 June 1996
6. In 1996, heated controversy arose between the states of New Jersey
and New York over formal possession of Ellis Island, located at the
mouth of the Hudson River near the New Jersey shore, a tiny speck of
land on which so many tens of thousands of immigrants to the United
States first touched American soil. An essay defending New York’s
claim to the historic island appeared in the New York Times on 
23 July 1996. The following letter appeared in the same newspaper
four days later:
Clyde Haberman is right that almost every immigrant who passed through Ellis
Island was bound for New York, not New Jersey. But this fact does not deter-
mine where the island is. A significant number of passengers arriving at Newark
International Airport are also on their way to New York, but it would be hard to
argue that New York thus has a claim on the airport. Cincinnati International
Airport is in Covington, Kentucky, and presumably, few travelers are on their
way to sparsely populated northern Kentucky. Would Mr. Haberman suggest
that the airport belongs to Ohio?
7. Edward Rothstein suggests that poverty and injustice cannot be consid-
ered among the root causes of Islamic terrorism because Osama bin
Laden is a multimillionaire. By that logic, slavery could not have caused
the Civil War because Abraham Lincoln was not a slave.
—Corey Robin, “The Root Causes of Terror,” The New York Times, 
17 November 2001
8. Each of the multitude of universes may have different laws of nature.
Or different values of quantities that determine how they behave, such
as the speed of light. Some may be suitable for life, and some may not.
All those suitable for life may have life develop. Sometimes life will
evolve only into dinosaurs rather than something more intelligent. We
cannot attach any meaning to the fact that a life form which could ask
anthropic questions [questions about the properties that are essential for
intelligent life] did develop in at least one universe. It is very much like
a lottery. If you win the lottery, you may feel very grateful, but someone
had to win, and no one selected who that was, except randomly. Just be-
cause a universe has a unique set of laws and parameters should not
lead one to wonder whether that set was designed.
—Gordon Kane, “Anthropic Questions,” Phi Kappa Phi Forum, 
Fall 2002
9. Artificial human minds will never be made (we are told) because “artifi-
cial intelligence investigation is based on advanced solid-state physics,
whereas the humble human brain is a viable semiliquid system!” That is
Analogical Reasoning
509

Analogical Reasoning
no more reassuring than the suggestion that automobiles could never
replace horses because they are made of metal, while the humble horse
is a viable organic system with legs of flesh and bone.
—Michael D. Rohr, The New York Times, 27 March 1998
10. Modern political rhetoric [Ronald Dworkin argues] “is now extremely
repetitive,” and a good bit of it could be dispensed with—by law. “Every
European democracy does this,” the world’s most highly regarded legal
philosopher points out, “and Europeans are amazed that we do not.”
Europeans are also amazed that we bathe as frequently as we do.
What the hell kind of argument is that?
—David Tell, “Silencing Free Speech in the Name of Reform,” 
The Weekly Standard, 25 November 1996
chapter 
Summary
In this chapter we began the analysis of induction. Section 1 reviewed the funda-
mental distinction between deductive arguments, which claim certainty for their
conclusions, and inductive arguments, which make no such claim. The terms
validity and invalidity do not apply to inductive arguments, whose conclusions
can only have some degree of probability of being true.
In Section 2 we explained argument by analogy. An analogy is a likeness or
comparison; we draw an analogy when we indicate one or more respects in
which two or more entities are similar. An argument by analogy is an argument
whose premises assert the similarity of two or more entities in one or more re-
spects, and whose conclusion is that those entities are similar in some further re-
spect. Its conclusion, like that of every inductive argument, can be no more than
probable.
Courtesy of King Features Syndicate.
510

In Section 3 we explained six criteria used in determining whether the prem-
ises of an analogical argument render its conclusion more or less probable. These
criteria are:
1. The number of entities among which the analogy is said to hold
2. The variety, or degree of dissimilarity, among those entities or instances
mentioned only in the premises
3. The number of respects in which the entities involved are said to be analo-
gous
4. The relevance of the respects mentioned in the premises to the further re-
spect mentioned in the conclusion
5. The number and importance of disanalogies between the instances men-
tioned only in the premises and the instance mentioned in the conclu-
sion
6. The modesty (or boldness) of the conclusion relative to the premises
In Section 4 we explained refutation by logical analogy. To show that a given
argument (whether inductive or deductive) is mistaken, one effective method is
to present another argument, which is plainly mistaken, and whose form is the
same as that of the argument under attack.
END NOTES
1Bert Vogelstein, “So, Smoking Causes Cancer: This Is News?” The New York Times, 27 October 1996.
2Albert Shanker, “Testing Teachers,” The New York Times, 8 January 1995.
3Thomas Reid, Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man, Essay 1, 1785.
4Andrew Massimino, “Building a Country,” The New York Times, 5 June 2006.
5Eric Lander, quoted in an interview in the The New York Times, 10 September 1996.
6Crawford v. Washington, 541 U.S. 36 (2004).
7F. Barringer and A. Revkin, “A Few Spitballs Greet Professor Gore,” The Ann Arbor (Mich.) News, 22
March 2007.
8Parents Involved in Community Schools v. Seattle School District No. 1 (No. 05-908); and Crystal D. Meredith,
Custodial Parent v. Jefferson County (KY) Board of Education (No. 05-915).
9Roger Clegg, “An Issue for the Court: Diversity in Our Schools,” The New York Times, 11 December 2006.
10Bassam Abed, in a letter to The New York Times, 26 June 1988.
11“Evangelical Update,” The New York Times, 21 November 1992.
12John Tierney, “Findings,” The New York Times, 13 February 2007.
13Ray Sten, “Debating Climate Change,” The New York Times, 20 February 2007.
14Antonin Scalia, The New York Times Magazine, 3 January 2010.
15John M. Hayes, The New York Times, 27 November 2009.
16E.O. Wilson, Consilience (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1998), p. 99.
17S. N. Barr, “Mindless Science,” The Weekly Standard, 6 April 1998.
18A. Duany, E. Plater-Zyberk, and J. Speck, Suburban Nation: The Rise of Sprawl and the Decline of the Ameri-
can Dream (New York: North Point, 2000).
19F. Barnes, “Suburban Beauty: Why Sprawl Works,” The Weekly Standard, 22 May 2000.
Analogical Reasoning
511

This page intentionally left blank 

Causal Reasoning
From Chapter 12 of Introduction to Logic, Fourteenth Edition. Irving M. Copi, Carl Cohen, Kenneth McMahon. 
Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Prentice Hall. All rights reserved.

Causal Reasoning
1
Cause and Effect
2
Causal Laws and the Uniformity of Nature
3
Induction by Simple Enumeration
4
Methods of Causal Analysis
5
Limitations of Inductive Techniques
1
Cause and Effect
Induction goes far beyond analogical arguments. When we know, or think we
know, that one thing is the cause of another, or the effect of another, we can reason
from cause to effect, or from effect to cause. If the supposed relations between
cause and effect have been correctly established, the reasoning based on those re-
lations is very powerful.
Causal reasoning is also of the very greatest practical importance. Our abili-
ty to control our environment, to live successfully and to achieve our purposes,
depends critically on our knowledge of causal connections. To cure some dis-
ease, for example, physicians must know its cause—and of course they must
learn the effects (including the side effects) of the drugs they administer.
In every sphere in which we take action and seek to achieve some result, the
relation of cause and effect is fundamental. David Hume, one of the keenest of all
thinkers in this arena, wrote:
All reasonings concerning matter of fact seem to be founded on the relation of Cause
and Effect. By means of that relation alone we can go beyond the evidence of our mem-
ory and senses. If you were to ask a man, why he believes any matter of fact, which is
absent; for instance, that his friend is in the country, or in France; he would give you a
reason; and this reason would be some other fact; as a letter received from him, or the
knowledge of his former resolutions and promises. A man finding a watch or any other
machine in a desert island, would conclude that there had once been men in that island.
All our reasonings concerning fact are of the same nature. . . . If we would satisfy our-
selves, therefore, concerning the nature of that evidence, which assures us of matters of
fact, we must enquire how we arrive at the knowledge of cause and effect.1
The methods by which we arrive at such knowledge are the central concern
of this chapter. This matter is complicated, however, by the fact that there are
several different meanings of the word “cause.” Therefore we begin by distin-
guishing these meanings from one another.
Things do not just happen. Events take place under certain conditions, and it is
an axiom in the study of nature that to understand the world in which we live we
must seek to learn the conditions under which events do or do not happen. It is
customary to distinguish between the necessary and the sufficient conditions for
the occurrence of an event.
Causal reasoning
Inductive reasoning in
which some effect is
inferred from what is
assumed to be its
cause, or some cause is
inferred from what is
assumed to be its effect.
This asset is
intentionally omitted
from this text. It may
be accessed at
www.mcescher.com.
(Relativity by 
M.C. Escher)
514

Causal Reasoning
A necessary condition for the occurrence of a specified event is a circum-
stance in whose absence the event cannot occur. For example, the presence of oxy-
gen is a necessary condition for combustion to occur. If combustion occurs, then
oxygen must have been present, because in the absence of oxygen there can be no
combustion.
A sufficient condition for the occurrence of an event is a circumstance in
whose presence the event must occur. The presence of oxygen is a necessary con-
dition for combustion, as we noted, but it is not a sufficient condition for com-
bustion to occur—because it is obvious that oxygen can be present without
combustion occurring. For almost any substance, however, there is some range
of temperature such that being in that range of temperature in the presence of
oxygen is a sufficient condition for the combustion of that substance. So it is clear
that for the occurrence of an event there may be several necessary conditions—
and all of those necessary conditions must be included in the sufficient condition
of that event.
Now, the word “cause” is used (with respect to some event) sometimes to
mean “the necessary condition of that event,” and sometimes to mean “the suffi-
cient condition of that event.” It is most often used in the sense of necessary con-
dition when the problem at hand is the elimination of some undesirable
phenomenon. To eliminate it, one need only find some condition that is neces-
sary to the existence of that phenomenon, and then eliminate that condition.
What virus or bacterium is the cause of a certain illness? The physician cures the
illness by administering a drug that will destroy those germs. The germs are said
to be the cause of the disease in that they are a necessary condition for it—because
in their absence the disease cannot occur.
However, the word “cause” is also commonly used to mean sufficient condi-
tion—especially when we are interested in the production of something desired,
rather than the elimination of something undesirable. The metallurgist aims to
discover what will produce greater strength in metal alloys, and when it is found
that a certain process of mixed heating and cooling has that desired result, we
say that such a process is the cause of the increased strength of the alloy. It is cor-
rect to use the word “cause” in the one sense (necessary condition), or in the
other (sufficient condition), but one should be clear about which of those mean-
ings is intended.
Closely related to sufficient condition is another sense of the word “cause”—
when a given phenomenon tends to have a causative role in the production of
certain outcomes. For example, it is indeed correct to say that “smoking causes
lung cancer,” even though smoking cigarettes may long continue without having
cancer as its result. Smoking is certainly not a necessary condition of lung cancer,
because many such cancers arise in the total absence of smoking. But smoking
cigarettes, in conjunction with very common biological circumstances, so fre-
quently plays a role in the development of lung cancer that we think it correct to
report that smoking is a “cause” of cancer.
Sufficient condition
A circumstance (or set
of circumstances)
whose presence
ensures the occurrence
of a given event.
Necessary condition
A circumstance (or set
of circumstances) in
whose absence a given
event cannot occur.
515

This points to yet another common use of the word “cause”—cause as the one
factor that was critical in the occurrence of some phenomenon. An insurance com-
pany sends investigators to determine the cause of a mysterious fire. The investi-
gators are likely to lose their jobs if they report that it was the presence of oxygen
in the atmosphere that was the fire’s cause—and yet of course it was (in the sense
of necessary condition), for had there been no oxygen present there would have
been no fire. Nor is the sufficient condition of the fire of interest to the company, for
if the investigators reported that, although they had proof the fire was deliberately
ignited by the policyholder, they had not yet been able to learn all the necessary
conditions of the fire and therefore had not yet determined its full cause, they
would certainly lose their jobs! What the company was seeking to discover was the
incident or action that, in the presence of those conditions that usually prevail,
made the difference between the occurrence and nonoccurrence of the fire.
In the real world, a huge man, forcibly resisting arrest, died shortly after hav-
ing been beaten into submission by police officers in Cincinnati, Ohio, in Novem-
ber 2003. The county coroner investigating the death held it to be a “homicide,”
carefully noting that hostile or malign intent is not implied by that word. “Ab-
sent the struggle,” the coroner said, “Mr. Jones would not have died at that pre-
cise moment in time, and the struggle therefore is the primary cause of his
death.” This sense of cause as “critical factor” is common and useful.2
There are subdivisions of this third sense of cause. When there is a causal se-
quence—a chain of events in which A causes B, B causes C, C causes D, and D
causes E—we may regard the outcome, E, as the effect of any one of those pre-
ceding events. The death described above (symbolized by E) was caused by the
struggle, the struggle (D) was caused by the resistance, the resistance (C) was
caused by the arrest, the arrest (B) was caused by some violation of law (A), and
so on. We distinguish between the remote cause and the proximate cause of E.
The proximate cause is the event closest to it in the chain of events. The death, E,
is the result of the proximate cause of the struggle, D; the other causes are re-
mote: A more remote than B, B more remote than C, and so on.
Persons who leave school before the age of 16 are five times more likely than
university graduates to die from a heart attack; and the death rate within one
year of a heart attack is 3.5 percent for college graduates but 20 percent for those
with fewer than eight years of formal schooling.3 But a college education is not
the proximate cause of good health, nor is ignorance the proximate cause of dis-
ease. A poor education is a link in the causal chain, often resulting in a less ade-
quate understanding of the disease process and thus a failure to make the
lifestyle changes needed to promote better medical outcomes. So it is commonly
and correctly observed that poverty, affecting education almost universally, is
one of the “root causes” of poor health—not its proximate cause, of course, but a
remote cause that needs uprooting.
The several different senses of the word “cause” need to be distinguished. We
can legitimately infer cause from effect only when by cause is meant necessary condi-
tion. We can infer effect from cause only when by cause is meant sufficient condition.
When inferences are drawn both from cause to effect and from effect to cause, the
word “cause” must be used in the sense of necessary and sufficient condition—the
Causal Reasoning
Proximate cause
In any chain of causes
and effects, the event
nearest to the event
whose explanation is
sought. Contrasted with
“remote” causes, which
are more distant in the
causal chain.
Remote cause
In any chain of causes
and effects, an event
distant from the effect
for which explanation is
sought. Contrasted with
“proximate” cause.
Necessary and
sufficient condition
The conjunction of
necessary conditions for
the occurrence of a
given event, this
conjunction being all
that is needed to ensure
the occurrence of the
event. It is the sense in
which the word cause is
used when inferences
are drawn both from
cause to effect and from
effect to cause.
516

Causal Reasoning
cause regarded as the sufficient condition of the event and that sufficient condition
regarded as the conjunction of all its necessary conditions. No single definition of
cause conforms to all the different (and reasonable) uses of that word.
2
Causal Laws and the Uniformity of Nature
Every use of the word “cause,” whether in everyday life or in science, involves or
presupposes the doctrine that cause and effect are uniformly connected. We will
allow that some particular circumstance was the cause of some particular effect
only if we agree that any other circumstance of that type will (if the attendant cir-
cumstances are sufficiently similar) cause another effect of the same kind as the
first. In other words, similar causes produce similar effects. As we use the word
“cause,” part of its meaning is that every occurrence of a cause producing some
effect is an instance or example of the general causal law that such circumstances
are always accompanied by such phenomena. If it can be shown that in another
situation, after an occurrence of that supposed cause, the supposed effect did not
occur, we will relinquish the belief that the one is the cause of the other.
Because every assertion that a particular circumstance was the cause of a par-
ticular phenomenon implies the existence of some causal law, every assertion of
causal connection contains a critical element of generality. A causal law, as we use
the term, asserts that a circumstance of such-and-such kind is invariably attend-
ed by a phenomenon of a specified kind, no matter where or when it occurs.
How can we come to know such general truths? The causal relation is not pure-
ly logical or deductive; as David Hume emphasized, it cannot be discovered by any
a priori reasoning.* Causal laws can be discovered only empirically, a posteriori, by
an appeal to experience. But our experiences are always of particular circumstances,
particular phenomena, and particular sequences of them. We may observe several in-
stances of a circumstance (call it C), and every instance that we observe may be ac-
companied by an instance of a certain kind of phenomenon (call it P). However, we
will have experienced only some of the instances of C in the world, and our obser-
vations can therefore show us only that some cases of C are attended by P. Yet our
aim is to establish a general causal relation. How are we to get from the particulars
we experience to the general proposition that all cases of C are attended by P—
which is involved in saying that C causes P?
Causal laws
Descriptive laws
asserting a necessary
connection between
events of two kinds, of
which one is the cause
and the other the effect.
*Hume wrote: “But to convince us that all the laws of nature, and all the operations of bodies without excep-
tion, are known only by experience, the following reflections may, perhaps, suffice. Were any object presented
to us, and were we required to pronounce concerning the effect, which will result from it, without consulting
past observation, after what manner, I beseech you, must the mind proceed in this operation? It must invent
or imagine some event, which it ascribes to the object as its effect; and it is plain that this invention must be en-
tirely arbitrary. The mind can never possibly find the effect in the supposed cause, by the most accurate scruti-
ny and examination. For the effect is totally different from the cause, and consequently can never be
discovered in it. . . . A stone or piece of metal raised into the air, and left without any support, immediately
falls; but to consider the matter a priori, is there anything we can discover in this situation which can beget the
idea of a downward, rather than an upward, or any other motion, in the stone or metal? . . . In vain, therefore,
should we pretend to determine any single event, or infer any cause or effect, without the assistance of obser-
vation and experience.” (An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, 1748, sec. IV).
517

Causal Reasoning
Inductive
generalization
The process of arriving
at universal propositions
from particular facts of
experience, relying upon
the principle of
induction.
Induction by simple
enumeration
A type of inductive
generalization in which
the premises are
instances where
phenomena of two kinds
repeatedly accompany
one another in certain
circumstances, from
which it is concluded
that phenomena of
those two kinds always
accompany one another
in such circumstances.
3
Induction by Simple Enumeration
When we assert that all cases of C are attended by P—that is, when we affirm a
general causal relation—we have gone beyond analogy. The process of arriving
at universal propositions from the particular facts of experience is called
inductive generalization. Suppose we dip blue litmus paper into acid and it
turns red. Suppose we do this three times, or ten times, always with the same
result. What conclusion do we draw? By analogy we may draw a particular con-
clusion about what will happen to the color of the next piece of litmus paper
we dip in acid—the fourth or the eleventh. We may draw a general conclusion
about what will happen to every piece of blue litmus paper when it is dipped in
acid. If we do the latter, it is with an inductive generalization that our argument
concludes.
When the premises of an argument report a number of instances in which
two attributes (or circumstances, or phenomena) occur together, we may infer
by analogy that some particular instance of one attribute will also exhibit the
other attribute. By inductive generalization we might infer that every instance
of the one attribute will also be an instance of the other. Inductive generaliza-
tion of the form
Instance 1 of phenomenon E is accompanied by circumstance C.
Instance 2 of phenomenon E is accompanied by circumstance C.
Instance 3 of phenomenon E is accompanied by circumstance C.
Therefore every instance of phenomenon E is accompanied by circumstance C.
is an induction by simple enumeration. An induction by simple enumeration is
very similar to an argument by analogy, differing only in having a more general
conclusion.
Simple enumeration is often used in establishing causal connections.
Where a number of instances of a phenomenon are invariably accompanied by
a certain type of circumstance, it is only natural to infer the existence of a causal
relationship between them. Since the circumstance of dipping blue litmus
paper in acid is accompanied in all observed instances by the phenomenon of
the paper turning red, we infer by simple enumeration that dipping blue lit-
mus paper in acid is the cause of its turning red. The analogical character of
such an argument is quite apparent.
Because of the great similarity between argument by simple enumeration
and argument by analogy, similar criteria for appraisal apply to both. Some argu-
ments by simple enumeration may establish their conclusions with a higher de-
gree of probability than others. The greater the number of instances appealed to,
the greater is the probability of the conclusion. The various instances or cases of
phenomenon E accompanied by circumstance C are often called confirming in-
stances of the causal law asserting that C causes E. The greater the number of con-
firming instances, the greater is the probability of the causal law—other things
518

Causal Reasoning
being equal. Thus the first criterion for analogical arguments also applies direct-
ly to arguments by simple enumeration.
In a historical report, simple enumeration can provide persuasive grounds
for inferring a causal relationship. To illustrate, legislative acts called "bills of
attainder," designed to savage some individual or group temporarily out of
favor, are known to endanger their advocates when the pendulum of political
power swings. The accuser today becomes the victim tomorrow. Condemning
such a bill of attainder (aimed at Thomas Osborne, Earl of Danbury) in the
British House of Lords, the Earl of Carnarvon drove the point home in 1678 with
the following enumeration:
My Lords, I understand . . . not a little of our English history, from which I have learnt
the mischiefs of prosecutions such as these, and the ill fate of the prosecutors. I shall
go no further back than the latter end of Queen Elizabeth’s reign, at which time the Earl
of Essex was run down by Sir Walter Raleigh, and your Lordships well know what be-
came of Sir Walter Raleigh. My Lord Bacon, he ran down Sir Walter Raleigh, and your
Lordships know what became of my Lord Bacon. The Duke of Buckingham, he ran
down my Lord Bacon, and your Lordships know what happened to the Duke of Buck-
ingham. Sir Thomas Wentworth, afterwards Earl of Strafford, ran down the Duke of
Buckingham, and you all know what became of him. Sir Harry Vane, he ran down the
Earl of Strafford, and your Lordships know what became of Sir Harry Vane. Chancellor
Hyde, he ran down Sir Harry Vane, and your Lordships know what became of the
Chancellor. Sir Thomas Osborne, now Earl of Danby, ran down Chancellor Hyde.
What will now become of the Earl of Danby, your Lordships best can tell. But let
me see that man that dare run the Earl of Danby down, and we shall soon see what
will become of him.4
Rhetorically effective though this recounting of instances may be, it does not
provide a trustworthy argument. The conclusion—that there is a causal connec-
tion between malicious accusation and subsequent destruction—appeals to six
confirming instances, but by the very nature of those instances we cannot distin-
guish which are confirming instances of a genuine causal law and which are
mere historical accidents.
The heart of the difficulty is this: The method of simple enumeration takes
no account—can take no account—of exceptions to the causal law being sug-
gested. Any alleged causal law may be overthrown by a single negative case,
for any one disconfirming instance shows that what had been proposed as a
“law” was not truly general. Exceptions disprove the rule—for an exception (or
“negative instance”) is either one in which the alleged cause is found and is not
followed by the alleged effect (in this historical case, a bill of attainder whose
author did not suffer a like fate), or one in which the effect is encountered while
the alleged cause is absent—where (using our earlier schema) C is present
without E, or E is present without C. In an argument by simple enumeration
there is no place for either of these; the only legitimate premises in such an ar-
gument are reports of instances in which both the alleged cause and the alleged
effect are present.
519

Four hundred years ago Sir Francis Bacon, in The Advancement of Learning
(1605), clearly identified the shortcomings of induction by simple enumeration.
He wrote: “The induction that proceeds by simple enumeration is childish; its
conclusions are precarious, and exposed to peril from a contradictory instance;
and it generally reaches decision on too small a number of facts, and on those
only that are on hand.”
It is thus a grave weakness of simple enumeration arguments that, if we con-
fine ourselves to them exclusively, we will not look for, and are therefore unlike-
ly even to notice, the negative or disconfirming instances that might otherwise be
found. For this reason, despite their fruitfulness and value in suggesting causal
laws, inductions by simple enumeration are not at all suitable for testing causal
laws. Yet such testing is essential; to accomplish it we must rely upon other types
of inductive arguments—and to these we turn now.
4
Methods of Causal Analysis
The classic formulation of the methods central to all induction were given in the
nineteenth century by John Stuart Mill (in A System of Logic, 1843). His systemat-
ic account of these methods has led logicians to refer to them as Mill’s methods
of inductive inference. The techniques themselves—five are commonly distin-
guished—were certainly not invented by him, nor should they be thought of as
merely a product of nineteenth-century thought. On the contrary, these are uni-
versal tools of scientific investigation. The names Mill gave to them are still in
use, as are Mill’s precise formulations of what he called the “canons of induc-
tion.” These techniques of investigation are permanently useful. Present-day ac-
counts of discoveries in the biological, social, and physical sciences commonly
report the methodology used as one or another variant (or combination) of these
five techniques of inductive inference called Mill’s methods. They are:
1. The method of agreement
2. The method of difference
3. The joint method of agreement and difference
4. The method of residues
5. The method of concomitant variation
We will examine each of these in turn, presenting Mill’s classic statement of each
(with one exception), followed by explication and illustration. These are the tech-
niques on which science does and will rely in the search for causal laws.
A. The Method of Agreement
John Stuart Mill wrote:
If two or more instances of the phenomenon under investigation have only one
circumstance in common, the circumstance in which alone all the instances agree, is
the cause (or effect) of the given phenomenon.
Causal Reasoning
Mill's methods
The five patterns of
inductive inference,
analyzed and formulated
by John Stuart Mill, with
which hypotheses are
confirmed or
disconfirmed.
520

Causal Reasoning
This method goes beyond simple enumeration in that it seeks not only to dis-
cover the repeated conjunction of cause with effect, but also to identify the only
circumstance, the one circumstance, that is invariably associated with the effect,
or phenomenon, in which we are interested. This is an essential, and exceedingly
common, tool of scientific inquiry. In searching for the cause of some deadly epi-
demic, for example, or in searching for the cause of some geological phenome-
non, the epidemiologist or geologist will seek out the special circumstances that
in every instance attend that result. In what way, they ask, do apparently differ-
ing sets of circumstances agree, where that result is produced?
Imagine, among the residents of some residence hall, a rash of stomach
upsets, whose cause we must learn. The first line of inquiry naturally will be:
What food or foods were eaten by all those who fell ill? Foods that were eaten
by some but not all of those afflicted are not likely to be the cause of the out-
break; we want to know what circumstance can be found to be common to
every case of the illness. Of course, what turns out to be common may not be a
food; it may be the use of some infected utensil, or proximity to some noxious
effluent, or other circumstance. Only when some circumstance is found
in which all the cases of the illness agree are we on the way to the solution of
the problem.
Schematically, the method of agreement may be represented as follows,
where capital letters represent circumstances and lowercase letters denote
phenomena:
A B C D occur together with w x y z.
A E F G occur together with w t u v.
Therefore A is the cause (or the effect) of w.
This method is particularly useful in identifying a kind of phenomenon, or a
range of circumstances, whose investigation holds scientific promise. In molecu-
lar genetics, for example, the search for the causes of some inherited disease can
be greatly narrowed down using the method of agreement. Is there a common
factor among families in which some specific disorder is prevalent? By examin-
ing the genetic makeup of such families, then closing in on those genetic factors
that are found in such families but are not found commonly in others, the chro-
mosome (and sometimes the site on that chromosome) where the inherited de-
fect lies may be identified. This has proved a very effective method in tracing the
cause of some diseases.
Similarly, the fluoridation of water in developed areas around the globe
was the consequence of the discovery, more than half a century ago, that in
cities where the rates of dental decay were unusually low, the one circumstance
in common was an unusually high level of fluorine in the water supply. To con-
firm the causal connection, two cities of comparable size along the Hudson
River—Newburgh and Kingston, New York—were closely studied in the
1940s; Newburgh’s water was treated with fluoride, Kingston’s had no
Method of agreement
A pattern of inductive
inference in which it is
concluded that, if two or
more instances of a
given phenomenon have
only one circumstance in
common, that one
common circumstance
is the cause (or effect) of
the phenomenon.
521

Causal Reasoning
fluoride. The statistics proved remarkable: Children in Newburgh showed a 70
percent reduction in cavities by the time they reached 14 years of age—and yet
there were no differences between the two cities in rates of cancer, birth defects,
or heart disease. The full explanation of this prevention of cavities could not be
given at that time, but enough was known to justify the fluoridation of munic-
ipal water systems.
The method of agreement is widely powerful. A very promising develop-
ment in the effort to help smokers break their addiction to nicotine was the
discovery, reported in Science in 2007, that in a small number of persons who
had suffered an injury to a particular region of their brains called the insula,
the desire to smoke was immediately lost! Something in the insula appears to
be a critical element in addiction. When statistical analyses of the data were
completed, said a lead investigator from the University of Southern Califor-
nia, “it turned out that the likelihood of quitting smoking with ease after insu-
la damage was 136 times higher than for damage anywhere else in the brain.”
A neuroscientist from the National Institute of Drug Abuse was enthusiastic:
“To have any kind of variable produce this rate of quitting smoking is remark-
able, to have it associated with a particular brain region is fantastic.”5 Thus,
for addiction researchers, who are eager to apply the method of agreement to
nicotine addiction, a major question has now become: “Can we learn to de-ac-
tivate the insula?”6
In short, whenever we find a single circumstance common to all instances of a
given phenomenon, we may rightly conclude that we have located at least the re-
gion of its cause.
The method of agreement has serious limitations, however. Looking chiefly
to confirming instances, the method by itself is often insufficient to identify the
cause being sought. The data available are seldom so conveniently arranged as to
permit the identification of one circumstance common to all cases. When inquiry
reveals more than one circumstance common to all cases, this technique alone
cannot evaluate those alternative possibilities.
Although the presence of agreement between circumstance and phenome-
non is often inconclusive, the absence of agreement may help us to determine
what is not the cause of a phenomenon of interest. The method of agreement is in
essence eliminative; it points to the fact that circumstances arising in some of the
cases, but not all of the cases, of the phenomenon in which we are interested, are
not likely to be its cause. Those who argue against an alleged causal relation,
therefore, are likely to call attention to the absence of uniform agreement, infer-
ring that the alleged cause can be neither the sufficient condition nor the neces-
sary condition of that phenomenon.
After we have learned all that the method of agreement can teach, other in-
ductive methods capable of greater refinement in the search for causes are sure to
be required.
522

Causal Reasoning
EXERCISES
Analyze each of the following scientific reports, explaining how the pattern
of the method of agreement is manifested by each. Discuss, in each case, the
limitations of the method of agreement as applied to that quest for a causal
connection.
1. Contaminated scallions, chopped up raw in salsa that was served free
to every table at a Chi-Chi’s restaurant in western Pennsylvania, al-
most certainly caused the large outbreak of hepatitis A in the region,
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said yesterday.
Bunches of scallions (green onions) were stored together in large
buckets for five days or more with the ice they had been shipped in
from Mexico. As a result, even if only some bunches were tainted
with the hepatitis virus when they were delivered, it would have
quickly spread to all the other scallions—the ice water in the bucket
becoming “hepatitis soup.” The scallions were later rinsed, chopped,
refrigerated for two more days, and then added to the salsa which
was made in 40-quart batches and kept refrigerated for up to three
days. The outbreak, which has killed three people and made 575 other
Chi-Chi’s patrons sick, is the nation’s biggest outbreak of hepatitis A
from one source. Hepatitis A is spread by fecal matter from infected
people, particularly those who fail to wash their hands after using the
restroom. The virus does not multiply outside the body, but it can
survive in food.
Hepatitis A is a common childhood disease in Mexico, and children
commonly work on the scallion farms there; sewage-contaminated
water could also have been the culprit, whether used to irrigate the scal-
lions, or wash them, or make the ice used in shipping. How the scallions
became contaminated is not known.
—“Government Makes It Official: Blame Scallions for Outbreak,” 
The New York Times, 22 November 2003
2. Researchers at the University of California at Irvine have theorized
that listening to Mozart’s piano music significantly improves perform-
ance on intelligence tests. Dr. Frances H. Rauscher and her colleagues
reported:
We performed an experiment in which students were each given three sets
of standard IQ spatial reasoning tasks; each task was preceded by 10
minutes of
1. listening to Mozart’s Sonata for Two Pianos in D major, K. 488; or
2. listening to a relaxation tape; or
3. silence.
523

Causal Reasoning
Performance was improved for those tasks immediately following the first
condition compared to the second two.
Test scores rose an average of 8 or 9 points following the Mozart sonata.
Some of the students had reported that they liked Mozart, and some that they
did not, but there were no measurable differences attributable to varying
tastes. “We are testing a neurobiological model of brain function with these
experiments,” Dr. Rauscher said, “and we hypothesize that these patterns
may be common in certain activities—chess, mathematics, and certain kinds
of music. . . . Listening to such music may stimulate neural pathways
important to cognition.”
—Frances H. Rauscher, Gordon L. Shaw, Katherine N. Ky, 
“Music and Spatial Task Performance,” Nature, 14 October 1993
3. Medical researchers have concluded not only that the timing of sexual
intercourse in relation to ovulation strongly influences the chance of
conception, but that conception occurs only when intercourse takes
place during a specifiable period in the menstrual cycle. The researchers
summarized their findings thus:
We recruited 221 healthy women who were planning to become pregnant. At
the same time the women stopped using birth control methods, they began
collecting daily urine specimens and keeping daily records of whether they had
sexual intercourse. We measured estrogen and progesterone metabolites in
urine to estimate the day of ovulation.
In a total of 625 menstrual cycles for which the dates of ovulation could be
estimated, 192 pregnancies were initiated. . . . Two-thirds (n = 129) ended in live
births. Conception occurred only when intercourse took place during a six-day
period that ended on the estimated day of ovulation. The probability of conception
ranged from 0.10 when intercourse occurred five days before ovulation to 0.33
when it occurred on the day of ovulation itself.
Conclusion: Among healthy women trying to conceive, nearly all
pregnancies can be attributed to intercourse during a six-day period ending on
the day of ovulation.
—Allen J. Wilcox, Clarice R. Weinberg, Donna D. Baird, “Timing of Sexual 
Intercourse in Relation to Ovulation,” The New England Journal of Medicine, 
7 December 1995
4. A large extended family in the town of Cartago, Costa Rica, has long
suffered an unusual affliction—an incurable form of genetically
caused deafness. Children born into the family have a 50 percent
chance of developing the disease, and learn their fate at about the age
of ten, when those who have inherited a genetic mutation find that
they are beginning to lose their hearing. Scientists from the University
of Washington have recently traced the cause of the family’s affliction
to a previously unknown gene, named the diaphanous gene, that
helps operate the delicate hair cells in the inner ear that respond to
sound vibrations.
524

Causal Reasoning
This gene has a single mutation appearing in the Costa Rican fami-
ly, whose founder arrived in Cartago from Spain in 1713, and who suf-
fered from this form of deafness—as have half his descendants in the
eight generations since. Many in the family remain in Cartago because
the family’s hereditary deafness is well known and accepted there.
With only a single family to be studied, and thus very few genetic dif-
ferences to work with, pinpointing the gene took six years. The critical
mutation involved just one of the 3,800 chemical letters that constitute
the gene’s DNA.
—Reported in Science, 14 November 1997
5. Researchers from the National Cancer Institute announced that they
have found a number of genetic markers shared by gay brothers, in-
dicating that homosexuality has genetic roots. The investigators, re-
porting in Science, 16 July 1993, have found that out of 40 pairs of
gay brothers examined in their study, 33 pairs shared certain DNA
sequences on their X chromosome, the chromosome men inherit
only from their mothers. The implicit reasoning of this report is that,
if brothers who have specific DNA sequences in common are
both gay, these sequences can be considered genetic markers for
homosexuality.
6. The relation between male circumcision and HIV infection has been a
concern of the British medical journal, The Lancet, for many years. Be-
fore the turn of this century investigators studying that relation
wrote, in The Lancet, that studies going back as far as 1989 showed a
very greatly increased risk of HIV-1 infection for men who are not
circumcised. The epidemiological and biological evidence that links
the two, they later wrote, “has become compelling.” Very recent
studies in Kenya and Uganda have produced evidence that is even
more compelling. In 2006, trials in those countries conducted by the
U.S. National Institutes of Health were stopped because the results
were so clear! It appeared that circumcision reduces a man’s risk of
contracting AIDS from heterosexual sex by about half, and therefore
U.S. officials concluded that it would have been unethical to continue
without offering circumcision to all 8,000 men in the trials. The final
figures, reevaluated and published in The Lancet on 23 February 2007,
are even more striking. They suggest that circumcision reduces a man’s
risk of contracting AIDS by as much as 65 percent. Dr. Anthony Fauci, of
the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, was em-
phatic: “Look. This is a one-time, permanent intervention that’s safe
when done under appropriate medical conditions. If we had an AIDS
vaccine that was performing as well as this, it would be the talk of
the town.”
525

Causal Reasoning
B. The Method of Difference
John Stuart Mill wrote:
If an instance in which the phenomenon under investigation occurs and an instance
in which it does not occur, have every circumstance in common save one, that one
occurring only in the former, the circumstance in which alone the two instances
differ, is the effect, or the cause, or an indispensable part of the cause, of the
phenomenon.
This pattern focuses not on what is common among those cases in which the
effect is produced, but on what is different between those cases in which the effect
is produced and those in which it is not. If we had learned, when investigating
that rash of stomach upsets described earlier, that all those who had become ill
had eaten the canned pears for dessert, but that the pears had been eaten by none
of those who did not become ill, we would be fairly confident that the cause of
the illness had been identified.
The difference between the method of difference and the method of agree-
ment is highlighted in a recent report about the role of the hormone testosterone
in the aggressive conduct of males.
Among many species, testes are mothballed most of the year, kicking into action and
pouring out testosterone only during a very circumscribed mating season—precisely
the time when male-male aggression soars. Impressive though they seem, these data
are only correlative—[reporting only] testosterone found on the scene repeatedly when
aggression has occurred.
The proof comes with the knife, the performance of what is euphemistically known
as a subtraction experiment. Remove the source of the testosterone in species after
species, and levels of aggression plummet. Reinstate normal testosterone levels
afterward with injections of synthetic testosterone and aggression returns.
The subtraction and replacement paradigm gives damning proof that this hormone
is involved in aggression.7
Testosterone makes the critical difference, clearly, but the author of this re-
port is careful not to assert that testosterone is the cause of male aggression. More
accurately, the report states that testosterone is surely involved in aggression. As
Mill would put it, the hormone is an indispensable part of the cause of male aggres-
sion. Wherever we can identify a single factor that makes the critical difference
when all else remains normal—the factor that eliminates the phenomenon in
question when we remove it, or the factor that produces the phenomenon in
question when we introduce it—we will pretty surely have identified the cause,
or an indispensable part of the cause, of the phenomenon we are investigating.
Schematically, where again capital letters denote circumstances and lower-
case letters denote phenomena, the method of difference may be represented as
follows:
A B C D occur together with w x y z.
B C D occur together with x y z.
Therefore A is the cause, or the effect, or an indispensable part of the cause of w.
Method of difference
A pattern of inductive
inference in which, when
cases in which a given
phenomenon occurs
differ in only one
circumstance from
cases in which the
phenomenon does not
occur, that circumstance
is inferred to be causally
connected to the
phenomenon.
526

Causal Reasoning
The method of difference is of central importance in scientific investiga-
tions of almost every kind. One vivid illustration of its use is the ongoing in-
vestigation by medical researchers into the effects of particular proteins
suspected of being implicated in the development of certain diseases. Whether
the substance under investigation really is the cause (or an indispensable part
of the cause) can only be determined when we create an experimental envi-
ronment in which that substance has been eliminated. Investigators some-
times are able to do just that—not in humans, of course, but in mice which are
subject to the same disease and from which the gene that is known to produce
the suspect protein is deleted. Animals so treated are then inbred, creating
populations of what are called “knockout mice,” precious in the world of con-
temporary medical research, in which the process relevant to the disease in
question can be studied in an animal exactly like other animals subject to that
disease, except for the critical difference created by the knockout, the absence of the
substance hypothesized as cause. Such studies have resulted in some remark-
able medical advances.
To illustrate: Using knockout mice, scientists have been able to identify the
gene that causes inflammation—swelling, redness, and pain. The gene MIP-1
alpha, present in mice and in humans, was suspected of producing the protein
that begins the process of inflammation. Pathologists at the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill bred mice that lacked the gene MIP-1 alpha, and
then infected those mice, as well as a control group of normal mice, with virus-
es known to cause influenza and other diseases. The normal mice did develop
extreme inflammation as expected, but mice lacking the MIP-1 alpha gene had
only slight inflammation. This is one big step toward the development of drugs
that will allow humans to fight viral infections without painful and damaging
inflammation.8
A famous and very dramatic illustration of the method of difference is provid-
ed by the following account of experiments confirming the true cause of yellow
fever, long one of the great plagues of humankind. The experiments described here
were conducted by U.S. Army doctors Walter Reed, James Carroll, and Jesse W.
Lazear. Shortly before those experiments Dr. Carroll had contracted yellow fever
by deliberately allowing himself to be bitten by an infected mosquito in a different
experiment. Shortly after these experiments Dr. Lazear died of yellow fever; the
camp in which the experiments took place was named for him.
Experiments were devised to show that yellow fever was transmitted by the mosquito
alone, all other reasonable opportunities for being infected being excluded. A small
building was erected, all windows and doors and every other possible opening being
absolutely mosquito-proof. A wire mosquito screen divided the room into two spaces.
In one of these spaces fifteen mosquitoes, which had fed on yellow fever patients,
were liberated. A nonimmune volunteer entered the room with the mosquitoes and
was bitten by seven mosquitoes. Four days later, he suffered an attack of yellow fever.
Two other nonimmune men slept for thirteen nights in the mosquito-free room without
disturbances of any sort.
527

Causal Reasoning
To show that the disease was transmitted by the mosquito and not through the
excreta of yellow fever patients or anything which had come in contact with them,
another house was constructed and made mosquito-proof. For 20 days, this house
was occupied by three nonimmunes, after the clothing, bedding and eating utensils
and other vessels soiled with the discharge, blood and vomitus of yellow fever pa-
tients had been placed in it. The bed clothing which they used had been brought
from the beds of the patients who had died of yellow fever, without being subjected
to washing or any other treatment to remove anything with which it might have been
soiled. The experiment was twice repeated by other nonimmune volunteers. During
the entire period all the men who occupied the house were strictly quarantined and
protected from mosquitoes. None of those exposed to these experiments contract-
ed yellow fever. That they were not immune was subsequently shown, since four of
them became infected either by mosquito bites or the injection of blood from yellow
fever patients.9
That portion of the experiment described in the first paragraph above very delib-
erately created a single important difference between the subjects in the two
carefully enclosed spaces: the presence of mosquitoes that had fed on yellow
fever patients in the one space, the absence of such mosquitoes in the other. That
portion of the experiment described in the second paragraph above deliberately
created a second use of the method of difference, in which the only significant
difference between two groups of subjects, both of whom had submitted to very
close contact with items that had been used by victims of yellow fever, was the
exposure of some of them to infected mosquito bites or infected blood. Absent
that circumstance, no infection arose.
Science seeks causal laws. In the never-ending efforts to confirm or to discon-
firm hypothesized causal connections, the method of difference is pervasive and
powerful.
EXERCISES
Analyze each of the following reports, explaining the ways in which the
method of difference has been applied in the investigations recounted. Discuss
the strengths and weaknesses of the method of difference as it is used in each
case.
1. How critical is sleep to memory? Researchers at two universities, sepa-
rately, conducted experiments in 2003 designed to determine how
sleep affects our ability to remember. College-age people were trained
to perform certain tasks and then tested to see how much they recalled
in confronting such tasks after either a night’s sleep or several hours
awake. “We all have the experience of going to sleep with a question
and waking up with the solution,” observed one of the investigators,
Prof. Danial Margoliash, of the University of Chicago. But does the
sleep really help?
It does, markedly. Not just as a matter of re-charge, but, the inves-
tigators found, because sleep rescues memories by storing and consoli-
dating them deep in the brain’s circuitry. At the University of
528

Causal Reasoning
Chicago, subjects trained to understand murky speech on a voice syn-
thesizer could regularly understand more words after a night of sleep
than matched counterparts who were tested just hours after the train-
ing with no intervening sleep. And at the Harvard Medical School,
one hundred subjects were trained to perform certain finger-tapping
sequences that they were later asked, at various intervals, to repeat.
The process of memory consolidation required one or two nights
of sleep—after which the performance of the subjects improved
substantially.
—Reported in Nature, 9 October 2003
2. The heavy use of salt is widely suspected by experts to be the cause of
an epidemic of high blood pressure and many deaths from heart disease
around the world. But how to prove that salt is the culprit? There are
“natural experiments” in which isolated jungle or farming communities
are introduced to modern civilization, move to cities, adopt high-salt
diets, and commonly develop high blood pressure. But such evidence is
inconclusive because many important factors change together; new
stresses and many dietary changes accompany the increase in salt. How
can the causal effects of salt by itself be tested?
Dr. Derek Denton, of the University of Melbourne, selected a
group of normal chimpanzees, a species biologically very close to hu-
mans, in which to conduct the needed trials. A group of chimpanzees
in Gabon, with normal blood pressure, were first studied in their natu-
ral state. The group was then divided in half, with one half receiving
gradually increasing amounts of salt in their diet for twenty months.
Normal blood pressure in a chimpanzee is 110/70. In Dr. Denton’s ex-
periment, the animals’ blood pressure commonly rose as high as
150/90, and in some individuals much higher. But among animals in
the control group, who received no additional salt, blood pressure did
not rise. Six months after the extra salt was withdrawn from their diet,
all the chimpanzees in the experimental group had the same low blood
pressure they had enjoyed before the experiment. Because there was
no other change in the lifestyle of those animals, the investigators con-
cluded that changes in salt consumption caused the changes in blood
pressure.
—D. Denton et al., “The Effect of Increased Salt Intake on Blood Pressure of
Chimpanzees,” Nature, October 1995
3. Does Louisiana hot sauce, the principal ingredient of the spicy New Or-
leans cocktail sauce commonly served with raw shellfish, kill certain
bacteria found in raw oysters and clams? The answer appears to be yes.
Bacteria of an infectious and sometimes fatal kind—Vibrio vulnificus—
are found in 5 to 10 percent of raw shellfish on the market. Dr. Charles
V. Sanders and his research team, from Louisiana State University Med-
ical Center in New Orleans, added Louisiana hot sauce to cultures of
Vibrio growing in test tubes; the sauce, even when greatly diluted, killed
529

Causal Reasoning
V. vulnificus in five minutes or less. “I couldn’t believe what happened,”
Dr. Sanders said. He admits that he still eats raw oysters, “but only with
plenty of hot sauce.”
—Reported to the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents, 
New Orleans, October 1993
4. In Lithuania, rear-end auto collisions happen as they do in the rest of
the world; bumpers crumple, tempers flare. But drivers there do not
seem to suffer the complaints so common in the United States, the
headaches and lingering neck pains known as “whiplash syndrome.”
Dr. Harald Schrader and colleagues from University Hospital in Trond-
heim, Norway, without disclosing the purpose of their study, gave
health questionnaires to 202 Lithuanian drivers whose cars had been
struck from behind one to three years earlier in accidents of varying
severity. The drivers’ reports of their symptoms were compared to the
reports of a control group (of the same size, same ages, and same home
towns) of drivers who had not been in an accident. Thirty-five percent
of the accident victims reported neck pain, but so did 33 percent of the
controls; 53 percent of those who had been in an accident had
headaches, but so did 50 percent of those in the control group. The re-
searchers concluded: “No one in the study group had disabling or per-
sistent symptoms as a result of the car accident.”
What, then, can account for the explosion of whiplash cases else-
where in the world? Drivers in the Lithuanian study did not carry per-
sonal injury insurance at the time of the study, and people there very
infrequently sue one another. Most medical bills are paid by the govern-
ment, and at the time of the study there were no claims to be filed, no
money to be won, and nothing to be gained from a diagnosis of chronic
whiplash. Chronic whiplash syndrome, the Norwegian researchers con-
cluded, “has little validity.”
—Harald Schrader et al., “Natural Evolution of Late Whiplash Syndrome 
Outside the Medicolegal Context,” The Lancet, 4 May 1996
5. To determine the role of specific genes, mice are bred in which certain
genes have been deleted. Such mice are called “knockout mice.”
When normal mice are placed in a lighted room, with dark corners,
they go immediately to the dark. In one recent experiment the mice,
upon entering the dark, encounter a mild electric shock, and very
quickly learn to stay away from those dark regions. Mice who lack a
gene called Ras-GRF learn to be wary just as quickly as do normal
mice. But, unlike normal mice, the knockout mice throw caution to
the winds the next day, and chance the dark corners again and yet
again. It appears that the Ras-GRF gene—probably very much like the
analogous gene in humans—plays a critical role in the ability of the
mice to remember fear. This gene is almost certainly crucial for the
survival of mammals.
—Reported in Nature, December 1997
530

Causal Reasoning
6. Here is some reassuring news for those whose career plans are slightly
behind schedule: It turns out that peaking too early may kill you. That’s
the finding of Stuart J. H. McCann, a professor of psychology at the
University College of Cape Breton in Nova Scotia.
McCann’s research concerns what he calls the “precocity-longevity
hypothesis.” McCann analyzed the lives of 1,672 U.S. governors who
served between 1789 and 1978 and found that those who were elected at
relatively tender ages generally died earlier than their less precocious
counterparts. Even when he controlled for the year that the governors
were born, or how long they served, and what state they governed, the
pattern held. No matter how he sliced the data, or ran the regressions,
or accounted for various statistical biases, the story remained the same:
governors elected to office at younger ages tended to have shorter lives.
And what holds for state executives seems also to hold for other
young achievers. McCann also analyzed smaller but more diverse sets
of accomplished people—including American and French presidents,
Canadian and British prime ministers, Nobel Laureates, signers of the
Declaration of Independence, Academy Award winners, and seven cen-
turies of Roman Catholic pontiffs. Again he found that “those who
climb to the loftiest peaks in the shortest time also die younger. For the
eminent, and perhaps for all, an early rise may lead to an early fall.”
—Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, February 2003
7. Cholera, caused by a water-borne bacterium ingested by drinking con-
taminated water, is a dreadful disease; pandemics of cholera in the 19th
century killed tens of thousands. The accepted view, that it was caused
by breathing a filthy miasma, was doubted by John Snow, a founding
member of the London Epidemiological Society. When a terrible cholera
epidemic struck London in 1848–49, Snow hypothesized that bad water,
from urban wells and from the Thames River, was the villain. Some
water companies drew their water from within the tidal section of the
Thames, where the city’s sewage was also dumped, thus providing their
customers with excrement-contaminated drinking water. It stank, so
some of the intake pipes were shifted to points above the tideway. In
1854 cholera returned with even greater horror. Snow identified two
water companies, one of which had moved its intake to a point above the
tidal region of the river, the other still supplying a fecal cocktail; his data
from these two districts showed a strong connection between cholera
mortality and water source. Snow also identified a particular well, on
Broad Street, and plotted cholera mortality house by house in the area of
that well—the number of dead increasing sharply with proximity to the
Broad Street pump—while a few streets away on Warwick Street there
were no cholera deaths at all. Just across from the Broad Street pump
was the Poland Street Workhouse, whose wretched inmates remained
healthy—the workhouse had its own well. The Lion Brewery, close to the
pump on Broad Street, also had its own well; its workers did not contract
531

Causal Reasoning
cholera—they drank mainly malt liquor. The outbreak ended when
Snow persuaded the authorities to remove the handle from the Broad Street
pump. There is today a replica of the handleless pump outside a nearby
pub named in honor of John Snow.
Steven Shapin, “Sick City,” The New Yorker, 6 November 2006
C. The Joint Method of Agreement and Difference
Although Mill believed that the joint method of agreement and difference was
an additional and separate technique, it is best understood as the combined use
of the method of agreement and the method of difference in the same investiga-
tion. It can be represented schematically (capital letters again denoting circum-
stances, lowercase letters denoting phenomena) as follows:
A B C — x y z.
A B C — x y z.
A D E — x t w.
B C — y z.
Therefore A is the effect, or the cause, or an indispensable part of the cause, of x.
Because each of the two methods (agreement schematized above on the left, dif-
ference schematized on the right) affords some probability to the conclusion,
their joint use affords a higher probability to that conclusion. In many scientific
investigations this combination serves as an extremely powerful pattern of in-
ductive inference.
A notable advance in medicine provides an illustration of the power of the
joint method. Hepatitis A is a liver infection that afflicted tens of thousands of
Americans; it spread widely among children, chiefly through contaminated food
or water, and was sometimes deadly. How might it be prevented? The ideal solu-
tion, of course, would be an effective vaccine. However, an enormous difficulty
faced those who would test any vaccine for hepatitis A: It was very hard to pre-
dict where outbreaks of the infection would occur, and therefore it was usually
not possible to select experimental subjects in ways that would yield reliable re-
sults. This difficulty was finally overcome in the following way.
A potential vaccine was tested in a community of Hasidic Jews, Kiryas Joel,
in Orange County, New York, a community that was highly unusual in that it
was plagued by yearly epidemics of this infection. Almost no one escaped hepa-
titis A in Kiryas Joel, and nearly 70 percent of the community members had been
infected by the time they were nineteen years old. Dr. Alan Werzberger, of the
Kiryas Joel Institute of Medicine, and his colleagues recruited 1,037 children in
that community, ages two to sixteen, who had not been exposed to the hepatitis
A virus, as determined by a lack of antibodies to the virus in their blood. Half of
them (519) received a single dose of the new vaccine, and among those vaccinat-
ed children not a single case of hepatitis A was reported. Of the 518 children who
received dummy injections, 25 became infected with hepatitis A soon after. The
vaccine for hepatitis A had been found.10
Liver specialists in Boston and Washington greeted this study with admi-
ration, calling it “a great breakthrough” and a “major medical advance.” What
Joint method of
agreement and
difference
A pattern of inductive
inference in which the
method of agreement
and the method of
difference are used in
combination to give the
conclusion a higher
degree of probability.
532

Causal Reasoning
is the pattern of inference on which this achievement relied? Both the method
of agreement and the method of difference were employed, as is common in
medical investigations. Among all those young residents of the community
who became immune to hepatitis A, there was only one relevent circumstance
in common: All the immunes had received the new vaccine. By itself, this
strongly tended to show that the vaccine did cause that immunity. The
method of difference supported this conclusion overwhelmingly: The circum-
stances of those who did become immune and those who did not were essen-
tially alike in every respect except one, the administration of the vaccine to the
immune residents.
The testing of new drugs or procedures is often conducted in what are called
“double-arm” trials, one group receiving the new treatment while the other
group does not, after which (in suitable cases) there may be a carefully executed
crossover, in a second phase, in which those who originally did not receive the
treatment do so, and those who originally did receive the treatment do not. The
application of the joint method of agreement and difference underlies such in-
vestigations, which are common and exceedingly productive.
EXERCISES
Analyze each of the following reports, explaining the way in which the
method of agreement and the method of difference have been jointly applied,
and identifying the special force, if any, of their combination.
1. Pain can be agonizing, but it serves a useful function: It teaches people
and animals to avoid dangers, and forces them to attend to wounds.
Strangely, there are a very few people who never feel pain; they remain
unaware of having suffered significant injuries.
One family in northern Pakistan has several such members. One, a
ten-year old boy, became famous for giving street performances in
which he put knives through his arms and walked on hot coals. Tissue
damage would result, but no discomfort. Geneticist C. G. Woods of
Cambridge University searched for the cause of this remarkable inabili-
ty to feel pain. Eventually he zeroed in on mutations in a gene, SCN9A,
that codes for the channel through which sodium enters pain-sensing
cells, critical to the pain signal. Testing with electric current, he could
open and close sodium channels on some cells—but he could not open
the sodium channels on those mutant cells. Said Woods, “This shows
that rare diseases can still be of great importance because of the insights
they give into biological processes.”
A Yale University neurologist, Stephen Waxman, observes that if
researchers could craft a drug that can make these channels inactive, as
they are in the Pakistani family members, millions of people worldwide
who suffer from chronic pain would be wonderfully served.
—Reported in Nature, 14 December 2006
533

Causal Reasoning
2. A deadly heart ailment affecting about 1 million African American
men—familial amyloid cardiomyopathy—and another that afflicts older
men of all ethnicities, are known to be caused by an abnormally folded
protein that builds up in the organism. Transthyretin protein, made in
the liver, has four subunits. A mutation in the gene that makes two of
those subunits results in the instability of the protein, its misfolding,
and eventually in death. That this is indeed the cause of the ailments
was shown by the fact that a liver transplant, providing a healthy ver-
sion of the critical gene, can result in cure—but often that correction
comes too late to stymie the misfolding that did the damage.
A strange twist of nature, reported in Science in January 2003 by
Dr. Jeffrey Kelly, of the Scripps Research Institute in San Diego, provided
the clues to a therapy that can thwart the misfolding process. Because dis-
eases of this kind are quite common in Portugal, families there are screened
to see who has the mutated gene and is therefore at risk. One very large
family was identified whose members had the mutated gene and yet never
did contract the disease. It turned out that in this family, a second gene that
made the other two subunits of the protein had undergone its own muta-
tion, suppressing or reversing the disease process. Members of that family
carried a cure to an inherited disease in their own genes.
Dr. Kelly found that as a result of this further mutation the disease
was prevented by the erection of a kind of barrier between the normal
and the abnormal protein states. Then, by screening libraries of small
molecules, he located several that, already approved by the Food and
Drug Administration for other purposes, could mimic the effect of the
second mutation, successfuly reversing the misfolded protein in animals.
3. Sixteen-year-old David Merrill, of Suffolk, Virginia, hypothesized that
the loud sounds of hard-rock music have a bad effect on its devoted
fans. He tested the theory on mice. Seventy-two mice were divided into
three groups of 24, the first to be exposed to hard-rock music, the sec-
ond to music by Mozart, and the third to no music at all. After allowing
the mice to become accustomed to their environments, but before expos-
ing them to the music, Merrill tested all of them in a maze, which took
the mice an average of 10 minutes to complete. Then the groups were
exposed to the music for 10 hours a day.
With repeated testing the control-group mice reduced their time in
the maze by an average of 5 minutes. Those exposed to Mozart reduced
their time by 8.5 minutes. The hard-rock mice increased their time in the
maze by 20 minutes.
Merrill also reported that when, in an earlier attempt, he had al-
lowed all the mice to live together, the project had to be cut short be-
cause, unlike the Mozart-listening mice, the hard-rock-listening mice
killed other mice.
—Reported in Insight, 8 September 1997
534

Causal Reasoning
4. Scientists have long known that severely restricting the number of calo-
ries that mice and other organisms consume lengthens their life span.
Animals on low-calorie diets typically have abnormally cool body tem-
peratures. Does low temperature, in itself, result in longer life? The an-
swer is yes.
Bruno Conti, of the Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, California,
genetically engineered mice to have a faulty sense of body temperature.
The alteration reduced the animals’ temperatures by 0.03 to 0.05°C
below normal; they were given as much food as they wanted, maintain-
ing their normal weight. The low-temperature mice lived about 15 per-
cent longer than normal mice did.
—Reported in Science, 3 November 2006
5. At a social gathering of eighty-five faculty members, graduate students,
and staff workers in the Department of Food Science at the University of
Illinois in Urbana-Champaign, the partygoers served themselves ice
cream. They did not know they were also the subjects of an experiment.
Half the participants were given 17-ounce bowls, and half 34-ounce
bowls. In addition, half were given 2-ounce spoons to scoop out their ice
cream, and half were given 3-ounce serving spoons.
With larger spoons, people served themselves 14.5 percent more,
and with a larger bowl they heaped on 31 percent more. With both large
spoon and large bowl these nutrition experts helped themselves to 56.8
percent more ice cream than those who used the smaller utensils. And
all but three ate every bit of the ice cream they took. Smaller platters and
smaller utensils may be the key to a successful diet.
—Reported by Brian Wansink in The American Journal of Preventive Medicine,
September 2006
D. The Method of Residues
John Stuart Mill wrote:
Subduct from any phenomenon such part as is known by previous inductions to be
the effect of certain antecedents, and the residue of the phenomenon is the effect of
the remaining antecedents.
The first three methods seem to suppose that we can eliminate or produce
the cause (or effect) of some phenomenon in its entirety, as indeed we sometimes
can. In many contexts, however, we can only deduce the causal effect of some
phenomenon by observing the change that it makes in a set of circumstances
whose cause is already understood in part.
This method, focusing on residues, is well illustrated by the very simple device
used to weigh truck cargos. The weight of the truck when empty is known. To de-
termine the weight of the cargo, the entire truck is weighed with its cargo—and
the weight of the cargo is then known to be the weight of the whole minus the
weight of the truck. The known “antecedent,” in Mill’s phrase, is the recorded
weight of the empty truck that must be subtracted from the reading on the scale;
535

Causal Reasoning
the cause of the difference between that reading and the known antecedent is ob-
viously attributable to the remaining “antecedents”—that is, to the cargo itself.
Schematically, the method of residues can be represented as follows:
A B C — x y z.
B is known to be the cause of y.
C is known to be the cause of z.
Therefore A is the cause of x.
A splendid illustration of the effectiveness of the method of residues is pro-
vided by one of the great chapters in the history of astronomy, the discovery of
the planet Neptune:
In 1821, Bouvard of Paris published tables of the motions of a number of planets,
including Uranus. In preparing the latter he had found great difficulty in making an
orbit calculated on the basis of positions obtained in the years after 1800 agree with
one calculated from observations taken in the years immediately following discov-
ery. He finally disregarded the older observations entirely and based his tables on
the newer observations. In a few years, however, the positions calculated from the
tables disagreed with the observed positions of the planet and by 1844 the discrep-
ancy amounted to 2 minutes of arc. Since all the other known planets agreed in
their motions with those calculated for them, the discrepancy in the case of Uranus
aroused much discussion.
In 1845, Leverrier, then a young man, attacked the problem. He checked Bou-
vard’s calculations and found them essentially correct. Thereupon he felt that the only
satisfactory explanation of the trouble lay in the presence of a planet somewhere be-
yond Uranus which was disturbing its motion. By the middle of 1846 he had finished
his calculations. In September he wrote to Galle at Berlin and requested the latter to
look for a new planet in a certain region of the sky for which some new star charts had
just been prepared in Germany but of which Leverrier apparently had not as yet ob-
tained copies. On the twenty-third of September Galle started the search and in less
than an hour he found an object which was not on the chart. By the next night it had
moved appreciably and the new planet, subsequently named Neptune, was discov-
ered within 1° of the predicted place. This discovery ranks among the greatest
achievements of mathematical astronomy.11
The phenomenon under investigation here is the movement of Uranus. A
great part of that phenomenon, the orbit of Uranus around the sun, was well
understood at the time. Observations of Uranus approximated this calculated
orbit but exhibited a puzzling residue, some perturbation of what had been
calculated, for which further explanation was needed. An additional “an-
tecedent”—that is, an additional existing factor that would account for the
perturbation—was hypothesized to be another (undiscovered) planet whose
gravity would, together with what was already known about the orbit of
Uranus, explain that residue. Once hypothesized, that new planet, Neptune,
was very quickly found.
The method of residues differs from the other methods in that it can be used
with the examination of only one case, whereas the others require the examina-
tion of at least two cases. The method of residues, unlike the others, appears to
Method of residues
A pattern of inductive
inference in which, when
some portions of a given
phenomenon are known
to be the effects of
certain identified
antecedents, we
conclude that the
remaining portion of the
phenomenon is the
effect of the remaining
antecedents.
536

Causal Reasoning
depend on antecedently established causal laws, while the other methods (as
Mill formulated them) do not. The method of residues is nevertheless an induc-
tive, not a deductive, method (as some have suggested), because it yields conclu-
sions that are only probable and cannot be validly deduced from their premises.
An additional premise or two might transform an inference by the method of
residues into a valid deductive argument, but that can be said for other inductive
methods as well.
EXERCISES
Analyze each of the following arguments in terms of “antecedents” and
“phenomena” to show how they follow the pattern of the method of
residues:
1. For nineteen years space scientists, astronomers, and physicists have
been puzzled by what appears to be a mysterious force pulling space-
craft in the direction of the sun. It was first noticed when the trajectories
of two outward bound and very distant spacecraft (Pioneer 10 and 11,
launched in 1972 and 1973) were carefully analyzed. The trajectories of
two later probes (Galileo, launched toward Jupiter in 1989, and Ulysses,
launched into polar orbit around the sun) have exhibited the same pecu-
liarities: They give evidence of a weak force that perturbs their direc-
tions and velocities. This force was discovered by adding up the effects
of all other known forces acting on the spacecraft and finding that some-
thing unexplained was left over.
This force is apparently slowing the outward progress of the space-
craft speeding away from or around the sun—but in contrast to the
force of gravity, the strength of this mystery force does not decline pro-
portionally to the inverse square of a spacecraft’s distance from the sun,
but instead at a linear rate, which makes it very unlikely that the mys-
tery force is a gravitational effect of the sun.
Calculations were made using two independent methods, and data
of different types, taking into account possible errors in the software
and the hardware used in the measurements. A host of other possible er-
rors were investigated and accounted for—and after ruling all of these
out, a team of physicists from the Los Alamos National Laboratory an-
nounced that the mystery remained. This means that some hitherto un-
known phenomenon may be at work—what physicists excitedly call
“new physics.”
—Reported in Physical Review Letters, September 1998
2. In H. Davies’ experiments on the decomposition of water by galvanism,
it was found that besides the two components of water, oxygen and hy-
drogen, an acid and an alkali were developed at opposite poles of the
machine. Since the theory of the analysis of water did not give reason to
expect these products, their presence constituted a problem. Some
537

Causal Reasoning
chemists thought that electricity had the power of producing these sub-
stances of itself. Davies conjectured that there might be some hidden
cause for this part of the effect—the glass might suffer decomposition,
or some foreign matter might be in the water. He then proceeded to in-
vestigate whether or not the diminution or total elimination of possible
causes would change or eliminate the effect in question. Substituting
gold vessels for glass ones, he found no change in the effect and con-
cluded that glass was not the cause. Using distilled water, he found a
decrease in the quantity of acid and alkali involved, yet enough re-
mained to show that the cause was still in operation. He inferred that
impurity of the water was not the sole cause, but was a concurrent
cause. He then suspected that perspiration from the hands might be the
cause, as it would contain salt which would decompose into acid and al-
kali under electricity. By avoiding such contact, he reduced the quantity
of the effect still further, till only slight traces remained. These might be
due to some impurity of the atmosphere decomposed by the electricity.
An experiment determined this to be the case. The machine was put
under an exhaust receiver and when it was thus secured from atmos-
pheric influences, no acid or alkali was produced.
—G. Gore, The Art of Scientific Discovery, 1878
3. Satellite observations collected between 1992 and 2001 suggest that the
upper surface of the Larsen C ice shelf, in Antarctica, dropped as much
as 27 cm per year during that period. About a quarter of that shrinkage,
or 7 cm, may have resulted from snow packing down into denser mate-
rial called firn. Uncertainties about such factors as the height of the
ocean tides, and the salinity of water beneath the ice shelf would ac-
count for no more than a small fraction of the remaining loss of height
above water.
Therefore, concluded Andrew Shepherd, a glaciologist at the Uni-
versity of Cambridge in England, as much as 20 cm per year of the
upper surface’s drop must stem from melting. Nine-tenths of any mass
of floating ice lies below the water’s surface, suggesting that the Larsen
C ice shelf is thinning by as much as 2 m each year.
The likely cause of this thinning is relatively warm water beneath
the shelf. Even a very small temperature increase in the water below an
ice shelf can make a big difference in the melting rate of the overlying
ice. Larsen C is stable, and isn’t shedding more icebergs than normal,
Shepherd reported, but at its current rate of thinning, Larsen C could
reach 200 m in thickness (the thickness at which other ice shelves have
disintegrated) and therefore be susceptible to disintegration in 70
years—but if the waters in the region continue to warm, the demise of
Larsen C could occur even sooner.
—Reported in Science News, 1 November 2003
538

Causal Reasoning
4. Analyzing more than forty years of weather data, climatologists at the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in Boulder, Col-
orado, recently found that the daily temperature range—the difference
between the daytime maximum and the nighttime minimum tempera-
tures—at 660 weather stations in the continental United States fluctuates
in a very puzzling manner: the variation of the temperature range over
the course of a week, in some regions, does not line up with any natural
cycles that can be detected.
The average temperature range for the weekends (Saturday, Sunday,
and Monday) varied from the average temperature range for weekdays
(Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday)! Fluctuations in the daily
range can be caused by natural factors; storm systems moving across an
area, for example, can cause such fluctuation—but there are no natural
factors known to fall consistently on certain days of the week.
The precise cause of this extraordinary pattern is not clear. However,
contend the researchers (Piers M. de F. Forster and Susan Solomon), the
only possible explanation for this weekend/weekday disparity is
human activity and the atmospheric pollutants such activity creates.
—Reported in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 30 September 2003
5. It is no longer open to discussion that air has weight. It is common
knowledge that a balloon is heavier when inflated than when empty,
which is proof enough. For if the air were light, the more the balloon
was inflated, the lighter the whole would be, since there would be more
air in it. But since, on the contrary, when more air is put in, the whole
becomes heavier, it follows that each part has a weight of its own, and
consequently that the air has weight.
—Blaise Pascal, Treatise on the Weight of the Mass of the Air, 1653
E. The Method of Concomitant Variation
The four methods discussed so far are all eliminative in nature. By eliminating
some possible cause or causes of a given phenomenon, they support some other
causal account hypothesized. The method of agreement eliminates as possible
causes those circumstances in whose absence the phenomenon can nevertheless
occur; the method of difference permits the elimination of some possible causes
by removing an antecedent factor shown to be critical; the joint method is elimi-
native in both of these ways; and the method of residues seeks to eliminate as
possible causes those circumstances whose effects have already been established
by previous inductions.
However, in many situations, no one of these methods is applicable, because
they involve circumstances that cannot possibly be eliminated. This is often the
case in economics, in physics, in medicine, and wherever the general increase or
decrease of one factor results in a concomitant increase or decrease of another—
the complete elimination of either factor not being feasible.
539

Causal Reasoning
John Stuart Mill wrote:
Whatever phenomenon varies in any manner whenever another phenomenon varies in
some particular manner is either a cause or an effect of that phenomenon or is con-
nected with it through some fact of causation.
Concomitant variation is critical to the study of the causal impact of certain
foods, for example. We cannot eliminate disease, no matter the diet; we can
rarely eliminate foods of certain kinds from the diets of large populations. But
we can note the effect of increasing or decreasing the intake of certain foods on
the frequency of certain diseases in specified populations. One investigation of
this kind examined the frequency of heart attacks compared to the frequency
with which fish had been eaten by those in the study. The inductive conclusion
was striking: Eating one fish meal a week reduced the risk of heart attack by 50
percent; eating just two fish meals a month reduced the risk of heart attack by 30
percent. Within some limits there appears to be a marked concomitant variation
between cardiac arrests and the use of fish in the diet.12
Using plus and minus signs to indicate the greater or lesser degree to which a
varying phenomenon is present in a given situation, the method of concomitant
variation can be schematized as:
A B C — x y z.
A+ B C — x+ y z.
Therefore A and x are causally connected.
This method is very widely used. A farmer establishes that there is a causal
connection between the application of fertilizer to the soil and the size of the crop
by applying different amounts to different parts of a field, then noting the con-
comitant variation between the amounts of the additive and the yield. A mer-
chant seeks to verify the efficacy of advertising of different kinds by running
varied advertisements at varying intervals, then noting the concomitant increase
or decrease of business during some of those periods.
Concomitant variation is exemplified in the search for the causes of divorce
and of other important decisions among families. Of course the cause of any
particular divorce will lie in the special circumstances of that marriage and that
family, but there are conditions that tend generally to contribute to the breakup
of families, and concomitant variation is useful in learning what these are.
Analysis of data from the U.S. Census Bureau reveals that, in every decade
since the 1940s, and in every region of the country, couples who were the par-
ents of only girls divorced more often than couples who were the parents of
only boys. It happened among whites and among blacks, among those with
only high school diplomas and among those with college degrees. Parents with
an only child who is a girl are 6 percent more likely to split up than parents of
a single boy. The gap rises to 8 percent for parents of two girls versus parents of
Method of
concomitant variation
A pattern of inductive
inference in which it is
concluded that, when
one phenomenon varies
consistently with some
other phenomenon in
some manner, there is
some causal relation
between the two
phenomena.
540

Causal Reasoning
two boys, 10 percent for families with three girls, and 13 percent if there are
four girls. Thousands upon thousands of U.S. divorces appear to stem partly
from the number of girls in the family.
The age-old favoring of boys, overt and common in China, India, and other
developing countries, is more subtle in the United States, but it remains a wide-
spread factor in the dynamics of U.S. family life. Parents invest more in their
sons, spending, when their families include a boy, an average of an additional
$600 a year on housing. Fathers increase their workweeks after the birth of the
first family child of either sex—but increase it by more than two hours if the
child is a boy, less than one hour if it is a girl. These patterns of concomitant
variation make it plain that parents have a preference for boys—a preference
that will have increasingly important consequences when the technology for
the selection of the sex of a baby, already known and reliable, becomes more
widely available.13
When the increase of one phenomenon parallels the increase of another, we say
that the phenomena vary directly with each other. However, the method permits the
use of variation “in any manner,” and we may also infer a causal connection when
the phenomena vary inversely—the increase of one leading to the decrease of anoth-
er. Thus economists often say that, other things remaining roughly stable, in an un-
regulated market an increase of the supply of some good (say, crude oil) will result
in a concomitant decrease in its price. That relation does appear to be genuinely
concomitant: When international tension threatens to reduce the available supply of
crude oil, we note that the price of the oil almost invariably rises.
Some concomitant variations are entirely coincidental, of course. Care must
be taken not to infer a causal connection from patterns of occurrence that are
wholly fortuitous. But some variations that appear to be coincidental, or are
otherwise puzzling, may have an obscure causal explanation. It has been
shown that there is a high correlation between the number of storks found
nesting in English villages and the number of babies born in each of those vil-
lages—the more storks, the more babies. Surely it is not possible that . . . No,
it’s not. Villages with high birth rates have more newly married couples, and
therefore have more newly constructed houses. Storks, it turns out, prefer to
nest beside chimneys that have not been used previously by other storks.14
Tracing the causal chains of phenomena that vary concomitantly, we may find
links in common, which is what Mill meant when he said that the phenomena
may be “connected . . . through some fact of causation.”
Because the method of concomitant variation permits us to adduce, as evi-
dence, changes in the degree to which circumstances and phenomena are present,
it greatly strengthens our set of inductive techniques. It is a quantitative method
of inductive inference, those earlier discussed being essentially qualitative. The
use of concomitant variation therefore presupposes the existence of some
method of measuring or estimating, even if only roughly, the degrees to which
phenomena vary.
541

Causal Reasoning
EXERCISES
Analyze each of the following arguments in terms of the variation of the
“phenomena” to show how they follow the pattern of the method of concomitant
variation:
1. The notion that poverty and mental illness are intertwined is not
new—but finding evidence that one begets the other has often proved
difficult. New research, which coincided with the opening of a new
gambling casino on an Indian reservation, appears to strengthen that
link, strongly suggesting that lifting children out of poverty (as casino
income did in many cases) tends to diminish some (but not all) psychi-
atric symptoms.
A study published in the Journal of the American Medical Association
in October 2003 tracked 1,420 children, ages 9 to 13, in rural North Car-
olina, very many of whom lived on a Cherokee Indian reservation. Dur-
ing the study a casino that had been opened on the reservation began
distributing some of its profits to tribal families, the payments reaching
about $6,000 per year by 2001. The researchers found that the rate of
psychiatric symptoms among the children who had risen from poverty
dropped steadily; those children were less inclined to temper tantrums,
stealing, bullying, and vandalism—common symptoms of oppositional
defiant disorders.
Children whose families rose above the poverty threshold showed
a 40 percent decrease in behavioral symptoms. The rate of such behav-
iors, after four years, dropped to the same levels found among children
whose families had never been poor. But the casino payments had no
effect on children whose families were nevertheless unable to rise from
poverty, or on those children whose families had not been poor to
begin with.
The economic change had a significant effect on only a fraction of
the children followed. This, it was hypothesized, was a consequence of
the fact that, although all the families that received the payment re-
ceived the same amount of money, the payments resulted in lifting only
14 percent of those families above the poverty line which, in 2002, was
$14,348 for a family of three. The study suggests, said Dr. Arline Geron-
imus, of the University of Michigan, that poverty puts stress on families,
which can increase the likelihood that children will develop behavioral
problems.
2. In Finland, heart attacks occur more frequently in the eastern part of
the country than in the western and southern parts. Researchers seek-
ing to explain these differences concluded that they “cannot be ex-
plained by individual lifestyle or by genetic factors.” How, then, can
they be explained? A study led by Dr. Anne Kousa, of the Geological
Survey of Finland, examined heart attacks that occurred in 18,946 men,
542

Causal Reasoning
ages 35 to 74, in three different years. The researchers then correlated
the incidence of heart attack in these populations with the level of
water hardness—as measured by the presence of minerals in the
water—in their communities. The study found that the degree of
water hardness correlated directly with a lowered risk of heart attack.
Drinking water rich in minerals appears to play a role in reducing
heart disease.
— Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, January 2004
3. When it comes to love, sex, and friendship, do birds of a feather flock to-
gether? Or is it more important that opposites attract? Dr. Claus
Wedekind, of Bern University in Switzerland, hypothesized that body
odor might signal that its owner had desirable immune genes—called
MHC genes—that would help offspring to fight off diseases. He devised
an experiment to see if human body odor correlated with MHC genes
and if people could tell.
He and his team collected DNA samples for 49 female and 44 male
university students. He asked the men to wear cotton T-shirts on two
successive nights, to keep the shirt in a plastic bag, to use perfume-free
detergents and soaps, and to avoid smelly rooms, smell-producing
foods, and activities like smoking and sex that create odors. Meanwhile,
the women were given a nasal spray to protect their nasal membranes
from infection, and each received a copy of the Patrick Susskind novel
Perfume to make them more conscious of odors.
When the T-shirts were collected, the women were asked to give rat-
ings, for intensity, pleasantness, and sexiness, to three T-shirts from men
whose MHC genes were similar to those of the women, and three from
men whose MHC genes were dissimilar, not knowing which were which.
Women who were dissimilar to a particular male’s MHC perceived
his odor as more pleasant than did women whose MHC was similar to
that of the test man. Odors of men with dissimilar MHC reminded the
women of their own mates or former mates twice as often as did the
odors of men with similar MHC.
However, if a woman was taking oral contraceptives, which partly
mimic pregnancy, this predilection was reversed, and they gave higher
ratings to men with similar MHC. “The Pill effect really surprised me,”
said Dr. Wedekind.
—Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, 1995
4. Stanley Coren sought to plumb the connections between sleeplessness
and accidents. To do that he focused on the yearly shift to daylight time
in eastern North America, when (because clocks are moved forward one
hour) most people lose an hour of sleep. He compared the number of
accidents then with the number on normal days, and found that on the
day after the time change, in Canada, there was an 8 percent increase in
accidents. Then, examining the day after the return to standard time,
when people gain an hour of sleep, he found a corresponding decrease
543

Causal Reasoning
in accidents. “What we’re looking at,” says the Director of the Human
Chronobiology Laboratory at the University of Pittsburgh, commenting
upon Soren’s results, “is national jet lag.”
—S. Coren, Sleep Thieves (New York: The Free Press, 1996)
5. Prof. Kathleen Vohs reports that two groups of college students were
asked to read out loud from “a boring book on the biographies of scien-
tists.” One of the groups was obliged to wear fake expressions of de-
light and interest, while the other group was allowed to read the same
texts naturally. Each group was afterward given a sum of money to
spend on an assortment of goods, or to save. Those who had been fak-
ing delight spent 62 percent more than those who had not. Similarly, a
group of students writing down their thoughts without restraint spent
very much less than a similar group obliged while writing to avoid all
thoughts about white bears. The more self-restraint that a person ex-
pends to control one impulse, it appears, the less self-restraint is avail-
able to control others.
—Reported in The Journal of Consumer Research, March 2007
6. Potassium in the urine is known to reflect potassium intake from the diet.
At the Prosserman Center for Health Research in Toronto, Dr. Andrew
Mente and colleagues analyzed urinary potassium as a useful clinical
marker of a healthy diet. They collected urine samples from hundreds of
patients and separately calculated the quality of their diets. The results
were striking: as urinary potassium increased there was a steady and
significant increase in diet quality score, as well as a steady decrease in
body mass, blood pressure and heart rate. “This urinary marker,” said
Dr. Mente, “is a simple, objective, universally available measure of diet
quality.”
—Urology/Nephrology News, 20 November 2006
7. Whenever the U.S. says things that make a military conflict with Iran
seem more likely, the price of oil rises, strengthening Iran’s regime
rather than weakening it. The more we talk about curbing Iranian
power, the more difficult it gets. . . . So cooling down the martial
rhetoric, even if we plan to take military action eventually, would
likely bring oil prices down, making Iran weaker. . . . Lower oil
prices won’t, by themselves, topple the mullahs in Iran. But it’s sig-
nificant that, historically, when oil prices have been low, Iranian re-
formers have been ascendant and radicals relatively subdued, and
vice versa when prices have been high. Talking tough may look like a
good way of demonstrating U.S. resolve, but when tough talk makes
our opponent richer and stronger we may accomplish more by
saying less.
—James Surowieki, “Troubled Waters over Oil,” The New Yorker, 
19 February 2007
544

Causal Reasoning
Five Methods of Inductive Inference
o v e r v i e w
1. The method of agreement. The one factor or circumstance that is
common to all the cases of the phenomenon under investigation is likely
to be the cause (or effect) of that phenomenon.
2. The method of difference. The one factor or circumstance whose ab-
sence or presence distinguishes all cases in which the phenomenon
under investigation occurs from those cases in which it does not
occur, is likely to be the cause, or part of the cause, of that phenome-
non.
3. The joint method of agreement and difference. Although perhaps not
a separate method, the combination, in the same investigation, of the
method of agreement and the method of difference gives substantial probabili-
ty to the inductive conclusion.
4. The method of residues. When some portion of the phenomenon
under examination is known to be the consequence of well-understood
antecedent circumstances, we may infer that the remainder of that phenom-
enon is the effect of the remaining antecedents.
5. The method of concomitant variation. When the variations in one phe-
nomenon are highly correlated with the variations in another phenomenon,
one of the two is likely to be the cause of the other, or they may be relat-
ed as the products of some third factor causing both.
These are the inductive methods frequently called Mill’s methods, most com-
monly used by scientists in their investigation of causal laws.
5
Limitations of Inductive Techniques
What do the methods explained in the preceding sections actually do for us?
John Stuart Mill believed that they were instruments with which we may discover
causal connections; also that they were canons with which causal connections
may be proved. On both counts he overestimated their power. Inductive tech-
niques are indeed of very great importance, but their role in science is more lim-
ited than Mill supposed.
One substantial difficulty arises from the fact that, in formulating these
methods, Mill made the assumption that one can identify cases “having only
one circumstance in common” or other cases “having every circumstance in
common save one.” But these expressions must not be taken literally; any two
objects will have many circumstances in common, however different they may
appear; and no two things can ever differ in only one respect—one will be far-
ther to the north, one will be closer to the sun, and so on. Nor could we even
545

Causal Reasoning
examine all possible circumstances to determine if they differ in only one way.
What the scientist has in mind as he or she applies these techniques are not all
circumstances, but the sets of relevant circumstances—whether there is only
one relevant circumstance in common, or all relevant circumstances save one
in common. That is, we apply the methods to the circumstances that have
some bearing on the causal connection in question.
John Stuart Mill
J
ohn Stuart Mill (1806–1873), one of the most prominent philosophers and
logicians of the nineteenth century, was the beneficiary of an extraordinary
education, which he recounts in detail in his famous Autobiography (1873).
He did not attend school, but studied intensively with his father, James Mill, a
very learned man and a philosopher himself. The young John Stuart was taught
to read before he was two; he studied Greek at the age of three and Latin at the
age of eight. Before he was fourteen he had read most of the Greek
and Latin classics, had pursued extensive studies in logic and mathe-
matics, and had been writing essays in economic theory under the
direction of his father, whose guidance was demanding but also lov-
ing. James was one of a small group of brilliant liberal intellectuals,
radical reformers who were at once moral thinkers and economists,
led by the great English legislative reformer, Jeremy Bentham. While
still a boy Mill interacted with these powerful intellects in his own
living room; eventually he himself became a leader of nineteenth-
century English liberalism.
At the age of seventeen Mill followed his father as an employee
of the East India Company, which was the de facto government of
much of India during those years. Mill rose through the ranks to be-
come, when he was 50, Chief Examiner for that company. After his
retirement he was elected to Parliament, where he served with great
distinction.
Mill’s philosophical views remain highly relevant in the twenty-first cen-
tury. His early feminism (The Subjection of Women, 1869) was courageous; his
advocacy of self-government (Considerations on Representative Government,
1861) was profound; his moral views brought utilitarian thinking to the high-
est point it had reached in his time (Utilitarianism, 1861); his defense of free
speech and expression (On Liberty, 1959) has made him, to this day, an intellec-
tual hero around the globe.
His philosophical reputation was first established in his 30s, when he
published his System of Logic (1843). In that work he explained why formal
deductive logic, or syllogistics, cannot really add to our knowledge, al-
though it certainly can help us to reason consistently on the basis of what
Biography
© Bettmann/CORBIS
All Rights Reserved
546

Causal Reasoning
we do already know. On the other hand, inductive logic—the logic of sci-
ence—can provide, he argued, rules and guidelines for the discovery of new
truths. Refining the old Baconian rules of inference, Mill formulated and ex-
plained the principles of inductive logic as no one had before him. Since the
premises of any syllogism must be established or assumed before ratiocina-
tion can begin, Mill contended that induction must precede deduction and
is necessarily more fundamental. In the realm of inductive logic his work
was incisive and original.
John Stuart Mill was, overall, an effective and honest reformer, univer-
sally respected. He was a loving husband, an admired scholar, and a
legislator of unquestioned integrity. His philosophical reasoning on a wide
range of issues was subtle, his sentiments always humane. He was the
most influential English-speaking philosopher and logician of the nine-
teenth century .
Which are those circumstances? We cannot learn which factors are relevant
using the methods alone. In order to use the methods we must come to the con-
text in which they are to be applied with some analysis of causal factors already
in mind. The caricature of the “scientific drinker” illustrates this difficulty: He
drinks Scotch and soda one night, bourbon and soda the next night, and on the
following nights brandy and soda, then rum and soda, then gin and soda. What
is the cause of his intoxication? Repeatedly inebriated, he swears never to touch
soda again!
This scientific drinker did apply the method of agreement in accordance with
the rules—but his doing so was to no avail because the factors that really are rel-
evant in those antecedent circumstances had not been identified and therefore
could not be manipulated. Had alcohol been specified as one of the factors com-
mon to all the cases, it would have been possible to eliminate soda very quickly,
of course, using the method of difference.
The heroic investigation of the causes of yellow fever, discussed earlier in
connection with the method of difference, confirmed the conclusion that the
fever is spread by the bite of an infected mosquito. We know that now, just as we
know now that it is alcohol and not soda that causes drunkenness. But the yel-
low fever experiments required insight and imagination as well as courage; the
notion that the fever was spread by mosquitoes was originally thought to be silly,
or absurd, or was not thought of at all. Circumstances in the real world do not
come wearing tags marked “relevant” or “irrelevant.” The testing of mosquito
bites as cause required some earlier sorting of possibly relevant factors, to which
547

Causal Reasoning
the inductive methods might then be applied. With that prior analysis in hand,
the methods can prove exceedingly helpful—but the methods by themselves,
without some hypotheses in the background, are not sufficient instruments for
scientific discovery.
Nor can the methods by themselves constitute rules for proof. Their applica-
tion proceeds always on the basis of some antecedent hypotheses about causal
factors, as noted just above, and because all circumstances cannot have been
considered, attention will be confined to those believed to be the possible caus-
es in question. However, this judgment regarding which circumstances are to
be investigated may prove to have been in error. Medical scientists, for a very
long time, did not consider dirty hands even as possible agents of infection, and
so could not identify such dirtiness as the cause of disease. The failure of physi-
cians to wash their hands (because they did not understand how infectious dis-
eases were spread) resulted in untold misery and uncounted deaths over
centuries, especially from puerperal (or childbed) fever, which was carried on
the hands of doctors from mother to mother, until the proof of that disastrous
causal connection was given by the Hungarian physician Ignac Semmelweis, in
the middle of the nineteenth century.15 Investigation is stymied when the in-
vestigators fail to break down the circumstances before them into the appropri-
ate elements, elements that cannot be known in advance. Because the analyses
presupposed by the application of the methods may be incorrect, or inade-
quate, the inferences based on those analyses may also prove to be mistaken.
This dependence of induction on the merit of the underlying hypotheses shows
that inductive techniques cannot by themselves provide the proof of causation
that Mill had hoped for.
Yet another problem should be borne in mind: The application of inductive
methods always depends on observed correlations, and even when the observa-
tions have been made accurately, they may be incomplete and therefore decep-
tive. The greater the number of observations, the greater is the likelihood that the
correlation we observe is the manifestation of a genuine causal law—but no mat-
ter how great that number is, we cannot infer with certainty a causal connection
among instances that have not yet been observed.
These limitations illuminate once again the great gulf between deduction
and induction. A valid deductive inference constitutes a proof, or demonstration,
but every inductive inference is, at best, highly probable and never demonstra-
tive. Therefore Mill’s claim that his canons are “methods of proof” must be reject-
ed, along with the claim that they are “the methods of discovery.”
Nevertheless, the techniques explained in this chapter are central in much
of science and are very powerful. Because it is impossible for investigators to
take all circumstances into account, the application of the methods must al-
ways suppose one or more causal hypotheses about the circumstances under in-
vestigation. Being unsure which factor(s) are the cause(s) of the phenomenon
under investigation, we often formulate alternative hypotheses and subject
548

Causal Reasoning
each to testing. What the five methods of induction, being mainly eliminative
in nature, enable us to determine is this: If some specified analysis of the an-
tecedent circumstances is correct, one of these factors cannot be (or must be)
the cause (or part of the cause) of the phenomenon in question. This may be
deduced, and the deduction may be valid, but the soundness of that argument
will always depend on the correctness of the antecedent analysis that had
been supposed.
The methods of induction are splendid, but they can yield reliable results
only when the hypothesis that they seek to confirm (or falsify) does identify cor-
rectly the circumstances that are causally relevant. The methods permit the
deduction of those results only when that hypothesis has been assumed as a
premise in the argument. The nature of the power these methods give us may
now be seen. They are not paths for discovery; they are not rules for proof. They
are instruments for testing hypotheses. The statements of these inductive tech-
niques, taken together, describe the general method of controlled experiment,
which is a common and indispensable tool in all of modern science.
So important is the role of hypotheses in systematic empirical investigations
that the enterprise of devising and testing hypotheses may be regarded as the
method of science.
EXERCISES
Analyze each of the following investigations, or arguments, and indicate which
of the methods of causal reasoning—Mill’s methods—are being used in each of
them:
1. Teens who lose their virginity earlier than their peers are more likely to
shoplift, destroy property, or sell drugs than their virgin counterparts,
according to a recent national study of 7,000 teenagers. Those who had
sex early were 20 percent more likely to engage in delinquent acts one
year later compared to those whose first sexual experience occurred at
the average age for their school. Those who waited longer than average
to have sex had delinquency rates 50 percent lower a year later com-
pared to average teens. Waiting appears to have a protective effect.
“We’re not finding that sex itself leads to delinquency; sex itself is not
always a problem behavior,” writes co-author and Ohio State sociologist
Stacy Armour. However, “the timing of sexual initiation does matter.
Kids go off on a different trajectory if they’re having sex early.”
—Reported in The Journal of Youth and Adolescence, February 2007
2. Strong evidence has been presented that a diet low in folic acid [a trace
vitamin in the B complex] during pregnancy increases the chances of
giving birth to a premature baby of lower than normal birth weight.
Dr. Theresa Scholl [of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
549

Causal Reasoning
Jersey] studied the outcomes of pregnancy for 832 women from the
inner city of Camden, N.J., to determine the influence of dietary and
supplementary consumption of folic acid. “We found that the women
who consumed less than 240 micrograms per day of folic acid had about
a two- to threefold greater risk of preterm delivery and low birth
weight,” she said. She reported that even small increases in the
women’s serum folic acid concentrations by the 28th week decreased
the odds of preterm delivery as well as the chance of having a baby of
low birth weight. Of the 219 women in the low-folic-acid category (re-
ceiving less than 240 micrograms a day), 44 had preterm, low-birth-
weight infants. “The risks declined in direct relationship to increased
serum levels of folic acid, showing that low intake is a risk factor
throughout pregnancy,” Dr. Scholl concluded.
—T. O. Scholl, et al., “Dietary and Serum Folate: Their Influence on the 
Outcome of Pregnancy,” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, April 1996
3. The sequence of DNA units in the genome of humans and in that of
chimpanzees is 98.8 percent identical; humans and chimps shared a
joint ancestor as recently as five million years ago. Relatively few genes,
therefore, must define the essence of humanity, and biologists have long
supposed that if they could identify genes that have changed in the evo-
lutionary advance leading from that joint ancestor, they would better
understand the genetic basis of how people differ from chimpanzees,
and hence what makes humans human.
This project received a significant boost in 2001 when a large Lon-
don family with barely intelligible speech was found to have mutations
in a gene called FOXP2. Chimpanzees also have an FOXP2 gene, but
theirs is significantly different from ours. The human version shows
signs of accelerated evolutionary change in the last 100,000 years, which
suggests that the gene acquired a new function that helped to make
human speech possible.
—Reported by Dr. Michelle Cargill of Celera Diagnostics, Alameda, CA, and 
Dr. Andrew Clark, of Cornell, in Science, 11 December 2003
4. A simple, inexpensive and surprisingly powerful combination of treat-
ments that all but wiped out malaria in a group of HIV-positive children
in a recent study in Uganda was described at a very recent medical con-
ference in Los Angeles. The combination—taking one inexpensive an-
tibiotic pill each day and sleeping under an insecticide-treated mosquito
net—reduced the incidence of malaria by 97 percent compared with a control
group. The study, conducted by Dr. Anne Gasasira of Makerere Univer-
sity in Kampala, Uganda, found that among 561 healthy children who
were not HIV-infected and who did not take the antibiotic or sleep
under bed nets, there were 356 episodes of malaria. This compared with
4 episodes among 300 children who were known to be HIV-infected and
received both treatments. “The findings were shockingly dramatic,”
550

Causal Reasoning
said Dr. Elaine Abrams, a professor of pediatrics and epidemiology at
Columbia University.
—Reported at the 14th Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections, 
Los Angeles, 28 February 2007
5. Some theories arise from anecdotal evidence that is difficult to confirm.
In The Left-Hander Syndrome (New York: Bantam Books, 1992), Stanley
Coren sought to evaluate the common belief that left-handed persons
die sooner than right-handers. But death certificates and other public
records very rarely mention the hand preferred by the deceased. What
could serve as a reliable data source with which that hypothesis could
be tested? Coren searched baseball records, noting which hand baseball
pitchers threw with, and then recording their ages at death. Right-handed
pitchers, he found, lived on average nine months longer than lefties.
Then, in a follow-up study, he and a colleague telephoned the relatives
of people named on death certificates in two California counties, to ask
which hand the deceased favored. Right-handed people (that study
found) lived an average of nine years longer than lefties.
6. It has long been recognized that taller adults hold jobs of higher status
and, on average, earn more than other workers. A large number of hy-
potheses have been put forward to explain the association between
height and earnings. In developed countries, researchers have empha-
sized factors such as self esteem, social dominance, and discrimination.
In this paper, we offer a simpler explanation: On average, taller people
earn more because they are smarter. As early as age 3—before schooling
has had a chance to play a role—and throughout childhood, taller chil-
dren perform significantly better on cognitive tests. The correlation be-
tween height in childhood and adulthood is approximately 0.7 for both
men and women, so that tall children are much more likely to become
tall adults. As adults, taller individuals are more likely to select into
higher-paying occupations that require more advanced verbal and nu-
merical skills and greater intelligence, for which they earn handsome
returns. Using four data sets from the US and the UK, we find that the
height premium in adult earnings can be explained by childhood scores
on cognitive tests. Furthermore, we show that taller adults select into
occupations that have higher cognitive skill requirements and lower
physical skill demands.
—Anne Case and Christina Paxson, “Stature and Status: Height, Ability, 
and Labor Market Outcomes,” National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Working Paper No. 12466, August 2006
7. Does the position of the arm, when blood pressure is being checked,
make any difference? Researchers at the University of California at San
Diego, using automated cuffs, took six readings from one hundred
emergency room patients whose problems did not involve their circula-
tory systems. Their blood pressure was measured standing, sitting, and
551

Causal Reasoning
lying down; in each position it was measured with the arm straight out
from the body and with the arm held at the side. They found that the
position of the arm had a bigger effect on the readings than the position
of the body. When the arm was parallel to the body, readings were high-
er by as much as 14 millimeters of mercury. Dr. David A. Guss, one of
the authors of the study, said that no single position was more accurate,
“the most important thing is to use a consistent position from measure-
ment to measurement.”
—From the Annals of Internal Medicine, reported in The New York Times, 
6 January 2004
8. Near the end of the Middle Ages, a few theologians (the “scientists” of
that time) persuaded a king of France to give them permission for an ex-
periment that had been forbidden by the Roman Catholic Church. They
were allowed to weigh the soul of a criminal by measuring him both be-
fore and after his hanging. As usually happens with academics, they came
up with a definite result: the soul weighed about an ounce and a half.
—John Lukacs, “Atom Smasher Is Super Nonsense,” 
The New York Times, 17 June 1993
9. Undoubtedly the outstanding point of departure of industrial social
psychology was the series of studies performed in the Hawthorne plant
of the Western Electric Company, starting in 1927. These were conduct-
ed by three Harvard professors, Elton Mayo, F. J. Roethlisberger, and
T. N. Whitehead, and by W. J. Dickson of Western Electric. The original
aim of the studies was to obtain concrete data on the effects of illumina-
tion, temperature, rest periods, hours of work, wage rate, etc., upon pro-
duction. A group of six girls, average workers, were chosen for the
experiment; their task was the assembly of telephone relays. Almost
from the beginning, unexpected results appeared: The production rate
kept going up whether rest periods and hours were increased or de-
creased! In each experimental period, whatever its conditions, output
was higher than in the preceding one. The answer seemed to lie in a
number of subtle social factors.
. . . As Homans summarizes it, the increase in the girls’ output rate
“could not be related to any change in their conditions of work, whether
experimentally induced or not. It could, however, be related to what can
only be spoken of as the development of an organized social group in a
peculiar and effective relation with its supervisors.”
—S. Stansfeld Sargent and Robert C. Williamson, Social Psychology, 1966
10. Does noise have an adverse effect on those subjected involuntarily to it?
When the airport at Munich, Germany, moved, researchers from the Uni-
versity of Hamburg, the University of Gavle in Sweden, and Cornell
University took that rare opportunity to conduct a prospective study on
the effects of noise, measuring the performance of students near the old
airport and near the new one, before and after the move. The reading
skills of students in both groups were tested, along with short-term and
552

Causal Reasoning
long-term memory, as reported in the journal Psychological Science, in Oc-
tober 2002. After the move, improvements in memory and reading were
found among students near the old airport, while among students living
near the new airport, reading skills and memory performance declined.
High levels of noise do interfere with learning and development,
those researchers concluded—but the brighter side of their findings was
this: Most of the learning damage done by noise appeared to reverse it-
self when the noise was removed.
11. The mood changes that many people experience during the shorter days
of winter have a physiological basis in the brain, according to a study
reported in the British medical journal, The Lancet, in January 2003. One
hundred healthy volunteers, ages 18 to 79, allowed researchers to draw
blood samples, at different times of the year, from their jugular veins, to
get blood as close to the brain as possible. The researchers then correlat-
ed levels of brain chemicals, especially serotonin, with the weather
data—temperature, air pressure, rainfall, and sunlight—at the times of
blood collection. Only sunlight had causal impact; serotonin levels were
found to be lowest in the three months of winter, but varied depending
on the brightness of the day. “Our findings [the researchers wrote] are
further evidence for the notion that changes in release of serotonin by
the brain underlie mood seasonality and seasonal affective disorder.”
12. Prof. Norbert Schwartz, of the University of Michigan, conducted the
following experiment. He tested the attitudes of people who had just
used a University of Michigan copying machine in which, for some sub-
jects, he had planted a dime (which they found), while for others there
was no windfall dime. After using the copier, subjects were asked how
happy they were about life. Those who had found a dime were consis-
tently more upbeat about “their lives as a whole,” and about the econo-
my and many other matters. “We found,” said Prof. Schwartz, “that a
dime can make you happy for about twenty minutes. Then the mood
wears off.”
—N. Schwartz, Well Being: Foundations of Hedonic Psychology
(New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1999)
13. The largest and longest-running study of American child care has found
that keeping a preschooler in a day care center for a year or more in-
creased the likelihood that the child would become disruptive in class—
and that this effect persisted through the sixth grade. Every year spent
in such centers for at least 10 hours per week was associated with a
1 percent higher score on a standardized assessment of problem behav-
iors completed by teachers. Parents’ guidance, and their genes, had the
strongest influence on how children behaved—but this finding about
the impact of day care centers held up regardless of the child’s sex, or
family income, and regardless of the quality of the day care center.
—National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, 
“Early Child Care and Youth Development,” 26 March 2007
553

Causal Reasoning
14. Speed kills. A report from the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, is-
sued in November of 2003, concluded that increased speed limits on Inter-
state highways led to nearly 1,900 additional deaths in 22 states from 1996
to 1999. The report is based, oddly, on a study by the Transport Safety Au-
thority of New Zealand, working in the United States, which showed that,
when the Federal cap on speed limits was placed at 65 mph, the number of
deaths on U.S. highways decreased. But almost immediately after the re-
peal of that Federal cap on speed limits the number of deaths in the states
that did not retain the 65 mph limit increased markedly, while the number
of deaths in those states that retained the 65 mph limit did not increase.
Drivers in states with higher speed limits, the study showed, drive faster,
and where the driving is faster the number of traffic fatalities goes up.
—“Study Links Higher Speed Limits to Deaths,” 
The New York Times, 24 November 2003
15. A 16-year study followed 8,867 non-smoking male professionals with
normal body weight who participated in vigorous daily exercise and ate
a healthy diet. Those who drank one-half to two normal servings of
wine, beer, or hard liquor a day had a 41 to 62 percent reduction of heart
attack risk compared with those who drank no alcohol at all. It seems
clear that in moderate quantities alcoholic drinks reduce the likelihood
of heart attack. This effect is found not only in those with heart disease.
The lead author of the study writes: “Even in the lowest risk people, we
still find a lower risk associated with moderate drinking.”
—Kenneth Mukamal, “Alcohol Consumption and Risk for Coronary Heart 
Disease in Men with Healthy Lifestyles,” Archives of Internal Medicine, 
23 October 2006
16. For heart patients, “noetic” intervention—such as prayer and MIT (ther-
apy relying on music, imagery, and touch)—is defined as “an intangible
healing influence brought about without the use of a drug, device, or
surgical procedure.” 748 patients with coronary heart disease who were
to undergo percutaneous coronary intervention (a type of stenting proce-
dure), or elective cardiac catheterization, were enrolled at one of nine
study sites between 1999 and 2002. To test the efficacy of noetic interven-
tion, patients were randomized into four groups: one group (189 pa-
tients) received both offsite intercessory prayer and MIT therapy; a
second group (182 patients) received intercessory prayer only; a third
group (185 patients) received MIT therapy only; the fourth group (192
patients) received neither the intercessory prayer nor the MIT therapy.
The interventional heart procedures were conducted according to each
institution’s standard practices, with a six-month period of follow-up.
The prayer portion was double blinded, meaning that the patients and
their care team did not know which patients were receiving intercessory
prayer. The prayer groups for the study were located throughout the
world and included Buddhist, Muslim, Jewish and many Christian de-
nominations. 89 percent of the patients in this study also knew of some-
one praying for them outside of the study protocol.
554

Causal Reasoning
As reported by the Duke University Medical Center, the researchers
found no significant difference among the four treatment groups. Dis-
tant prayer and the bedside use of music, imagery and touch did not
have a significant effect upon the primary clinical outcome of these pa-
tients undergoing medical interventions.
—“First Multicenter Trial of Intercessory Prayer,” The Lancet, 16 July 2005
17. The impulse to share does not come naturally to one who is thinking about
money. Psychologists found that subconscious reminders of money
prompted people to become more independent in their work, and less like-
ly to seek help from others or to provide it. In one experiment 52 under-
graduates unscrambled sets of jumbled phrases; one group untangled
phrases that were often about money, like “high salary paying,” while an-
other solved word puzzles that did not refer to money. Researchers then
had the students work on a difficult abstract puzzle and offered to give
help if they wanted it. Those who had been thinking about money worked
on the problem by themselves an average of more than 70 percent longer
than the others. Students “primed” to have money on their minds, while
clearly self-reliant, were less likely than peers who had not been so primed
to lend assistance, twice as slow to help another confused student, and
about twice as stingy when asked to donate money to help needy students.
—Kathleen Vohs, Nicole Mead, and Miranda Goode, “The Psychological 
Consequences of Money,” Science, 17 November 2006
chapter 
Summary
In this chapter we have examined the concept of cause, the nature of causal con-
nections, and the methods used to establish causal laws.
In Section 1, we examined various meanings of “cause.”
In Section 2, we explained the supposition of the uniformity of nature, and
the generality of causal laws.
In Section 3, we discussed induction by simple enumeration.
In Section 4, we recounted and illustrated the principal techniques of induc-
tive inference, called Mill’s methods, explaining their essentially eliminative na-
ture. These five methods are:
1. The method of agreement
2. The method of difference
3. The joint method of agreement and difference
4. The method of residues
5. The method of concomitant variation
In Section 5, we explained the limitations and the strengths of these induc-
tive techniques, concluding that, although they cannot do all that John Stuart
Mill had claimed for them, they are profoundly important as the intellectual in-
struments with which scientific hypotheses are confirmed or disconfirmed.
555

Causal Reasoning
For additional exercises and tutorials about concepts covered in this
chapter, log in to MyLogicLab at www.mylogiclab.com and select your
current textbook.
END NOTES
1David Hume, An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding (1748), sec. IV.
2Dao, “Coroner in Cincinnati Rules Man’s Struggle Led to Death,” The New York Times, 4 December 2003.
3Reported by Connor O’Shea of the Duke University Medical Center, at the meetings of the European
Society of Cardiology in August 2000.
4See Zachariah Chafee, Jr., Three Human Rights in the Constitution of 1787 (1952).
5Dr. Steven Grant, quoted in Science News, 27 January 2007.
6Here quoting Dr. Nora Volkow, director of the National Institute of Drug Abuse, quoted by Benedict
Carey, “In Clue to Addictive Behavior, A Brain Injury Halts Smoking,” The New York Times, 26 January
2007.
7Robert Sapolsky, “Testosterone Rules,” Discover, March 1997.
8D. N. Cook et al., “Requirement of MIP-1 alpha for an Inflammatory Response to Viral Infection,”
Science, 15 September 1995.
9Paul Henle and William K. Frankena, Exercises in Elementary Logic (1940).
10A. Werzberger et al., “A Controlled Trial of a Formalin-Inactivated Hepatitis A Vaccine in Healthy Chil-
dren,” The New England Journal of Medicine, 13 August 1992.
11Edward Arthur Fath, The Elements of Astronomy (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1926), p. 170.
12D. S. Siscovick et al., “Dietary Intake and Cell Membrane Levels of Long-Chain n-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty
Acids and the Risk of Primary Cardiac Arrest,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 1 November 1995.
13The source of these data is the U.S. Census Bureau; the analysts are Gordon B. Dahl of the University of
Rochester and Enrico Moretti of the University of California at Los Angeles, reporting online in Slate, in
October 2003.
14J. L. Casti, Searching for Certainty (New York: William Morrow, 1991).
15See Sherwin B. Nuland, The Doctors’ Plague (New York: W. W. Norton, 2003).
Logic Overview—Mill’s Methods of Inductive Inference 
1.
The Method of Agreement: The one factor or circumstance that is common to all the cases of the
phenomenon under investigation is likely to be the cause (or effect) of that phenomenon.
A B C D occur together with w x y z.
A E F G occur together with w t u v.
Therefore A is the cause (or the effect) of w.
2.
The Method of Difference: The one factor or circumstance whose absence or presence distin-
guishes all cases in which the phenomenon under investigation occurs from those cases in
which it does not occur, is likely to be the cause, or part of the cause, of that phenomenon.
A B C D occur together with w x y z.
B C D occur together with x y z.
Therefore A is the cause, or the effect, or an indispensable part of the cause of w.
556

3.
The Joint Method of Agreement and Difference: The combination, in the same investigation,
of the Method of Agreement and the Method of Difference.
A B C — x y z.                   A B C — x y z.
A D E — x t w.                   B C — y z.
Therefore A is the effect, or the cause, or an indispensable part of the cause, of x.
4.
The Method of Residues: When some portion of the phenomenon under examination is
known to be the consequence of well-understood antecedent circumstances, we may infer
that the remainder of that phenomenon is the effect of the remaining antecedents.
A B C — x y z.
B is known to be the cause of y.
C is known to be the cause of z.
Therefore A is the cause of x.
5.
The Method of Concomitant Variation: When the variations in one phenomenon are highly
correlated with the variation in another phenomenon, one of the two is likely to be the cause
of the other, or they may be related as the products of some third factor causing both.
A B C — x y z.
A+BC — x+yz.
Therefore A and x are causally connected.
Causal Reasoning
557

This page intentionally left blank 

Science and Hypothesis
1
Scientific Explanation
2
Scientific Inquiry: Hypothesis and Confirmation
3
Evaluating Scientific Explanations
4
Classification as Hypothesis
1
Scientific Explanation
To learn the truth about the world, the world must be studied scientifically. How-
ever, individual truths do not take us very far; a mere collection of facts no more
constitutes a science than a collection of stones constitutes a house. The aim of
science is to discover general truths with which the facts we encounter can be
explained.
What is an explanation? Every explanation gives an account, a set of state-
ments from which the thing to be explained can be logically inferred. The best ac-
count will be the one that most reduces the problematic aspects of what was to be
explained. Such an account will comprise a coherent set of general truths, or a the-
ory. To explain some serious disease, for example, we need a coherent account of
what causes that disease and how it can be treated. Is the presence or absence of
some particular substance the key to the disorder? The theory explaining dia-
betes, for example, is a coherent account of the use of sugars by the human body
and the central role, in that use, of a protein hormone called insulin, produced by
certain special cells within the body. According to this theory, it is a deficiency of
insulin (or the inability of the body to use the insulin it produces) that explains the
resulting disorder in the absorption of sugars from the blood. An account of this
kind (here greatly oversimplified, of course) gives a scientific explanation of this
serious disease. Patients suffer from diabetes because of their insulin deficiency.
When we say “Q because P,” that may express either an explanation or an ar-
gument. It expresses an argument when we are inferring the conclusion, Q, from
the premises, P. It expresses an explanation when, facing the fact of Q, our rea-
soning moves back from that fact to discover the circumstances that led to it.
Diabetes—excess sugar in the blood—is a cruel fact in the lives of many patients.
We explain their diabetes by calling attention to the insulin deficiency that has
that result. The account of the interrelated set of circumstances in which the in-
sulin deficiency, P, accounts for the sugar excess, Q, is thus an explanation of that
disease.
A good explanation must offer truths that are relevant to the fact explained.
If I seek to explain my being late to work on some occasion by calling attention
to the rising birth rate in Brazil, the fact thus introduced may be correct, but it
is not relevant, and it therefore cannot be a satisfactory explanation of my
Scientific explanation
A theoretical account of
some fact or event,
predicated upon
empirical evidence and
subject to revision in the
light of new information.
From Chapter 13 of Introduction to Logic, Fourteenth Edition. Irving M. Copi, Carl Cohen, Kenneth McMahon. 
Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Prentice Hall. All rights reserved.
This asset is
intentionally omitted
from this text. It may
be accessed at
www.mcescher.com.
(Relativity by 
M.C. Escher)

absence, the event in question. In this trivial example, an explanation is sought
for a single event. In science we seek explanations that are not only true and
relevant, but also general. The explanations we aim for will provide an under-
standing of all the events of some given kind—say, all the occurrences of dia-
betes, for example.
The more facts for which a scientific theory accounts, the more powerful it is.
Some theories are magnificent in their range and power. Here, for example, is a
short statement of Isaac Newton’s law of universal gravitation:
Every particle of matter in the universe attracts every other particle with a force that
is directly proportional to the product of the masses of the particles and inversely
proportional to the square of the distance between them.
An explanation may be relevant and general, and yet not scientific. The reg-
ular motions of the planets were long thought to be accounted for by the “intelli-
gence” that was held to reside in each planet. In some cultures, disease is
“explained” as the work of an evil spirit that has invaded the body. These are cer-
tainly unscientific accounts, although the explanations they offer are general and
are relevant to the facts of interest. What, then, distinguishes genuinely scientific
from unscientific explanations?
There are two chief differences. The first is attitude. An unscientific explana-
tion is presented dogmatically; the account that it gives is regarded as being un-
questionably true and not improvable. The opinions of Aristotle were accepted
for centuries as the ultimate authority on matters of fact. Aristotle himself ap-
pears to have been open-minded, but his views were adopted by some medieval
scholars in a rigid and unscientific spirit. One of the scholars to whom Galileo of-
fered his telescope to view the newly discovered moons of Jupiter declined to
look, expressing his certainty that no real moons could possibly be seen because
no mention of them could be found in Aristotle’s treatise on astronomy! In con-
trast, the attitude of a serious scientist is undogmatic; explanations are put for-
ward provisionally; hypotheses may be thought highly probable, but they are
regarded as subject to alteration in the light of the evidence.
The vocabulary of science is sometimes misleading on this point. When what
is first suggested as a “hypothesis” is well confirmed, its status may be elevated
to that of a “theory”; after universal acceptance, it may be further elevated to that
of a “law.” However, the use of these terms is not consistent. Newton’s discovery
is still called the “law of gravitation,” while Einstein’s contribution, which im-
proved and superseded it, is referred to as the “theory of relativity.” Whatever
the terms used, the attitude of genuine scientists is not dogmatic. The general
propositions of science are all in essence hypotheses, never absolutely certain.
In everyday speech the word theory is often used to refer to a hunch, or a
mere opinion. Scientists use the word differently. In physics and chemistry we
refer—not dogmatically, but nevertheless with great confidence—to “quan-
tum theory” and to the “molecular theory of matter”; in biology we
rightly rely upon the “cellular theory” and the “germ theory of disease.”
These are sets of very well-established truths, not ungrounded speculations.
Science and Hypothesis
Unscientific
explanation
An explanation that is
asserted dogmatically
and regarded as
unquestionable.
560

Evolution—the "theory of evolution”—is also an established fact; doubts
about evolution expressed because it is “only a theory” are the result of this
semantic misunderstanding.
The second difference concerns the basis for accepting the account in ques-
tion. In science a hypothesis is worthy of acceptance only to the extent that there
is good evidence for it. An unscientific belief may be held independently of what
we should regard as evidence in its favor; the explanation is taken as simply
true—perhaps because “everyone knows” that it is so, or perhaps because it is
thought to have been revealed from on high. There is no reliable test of such
claims, whereas in genuine science the claims for truth can be tested, and those
tests lie in our experience. Thus we say that genuine science is empirical.
To say that a hypothesis is testable is at least to say that some prediction made
on the basis of that hypothesis may confirm or disconfirm it. Science demands
evidence. But, of course, the evidence accumulated that could confirm the hy-
pothesis in question can never be complete, as we have earlier emphasized; all
the evidence is never in hand. Therefore, even when that supporting evidence is
very strong, some doubt must remain, and certainty is unattainable. On the neg-
ative side, however, if the evidence shows indisputably that the predictions
made on the basis of that hypothesis are false, our confidence that the hypothesis
must be rejected may be total. Although we cannot complete the verification of a
hypothesis, we can, with closure, establish that it has been falsified. For reasons
of this kind, some philosophers have held that to say of a scientific hypothesis
that it is testable is also to say that it is, at least in principle, falsifiable.
The test of truth may be direct or indirect. To determine whether it is rain-
ing outside, I need only glance out the window. In general, however, the
propositions offered as explanatory hypotheses are not directly testable. If my
lateness at work had been explained by my claim about some traffic accident,
my employer, if suspicious, might test that explanation indirectly by seeking
the police accident report. An indirect test deduces, from the proposition to be
tested (for example, that I was involved in an accident), some other proposi-
tion (for example, that an accident report had been submitted) capable of
being tested directly. If that deduced proposition is false, the explanation that
implied it is very likely to be false. If the deduced proposition is true, that pro-
vides some evidence (but not conclusive evidence) that the explanation is true,
having been indirectly confirmed.
Indirect testing is never certain. It always relies on some additional premises,
such as the premise that accidents of the sort I described to my employer are in-
variably reported to the police. But the accident report that should have been
submitted in my case may not have been, so its absence does not prove my expla-
nation false. Even the truth of some added premises does not render my explana-
tion certain—although the successful testing of the conclusion deduced (the
reality of the accident report, in this example) does corroborate the premises
from which it was deduced.
Even an unscientific explanation has some evidence in its favor, namely, the
very fact it is held to explain. The unscientific theory that the planets are inhabited
Science and Hypothesis
561

Science and Hypothesis
by “intelligences” that cause them to move in their observed orbits can claim, as
evidence, the fact that the planets do move in those orbits. However, the great
difference between that hypothesis and the reliable astronomical explanation of
planetary movement lies in this: For the unscientific hypothesis there is no other
directly testable proposition that can be deduced from it. Any scientific explana-
tion of a given phenomenon, on the other hand, will have directly testable propo-
sitions deducible from it other than the proposition stating the fact to be explained.
This is what we mean when we say that an explanation is empirically verifiable,
and such verifiability is the most essential mark of a scientific explanation.*
2
Scientific Inquiry: Hypothesis 
and Confirmation
We seek scientific explanations that are correct, and whose correctness may be
empirically verified. How can we obtain these explanations? No formulas for
doing science can be given, but there are stages, or distinct phases, in most scien-
tific investigations. By identifying and describing seven such stages we may
come to understand more fully how good science advances.
A. Identifying the Problem
Scientific investigation begins with a problem of some kind. By problem is meant
only some fact, or group of facts, for which no acceptable explanation is at that
time available. The sociologist confronts a puzzling trend in work or play; what
accounts for it? The medical investigator confronts a puzzling disease; what
causes it? The economist observes different patterns of spending or saving; what
explains the variations? Some problems are quite sharply identified, as when a
detective confronts a specific crime and asks: Who is the perpetrator? Some prob-
lems may arise from a gap in current understanding. Eratosthenes, librarian at
Alexandria in the third century BCE, believed correctly that the Earth was a
sphere, but its size was unknown. His problem was to determine the circumfer-
ence of the sphere we call Earth. Reflective thinking—whether in sociology or
medicine or law enforcement or physics, or any other realm—is problem-solving
activity, as John Dewey and other modern philosophers have repeatedly empha-
sized. The recognition of some problem is the trigger for the science that ensues.
B. Devising Preliminary Hypotheses
Preliminary speculation is the second step—some very tentative explanation of the
problem identified. Long before a full solution is in sight, some theorizing is needed
to indicate the kind of evidence needed, and perhaps to indicate where such evi-
*This general conception of “scientific explanation” rightly applies outside the realm of what is normally
thought of as the sciences, such as physics or psychology. Thus, the explanation of an event such as my
lateness to work as a consequence of a traffic accident, in being indirectly testable in various ways, is in
this wide sense “scientific.”
562

Science and Hypothesis
dence might best be sought. The detective examines the scene of the crime, inter-
views suspects, seeks clues. The physician examines the patient, records data, notes
irregularities. Bare facts are accumulated; they become usable clues or revealing
symptoms only when they are fitted into some coherent pattern, even if that pattern
is speculative and incomplete. To illustrate: Thomas Malthus had shown, in “An
Essay on the Principle of Population” (1798), that the tendency of population to
grow faster than the food supply keeps most people at the edge of starvation.
Charles Darwin, reading this while speculating about the origin of species many
years later, hit upon an exceedingly fruitful notion. He wrote:
It at once struck me that under these circumstances favourable variations would tend
to be preserved, and unfavourable ones to be destroyed. . . . Here then I had at last
got a theory by which to work” (Autobiography, 1881).
There are too many possibly relevant facts—too much data in the world—for
the scientist to collect them all. The most thorough investigator must select some
facts for further study and put other facts aside as not relevant. If the Earth is a
sphere, the rays of the sun will fall (at any given time) upon different points of
that sphere at different angles. Might geometry help us to calculate the size of the
Earth? The outline of a theory is essential because, without that, the investigator
cannot decide which facts to select and pursue from the totality of facts.
However incomplete or tentative, a preliminary hypothesis of some kind is
needed before serious inquiry can get under way.
C. Collecting Additional Facts
The preliminary hypothesis serves to guide the search for relevant facts. As a
preliminary matter, the patient is thought to have some infection, and that hy-
pothesis puts the physician on the trail of certain kinds of data that are normally
associated with infection: temperature irregularities, patterns of inflammation,
and the like. The preliminary supposition that the crime was committed by a
member of the household will cause the detective to inquire into the conduct of
persons residing there, and so on. If the angle at which the sun’s rays strike the
Earth must differ at different points on the Earth’s surface, one must seek, in
order to apply geometric principles, at least one point at which the sun is known
to be directly overhead at a given time. Where might that be?
The second and third steps are not fully separable, of course; in real life they
are interconnected and mutually suggestive. New facts found may cause an ad-
justment of the preliminary hypothesis; that adjustment may lead to facts earlier
not noted. The process of gathering evidence by using the preliminary hypothe-
sis merges with the process of refining that hypothesis, leading to new findings,
and so on and on.
D. Formulating the Explanatory Hypothesis
Eventually, the investigator—the scientist, or detective, or ordinary person—
may come to believe that all the facts needed for solving the original problem are
in hand. The task then becomes that of assembling the pieces of the puzzle in a
563

Science and Hypothesis
way that makes sense of the whole. If that synthesis is successful, a hypothesis
will emerge that accounts for all the data—the original set of facts that gave rise
to the problem, as well as the additional facts to which earlier hypotheses had
pointed. A surge in unemployment is explained by some larger theory of the
labor market. The patient is found to be suffering from an identifiable infectious
agent known to cause the symptoms noted in this patient’s condition. An identi-
fiable member of the household is charged by the state as the perpetrator of the
crime and the case against him is formulated.
There is no mechanical way to find some overarching theory. The actual dis-
covery, or invention, of a successful explanatory hypothesis is a process of cre-
ation, in which imagination as well as knowledge is involved. That is why those
who make important scientific discoveries are so widely honored and so much
admired.
What is the circumference of the globe? Eratosthenes learned that in the
Egyptian town of Syene (now called Aswan), the sun’s rays shine directly down
a deep well at a given time on a particular day each year. At that same time he
could measure the sun’s shadows (and therefore the angle of its rays) in Alexan-
dria; he found that the rays there deviated from the vertical by 7°. That is about
one-fiftieth of the 360° of the sphere’s circumference. The distance between
Syene and Alexandria was known. The circumference of the entire sphere of
Earth must therefore be about fifty times that distance. Eratosthenes’ subsequent
calculation of the Earth’s circumference (“250,000 stadia”) is believed (we are un-
sure of the length of a stadium) to have an error of less than 5 percent. He had no
way to confirm that calculation, but it was impressive science for his time. Truly
great scientists—such as Einstein or Newton—are understandably viewed as
creative geniuses.
E. Deducing Further Consequences
A good explanatory hypothesis will be fruitful; that is, it will explain not only the
facts that provoked the inquiry but many other facts as well. It is likely to suggest
some facts that had not even been thought of earlier. Verification of these addi-
tional facts may strongly confirm (but, of course, cannot prove with certainty)
the hypothesis that led to them.
To illustrate, the cosmological theory known as the Big Bang hypothesizes
that the present universe began with one singular explosive event. The initial
fireball would have been smooth and homogenous, lacking structure. But the
universe today exhibits a great deal of structure; its visible matter is clumped
into galaxies, clusters of galaxies, and so on. If the Big Bang theory is correct,
the seeds of the present structure of the universe must in principle be identifi-
able. We need to be able to look back in time—and by observing the most dis-
tant objects in an expanding universe, astronomers actually can, in effect, look
back in time, since the light being received must have left its sources billions of
years ago. If, in these observations, early structures were not detectable by the
564

Science and Hypothesis
most sensitive instruments, the Big Bang theory would be seriously under-
mined. But if such structure were detectable, the Big Bang theory would be sig-
nificantly confirmed.
F. Testing the Consequences
Critical for the evaluation of every explanatory hypothesis is the accuracy of its
predictions. Can the facts to which the theory points be ascertained? Often they
can. If there was structure in the universe early in its expansion, as the Big Bang
theory predicts, there would have to be irregularities, unevenness, that may be
found in background radiation and traced to that early time. Happily, it is possi-
ble to measure that background radiation and thus to determine now, indirectly,
that there were structural irregularities very shortly after the supposed Big Bang.
To detect those predicted radiation irregularities, a special satellite was de-
signed—the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE). Using this satellite, the pre-
dicted irregularities have indeed been detected, giving very important
confirmatory evidence for the truth of the Big Bang hypothesis.
Consider prediction in another context. In biology we may come to formu-
late the hypothesis that a particular protein is produced in mammals as a reac-
tion to a particular enzyme, and that that enzyme is produced under the
direction of a specifically identified gene. From this hypothesis we may deduce
the further consequence that when that gene is absent there will be an absence, or
a deficiency, of the protein in question.
To test that hypothesis we construct an experiment in which the effect of the
identified gene may be measured. This can sometimes be done by breeding mice
in which the critical gene has been deleted—“knockout mice.” If, in such mice,
the enzyme in question and the protein associated with it are indeed also absent,
our hypothesis will have been strongly confirmed.* Much information that
proves very valuable in medicine is acquired in just this way. We devise the exper-
iment to determine whether what we thought to be true (if such-and-such were
the case) really is true. To do that we must often construct the very special circum-
stances in which such-and-such has been made the case. “An experiment,” as the
great physicist Max Planck said, “is a question that science poses to Nature; a
measurement is the recording of Nature’s answer.”
It is not always feasible to construct the circumstances needed to perform a
test. We must then seek the circumstances needed for testing in some natural set-
ting. That was the case in the effort to test the general theory of relativity.† Ein-
stein’s theory proposed that gravitation is not a force (as Newton had thought)
but a curved field in the space–time continuum, created by the presence of mass.
This might be proved (or disproved), Einstein suggested, by measuring the de-
*Testing of this kind relies on what we call the method of difference. The many methods discussed there
(Mill’s methods) are intellectual tools used to confirm (or disconfirm) hypotheses.
†“The Foundation of the General Theory of Relativity” was published in 1916, in Annalen der Physik.
565

Science and Hypothesis
flection of starlight as it traveled close by the mass of the sun; the starlight needed
would be visible only during a total eclipse of the sun. The testing of this predic-
tion had to await the solar eclipse of 1919, when the sun would be silhouetted
against the Hyades star cluster, for which the positions were known exactly. Dur-
ing that eclipse, physicist Sir Arthur Eddington stationed himself on an island off
the western coast of Africa; another group of British scientists went to Brazil. The
two teams measured accurately the apparent position of several of the stars in the
cluster; their measurements plainly showed that light from these stars was indeed
bent as it grazed the sun, and that it was bent by the exact amount of Einstein’s
prediction. The general theory of relativity had been very solidly confirmed.
This theory showed that space, time, and gravity are so entwined that to
speak sensibly about one there must be reference to the others. Einstein strug-
gled to go further, to develop a theory in which all of nature’s forces are merged
into one single, overarching theory. In this effort he did not succeed, and neither
has anyone else so far.
A new approach—to construct a complete and unified theory of natural
forces called string theory—now has many adherents. It offers a theoretical ac-
count that may unify gravity, quantum mechanics, and nature’s other forces, and
solve some earlier mathematical problems as well. String theory, which is based
on a new conception of matter’s fundamental constituents, is free of mathemati-
cal contradictions but it has not yet been confirmed.
What predictions does string theory make that might confirm it by experi-
mental test? It may become possible to confirm the theory’s predictions regard-
ing new kinds of particles; it may become possible to test the prediction that
highly energetic particle collisions will produce microscopic black holes. As this
is being written, a gigantic particle accelerator, the Large Hadron Collider, is per-
forming its first set of high-energy collisions. In a few years we may have empir-
ical evidence to confirm the explanations given by string theory, or to disconfirm
them.*
Evolutionary theory, as presented by Darwin in The Origin of Species (1859)
and by very many of his successors, is now almost universally accepted as a cor-
rect explanation of the development of species of animals and plants. Predictions
that can test this theory prospectively (rather than retrospectively) are difficult to
devise because the natural selection hypothesized seems to require the passage
of many generations. Very recently, a Harvard professor of evolutionary biology,
Jonathan Losos, devised an experiment that makes speedy testing feasible. On
some tiny cays in the Bahamas, where the brown lizard Anolis sagrei lives free of
predators and reproduces rapidly, he introduced a predator whose activity
would quickly result in the development (in those islands as compared to other,
similar islands left unperturbed) of a lizard population with longer legs, much
*Some scientists contend that string theory makes no predictions whose testing will truly confirm or dis-
confirm it. See L. Smolin, The Trouble with Physics (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2006); and P. Woit, Not Even
Wrong: The Failure of String Theory (New York: Basic Books, 2006). It may be that the theory makes predic-
tions that are testable in principle, but not testable in practice given current technological limitations.
This heated controversy is likely to continue.
566

Science and Hypothesis
better suited to running away. Selective forces operated as expected; long legs
came to predominate. However, when continually preyed upon, the Anolis lizard
climbs into trees and bushes, where short legs are much more advantageous. The
further prediction was that natural selection would produce a reversal and that
short legs would eventually predominate—and six months later that prediction
also was confirmed. Evolution has been first manipulated and then deliberately
reversed. Said Prof. Losos:
Evolutionary biology is often caricatured as incompatible with controlled experimen-
tation. Recent work has shown, however, that evolutionary biology can be studied
on short time scales and that predictions about it can be tested experimentally. We
predicted, and then demonstrated, a reversal in the direction of natural selection acting
on limb length in a population of lizards. We did a controlled, replicable experiment in
nature. It illustrates that evolutionary biology at its heart is no different from any other
science.1
G. Applying the Theory
When a phenomenon is encountered, one goal is to explain it; however, people
also strive to control those phenomena to their advantage. Not only do the theo-
ries of Newton and Einstein and their successors play a central role in our under-
standing of celestial phenomena, but they are also critical in our actual
exploration of the solar system, and outer space beyond. Nuclear fusion is now
well understood as a process; we seek to apply this understanding in producing
energy on a scale we can control. Disease and disorder are understood as never
before, incorporating the well-tested explanations of genetic theory and our
grasp of the human genome; now we seek to put this understanding to use in
clinical medicine by eliminating genetic disorders, and even by regenerating or-
ganic tissue. In this twenty-first century it is probably biological science, more
than any other field, whose explanations will enhance the quality and the length
of ordinary human lives.
Good practice in every sphere must be guided by good theory. Good theory
must pass the test of empirical verification. Theory and practice are not two
realms; they are equally critical aspects of every genuinely scientific undertak-
ing. More than two centuries ago, Immanuel Kant wrote an incisive little book
explaining why it makes no good sense to say, “that may be right in theory but it
won’t work in practice.”2 What is right in theory does work in practice, and for
everything that does work in practice we may reasonably hope to discover the
explanatory theory that underlies its success.
3
Evaluating Scientific Explanations
The same phenomenon may receive different explanations, all scientific in the
sense we have described, and yet some of them may not be true. Conflicting ex-
planations of some physical or economic phenomenon may be offered. In a crim-
inal investigation we may hypothesize that the perpetrator was X, or was Y.
567

Science and Hypothesis
More than one hypothesis may account for the facts neatly, but not all can be
true. How shall we choose among alternative scientific explanations?
Let us assume that all the alternatives are relevant and testable. How ought
we determine which of the available hypotheses is the best? There are stan-
dards—going beyond relevance and testability—to which acceptable hypotheses
may be expected to conform. Three criteria are most commonly used in judging
the merit of competing hypotheses.
1. Compatibility with previously well-established hypotheses. Science
aims at achieving a system of explanatory hypotheses. A satisfactory sys-
tem must be internally consistent, of course. A satisfactory explanatory
system cannot contain contradictory elements; if it did, the full set of
propositions could not possibly be true. We progress by gradually ex-
panding hypotheses to comprehend more and more facts, but each new
hypothesis brought into the set must be compatible with those already
confirmed.
Sometimes the expansion involves only one new hypothesis, as
when the aberrations in the orbit of Uranus were explained by the hy-
pothesis that there was some other planet, uncharted at that time,
whose mass was creating the aberrations. That supposition was perfect-
ly consistent with the main body of astronomical theory at the time. A
search for the mysterious object resulted in the discovery of the planet
Neptune in 1846. The theory that led to that discovery fit very nicely
with all the other theories concerning planetary movements generally
accepted at that time.
Although theoretical knowledge grows gradually, it does not al-
ways grow by adding just one new hypothesis after another in orderly
fashion. Clumps of theory may be introduced; new hypotheses that are
flatly inconsistent with older theories sometimes replace their prede-
cessors outright, rather than being fitted in with them. Einstein’s theory
of relativity was of that sort: It shattered many of the preconceptions of
the older, Newtonian theory of gravitation. In another branch of
physics, it was discovered that radium atoms undergo spontaneous
disintegration, and this well-confirmed fact was simply inconsistent
with an older principle that matter could neither be created nor destroyed.
To maintain a consistent set of hypotheses, the older principle had to be
relinquished.
The consistency of the set of scientific theories in a given field is
thus achieved in different ways. However, apart from those cases in
which some revolutionary theory upsets long-established principles, the
first criterion for an acceptable new hypothesis is that it retain the exist-
ing consistency, be compatible with what is already known, or be rea-
sonably believed.
When old and new collide, the established scientific theories will
not be abandoned quickly in favor of some that are shinier or more
568

Science and Hypothesis
trendy. The older body of theory will be adjusted to accommodate the
new if that is possible. Large-scale change will be resisted. Einstein him-
self always insisted that his own work was a modification of Newton’s,
not a rejection of it. The principle of the conservation of matter was
modified by being absorbed into the more comprehensive principle of
the conservation of mass–energy. An established theory has the support
that it does because it explains a considerable mass of data, so it cannot
be dethroned by some new hypothesis unless the new hypothesis ac-
counts for the same facts as well as (or better than) the older one, and
accounts for other known facts also.
Science advances as its theories give more comprehensive explana-
tions, more adequate accounts of the world we encounter. When incon-
sistencies arise, the greater age of one hypothesis does not automatically
prove it correct. If the older view has been extensively confirmed, pre-
sumption will support it. When the newer, competing view has also re-
ceived extensive confirmation, mere age and priority cease to be
relevant. We must then decide between the competitors on the basis of
something we learn about the observable facts. The ultimate court of
appeal is always experience.
2. Predictive power. As we have seen, every scientific hypothesis must be
testable, and testability requires that some observable fact or facts be de-
ducible from it. Alternative hypotheses will differ in the nature and extent
of their predictions, and we seek the theoretical explanation that has the
greater predictive power.
To illustrate: The behavior of bodies near the surface of the Earth
was explained by Galileo Galilei (1564–1642) with his laws of falling
bodies. The behavior of bodies far off in the solar system was explained
at about that same time by the German astronomer Johannes Kepler
(1571–1630), who formulated the laws of planetary motion. Using the
data that had been collected by Denmark’s Tycho Brahe, Kepler could
account for the motions of the planets on the basis of the elliptical orbits
they travel around the sun. Galileo gave a theoretically powerful ac-
count of the various phenomena of terrestrial mechanics. Kepler gave a
theoretically powerful account of celestial mechanics. But the two ac-
counts were isolated from one another. Their unification was needed; it
came with Isaac Newton’s theory of universal gravitation, and his three
laws of motion. All the phenomena explained by Galileo and by Kepler,
and many more facts besides, were explained by Newton’s account of
universal gravitation.
A fact that can be deduced from a given hypothesis is said to be ex-
plained by it, and may also be said to be predicted by it. Newton’s theo-
ries had enormous predictive power. The greater the predictive power
of any hypothesis, the better it contributes to our understanding of the
phenomena with which it is concerned.
569

Science and Hypothesis
Earlier we described the great predictive power of Einstein’s general
theory of relativity, which accounts for the admiration given to it and to
its creator. We also pointed out that his enterprise—the development of
an overarching theory of natural forces—is held by some to approach
success now in the form of what is called string theory; some predic-
tions of great interest are claimed to be deducible from this theory. If
those predictions are one day confirmed, the predictive power of string
theory will elevate it to a position of the very first importance in physics
and cosmology.
However, the criterion of predictive power also has a negative side.
If the hypothesis predicts what does not take place, or is in some other
way shown to be inconsistent with well-attested observations, that hy-
pothesis has been falsified and must be rejected. A meaningful scientific
hypothesis must be at least falsifiable—that is, we must know what
would or might show it to be false. If there is no set of observable out-
comes that will lead us to conclude that the hypothesis is false, we may
seriously doubt if the hypothesis has any predictive power whatever.
Suppose we confront two different hypotheses, both of which fully
explain some set of facts, both of which are testable, and both of which
are compatible with the body of already established scientific theory. In
such a case, it may be possible to devise a crucial experiment to decide be-
tween the conflicting theories. If the first hypothesis entails that, under a
given set of circumstances, a specified result will occur, and the second
entails that it will not, we may decide between the competitors by ob-
serving the presence or absence of that predicted result. Its appearance
falsifies the second hypothesis; its nonappearance falsifies the first.
The experiment described earlier, in which the general theory of rela-
tivity was tested by making exact measurements of the starlight that
passed closely by the mass of sun, was crucial in just this way. The theory
of Newton and the theory of Einstein cannot both be correct. If the bend-
ing of the light is as Einstein’s theory predicted, the Newtonian view is
disconfirmed; if the bending of light is not observed, the general theory of
relativity is disconfirmed. With good cameras, very careful observers, and
a solar eclipse in which the three bodies (sun, moon, and Earth) were
correctly lined up, the crucial experiment might be made. Those ideal
circumstances arose on 29 May 1919. Photographs proved that Einstein
was right; we do live in a curved, four-dimensional space–time continuum.
Einstein became a worldwide sensation overnight.
3. Simplicity. Two rival hypotheses may fit equally well with established
theory, and they may also have predictive power that is roughly equal.
In such circumstances we are likely to favor the simpler of the two. The
conflict between the Ptolemaic (Earth-centered) and the Copernican
(sun-centered) theories of celestial motion was like that. Both fit well
with earlier theory, and they predicted celestial movements about equally
570

Science and Hypothesis
well. Both hypotheses relied on a clumsy (and, as we now know, mis-
taken) device, hypothesized epicycles (smaller circles of movement on
the larger orbits), in order to explain some well-established astronomical
observations. But the Copernican system relied on many fewer such
epicycles and was therefore much simpler. This greater simplicity con-
tributed substantially to its acceptance by later astronomers.
Simplicity seems to be a “natural” criterion to invoke. In ordinary
life also, we are inclined to accept the simplest theory that fits all the
facts. Two theories about a crime may be presented at a trial; the verdict
is likely to be given—perhaps ought to be given—in favor of the hy-
pothesis that seems simpler, more natural.
“Simplicity,” however, is a tricky notion. That one of the competing
theories will involve a smaller number of some troubling entity (such as
the epicycles in the case of Copernican astronomy) is a rare situation.
Each of two theories may be simpler than the other in different ways.
One may rely on a smaller number of entities, while the other may rely
on simpler mathematical equations. Even “naturalness” may prove to
be deceptive. Many find it more “natural” to believe that the Earth,
which does not seem to be moving, really is not moving, and that the
Sun, which appears to move around us, is doing just that. The lesson
here is that simplicity is a criterion that is difficult to formulate and not
always easy to apply.
Progress in science is never easy and rarely straightforward. No one suppos-
es that simply by applying the seven steps of the hypothetico-deductive method
(recounted in Section 2) to some problem he will find its solution. Correct ex-
planatory hypotheses are often obscure and may require very elaborate theoreti-
cal machinery. Devising a final, presumably correct theory may be exceedingly
difficult. Far from being mechanical, the process commonly requires, in addition
to laborious observation and measurement, insight and creative imagination.
When some hypothesis already in hand is widely believed to explain the
phenomena in question, a replacement for it encounters very high hurdles. The
new hypothesis is likely to encounter ridicule and disdain. The new hypothesis
is very probably inconsistent with the previously accepted theory, and the estab-
lished view always has the upper hand. A crucial experiment, of the sort de-
scribed earlier in the case of the general theory of relativity, is possible only in
rare circumstances.
Contemporary physics faces a major conflict of just this kind. Between its
two most powerful general theories there is an apparent conflict that cannot
presently be resolved. The general theory of relativity is well confirmed. From its
laws (describing gravity and how it shapes space and time), it is an apparently
inevitable consequence that some collapsing, massive stars will form “black
holes” from which escape would require a speed faster than light, which is impos-
sible. The laws of quantum mechanics are also well confirmed, and they entail
that information cannot ever be permanently lost, even if drawn into a black
571

Science and Hypothesis
hole. Therefore, either there is some property of space and time, not now under-
stood, that can account for the retention of that information, or there is some law-
lessness in physics that can account for the permanent loss of that information.
One of the two theories must need at least an amendment, but we do not yet
know which one, and we do not have the means to construct an experiment that
would enable us to decide between them.*
Confronted by such conflicts we will seek to apply the criteria of good scien-
tific explanations we set forth earlier: Which of the competing theories is simpler?
Which of the two has greater compatibility with previously established hypothe-
ses? Finally, above all, which has the greater explanatory or predictive power? So
long as definitive answers to these questions are lacking, the intellectual contro-
versy is likely to continue unresolved.
It does happen in the history of scientific progress that such conflicts are
sometimes resolved. There is no better way to exhibit the methods of science,
and to exemplify the application of the criteria described here, than by recount-
ing the observational confirmation by Galileo of the heliocentric account of the
solar system—and the resulting replacement of the geocentric account that had
been accepted as true for more than a thousand years.
By the early 1600s, the movement of the planets against the backdrop of the
fixed stars had been so carefully studied that their apparent movements were
quite accurately predictable. The Moon, also much studied, was believed by the-
ologians to be a perfect sphere. The heavenly bodies, deemed flawless in shape
and movement, were widely believed to travel in perfect circles around the
Earth, which was the center of the world God had created. By 1609, Galileo had
devised a telescope with 20-power magnification, its chief uses being thought at
first to be maritime, or as a spyglass that could provide military advantage. With
this instrument he observed the heavens, almost by accident, in January 1610. On
the 7th of that month he began a long letter, reporting in detail his observations
of the moon and other bodies. He wrote:
I have observed with one of my telescopes. . . the face of the Moon, which I have been
able to see very near. . . . [W]hat is there can be discerned with great distinctness, and
in fact it is seen that the Moon is most evidently not at all of an even, smooth and
regular surface, as a great many people believe of it and of the other heavenly bodies,
but on the contrary it is rough and unequal. In short, it is shown to be such that sane
reasoning cannot conclude otherwise than that it is full of prominences and cavities
similar, but much larger, to the mountains and valleys spread over the Earth’s surface.3
*A hypothetical experiment has been proposed: Throw a volume of the Encyclopaedia Britannica into a
black hole. Will the information it contains be forever lost? Is such a total loss impossible? A wager, light-
hearted but serious, between two distinguished Caltech physicists has been placed on the outcome. Prof.
Kip Thorne bets on relativity, whose equations describe space and time and predict that from the singular-
ity of a black hole there could never be any recovery. Prof. John Preskill bets on quantum mechanics, whose
equations precisely describe the lives of minuscule elementary particles and predict that the information
can never be totally lost. The stakes of the wager are a set of encyclopedias. Payoff is unlikely to come soon.
Says their equally distinguished colleague, Prof. Stephen Hawking of Cambridge University, who origi-
nally was in on the bet, “In my opinion it could go either way.” Hawking, but not Thorne, conceded the
bet in 2004. [Science News, 25 September 2004]
572

Science and Hypothesis
To save the hypothesis that the Moon was indeed a perfect sphere, and thus
to retain the coherence of the theological account of the heavenly bodies of which
that perfection was one element, some of Galileo’s critics later proposed the hy-
pothesis—outrageously ad hoc—that the apparent cavities and irregularities on
the surface of the Moon were, in fact, filled in by a celestial substance that was
flawless and crystalline, and thus invisible through Galileo’s telescope!
More than the Moon was examined by Galileo. His letter continued:
And besides the observations of the Moon. . . many fixed stars are seen with the
telescope that are not [otherwise] discerned; and only this evening I have seen
Jupiter accompanied by three fixed stars, totally invisible [to the naked eye] by their
smallness, and the configuration was in this form:4
At that point Galileo inserted a sketch that appears here as Figure 1, showing
the three stars in a straight line, two to the east and one to the west of Jupiter; he
reported that they did not extend more than one degree of longitude, but since at
that time he supposed them to be fixed stars, their distances from Jupiter and
from one another were indicated only very roughly.
On the following day, 8 January 1610, “led by I know not what,” Galileo hap-
pened to observe Jupiter once again; the earlier positions of those “fixed stars”
had fortunately been written down. His letter remained unsent; at the bottom of
the sheet he wrote the following note:
On the 8th thus: [He inserts a sketch showing Jupiter and three stars now closer to one
another and nearly equidistant from one another, and all three to the west of Jupiter!]
This created a serious theoretical problem for Galileo, because at this time the
assumption that the newly discovered stars were fixed had not been seriously
doubted. Therefore their appearance on the other side of Jupiter had to be ac-
counted for by Jupiter’s movements. On the 8th he added the note:
It [Jupiter’s movement] was therefore direct and not retrograde.
If, on the 8th, Jupiter was to the east of all three stars, and the day before Jupiter
had been to the west of two of them, Jupiter must have moved, and moved in a
way that was contrary to reliable astronomical calculations! One can imagine
Galileo’s agitation as he waited for the observations of the following night; could
his direct observations and his calculations remain so sharply inconsistent? On
the 9th it was too cloudy to observe, but he was able to resume his observations
the following night and to record the new pattern. On 11 January a similar pat-
tern was observed, but on this night Galileo later wrote:
The star nearer Jupiter was half the size of the other, and very close to the other,
whereas the other evenings all three of the said stars appeared of equal size and
equally far apart.
On the 12th, Jupiter apparently had moved back to the west, and two of the
new "stars" were again observed to the east of the planet! Clearly, something had
to give. From the accepted theories and beliefs a prediction confidently could be
drawn, a deduction concerning the movements of Jupiter, which—if those three
573

Science and Hypothesis
new stars were fixed, and Galileo’s observations were accurate—did not take
place. One could save the belief that those new stars were fixed by somehow re-
vamping the entire set of astronomical calculations, but these were not in serious
doubt; or, one could challenge the accuracy of Galileo’s observations—which is
On the 7th of January
Jupiter is seen thus
On the 8th thus
On the 12th day it is seen in this arrangement
The 13th are seen very close to Jupiter 4 stars                or better so
On the 14th it is cloudy
The 15th                          the nearest to Jupiter was smallest the 4th was
distant from the 3rd about double.
The spacing of the 3 to the west was no
greater than the diameter of Jupiter and
they were in a straight line.
   It was therefore direct and not retrograde        
long. 71°38' lat 1°13'
east
east
west
west
west
10.
11.
Figure 1 A photograph of the letter begun by Galileo on 7 January 1610, on
which are recorded his first monumental observations of the four major satellites
of Jupiter, thus confirming the Copernican account of the movement of the celes-
tial bodies. The letter itself was to be sent to the Doge in Venice, and included a
telescope with which Galileo intended to present him. On a draft of that letter
which he happened to have in hand, Galileo made the critical notes of his obser-
vations, which appear on the bottom half of the sheet. The translation of the bot-
tom half into English appears below. Courtesy of the Special Collections Library,
University of Michigan.
574

Science and Hypothesis
what some of his critics later sought to do, calling his telescope an instrument of
the devil. Galileo himself had no doubt about what he had seen, and he grasped
quickly which element in the set of accepted hypotheses had to be relinquished,
to the great distress of his dogmatic opponents. His note on the observation of
the 11th continued:
. . . from which it appears that around Jupiter there are three moving stars invisible to
everyone to this time.
And these three moving stars, he later wrote,
. . . revolved round Jupiter in the same manner as Venus and Mercury revolved round
the sun.
The observations of the following nights confirmed this revolutionary con-
clusion, which, together with his earlier observations of the moon, cast serious
doubt on the account of celestial bodies that had been widely and dogmatically
affirmed for many centuries.
On 13 January 1610, Galileo observed a fourth “star,” and the four major
satellites of Jupiter had been discovered. These observations provided very
strong confirmation of the Copernican hypothesis—an account of the celestial
bodies that was difficult to reconcile with the established theological doctrine of
Galileo’s time. Many moons of Jupiter have been discovered since, but these four
moons—Ganymede, Io, Europa, and Callisto—are appropriately called “the
Galilean satellites.” On a clear night, when Jupiter is visible in the sky, the revo-
lutions of the Galilean satellites around the planet may be readily confirmed
with no more than an ordinary pair of binoculars.
The ultimate success of the Copernican account of the solar system was due not
merely to its greater simplicity, but to its correctness, made manifest in the much
larger body of facts it was able to account for, and the remarkable predictions de-
ducible from the theory that were very soon confirmed beyond reasonable doubt.
4
Classification as Hypothesis
It is a mistake to suppose that hypotheses are important only in the advanced sci-
ences, such as physics and chemistry, but play no role in the so-called descriptive
sciences, such as botany or history. In fact, description itself is based on, or em-
bodies, hypotheses. Hypotheses are as critical to the various systems of classifi-
cation in biology as they are to interpretation in history, and as they are to all
knowledge in the social sciences.
In the science of history the importance of hypotheses is easily shown. Many
historians seek explanations of past events that can account for them and that
can be confirmed by other recorded events. For some it is some larger purpose or
pattern, religious or naturalistic, that explains the entire course of recorded histo-
ry. For others, who reject such cosmic designs, the study of the past nevertheless
reveals some historical laws that explain some past sequences and can then be
used to predict some future events. Both of these two groups conceive of history
575

Science and Hypothesis
as a theoretical science, not one that is merely descriptive; for both the role of
hypothesis is central to the historian’s enterprise.
A third group sets a more modest goal. For them the task of historians is sim-
ply to chronicle the past, to present an accurate description of past events in
chronological order. Their concern is with the facts themselves, rather than with
theories about the facts, so it might seem that they have no need of hypotheses.
However, past events are not so easily chronicled as this view would have
us believe. The past itself simply is not available for this kind of bare descrip-
tion. What is available are records of the past and traces of the past. We have
government archives, epic poems, the writings of earlier historians, the arti-
facts unearthed by archeological excavations, and so on. It is from a great vari-
ety of facts like these that historians must infer the nature of the past events
they aim to describe. They cannot do this without some hypotheses. Not all
hypotheses are general; some are particular, and with particular hypotheses
historians seek to convert the data at hand into evidence for their account of
the events in question.
Historians are detectives on a grand scale. Their methods are the same, and
their difficulties too. The evidence is scanty, and much of it has been destroyed
by intervening wars or natural disasters. False or misleading clues throw detec-
tives off the scent, and similarly, many existing “records” are falsifications of the
past, perhaps unintentional, such as the writings of earlier, uncritical historians.
The methods of science must be used by good detectives and good historians
both, and even those historians who seek to limit themselves to the bare descrip-
tion of past events must work from some hypotheses. They are theorists in spite
of themselves.
Biologists are in a more favorable position. The facts with which they deal are
present and available for inspection. To describe the flora and fauna of a region,
biologists are not obliged to draw elaborate inferences, as historians are, because
they can perceive the data directly. Their descriptions are not casual or random,
but highly systematic. They classify plants and animals, and do not merely de-
scribe them. But classification and description are, at bottom, the same process. To
describe an animal as carnivorous is to classify it as a carnivore; to classify it as a
reptile is to describe it as reptilian. To describe any object as having a certain at-
tribute is to classify it as a member of the class of objects having that attribute.
Scientific classification involves not merely a single division of objects into
groups, but further subdivision of each group into subgroups and subclasses, and
so on. Classification is also the tool of our inquiry when we play “Twenty Ques-
tions”—but it is a nearly universal tool, because it answers an almost universal
need. Primitive people needed to sort the poisonous from the edible, the danger-
ous from the harmless, and so forth. We all draw distinctions, and we do so more
meticulously with respect to the matters that chiefly concern us. The farmer’s
vegetables he will classify with greatest care, while treating all the flowers, in
which he has no interest, as weeds. The florist will give delicate care to the classi-
fication of flowers, but may treat all the farmer’s crops merely as “produce.”
Classification
The organization and
division of large
collections of things into
an ordered system of
groups and subgroups,
often used in the
construction of scientific
hypotheses.
576

Science and Hypothesis
Two basic motives lead us to classify things. One is practical, the other theo-
retical. In any library, with many thousands of volumes, books could not be found
if they were not shelved according to some system of classification. The larger the
number of objects with which we deal, the greater is the need to classify them. In
museums, libraries, large department stores, this practical need is plain.
The theoretical object of classification is less obvious. Alternative schemes of
classification are neither true nor false. Objects may be described in different ways,
from different points of view. The system of classification adopted will depend on
the purpose or interest of the classifier. A librarian will classify books according to
their subject matter; a bookbinder according to the material of their leaves and
bindings; a bibliophile by date of publication and perhaps by rarity; a shipper by
weight and size—and there will be other schemes of classification as well.
What is the special interest of scientists, leading them to prefer one scheme of
classification over another? The scientist seeks knowledge, not merely of this or
that particular fact, but of the general laws to which the facts conform, and of
their causal interrelations. One scheme of classification is better than another,
from the scientific point of view, to the extent that it is more fruitful in suggesting
scientific laws, and more helpful in the formulation of explanatory hypotheses.
The theoretical, or scientific, motivation for classifying objects is the desire to
increase our knowledge of them, to achieve insight into their attributes, their
similarities and differences, and their interrelations. Classification with a nar-
rowly practical purpose—dangerous and harmless, or flying and swimming—
will not much advance that understanding. The rattlesnake and the wild boar
will go into one class, the grass snake and the domestic pig into the other; the
bats and the birds will go into one class, the whales and the fishes into another.
However, snakes and boars are profoundly different, whereas whales and bats
are profoundly like one another. Being warm-blooded or not, bearing young
alive or laying eggs, are much more important characteristics than dangerous-
ness on which to base a system of classification.
A characteristic is important when it indicates the presence of other charac-
teristics. When an attribute is causally connected with many other attributes, it
can serve in the framing of a greater number of causal laws and of more general
explanatory hypotheses. That classification scheme is best which is based on the
most important characteristics of the objects to be classified. We cannot know in
advance which these are, because we cannot know in advance the causal connec-
tions we aim to learn. So scientists classify hypothetically. Different classification
schemes are tried, with the understanding that later they may be improved on or
rejected. Later investigations may reveal other characteristics that are involved in
a greater number of causal laws and explanatory hypotheses, and we will then
revise the classification scheme so as to base our categories on it.
It is true that classification tends to be more important in the early or less de-
veloped stages of a science, but it need not diminish in importance as that science
develops. Taxonomy is a legitimate, important, and still growing branch of biol-
ogy, in which earlier systems of classification have been abandoned in favor of
577

Science and Hypothesis
others that prove more productive. Some classificatory tools—such as the peri-
odic table of the elements—remain valuable to the chemist.
Hypotheses in history are illuminated by these biological considerations.
Historians, too, focus on what they find to be most important in increasing our
understanding of past events. Life is too short to permit the description of past
events in complete detail, so every description by a historian must be selective,
recording only some features. How may that selection be made? Of course histo-
rians want to focus on what is important, ignoring the insignificant. Historians,
like biologists and other scientists, regard those aspects of events as important
that enter most widely into the formulation of causal laws and explanatory hy-
potheses—always subject to correction in the light of further research, of course.
Early historians emphasized the political and military aspects of events, ignoring
other attributes we now think to be important. The turn to economic and social
attributes brought enormous changes in the work and the products of historians;
today we go beyond economic and social issues to attend to cultural and other
characteristics that are now thought to be causally related to a maximum number
of others. So the decision to focus on one rather than another set of attributes em-
bodies some hypothesis about which characteristics really are important. Some
such hypotheses are required before historians can even begin to do any system-
atic describing of the past. It is this hypothetical character of classification and de-
scription that leads us to regard hypothesis as the all-pervasive method of
scientific inquiry.
EXERCISES
In each of the following passages,
a. What data are to be explained?
b. What hypotheses are proposed to explain them?
c. Evaluate the hypotheses in terms of the criteria presented in Section 3.
1. In an unusual logjam of contradictory claims, a revolutionary new
model of the universe, as a soccer ball, arrived on astronomers’ desks in
October of 2003—at least slightly deflated.
Based on an analysis of maps of the Big Bang, Dr. Jeffrey Weeks and
colleagues, from Canton, NY, suggest that space is a kind of 12-sided
hall of mirrors, in which the illusion of infinity is created by looking out
and seeing multiple copies of the same stars.
If his model is correct, Dr. Weeks said, it would rule out one variant
of the Big Bang theory that asserts that our own observable universe is
just a bubble among others in a realm of vastly larger extent. “It means
we can just about see the whole universe now,” Dr. Weeks said.
Other astronomers, led by Dr. David Spergel of Princeton, said that
their analysis of the same data had probably already ruled out the
578

Science and Hypothesis
soccer-ball universe. The two groups of scientists, who have been in in-
tense communication in recent days, disagree about whether the soccer
ball universe has been refuted. But they all agree that what is amazing
about this debate is that the controversy will actually be settled soon,
underscoring the power of modern data to resolve issues that were once
considered almost metaphysical.
In the scientific journal Nature Dr. Weeks wrote: “Since antiquity our
ancestors have wondered whether our universe is finite or infinite.
Now, after more than two millennia of speculation, observational data
might finally settle this ancient question.”
Dr. Weeks and his colleagues propose that the universe is 12-sided, a
dodecahedron. The waves appearing in a radio map of the universe
when it was very young indicate, he argues, that if you go far enough in
one direction you would find yourself back where you started, like a
cursor disappearing off the left side of a computer screen and reappear-
ing on the right. Thus when cosmic radiation intersects the edges of the
universe it would make identical circles on opposite sides of the sky—
six pairs of circles, 35 degrees in diameter, in the case of Dr. Weeks’s
dodecahedron.
Dr. Max Tegmark, a cosmologist at the University of Pennsylvania,
observed: “What’s nice is that this is so testable. It’s the truth or it’s
dead. The data are actually already out there; it’s just a question of sift-
ing through them. We ought to have seen those circles.” So far the
circles have not showed up. “Is space infinite or is it not?” Dr. Tegmark
asked. “This is what got Giordano Bruno burned at the stake!”
—Reported in Nature, 9 October 2003
2. Population clusters—groups of persons who are found to buy the same
things, get their entertainment from the same sources, exhibit similar
voting patterns, and generally behave in quite similar ways—are of
growing interest. Michael J. Weiss has distinguished some 62 of these
clusters, which he calls “distinctive lifestyle types.” He also names them
and highlights some of their peculiarities.
In the Towns and Gowns cluster, for example, tequila is far more popu-
lar than elsewhere, and twice as many people watch the soap opera “An-
other World” there than do people elsewhere. In the Military Quarters
cluster people are four times as likely to watch the TV show “Hard Copy”
as the average American. Among the young, middle-class Americans in
suburbia, furniture refinishing, downhill skiing, and cats are abnormally
popular, while chess and tractor pulls are abnormally unpopular.
Lifestyle clusters are found useful by businesses seeking customers,
by candidates seeking votes, by nonprofit organizations seeking new
contributors, and so on. What may appear trivial can be very revealing.
In Washington, DC, Weiss observes, “there is a fault line between the
fans of Brie cheese, who tend to hold down executive jobs and write the
579

Science and Hypothesis
laws, and those of Kraft Velveeta, who maintain the service economy.”
He asks: “What prompts some of us to eat Brie and others to devour
Velveeta cheese?”
—Michael J. Weiss, The Clustered World (Boston: Little, Brown, 2000)
3. Monkeypox, a viral disease related to smallpox but less infectious and
less deadly, was detected for the first time in the Americas in 2003. At
least 20 cases have been reported, in three Midwestern states, Wiscon-
sin, Illinois and Indiana, according to the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention.
The patients ranged in age from 4 to 48, and became ill between 15
May and 3 June, 2003. All had direct or close contact with ill prairie dogs,
which have become common household pets, and which might have
caught monkeypox from another species, possibly Gambian giant
pouched rats, which are imported as pets from West or Central Africa,
where the disease had long occurred. Monkeypox in Africa is carried
mainly by squirrels but is named after monkeys because it often kills them.
Several patients in the American outbreak work for veterinarians or
pet stores that sold prairie dogs and Gambian rats. By quickly identify-
ing the animals that can be infected with monkeypox, health officials
hope to eliminate them before the disease becomes endemic in the
Americas.
—Reported in the The New York Times, 9 June 2003
4. A small study of heart-disease patients testing a hypothesis so improba-
ble that its principal investigator says he gave it a one-in-10,000 chance
of succeeding has found that just a few treatments with an experimental
drug, developed by Esperion Therapeutics of Ann Arbor, Michigan,
reversed what may be the equivalent of years’ worth of plaque in
coronary arteries.
Forty-seven heart attack patients were randomly assigned to be
infused with either a concentration of a substance that mimics high den-
sity lipoprotein (or HDL, the substance that removes cholesterol from
arteries) or to be infused with an inactive saline solution, which served
as a control.
After 5 weekly infusions those who got the experimental drug had a
4.2-percent decrease in the volume of plaque in their coronary arteries,
while those who had saline infusions had, if anything, a slight increase
in their plaque.
“Until now,” said Dr. Steven Nissen, a cardiologist at the Cleveland
Clinic who directed the study, “the paradigm has been to prevent dis-
ease by lowering bad cholesterol (LDL). If you get the bad cholesterol
low enough, the plaques don’t build up in the artery walls. This experi-
ment says you can also remove the disease in the wall of the artery.”
—Reported in the Journal of the American Medical Association, 
5 November 2003
580

Science and Hypothesis
5. Boy babies tend to be about 100 grams heavier on average than girl ba-
bies, but it has never been explained, until recently, why that is so. In-
vestigators were unsure whether the increased weight was to be
explained by the fact that mothers of boys took in more energy, or be-
cause (when the fetus was male) those mothers used the energy taken in
more efficiently.
Dr. Rulla M. Tamimi, of the Harvard School of Public Health, sought
to resolve this uncertainty by measuring the intake of calories. During
the second trimester of their pregnancy, 244 women in Boston were
asked to record their dietary intake in full detail. The data collected
were later correlated with the resultant births. Women carrying boys,
Dr. Tamimi found, took in (as carbohydrates, fats, or proteins) about 10
percent more calories than women carrying girls. It is intake, and not
efficiency of use, that makes the difference.
But what accounts for that difference of intake? Dr. Tamimi specu-
lated that it may be triggered by some signal from the testosterone given
off by the male fetuses.
—Reported in the British Medical Journal, June 2003
6. Humans, apes, and dolphins are highly social animals with large brains;
they have been shown to be aware of themselves by recognizing them-
selves in a mirror. Most animals pay very little attention to their reflec-
tions in a mirror. Elephants are like humans in being large-brained and
empathic, but they don’t share a relatively recent common ancestor with
humans, like apes do. Might they also recognize an image of themselves?
Yes, they do. Elephants at the Bronx Zoo, in New York City, inspect-
ed themselves with their trunks while staring at their reflections in a
huge mirror. One of the elephants (but only one) completed the highest
level of self-recognition, called the “mark test.” Researchers placed a
white X above one eye of each elephant. After approaching the mirror,
this elephant touched the mark with her trunk 12 times in 90 seconds—
confirmation that she believed that what she saw in the mirror was in-
deed herself.
—Reported by Diana Reiss, of the Wildlife Conservation Society and Columbia
University, in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, November 7, 2006
7. The Nobel Prize for chemistry for 2003 was shared by Dr. Peter Agre,
who encountered a new protein by serendipity. He had been studying a
particular protein found in blood when he found another protein con-
taminating his sample. Trying to develop an antibody that would hook
on to the protein he was studying, Dr. Agre found that the antibody
hooked on to the contaminating protein instead—which turned out to
be one of the most abundant proteins found in blood samples, although
no one had identified it before.
But what did it do? He looked for similar proteins and found some—
whose functions also were not known—in the roots of plants. The situation
581

Science and Hypothesis
grew “curiouser and curiouser,” Dr. Agre said. Finally he tried testing
whether the new protein could be a water channel. That such channels
might exist had been suggested long ago—but diffusion had then seemed to
explain water movement, and specific channels had never been discovered.
To test the water channel hypothesis, Dr. Agre added the gene that
produced the mystery protein to the eggs of frogs. The modified eggs,
placed in fresh water, quickly swelled and burst, strongly confirming
that theory. “The eggs exploded like popcorn,” Dr. Agre said. The newly
discovered proteins, called “aquaporins,” have a channel just a little
wider than a water molecule, and have recently been found also in
human kidneys, where water is extracted from urine and recycled.
“This really fell into our laps,” Dr. Agre said when his Nobel Prize was
announced. “Being lucky is an important ingredient in scientific success.”
8. Early in the eighteenth century Edmund Halley asked: “Why is the sky
dark at night?” This apparently naive question is not easy to answer, be-
cause if the universe had the simplest imaginable structure on the
largest possible scale, the background radiation of the sky would be in-
tense. Imagine a static infinite universe—that is, a universe of infinite
size in which the stars and galaxies are stationary with respect to one
another. A line of sight in any direction will ultimately cross the surface
of a star, and the sky should appear to be made up of overlapping stel-
lar disks. The apparent brightness of a star’s surface is independent of
its distance, so that everywhere the sky should be as bright as the sur-
face of an average star. Since the sun is an average star, the entire sky,
day and night, should be about as bright as the surface of the sun. The
fact that it is not was later characterized as Olbers’ paradox (after the
eighteenth-century German astronomer Heinrich Olbers). The paradox
applies not only to starlight but also to all other regions of the electro-
magnetic spectrum. It indicates that there is something fundamentally
wrong with the model of a static infinite universe, but it does not speci-
fy what.
—Adrian Webster, “The Cosmic Radiation Background,” 
Scientific American, August 1974
9. Swedish researchers, collaborating with colleagues in South Africa,
found that dung beetles active during the day detect polarity patterns in
sunlight and rely on those patterns to find their way out of great masses
of elephant dung. Dr. Marie Dacke, of the University of Lund, noticed
subsequently that on moonlit nights one beetle species worked (rolling
dung) particularly late. Could they have been relying upon the polariza-
tion of moonlight?
Researchers set up polarizing filters to shift the moonbeams—and sure
enough, the African beetle, Scarabaeus zambesianus, changed direction to
compensate. When the polarization of the moonlight under the filter was
rotated by 90 degrees, they found that beetles under that filter deviated
582

Science and Hypothesis
from their course by almost exactly 90 degrees. “This is the first proof,”
writes Dr. Dacke in her report in Nature of 3 July 2003, “that any animal
can use polarized moonlight for orientation.”
10. For centuries (since the 1500s in Scandinavia) people have puzzled over
lemmings, northern rodents whose populations surge and crash so
quickly and so regularly that they inspired an enduring myth: that lem-
mings commit mass suicide when their numbers grow too large, pitch-
ing themselves off cliffs to their deaths in a foamy sea.
Scientists debunked that notion decades ago, but have never been cer-
tain what causes the rapid boom-and-bust population cycles—a mystery
in ecology that has been hotly debated. “There have been several dozen
hypotheses,” said Dr. Oliver Gilg, an ecologist at the University of Helsinki
in Finland, “and scientists were sticking so closely to their hypotheses that
they were almost killing each other.” But Dr. Gilg, the author of a recent
study published in the journal Science, provides a single hypothesis that
his team of researchers claims provides the entire explanation.
The rapid population cycles have nothing to do with self-annihila-
tion, they contend, but everything to do with hungry predators. After 15
years of research they have discovered that the actions of four predator
species—snowy owls, arctic foxes, seabirds called long-tailed skuas, and
the weasel-like stoats—account for the four-year cycles during which
lemming populations rapidly explode and then nearly disappear. After
creating a model based only on those four predators, they found that
the model predicted precisely the numerical fluctuation of lemming
populations in nature.
—Reported in Science, 31 October 2003
chapter    
Summary
In this chapter we explored the principles that underlie the methods of science.
In Section 1, we distinguished scientific from unscientific explanations, the
former being always hypothetical and empirically verifiable, the latter dogmatic
in spirit and not testable by propositions that can be deduced from them.
In Section 2, we examined the method of science, relying on the confirmation
of hypotheses. We identified the seven stages that may be distinguished in any
scientific inquiry:
1. The identification of some problem
2. The construction of some preliminary hypothesis
3. The collection of additional data in the light of that preliminary hypothesis
4. The formulation of a fully explanatory hypothesis supported by the
data collected
583

Science and Hypothesis
5. The deduction of further consequences from the explanatory hypothesis
6. The testing of the consequences deduced
7. The application of the theory developed
In Section 3, we explored the evaluation of alternative scientific hypotheses.
We identified criteria with which we might choose between competing
hypotheses:
1. The compatibility of a theory with the body of theory previously 
established
2. The degree of predictive or explanatory power that a new theory
manifests
3. The relative simplicity of competing theories
We illustrated these criteria with events in the history of science—most notably,
the replacement of the geocentric (or Ptolemaic) theory of the solar system with
the heliocentric (or Copernican) theory, confirmed by the remarkable observa-
tions of Galileo Galilei.
In Section 4, we discussed classification, an intellectual instrument that is
greatly valued in the social and biological sciences as well as in the physical sci-
ences, noting that every classificatory scheme suggests general truths and invites
the formation of explanatory hypotheses.
For additional exercises and tutorials about concepts covered in this
chapter, log in to MyLogicLab at www.mylogiclab.com and select your
current textbook.
END NOTES
1D. Biello, “Island Lizards Morph in Evolutionary Experiment,” Scientific American, 17 November 2006.
2On the Old Saying: “That Might Be Right in Theory” [Uber den Gemeinspruch: Das mag in der Theorie richtig
sein], 1793, translated by E. B. Ashton (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1974).
3This letter, dated 7 January 1610, apparently was written over a period of many days. It, and other notes
taken by Galileo during these momentous days, are discussed in detail in Jean Meeus, “Galileo’s First
Records of Jupiter’s Satellites,” Sky and Telescope, February 1964; in Stillman Drake, “Galileo’s First Tele-
scopic Observations,” Journal of the History of Astronomy, 1976, p. 153; and in Dale P. Cruikshank and
David Morrison, “The Galilean Satellites of Jupiter,” Scientific American, May 1976. A photocopy of the
original sketch Galileo made to record his observations, his notes appearing on it in Italian, is reproduced
in Figure 1, through the courtesy of the library of the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, in whose rare-
book room that precious manuscript is held.
4That Galileo began this letter on 7 January 1610 is clear; the exact days of that month on which he con-
tinued it, with sketches and notes, are a matter about which scholars disagree.
584

1.
Identify the problem
2.
Devise preliminary hypotheses
3.
Collect additional facts
4.
5.
Deduce consequences from the refined hypothesis
6.
Test the consequences deduced
7.
Apply the theory
Formulate a refined explanatory hypothesis
The Scientific Method 
Logic Overview—The Seven Stages of Scientific Investigation:
Science and Hypothesis
585

This page intentionally left blank 

Probability
1
Alternative Conceptions of Probability
2
The Probability Calculus
3
Probability in Everyday Life
1
Alternative Conceptions of Probability
Probability is the central evaluative concept in all inductive logic. The theory of
probability, as the American philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce put it, “is sim-
ply the science of logic quantitatively treated.” The mathematical applications of
this theory go far beyond the concerns of this text, but it is fitting to conclude our
treatment of inductive logic with an analysis of the concept of probability and a
brief account of its practical applications.
Scientific theories, and the causal laws that they encompass, can be no more
than probable. Inductive arguments, even at their very best, fall short of the cer-
tainty that attaches to valid deductive arguments. We assign to theories, or to hy-
potheses of any sort, a degree of probability expressed discursively. As one
example, we may assert, on the evidence we now have, that it is “highly proba-
ble” that Einstein’s theory of relativity is correct. As another example, although
we cannot be certain that there is no life on other planets in our solar system, we
can say that the probability of any theory that entails such life, in the light of
what we know about these planets, is very low. We do not normally assign a nu-
merical value to the probability of theories in this sense.
However, we can and do assign numbers to the probability of events in
many contexts. The number we assign to the probability of an event is called the
numerical coefficient of probability, and that number may be very useful. How
can such numbers be reliably assigned? To answer this question we must distin-
guish two additional senses in which the concept of “probability” is used:
1. The a priori conception of probability
2. The relative frequency conception of probability
We use the first of these when we toss a coin and suppose that the probability
that it will show heads is 
. We use the second of these when we say that the
probability that an American woman of age 25 will live at least one additional
year is .971. Games of chance—dice and cards—gave rise to the investigation of
probability in the first sense,* and the uses of mortality statistics gave rise to the in-
vestigation of probability in the second sense,† in both cases during the seventeenth
1>2
*Pierre de Fermat (1608–1665) and Blaise Pascal, both distinguished mathematicians, reflected upon prob-
abilities when corresponding about the proper division of the stakes when a game of chance had been
interrupted.
†Captain John Graunt published (in 1662) calculations concerning what could be inferred from death
records that had been kept in London from 1592.
Numerical coefficient
of probability
A number that describes
the likelihood, or
probability, of the
occurrence of an event.
Its possible values range
from 0 (impossibility) to
1 (certainty).
From Chapter 14 of Introduction to Logic, Fourteenth Edition. Irving M. Copi, Carl Cohen, Kenneth McMahon. 
Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Prentice Hall. All rights reserved.
This asset is
intentionally omitted
from this text. It may
be accessed at
www.mcescher.com.
(Relativity by 
M.C. Escher)

century. The calculations in the two cases were of different kinds, leading even-
tually to the two different interpretations of the coefficient of probability. Both
are important.
The a priori theory of probability asks, in effect, what a rational person ought
to believe about some event under consideration, and assigns a number between
0 and 1 to represent the degree of belief that is rational. If we are completely con-
vinced that the event will take place, we assign the number 1. If we believe that
the event cannot possibly happen, our belief that it will happen is assigned the
number 0. When we are unsure, the number assigned will be between 0 and 1.
Probability is predicated of an event according to the degree to which one ration-
ally believes that that event will occur. Probability is predicated of a proposition
according to the degree to which a completely rational person would believe it.
How (in this theory) do we determine rationally, when we are unsure, what
number between 0 and 1 ought to be assigned? We are unsure, in the classical
view, because our knowledge is partial; if we knew everything about a coin
being flipped, we could confidently predict its trajectory and its final resting po-
sition. However, there is an enormous amount about that coin and its flip that we
do not and cannot know. What we mainly know is this: The coin has two sides,
and we have no reason to believe it more likely that it will come to rest on one
side than on the other. So we consider all the possible outcomes that are (so far as
we know) equally probable; in the case of a flipped coin there are two—heads
and tails. Of the two, heads is only one. The probability of heads is therefore one
over two, 
, and this number, .5, is said to be the probability of the event in
question.
Similarly, when a deck of randomly shuffled cards is about to be dealt, they
will come off the deck in exactly the sequence they are in, determined by the out-
come of the preceding shuffle, which we do not know. We know only that there
are 13 cards of each suit (out of a total of 52 in the deck) and therefore the proba-
bility that the first card dealt will be a spade is 13/52, or exactly 
.
This is called the a priori theory of probability because we make the numerical
assignment, 
, before we run any trials with that deck of cards. If the deck is
regular and the shuffle was fair, we think it is not necessary to take a sample, but
only to consider the antecedent conditions: 13 spades, 52 cards, and an honest
deal. Any one card (as far as we know) has as much chance as any other of being
dealt first.
To compute the probability of an event’s occurring in given circumstances,
we divide the number of ways it can occur by the total number of possible out-
comes of those circumstances, provided that there is no reason to believe that any
one of those possible outcomes is more likely than any other. The probability of
an event, in the a priori theory of probability, is thus expressed by a fraction,
whose denominator is the number of equipossible outcomes and whose numer-
ator is the number of outcomes that will successfully yield the event in question.
Such numerical assignments (“successes over possibilities”) are rational, convenient,
and very useful.
1>4
1>4
1>2
Probability
A priori theory of
probability
A theory in which the
probability ascribed to a
simple event is a fraction
between 0 and 1, of
which the denominator
is the number of
equipossible outcomes,
and the numerator is the
number of outcomes in
which the event in
question occurs. Thus
on the a priori theory,
the probability of
drawing a spade at
random from a deck of
playing cards is 13/52.
588

There is an alternative view of probability. In this view the probability as-
signed to an event must depend on the relative frequency with which the event
takes place. Earlier we suggested that the probability of a 25-year-old American
woman living at least one additional year is .971. This can be learned only by ex-
amining the entire class of 25-year-old American women, and determining how
many of them do indeed live, or have lived, at least one additional year. Only after
we learn the mortality rates for that class of women can we make the numerical
assignment.
We distinguish, in this theory, the reference class (25-year-old American
women, in the example given) and the attribute of interest (living at least one ad-
ditional year, in this example). The probability assigned is the measure of the rel-
ative frequency with which the members of the class exhibit the attribute in
question. In this theory also, probability is expressed as a fraction (and often ex-
pressed in decimal form), but the denominator is in this case the number of
members in the reference class and the numerator is the number of class mem-
bers that have the attribute of interest. If the number of male automobile drivers
in California between the ages of 16 and 24 is y, and the number of such drivers
who are involved in an automobile accident in the course of a year is x, the prob-
ability of an accident among such drivers in any given year we assign as x/y. The
reference class here is the set of drivers described in certain ways, and the attrib-
ute is the fact of involvement in an automobile accident within some specified
period. “Rational belief” is not at issue here. In the relative frequency theory of
probability, probability is defined as the relative frequency with which members of a
class exhibit a specified attribute.
Note that in both theories the probabilities assigned are relative to the evi-
dence available. For the relative frequency theory this is obvious: The probability
of a given attribute must vary with the reference class chosen for the computation.
If the male automobile drivers in the reference class are between the ages of 36
and 44, the relative frequency of accidents will be lower; drivers in that range
have fewer accidents, and hence the computed probability of an accident will be
lower. If the reference class consisted of females rather than males, that would
again change the coefficient of probability. Probability is relative to the evidence.
This is also true in the a priori theory of probability. An event can be assigned
a probability only on the basis of the evidence available to the person making the
assignment. After all, a person’s “rational belief” may change with changes in the
knowledge that person possesses. For example, suppose that two people are
watching a deck of cards being shuffled, and because of the dealer’s slip, one of
them happens to see that the top card is black, but cannot see the card's suit. The
second observer sees nothing but the shuffle. If asked to estimate the probability
of the first card’s being a spade, the first observer will assign the probability 
,
because he knows that there are 26 black cards, of which half are spades. The sec-
ond observer will assign the probability 
, because he knows only that there are
13 spades in the deck of 52 cards. Different probabilities are assigned by the
two observers to the same event. Neither has made a mistake; both have assigned
1>4
1>2
Probability
Relative frequency
theory of probability
The view of probability in
which the probability of
a simple event is
determined as a fraction
whose denominator is
the total number of
members of a class, and
whose numerator is the
number of members of
that class that are found
to exhibit a particular
attribute that is
equivalent to the event
in question.
589

the correct probability relative to the evidence available to each—even if the card
turns out to be a club. No event has any probability in and of itself, in this view,
and therefore, with different sets of evidence, the probabilities may well vary.
These two accounts of probability—the relative frequency account and the
a priori account—are in fundamental agreement in holding that probability is rel-
ative to the evidence. They are also in agreement in holding that a numerical as-
signment of probability can usually be made for a given event. It is possible to
reinterpret the number assigned on the a priori theory as being a “shortcut” esti-
mate of relative frequency. Thus the probability that a flipped coin, if it is fair,
will show heads when it comes to rest may be calculated as a relative frequency;
it will be the relative frequency with which the coin does show heads when it is
randomly flipped a thousand, or ten thousand times. As the number of random
flips increases (supposing the coin truly balanced), the fraction representing the
relative frequency of heads will continue to approach .5 more closely. We may
call .5 the limit of the relative frequency of that event. In the light of such possible
reinterpretation of numerical assignments, some theorists hold that the relative
frequency theory is the more fundamental of the two. It is also true, however,
that in a great many contexts the a priori theory is the simpler and more conven-
ient theory to employ; we will rely chiefly on the latter as we go forward.
2
The Probability Calculus
The probability of single events, as we have seen, can often be determined.
Knowing (or assuming) these, we can go on to calculate the probability of some
complex event—an event that may be regarded as a whole of which its compo-
nent single events are parts. To illustrate, the probability of drawing a spade
from a shuffled deck of cards is 
, as we have seen, relying on the a priori theory
of probability. What, then, is the probability of drawing two spades in succession
from a deck of playing cards? Drawing the first spade is the first component;
drawing the second spade is the second; drawing two spades in succession is the
complex event whose probability we may want to calculate. When it is known
how the component events are related to each other, the probabilities of the com-
plex event can be calculated from the probabilities of its components.
The calculus of probability is the branch of mathematics that permits such
calculation. Here we explore only its elementary outline. Knowing the likelihood
of certain outcomes in our everyday lives can be important; application of the
probability calculus, therefore, can be extremely helpful. Mastery of its basic the-
orems is one of the most useful products of the study of logic.
The probability calculus can be most easily explained in terms of games of
chance—dice, cards, and the like—because the artificially restricted universe cre-
ated by the rules of such games makes possible the straightforward application
of probability theorems. In this exposition, the a priori theory of probability is
used, but all of these results can, with a minimum of reinterpretation, be ex-
pressed and justified in terms of the relative frequency theory as well.
1>4
Probability
Calculus of probability
A branch of
mathematics that can
be used to compute the
probabilities of complex
events from the
probabilities of their
component events.
590

Two elementary theorems will be discussed.
A. With the first we can calculate the probability of a complex event consisting of
the joint occurrences of its components: the probability of two events both hap-
pening, or of all the events of a specified set happening.
B.
With the second we can calculate the probability of a complex event consisting
of alternative occurrences: the probability that at least one (that is, one or more)
of a given set of alternative events will occur. We take these in turn.
A. Probability of Joint Occurrences
Suppose we wish to learn the probability of getting two heads in two flips of a
coin. Call these two components a and b; there is a very simple theorem that en-
ables us to compute the probability of both a and b. It is called the product
theorem, and it involves merely multiplying the two fractions representing the
probabilities of the component events. There are four distinct possible outcomes
when two coins are tossed. These may be shown most clearly in a table:
Probability
Product theorem
In the calculus of
probability, a theorem
asserting that the
probability of the joint
occurrence of multiple
independent events is
equal to the product of
their separate
probabilities.
First Coin
Second Coin
H
H
H
T
T
H
T
T
There is no reason to expect any one of these four cases more than another, so we
regard them as equipossible. The case (two heads) about which we are asking oc-
curs in only one of the four equipossible events, so the probability of getting two
heads in two flips of a coin is 
. We can calculate this directly: The joint occur-
rence of two heads is equal to the probability of getting a head on the first flip
(
) multiplied by the probability of getting a head on the second flip (
), or
. However, this simple multiplication succeeds only when the two
events are independent events—that is, when the occurrence of the one does not
affect the probability of the occurrence of the other.
The product theorem for independent events asserts that the probability of
the joint occurrence of two independent events is equal to the product of their
separate probabilities. It is written as
where P(a) and P(b) are the separate probabilities of the two events, and P(a and b)
designates the probability of their joint occurrence.
Applied to another case, what is the probability of getting 12 when rolling
two dice? Two dice will show twelve points only if each of them shows six
points. Each die has six sides, any one of which is as likely to be face up after a
roll as any other. When a is the event of the first die showing 6, 
. And
PAaB = 1>6
P(a and b) = P(a) * P(b)
1>2 * 1>2 = 1>4
1>2
1>2
1>4
Independent events
In probability theory,
events so related that
the occurrence or
nonoccurrence of one
has no effect upon the
occurrence or
nonoccurrence of the
other.
591

when b is the event of the second die showing 6, 
. The complex event
of the two dice showing 12 is constituted by the joint occurrence of a and b. By
the product theorem, 
, which is the probability of
getting a 12 on one roll of two dice. The same result is shown if we lay out, in a
table, all the separate equipossible outcomes of the roll of two dice. There are 36
possible outcomes, and only one of them is favorable to getting 12.
We do not need to restrict ourselves to two components. The product theorem
may be generalized to cover the joint occurrence of any number of independent
events. If we draw a card from a shuffled deck, replace it and draw again, replace
it again and draw a third time, the likelihood of getting a spade in each drawing is
not affected by success or failure in the other drawings. (We assume that the re-
placement of a card is followed immediately by a reshuffling of the deck.) The
probability of getting a spade in any one drawing is 
, or 
. The probability of
getting three spades in three drawings, if the card is replaced after each drawing, is
. The general product theorem thus allows us to compute
the probability of the joint occurrence of any number of independent events.
But what happens if the events are not independent? What happens if suc-
cess in one case has an effect on the probability of success in another case? The
examples thus far need take no account of any relationship among the compo-
nent events, and yet component events may be related in ways that require more
careful calculation. Consider a revised version of the example just given. Sup-
pose we seek the probability of drawing three successive spades from a shuffled
deck, but the cards withdrawn are not replaced. If each card drawn is not returned to
the deck before the next drawing, the outcomes of the earlier drawings do have
an effect on the outcomes of the later drawings.
If the first card drawn is a spade, then for the second draw there are only 12
spades left among a total of 51 cards, whereas if the first card is not a spade, then
there are 13 spades left among 51 cards. Where a is the event of drawing a spade
from the deck and not replacing it, and b is the event of drawing another spade from
among the remaining cards, the probability of b, that is, P(b if a), is 
, or 
. If
both a and b occur, the third draw will be made from a deck of 50 cards containing
only 11 spades. If c is this last event, then P(c if both a and b) is 
. Thus, the prob-
ability that all three are spades, if three cards are drawn from a deck and not re-
placed, is, according to the product theorem, 
, or 
. This is
less than the probability of getting three spades in three draws when the cards
drawn are replaced before drawing again, which was to be expected, because re-
placing a spade increases the probability of getting a spade on the next draw.
The general product theorem can be applied to real-world problems of con-
sequence, as in the following true account. A California teenager, afflicted with
chronic leukemia that would soon kill her if untreated, could be saved only if a
donor with matching bone marrow were found. When all efforts to locate such a
donor failed, her parents decided to try to have another child, hoping that a suc-
cessful bone-marrow transplant might then be possible. But the girl’s father first
had to have his vasectomy reversed, for which there was only a 50 percent (.5)
chance of success. Even if that were successful, the mother, 45 years old at the
11>850
13>52 * 12>51 * 11>50
11>50
4>17
12>51
1>4 * 1>4 * 1>4 = 1>64
1>4
13>52
P(a and b) = 1>6 * 1>6 = 1>36
PAbB = 1>6
Probability
592

time, would have only a .73 chance of becoming pregnant, and if she did become
pregnant, there was only a one-in-four chance (.25) that the baby’s marrow
would match that of the afflicted daughter. Even if there were such a match,
there would still be only a .7 chance that the leukemia patient would live through
the needed chemotherapy and bone-marrow transplant.
The probability of a successful outcome was seen at the outset to be low, but
not hopelessly low. The vasectomy was successfully reversed, and the mother
did become pregnant—after which prospects improved. It turned out that the
baby did possess matching bone marrow. Then, in 1992, the arduous bone-
marrow transplant procedure was begun. It proved to be a complete success.*
What was the probability of this happy outcome at the time of the parents’ origi-
nal decision to pursue it?
EXERCISES
EXAMPLE
1.
What is the probability of getting three aces in three successive draws
from a deck of cards:
a.
If each card drawn is replaced before the next drawing is made?
b.
If the cards drawn are not replaced?
SOLUTION
a.
If each card drawn is replaced before the next drawing is made, the com-
ponent events have absolutely no effect on one another and are therefore
independent. In this case, 
. There
are 52 cards in the deck, of which four are aces. So the probability of
drawing the first ace, P(a), is 
, or 
. The probability of drawing the
second ace, P(b), is likewise 
, as is the probability of drawing the third
ace, P(c). So the probability of the joint occurrence of a and b and c is
, or 
.
b.
If the cards drawn are not replaced, the component events are
dependent, not independent. The formula is
. 
In this case, the probability of drawing the first ace, P(a), remains 
,
or 
. But the probability of drawing a second ace if the first card
drawn was an ace, P(b if a), is 
, or 
. And the probability of
drawing a third ace if the first two cards drawn were aces, P(c if a and
b), is 
, or 
. The probability of the joint occurrence of these three
dependent events is therefore 
, or 
.
1>5,525
1>13 * 1>17 * 1>25
1>25
2>50
1>17
3>51
1>13
4>52
P(a and b and c) = P(a) * P(b if a) * P(c if a and b)
1>2,197
1>13 * 1>13 * 1>13
1>13
1>13
4>52
P(a and b and c) = P(a) * P(b) * P(c)
Probability
*Anissa Ayala, the patient, was married a year after the successful transplant; the sister who saved her
life, Marissa Ayala, was a flower girl at her wedding. Details of this case were reported in Life maga-
zine, December 1993.
593

The probability of getting three successive aces in the second case is much
lower than in the first, as one might expect, because without replacement the
chances of getting an ace in each successive drawing are reduced by success in
the preceding drawing.
2.
What is the probability of getting tails every time in three tosses of a
coin?
3.
An urn contains 27 white balls and 40 black balls. What is the proba-
bility of getting four black balls in four successive drawings:
a.
If each ball drawn is replaced before making the next drawing?
b.
If the balls are not replaced?
4.
What is the probability of rolling three dice so the total number of
points that appear on their top faces is 3, three times in a row?
*5.
Four men whose houses are built around a square spend an evening
celebrating in the center of the square. At the end of the celebration
each staggers off to one of the houses, no two going to the same
house. What is the probability that each one reached his own house?
6.
A dentist has her office in a building with five entrances, all equally
accessible. Three patients arrive at her office at the same time. What is
the probability that they all entered the building by the same door?
7.
On 25 October 2003, at the Santa Anita Racetrack in Arcadia, California,
Mr. Graham Stone, from Rapid City, South Dakota, won a single bet
in which he had picked the winner of six successive races! Mr. Stone
had never visited a racetrack; racing fans across the nation were
stunned. The winning horses, and the odds of each horse winning, as
determined just before the race in which it ran, were as follows:
Probability
Winning Horse
Odds
1. Six Perfections
5–1
2. Cajun Beat
22–1
3. Islington
3–1
4. Action This Day
26–1
5. High Chaparral
5–1
6. Pleasantly Perfect
14–1
Mr. Stone’s wager cost $8; his payoff was $2,687,661.60.
The odds against such good fortune (or handicapping skill?), we
might say in casual conversation, are “a million to one.” Mr. Stone’s
payoff was at a rate far below that. Did he deserve a million-to-one
payoff? How would you justify your answer?
8.
In each of two closets there are three cartons. Five of the cartons
contain canned vegetables. The other carton contains canned fruits:
ten cans of pears, eight cans of peaches, and six cans of fruit cocktail.
594

Each can of fruit cocktail contains 300 chunks of fruit of approximately
equal size, of which three are cherries. If a child goes into one of the
closets, unpacks one of the cartons, opens a can and eats two pieces of
its contents, what is the probability that two cherries will be eaten?
9.
A player at draw poker holds the seven of spades and the eight, nine,
ten, and ace of diamonds. Aware that all the other players are draw-
ing three cards, he figures that any hand he could win with a flush he
could also win with a straight. For which should he draw? (A straight
consists of any five cards in numerical sequence; a flush consists of
any five cards all of the same suit.)
*10.
Four students decide they need an extra day to cram for a Monday
exam. They leave town for the weekend, returning Tuesday. Produc-
ing dated receipts for hotel and other expenses, they explain that
their car suffered a flat tire, and that they did not have a spare.
The professor agrees to give them a make-up exam in the form of
a single written question. The students take their seats in separate
corners of the exam room, silently crowing over their deceptive tri-
umph—until the professor writes the question on the blackboard:
“Which tire?”
Assuming that the students had not agreed in advance on the
identification of the tire in their story, what is the probability that all
four students will identify the same tire?
B. Probability of Alternative Occurrences
Sometimes we ask: What is the probability of the occurrence of at least one of
some set of events—their alternative occurrence? This we can calculate if we
know or can estimate the probability of each of the component events. The theo-
rem we use is called the addition theorem.
For example, one might ask: What is the probability of drawing, from a shuf-
fled deck of cards, either a spade or a club? Of course the probability of getting ei-
ther of these outcomes will be greater than the probability of getting one of them,
and certainly greater than the probability of getting the two of them jointly. In
many cases, like this one, the probability of their alternative occurrence is simply
the sum of the probabilities of the components. The probability of drawing a
spade is 
; the probability of drawing a club is 
; the probability of drawing ei-
ther a spade or a club is 
. When the question concerns joint occur-
rence, we multiply; when the question concerns alternative occurrence, we add.
In the example just above, the two component events are mutually
exclusive; if one of them happens, the other cannot. Drawing a spade necessari-
ly entails the fact that a club was not drawn, and vice versa. So the addition theo-
rem, when events are mutually exclusive, is straightforward and simple:
P(a or b) = P(a) + P(b)
1>4 + 1>4 = 1>2
1>4
1>4
Probability
Addition theorem
In the calculus of
probability, a theorem
used to determine the
probability of a complex
event consisting of one
or more alternative
occurrences of simple
events whose
probabilities are known.
The theorem applies
only to mutually
exclusive alternatives.
Mutually exclusive
events
Events of such a nature
that, if one occurs, the
other(s) cannot occur at
the same time. Thus, in
a coin flip, the outcomes
"heads" and "tails" are
mutually exclusive
events.
595

This may be generalized to any number of alternatives, a or b or c or . . . . If all the
alternatives are mutually exclusive, the probability of one or another of them tak-
ing place is the sum of the probabilities of all of them.
Sometimes we may need to apply both the addition theorem and the product
theorem. To illustrate, in the game of poker, a flush (five cards of the same suit) is
a very strong hand. What is the probability of such a draw? We calculate first the
probability of getting five cards in one given suit—say, spades. That is a joint oc-
currence, five component events that are certainly not independent, because
each spade dealt reduces the probability of getting the next spade. Using the
product theorem for dependent probabilities, we get
The same probability applies to a flush in hearts, or diamonds, or clubs. These
four different flushes are mutually exclusive alternatives, so the probability
of being dealt any flush is the sum of them: 
, a little less than .002. No wonder a flush is
usually a winning hand.
Alternative events are often not mutually exclusive, and when they are not, the
calculation becomes more complicated. Consider first an easy case: What is the
probability of getting at least one head in two flips of a coin? The two compo-
nents (getting a head on the first flip, or getting one on the second flip) are cer-
tainly not mutually exclusive; both could happen. If we simply add their
probabilities, we get 
, or certainty—and we know that the outcome
we are interested in is not certain! This shows that the addition theorem is not di-
rectly applicable when the component events are not mutually exclusive. But we
can use it indirectly, in either of two ways.
First, we can break down the set of favorable cases into mutually exclusive
events and then simply add those probabilities. In the coin example, there are
three favorable events: head–tail, tail–head, and head–head. The probability of
each (calculated using the product theorem) is 
. The probability of getting one
of those three mutually exclusive events (using the addition theorem) is the sum
of the three: 
, or .75.
There is another way to reach the same result. We know that no outcome can be
both favorable and unfavorable. Therefore the probability of the alternative com-
plex we are asking about will be equal to the probability that not one of the compo-
nent alternatives occurs, subtracted from 1. In the coin example, the only unfavorable
outcome is tail–tail. The probability of tail–tail is 
; hence the probability of a head
on at least one flip is 
, or .75, again. Using the notation to designate an
event that is unfavorable to a, we can formulate the theorem for alternative events,
where the component events are not mutually exclusive, in this way:
The probability of an event’s occurrence is equal to 1, minus the probability that
that event will not occur.*
P(a) = 1 - P(a)
a
1 - 1>4 = 3>4
1>4
3>4
1>4
1>2 + 1>2 = 1
33>66,640 + 33>66,640 = 33>16,660
33>66,640 + 33>66,640 +
13>52 * 12>51 * 11>50 * 10>49 * 9>48 = 33>66,640
Probability
596

Sometimes the first method is simpler, sometimes the second. The two methods
may be compared using the following illustration: Suppose we have two urns, the
first containing two white balls and four black balls, the second containing three
white balls and nine black balls. If one ball is drawn at random from each urn, what
is the probability of drawing at least one white ball? Using the first method we divide
the favorable cases into three mutually exclusive alternatives and then add the
probabilities: (1) a white ball from the first urn and a black ball from the second
; (2) a black ball from the first urn and a white ball from the sec-
ond 
; and (3) a white ball from both urns 
.
These being mutually exclusive we can simply add 
. That
sum is the probability of drawing at least one white ball. Using the second method
we determine the probability of failing, which is the probability of drawing a black
ball from both urns 
and subtract that from 1. Thus we get
. The two methods yield the same result, of course.
Application of the probability calculus sometimes leads to a result that, al-
though correct, differs from what we might anticipate after a casual considera-
tion of the facts given. Such a result is called counterintuitive. When a problem’s
solution is counterintuitive, one may be led to judge probability mistakenly, and
such “natural” mistakes encourage, at carnivals and elsewhere, the following
wager: Three dice are to be thrown; the operator of the gambling booth offers to
bet you even money (risk one dollar, and get that dollar back plus one more if
you win) that no one of the three dice will show a one. There are six faces on each
of the dice, each with a different number; you get three chances for an ace; super-
ficially, this looks like a fair game.
In fact it is not a fair game, and hefty profits are reaped by swindlers who
capitalize on that counterintuitive reality. The game would be fair only if the ap-
pearance of any given number on one of the three dice precluded its appearance
on either of the other two dice. That is plainly not true. The unwary player is mis-
led by mistakenly (and subconsciously) supposing mutual exclusivity. Of course,
the numbers are not mutually exclusive; some throws will result in the same
number appearing on two or three of the dice. The attempt to identify and count
all possible outcomes, and then to count the outcomes in which at least one ace
appears, quickly becomes frustrating. Because the appearance of any given num-
ber does not exclude the appearance of that same number on the remaining dice,
the game truly is a swindle—and this becomes evident when the chances of win-
ning are calculated by first determining the probability of losing and subtracting
that from 1. The probability of any single non-ace (a 2, or 3, or 4, or 5, or 6) show-
ing up is 
. The probability of losing is that of getting three non-aces, which
(because the dice are independent of one another) is 
, which
5>6 * 5>6 * 5>6
5>6
1 - 1>2 = 1>2
A4>6 * 9>12B
1>4 + 1>6 + 1>12 = 1>2
A2>6 * 3>12 = 1>12B
A4>6 * 3>12 = 1>6B
A2>6 * 9>12 = 1>4B
Probability
*The reasoning that underlies this formulation of the theorem for alternative occurrences is as follows: The
probability coefficient assigned to an event that is certain to occur is 1. For every event it is certain that ei-
ther it occurs or it does not; either a or must be true. Therefore, 
. Obviously, a and are mu-
tually exclusive, so the probability of one or the other is equal to the sum of their probabilities; that is,
. So 
. By moving 
to the other side of the equation and changing
its sign, we get 
.
P(a) = 1 - P(a)
P(a)
P(a) + P(a) = 1
P(a or a) = P(a) + P(a)
a
P(a or a) = 1
a
597

equals 
, or .579! The probability of the player throwing at least one ace,
therefore, is 
, which is .421. This is a gambling game to pass up.
Let us now attempt to work out a moderately complicated problem in prob-
ability. The game of craps is played with two dice. The shooter, who rolls the dice,
wins if a 7 or an 11 turns up on the first roll, but loses if a 2, or 3, or 12 turns up on
the first roll. If one of the remaining numbers, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, or 10, turns up on the
first roll, the shooter continues to roll the dice until either that number turns up
again, in which case the shooter wins, or a 7 appears, in which case the shooter
loses. Craps is widely believed to be a “fair” game—that is, a game in which the
shooter has an even chance of winning. Is this true? Let us calculate the probabil-
ity that the shooter will win at craps.
To do this, we must first obtain the probabilities that the various numbers
will occur. There are 36 different equipossible ways for two dice to fall. Only one
of these ways will show a 2, so the probability here is 
. Only one of these
ways will show a 12, so here the probability is also 
. There are two ways to
throw a 3: 1–2 and 2–1, so the probability of a 3 is 
. Similarly, the probability
of getting an 11 is 
. There are three ways to throw a 4: 1–3, 2–2, and 3–1, so the
probability of a 4 is 
. Similarly, the probability of getting a 10 is 
. There are
four ways to roll a 5 (1–4, 2–3, 3–2, and 4–1), so its probability is 
, and this is
also the probability of getting a 9. A 6 can be obtained in any one of five ways
(1–5, 2–4, 3–3, 4–2, and 5–1), so the probability of getting a 6 is 
, and the same
probability exists for an 8. There are six different combinations that yield 7
(1–6, 2–5, 3–4, 4–3, 5–2, 6–1), so the probability of rolling a 7 is 
.
The probability that the shooter will win on the first roll is the sum of the
probability that a 7 will turn up and the probability that an 11 will turn up, which
is 
, or 
. The probability of losing on the first roll is the sum of
the probabilities of getting a 2, a 3, and a 12, which is 
, or
. The shooter is twice as likely to win on the first roll as to lose on the first roll;
however, the shooter is most likely not to do either on the first roll, but to get a 4,
5, 6, 8, 9, or 10. If one of these six numbers is thrown, the shooter is obliged to
continue rolling the dice until that number is rolled again, in which case the
shooter wins, or until a 7 comes up, which is a losing case. Those cases in which
neither the number first thrown nor a 7 occurs can be ignored, for they are not
decisive. Suppose the shooter gets a 4 on the first roll. The next decisive roll will
show either a 4 or a 7. In a decisive roll, the equipossible cases are the three com-
binations that make up a 4 (1–3, 2–2, 3–1) and the six combinations that make up
a 7. The probability of throwing a second 4 in the next decisive roll is therefore 
.
The probability of getting a 4 on the first roll was 
, so the probability of win-
ning by throwing a 4 on the first roll and then getting another 4 before a 7 occurs
is 
. Similarly, the probability of the shooter winning by throwing
a 10 on the first roll and then getting another 10 before a 7 occurs is also
.
By the same line of reasoning, we can find the probability of the shooter win-
ning by throwing a 5 on the first roll and then getting another 5 before throwing
a 7. In this case, there are 10 equipossible cases for the decisive roll: the four ways
3>36 * 3>9 = 1>36
3>36 * 3>9 = 1>36
3>36
3>9
1>9
1>36 + 2>36 + 1>36 = 4>36
2>9
6>36 + 2>36 = 8>36
6>36
5>36
4>36
3>36
3>36
2>36
2>36
1>36
1>36
1 - 125>216 = 91>216
125>216
Probability
598

to make a 5 (1–4, 2–3, 3–2, 4–1) and the six ways to make a 7. The probability of
winning with a 5 is therefore 
. The probability of winning with
a 9 is also 
. The number 6 is still more likely to occur on the first roll, its prob-
ability being 
and it is more likely than the others mentioned to occur a sec-
ond time before a 7 appears, the probability here being 
So the probability of
winning with a 6 is 
And again, likewise, the probability
of winning with an 8 is 
.
There are eight different ways for the shooter to win: if a 7 or 11 is thrown on
the first roll, or if one of the six numbers 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, or 10 is thrown on the first
roll and again before a 7. These ways are all exclusive; so the total probability of
the shooter’s winning is the sum of the probabilities of the alternative ways in
which winning is possible, and this is 
. Expressed as a decimal fraction this is .493. This
shows that in a craps game the shooter has less than an even chance of winning—
only slightly less, to be sure, but still less than .5.
25>396 + 2>45 + 1>36 = 244>495
6>36 + 2>36 + 1>36 + 2>45 + 25>396 +
25>396
6>36 * 5>11 +
= 25>396.
5>11.
5>36.
2>45
4>36 * 4>10 = 2>45
Probability
The Product Theorem
To calculate the probability of the joint occurrence of two or more events:
A. If the events (say, a and b) are independent, the probability of their joint occur-
ance is the simple product of their probabilities:
B. If the events (say, a and b and c, etc.) are not independent, the probability of their
joint occurance is the probability of the first event times the probability of the sec-
ond event if the first occured, times the probability of the third event if the first
and the second occured, etc:
The Addition Theorem
To calculate the probability of the alternative occurence of two or more events:
A. If the events (say, a and b) are mutually exclusive, the probability of at least one
of them occuring is the simple addition of their probabilities:
B. If the events (say, a or b or c, etc.) are not mutually exclusive, the probability of at
least one of them occuring may be determined by either
1. Analyzing the favorable cases into mutually exclusive events and summing
the probabilities of those successful events; or 
2. Determining the probability that no one of the alternative events will occur,
and then subtracting that probability from 1.
P(a or b) = P(a) + P(b)
P(a and b and c) = P(a) * P(b if a) * P(c if both a and b)
P(a and b) = P(a) * P(b)
o v e r v i e w
599

Probability
EXERCISES
B.
*1. Calculate the shooter’s chances of winning in a craps game by the sec-
ond method; that is, compute the chances of his losing, and subtract that
result from 1.
2. In drawing three cards in succession from a standard deck, what is the
probability of getting at least one spade (a) if each card is replaced be-
fore making the next drawing? (b) if the cards drawn are not replaced?
3. What is the probability of getting heads at least once in three tosses of a
coin?
4. If three balls are selected at random from an urn containing 5 red, 10
white, and 15 blue balls, what is the probability that they will all be the
same color (a) if each ball is replaced before the next one is withdrawn?
(b) if the balls selected are not replaced?
*5. If someone offers to bet you even money that you will not throw either
an ace or a six on either of two successive throws of a die, should you
accept the wager?
6. In a group of 30 students randomly gathered in a classroom, what is the
probability that no two of those students will have the same birthday;
that is, what is the probability that there will be no duplication of the
same date of birth, ignoring the year and attending only to the month
and the day of the month? How many students would need to be in the
group in order for the probability of such a duplication to be approxi-
mately .5?
7. If the probability that a man of 25 will survive his 50th birthday is .742,
and the probability that a woman of 22 will survive her 47th birthday is
.801, and such a man and woman marry, what is the probability (a) that
at least one of them lives at least another 25 years? (b) that only one of
them lives at least another 25 years?
8. One partly filled case contains two bottles of orange juice, four bottles of
cola, and four bottles of beer; another partly filled case contains three
bottles of orange juice, seven colas, and two beers. A case is opened at
random and a bottle selected at random from it. What is the probability
that it contains a nonalcoholic drink? Had all the bottles been in one
case, what is the probability that a bottle selected at random from it
would contain a nonalcoholic drink?
9. A player in a game of draw poker  is dealt three jacks and two small
odd cards. He discards the latter and draws two cards. What is the
probability that he improves his hand on the draw? (One way to im-
prove it is to draw another jack to make four-of-a-kind; the other way to
improve it is to draw any pair to make a full house.
600

Probability
*For some discussion of this problem, see L. E. Rose, “Countering a Counter-Intuitive Probability,”
Philosophy of Science 39 (1972): 523–524; A. I. Dale, “On a Problem in Conditional Probability,” Philosophy of
Science 41 (1974): 204–206; R. Faber, “Re-Encountering a Counter-Intuitive Probability,” Philosophy of Sci-
ence 43 (1976): 283–285; and S. Goldberg, “Copi’s Conditional Probability Problem,” Philosophy of Science 43
(1976): 286–289.
Expectation value
In probability theory, the
value of a wager or an
investment; determined
by multiplying each of
the mutually exclusive
possible returns from
that wager by the
probability of the return,
and summing those
products.
CHALLENGE TO THE READER
The following problem has been a source of some controversy among probability
theorists. Is the correct solution counterintuitive?
10. Remove all cards except aces and kings from a deck, so that only eight
cards remain, of which four are aces and four are kings. From this ab-
breviated deck, deal two cards to a friend. If she looks at her cards and
announces (truthfully) that her hand contains an ace, what is the proba-
bility that both her cards are aces? If she announces instead that one of
her cards is the ace of spades, what is the probability then that both her
cards are aces? Are these two probabilities the same?*
3
Probability in Everyday Life
In placing bets or making investments, it is important to consider not only the
probability of winning or receiving a return, but also how much can be won on the
bet or returned on the investment. These two considerations, safety and
productivity, often clash; greater potential returns usually entail greater risks. The
safest investment may not be the best one to make, nor may the investment that
promises the greatest return if it succeeds. The need to reconcile safety and max-
imum return confronts us not only in gambling and investing, but also in choos-
ing among alternatives in education, employment, and other spheres of life. We
would like to know whether the investment—of money or of time and energy—
is “worth it”—that is, whether that wager on the future is wise, all things consid-
ered. The future cannot be known, but the probabilities may be estimated. When
one is attempting to compare investments, or bets, or “chancy” decisions of any
kind, the concept of expectation value is a powerful tool to use.
Expectation value can best be explained in the context of wagers whose out-
comes have known probabilities. Any bet—say, an even-money bet of $1 that
heads will appear on the toss of a coin—should be thought of as a purchase; the
money is spent when the bet has been made. The dollar wagered is the price of
the purchase; it buys some expectation. If heads appears, the bettor receives a re-
turn of two dollars (one his own, the other his winnings); if tails appears, the bet-
tor receives a $0 return. There are only two possible outcomes of this wager, a
head or a tail; the probability of each is known to be 
; and there is a specified
return ($2 or $0) associated with each outcome. We multiply the return yielded
on each possible outcome by the probability of that outcome being realized; the
sum of all such products is the expectation value of the bet or investment. The
expectation value of a one-dollar bet that heads will turn up when a fair coin is
1>2
601

tossed is thus equal to 
, which is $1. In this case, as we
know, the “odds” are even—which means that the expectation value of the pur-
chase was equal to the purchase price.
This is not always the case. We seek investments in which the expectation
value purchased will prove greater than the cost of our investment. We want the
odds to be in our favor. Yet often we are tempted by wagers for which the expec-
tation value is less, sometimes much less, than the price of the gamble.
The disparity between the price and the expectation value of a bet can be
readily seen in a raffle, in which the purchase of a ticket offers a small chance at a
large return. How much the raffle ticket is really worth depends on how small
the chance is and how large the return is. Suppose that the return, if we win it, is
an automobile worth $20,000, and the price of the raffle ticket is $1. If 20,000 raf-
fle tickets are sold, of which we buy one, the probability of our winning is 
.
The chances of winning are thus very small, but the return if we win is very
large. In this hypothetical case, the expectation value of the raffle ticket is
, or precisely $1, the purchase price of
the ticket. The usual purpose of a raffle, however, is to raise money for some
worthy cause, and that can happen only if more money is collected from
ticket sales than is paid out in prizes. Therefore many more than 20,000
tickets—perhaps 40,000 or 80,000 or 100,000—will be sold. Suppose that
40,000 tickets are sold. The expectation value of our $1 ticket then will be
, or 50 cents. If 80,000 tickets are sold,
the expectation value of the $1 ticket will be reduced to 25 cents, and so on. We
may be confident that the expectation value of any raffle ticket we are asked to
buy will be substantially less than the amount we are asked to pay for it.
Lotteries are very popular because of the very large prizes that may be won.
States and countries conduct lotteries because every ticket purchased buys an ex-
pectation value equal to only a fraction of the ticket’s price; those who run the
lottery retain the difference, reaping huge profits.
The Michigan lottery, played by more than two-thirds of the citizens of that
state, is typical. Different bets are offered. In one game, called the “Daily 3,” the
player may choose (in a “straight bet”) any three-digit number from 000 to 999.
After all bets are placed, a number is drawn at random and announced by the
state; a player who has purchased a $1 straight-bet ticket on that winning num-
ber wins a prize of $500. The probability that the correct three digits in the correct
order have been selected is 1 in 1,000; the expectation value of a $1 “Daily 3”
straight-bet ticket is therefore 
, or 50 cents.*
Lotteries and raffles are examples of great disparity between the price and the
expectation value of the gambler’s purchase. Sometimes the disparity is small, but
the number of purchasers nevertheless ensures the profitability of the sale, as in
gambling casinos, where every normal bet is one in which the purchase price is
A1>1,000 * $500B + A999>1,000 * $0B
A1>40,000 * $20,000B + A39,999>40,000 * $0B
A1>20,000 * $20,000B + A19,999>20,000 * $0B
1>20,000
A1>2 * $2B + A1>2 * $0B
Probability
*However imprudent a wager on the “Daily 3” may be, it is a very popular lottery—so popular that it is
now run twice a day, midday and evening. One may infer that either those who purchase such lottery tick-
ets have not thought through the expected value of their wagers, or that such wagering offers them satis-
factions independent of the money value of their bets.
602

greater than the expectation value bought. In the preceding section we determined,
using the product theorem and the addition theorem of the calculus of probability,
that the dice game called craps is one in which the shooter’s chance of winning is
.493—just a little less than even. But that game is widely and mistakenly believed to
offer the shooting player an even chance. Betting on the shooter in craps, at even
money, is therefore a leading attraction in gambling casinos. Every such bet of $1 is
a purchase of expectation value equal to 
, which is 98.6
cents. The difference of approximately a penny and a half may seem trivial, but be-
cause casinos receive that advantage (and other even greater advantages on other
wagers) in thousands of bets made each day on the dice tables, they are very prof-
itable enterprises. In the gambling fraternity, those who regularly bet on the shooter
to win at craps are called paradoxically “right bettors,” and among professional
gamblers it is commonly said that “all right bettors die broke.”
The concept of expectation value is of practical use in helping to decide how to
save (or invest) money most wisely. Banks pay differing rates of interest on ac-
counts of different kinds. Let us assume that the alternative bank accounts
among which we choose are all government-insured, and that therefore there is
no chance of a loss of the principal. At the end of a full year, the expectation value
of each $1,000 savings investment, at 5 percent simple interest, is 
, or $1,050 in all.
To complete the calculation, this return must be multiplied by the probability of
our getting it—but here we assume, because the account is insured, that our get-
ting it is certain, so we merely multiply by 1, or 
. If the rate of interest is 6
percent, the insured return will be $1,060, and so on. The expectation value pur-
chased in such savings accounts is indeed greater than the deposit, the purchase
price, but to get that interest income we must give up the use of our money for
some period of time. The bank pays us for its use during that time because, of
course, it plans to invest that money at yet higher rates of return.
Safety and productivity are considerations that are always in tension. If we
are prepared to sacrifice a very small degree of safety for our savings, we may
achieve a modest increase in the rate of return. For example, with that $1,000 we
may purchase a corporate bond, perhaps paying 8 or even 10 percent interest, in
effect lending our money to the company issuing the bond. The yield on our cor-
porate bond may be double that of a bank savings account, but we will be run-
ning the risk—small but real—that the corporation issuing the bond will be
unable to make payment when the loan we made to them falls due. In calculat-
ing the expectation value of such a bond, say at 10 percent, the amount to be re-
turned to the investor of $1,000 is determined in precisely the same way in which
we calculated the yield on a savings account. First we calculate the return, if we
get it: 
, or $1,100 total re-
turn. But in this case the probability of our getting that return is not 
; it may
be very high, but it is not 1. The fraction by which that $1,100 return therefore
must be multiplied is the probability, as best we can estimate it, that the corpora-
tion will be financially sound when its bond is due for payment. If we think this
probability is very high—say, .99—we may conclude that the purchase of the cor-
porate bond at 10 percent offers an expectation value ($1,089) greater than that of
100>100
($1,000 [the principal]) + (10% * $1,000 [the interest])
100>100
[the principal that we know will be returned]) + (.05 * $1,000)
($1,000 
(.493 * $2) + (.507 * $0)
Probability
603

the insured bank account at 5 percent ($1,050), and is therefore a wiser invest-
ment. Here is the comparison in detail:
Insured bank account at 5 percent simple interest for 1 year:
Expectation value of investment in this bank account:
Corporate bond at 10 percent interest, at the end of 1 year:
Expectation value of investment in this corporate bond:
However, if we conclude that the company to which we would be lending the
money is not absolutely reliable, our estimated probability of ultimate return will
drop, say, to .95, and the expectation value will also drop:
Corporate bond at 10 percent interest, at the end of 1 year:
Expectation value of investment in this corporate bond:
If this last estimate reflects our evaluation of the company selling the bond, then
we will judge the bank account, paying a lower rate of interest with much greater
safety, the wiser investment.
Interest rates on bonds or on bank accounts fluctuate, of course, depending
on the current rate of inflation and other factors, but the interest paid on a com-
mercial bond is always higher than that paid on an insured bank account because
the risk of the bond is greater; that is, the probability of its anticipated return is
lower. The greater the known risk, the higher the interest rate must go to attract
investors. Expectation value, in financial markets as everywhere, must take into
consideration both probability (risk) and outcome (return).
When the soundness of a company enters our calculation of the expectation
value of an investment in it, we must make some probability assumptions.
Explicitly or implicitly, we estimate the fractions that we then think best repre-
sent the likelihoods of the possible outcomes foreseen. These are the fractions by
which the returns that we anticipate in the event of these outcomes must be mul-
tiplied, before we sum the products. All such predictions are necessarily specula-
tive, and all the outcomes calculated are therefore uncertain, of course.
When we can determine the approximate value of a given return if we
achieve it, calculations of the kind here described enable us to determine what
probability those outcomes need to have (given present evidence) so that our in-
vestment now will prove worthwhile. Many decisions in financial matters, and
many choices in ordinary life, depend (if they are to be rational) on such esti-
mates of probability and the resultant expected value. The calculus of probabili-
ty may have application whenever we must gamble on the future.
($1,100 * .95 = $1,045) + ($0 * .05 = $0) or $1,045 total
Probability of return (new estimate) = .95
Return if we get it = (principal + interest) = ($1,000 + $100) = $1,100
($1,100 * .99 = $1,089) + ($0 * .01 = $0) or $1,089 total
Probability of return (estimated) = .99
Return if we get it = (principal + interest) = ($1,000 + $100) = $1,100
($1050 * 1 = $1,050) + ($0 * 0 = $0) or $1,050 total
Probability of return (assumed) = 1.0
Return = (principal + interest) = ($1,000 + $50) = $1,050
Probability
604

There is no gambling system that can evade the rigor of the probability calcu-
lus. It is sometimes argued, for example, that in a game in which there are even-
money stakes to be awarded on the basis of approximately equiprobable
alternatives (such as tossing a coin, or betting black versus red on a roulette
wheel), one can be sure to win by making the same bet consistently—always
heads, or always the same color—and doubling the amount of money wagered
after each loss. Thus, if I bet $1 on heads, and tails shows, then I should bet $2 on
heads the next time, and if tails shows again, my third bet, also on heads, should
be $4, and so on. One cannot fail to win by following this procedure, some sup-
pose, because extended runs (of tails, or of the color I don’t bet on) are highly im-
probable.* Anyway, it is said, the longest run must sometime end, and when it
does, the person who has regularly doubled the bet will always be money ahead.
Wonderful! Why need anyone work for a living, when we can all adopt this
apparently foolproof system of winning at the gaming table? Let us ignore the
fact that most gaming houses put an upper limit on the size of the wager they
will accept, a limit that may block the application of the doubling system. What
is the real fallacy contained in this doubling prescription? A long run of tails, say,
is almost certain to end sooner or later, but it may end later rather than sooner. So
an adverse run may last long enough to exhaust any finite amount of money the
bettor has to wager. To be certain of being able to continue doubling the bet each
time, no matter how long the adverse run may continue or how large the losses
are that the run has imposed, the bettor would have to begin with an infinite
amount of money. Of course, a player with an infinite amount of money could
not possibly win—in the sense of increasing his wealth.
Finally, there is a dangerous fallacy, in wagering or in investing, that an un-
derstanding of the calculus of probability may help us to avoid. The inevitable
failure of the doubling technique underscores the truth that the probability of
getting a head (or a tail) on the next toss of a fair coin cannot be affected by the
outcomes of preceding tosses; each toss is an independent event. Therefore it is a
foolish mistake to conclude, in flipping a coin, that because heads have appeared
ten times in a row, tails is “due”—or to suppose that because certain digits have
appeared frequently among winning lottery numbers that those digits are “hot.”
One who bets, or invests, on the supposition that some future event is made
more probable, or less probable, by the frequency of the occurrence of independ-
ent events that have preceded it commits a blunder so common that it has been
given a mocking name: “the gambler’s fallacy.”
On the other hand, if some mechanical device produces certain outcomes more
frequently than others in a long-repeated pattern, one might conclude that the de-
vice is not designed (or is not functioning) as one supposed to yield outcomes that
are equipossible. The dice may be loaded, or a roulette wheel (if the ball very fre-
quently stops at the same section of the wheel) may not be balanced properly. The
Probability
*In fact, a long random sequence of heads and tails (or reds and blacks on a roulette wheel, etc.) will in-
clude extended runs of one result (tails, or reds, etc.) with much greater frequency than is commonly sup-
posed. A run of a dozen heads in a row—requiring a bet of $2,048 on the 12th bet if one wagers steadily on
tails in a doubling series that began with $1—is very far from rare. And after a run of twelve, of course, the
chance of a thirteenth tail is 
!
1>2
605

a priori theory of probability (“successes over outcomes”) is rationally applied
when we are confident that the set represented by the denominator of the frac-
tion—the set of all outcomes—is a set of genuinely equipossible events. However,
accumulated evidence may eventually cause one to conclude that the members of
that set are not equipossible. At that point we may be well advised to revert to the
frequency theory of probability, reasoning that the likelihood of certain outcomes
is the fraction that represents the limit of the frequency with which that smaller set
of outcomes has appeared. Whether we ought to apply the a priori theory or the rel-
ative frequency theory must depend on the evidence we have gathered and on our
understanding of the calculus of probability as applied to that context.
EXERCISES
*1. In the Virginia lottery in 1992, six numbers were drawn at random from
44 numbers; the winner needed to select all six, in any order. Each ticket
(with one such combination) cost $1. The total number of possible six-
number combinations was 7,059,052. One week in February of that year,
the jackpot in the Virginia lottery had risen to $27 million. (a) What was
the expectation value of each ticket in the Virginia lottery that week?
These unusual circumstances led an Australian gambling syndicate
to try to buy all of the tickets in the Virginia lottery that week. They fell
short, but they were able to acquire some 5 million of the available
six-number combinations. (b) What was the expectation value of their
$5-million purchase? (Yes, the Aussies won!)
2. At most craps tables in gambling houses, the house will give odds of
6 to 1 against rolling a 4 the “hard way,” that is, with a pair of 2’s as con-
trasted with a 3 and a 1, which is the “easy way.” A bet made on a “hard
way” 4 wins if a pair of 2’s show before either a 7 is rolled or a 4 is made
the “easy way”; otherwise it loses. What is the expectation purchased by
a $1 bet on a “hard-way” 4?
3. If the odds in craps are 8-to-1 against rolling an 8 the “hard way” 
(that is, with two 4’s), what is the expectation purchased by a $1 bet on
a “hard-way” 8?
4. What expectation does a person with $15 have who bets on heads, be-
ginning with a $1 bet, and uses the doubling technique, if the bettor re-
solves to play just four times and quit?
*5. Anthrax is a disease that is nearly always deadly to cows and other ani-
mals. The nineteenth-century French veterinarian Louvrier devised a
treatment for anthrax that was later shown to be totally without merit.
His alleged “cure” was tried on two cows, selected at random from four
cows that had received a powerful dose of anthrax microbes. Of the two
he treated, one died and one recovered; of the two he left untreated, one
died and one recovered. The reasons for recovery were unknown. Had
Louvrier tested his “cure” on the two cows that happened to live, his
treatment would have received impressive but spurious confirmation.
Probability
606

What was the probability of Louvrier choosing, for his test, just those
two cows that chanced to live?
6. On the basis of past performance, the probability that the favorite will
win the Bellevue Handicap is .46, while there is a probability of only .1
that a certain dark horse will win. If the favorite pays even money, and
the odds offered are 8-to-1 against the dark horse, which is the better bet?
7. If $100 invested in the preferred stock of a certain company will yield a
return of $110 with a probability of .85, whereas the probability is only .67
that the same amount invested in common stock will yield a return of
$140, which is the better investment?
8. The probability of being killed by a stroke of lightning, calculated using
the frequency theory of probability, is approximately 1 in 3 million. That
is about 58 times greater than was the probability of winning the jackpot
($390 million) in the Mega Millions lottery in the United States in March
of 2007. In that lottery the chances of buying a successful ticket were 1 in
175,711,536. One of two winning tickets was in fact purchased by a Cana-
dian truck driver. If he had known the size of the jackpot, and that it
would be divided by two winners, what would the expectation value of
the $1 ticket he bought have been, at the time he bought it?
9. The following notice is a real one, distributed to all the parents in the
school attended by the son of one of the authors of this chapter:
Probability
Emerson School Raffle—Up, Up and Away!
We are all winners!
4 lucky people will walk away with lots of cash!
1st Prize
$1,000
2nd Prize
$400
3rd Prize
$250
4th Prize
$100
Chances of winning are good—Only 4,000 tickets were printed!
Everyone will benefit from the great new sports equipment we
will be able to buy with the money raised!
In this raffle, supposing all the tickets were sold, what was the ex-
pectation value of each ticket costing $1?
*10. The probability of the shooter winning in craps is .493, slightly less than
even, as we proved in the preceding section. In casinos, a bet that the
shooter will win is a bet on what is called the “Pass” line. We could all
become rich, it would seem, if only we bet consistently against the
shooter, on the “Don’t Pass” line. But of course there is no such line; one
cannot simply bet against the shooter, because the house will not take so
unprofitable a bet. Yet usually one can place a bet called “Don’t
Pass–Bar 3,” which wins if the shooter loses, unless the shooter loses by
rolling a 3, in which case this bet loses also. What is the expectation
value of a $100 bet on the “Don’t Pass–Bar 3” line?
607

Probability
chapter 
Summary
In all inductive arguments the conclusion is supported by the premises with only
some degree of probability, and it is usually described simply as “more” or “less”
probable in the case of scientific hypotheses. We explained in this chapter how a
quantitative measure of probability, stated as a fraction between 0 and 1, can be
assigned to many inductive conclusions.
Two alternative conceptions of probability, both permitting this quantitative
assignment, were presented in Section 1.

The relative frequency theory, according to which probability is defined as
the relative frequency with which members of a class exhibit a specified
attribute.

The a priori theory, according to which the probability of an event occurring
is determined by dividing the number of ways in which the event can occur
by the number of equipossible outcomes.
Both theories accommodate the development of a calculus of probability, introduced
in Section 2, with which the probability of a complex event can be computed if the
probability of its component events can be determined. Two basic theorems, the
product theorem and the addition theorem, are used in this probability calculus.
If the complex event of interest is a joint occurrence, the probability of two or
more components both occurring, the product theorem is applied. The product
theorem asserts that if the component events are independent, the probability of
their joint occurrence is equal to the product of their separate probabilities. How-
ever, if the component events are not independent, the general product theorem
applies, in which the probability of (a and b) is equal to the probability of (a) mul-
tiplied by the probability of (b if a).
If the complex event of interest is an alternative occurrence (the probability
of at least one of two or more events), the addition theorem is applied. The addi-
tion theorem asserts that if the component events are mutually exclusive, their
probabilities are summed to determine their alternative occurrence. But if the
component events are not mutually exclusive, the probability of their alternative
occurrence may be computed either:

by analyzing the favorable cases into mutually exclusive events and sum-
ming the probabilities of those successes; or

by determining the probability that the alternative occurrence will not occur
and subtracting that fraction from 1.
In Section 3 we explained how the calculus of probability can be put to use in
everyday life, allowing us to calculate the relative merits of alternative invest-
ments or wagers. We must consider both the probability of each of the various
possible outcomes of an investment and the return received in the event of each.
For each outcome, the anticipated return is multiplied by the fraction that repre-
sents the probability of that outcome occurring; those products are then summed
to calculate the expectation value of that investment.
608

Probability
LOGIC IN THE REAL WORLD
¡LUCHA LIBRE!
Lucha libre (“free wrestling”) is a form of profes-
sional wrestling popular in Mexico and many
other countries. The fighters, or luchadores,
wear colorful masks and adopt intriguing stage
names, such as Mil Máscaras, “Man of a Thou-
sand Masks.”
In an unprecedented move, two rival
luchadores, El Profesor Belicoso (B) and El Filósofo
Enojado, (G) have decided to settle their disputes
with inductive arguments rather than body
presses, headbutts, and aerial power moves. 
Round 1: Argumentative Versus
Nonargumentative Use of Analogy
Your mother is like an iceberg for five reasons:
She is large, she is cold, she sank the Titanic in
1912, she helps polar bears travel from place to
place, and global warming is melting her!
That is a nonargumentative use of analogy!
¡Estúpido! Then you try!
¡Sí, señor! Four months ago, the entire Hoyle
family of Chiapas was preemptively imprisoned
because they had been making suspicious maps
and stockpiling supplies from the local match
factory. Two weeks later, police searched the
Hoyle family’s iPads and found plans for a huge
explosion! Since everyone who is related to you
has been making suspicious maps and stockpil-
ing supplies from the local match factory, your
whole family should be jailed!
That is a mere personal attack, not an argu-
mentative use of analogy! ¡El Profesor está belicoso!
You Be the Referee: Use your knowledge
of argumentative versus nonargumentative
analogies to decide who is correct and wins
the point!
Round 2: Refutation by Logical
Analogy
My divorce is a travesty! The judge has ordered
me to give half of my assets to my ex-wife, say-
ing that, by being my spotter in the gym, video-
taping and analyzing the playbacks on all my
fights, and making me high-protein meals for
the last fifteen years, she gets half the credit for
my success. However, my ex-wife and I also
contributed 50/50 to our son Anolfo and the
judge does not propose that we split him down
the middle!
Your refutation by logical analogy does not
share the same form as the argument you are
trying to refute!
Oh yes it does, señor!
And besides, there are very important dif-
ferences between your assets and your son
Anolfo. Assets can be split down the middle,
whereas a child cannot. And Anolfo has his
own interests that must be taken into account,
whereas your assets do not.
I defy you!
You Be the Referee: El Profesor has made
two charges against El Filósofo—that his refu-
tation does not share the same form as the ar-
gument he is trying to refute, and that the
analogy is weak because of differences be-
tween the two things being compared. Use
your knowledge of refutation by logical anal-
ogy to decide who wins the point!
Round 3: Match the Induction with the
Method Being Used
If a man lights a match, calls his mother on
the phone, and adopts a shelter dog, and then
receives a care package in the mail, and then
scratches his elbow, calls his mother on the
phone, and buys illegal fireworks, and then
receives a care package in the mail, and we
conclude that the man’s calling his mother on
the phone is the cause of receiving the care
package, which of John Stuart Mill’s five tech-
niques of inductive inference have we just
used?!
Er... that is the method of difference! Okay,
my turn!
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
609

Probability
If a luchador eats more tomatoes, begins exer-
cising his pinky toe flexors, and adopts Vedic
meditation practices, and then discovers that his
fighting and his digestive health have improved,
and then he increases his Vedic meditation and
his digestive health improves to such a glorious
extent that his lower body feels like that of a new,
solid-gold-plated man, and we infer that the
meditation has caused the enhanced digestive
health, which of John Stuart Mill’s five tech-
niques of inductive inference have we just used?!
The method of concomitant variation!
Oh, really? Then what kind of variation is
it, direct or inverse?
Um, direct!
Okay, my turn! If we know that Spandex
gives you a rash and then you put on a Span-
dex bodysuit and I bodyslam you, and you
both get a rash and get a big bruise on your stu-
pid chest, and I conclude, since I know the
bodysuit caused the rash, that my bodyslam-
ming caused the bruise, which of John Stuart
Mill’s five techniques of inductive inference
have I just used?
That would never happen! But it is the
method of residues!
You Be the Referee: Each luchador has
answered two questions. Tally up the right
versus wrong answers to decide who wins 
the point!
Round 4: Scientific Method Quiz
True or False: The first step in scientific
investigation is formulating the explanatory
hypothesis.
True!
False! The first step is identifying the prob-
lem!
True or False: Compatibility with previ-
ously well-established hypotheses is a
justifiable way of evaluating scientific
explanations.
True!
Ridiculous. The point of hypotheses is to
help us find out new things.
True or False: When two rival hypotheses
fit equally well with established theory and
have roughly equal predictive power, we are
likely to favor the more intricate of the two.
True! And fancy!
False! We want the simpler of the two. The
simplest theory that fits the facts is likely to in-
volve the smallest number of unjustified as-
sumptions.
You Be the Referee: Use your knowledge
of the scientific method to decide who is cor-
rect and wins the point!
Round 5: The Probability Calculus
If there is a 1/10 chance that you will ever win
a match against a luchador over five feet tall,
what is the probability that you will win five
matches against five different luchadores all over
five feet tall?
Lies! But if I only had a 1/10 chance of win-
ning, which is totally false, then the answer is
5/10, or 1/2!
Here is one for you: If there is a 1/5 chance
you can eat a taco without getting salsa all over
your costume, what is the probability that you
can eat three tacos without getting salsa all over
your costume?
I will avenge my honor! But the answer is
1/125.
A question: If you have a bag of eggs and 8
of them are rotten and 2 of them are good be-
cause all your chickens are sickly, and you
reach into the bag to pull out one egg, and then
another egg, what are your miserable chances
of getting two good eggs?
How dare you malign my chickens! But the
answer is 1/25.
One more question: If the probability of
your passing an eye test is 0.65, and the proba-
bility of your showing up to a match on time
is 50%, and the probability of your rash
clearing up is 3/8, and if all those things are
necessary— but not sufficient—conditions for
you to win a match, and even after all of that,
you still only have a one-in-four chance of vic-
tory, what is the probability of your winning a
match? You may use a calculator, fool!
I do not know! I will crush you!
I have crushed you already—with my mind!
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
610

Probability
LOGIC IN THE REAL WORLD
You Be the Referee: Each luchador has an-
swered (or failed to answer) two questions.
Calculate the answer to each question for
yourself, and award the point to the competi-
tor who performed better overall.
Who wins the five-round battle?
Solutions
Because this section of your textbook dealt with
inductive, rather than deductive, arguments,
some difference of opinion is reasonable here.
Round One
El Profesor gives five reasons why El Filósofo’s
mother is like an iceberg. While he puts great ef-
fort into constructing an analogy, he neglects to
use the analogy to make an argument; that is,
there is no conclusion other than the analogy it-
self. A fully developed analogical argument
would then say something else about an iceberg
that could then be applied to El Filósofo’s mother.
El Profesor attempts to write off El Filósofo’s
argument as a mere personal attack, but the ar-
gument is actually a well-developed analogical
argument: It lays out the ways in which El Pro-
fesor’s family is like the Hoyle family, and then
it makes an argument that the way the Hoyle
family was treated is how El Profesor’s family
should be treated. Regardless of the truth of the
premises, El Filósofo has in fact made an argu-
mentative use of analogy.
Point to El Filósofo!
Round Two
El Profesor alleges that El Filósofo’s refutation by
logical analogy does not share the same form as
the argument he is trying to refute. This is not
true. The argument he is trying to refute is as
follows: Because El Filósofo and his ex-wife each
contributed to his career, the proceeds should
be split. El Filósofo makes an argument that
shares the same form: He and his ex-wife each
contributed to Anolfo, but the conclusion that
Anolfo should be split is absurd.
However, El Profesor’s second claim certain-
ly has merit. Anolfo is different from El
Filósofo’s assets in many important ways.
El Filósofo has made a flawed argument. El
Profesor has made two criticisms of it, only one
of which was correct.
A referee might reasonably award the point to El
Profesor or might declare a draw.
Round Three
If a man does A, B, and C, and then receives
a care package in the mail; and then does X,
B, and Y, and again receives a care package in
the mail; and we conclude that B was the
cause of receiving the care package, we
have not used the method of difference, but
rather the method of agreement. El Profesor
is ahead.
If a luchador does A, B, and C, and then dis-
covers that his fighting and his digestive health
have improved, and then he increases C and
his digestive health improves even more, and
we infer that C has caused the enhanced diges-
tive health, we have indeed used the method of
concomitant variation. El Profesor is also correct
that this is an instance of direct variation—
when one thing increases, so does the other
thing.
If A and C result in X and Y, and we know
that A causes X, so we “subtract out” A and X
to conclude that C caused Y, we have indeed
used the method of residues. Score one for El
Filósofo.
El Profesor has wiped the floor with El Filósofo
in this round.
Round Four
1. El Filósofo is correct—the first step is identi-
fying the problem.
2. El Profesor is correct—while it is true that
the point of the scientific method is to be
open to new information and ideas, it is
also true that science aims at compiling a
system of hypotheses that work together.
3. El Filósofo is correct—the simpler theory is
preferred. The principle of Ockham's
Razor may also be invoked (Google it!)
Point to El Filósofo!
611

Probability
Round Five
El Filósofo asks about the chance of winning five
matches if the chance of winning each one is
1/10. El Profesor answers 5/10, or 1/2. Howev-
er, this answer is not sensible—how could the
probability of winning all five matches be
greater than the probability of winning one of
them? El Profesor has made the common mis-
take of adding instead of multiplying. The cor-
rect answer is 1/100,000.
El Profesor asks, “If there is a 1/5 chance
you can eat a taco without getting salsa all over
your costume, what is the probability that you
can eat three tacos without getting salsa all over
your costume?” El Filósofo has correctly multi-
plied the probabilities of three independent
events: 1/5 × 1/5 × 1/5 = 1/125. El Filósofo is
most definitely ahead.
El Filósofo gives a scenario with 8 rotten and
2 good eggs, and asks for the probability of se-
lecting the two good eggs. El Profesor seems to
have correctly determined that the probability
of selecting a good egg on the first pick is 2/10,
or 1/5, but then he incorrectly assumes that the
probability is the same on the second pick. He
then erroneously multiplies 1/5 × 1/5 to get
1/25. However, after the first good egg has
been selected, the chance of picking another
good egg is no longer 2 out of 10 because there
are only 9 eggs left and only 1 of them is good.
The chance of getting a good egg the second
time around is 1/9. The correct answer is 1/5 ×
1/9 = 1/45. El Filósofo is still ahead.
Finally, El Profesor gives a complicated and
insulting scenario with a variety of probabili-
ties. In order to win, El Filósofo would have to
pass an eye test (
), show up on time
(0.5), have his rash clear up (3/8 or 0.375), and
then actually beat his opponent (0.25). While
this sounds complicated, all that is necessary is
simply to plug 0.65 × 0.5 × 0.375 × 0.25 into a
calculator. The answer is 0.03046875, or about
3%. El Filósofo neglected to attempt this ques-
tion, so score one for El Profesor.
However, El Filósofo is the only one to have an-
swered a question correctly in round 5, so he gets
the point.
El Filósofo is the clear winner in three of five
rounds and wins overall! He will be receiving an ex-
tremely heavy belt as a prize. El Profesor has already
challenged him to a rematch on the topic of seven-
teenth-century French poetry.
P = 0.65
To calculate the probability of the joint occurrence of two or more events:
(A) If the events (say, a and b) are independent, the probability of their joint occurrence is the sim-
ple product of their probabilities: P(a and b) = P(a) x P(b).
(B) If the events (say, a and b and c) are not independent, the probability of their joint occurrence is
the probability of the first event, times the probability of the second event if the first
occurred, times the probability of the third event if the first and second occurred, and so on:
P(a and b and c) = P(a) x P(b if a) x P(c if both a and b).
To calculate the probability of the alternative occurrence of two or more events:
(A) If the events (say, a or b) are mutually exclusive, the probability of at least one of them occur-
ring is the simple sum of their probabilities: P(a or b) = P(a) + P(b).
(B) If the events (say, a or b or c) are not mutually exclusive, the probability of at least one of them
occurring may be determined by either:
(1) analyzing the favorable cases into mutually exclusive events and summing the probabili-
ties of those successful events; or
(2) determining the probability that no one of the alternative events will occur and subtract-
ing that probability from 1.
Logic Overview—Probability Calculations
612

SECTION 2
Exercises
A.
5.
1⁄4 × 1⁄3 × 1⁄2 × 1⁄1 = 124
The component events here are not independent, but in this case
each success (in reaching the right house) increases rather than
decreases the probability of the next success, because the number of
available houses is fixed. After three men reach the correct house,
the fourth (having to go to a different house) must succeed!
10. The probability that all four students will identify the same tire may
be calculated in two different ways—just as the solution to Exercise
6 in this same set may be reached in two different ways.
Suppose that the first student, A, names the front left tire. The proba-
bility of his doing so, after having done so, is 1. Now the probability of
the second student, B, naming that tire is 1⁄4, there being four tires all
(from B’s point of view) equipossibly the one that A had named. The
same is true of student C, and of student D. Therefore, regardless of
which tire A does happen to name (front left, or any other), the proba-
bility that all four students will name the same tire is 1 × 1⁄4 × 1⁄4 × 1⁄4 = 1⁄64
or .016.
The same result could be achieved by first specifying a particular
tire (say, the front left tire) and asking: What is the probability of all four
students naming that specified tire? This would be 1⁄4 × 1⁄4 × 1⁄4 × 1⁄4 = .004.
But the condition specified in the problem, that all four name the same
tire, would be satisfied if all named the front left, or if all named the
front right, or if all named the rear left, or if all named the rear right tire.
So, if we were to approach the problem in this way, we also would need
to inquire as to the probability of either the one or the other of these four
outcomes—a calculation requiring the addition theorem, explained in
Section 2B, for alternative outcomes. Because the four successful out-
comes are mutually exclusive, we can simply sum the four probabilities:
.004 + .004 + .004 + .004 = .016. The two ways of approaching the prob-
lem must yield exactly the same result, of course.
This dual analysis applies likewise to the three patients arriving at a
building with five entrances, in Exercise 6. One may calculate 1 × 1⁄5 × 1⁄5 =
1⁄25; or (using the addition theorem discussed in Section 2B,) one may calcu-
late 1⁄5 × 1⁄5 × 1⁄5 = 1⁄125 and then add 1⁄125 + 1⁄125 + 1⁄125 + 1⁄125 + 1⁄125 = 1⁄25.
B.
1. Probability of losing with a 2, a 3, or a 12 is 4⁄36 or 1⁄9
Probability of throwing a 4, and then a 7 before another 4, is 3⁄36 × 6⁄9 =
1⁄18
Probability of throwing a 10, and then a 7 before another 10, is like-
wise 1⁄18
Probability of throwing a 5, and then a 7 before another 5, is 4⁄36 × 6⁄10 =
1⁄15
Probability of throwing a 9, and then a 7 before another 9, is likewise
1⁄15
Probability of throwing a 6, and then a 7 before another 6, is 5⁄36 × 6⁄11 =
5⁄66
Probability of throwing an 8, and then a 7 before another 8, is like-
wise 5⁄66
Sum of the probabilities of the exclusive ways of the shooter’s losing
is 251⁄495
So the shooter’s chance of winning is 1  251⁄495 = 244⁄495 or .493.
5. Yes. You lose the bet only if you throw a 2, or a 3, or a 4, or a 5, on
both rolls of the die. On each throw, the chance of getting one of
those four numbers is 4⁄6 or 2⁄3. The chance of losing the bet is therefore
2⁄3 × 2⁄3, or 4⁄9. Your chance of winning the bet, therefore, is 1  4⁄9 = 5⁄9 =
.556.
Probability
SOLUTIONS TO SELECTED EXERCISES
613

10. Challenge to the Reader
This problem, which has been the focus of some controversy, may be
analyzed in two different ways.
First analysis:
a. There are 28 possible pairs in the abbreviated deck consisting of
four kings and four aces. Of these 28 possible pairs, only seven
(equipossible) pairs contain the ace of spades. Of these seven
pairs, three contain two aces. If we know that the pair drawn con-
tains the ace of spades, the probability that this pair contains two
aces is 3⁄7.
b. However, if we know only that one of the cards in the pair is an
ace, we know only that the pair drawn is one of the 22 (equipossi-
ble) pairs that contain at least one ace. Of these 22 pairs, six con-
tain two aces. Therefore, if we know only that the pair contains
an ace, the probability that the pair drawn contains two aces is 6⁄22
or 3⁄11.
In this first analysis, the probabilities in the two cases are different.
Second analysis:
a. If one of the cards of the pair drawn is known to be the ace of spades,
there are seven other possible cards with which the pair may be com-
pleted. Of these seven, three are aces. Therefore, if we know that one
of the cards drawn is the ace of spades, the probability that this pair
contains two aces is 3⁄7.
b. If we know only that one of the cards drawn is an ace, we know that it
is either the ace of spades, or the ace of hearts, or the ace of diamonds,
or the ace of clubs. If it is the ace of spades, the analysis immediately
preceding applies, and the probability that this pair contains two aces
is again 3⁄7.
If the ace is the ace of hearts, the same analysis applies; as it does
if the card drawn is the ace of diamonds, or the ace of clubs.
Therefore, even if we know only that an ace is one of the cards
drawn, the probability that the pair contains two aces remains 3⁄7.
In this second analysis, the probabilities in the two cases are the
same. Which of these two analyses do you believe to be correct?
Why?
SECTION 3
Exercises
1. a. $3.82
b. $19,100,000.00
But note: This was a very unusual set of circumstances!
5. This problem requires only a straightforward use of the product the-
orem. The probability of selecting, at random, just those two cows
out of four is the probability of selecting one of that pair on the first
choosing (1⁄2), times the probability of selecting the other one of that
pair on the second choosing, where the first already had been select-
ed (1⁄3). So the calculation is 1⁄2 × 1⁄3 = 1⁄6.
10. The calculation of the bettor’s chances of winning on the “Don’t Pass-
Bar 3” line is the probability of the player’s losing when the game is
played according to the normal rules, with the provision that he does
not lose if he gets a 3 on the first roll. The probability of a 3 on the first
roll is 2⁄36 or .056. The probability of the player losing on the normal
rules is .507, as was shown in Section 2B. Therefore the probability of
the player losing, barring the loss on a first-roll 3, is .507  .056 =
.451. Because this is the probability of the player’s losing if he cannot
lose by getting a 3 on the first roll, it is the probability of the bettor
winning on the “Don’t Pass-Bar 3” line. So the expected value of a
$100 bet on the “Don’t Pass-Bar 3” line is .451  $200 = $90.20.
Note that this bet, which the house will gladly accept, is substan-
tially less favorable to the bettor than simply betting on the pass
line—that is, simply betting on the player to win. The expected
value of such a $100 wager (i.e., on the player to win according to
normal rules) is .493 × $200 = $98.60.
Probability
614

P
hilosophy begins with wonder.
What is the world made of? Where
does it come from? Why are we here?
The speculations of primitive peoples
were often imaginative, but were un-
founded, irrational. Philosophy as we
think of it today did not arise until the
Greek philosophers of the sixth century
BCE sought some overriding theories
about the world. Is there one stuff of
which the world is made? One principle
that is fundamental throughout?
We think of Socrates and Plato as the
great figures in the birth of Western phi-
losophy, and we study them still today.
Their greatness lies in part in their efforts
to bring things into intellectual order—to
provide, or at least to seek, some coherent
system that can explain why things are
the way they are. But even before Socrates
there had been deep thinkers—Thales,
Parmenides, Heraclitus, Democritus and
others who had proposed assorted ac-
counts of the fundamental stuff of the
world, or of the fundamental principle by
which all is governed.
They were theorizing, not merely
guessing—but there was no real science
in these early speculations. Dogmatic
suppositions, supernatural forces, the
gods, ancient myths and legends had al-
ways to be called upon. As philosophy
gradually matured there grew the drive
to know, to discover principles that could
be relied upon in giving explanations.
Thus logic begins. Judgments are
sought that can be tested and confirmed.
The methods with which we discover and
confirm whatever we really know need to
be identified and refined. We must reason
about things, and we hunger to under-
stand the principles of right reasoning.
That first climb from chaotic thought
into some well-ordered system of reason-
ing was an enterprise of extraordinary
difficulty. Its first master, Aristotle (see
p. 3), having developed a system within
which the principles of reasoning could
be precisely formulated, was rightly held
in awe by rational thinkers from his day
to ours. He was the first great logician.
Aristotle approached reasoning as an
activity in which we first identify classes of
things. We then recognize the relations
among these classes. Then we can manip-
ulate the propositions in which these rela-
tions are specified. The fundamental
elements of reasoning are, he thought, the
groups themselves, the categories into
which we can put things. He therefore dis-
tinguished types of categorical propositions
(e.g., “All Xs are Ys”—a universal affirma-
tive proposition; “Some Ys are not Xs”—a
particular negative proposition; and so on)
and with those understood we can reason
immediately to conclusions about the rela-
tions among these propositions (e.g., “If
some Xs are Ys, then it cannot be true that
no Ys are Xs”). More importantly, by com-
bining categorical propositions involving
three terms (say, Xs, Ys, and Zs) in various
ways, we can reason accurately by con-
structing categorical syllogisms (e.g., “If all
Xs are Ys, and some Xs are Zs, it must be
that some Zs are Ys”). Using such tech-
niques, a great system of deductive logic
can be built, as will be shown in Chapters
5, 6 and 7 of this book.
A century after Aristotle the work of
the Stoic philosopher, Chrysippus (see
p. 7), carried logical analysis to a higher
level. The fundamental elements of rea-
soning were taken to be not the
Aristotelian categories, but propositions,
the units with which we can affirm or
deny some states of affairs (e.g., “X is in
Athens,” or “X is in Sparta”). We can
then discover the logical relations among
propositions: “If X is in Athens then X is
not in Sparta.” We can then identify ele-
mentary arguments that depend upon
these various relations: “If X is in Athens
then X is not in Sparta. X is in Athens.
Therefore X is not in Sparta.” The form
of this simple argument, called modus po-
nens, is common and useful; many other
such elementary forms may be identified
and applied in rational discourse, as we
will see in later  portions of this book.
With these advances it soon becomes
clear that the validity of a deductive
argument, the solidity with which a con-
clusion may be inferred if the premises
are true, depends upon the form of the
argument, its shape rather than its
content—or as logicians say, its syntactic
features rather than its semantic content.
Modus ponens, and every such argument
form, can have an unlimited number of
realizations, or instances. The conse-
quences of this formal nature of validity
remained to be investigated. With the
decline of the Roman Empire, the work
of the Greek logicians had been pre-
served by Muslim scholars, most notably
Al-Farabi (c. 872–c. 950), who wrote, in
Baghdad, a commentary on the works of
Aristotle, and came to be called “the
Second Teacher,” second only to Aristotle
in breadth and depth of learning. He was
followed by the great Muslim polymath,
Ibn Sina, known by his Latinized name,
Avicenna. Their scholarship eventually
penetrated and refreshed Western
thought. Syntactic forms came again to
be of central interest in logic in the
twelfth century, in France, with the work
of the monk, Peter Abelard (1079–1142).
In England the great logical figure of
those early modern years was William of
Ockham (1287–1348). He identified some
of the theorems more precisely formulat-
ed many years later by the mathematical
logician, Augustus De Morgan; De
Morgan’s theorems we will encounter
and apply in the second part of this book.
Ockham sought to rid metaphysics, in
which he was chiefly interested, of use-
less concepts. He urged that when a term
or notion has been shown fruitless it
should be simply cut out and discarded.
This imperative principle, “Ockham’s
razor,” remains a common guideline: In
all rational thinking, entities must not be
multiplied beyond necessity.
Deductive logic had largely begun
with Aristotle’s compiled treatises, The
Organon. That logic allowed and encour-
aged the powerful manipulation of what
is already known, and that is indeed ex-
tremely useful. However, the long-stud-
ied analysis of propositions and their
relations did not provide the stuff of new
knowledge, desperately needed and
widely sought in the early modern cen-
turies. What the intellectual world re-
quired, many thought, was a new
Organon. That Novum Organum was pub-
lished by Francis Bacon (1561–1626) in
England in 1620. The Baconian method
aimed to codify the procedures used by
scientists when investigating all natural
things. Called “the father of empiricism”,
Bacon, with other pioneers of the scien-
tific revolution in astronomy and medi-
cine, did not reject the work of classical
logicians, but supplemented that work
by formulating the methods that make
possible the acquisition of empirical
truths. Facts—what we learn about the
world—constitute the premises upon
which deductive arguments can be built.
These were the first great steps in formu-
lating the principles of inductive logic.
It was time to gather the threads of
logical analysis, deductive and inductive,
into one coherent fabric. The first text-
book of logic (Logic, or the Art of Thinking),
was published anonymously in 1662 by a
group known as the Port-Royal logicians.
The principal authors, Antoine Arnauld
(famous for his published disputes with
Descartes) and Pierre Nicole, were joined
by Blaise Pascal (1623–1662), a great
French mathematician who had invented,
while a teenager, a functioning mechani-
cal calculator. Pascal was also one of the
originators of the theory of probability—a
sphere of logic that we will enter in the
final chapter of this book. Other textbooks
followed, including Logick, or the Right
Use of Reason (1725) by Isaac Watts; then
Logic (1826) by Richard Whately. Then, in
1843, there was published in England
one of the greatest of all logic textbooks:
A System of Logic, by John Stuart Mill
(1806–1873). In this work the techniques
with which we uncover and confirm
causal connections in the real world
were for the first time set forth in
accurate detail. Mill’s methods, his still
relevant contributions to the study of
inductive logic, we discuss at length in
Part III of this book.
A Very Brief History of Logic
From Introduction to Logic, Fourteenth Edition. Irving M. Copi, Carl Cohen, Kenneth McMahon. 
Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Prentice Hall. All rights reserved.

In deductive logic much creative
work remained to be done. Reasoning
was known to be burdened by the ambi-
guities and imprecision of ordinary lan-
guage. One of the greatest of early
modern thinkers, Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibniz (1646–1716), set himself the task
of overcoming these deficiencies by de-
veloping a mathematically exact symbol-
ic language, one in which concepts might
be expressed with unambiguous clarity.
Leibniz (also one of the independent in-
ventors of the infinitesimal calculus) had
envisioned a sort of logic machine—one
with which operations of a logical nature
might be performed efficiently and accu-
rately, as can be done in the algebra that
he knew well. That great logic machine
he never produced, but his dream of it
may be seen as the foreshadowing of the
modern electronic computer.
A major advance toward Leibniz’s
goal was made by the English logician
George Boole (see p. 189), who devised,
in his Investigation into the Laws of
Thought (1854), a general system for the
accurate expression and thus manipula-
tion of propositions. Propositions had
played a central role in logic since the
time of Aristotle and Chrysippus. But it
was only with Boole’s deep analysis of
propositions—the Boolean interpretation
discussed in great detail in Chapter 5 of
this book—that a fully consistent system
of the logic of propositions was at last
possible.
Other mathematicians and logicians
made significant advances that brought
greater precision and efficiency to the
realm of deductive logic. One of these
was Augustus De Morgan (1806–1871),
alluded to above in connection with the
work of William of Ockham. The theo-
rems that still carry his name remain to
this day critical logical tools in proving
the validity of deductive arguments.
Another English logician, John Venn
(1834–1923), contributed brilliantly to the
process of determining deductive validi-
ty by designing a system, as beautiful as
it is simple, for the iconic exhibition of
the relations of the terms in categorical
propositions. Venn diagrams, consisting
of interlocking circles, are now very
widely used. They serve as an easily ap-
plied device with which the sense of
propositions can be given visual force,
and with which the validity or invalidity
of categorical syllogisms can be estab-
lished. We use Venn diagrams extensive-
ly in Part II of this book.
One of the greatest American
philosophers, Charles Sanders Peirce
(1839–1914), best known as the founder
of the movement known as pragmatism,
thought of himself primarily as a logi-
cian. Logic was for him a very broad
study, involving the methods of all in-
quiry; formal deductive logic, to which
he made some notable contributions, he
took to be one of its branches. We think
with signs, said Peirce, and logic is the
formal theory of signs. He introduced
some new concepts, such as inclusion
and logical sum; he devised symbols for
the expression of novel logical opera-
tions; he explored the logic of relations—
and he anticipated work later done in
expressing Boolean operations using the
features of electrical switching circuits, a
key step toward the actual development
of the all-conquering logic machine that
had been envisioned by Gottfried
Leibniz.
A rigorous, formal system of proposi-
tional logic was produced by the
German logician Gottlob Frege
(1848–1925). That system, and his inven-
tion of the concept of quantification, es-
tablish him as one of the greatest of
modern logicians. With quantification—
as we explain in detail in Chapter 10 of
this book—it is possible to deal accurate-
ly with a huge body of deductive argu-
ment that cannot otherwise be readily
penetrated by the machinery of modern
symbolic logic.
Bertrand Russell (1872–1970) and
Alfred North Whitehead (1861–1947)
sought to integrate all this modern work
on deductive logic in one great and re-
markable treatise: Principia Mathematica,
published in segments from 1910 to 1913.
Using (with some adjustments) the nota-
tion that had been devised by the Italian
logician Giuseppe Peano (1858–1932), as
well as the logical system earlier devel-
oped by Frege, Russell and Whitehead
attempted to show that the whole of
mathematics could be derived from a
few basic logical axioms. Much of what
appears in chapters 8, 9, and 10 of this
book is derived from their work.
Deductive logic continued to devel-
op. The completeness of axiomatic sys-
tems became a matter of great interest in
the twentieth century. Kurt Gödel
(1906–1978) was able to demonstrate that
any formal axiomatic system, if it is con-
sistent, must in fact be incomplete, and
from Gödel’s incompleteness theorems it
follows that within any formal system
there will be some formulas that must re-
main undecidable. Other aspects of de-
ductive logic have been more recently
investigated: the distinction between
“fuzzy” and “crisp” logic has been ex-
plored; modal logic, in which the con-
cepts of possibility and necessity are
manipulated, has been highly devel-
oped.
But perhaps nothing that modern lo-
gicians have accomplished has had more
profound impact than the develop-
ment—by John von Neumann
(1903–1957) and others—of the intellec-
tual architecture of the circuits of digital
computers. Not long thereafter, with the
actual construction and gradual perfec-
tion of the electronic digital computer
during the twentieth century, Leibniz’s
great vision was at last made real.
The account above sketches the histo-
ry of logic in the West, mainly in Europe
and North America. Elsewhere on the
planet logic was also studied, of
course—but we do not have accessible
and accurate records of the discoveries
made long ago in China and India. We
know that in India much work had been
done on the principles of logic. Augustus
De Morgan was influenced by that work;
the theorems that bear his name, ex-
plained in Chapter 9 of this book, were
developed independently in India.
George Boole was influenced by Indian
thinkers as well. The rules of immediate
inference, discussed in this book in
chapter 5, appear also to have been artic-
ulated in India, but logic there empha-
sized effective philosophical
argumentation, including both deductive
and inductive elements, rather than for-
mal systems. In China, at the time of the
philosopher Mozi (470–391 BCE), the
principles of analogical reasoning, dis-
cussed in chapter 11 of this book, were
developed. But of that history we cannot
be sure, because in the years 213–206 BCE
the Qin dynasty, to erase all marks of
preceding dynasties, burned many books
and killed many scholars. Much work
done in earlier periods was thus perma-
nently lost.
From the time of Aristotle’s Organon
to the twenty-first century more people
have studied logic from one book than
from any other; that book, now in your
hands, is Introduction to Logic, originally
conceived and written by one of the
most powerful and incisive thinkers of
the twentieth century, the late Irving
Copi (1917–2002).
A Very Brief History of Logic
616

Glossary
From the Glossary of Introduction to Logic, Fourteenth Edition. Irving M. Copi, Carl Cohen, Kenneth McMahon. 
Copyright © 2011 by Pearson Education, Inc. Published by Pearson Prentice Hall. All rights reserved.

A
Absorption: A rule of inference; one of nine elementary valid
argument forms. If p implies q, absorption permits the infer-
ence that p implies both p and q. Symbolized as: 
,
therefore 
Accent: An informal fallacy, committed when a term or phrase
has a meaning in the conclusion of an argument different
from its meaning in one of the premises, the difference aris-
ing chiefly from a change in emphasis given to the words
used
Accident: An informal fallacy, committed when a generalization
is applied to individual cases that it does not properly
govern. See also Converse accident
Ad baculum (appeal to force): An informal fallacy in which an
inappropriate appeal to force is used to support the truth of
some conclusion
Addition (Add.): A rule of logical inference, one of nine elemen-
tary valid argument forms. Given any proposition p, addi-
tion permits the inference that p or q. Also called “logical
addition”
Addition theorem: In the calculus of probability, a theorem
used to determine the probability of a complex event con-
sisting of one or more alternative occurrences of simple
events whose probabilities are known
Ad hoc: A term with several meanings, used to characterize
hypotheses. It may mean only that the hypothesis was con-
structed after the facts it purports to explain; it may mean
that the hypothesis is merely descriptive. Most commonly,
“ad hoc” is used pejoratively, describing a hypothesis that
serves to explain only the facts it was invented to explain
and has no other testable consequences
Ad hominem (argument against the person): An informal fallacy
in which the object of attack is not the merits of some posi-
tion, but the person who takes that position
Ad ignorantiam (argument from ignorance): An informal fallacy
in which a conclusion is supported by an illegitimate appeal
to ignorance, as when it is supposed that something is likely
to be true because we cannot prove that it is false
Ad misericordiam (appeal to pity): An informal fallacy in which
the support given for some conclusion is an inappropriate
appeal to the mercy or altruism of the audience
Ad populum (appeal to emotion): An informal fallacy in which
the support given for some conclusion is an inappropriate
appeal to popular belief
Ad verecundiam (appeal to inappropriate authority): An infor-
mal fallacy in which an appeal is made to authority, which is
fallacious both because the authority appealed to has no 
special claim to expertness on the matter in question, and
because even legitimate authorities are often wrong
Affirmative singular proposition: A proposition in which it is
asserted that a particular individual has some specified
attribute
p ) (p # q)
p ) q
Glossary
Affirming the consequent: A formal fallacy, so named because
the categorical premise in the argument affirms the conse-
quent rather than the antecedent of the conditional premise.
Symbolized as: 
, q, therefore p
Agreement, Method of: A pattern of inductive inference in
which it is concluded that, if two or more instances of a phe-
nomenon have only one circumstance in common, that one
common circumstance is the cause (or effect) of the phenom-
enon under investigation
Alternative occurrences: In probability theory, a complex event
that consists of the occurrence of any one of two or more
simple component events. (e.g., the complex event of getting
either a spade or a club in the random drawing of a playing
card)
Ambiguity: Uncertainty of meaning, often leading to disputes
or to mistakes when the same word or phrase has two (or
more) distinct meanings, and the context does not make
clear which meaning is intended
Ambiguity, Fallacy of: Any fallacy caused by a shift in or confu-
sion of meanings within an argument. Also known as a
“sophism”
Ambiguous middle: A formal fallacy, so called because the 
mistake in some syllogism arises from a shift, within the
argument, in the meaning of the middle term
Amphiboly: A kind of ambiguity arising from the loose, awk-
ward, or mistaken way in which words are combined, leading
to alternative possible meanings of a statement. Also, the
name of a fallacy when an argument incorporates an amphi-
bolous statement that is true as used in one occurrence, but
false as used in another occurrence of the statement in that
argument
Analogical argument: A kind of inductive argument in which,
from the fact that two entities are alike in some respect(s), it
is concluded that they are also alike in some other respect(s)
Analogy: A parallel drawn between two (or more) entities by
indicating one or more respects in which they are similar
Analytical definition: See Definition by genus and difference
Antecedent: In a conditional statement (“if . . . then . . .”), the
component that immediately follows the “if.” Sometimes
called the implicans or the protasis
Apodosis: The consequent in a hypothetical proposition
Appeal to inappropriate authority: A fallacy in which a conclu-
sion is accepted as true simply because an expert has said
that it is true. This is a fallacy whether or not the expert's
area of expertise is relevant to the conclusion. Also known as
"argument ad verecundiam"
Appeal to force: A fallacy in which the argument relies upon an
open or veiled threat of force. Also known as "argument ad
baculum"
Appeal to pity: A fallacy in which the argument relies on gen-
erosity, altruism, or mercy, rather than on reason. Also
known as “argument ad misericordiam”
p ) q
618

Glossary
Appeal to the populace: An informal fallacy in which the sup-
port given for some conclusion is an appeal to popular
belief. Also known as “argument ad populum”
A priori theory of probability: A theory in which the probability
ascribed to a simple event is a fraction between 0 and 1, of
which the denominator is the number of equipossible out-
comes, and the numerator is the number of outcomes in
which the event in question occurs. Thus on the a priori theo-
ry, the probability of drawing a spade at random from a
deck of playing cards is 13/52
Argument: Any group of propositions of which one is claimed
to follow from the others, which are regarded as providing
support or grounds for the truth of that one
Argument against the person: A fallacy in which the argument
relies upon an attack against the person taking a position.
This fallacy is also known as "argument ad hominem"
Argument form: An array of symbols exhibiting logical struc-
ture; it contains no statements but it contains statement vari-
ables. These variables are arranged in such a way that when
statements are consistently substituted for the statement
variables, the result is an argument
Argument from ignorance: A fallacy in which a proposition is
held to be true just because it has not been proven false, or
false because it has not been proven true. Also known as
“argument ad ignorantiam”
Aristotelian logic: The traditional account of syllogistic reasoning,
in which certain interpretations of categorical propositions are
presupposed. Often contrasted with the modern symbolic, or
Boolean, interpretation of categorical propositions
Association (Assoc.): An expression of logical equivalence; a
rule of inference that permits the valid regrouping of simple
propositions. According to it, [
] may be replaced
by [
] and vice versa, and [
] may be
replaced by [
] and vice versa
Asyllogistic argument: An argument in which one or more of
the component propositions is of a form more complicated
than the form of the A, E, I, and O propositions of the cate-
gorical syllogism, and whose analysis therefore requires log-
ical tools more powerful than those provided by Aristotelian
logic
Authority, appeal to. See Ad verecundiam
B
Barbara: The traditional name of one of the 15 valid standard-
form categorical syllogisms. A syllogism in the form Barbara
has the mood and figure AAA–1; that is to say, all three of its
propositions are A propositions, and it is in the first figure
because the middle term is the subject of the major premise
and the predicate of the minor premise
Baroko: The traditional name of one of the 15 valid standard-
form categorical syllogisms. A syllogism in the form Baroko
has the mood and figure AOO–2; that is to say, the minor
premise and conclusion are O propositions, the major prem-
ise is an A proposition, and it is in the second figure because
the middle term is the predicate of both the major and the
minor premise
Begging the question: An informal fallacy in which the conclusion
of an argument is stated or assumed in any one of the premises.
Also known as "circular argument" and petitio principii
(p # q) # r
p # (q # r)
(p ¡ q) ¡ r
p ¡ (q ¡ r)
Biconditional statement or proposition: A compound statement
or proposition that asserts that its two component statements
have the same truth value, and therefore are materially equiv-
alent. So named because, since the two component statements
are either both true or both false, they must imply one anoth-
er. A biconditional statement form is symbolized “
,”
which may be read as “p if and only if q”
Bokardo: The traditional name of one of the 15 valid standard-form
categorical syllogisms. A syllogism in the form Bokardo has the
mood and figure OAO–3; that is to say, its major premise and
conclusion are O propositions, its minor premise is an A
proposition, and it is in the third figure because the middle
term is the subject of both the minor and the major premise
Boolean interpretation: The modern interpretation of categori-
cal propositions, adopted in this book and named after the
English logician George Boole (1815–1864). In the Boolean
interpretation, often contrasted with the Aristotelian inter-
pretation, universal propositions (A and E propositions) do
not have existential import
C
Calculus of probability: A branch of mathematics that can be
used to compute the probabilities of complex events from
the probabilities of their component events
Camenes: The traditional name of one of the 15 valid standard-
form categorical syllogisms. A syllogism in the form Camenes
has the mood and figure AEE–4; that is to say, its minor
premise and conclusion are E propositions, its major prem-
ise is an A proposition, and it is in the fourth figure because
the middle term is the predicate of the major premise and
the subject of the minor premise
Camestres: The traditional name of one of the 15 valid standard-
form categorical syllogisms. A syllogism in the form
Camestres has the mood and figure AEE–2; that is to say, its
minor premise and conclusion are E propositions, its major
premise is an A proposition, and it is in the second figure
because the middle term is the predicate of both the major
and the minor premise
Categorical proposition: A proposition that can be analyzed as
being about classes, or categories, affirming or denying that
one class, S, is included in some other class, P, in whole or in
part. Four standard forms of categorical propositions are
traditionally distinguished: A: Universal affirmative proposi-
tions (All S is P); E: Universal negative propositions (No S is P);
I: Particular affirmative propositions (Some S is P); O:
Particular negative propositions (Some S is not P). See also
Standard-form categorical proposition
Categorical syllogism: A deductive argument consisting of
three categorical propositions that contain exactly three
terms, each of which occurs in exactly two of the proposi-
tions. See also Disjunctive Syllogism; Hypothetical Syllogism;
Syllogistic argument
Causal laws: Descriptive laws asserting a necessary connection
between events of two kinds, of which one is the cause and
the other the effect
Causal reasoning: Inductive reasoning in which some effect is
inferred from what is assumed to be its cause, or some cause
is inferred from what is assumed to be its effect
Cause: Either the necessary condition for the occurrence of an
effect (the sense used when we seek to eliminate some thing
p K q
619

or event by eliminating its cause), or the sufficient condition
for the occurrence of an effect, understood as the conjunc-
tion of its necessary conditions. The latter meaning is more
common, and is the sense of cause used when we wish to
produce some thing or event
Celarent: The traditional name of one of the 15 valid standard-
form categorical syllogisms. A syllogism in the form
Celarent has the mood and figure EAE–1; that is to say, its
major premise and conclusions are E propositions, its
minor premise is an A proposition, and it is in the first
figure because the middle term is the subject of the major
premise and the predicate of the minor premise
Ceremonial language: language with special social uses nor-
mally having a mix of expressive, directive, and informative
functions
Cesare: The traditional name of one of the 15 valid standard-
form categorical syllogisms. A syllogism in the form Cesare
has the mood and figure EAE–2; that is to say, its major
premise and conclusion are E propositions, its minor prem-
ise is an A proposition, and it is in the second figure because
the middle term is the predicate of both the major and the
minor premise
Circular argument: A fallacious argument in which the conclu-
sion is assumed in one of the premises; begging the 
question. Also called petitio principii
Circular definition: A definition that is faulty because its
definiendum (what is to be defined) appears in its definiens
(the defining symbols) and therefore is useless
Circumstantial ad hominem argument: An informal fallacy in
which the ad hominem attack against the opponent is based
upon special circumstances associated with that person
Class: The collection of all objects that have some specified 
characteristic in common
Classical logic. See Aristotelian logic
Classification: The organization and division of large collections
of things into an ordered system of groups and subgroups,
often used in the construction of scientific hypotheses
Command: One common form of discourse having a directive
function
Commutation (Com.): An expression of logical equivalence; a
rule of inference that permits the valid reordering of the
components of conjunctive or disjunctive statements.
According to commutation, (
) and (
) may replace
one another, as may (
) and (
)
Complement, or complementary class: The complement of a
class is the collection of all things that do not belong to that
class
Complex dilemma: An argument consisting of (a) a disjunction,
(b) two conditional premises linked by a conjunction, and (c)
a conclusion that is not a single categorical proposition (as in
a simple dilemma) but a disjunction, a pair of (usually unde-
sirable) alternatives
Complex question: An informal fallacy in which a question is
asked in such a way as to presuppose the truth of some con-
clusion buried in that question
Component: A part of a compound statement that is itself a
statement, and is of such a nature that, if replaced in the
larger statement by any other statement, the result will be
meaningful
q # p
p # q
q ¡ p
p ¡ q
Glossary
Composition: An informal fallacy in which an argument erro-
neously assigns attributes to a whole (or to a collection)
based on the fact that parts of that whole (or members of
that collection) have those attributes
Compound statement or compound proposition: A statement
that contains two or more statements as components
Conclusion: In any argument, the proposition to which the
other propositions in the argument are claimed to give sup-
port, or for which they are given as reasons
Conclusion indicator: A word or phrase (such as “therefore” or
“thus”) appearing in an argument and usually indicating
that what follows it is the conclusion of that argument
Concomitant Variation, Method of: A pattern of inductive infer-
ence in which it is concluded that, when one phenomenon
varies consistently with some other phenomenon in some
manner, there is some causal relation between the two 
phenomena
Conditional statement: A hypothetical statement; a compound
proposition or statement of the form “If p then q”
Conjunction (Conj.): A truth-functional connective meaning
“and,” symbolized by the dot. A statement of the form 
is
true if and only if p is true and q is true. “Conjunction”
(“Conj.”) is also the name of a rule of inference, one of nine
elementary valid argument forms; it permits statements
assumed to be true to be combined in one compound 
statement. Symbolized as: p, q, therefore 
Conjunct: Each one of the component statements connected in a
conjunctive statement
Connotation: The intension of a term; the attributes shared by
all and only those objects to which the term refers
Connotative definition: A definition that states the conventional
connotation, or intension, of the term to be defined; usually
a definition by genus and difference
Consequent: In a hypothetical proposition (“if . . . then”), the
component that immediately follows the “then.” Sometimes
called the implicate, or the apodosis
Constant. See Individual constant
Constructive Dilemma (C.D.): A rule of inference; one of nine
elementary valid argument forms. Constructive Dilemma
permits the inference that if 
is true, and 
is also true, then 
must be true
Contingent: Being neither tautologous nor self-contradictory. A
contingent statement may be true or false; a contingent
statement form has some true and some false substitution
instances
Contradiction: A statement that is necessarily false; a state-
ment form that cannot have any true substitution 
instances
Contradictories: Two propositions so related that one is the
denial or negation of the other. On the traditional square of
opposition, the two pairs of contradictories are indicated by
the diagonals of the square: A and E propositions are the
contradictories of O and I, respectively
Contraposition: A valid form of immediate inference for some,
but not for all types of propositions. To form the contraposi-
tive of a given proposition, its subject term is replaced by the
complement of its predicate term, and its predicate term is
replaced by the complement of its subject term. Thus the
contrapositive of the proposition “All humans are mammals”
q ¡ s
p ¡ r
(p ) q) # (r ) s)
p # q
p # q
620

is the proposition “All nonmammals are nonhumans.” See
also Limitation
Contrapositive: The conclusion of the inference called 
contraposition
Contraries: Two propositions so related that they cannot both be
true, although both may be false. On the traditional square
of opposition, corresponding A and E propositions are 
contraries; but corresponding A and E propositions are 
not contraries in the Boolean interpretation, according to
which they might both be true. See also Subcontraries
Conventional intension: The commonly accepted intension of a
term; the criteria generally agreed upon for deciding, with
respect to any object, whether it is part of the extension of
that term
Converse: The conclusion of the immediate inference called
“conversion”
Converse accident: An informal fallacy (sometimes called
“hasty generalization”) committed when one moves
carelessly or too quickly from individual cases to a
generalization
Conversion: A valid form of immediate inference for some but
not all types of propositions. To form the converse of a
proposition the subject and predicate terms are simply inter-
changed. Thus, “No circles are squares” is the converse of
“No squares are circles,” and “Some thinkers are athletes” is
the converse of “Some athletes are thinkers.” The proposition
converted is called the “convertend.” See also Limitation
Convertend. See Conversion
Copula: Any form of the verb “to be” that serves to connect the
subject term and the predicate term of a categorical 
proposition
Corresponding propositions. See Square of Opposition
Crucial experiment: An experiment whose outcome is claimed
to establish the falsehood of one of two competing and
inconsistent scientific hypotheses
Curl: The symbol for negation, ~; the tilde. It appears
immediately before (to the left of) what is negated or denied
D
Darii: The traditional name of one of the 15 valid standard-form
categorical syllogisms. A syllogism in the form Darii has the
mood and figure AII–1; that is to say, its minor premise and
conclusion are I propositions, its major premise is an A
proposition, and it is in the third figure because the middle
term is the subject of both the major and the minor premise
Datisi: The traditional name of one of the 15 valid standard-form
categorical syllogisms. A syllogism in the form Datisi has
the mood and figure AII–3; that is to say, its minor premise
and conclusion are I propositions, its major premise is an A
proposition, and it is in the third figure because the middle
term is the subject of both the major and minor premise
Deduction: One of the two major types of argument traditional-
ly distinguished, the other being induction. A deductive
argument claims to provide conclusive grounds for its con-
clusion; if it does so it is valid, if it does not it is invalid
Defective induction, fallacy of: A fallacy in which the premises
are too weak or ineffective to warrant the conclusion
Definiendum: In any definition, the word or symbol being
defined. See also specific types of definition
Definiens: In any definition, a symbol or group of symbols that
is said to have the same meaning as the definiendum. See also
specific types of definition
Definition: An expression in which one word or set of symbols
(the definiens) is provided, which is claimed to have the
same meaning as the definiendum
Definition by genus and difference: A type of connotative defi-
nition of a term that first identifies the larger class (“genus”)
of which the definiendum is a species or subclass, and then
identifies the attribute (“difference”) that distinguishes the
members of that species from members of all other species
in that genus
Demonstrative definition: An ostensive definition; one
that refers by gesture to examples of the term being
defined
De Morgan’s Theorem (De M.): An expression of logical equiva-
lence; a rule of inference that permits the valid mutual
replacement of the negation of a disjunction by the conjunction
of the negations of its disjuncts: 
T
; and
that permits the valid mutual replacement of the negation of
a conjunction by the disjunction of the negations of its con-
juncts: 
T
Denotation: The several objects to which a term may correctly
be applied; its extension
Denotative definition: A definition that identifies the extension
of a term, by (for example) listing the members of the class
of objects to which the term refers; the members of that class
are thus denoted. An extensional definition
Denying the antecedent: A formal fallacy, so named because the
categorical premise in the argument, ~p, denies the
antecedent rather than the consequent of the conditional
premise. Symbolized as: 
, ~p, therefore ~q
Difference, Method of: A pattern of inductive argument in
which, when cases in which the phenomenon under investi-
gation occurs and cases in which it does not occur differ in
only one circumstance, that circumstance is inferred to be
causally connected to the phenomenon under investigation
Dilemma: A common form of argument in ordinary discourse
in which it is claimed that a choice must be made between
two alternatives, both of which are (usually) bad
Dimaris: The traditional name of one of the 15 valid standard-
form categorical syllogisms. A syllogism in the form Dimaris
has the mood and figure IAI–4; that is to say, its major prem-
ise and conclusion are I propositions, its minor premise is an
A proposition, and it is in the fourth figure because the 
middle term is the predicate of the major premise and the
subject of the minor premise
Disamis: The traditional name of one of the 15 valid standard-form
categorical syllogisms. A syllogism in the Disamis has the mood
and figure IAI–3; that is to say, its major premise and conclu-
sion are I propositions, its minor premise is an A proposition,
and it is in the third figure because the middle term is the
subject of both the major and the minor premise
Disanalogy: In an anological argument, a point of difference
between the cases mentioned in the premises and the case
mentioned in the conclusion
Discourse. See Language, functions of
Disjunction: A truth-functional connective meaning “or”;
components so connected are called “disjuncts.” When 
p ) q
('p ¡ 'q)
K
'(p# q)
('p# 'q)
K
'(p ¡ q)
Glossary
621

disjunction is taken to mean that at least one of the disjuncts
is true and that they may both be true, it is called a “weak”
or “inclusive” disjunction and symbolized by the wedge, 
. When disjunction is taken to mean that at least one of the
disjuncts is true and that at least one of them is false, it is
called a “strong” of “exclusive” disjunction
Disjunctive statement: A compound statement whose compo-
nent statements are connected by a disjunction. In modern
symbolic logic the interpretation normally given to “or” is
weak (inclusive) disjunction, unless further information is
provided in the context
Disjunctive statement form: A statement form symbolized as:
; its substitution instances are disjunctive statements
Disjunctive Syllogism (D.S.): A rule of inference; a valid argu-
ment form in which one premise is a disjunction, another
premise is the denial of one of the two disjuncts, and the
conclusion is the truth of the other disjunct. Symbolized as:
, ~p, therefore q
Disputes: apparently verbal but really genuine
Distribution, as a rule of replacement (Dist): An expression of
logical equivalence; a rule of inference that permits, in
deductive argument, the mutual replacement of certain
specified pairs of symbolic expressions
Distribution: An attribute that describes the relationship
between a categorical proposition and each one of its terms,
indicating whether or not the proposition makes a statement
about every member of the class represented by a given term
Division: A fallacy of ambiguity in which an argument erro-
neously assigns attributes to parts of a whole (or to members
of a collection) based on the fact that the whole (or the 
collection) has those attributes
Dot: The symbol for conjunction, , meaning “and”
Double negation: An expression of logical equivalence; a rule 
of inference that permits the valid mutual replacement of
any symbol by the negation of the negation of that symbol.
Symbolized as 
T
E
Elementary valid argument: Any one of a set of specified
deductive arguments that serves as a rule of inference and
that may therefore be used in constructing a formal proof of
validity
Enthymeme: An argument that is stated incompletely, the
unstated part of it being taken for granted. An enthymeme
may be of the first, second, or third order, depending upon
whether the unstated proposition is the major premise, the
minor premise, or the conclusion of the argument
Equivocation: An informal fallacy in which two or more mean-
ings of the same word or phrase have been confused. If used
with one of its meanings in one of the propositions of the
argument but with a different meaning in another proposi-
tion of the argument, a word is said to have been used
equivocally
Exceptive proposition: A proposition that asserts that all mem-
bers of some class, with the exception of the members of one
of its subclasses, are members of some other class. Exceptive
propositions are in reality compound, because they assert
both a relation of class inclusion, and a relation of class
exclusion. Example: “All persons except employees are 
' 'p
K
p
#
p ¡ q
p ¡ q
¡
Glossary
eligible” is an exceptive proposition in which it is asserted
both that “All nonemployees are eligible,” and that “No
employees are eligible”
Excluded middle, Principle of: The principle that asserts that
any statement is either true or false; sometimes called one of
the laws of thought
Exclusive disjunction or strong disjunction: A logical 
relation meaning “or,” that may connect two component
statements. A compound statement asserting exclusive 
disjunction says that at least one of the disjuncts is true 
and that at least one of the disjuncts is false. It is contrasted
with an “inclusive” (or “weak”) disjunction, which says 
that at least one of the disjuncts is true and that they may
both be true
Exclusive premises, Fallacy of: The formal fallacy that is 
committed when both premises in a syllogism are negative
propositions (E or O)
Exclusive propositions: Propositions that assert that the predi-
cate applies exclusively to the subject named. Example:
“None but generals wear stars” asserts that the predicate,
“wearing stars,” applies only to generals
Existential fallacy: Any mistake in reasoning that arises from
assuming illegitimately that some class has members. It is a
formal fallacy when, in a standard-form categorical syllo-
gism, a particular conclusion is inferred from two universal
premises
Existential Generalization (E.G.): A rule of inference in the 
theory of quantification that says that from any true substi-
tution instance of a propositional function we may validly
infer the existential quantification of the propositional
function
Existential import: An attribute of those propositions that nor-
mally assert the existence of objects of some specified kind.
Particular propositions (I and O propositions) always have
existential import; thus the proposition “Some dogs are obe-
dient” asserts that there are dogs. Whether universal propo-
sitions (A and E propositions) have existential import is an
issue on which the Aristotelian and Boolean interpretations
of propositions differ
Existential Instantiation (E.I.): A rule of inference in the theory
of quantification that says that we may (with some restric-
tions) validly infer from the existential quantification of a
propositional function the truth of its substitution instance
with respect to any individual constant that does not occur
earlier in that context
Existential presupposition: In Aristotelian logic, the blanket
presupposition that all classes referred to in a proposition
have members
Existential quantifier: A symbol ( ) in modern quantification
theory that indicates that any propositional function
immediately following it has some true substitution
instance; “
” means “there exists an x such that F is
true of it"
Expectation value: In probability theory, the value of a wager or
an investment; determined by multiplying each of the mutu-
ally exclusive possible returns from that wager by the proba-
bility of the return, and summing those products
Explanation: A group of statements from which some event (or
thing) to be explained can logically be inferred and whose
(x)Fx

622

acceptance removes or diminishes the problematic character
of that event (or thing). See also Scientific explanation
Exportation (Exp): The name of a rule of inference; an expression
of logical equivalence that permits the mutual replacement of
statements of the form 
by statements of the form
Extension: The several objects to which a term may correctly be
applied; its denotation
Extensional definition. See Denotative definition
F
Fallacies of ambiguity. See Ambiguity, fallacy of
Fallacies of defective induction: See Defective induction, 
fallacy of 
Fallacies of presumption. See Presumption, fallacy of
Fallacies of relevance. See Relevance, fallacy of
Fallacy: A type of argument that seems to be correct, but 
contains a mistake in reasoning. Fallacies may be formal or
informal. See also specific fallacies
Fallacy of accent: A fallacy in which a phrase is used to convey
two different meanings within an argument, and the differ-
ence is based on changes in emphasis given to words within
the phrase
Fallacy of accident: A fallacy in which a generalization is
wrongly applied to a particular case
Fallacy of amphiboly: A fallacy in which a loose or awkward
combination of words can be interpreted in more than one
way; the argument contains a premise based upon one 
interpretation, while the conclusion relies on a different
interpretation
Fallacy of composition: A fallacy in which an inference is mis-
takenly drawn from the attributes of the parts of a whole to
the attributes of the whole
Fallacy of division: A fallacy in which a mistaken inference is
drawn from the attributes of a whole to the attributes of the
parts of the whole
Fallacy of equivocation: A fallacy in which two or more mean-
ings of a word or phrase are used in different parts of an
argument
False cause: A fallacy in which something that is not really the
cause is treated as as cause. Also known as non causa pro
causa
Ferio: The traditional name of one of the 15 valid standard-form
categorical syllogisms. A syllogism in the form Ferio has the
mood and figure EIO–1; that is to say, its major premise is 
an E proposition, its minor premise is an I proposition, its
conclusion is an O proposition, and it is in the first figure
because the middle term is the subject of both the major and
the minor premise
Ferison: The traditional name of one of the 15 valid standard-
form categorical syllogisms. A syllogism in the form Ferison
has the mood and figure EIO–3; that is to say, its major
premise is an E proposition, its minor premise is an I
proposition, its conclusion is an O proposition, and it is in
the third figure because the middle term is the subject of
both the major and the minor premise
Festino: The traditional name of one of the 15 valid standard-
form categorical syllogisms. A syllogism in the form Festino
has the mood and figure EIO–2; that is to say, its major
p ) (q ) r)
(p # q) ) r
premise is and E proposition, its minor premise is an I
proposition, its conclusion is an O proposition, and it is in
the second figure because the middle term is the predicate of
both the major and the minor premise
Figure: The logical shape of  a standard-form syllogism as
determined by the position of the middle term in its
premises. There are four figures, corresponding to the four
possible positions of the middle term. First figure: the
middle term is the subject term of the major premise and
predicate term of the minor premise; second figure: the
middle term is the predicate term of both premises; third
figure: the middle term is the subject term of both premises;
fourth figure: the middle term is the predicate term of the
major premise and the subject term of the minor premise
First-order enthymeme: An incompletely stated argument in
which the proposition that is taken for granted but not 
stated is the major premise of the syllogism
Formal proof of validity: A sequence of statements each of
which is either a premise of a given argument, or follows
from the preceding statements of the sequence by one of the
rules of inference, where the last statement in the sequence
is the conclusion of the argument whose validity is proved;
for deductive arguments dependent on inner structure of
noncompound propositions
Four terms, fallacy of: A formal fallacy in which a categorical
syllogism contains more than three terms
Fresison: The traditional name of one of the 15 valid standard-
form categorical syllogisms. A syllogism in the form 
Fresison has the mood and figure EIO–4; that is to say, its
major premise is an E proposition, its minor premise is an 
I proposition, its conclusion is an O proposition, and it 
is in the fourth figure because the middle term is the predi-
cate of the major premise and the subject of the minor 
premise
G
Generalization: In quantification theory, the process of
forming a proposition from a propositional function by
placing a universal quantifier or an existential quantifier
before it
General product theorem: A theorem in the calculus of proba-
bility used to determine the probability of the joint occur-
rence of any number of independent events
Genus and difference: A technique for constructing connota-
tive definitions. See also Definition by genus and difference
H
Hasty generalization: A fallacy in which one moves carelessly
from individual cases to generalization. Also known as
“converse accident”
Horseshoe: The symbol for material implication, 
Hypothetical proposition or hypothetical statement: A com-
pound proposition of the form “if p then q”; a conditional
proposition or statement
Hypothetical Syllogism (H.S.): A syllogism that contains a
hypothetical proposition as a premise. If the syllogism con-
tains hypothetical propositions exclusively it is called a
“pure” hypothetical syllogism; if the syllogism contains one
conditional and one categorical premise, it is called a
)
Glossary
623

“mixed” hypothetical syllogism. “Hypothetical syllogism”
(“H.S.”) is also the name of an elementary valid argument
form that permits the conclusion that 
, if the premises
and 
are assumed to be true
I
Iconic representation: The representation of standard-form cat-
egorical propositions, and of arguments constituted by such
propositions, by means of spatial inclusions and exclusions,
as in the use of Venn diagrams
Identity, Principle of: A principle that asserts that if any state-
ment is true then it is true; sometimes held to be one of the
laws of thought
Ignoratio elenchi: The informal fallacy of irrelevant 
conclusion
Illicit major: Short name for the “Fallacy of Illicit Process of the
Major Term,” a formal mistake made when the major term
of a syllogism is undistributed in the major premise, but is
distributed in the conclusion. Such a mistake breaks the rule
that if either term is distributed in the conclusion, it must be
distributed in the premises
Illicit minor: Short name for the “Fallacy of Illicit Process of the
Minor Term,” a formal mistake made when the minor term
of a syllogism is undistributed in the minor premise, but is
distributed in the conclusion
Illicit process, fallacy of: The formal fallacy that is committed
when a term that is distributed in the conclusion is not 
distributed in the corresponding premise
Immediate inference: An inference that is drawn directly from
one premise without the mediation of any other premise.
Various kinds of immediate inferences may be distin-
guished, traditionally including conversion, obversion, and
contraposition
Implicans: The antecedent of a conditional or hypothetical state-
ment; the protasis
Implicate: The consequent of a conditional or hypothetical
statement; the apodosis
Implication: The relation that holds between the antecedent and
the consequent of a true conditional or hypothetical state-
ment. Because there are different kinds of hypothetical state-
ments, there are different kinds of implication, including:
logical implication, definitional implication, causal implica-
tion, decisional implication, and material implication.
“Impl.” is also the abbreviation for “Material Implication,”
the name of a rule of inference, the expression of a logical
equivalence that permits the mutual replacement of a state-
ment of the form “
” by one of the form “
.” See
also Material implication
Inclusive disjunction: A truth-functional connective between
two components, called disjuncts; a compound statement
asserting inclusive disjunction is true when at least one
(that is, one or both) of the disjuncts is true. Normally
called simply “disjunction” it is also called “weak disjunc-
tion” and is symbolized by the wedge, 
See also Exclusive
disjunction
Inconsistent: Characterizing any set of propositions that cannot
all be true together, or any argument having contradictory
premises
¡
'p ¡ q
p ) q
q ) r
p ) q
p ) r
Glossary
Independent events: In probability theory, events so related
that the occurrence or nonoccurrence of one has no effect
upon the occurrence or nonoccurrence of the other
Individual constant: A symbol (by convention, normally a
lower case letter, a through w) used in logical notation to
denote an individual
Individual variable: A symbol (by convention normally the lower
case x or y), that serves as a placeholder for an individual con-
stant. The universal quantifier, (x), means “for all x . . .” The
existential quantifier, (x) means “there is an x such that . . .”
Induction: One of the two major types of argument traditionally
distinguished, the other being deduction. An inductive argu-
ment claims that its premises give only some degree of prob-
ability, but not certainty, to its conclusion
Induction, Principle of: The principle, underlying all inductive
argument, that nature is sufficiently regular to permit the
discovery of causal laws having general application
Induction by simple enumeration: A type of inductive general-
ization, much criticized, where the premises are instances in
which phenomena of two kinds repeatedly accompany one
another in certain circumstances, from which it is concluded
that phenomena of those two kinds always accompany one
another in such circumstances. See also Methods of experi-
mental inquiry
Inductive generalization: The process of arriving at general or
universal propositions from the particular facts of experi-
ence, relying upon the principle of induction. See also
Methods of experimental inquiry
Inference: A process by which one proposition is arrived at and
affirmed on the basis of some other proposition or proposi-
tions. See also Immediate inference
Inference, Rules of: In deductive logic, the rules that may be
used in constructing formal proofs of validity, comprising
three groups: a set of elementary valid argument forms, a set
of logically equivalent pairs of expressions whose members
may be replaced by one another, and a set of rules for
quantification
Instantiation: In quantification theory, the process of substitut-
ing an individual constant for an individual variable, thereby
converting a propositional function into a proposition
Intension of a term: The attributes shared by all and only the
objects in the class that term denotes; the connotation of the
term
Invalid: Not valid; characterizing a deductive argument that
fails to provide conclusive grounds for the truth of its con-
clusion; every deductive argument is either valid or invalid
Irrelevant conclusion: An informal fallacy committed when the
premises of an argument purporting to establish one conclu-
sion are actually directed toward the establishment of some
other conclusion. Also called the fallacy of ignoratio elenchi
J
Joint Method of Agreement and Difference: A pattern of
inductive inference in which the Method of Agreement and
the Method of Difference are used in combination to give the
conclusion a higher degree of probability
Joint occurrence: In probability theory, a compound event in
which two simple events both occur. To calculate the probabili-
ty of joint occurrence the product theorem is applied
.
624

L
Language, Functions of: Various uses of language; the
informative, expressive, and directive functions of language
are most commonly distinguished; ceremonial and
performative functions are also noted
Laws of thought: Three tautologies—the principle of identity,
the principle of noncontradiction, and the principle of
excluded middle—that have sometimes been held to be the
fundamental principles of all reasoning
Lexical definition: A definition that reports a meaning the
definiendum (the term to be explained) already has, and thus a
definition that can usually be judged correct or incorrect
Lexical definitions, Rules for: Traditional criteria for appraising
definitions, normally applied to lexical definitions by genus
and difference
Limitation, Conversion by and Contraposition by: The imme-
diate inferences of conversion when applied to A proposi-
tions, and of contraposition when applied to E propositions;
the phrase “by limitation” in their names indicates that in
these special cases such inferences require the existential
assumption of Aristotelian logic to legitimize the inference.
Immediate inferences “by limitation” are therefore not
valid in the Boolean interpretation of categorical proposi-
tions, where that traditional existential assumption is
rejected
Logic: The study of the methods and principles used to distin-
guish correct from incorrect reasoning
Logical equivalence: In dealing with truth-functional com-
pound propositions, the relationship that holds between two
propositions when the statement of their material equiva-
lences is a tautology. A very strong relation; statements that
are logically equivalent must have the same meaning, and
may therefore replace one another wherever they occur
M
Major premise: In a standard-form syllogism, the premise that
contains the major term
Major term: The term that occurs as the predicate term of the
conclusion in a standard-form syllogism
Material equivalence: A truth-functional relation (symbolized by
the three bar sign, 
) that may connect two statements. Two
statements are materially equivalent when they are both true,
or when the are both false—that is, when they have the same
truth value. Materially equivalent statements always materi-
ally imply one another. “Material Equivalence” (“Equiv.”)
also is the name of a rule of logical inference that permits the
mutual replacement of certain pairs of logically equivalent
expressions. See also Logical equivalence
Material implication: A truth-functional relation (symbolized
by the horseshoe, 
) that may connect two statements. The
statement “p materially implies q” is true when either p is
false or q is true. Material implication is a weak relation; it
does not refer to the meaning of the statements connected,
but merely asserts that it is not the case both that p is true
and that q is false. “Material Implication” (“Impl.”) is the
name of a rule of inference, an expression of logical equiva-
lence that permits the mutual replacement of statements of
the form “
” by statements of the form “
”
Mediate inference: Any inference drawn from more than one
premise
'p ¡ q
p ) q
)
K
Glossary
Merely verbal dispute: A dispute in which the fact that there is
no real disagreement between the disputants is obscured by
the presence of some ambiguous key term
Methods of experimental inquiry (Mill’s Methods): The five
patterns of inductive inference, analyzed and formulated by
John Stuart Mill, with which hypotheses are confirmed or
disconfirmed
Middle term: In a standard-form syllogism (which must contain
exactly three terms), the term that appears in both premises,
but does not appear in the conclusion
Mill’s Methods. See Methods of experimental inquiry
Minor premise: In a standard-form syllogism, the premise that
contains the minor term
Minor term: The term that occurs as the subject term of the 
conclusion in a standard-form syllogism
Missing the point: A fallacy in which the premises support a
different conclusion from the one that is proposed. Also
known as "irrelevant conclusion" and "ignoratio elenchi"
Mixed hypothetical syllogism. See Hypothetical Syllogism
Modus Ponens (M.P.): A mixed hypothetical syllogism in which
the first premise is a conditional proposition, the second
premise affirms the antecedent of that conditional, and the
conclusion affirms the consequent of that conditional. One of
the nine elementary valid argument forms; a rule of infer-
ence according to which, if the truth of a hypothetical prem-
ise is assumed, and the truth of the antecedent of that prem-
ise is also assumed, we may conclude that the consequent of
that premise is true. Symbolized as: 
, p, therefore q
Modus Tollens (M.T.): A mixed hypothetical syllogism in which
the first premise is a conditional proposition, the second
premise denies the consequent of that conditional, and the
conclusion denies the antecedent of that conditional. One of
the nine elementary valid argument forms; a rule of inference
according to which, if the truth of a hypothetical premise is
assumed, and the falsity of the consequent of that premise is
also assumed, we may conclude that the antecedent of that
premise is false. Symbolized as 
, ~q, therefore ~p
Mood: A characterization of categorical syllogisms, determined
by the forms of the standard-form categorical propositions it
contains. Since there are just four forms of propositions, A,
E, I and O, and each syllogism contains exactly three such
propositions, there are exactly 64 moods, each mood identi-
fied by the three letters of its constituent propositions, AAA,
AAI, AAE, and so on, to OOO
Mutually exclusive events: Events of such a nature that, if one
occurs, the other(s) cannot occur at the same time. Thus, in a
coin flip, the outcomes "heads" and "tails" are mutually
exclusive events
N
Natural deduction: A method of proving the validity of a
deductive argument by using the rules of inference
Necessary and sufficient condition: The conjunction of neces-
sary conditions for the occurrence of a given event, this 
conjunction being all that is needed to ensure the occurrence
of the event. It is the sense in which the word cause is used
when inferences are drawn both from cause to effect and
from effect to cause. In deductive reasoning two statements
p ) q
p ) q
625

that are materially equivalent are necessary and sufficient
conditions for one another, since they imply one another.
Hence the sign for material equivalence (
) may be read as
“if and only if”
Necessary condition: That without which some other entity
cannot be. In deductive reasoning, the consequent of a 
hypothetical proposition is the necessary condition of the
antecedent of the proposition. In causal reasoning, the 
circumstance (or set of circumstances) in whose absence an
event under examination cannot occur; its sine qua non. See
also Sufficient condition
Negation: Denial; symbolized by the tilde or curl. ~p simply means
“it is not the case that p,” and may be read as “not-p”
Negative definition: A variety of faulty definition that seeks to
explain a term by reporting what it does not mean rather
than by explaining what it does mean
Nominal definition: A stipulative definition; one that arises
from the arbitrary assignment of a meaning to a new term
Non causa pro causa: An informal fallacy, more commonly
known as the fallacy of false cause, in which one mistakenly
treats as the cause of a thing that which is not really its cause
Noncontradiction, Principle of: A principle that asserts that no
statement can be both true and false; sometimes called one
of the laws of thought
Nonexclusive events: In probability theory, events so related
that the occurrence of one does not preclude the occurrence
of the other or others
Non sequitur: Any argument that commits one of those informal
fallacies in which the conclusion simply does not follow
from the premises
Nonstandard-form propositions, techniques for translating 
into standard form. See also Standard-form categorical
propositions
Normal-form formula: A formula in which negation signs apply
to simple predicates only
Numerical coefficient of probability: A number that describes
the likelihood, or probability, of the occurrence of an event. Its
possible values range from 0 (impossibility) to 1 (certainty)
O
Objective intension: The total set of characteristics shared by all
the objects in the extension of a term
Obverse. See Obversion
Obversion: A valid form of immediate inference for every
standard-form categorical proposition. To obvert a proposition
we change its quality (from affirmative to negative, or from
negative to affirmative) and replace the predicate term with
its complement. Thus, applied to the proposition “All dogs
are mammals” obversion yields “No dogs are non-mammals,”
which is called its “obverse.” The proposition obverted is
called the “obvertend”
Obvertend. See Obversion
Operational definition: A kind of connotative definition that
states that the term to be defined is correctly applied to a
given case if and only if the performance of specified 
operations in that case yields a specified result
Opposition: The logical relation that exists between two contra-
dictories, between two contraries, or in general between any
two categorical propositions that differ in quantity, quality,
K
Glossary
or other respects. These relations are displayed on the
square of opposition
Ostensive definition: A kind of denotative definition in which
the objects denoted by the term being defined are referred to
by means of pointing, or with some other gesture; some-
times called a demonstrative definition
P
Paradoxes of material implication: Certain counterintuitive
consequences of the definition of material implication:
Because 
means only that either p is false or q is true, it
follows that a false statement materially implies any state-
ment, and it follows that a true statement is materially
implied by any statement whatever. These so-called 
“paradoxes” are resolved when the strict logical meaning of
material implication is fully understood
Parameter: An auxiliary symbol or phrase that is introduced in
translating statements uniformly, helping to express a syllo-
gism with exactly three terms so that it may be accurately
tested
Particular proposition: A proposition that refers to some but not
to all the members of a class. The particular affirmative
proposition (traditionally called an I proposition) says that
“Some S is P.” The particular negative proposition (tradi-
tionally called an O proposition) says that “Some S is not P.”
In both traditional and modern logic, particular propositions
are understood to have existential import; in the theory of
quantification, they are symbolized using the existential
quantifier
Peirce’s law: A well-known statement form 
Performative utterance: An utterance which, under appropriate
circumstances, actually performs the act it appears to report
or describe. (E.g., “I apologize for my mistake,” said or 
written appropriately, is a performative utterance because,
in saying those words, one does apologize)
Persuasive definition: A definition formulated and used to
resolve a dispute influencing attitudes or stirring emotions,
often relying upon the use of emotive language
Petitio principii: The informal fallacy of begging the question;
an argument in which the conclusion is assumed in one of
the premises
Poisoning the well: An informal fallacy; a variety of abusive ad
hominen argument. So named because, by attacking the good
faith or intellectual honesty of the opponent, it undermines
continued rational exchange
Post hoc ergo propter hoc: A fallacy in which an event is pre-
sumed to have been caused by a closely preceding event.
Literally, “After this; therefore, because of this”
Precising definition: A definition devised to eliminate 
vagueness by delineating a concept more sharply
Preliminary hypothesis: A hypothesis, usually partial and 
tentative, adopted at the outset of any scientific inquiry to
give some direction to the collection of evidence
Premise indicator: In an argument, a word or phrase (like
“because” and “since”) that normally signals that what
follows it are statements serving as premises
Premises: In an argument, the propositions upon which inference
is based; the propositions that are claimed to provide grounds
or reasons for the conclusion
[(p ) q) ) p] ) p
p ) q
626

Presumption, fallacy of: Any fallacy in which the conclusion
depends on a tacit assumption that is dubious, unwarranted,
or false
Probability calculus. See Calculus of probability
Product theorem: In the calculus of probability, a theorem
asserting that the probability of the joint occurrence of 
multiple independent events is equal to the product of their
separate probabilities
Proposition: A statement; what is typically asserted using a declar-
ative sentence, and hence always either true or false—although
its truth or falsity may be unknown. See also Categorical propo-
sition; Standard-form categorical proposition
Propositional function: In quantification theory, an expression
from which a proposition may result either by instantiation
or by generalization. A propositional function is instantiated
when the individual variables within it are replaced by indi-
vidual constants (e.g., Hx is instantiated as Hs). A proposi-
tional function is generalized when either the universal or the
existential quantifier is introduced to precede it [e.g., Hx is
generalized as either (x)Hx or as 
Protasis: The antecedent in a hypothetical proposition
Proximate cause: In any chain of causes and effects, the event
nearest to the event whose explanation is sought. Contrasted
with “remote” causes, which are more distant in the causal
chain
Punctuation: The parentheses, brackets, and braces used in
mathematics and logic to eliminate ambiguity
Pure hypothetical syllogism: A syllogism that contains only
hypothetical propositions
Q
Quality: An attribute of every categorical proposition, deter-
mined by whether the proposition affirms or denies some
form of class inclusion. Every categorical proposition is
either affirmative in quality or negative in quality
Quantification: A method for describing and symbolizing 
noncompound statements by reference to their inner logical
structure; the modern theory used in the analysis of what
were traditionally called A, E, I and O propositions
Quantity: An attribute of every categorical proposition, deter-
mined by whether the proposition refers to all members or
only to some members of the class designated by its subject
term. Thus every categorical proposition is either universal
in quantity or particular in quantity
Quasi-ostensive definition: A variety of denotative definition
that relies upon gesture, in conjunction with a descriptive
phrase
Question: An expression in the interrogative mood that does not
assert anything, and which therefore does not express a propo-
sition—although in ordinary discourse questions are com-
monly used to assert the propositions their answers suggest
R
Reasoning: The central topic in the study of logic: problems 
in
Red herring fallacy: A fallacy in which attention is deliberately
deflected away from the issue under discussion
Reducing the number of terms in a syllogism: Eliminating syn-
onyms and the names of complementary classes from a 
(x)Hx]
Glossary
syllogism to ensure that it contains exactly three terms; part
of the process of translating a syllogism into standard form
to test it for validity
Reduction to standard form: The translation of syllogistic argu-
ments in any form into the standard form in which they can be
tested for validity; also called translation to standard form
Refutation by logical analogy: A method that shows the inva-
lidity of an argument by presenting another argument that
has the same form, but whose premises are known to be true
and whose conclusion is known to be false
Relative frequency theory of probability: The view of probabili-
ty in which the probability of a simple event is determined as
a fraction whose denominator is the total number of mem-
bers of a class, and whose numerator is the number of mem-
bers of that class that are found to exhibit a particular attrib-
ute that is equivalent to the event in question
Relevance: An essential attribute of a good scientific hypothesis,
possessed by a hypothesis when the fact(s) to be explained
are deducible from that hypothesis, either alone or from it
together with known causal laws. Also, one of the criteria
with which arguments by analogy are appraised
Relevance, fallacy of: Any fallacy in which the premises are
irrelevant to the conclusion
Remote cause: In any chain of causes and effects, an event dis-
tant from the effect for which explanation is sought.
Contrasted with “proximate” cause
Replacement, Rule of: The rule that logically equivalent expres-
sions may replace each other wherever they occur. The rule
of replacement underlies the 10 expressions of logical equiv-
alence that serve as rules of inference
Residues, Method of: A pattern of inductive inquiry in which,
when some portions of any phenomenon under investigation
are known to be the effects of certain identified antecedents,
we may conclude that the remaining portion of the phenom-
enon is the effect of the remaining antecedents
Retrograde analysis: Reasoning that seeks to explain how
things must have developed from what went before
Rhetorical question: An utterance used to make a statement,
but which, because it is in interrogative form and is therefore
neither true nor false, does not literally assert anything
Rules and fallacies for syllogisms: The set of rules with which
the validity of standard-form syllogisms may be tested.
These rules refer to the number and distribution of terms in
a valid syllogism, and to the restrictions imposed by the
quality and quantity of the premises
Rules of inference: The rules that permit valid inferences from
statements assumed as premises. Twenty-three rules of
inference are set forth in this book: nine elementary 
valid argument forms, ten logical equivalences whose 
members may replace one another, and four rules 
governing instantiation and generalization in 
quantified logic
S
Scientific explanation: Any theoretical account of some fact or
event, always subject to revision, that exhibits certain essen-
tial features: relevance, compatibility with previously well-
established hypotheses, predictive power, and simplicity
Scientific investigation. See Scientific method
627

Scientific method: A set of techniques for solving problems
involving the construction of preliminary hypotheses, the
formulation of explanatory hypotheses, the deduction 
of consequences from hypotheses, the testing of the
consequences deduced, and the application of the theory
thus confirmed to further problems
Second-order enthymeme: An incompletely stated argument in
which the proposition taken for granted but not stated is the
minor premise of the syllogism
Self-contradictory statement form: A statement form all of
whose substitution instances are false
Sentence: A unit of language that expresses a complete thought;
a sentence may express a proposition, but is distinct from
the proposition it may be used to express
Simple dilemma: An argument designed to push the adversary
to choose between two alternatives, the (usually undesirable)
conclusion in either case being a single categorical
proposition
Simple enumeration. See Induction by simple enumeration
Simple predicate: In quantification theory, a propositional func-
tion having some true and some false substitution instances,
each of which is an affirmative singular proposition
Simple statement: A statement that does not contain any other
statement as a component
Simplification (Simp.): One of the nine elementary valid argu-
ment forms; it is a rule of inference that permits the separa-
tion of conjoined statements. If the conjunction of p and q is
given, simplification permits the inference that p.
Symbolized as 
, therefore p
Sine qua non: A necessary condition for something; meaning 
literally: “that without which not”
Singular proposition: A proposition that asserts that a particular
individual has (or does not have) some specified attribute
Slippery slope: A fallacy in which change in a particular direc-
tion is asserted to lead inevitably to further changes (usually
undesirable) in the same direction
Sophism: Any of the fallacies of ambiguity. See also Ambiguity,
fallacy of
Sorites: An argument whose conclusion is inferred from its
premises by a chain of syllogistic inferences in which the
conclusion of each inference serves as a premise for the next,
and the conclusion of the last syllogism is the conclusion of
the entire argument
Sound: A deductive argument is said to be sound if it is valid
and has true premises; a deductive argument is unsound if it
is not valid, or if one or more of its premises is false
Specific form (of a given argument): The argument form from
which the given argument results when a different simple
statement is consistently substituted for each different 
statement variable in that form
Specific form (of a given statement): The statement form from
which the statement results by consistently substituting a differ-
ent simple statement for each different statement variable
Square of opposition: A diagram in the form of a square in
which the four types of categorical propositions (A, E, I, and
O) are situated at the corners, exhibiting the logical relations
(called “oppositions”) among these propositions. The tradi-
tional square of opposition, which represents the Aristotelian
interpretation of these propositions and their relations, dif-
fers importantly from the square of opposition as it is used
in Boolean, or modern symbolic, logic, according to which
some traditional oppositions do not hold
p # q
Glossary
Standard-form categorical propositions: The four categorical
propositions, named A, E, I, and O—for universal affirmative,
universal negative, particular affirmative, and particular neg-
ative, respectively
Standard-form categorical syllogism: A categorical syllogism in
which the premises and conclusions are all standard-form
categorical propositions (A, E, I or O) and are arranged in a
specified order; major premise first, minor premise second,
and conclusion last
Standard-form translation. See Reduction to standard form
Statement: A proposition; what is typically asserted by a declar-
ative sentence, but not the sentence itself. Every statement
must be either true or false, although the truth or falsity of a
given statement may be unknown
Statement form: A sequence of symbols containing no state-
ments, but containing statement variables connected in
such a way that when statements are consistently substituted
for the statement variables, the result is a statement. See also
Specific form of a given statement
Statement variable: a place-holder; a letter (by convention any
of the lower case letters, beginning with p, q, . . . etc.) for
which a statement may be substituted
Stipulative definition: A definition in which a new symbol is
introduced to which some meaning is arbitrarily assigned;
as opposed to a lexical definition, a stipulative definition
cannot be correct or incorrect
Straw man fallacy: A fallacy in which an opponent's position is
depicted as being more extreme or unreasonable than is jus-
tified by what was actually asserted
Subalternation: The relation on the square of opposition between
a universal proposition (an A or an E proposition) and its
corresponding particular proposition (the I or the O
proposition, respectively). In this relation, the particular
proposition (I or O) is called the “subaltern.” “Subalternation”
is also the name of an immediate inference from a 
universal proposition to its corresponding particular 
proposition; it is a valid inference in the traditional
interpretation, but generally it is not a valid inference in
modern symbolic logic
Subcontraries: Two propositions so related that they cannot
both be false, although they may both be true. On the tradi-
tional square of opposition the corresponding I and O
propositions, across the bottom of the square, are subcon-
traries, but on the modern, Boolean interpretation of these
propositions, according to which they can both be false, the I
and O propositions are not subcontraries
Subjective connotation. See Subjective intension
Subjective intension: The set of all attributes that the speaker
believes to be possessed by objects denoted by a given term
Subject-predicate propositions: The traditional categorical
propositions, identified as universal affirmative (A), 
universal negative (E), Particular affirmative (I) and 
particular negative (O)
Substitution instance: For any argument form, any argument
that results from the consistent substitution of statements for
statement variables is a substitution instance of the given
form. For any statement form, any statement that results
from the consistent substitution of statements for statement
variables is a substitution instance of the statement form
Sufficient condition: A circumstance (or set of circumstances)
whose presence ensures the occurrence of a given event. So
conceived, the sufficient condition must comprise the conjunc-
tion of all the necessary conditions of the event in question,
628

and is normally considered the “cause” of that event. See also
Necessary condition
Superaltern. See Subalternation
Syllogism: Any deductive argument in which a conclusion is
inferred from two premises. See also Categorical 
syllogism; Disjunctive syllogism; Hypothetical syllogism
Syllogistic argument: Any argument that is either a standard-
form categorical syllogism or can be reformulated as a
standard-form categorical syllogism without any change of
meaning
Syllogistic rules. See Rules and fallacies for syllogisms
Symbolic logic: The name commonly given to the modern 
treatment of deductive logic
Synonymous definition: A definition of a symbol that gives 
its synonym, another word or phrase or set of symbols 
having the same meaning as the definiendum; one kind of
connotative definition
Synonyms: Two words with the same meaning
T
Tautology: A statement form all of whose substitution instances
must be true. “Tautology” (“Taut.”) is also the name of an
expression of logical equivalence, a rule of inference that
permits the mutual replacement of p by (
), and the
mutual replacement of p by (
)
Testability: An attribute of a scientific (as contrasted with an
unscientific) hypothesis; its capacity to be confirmed or
disconfirmed
Theoretical definition: A definition that encapsulates an under-
standing of the theory in which that term is a key element
Third-order enthymeme: An incompletely stated argument in
which the proposition that is taken for granted but not 
stated is the conclusion
Tilde: The symbol for negation, ~, appearing immediately
before (to the left of) what is denied
Traditional square of opposition. See Square of opposition
Translation to standard form. See Reduction to standard form
Transposition (Trans.): The name of an expression of logical
equivalence; a rule of inference that permits the mutual
replacement of (
) and (
)
Truth-functional component: Any component of a compound
statement whose replacement there by any other statement
having the same truth value would leave the truth value of
the compound statement unchanged
Truth-functional compound statement: A compound statement
whose truth value is determined wholly by the truth values
of its components
Truth-functional connective: Any logical connective (e.g., con-
junction, disjunction, material implication and material
equivalence) between the components of a truth-functionally
compound statement
Truth table: An array on which all possible truth values of com-
pound statements are displayed, through the display of all
possible combinations of the truth values of their 
simple components. A truth table may be used to define
truth-functional connectives; it may also be used to test the
validity of many deductive arguments; testing arguments on
Truth value: The status of any statement as true or false 
(T or F)
'q ) 'p
p ) q
p # p
p ¡ p
Glossary
Tu quoque: An informal fallacy; a variety of circumstantial ad
hominem argument
U
Undistributed middle, Fallacy of: A syllogistic fallacy in which
the middle of the syllogism term is not distributed in either
premise
Uniform translation: Techniques (often requiring the use of
auxiliary symbols) making possible the reformulation of a
syllogistic argument into standard form, so that it may be
accurately tested
Unit class: A class with only one member
Universal Generalization (U.G.): A rule of inference in the 
theory of quantification that permits the valid inference of a
generalized, or universally quantified, expression from an
expression that is given as true of any arbitrarily selected
individual
Universal Instantiation (U.I.): A rule of inference in the
theory of quantification that permits the valid inference
of any substitution instance of a propositional function
from the universal quantification of the propositional
function
Universal proposition: A proposition that refers to all the
members of a class. The universal affirmative proposition
(traditionally called an A proposition) says that “All S is
P.” The universal negative proposition (traditionally called
an E proposition) says that “No S is P.” In the Aristotelian
interpretation universal propositions have existential
import; in modern symbolic logic they do not have such
import, and are symbolized using the universal quantifier
Universal quantifier: A symbol, (x), in the theory of quantifica-
tion, used before a propositional function to assert that the
predicate following the symbol is true of everything. Thus
“(x) Fx” means “Given any x, F is true of it”
Unscientific explanation: An explanation that is asserted 
dogmatically and regarded as unquestionable
V
Vagueness: The attribute of a term having “borderline cases”
regarding which it cannot be determined whether the term
should be applied to those cases or not. See also Ambiguity
Validity: A characteristic of any deductive argument whose
premises, if they were all true, would provide conclusive
grounds for the truth of its conclusion. Such an argument is
said to be valid. Validity is a formal characteristic; it applies
only to arguments, as distinguished from truth, which
applies to propositions
Variable. See Individual variable; Statement variable
Venn diagrams: Iconic representations of categorical proposi-
tions, and of arguments, to display their logical forms using
overlapping circles
Venn diagram technique: The method of testing the validity of
syllogisms using Venn diagrams
Verbal definition. See Stipulative definition
Verbal dispute. See Merely verbal dispute
W
Wedge: The symbol (
) for weak (inclusive) disjunction; any
statement of the form 
is true if p is true, or if q is true,
or if both p and q are true
p ¡ q
¡
629

This page intentionally left blank 

Index
Page references followed by "f" indicate illustrated
figures or photographs; followed by "t" indicates a
table.
A
A priori theory of probability, 588-590, 606, 619
Abraham, 5, 17, 28, 33, 46, 124, 148, 164-165, 277,
289, 509
Absorption, 369, 371-372, 397, 425, 559, 618
Abusive ad hominem argument, 120
Accent, 111, 146-149, 152, 160, 162, 618, 623
Accident, 75, 111, 136-138, 142, 151-152, 159, 162,
530, 561-562, 572, 589, 618, 621, 623
Accuracy, 3, 386, 502, 565, 574
Action, 12-13, 31, 56, 74, 101, 106, 113-114, 118,
139-140, 156, 286, 293, 379, 406, 490, 514,
516, 526, 544, 594
Ad baculum (appeal to force), 618
Ad hoc, 88, 573, 618
Ad hominem, 118-121, 124, 133, 158, 161-162,
618-620, 629
fallacy, 118-119, 121, 124, 133, 158, 161-162,
618-620, 629
types of, 620
Ad Hominem argument, 118, 120-121, 620, 629
Ad hominem (argument against the person), 618
Ad hominem arguments, 119-120
Ad hominem attack, 118, 120, 620
Ad hominem fallacy, 119
Ad ignorantiam (argument from ignorance), 618
Ad misericordiam (appeal to pity), 618
Ad populum (appeal to emotion), 618
Ad verecundiam (appeal to inappropriate authority),
618
Adams, Henry, 47
Addition (Add.), 370, 397, 618
Addition theorem, 595-596, 599, 603, 608, 613, 618
Advertisements, 140, 278, 540
Advertising, 76, 113, 133, 140, 148, 448, 540
Affirmative action, 12-13, 114, 118
Affirmative statements, 264
Affirming the consequent, 109-110, 284, 333, 338, 618
Agenda, 165
Agre, Peter, 581
Agreement, Method of, 618
AIDS, 25, 525
Alchemy, 143
Alexander the Great, 3, 168
Alford, Henry, 155
Alroy, Daniel, 48
Alternative occurrences, 591, 595, 597, 618
Ambiguity, 68, 79-81, 85-86, 94, 102, 107, 109, 111,
144-146, 149-152, 154, 158-159, 263-264,
312-313, 315, 319, 618, 622-623, 627-629
context and, 144
of argument, 109, 145, 158, 623
of statements, 622-623, 628
of terms, 80, 152, 627
Ambiguity, fallacy of, 618, 623, 628
Ambiguous middle, 231, 618
Ambrose, 62, 101, 103, 105, 153
Amphiboly, 111, 146, 152, 160, 162, 618, 623
Analogical argument, 489-491, 495-499, 511, 611, 618
Analogical reasoning, 485-496, 498-511, 616
Analogy, 218-219, 252, 305, 328, 332, 460, 473,
486-492, 494, 497-499, 502, 505-508,
510-511, 518, 609, 611, 618, 627
argument by, 218, 328, 486-487, 489, 494, 498,
505, 510, 518, 627
nonargumentative, 488, 490, 609
Analysis, 2, 9, 36, 40-41, 45, 51-52, 54, 59-60, 64-65,
70, 104, 168-169, 173, 180, 182, 193, 202,
212, 228, 248, 265-266, 282-283, 291,
305-306, 314, 332, 350, 434-435, 438, 446,
455, 465, 510, 514, 520, 537, 540, 547-549,
578, 587, 613-614, 615-616, 619, 627
deductive, 2, 168-169, 173, 305-306, 332, 350,
434, 510, 537, 548, 587, 615-616, 619
if-then, 350
inductive, 2, 510, 514, 520, 537, 540, 547-549,
587, 615-616, 619, 627
issue, 40, 627
Analyzing, 35-65, 104, 353, 539, 599, 608-609, 612
Analyzing arguments, 35-65
Anger, 115
Antecedent, 17, 284-286, 318-325, 336, 339, 345-347,
351, 357, 379, 389, 406-407, 411-412, 423,
437, 439, 442, 445, 535-536, 539, 545,
547-549, 557, 588, 618, 621, 624-627
Anthropology, 135, 501
Apodosis, 318-319, 618, 620, 624
Appeal to authority, 2, 137
Appeal to emotion, 111, 113-114, 124, 158, 618
Appeal to force, 111, 121-122, 124, 158, 618
Appeal to ignorance, 131-133, 137, 159, 162, 618
Appeal to inappropriate authority, 111, 133, 137, 159,
161, 618
Appeal to pity, 114-115, 618
Appeals
emotional, 114-115, 158, 305
to pity, 114-115
Appeals to emotion, 113-114
Appeals to ignorance, 132
Aquinas, Thomas, 9, 44, 65, 271, 287
Archimedes, 37-38
Argument, 2, 5-20, 24-32, 36-38, 40-45, 47, 52-54, 56,
61, 64, 69, 89, 92, 107, 109-115, 117-124,
126-128, 130-131, 133-138, 140-142,
144-150, 152, 154, 158-161, 163-164,
168-170, 173, 183, 189, 199-200, 211-212,
214-218, 222-225, 227, 230-237, 243, 250,
255-258, 262, 265-270, 274-279, 282-286,
288-291, 293-295, 303, 305-307, 311, 320,
328-341, 343, 345-346, 350, 353-354,
365-380, 382-383, 385, 388-389, 391-397,
399-400, 402, 404-406, 411-416, 420-424,
434-435, 443, 451-457, 459-465, 468, 473,
476-477, 481-482, 486-487, 489-491,
494-499, 502, 504-508, 510-511, 518-519,
537, 549, 559, 609, 611, 615-616, 618-629
analysis of, 9, 40, 64, 168, 173, 212, 305, 332, 350,
435, 510, 537, 549, 615-616, 627
by analogy, 486-487, 489, 494, 499, 507, 510, 518,
627
complex, 8, 28, 36, 40, 53, 64, 111, 138, 140, 142,
159, 217, 289, 329, 372, 376, 378-379,
382, 443, 504, 549, 618-620
conclusion of, 6-8, 11, 15, 17, 25-27, 29-31, 42,
44-45, 52, 112, 140, 142, 152, 159, 212,
223-224, 232, 234-235, 256, 266,
274-275, 279, 286, 289-291, 293, 328,
334, 346, 366, 373-374, 376-378, 391,
394-395, 413, 453, 459, 495, 499, 505,
618-623, 628
deductive, 2, 24-28, 31-32, 37, 56, 110, 168-170,
173, 211, 216, 243, 293, 305-306, 311,
328, 332, 345, 350, 353, 366, 368, 372,
376, 414, 423-424, 434, 473, 486-487,
505, 510-511, 537, 611, 615-616, 619,
621-626, 628-629
defined, 32, 89, 92, 107, 112, 149, 231, 307, 311,
332, 350, 353-354, 373, 504, 620-621,
626
diagramming, 36, 40, 45, 64, 199, 222-224
evaluating, 69, 465, 495, 559
explanations and, 18
in ordinary language, 255-258, 262, 265-270,
274-279, 282-286, 288-291, 293-295, 303
inductive, 2, 24-27, 32, 134, 141, 486-487, 490,
496, 505, 510-511, 518, 537, 549, 609,
611, 615-616, 618-621, 624-625, 627
interwoven, 45
invalid, 24, 27-30, 32, 149, 168, 200, 214, 216-218,
222, 224-225, 227, 230-231, 233,
235-237, 257, 266-267, 270, 274-276,
283-286, 290, 293, 305-306, 328,
332-335, 338-339, 346, 354, 411-414,
420, 422-423, 434, 457, 460-465, 468,
473, 481-482, 486, 505, 621, 624
paraphrasing, 36-37, 45, 56, 64
premise of, 12-13, 16-17, 36, 41, 44-45, 119, 146,
231, 234, 250, 266, 277, 279, 289, 366,
373, 423, 435, 623, 628
recognizing, 2, 11, 117, 290
sound, 2, 8, 31, 117, 154, 415, 424, 489, 628
structure of, 5, 36, 40, 45, 54, 56, 107, 168, 306,
330, 339, 353-354, 413, 435, 473, 489,
623
syllogistic, 28, 168, 173, 211, 214, 216-218, 225,
227, 230, 235-236, 243, 255-258, 262,
265-269, 274-276, 279, 295, 306, 455,
619, 627-629
valid, 24-32, 37, 61, 142, 145, 150, 168-169, 173,
189, 199-200, 211, 214-218, 222-223,
225, 227, 230-235, 237, 243, 250,
256-258, 266, 269-270, 274-277, 279,
282-286, 290, 305-306, 311, 320, 328,
332, 334-340, 346, 354, 365-374,
376-377, 380, 382, 385, 388, 392-396,
399-400, 405, 411, 414-416, 420,
423-424, 434-435, 452, 455-456,
460-462, 465, 468, 476, 486, 494, 537,
549, 618-629
Argument form, 7, 328-330, 332-341, 343, 346,
366-367, 369, 371, 374, 389, 393, 396-397,
399-400, 402, 412, 507, 615, 619, 622, 624,
628
common invalid, 338
common valid, 334
Arguments
by elimination, 57-58, 295
chain, 57, 279, 296, 372, 381, 627
cogent, 53, 494
conclusions in, 9, 29, 37, 43, 305
deductive, 2, 24-28, 31-32, 37, 56, 110, 168-170,
173, 211, 216, 293, 305-306, 309, 328,
332, 345, 350, 353, 366, 368, 372, 376,
423-424, 433-434, 473, 486-487, 505,
510, 537, 587, 611, 615-616, 622-624,
629
definition, 16, 92, 271, 330, 333, 350, 504, 623,
627, 629
definition of, 330, 333, 350, 629
evaluating, 69, 465
good, 2, 9, 14, 17, 26, 39, 42, 48, 56-57, 60, 92,
113, 120, 130, 136, 138, 141, 145, 173,
216, 242, 293, 307, 324, 393, 468,
486-487, 497, 510, 627
in real life, 13, 56, 64
in the strict sense, 307
inductive, 2, 24-27, 32, 141, 486-487, 490, 496,
505, 510, 514, 518, 520, 537, 549, 587,
608-609, 611, 615-616, 624, 627
invalid, 24, 27-30, 32, 125, 168, 200, 216-218, 242,
257, 261, 266, 270-271, 274-276, 286,
293, 297, 305-306, 328, 332-334,
338-339, 346, 411, 413, 420, 422-423,
434, 460, 462, 465, 468, 473, 486, 488,
505, 624
making, 5, 19, 36-37, 46, 61, 110, 136, 141, 228,
268, 382, 421, 460, 609, 629
persuasive, 2, 16, 56, 118, 274, 519
sound, 2, 8, 31, 117, 271, 424
structure of, 5, 36, 40, 45, 51, 54, 56, 168, 306,
330, 339, 353, 413, 433, 472-473, 501,
623
structures, 52, 451, 465
two, 5-6, 8, 13, 16, 18-19, 24-25, 27, 30, 32, 36, 38,
40, 43-45, 48, 50-52, 54, 60-64, 118, 121,
142, 150, 168-170, 205, 211, 218, 228,

257, 260-262, 265-266, 269, 271, 275,
279, 282, 292, 296-297, 302, 305, 307,
320, 324, 328-329, 333-334, 336,
338-339, 345, 350, 353, 365-369, 371,
376, 378, 391, 393-394, 399-400,
402-403, 405-406, 422, 433, 453, 456,
462, 465, 473, 486-487, 490, 494,
505-506, 510, 518, 520, 537, 587,
608-609, 611, 622-624, 629
valid, 24-32, 37, 61, 142, 145, 150, 168-169, 173,
200, 211, 216-218, 242, 257-258,
260-261, 266, 269-271, 274-276, 279,
282, 286, 297, 302, 305-306, 320, 324,
328, 332, 334, 336, 338-340, 346, 351,
365-369, 371-373, 376, 382, 385,
392-394, 399-400, 405, 411, 420,
423-424, 433-434, 455-456, 460, 462,
465, 468, 486, 488, 494, 537, 549, 587,
622-624, 627, 629
Aringarosa, Bishop, 116
Aristotelian logic, 168-169, 196, 306, 434, 465,
619-620, 622, 625
Aristotle, 3-4, 7-8, 24, 78, 106, 122, 131, 146-147,
154, 156, 168-169, 173, 195, 243, 272, 274,
279, 287-288, 306, 353, 436, 560, 615-616
Armour, Stacy, 549
Arnett, Cliff, 119
Arnold, Matthew, 105
Assertion, 4, 15, 28, 87, 123, 171, 176, 232-233,
268-269, 311, 322, 349, 390, 517
Assertions, 2, 13, 15, 121, 135, 197, 265, 273, 416,
435
Association (Assoc.), 388, 397, 426, 619
Assumptions, 111, 139, 196, 461, 604, 610
evaluating, 610
fallacies of, 111
value, 461, 604
Astell, Mary, 491
Astronomy, 3, 25, 42, 131, 157, 288, 342, 536, 556,
560, 571, 584, 615
Asyllogistic arguments, 465, 468, 473
Atheism, 73, 78, 126, 508
Audience
analysis, 291
neutral, 117
Authority, appeal to, 619
Average, 9, 53, 137, 291, 524, 534, 539, 541, 549,
551-552, 555, 579, 581-582
Axioms, 74, 367, 434, 616
B
Background knowledge, 467
Backing, 489
Bacon, Francis, 10, 73, 520, 615
Baker, Howard, 122
Barbara, 164, 217, 231, 243-244, 246, 250-251,
257-258, 261, 269, 274, 277, 281, 299-301,
475, 619
Baroko, 242, 244, 247-248, 250-251, 266, 299, 619
Bawer, Bruce, 126
Begging the question, 111, 140, 142, 159, 162,
619-620, 626
Begging the question (petitio principii), 140, 142, 159
Belief, 16, 69, 76-78, 104-105, 109, 112, 118, 130,
228, 517, 551, 561, 574, 588-589, 618-619
Beliefs, 2, 8, 68-69, 75-76, 79, 107, 113, 120, 164, 573
Bellow, Saul, 134
Bentham, Jeremy, 8, 546
Berkeley, George, 271
Bernstein, Anya, 46
Berra, Yogi, 416
Bettelheim, Bruno, 17
Biconditional, 345, 348-349, 390, 440-441, 467, 619
Biconditional statement or proposition, 619
Bierce, Ambrose, 101, 103, 105, 153
Biography, 3, 7, 37, 50, 57, 193, 228, 342, 367, 386,
433, 438, 449, 451, 546
Biology, 3, 6, 133, 503, 560, 565-567, 575, 577
Blair, Tony, 47
Bodin, Jean, 21
Bokardo, 244, 248, 250-251, 619
Bonaparte, Napoleon, 448
Boole, George, 193, 195, 228, 616, 619
Boolean algebra, 193
Boolean interpretation, 193, 195, 198-201, 208, 210,
228, 234-235, 241-243, 260, 445, 616, 619,
621, 625, 628
Boolean square of opposition, 202
Boredom, 302
Brahe, Tycho, 569
Brain, 104, 272, 450, 508-509, 522, 524, 528, 553,
556
structure of, 104
Breyer, Stephen, 90
Bright, John, 74
Brill, Steve, 507-508
Brinkley, Alan, 46
Broder, David, 116, 164
Brooks, David, 38, 448
Brooks, John, 271
Bruce, Thomas, 492
Bruggemann, Edward, 156
Bruno, Giordano, 579
Buchsbaum, Ralph, 502
Buckvar, Eric, 491
Burke, Edmund, 72
Butler, Joseph, 158
Butler, Samuel, 103
C
Calculus of probability, 590-591, 595, 603-606, 608,
618-619, 623, 627
Camenes, 244, 246, 250-251, 297-298, 477, 619
Camestres, 244, 246, 250-251, 257, 269, 276, 299,
301-302, 619
Candlish, Stewart, 286
Capital punishment, 10, 76
Cargill, Michelle, 550
Carroll, James, 527
Carroll, Lewis, 71, 144-145, 280, 296, 416, 505
Case, Anne, 551
Categorical proposition, 169-170, 174-177, 184,
186-187, 204, 206, 211, 220-221, 245,
262-265, 268, 289, 619-622, 626-628
translating into standard form, 626
Categorical propositions, 3, 167-210, 211-213, 219,
225, 228, 234, 241, 245, 255, 257, 259,
261-269, 283, 285, 291, 305, 443, 445, 465,
476, 615-616, 619, 624-626, 628-629
defined, 186, 626
types of, 3, 182, 184-185, 187, 202, 615, 624, 628
Categorical statement, 475
Categorical syllogism, 211-212, 214-215, 218-219,
226, 228, 230-231, 234-235, 240-241,
243-245, 248-251, 255-257, 261, 265-266,
268-269, 274, 276, 279, 465, 476, 619,
622-623, 628-629
standard-form, 211-212, 214-215, 219, 230,
234-235, 241, 244, 248-251, 255-257,
265-266, 268-269, 276, 465, 476, 619,
622-623, 628-629
Venn diagram technique for testing, 211, 219, 249
Categorical syllogisms
defined, 231, 620-621
enthymemes, 255, 276
four figures, 214-215, 241, 245, 247, 249, 623
kinds of propositions, 208, 282
rules for, 250, 255, 625
standard form of, 243
validity of, 206, 212, 218, 224, 228, 235, 249, 255,
260, 266, 280, 468, 615-616, 625
Categories, 7, 79, 88-89, 99, 110, 123, 145, 169, 211,
228, 282, 285, 307-308, 577, 615, 619
Causal laws, 82, 487, 514, 517, 520, 528, 537, 545,
555, 577-578, 587, 619, 624, 627
Causal reasoning, 513-557, 619, 626
limitations of inductive techniques, 514, 545
Causation, 503, 540-541, 548
Cause, 10, 15, 25-26, 56, 73, 76, 103, 111-112, 114,
129, 134-135, 137, 147, 159, 161-162,
287-288, 383, 409-410, 486, 491-492, 496,
504, 507-508, 514-522, 524, 526-527, 529,
532-536, 538-540, 545, 547-549, 555-557,
562-564, 602, 606, 609, 611, 618-620, 623,
625-627, 629
Cause and effect, 134, 514, 517
Causes, 3, 8, 19, 21, 25, 59, 72, 82, 86, 486-487, 502,
508-509, 511, 515-518, 521-522, 527,
538-540, 547-548, 559, 562, 583, 611, 627
Cecil, Robert, 74
Celarent, 215, 242, 244, 246, 250-251, 256, 271,
301-302, 455, 620
Ceremonial language, 69, 620
Certainty, 25-27, 153, 233, 369-370, 372, 486-488,
510, 548, 556, 560-561, 564, 587, 596, 624,
626
Cesare, 242, 244, 246, 250-251, 281, 298, 475, 477,
620
Challenger, James, 295
Chance, 47, 272, 504, 524, 530, 550-551, 580,
587-588, 590, 592-593, 598-599, 602-603,
605, 610, 612-613
Charles V, 529
Charts, 536
Chemistry, 488, 500, 560, 575, 581
Chen, Fan, 503
Childhood, 523, 551
Chirac, Jacques, 125
Choice, 65, 72, 76, 104, 134, 148, 226, 288-289, 296,
621
Chomsky, Noam, 33
Christianity, 492, 506
Christmas, 23
Chronological order, 576
Church of England, 228, 386
Churchill, Winston, 106, 278
Cicero, 277
Circular argument, 140-141, 619-620
Circular definition, 620
Circularity, 100
Circumcision, 25, 525
Circumstantial ad hominem argument, 120, 620, 629
Claims, 15, 25, 27, 38, 118, 120-121, 131, 136, 168,
419, 498, 530, 561, 578, 583, 621, 624
confirmation of, 583
definition, 621
research, 578, 583
two, 25, 27, 38, 118, 121, 168, 621, 624
Clarify, 15, 36
Clarity
of thought, 616
Class, 8, 74, 81, 91-94, 97-100, 102, 106-107, 123,
129-130, 136, 150-151, 169-179, 185-186,
194-206, 210, 220, 222, 225-226, 228,
231-233, 251, 257, 260, 262-263, 265, 273,
283, 333, 419, 475, 477, 553, 576-577, 579,
589, 608, 619-622, 624, 626-627, 629
complement of a, 185-186, 202, 620
exclusion, 171, 225, 233, 265, 622
inclusion, 170-172, 174, 225, 233, 260, 265, 622,
627
relative complement of a, 186
Classes, 7, 24, 72, 74, 94, 98, 129, 142, 149, 168-173,
175, 185-186, 194, 196-198, 200-202,
204-208, 211, 220, 225, 227, 231, 233, 241,
256, 260, 262-263, 265, 282, 295, 306, 411,
615, 619, 622, 627
Classification, 109-110, 122, 146, 164, 559, 575-578,
584, 620
Cleveland, Grover, 49
Coelho, Tony, 146
Cogent, 53, 290, 494
Cohen, Randy, 9
Coincidence, 287
Coke, Edward, 104
Collective, 21, 23, 65, 149, 151
Command, 4, 15, 68, 113, 379, 393, 620
Common sense, 125, 129, 476, 495
Common terms, 87
Communism, 508
Commutation (Com.), 388, 396, 620
Complement, 185-187, 196, 202, 204-205, 220, 257,
620, 626
Complement, or Complementary class, 186, 620
Complex argumentative passages, 36, 51, 53, 64
Complex arguments, 378
Complex dilemma, 289, 620
Complex question, 111, 138-140, 142, 159, 162, 620
Complex questions, 196
Complexity, 6, 42, 98, 116-117, 140, 342, 413, 473
Component of a compound statement, 308, 629
Composition, 111, 149-152, 160, 162-163, 508, 620,
623
Compound proposition, 284, 318, 620, 623
Compromise, 353, 394, 508
Concentration, 179, 501, 580
Concept, 5, 28, 86, 97, 105, 157, 178, 185-186, 207,
308, 328, 333, 433-434, 473, 487, 504, 555,
587, 601, 603, 616, 626
Conclusion, 2, 6-9, 11-12, 14-20, 24-32, 40-45, 51-55,
61, 106, 109, 111-112, 114, 117-124,
130-134, 137-142, 144, 146-150, 152-153,
158-159, 168-169, 183, 187-189, 193,
211-213, 215, 217-218, 222-226, 228-239,
242-254, 256-257, 266-267, 269, 274-276,
278-279, 282-286, 289-293, 299, 311, 328,
332-337, 339-340, 345-346, 365-366,
632

372-374, 376-379, 381, 385, 391-392,
394-396, 400, 402, 404, 406-407, 412-416,
420-421, 423, 435, 452-454, 456-457,
459-461, 465, 473, 476-477, 486-489,
495-500, 505, 510-511, 518-519, 524,
532-533, 540, 545, 547, 559, 561, 575, 608,
611, 615, 618-629
defined, 32, 112, 149, 231, 311, 332, 373, 608,
620-621, 626
definition, 16, 112, 333, 414, 489, 618, 620-621,
623, 625-629
false, 2, 8, 14-15, 17, 24, 26-32, 55, 109, 111, 121,
130-131, 134, 137-138, 146, 148, 150,
159, 183, 188-189, 217-218, 224,
285-286, 290, 292, 311, 328, 332-337,
339-340, 345, 394, 404, 407, 412-416,
423, 435, 460-461, 473, 487-488, 505,
561, 618-623, 625-629
missing, 17, 111-112, 122, 124, 141, 159, 274-276,
385, 476, 489, 625
repeated, 51-53, 505
Conclusion indicator, 11, 620
Conclusion (s), 251
Conclusions, 2, 6, 9, 12-15, 25, 27, 29-32, 36-37, 40,
43, 45, 47, 51, 56-57, 64, 103, 118, 130, 136,
142, 148, 243, 274, 280, 291, 305, 332-333,
366, 395, 453, 460, 477, 486-488, 494, 505,
510, 518, 520, 537, 608, 615, 620, 628
hasty, 136
legitimate, 36
of statements, 366, 453, 628
Concomitant Variation, Method of, 620
Conditional, 5, 284-286, 289-290, 305, 318-322,
324-326, 333, 336-338, 341, 345-346, 369,
374, 377, 389, 391, 402, 404, 406-407, 412,
442, 445, 453, 456, 508, 601, 618, 620-621,
623-625
Conditional probability, 601
Conditional statement, 5, 318-321, 324, 336, 341,
345-346, 374, 377, 389, 391, 445, 618, 620
defined, 620
Conditional statements, 305, 318-319, 322, 324-325,
337-338, 345, 402, 442, 453
if and only if, 345, 453
sufficient conditions, 325
Conditions, 59, 135, 143, 307, 325, 503-504, 514-517,
525, 540, 552, 588, 610, 620, 625-626, 628
necessary, 325, 514-517, 588, 610, 620, 625-626,
628
reversal of, 325
sufficient, 325, 514-517, 610, 620, 625-626, 628
Confirm, 521, 528, 549, 551, 561, 564-566, 615
Confirmation, 487, 559, 562, 569, 572, 575, 581, 583,
606
Confucius, 104
Confusion, 76, 122, 144, 149-151, 199, 329, 497, 618
Conjunct, 307, 313, 376, 391, 395, 423, 445, 620
Conjunction, 94, 262, 265, 289-290, 305-309,
313-314, 320-322, 345-346, 349-350, 353,
369-372, 376, 388-390, 395, 397, 400, 414,
423, 425, 444-445, 463, 466-467, 515-517,
521, 620-622, 625, 627-629
Conjunction (Conj.), 370, 397, 425, 620
Conjunctive proposition, 5, 289
Conjuncts, 307-309, 345, 349-350, 372, 388, 423, 621
Connotation, 91, 95, 620, 624, 628
Connotative definition, 96-97, 620-621, 626, 629
Conscience, 105, 125, 278
Consequences, 10, 19, 21, 31, 126, 132, 135, 139,
181, 194, 198, 208, 243, 289, 342, 350, 411,
486, 506, 541, 555, 564-565, 584-585, 615,
618, 626, 628
Consequent, 17, 109-110, 284-286, 318-325, 333,
336, 338, 345-347, 351, 374, 377, 389,
406-407, 412, 423, 618, 620-621, 624-626
Consistency, 367, 416, 450, 568
Constitution, U.S., 13, 36, 70, 86-87, 490
Constructive dilemma (C.D.), 369, 397, 425, 620
Context, 5, 11-14, 18-20, 32, 44, 59, 70, 76, 83, 86,
90, 107, 111, 114, 121, 137, 144, 147-148,
171, 175, 263-265, 275-276, 311-312, 349,
382, 436, 456-458, 467-468, 478, 506, 530,
547, 565, 601, 606, 618, 622
ambiguity, 86, 107, 111, 144, 263-264, 312, 618,
622
conclusions, 12-14, 32, 148
Conti, Bruno, 535
Contingency, 56
Contingent, 56, 181-182, 216-217, 343-344, 346-347,
354, 360-361, 620
Contingent statements, 344
Contradiction, 55, 292, 344, 353, 415-416, 420-421,
423, 620
Contradictories, 180-182, 195-196, 198, 202, 353,
441, 445, 620, 626
Contradictory statements, 420
Contraposition, 183-184, 187-190, 194, 199, 208, 258,
268, 477, 620-621, 624-625
Contraposition by limitation, 188, 194, 199
Contrapositive, 187-190, 257-258, 476, 620-621
Contraries, 180-182, 186, 196, 198, 353, 441, 621,
626
Control, 7, 36, 139, 388, 505, 514, 523-524, 527,
529-530, 534, 544, 550, 567, 580
Control group, 527, 529-530, 550
Conventional intension, 96, 100-101, 621
Converse, 136-138, 151-152, 159, 184-185, 188, 190,
234, 345, 618, 621, 623
Converse accident, 136-138, 151-152, 159, 618, 621,
623
Conversion, 183-185, 187-190, 194, 199-200, 208,
258, 268, 621, 624-625
Conversion by limitation, 185, 188-189, 194, 199-200
Convertend, 184-185, 190, 621
Cooper, Belinda, 10
Copernicus, 152, 157
Copernicus, Nicolaus, 152
Copula, 175, 263, 295, 621
Coren, Stanley, 543, 551
Corn, 509
Correlation, 69, 541, 548, 551
Correlations, 548
Cosmology, 53, 570
Cousins, Norman, 294
Cowell, Alan, 47
Credibility
speaker, 416
Criteria, 2, 80, 88, 96, 494, 501, 511, 518, 568, 572,
578, 584, 621, 625, 627
Criticism, 16, 116-118, 120, 134, 276, 289, 353, 508
need for, 116, 353
Croce, Benedetto, 155
Cronan, Sheila, 492
Crucial experiment, 570-571, 621
Curl, 310, 314-315, 326, 333-334, 338, 353, 443, 475,
621, 626
D
Dacke, Marie, 582
Dakota, 594
Daniel, 48, 62, 72, 237, 295
Danish, Steve, 493
Darii, 244, 247, 250-251, 261, 299-300, 621
Darrow, Clarence, 127
Darwin, Charles, 73, 278, 492, 563
Data, 25, 40, 52, 59, 488, 522, 526, 531, 537,
539-540, 551-553, 556, 563-564, 569, 576,
578-579, 581, 583
Datisi, 244, 247, 250-251, 621
David, 15, 20, 23, 33, 38-39, 55, 79, 116, 128-129,
141, 145, 164-165, 273, 277, 296, 354, 448,
486, 492, 502, 504, 510, 514, 517, 534, 552,
556, 578, 584
Davies, Paul, 157
Dawkins, Richard, 11
Debates, 28
Debs, Eugene, 74
Decatur, Stephen, 77
Decision, 28, 36, 123, 130, 136, 141, 224, 294, 303,
319, 467, 502, 520, 578, 593
Declaration of Independence, 531
Declarative sentence, 2, 4, 16, 627-628
Deduce, 31, 365-366, 374, 386, 393, 395, 400, 420,
535, 565, 585
Deduction, 25, 27, 168-169, 211, 245, 248, 250,
305-306, 352, 365-431, 435, 452, 486, 505,
547-549, 573, 584, 621, 624-625, 628
distinction between induction and, 27
formal proof of validity and, 422
methods of, 365-417, 419-431, 435, 548-549,
624-625
natural, 305, 352, 365-367, 382, 392, 405, 424,
452, 486, 625
theory of, 168-169, 305, 435, 584
Deductive analysis, 306
Deductive argument, 24-27, 31-32, 168-169, 173, 211,
293, 306, 311, 332, 366, 414, 423, 486, 537,
615-616, 619, 621-622, 624-625, 628-629
defined, 32, 311, 332, 621
Deductive arguments, 24-28, 32, 37, 110, 168, 170,
173, 293, 305-306, 309, 345, 350, 353, 366,
368, 424, 433-434, 473, 486, 505, 510, 587,
615-616, 622-623, 629
refuting, 505
Deductive reasoning, 173, 243, 305, 387, 625-626
definition, 625-626
definition of, 626
uses of, 625
Deductive validity, 616
Deep structure, 433
Defective induction
ad ignorantiam, 130, 137, 159
ad verecundiam, 137, 159
fallacies of, 109, 111, 130, 137, 142, 154, 158-159,
623
false cause, 111, 137, 159, 623
hasty generalization, 111, 136-137, 159, 621, 623
Definiendum, 83-85, 87, 97, 99-102, 107-108, 163,
620-621, 625, 629
Definiens, 83-85, 94, 97, 100-102, 107, 350, 620-621
Definition, 16, 68, 80, 83-90, 92-101, 103-104,
107-108, 112, 126, 162-163, 271, 310, 319,
321, 330, 333, 341, 344, 348, 350, 354, 389,
414, 447, 489, 493, 504, 517, 618, 620-621,
623, 625-629
by genus and difference, 68, 97-100, 103, 108,
618, 620-621, 623, 625
circular, 100, 108, 162-163, 620
denotative, 93-95, 621, 623, 626-627
disputes and, 68
intensional, 95, 97, 108
lexical, 83, 85-87, 89-90, 97, 100, 107, 162, 625,
628
operational, 97, 108, 626
ostensive, 94, 97, 107-108, 162-163, 621, 626-627
persuasive, 16, 83, 89-90, 97, 107, 162, 626
precising, 83, 86-90, 97, 107, 162, 626
quasi-ostensive, 94, 97, 627
stipulative, 83-85, 87, 89-90, 97, 107, 162, 626,
628-629
synonymous, 96-98, 100, 108, 629
theoretical, 83, 88-90, 97, 107, 162, 627, 629
Definition by genus and difference, 68, 97-99, 103,
618, 620-621, 623
rules for, 103
Definitions, 67-108, 225, 307, 315, 344, 354, 461-462,
623, 625
extensional, 91, 93, 97, 102, 107, 623
functional, 307, 315, 344, 354, 461-462, 625
intensional, 91, 95, 97, 102, 108
lexical, 83, 85-87, 89-90, 97, 100, 107, 625
operational, 97, 108
ostensive, 94, 97, 107-108
precising, 83, 86-90, 97, 107
stipulative, 83-85, 87, 89-90, 97, 107
Demonstrative definition, 94, 621, 626
Denial, 40, 119, 140, 172, 180, 185, 201, 283, 285,
292, 310, 322, 335, 341, 350, 353, 416,
420-421, 440, 620, 622, 626
Denotation, 91, 621, 623
Denotative definition, 93-94, 621, 623, 626-627
Denton, Derek, 529
Denying the antecedent, 285, 339, 357, 621
Descartes, René, 10
Determinism, 286
Detweiler, Elaine, 491
Dewey, John, 21, 57, 106, 278, 342, 562
Diagramming, 36, 40, 45, 51, 64, 199, 202, 204,
221-224
Diagrams
Euler, 228
of categorical syllogisms, 206, 616
Venn, 170, 205-206, 208, 219, 222-225, 228, 244,
255, 258, 260, 262, 267, 295, 474, 476,
616, 624, 629
Dialogue, 140
Diaspora, 143
Dice, 144, 587, 590-592, 594, 597-598, 603, 605
Difference, Method of, 621
Dilemma, 255, 288-292, 296, 303, 338, 369, 371, 397,
425, 620-621, 628
ways of evading or refuting, 290
Dilemmas, 291-292, 296
DiLorenzo, Thomas, 148, 165
Dimaris, 244, 247, 250-252, 621
Dirksen, Everett, 416
Disamis, 244, 247, 250-251, 253, 621
633

Disanalogy, 496-498, 500, 621
Discharged, 124
Disconfirm, 26, 528, 561, 565-566
Discussion, 28, 69, 90, 107, 115, 120, 139-140, 164,
194, 200, 223, 291, 345, 354, 365, 382, 386,
416, 446, 455, 458, 536, 539, 601, 627
Disease, 25, 104, 142, 272-273, 514-516, 521-524,
527-529, 531, 534, 540, 543, 548, 554,
559-560, 562, 567, 580, 606
Disjunct, 283, 289, 311, 313, 335, 351, 370, 389, 409,
423, 622
Disjunction, 283-284, 289-290, 305-306, 308,
310-314, 320, 322, 334-335, 341, 344-345,
349-351, 353, 370, 376-377, 388-390, 395,
404, 406-407, 409, 423, 463, 466, 620-622,
624, 629
exclusive, 310-312, 314, 320, 622, 624
inclusive, 310-312, 320, 622, 624, 629
rhetorical, 313
translation of, 320
truth and falsity of, 334, 351
Disjunctive proposition, 5, 283
Disjunctive statement, 341, 391, 622
Disjunctive statement form, 341, 622
Disjunctive syllogism, 283-284, 299, 302, 311, 320,
324, 334-335, 339, 366, 368, 371, 379, 393,
397, 416, 619, 622, 629
Disjunctive Syllogism (D.S.), 366, 368, 397, 622
Disjunctive syllogisms, 285, 296
Disjuncts, 283, 289, 310-312, 320, 334-335, 345, 349,
370, 388-389, 402, 409, 423, 621-622, 624
Disputes
apparently verbal but really genuine, 80, 622
merely verbal, 79-80, 107
obviously genuine, 79-80
Disraeli, Benjamin, 74, 76
Distinctions, 106, 117, 576
Distraction, 115, 117, 124
Distributed, 9, 63, 176-179, 208-209, 231-232,
235-236, 238, 245-251, 253-254, 386, 607,
624, 629
Distribution, 168, 174-176, 178-179, 262, 387, 389,
395, 397, 402, 426, 467, 622, 627
Distribution, as a rule of replacement (Dist), 622
Distribution of terms, 627
Distributive, 149, 151
Division, 111, 143, 150-152, 160, 162, 576, 587, 620,
622-623
Divorce, 39, 540, 609
DNA, 131, 525, 543, 550
Dollar, Steve, 449
Dot, 213, 307-310, 314-315, 326, 329, 333-334, 338,
345, 353, 443-444, 475, 478, 620, 622
Double negation, 348, 350, 354, 385, 387, 389, 397,
447, 622
Douglas, Stephen, 28
Douglass, Frederick, 130
Dreams, 73
Dubos, René, 491
Duhem, Pierre, 104
Duns Scotus, 273
Dworkin, Ronald, 21, 510
Dyson, Freeman, 278
E
Eddington, Arthur, 503, 566
Edwards, Jonathan, 157
Einstein, Albert, 156, 367-368, 450
El, 609, 611-612
Elders, 294
Elementary valid argument, 336, 365-374, 376-377,
380, 382, 385, 388, 396, 399, 424, 452, 618,
620, 622, 624-625, 627-628
Emotions, 7, 68, 70, 76, 89, 106, 112-114, 124, 158,
626
audience and, 158
observing, 106
Emotive language, 68, 75-76, 89, 626
Encyclopedias, 572
Engels, Friedrich, 43, 65, 106
ENIAC (Electronic Numerical Integrator and
Computer), 450
Enthymeme, 17, 274-277, 299-301, 622-623, 628-629
Enthymemes, 17, 32, 255, 274-276, 278, 296, 475,
477
Envy, 74, 115, 124, 158
Equality, 17, 38, 148, 341, 387
Equiprobable, 605
Equivalence, 305, 308, 313, 341, 344-345, 347-350,
354, 366, 373, 387-390, 396-397, 426, 443,
447, 456, 461-462, 467, 619-627, 629
logical, 305, 308, 313, 345, 347-350, 354, 366,
373, 387-390, 396, 447, 456, 462,
619-627, 629
material, 305, 308, 341, 344-345, 348-350, 354,
387-390, 397, 426, 447, 467, 623-626,
629
Equivocation, 110-111, 144-146, 152, 159, 161-162,
231, 253, 280, 622-623
fallacy of, 110, 144, 146, 161-162, 231, 253,
622-623
Erasmus, Desiderius, 77
Eratosthenes, 562, 564
Escher, M.C., 2, 36, 68, 109, 486, 514, 559, 587
Ethics, 3, 6, 23, 56, 75, 89, 105-106, 154, 164, 279
Euathlus, 291-292
Euphemism, 492
Euphemisms, 75
Euripides, 74, 279
Evaluation, 54, 121, 135, 177, 346, 487, 496, 565,
584, 604
Evidence, 9, 18, 22, 26, 52, 69, 73, 86-88, 90, 104,
112, 120-121, 128, 131-133, 137-139, 145,
147, 154, 243, 294, 303, 419, 496, 498-499,
514, 525, 529, 537, 541-542, 549, 551, 553,
559-563, 565-566, 576, 587, 589-590, 604,
606, 626
forms of, 69, 145, 243
indirect, 561
kinds of, 563, 566
need for, 88
preponderance of, 147
Exceptions, 21, 117, 138, 194, 519
Exceptive proposition, 265-266, 467, 622
Excluded middle, 352-354, 622, 625
Excluded middle, Principle of, 622
Exclusions, 206, 624
Exclusive disjunction, 311-312, 314, 320, 622, 624
Exclusive premises, 233, 235, 237, 250, 297, 622
Exclusive premises, Fallacy of, 622
Exclusive propositions, 264, 296, 622
Exhaustive, 443
Existential fallacy, 199-200, 234-235, 237, 250, 253,
261, 622
Existential Generalization (E.G.), 457, 622
Existential import, 168, 193-196, 198-200, 208, 210,
234, 241, 260-262, 264, 619, 622, 626, 629
Existential Instantiation (E.I.), 456, 622
Existential presupposition, 196-197, 199, 622
Existential quantification, 439-441, 445-446, 456-458,
473, 622
Existential quantifier, 439, 446, 473, 622-624, 626-627
Expectation value, 601-604, 606-608, 622
Expectations, 39
Experienced person, 281
Experimental group, 529
Experimentation, 131-132, 142, 567
Experiments, 65, 131, 524, 527-529, 537, 547
Expert
definition, 618
Experts, 133-134, 529, 535
use of, 529
Explanation, 18-20, 96, 101-102, 107, 151, 203, 218,
225, 227, 405, 488-489, 516, 522, 536, 539,
541, 551, 559-562, 566, 569, 583, 622-623,
627, 629
Explanations, 2, 18-20, 32, 101, 559-560, 562,
566-569, 572, 575, 583, 610, 615
Exportation (Exp), 623
Expressive discourse, 68
Extended argument, 365
Extension, 68, 90-93, 95-97, 107-108, 118, 409, 621,
623, 626
Extensional definitions, 102
Ezra, 108
F
Facts, 25-26, 42, 57, 61, 69, 75-76, 80, 107, 218, 272,
278, 291, 297, 343, 486-487, 497, 518, 520,
559-560, 562-565, 568-571, 575-577, 585,
597, 610, 615, 618, 624
defined, 107
Falcoff, Marc, 277
Fallacies, 109-165, 211, 230, 232-233, 235, 237, 339,
623, 626-629
ad hominem, 118-121, 124, 133, 158, 161-162, 629
Ad Hominem argument, 118, 120-121, 629
ad populum, 112-114, 124, 158
affirming the consequent, 109-110
amphiboly, 111, 146, 152, 160, 162, 623
appeal to emotion, 111, 113-114, 124, 158
appeal to force, 111, 121-122, 124, 158
appeal to inappropriate authority, 111, 133, 137,
159, 161
appeal to pity, 114-115
assumption, 138, 140, 159, 627
begging the question, 111, 140, 142, 159, 162, 626
common, 110-113, 117-119, 125, 129, 132,
134-139, 141, 147, 158, 211, 230, 233,
339
common cause, 112
complex question, 111, 138-140, 142, 159, 162
composition and division, 152
defined, 112, 149, 626
definition, 112, 126, 162-163, 623, 626-629
denying the antecedent, 339
equivocation, 110-111, 144-146, 152, 159, 161-162,
623
examples, 113, 133-134, 140, 149
existential, 235, 237, 623, 626-627, 629
formal, 110, 121, 123, 136, 140, 211, 230, 232-233,
237, 623, 629
hasty generalization, 111, 136-138, 151, 159, 162,
623
informal, 110, 112, 122, 124, 137, 139-140, 142,
144, 152, 158, 164, 230, 623, 626, 629
logical, 110, 114, 120, 140-141, 157, 339, 623,
626-629
of ambiguity, 109, 111, 144, 146, 149-152, 158-159,
623, 628
of composition, 149-151, 162-163, 623
of division, 150-151, 162, 623
of emphasis, 147
of equivocation, 144-146, 161, 623
of exclusive premises, 233, 237
of false cause, 134-135, 626
of relevance, 109, 111-112, 122, 124-125, 128, 154,
158, 623
post hoc, 135, 159, 626
red herring, 111, 115-117, 124, 158, 162, 627
slippery slope, 135-136, 157, 628
straw man, 111, 117-118, 124, 158, 162-163, 628
Straw man fallacy, 628
tu quoque, 119-120, 629
Fallacy, 109-115, 117-119, 121-124, 128, 130-131,
133-142, 144, 146-152, 154, 158, 160-164,
199-200, 230-239, 250, 253, 261, 266, 270,
275-276, 284-285, 333, 338-339, 357, 605,
618-629
classification of, 109-110, 122, 146, 164
Fallacy of presumption, 138
Fallacy of relevance, 112, 128
False cause, 111, 134-135, 137, 159, 161-162, 623,
626
False conclusions, 30-31
False premises, 29-32
Falsity, 2, 4, 6, 17, 28, 30, 32, 85, 118, 121, 130, 138,
155, 178, 181, 183, 285-286, 334, 336, 344,
348, 351-352, 370, 625, 627-628
Fauci, Anthony, 525
Fear, 16, 55, 106, 115, 124, 134, 136, 139, 419, 530
appeal to, 115, 124, 134
Ferio, 242, 244, 247-248, 250-251, 253, 623
Ferison, 244, 247-248, 250-251, 475, 623
Festino, 214-215, 242, 244, 247-248, 250-251, 275,
298, 623
Feynman, Richard, 289, 296
Figure, 91, 96, 182, 202-206, 213-216, 220-225, 227,
229, 238, 240-242, 244-249, 251-254, 258,
262, 269-271, 275-277, 395, 409, 441-442,
445, 455, 573-574, 584, 615, 619-621, 623
Figure of a standard-form syllogism, 251
Firestone, Shulamith, 130
First-order enthymeme, 275, 299-301, 623
Flexibility, 70, 123
Follows from, 12, 26, 319, 346, 366, 370, 372-373,
392-395, 414, 445, 454, 462, 623
Food and Drug Administration, 534
Fordice, Kirk, 506
Form, 6-7, 13, 15-16, 28-29, 40, 52-53, 59-60, 69-70,
72, 75, 91, 100, 104, 106, 110, 117, 119,
122, 131, 143, 152, 170-177, 179-180,
182-184, 186-188, 196, 199, 201-206,
208-209, 211-222, 224-225, 227-230,
234-235, 238, 241-252, 255-260, 262-270,
273-277, 280-281, 283-286, 288-289,
294-297, 299-300, 302, 306-307, 310-312,
634

318, 320, 323, 328-330, 332-341, 343-346,
350-352, 355, 357-360, 366-367, 369,
371-372, 374, 385-391, 393-394, 396-397,
399-400, 402, 407-408, 412-413, 415, 435,
443-444, 446-447, 449, 455, 458, 465, 468,
475-477, 490-491, 504-509, 511, 518,
524-525, 570-571, 573, 589, 595, 609, 611,
615, 619-629
Formal fallacies, 110, 230, 232, 237
Formal fallacy, 110, 230-234, 618, 621-624
Formal language, 433-434
Formal logic, 367, 386, 424
Formal proof of validity, 365-366, 373, 375, 379,
381-382, 392, 394-395, 403, 408, 411, 417,
422, 424, 453, 459-460, 469, 473, 622-623
for deductive arguments dependent on inner
structure of noncompound propositions,
623
Formal system, 616
Four terms, 230-231, 235-236, 250, 253, 257, 623
Four terms, fallacy of, 623
Framing, 15, 577
Frank, Anne, 494
Free will, 82, 288, 411
Freedom of choice, 104
Freeman, Samuel, 33
Frege, Gottlob, 109, 288, 433, 438, 493, 504, 616
Frequency theory of probability, 228, 342, 589,
606-607, 627
Fresison, 244, 247-248, 250-252, 623
Frost, Robert, 107
G
Gagarin, Yuri, 508
Galdikas, Birute, 11
Galilei, Galileo, 569, 584
Galileo Galilei, 569, 584
Gambling, 100, 116, 144, 542, 597-598, 601-603,
605-606
Games of chance, 587, 590
Gamow, George, 158
Gardner, Howard, 22
Gates, Bill, 29
Geiger counter, 503
Gell-Mann, Murray, 84
General product theorem, 592, 608, 623
Generalization, 111, 136-138, 142, 151, 159, 162, 366,
436, 438-439, 455, 457-458, 473, 478, 518,
618, 621-624, 627, 629
existential, 439, 457-458, 473, 478, 622-624, 627,
629
hasty, 111, 136-138, 151, 159, 162, 621, 623
universal, 159, 438-439, 455, 458, 473, 478, 518,
622-624, 627, 629
Generalizations, 123, 125, 137-138
hasty, 137-138
Genesis, 18-19, 336, 410
Genetics, 6, 139, 521
Gentzen Gerhard, 452
Genus and difference, 68, 97-100, 102-103, 108, 618,
620-621, 623, 625
Germ theory, 491, 560
Geronimus, Arline, 542
Gibbs, Walter, 492
Gilg, Oliver, 583
Gonzalez, Pancho, 277
Goode, Miranda, 555
Google, 84, 611
Gotti, Richard, 106
Grossman, Lev, 155
Grounds, 6, 24, 27, 69, 115, 119, 127, 168, 180, 290,
324, 332, 353, 519, 619, 621, 624, 626, 629
Groups
control, 534, 544
experimental, 552, 624
Grunstra, Ken, 39
Guilt by association, 119
Gulf War, 49
H
Hague, Frank, 74
Half-truths, 438
Halley, Edmund, 582
Hammoud, Alex, 39
Haraway, Donna, 448
Harlan, John, 70, 72
Harman, Gilbert, 288
Hasty generalization, 111, 136-138, 151, 159, 162,
621, 623
Hawking, Stephen, 572
Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 79
Hayden, Dorothy, 293
Henry, Patrick, 112
Hentoff, Nat, 278
Herbert, Bob, 40
Hitler, Adolf, 73, 112, 434
Hobbes, Thomas, 103, 106
Holmes, Sherlock, 274
Holt, John, 493
Homer, 115, 194
Horseshoe, 321, 326, 333-334, 336, 338, 344-345,
350-351, 353, 369, 443-444, 475, 478, 623,
625
Human nature, 49, 129, 273
Humanities, 411
Hume, David, 55, 129, 141, 165, 273, 277, 296, 486,
502, 504, 514, 517, 556
Hunting, 39, 295
Hussein, Saddam, 338
Hutchinsons, Richard, 48
Hypotheses, 273, 487, 520, 548-549, 551, 555,
560-562, 564-565, 568-572, 575-578,
583-585, 587, 608, 610-611, 618, 620-621,
625, 627-628
Hypothesis, 16, 128, 131, 273, 503, 531, 549, 551,
559-585, 610, 618, 626-627, 629
Hypothetical syllogism, 284-286, 302, 334, 337-338,
366, 368, 371, 395, 397-398, 425, 453, 456,
477, 619, 623-625, 627, 629
Hypothetical Syllogism (H.S.), 366, 368, 397, 425, 623
Hypothetical syllogisms, 255, 282, 285-286, 296
mixed, 285-286
I
Iconic representation, 170, 206, 240, 624
Identity, Principle of, 624
If, 5-22, 24, 26-29, 31-32, 38-39, 43, 47-48, 50, 53, 56,
60-61, 63-64, 69-71, 73-76, 78-81, 83,
86-89, 91-95, 97, 99-103, 108, 109-110,
112-117, 121-123, 125, 129-136, 138-140,
142, 144-145, 147, 151, 153-155, 157-158,
160-163, 168-169, 174-176, 180-181,
183-185, 188-189, 191-192, 194-199, 201,
205-206, 208-210, 213, 215, 217, 220-225,
228, 230-235, 239-240, 242-251, 254,
255-257, 259-262, 266-267, 269-270,
274-277, 279-280, 283-295, 303, 307-312,
314-315, 317-330, 332, 334, 336-342,
344-351, 353, 365-372, 374, 377, 379,
381-386, 388-390, 393-394, 400, 404,
406-420, 422-423, 433, 437, 439-440,
442-446, 451-454, 456-458, 461, 463-464,
467-478, 486-487, 489-491, 493-499,
501-505, 507-509, 514-518, 520-521, 523,
525-526, 533, 538-539, 541, 543-544, 546,
549-550, 555, 559, 561, 563-565, 568-571,
573, 577-580, 582, 588-614, 615-616,
618-626, 628-629
If and only if, 97, 108, 222, 307, 309, 332, 345-347,
410, 439, 451, 453, 456-457, 467, 469, 478,
619-620, 626
Ignoratio elenchi, 122-124, 159, 624-625
Illicit major, 232, 235-236, 250, 253, 624
Illicit minor, 232-233, 235-236, 250, 253, 298, 624
Illicit process, fallacy of, 624
Illicit process of the major term, 232, 235, 275, 624
Illicit process of the minor term, 232, 235, 624
Imagination, 103, 106, 547, 564, 571
Imitation, 106
Immediate inference, 183-189, 257-258, 616, 620-621,
624, 626, 628
Immediate inferences, 168, 183-184, 186, 189-190,
199, 208, 258, 624-625
contraposition, 183-184, 189-190, 199, 208, 258,
624-625
obversion, 183-184, 186, 189-190, 199, 208, 258,
624
Immortality, 26
Implicans, 318, 618, 624
Implicate, 318, 620, 624
Implication, 135, 163, 182, 305, 308, 318-324, 336,
344-345, 350-351, 353-354, 387, 389, 391,
397, 400, 404, 415, 445, 447, 477, 623-626,
629
Implications, 321, 324, 336, 338
Improvements, 553
Inclusive disjunction, 310-311, 320, 624
Inconsistency, 15, 60, 119-121, 365, 409, 414-416,
424, 462
Inconsistent, 292, 414-416, 424, 568, 570-571, 573,
621, 624
Inconsistent statements, 416
Independent events, 591-592, 605, 612, 623-624, 627
Individual constant, 436-437, 439, 456, 458-459, 473,
478, 620, 622, 624
Individual constants, 436-437, 473, 627
Individual variable, 436-437, 439, 465, 473, 624, 629
Induction, 25, 27, 109, 111, 130, 136-137, 141-142,
154, 158-159, 486-487, 510, 514, 518, 520,
547-549, 555, 609, 621, 623-624, 628
by simple enumeration, 514, 518, 520, 555, 624,
628
Induction by simple enumeration, 514, 518, 520, 555,
624, 628
Induction, Principle of, 624
Inductive argument, 24-27, 487, 490, 505, 510, 618,
621, 624
by analogy, 487, 510
defined, 621
Inductive arguments, 2, 24-27, 32, 486-487, 505, 510,
520, 587, 608-609
Inductive generalization, 518, 624
Inductive reasoning, 514, 619
Inference, 5-6, 8, 40, 57, 111, 130, 133, 140, 144,
149-152, 158, 183-189, 193, 200, 210, 234,
257-258, 266, 274-275, 279, 365-369,
371-374, 376, 378-382, 385-386, 388-390,
392-396, 398-400, 403, 405, 411, 421,
423-424, 433-435, 446, 451-452, 454-458,
465, 468, 473, 476, 489, 498, 520-521, 526,
532-533, 536-537, 540-541, 545, 547-548,
555-556, 609-610, 616, 618-629
Inference, Rules of, 624
Inferences
analogical, 487-488
analysis of, 168, 173, 435, 627
causal, 487, 516, 548, 624, 627
classification of, 110, 576
complex, 28, 57, 186
conditional, 5, 374, 624-625
deductive, 28, 56, 110, 168, 173, 366, 434, 487,
548, 624-625, 628
defined, 186
equivocation, 110
evaluation of, 487
immediate, 168, 183-184, 186, 189-190, 199, 208,
258, 624-625, 628
incomplete, 274, 548
inductive, 487, 548, 624-625, 627
invalid, 28, 168, 200, 241, 274, 434, 488, 624
logical form of, 241
logical structure of, 435
mediate, 183, 625
moderate, 487
rules of, 366, 374, 390, 435, 624-625, 627
sound, 628
strong, 625
unsound, 628
valid, 28, 168, 173, 184, 186, 189-190, 199-200,
241, 258, 274, 279, 366, 374, 434-435,
488, 548, 624-625, 627-628
weak, 624-625
Infinite, 126, 157, 288, 332, 454, 502, 579, 582, 605
Informal fallacies, 110, 122, 158, 230, 626
Informal fallacy, 112, 124, 137, 139-140, 142, 144,
152, 231, 618-622, 624, 626, 629
Informal logic, 164
Informative use of language, 89
Inquisition, 155
Insight, 134, 142, 534, 547, 571, 577
Instantiation, 366, 439, 452, 456, 458, 473, 478, 622,
624, 627, 629
existential, 439, 456, 458, 473, 478, 622, 624, 627,
629
universal, 439, 452, 458, 473, 478, 622, 624, 627,
629
Intellectual property, 139
Intension, 68, 90-93, 95-98, 100-101, 107, 162-163,
620-621, 624, 626, 628
Intension of a term, 92, 95-97, 100, 620-621, 624
Intensional definitions, 95, 102
Interpretation, 20, 41, 51, 54, 111, 146, 149, 168, 171,
181, 193-201, 208, 210, 228, 234-235,
241-243, 260, 296, 311, 435, 445, 467, 473,
489, 575, 616, 619, 621-623, 625, 628-629
defined, 149, 311, 621
635

Interrogative sentence, 13
Invalid, 24, 27-30, 32, 125, 149, 151, 168, 200, 210,
214, 216-218, 222, 224-225, 227, 229-231,
233, 235-239, 241-242, 245, 253, 257, 261,
266-267, 270-271, 273-276, 283-286, 290,
293, 297-299, 305-306, 328, 332-335,
338-339, 346, 354-358, 411-414, 420,
422-423, 430, 434, 457, 460-465, 468-470,
473, 479-482, 486, 488, 505, 621, 624
Invalid arguments, 29-30, 305-306, 434
Inventions, 48, 216
Investigation
IQ, 219, 523
Irony, 277
Irrelevant conclusion, 111, 122, 624-625
Isaac, 272, 560, 569, 615
Islam
today, 126
Issue, 15, 23, 40, 76, 80, 89, 115, 119-121, 123, 125,
137, 140-141, 158-159, 194, 208, 505, 511,
589, 622, 627
Issues, 15, 40, 81, 139, 164, 193, 305, 547, 578-579
policy, 15
J
Jablonski, Nina, 20
Jackson, Jesse, 157
Jacoby, James, 272
James, William, 104-105
Jefferson, Thomas, 75, 79
Jen, 161-162, 165
John Angus Smith v. United States, 155
Johnson, Lyndon, 46
Johnson, Samuel, 24, 73, 101, 103, 112, 153, 449
Joint Method of Agreement and Difference, 520,
532-533, 545, 555, 557, 624
Joint occurrence, 591-593, 595-596, 599, 608, 612,
623-624, 627
Journal of Blacks in Higher Education, 73
Judgment, 11, 13-14, 20, 69, 80, 83, 120, 130,
133-134, 159, 174, 209, 292, 499, 548
responsible, 174, 209
value, 133, 499
Jury, 10, 114-115, 121, 124, 127, 280, 490
research, 114
Justice, 10, 12-13, 36-37, 46, 48-49, 70, 72, 78, 88-90,
105-106, 114, 124, 126, 155, 164, 278, 490,
507
Justification, 37, 48, 136, 290, 351, 366, 374-375, 396,
400
K
Kakutani, Michiko, 125
Kane, Gordon, 22, 509
Kant, Immanuel, 21, 103, 106, 255, 296, 342, 567
Kass, Leon, 156
Kelly, Edmond, 153
Kelly, Jeffrey, 534
Kennedy, Anthony, 36
Kepler, Johannes, 569
Kettering, Charles, 449
Kim, Jaegwon, 288
Kingsley, Charles, 120
Kinsley, Michael, 506
Kipling, Rudyard, 90
Knowledge, 3, 17, 50, 53, 59, 103-104, 126, 130-132,
134, 136, 141, 168, 173, 270-271, 274, 467,
487, 502, 504, 514, 539, 546, 564, 568, 575,
577, 588-589, 609-610, 615
expanding, 564, 568
explosion, 609
Koedt, Anne, 492
Kolbert, Elizabeth, 128, 164
Kousa, Anne, 542
Kraska, Keith, 49
Kristof, Nicholas, 39
Kristol, Irving, 271
L
Lamont, Corliss, 104
Lander, Eric, 488, 511
Language, 4, 10-11, 18-19, 36, 38, 65, 67-108,
109-112, 125, 140, 146, 158, 168, 173, 197,
201, 255-303, 305-306, 313-314, 324, 353,
382, 405, 433-434, 443, 447, 450, 616,
620-621, 625-626, 628
emotional, 70, 76, 80, 84, 112, 158, 305
evolution of, 19
Functions of, 70, 77, 621, 625
metaphors, 305
of definitions, 68, 90, 99, 107
of inference, 382, 405, 620-621, 625, 628
power of, 10, 87, 106, 287, 434
Law and Order, 180
Law of averages, 38
Laws of thought, 193, 305, 351-353, 616, 622,
624-626
Leads, 353, 396, 406, 549, 578, 597
Lebenthal, Alexandra, 105
Legitimate, 10, 36, 133-134, 159, 225, 276, 288, 385,
409, 519, 577, 618
Lepore, Jill, 10
Levine, Ellen, 492
Levit, Fred, 143
Lewis, Bernard, 22
Lexical definition, 83, 85, 90, 625, 628
Lexical definitions, 85-86, 107, 625
Lexical definitions, Rules for, 625
Libraries, 534, 577
Limitation, Conversion by and Contraposition by, 625
Lincoln, Abraham, 5, 17, 28, 33, 46, 124, 148,
164-165, 289, 509
Lipset, Seymour, 38
Listening
critical, 534
Locke, John, 45, 105, 134
Logic
formal, 3, 24, 37, 110, 211, 216, 237, 328, 332,
342-343, 350, 353-354, 365-367, 372,
376, 382, 386, 392, 416, 424, 433-434,
451-452, 455, 476, 509, 546, 615-616,
622, 624, 629
predicate, 173, 177, 185, 196, 226, 228, 251, 296,
309, 312, 433, 435, 438, 442, 445,
619-620, 622, 625-626, 628-629
role of, 7, 173, 314, 438
Logical analysis, 54, 59, 70, 305, 314, 434, 615
Logical equivalence, 305, 313, 347-350, 354, 366,
373, 389-390, 396, 447, 456, 462, 619-625,
627, 629
expressions of, 349, 627
Logical form, 213, 241, 249, 328, 388, 505
Logical order, 36
Logical structure, 45, 51, 54, 157, 329, 339, 435, 472,
619, 627
Logically equivalent statements, 349
Logically impossible, 217, 415
Logically possible, 303, 488
Lombardi, Vince, 77
Losos, Jonathan, 566
Lovelock, James, 48
Lucretius, 39
Lukacs, John, 552
Luther, Martin, 11, 72
M
Macdonald, Mia, 158
Machiavelli, Niccolò, 55, 72
Madison, James, 294
Maimonides, 272, 278
Maimonides, Moses, 272, 278
Major premise, 153, 211-215, 229, 236, 241-244, 247,
249, 251-252, 254, 256, 258, 274-277,
619-625, 628
Major term, 212-213, 215, 219, 226, 230-232,
235-236, 238, 249, 251-252, 254, 275,
624-625
Malthus, Thomas, 563
Mao, 104
Marat, Jean-Paul, 74
Margoliash, Danial, 528
Marriage
Christianity, 492, 506
Marshall, Thurgood, 88
Marx, Karl, 43, 65, 106, 109
Marxism, 38, 110
Material equivalence, 305, 308, 341, 344-345,
348-349, 354, 387-388, 390, 397, 426, 467,
625-626, 629
Material implication, 305, 308, 318, 321-324, 336,
344-345, 350-351, 353-354, 387, 389, 391,
397, 400, 445, 447, 623-626, 629
paradoxes of, 626
Mayo, Elton, 552
McTaggart, Ellis, 157, 277
McTaggart, John, 157, 277
Mead, Nicole, 555
Mean, 31, 39, 47, 69, 83-85, 90, 94, 96, 101, 104, 106,
112, 130, 145, 147, 152, 163, 169, 171, 197,
199, 214, 246, 263, 288, 312-315, 320, 345,
348, 350, 390, 394, 411, 416, 419, 443, 486,
505, 515, 562, 618, 622, 626
Meaning, 4, 12-13, 18, 36, 76, 79-80, 83-87, 90-92,
94-96, 99-101, 107-108, 111, 116, 123, 144,
146-147, 152, 155, 159-160, 168, 174, 188,
194, 231, 249, 253, 255-256, 259, 263-264,
268, 279, 284-285, 305, 307-314, 319-322,
324, 326, 332, 342, 345-346, 348, 350-351,
370, 385, 424, 435, 443, 446-447, 466, 468,
473, 496, 505, 509, 517, 554, 618, 620-622,
625-626, 628-629
Mediate inference, 183, 625
Mediate inferences, 183
Medical Research, 17, 53, 527
Medicine, 25, 51, 53-54, 65, 74, 120, 143, 150, 164,
174, 493, 524, 532, 535, 539, 549, 552, 554,
556, 562, 565, 567, 615
Meditation, 75, 610
Memory, 85, 104, 156, 372, 514, 528-529, 553
false, 85
Menand, Louis, 491
Mente, Andrew, 544
Merely verbal dispute, 625, 629
Merit, 14, 25, 53-54, 56, 112-113, 118, 136, 140, 174,
242, 491, 498, 548, 568, 606, 611
Merrill, David, 534
Metaphors, 305
Method of agreement, 520-523, 526, 532-533, 539,
545, 547, 555-557, 611, 624
Method of agreement and difference, 520, 532-533,
545, 555, 557, 624
Method of concomitant variation, 520, 539-542, 545,
555, 557, 610-611
Method of difference, 520, 526-528, 532-533, 539,
545, 547, 555-557, 565, 609, 611, 624
Methods, 2, 25, 32, 96, 105, 121, 143, 164, 218, 260,
268, 273, 276, 295, 305, 350, 365-417,
419-431, 434-435, 514, 520, 522, 524, 532,
535-537, 539, 545-549, 555-556, 565, 572,
576, 583, 597, 615-616, 624-625
Metrodorus of Chios, 502
Michael, 65, 506, 510, 579-580
Middle term, 212-216, 219, 228-233, 235-236, 238,
240-241, 244, 246-247, 249-254, 258, 273,
276, 298, 386, 618-621, 623, 625
Miller, Algernon, 131
Mind-body problem, 127
Minor premise, 153, 211-215, 229, 236, 238, 241-245,
247, 249, 251-252, 254, 256, 258, 274-276,
619-625, 628
Minor term, 212-213, 215, 219, 230-233, 235-236,
238, 245, 249, 251, 624-625
Miracle, 73
Missing premise, 274, 276
Mode, 69, 105, 294
Modern symbolic logic, 168, 193, 198, 207, 296, 306,
353, 433, 616, 622, 628-629
Modus ponens, 7, 284, 286, 302, 334, 336, 338, 345,
367-369, 371, 374, 377, 393, 395-396, 452,
615, 625
Modus Ponens (M.P.), 367-368, 393, 396, 625
Modus tollens, 285-286, 302, 334, 336-337, 339, 366,
368, 371, 379-380, 389, 393, 395-396, 625
Modus tollens (M.T.), 366, 368, 396, 625
Mood, 213-216, 229, 240-243, 245-249, 251-252,
269-271, 275-276, 284, 455, 553, 619-621,
623, 625, 627
Moore, George, 78
Morals, 273, 278
More, Thomas, 72
Mozart, 523-524, 534
Mukamal, Kenneth, 554
Murray, Charles, 9
Muscarello v. U.S., 90
Mussolini, Benito, 78
Mutually exclusive events, 595-596, 599, 608, 612,
625
Mythology, 92
N
Napoleon, 409, 448
NASA, 289
National Commission on Civil Disorders, 72
National Geographic, 9, 33
Natural deduction, 352, 365-366, 392, 424, 452, 625
rules of inference, 365-366, 392, 424, 452, 625
636

Natural language, 65, 111, 305, 382, 405
Necessary and sufficient conditions, 325, 626
Necessary condition, 325-327, 515-516, 522, 619,
626, 628-629
Necessary conditions, 515-517, 620, 625, 628
Negation, 107, 180, 285, 305-306, 310-311, 313-314,
321, 341, 348-350, 353-354, 385, 387-389,
397, 406-407, 420, 440-441, 446-448,
620-622, 626, 629
double, 348, 350, 354, 385, 387, 389, 397, 447,
622
Negative definition, 626
Negative premises, 233, 235, 237, 246-248, 250-251,
271, 273, 297
Negative statements, 264
Neither, 4-5, 8, 13-15, 18, 22, 28, 42, 44, 58, 71-72,
78, 84, 87, 89, 96, 99, 101-102, 130, 150,
156, 162, 176-179, 181, 187, 194, 204-205,
217, 220, 231, 238, 245-247, 259, 273, 287,
294, 296, 313, 318, 327-328, 344, 353, 410,
418-419, 442, 462, 488, 492, 494, 496, 500,
522, 554, 566, 568, 577, 589, 598, 620, 627
Nesbit, Winston, 286
Netanyahu, Benjamin, 491
Network, 47, 418-419
Neutral language, 68, 75
Newton, Isaac, 560, 569
Nicotine, 522
Nigeria, 14
Nissen, Steven, 580
Nobility, 78
Noble, Kenneth, 143
Nominal definition, 626
Non causa pro causa, 134, 137, 159, 623, 626
Non sequitur, 123-124, 626
Noncontradiction, Principle of, 626
Nonexclusive events, 626
Nonstandard-form propositions, techniques for
translating into standard form, 626
Normal-form formula, 447, 449, 626
Nouns, 436, 443
Nutrition, 535, 550
O
Objective intension, 96, 100, 626
Observation, 52, 115, 141, 296, 496, 517, 571, 575
Obverse, 186-188, 190, 626
Obversion, 183-184, 186-190, 199, 202, 208, 258,
268, 624, 626
Obvertend, 186-187, 190, 626
Ockham's Razor, 611
Odds, 490, 550, 594, 602, 606-607
Olbers, Heinrich, 582
Only, 2, 4-5, 7-8, 11-13, 19-24, 27, 29, 31-32, 39, 41,
48-53, 56-58, 60-61, 63-64, 68, 70, 72-74,
77-79, 83, 87, 89, 91, 94-95, 97, 99-102,
105-108, 113-114, 117, 121, 123, 128-129,
133, 136, 138-141, 147-149, 154-158, 163,
170-172, 175, 177-181, 183, 185, 189,
194-199, 204-205, 208, 212, 214-215, 217,
221-222, 224-225, 227, 230-233, 235,
241-243, 245-250, 253-254, 256, 259-260,
262, 264-267, 269, 272-276, 278-279,
281-286, 288-291, 296, 307-311, 314, 319,
323, 325, 327, 329-330, 332-339, 343-348,
350-352, 368-370, 372, 376-379, 382,
385-386, 391, 394-396, 399-400, 402, 404,
406-407, 409-414, 416, 418, 420-421,
423-424, 434-439, 443-444, 446-448,
451-453, 455-457, 460-463, 465, 467-472,
476-478, 487-489, 491, 493-496, 498-500,
502, 506, 508-511, 515-521, 523-528, 530,
533, 535-542, 545-546, 549, 552-554,
560-564, 566-568, 571, 573, 575, 578,
581-583, 588-593, 595-602, 607-608,
610-614, 615-616, 618-622, 624, 626-627,
629
power of, 87, 106, 372, 385, 434-435, 538
Only if, 97, 108, 196, 208, 222, 230, 246, 279, 307,
309-311, 323, 325, 327, 332, 345-347, 372,
386, 394, 409-410, 412, 416, 418, 423, 439,
451, 453, 456-457, 461, 467-470, 478, 517,
591-592, 597, 602, 613, 619-620, 626
Operational definition, 97, 626
Operational definitions, 97, 108
Opinions, 133, 408, 452, 560
Opposition, 168, 180, 182-185, 194-197, 199, 202,
208, 271, 439, 442, 473, 620-621, 626,
628-629
Organizing, 502
Orwell, George, 278
Osborne, Thomas, 519
Ostensive definition, 94, 163, 621, 626-627
Ostensive definitions, 94, 97, 107-108
Owens, Gwinn, 494
Oxford English Dictionary, 19
P
Paine, Thomas, 73, 125, 129
Paradox, 582
Paradoxes of material implication, 626
Parameter, 268-269, 626
Paraphrasing, 36-37, 45, 56, 64
Paraphrasing arguments, 36
Parsons, Cynthia, 129
Particular proposition, 182, 188, 195, 200, 224, 234,
626, 628
Particular propositions, 176, 181, 194, 197-198, 208,
234, 260-261, 276, 386, 622, 626
Pascal, Blaise, 503, 539, 587, 615
Patterson, Orlando, 23, 38, 338, 354
Paxson, Christina, 551
Peer, Elizabeth, 153
Performative utterance, 626
Persuasion, 118, 122, 289
Persuasive definition, 89, 626
Peter, 33, 37, 164, 271, 273, 296, 354, 581, 615
Petitio principii, 140, 142, 159, 619-620, 626
Phi, 22, 441, 445, 509
Philosophy, 3, 7, 44, 50, 54, 65, 71, 73, 84, 88-89,
103, 125, 141, 155, 278, 287, 293, 342, 433,
438, 452, 474, 476, 493, 503, 601, 615
Pitcher, George, 493
Planck, Max, 59, 565
Plato, 3, 49, 89, 101, 103, 105, 127, 129, 158, 164,
168, 287, 294-295, 353, 615
Plessy v. Ferguson, 72
Poisoning the well, 120, 626
Pope Leo XIII, 79
Population, 10, 12, 16, 47, 81, 114, 116, 126, 135,
410, 467, 563, 566-567, 579, 583
Post hoc ergo propter hoc, 135, 159, 626
Pratkanis, Anthony, 106
Precht, Robert, 10
Precising definition, 86-87, 90, 626
Precising definitions, 86-88, 107
Precision, 87, 122, 199, 306-307, 310-311, 319, 332,
616
Predicate, 170-187, 196, 200, 202, 204, 209, 212-215,
220, 226, 228-233, 238, 241, 244, 246, 249,
251-254, 256-258, 262, 264, 268, 275-276,
296, 309, 312, 433, 435-438, 441-442, 445,
619-623, 625-626, 628-629
Predicate term, 172-173, 175-179, 186-187, 196, 209,
212, 214-215, 229, 232, 249, 251-253,
256-258, 262, 309, 312, 435-436, 620-621,
623, 625-626
Predictions, 561, 565-567, 569-570, 575, 604
and hypothesis, 561, 565-567, 569-570, 575
predictive power, 569-570
Prejudice, 104, 120
Preliminary hypothesis, 563, 583, 626
Premise, 6-9, 11-14, 16-19, 26-27, 29, 31-32, 36,
41-45, 52, 58, 69, 109, 119, 139, 144, 146,
150, 153, 169, 183, 187-190, 211-215, 217,
222-226, 229, 231-239, 241-254, 256-258,
260-261, 266, 269, 273-277, 279, 283-286,
289-290, 298-300, 303, 311, 333, 335-338,
366, 372-377, 379-380, 391-393, 395, 398,
400, 402, 404, 406-407, 413, 420, 423, 435,
451-452, 458-459, 496, 537, 549, 561,
618-626, 628-629
defined, 32, 231, 311, 373, 620-621, 626
definition, 16, 333, 618, 620-621, 623, 625-626,
628-629
Premise indicator, 12, 626
Premises, 2, 6-9, 11-16, 20, 24-32, 36-38, 40-41, 43,
45, 47, 51-52, 54, 56-57, 61, 64, 103, 109,
111-115, 117, 122-125, 130, 138, 140-142,
146, 152, 159, 168-169, 183, 189, 193,
211-214, 216-219, 221-226, 230-241,
243-251, 253-254, 256-257, 266-267, 269,
271, 273-276, 279-280, 282-284, 289,
291-293, 296-297, 305, 311, 328-329,
332-337, 339-340, 345-346, 365-366, 372,
374, 376, 379-382, 385-386, 394-395,
399-400, 402-403, 406-407, 412-416,
420-424, 435, 453-454, 459-462, 465, 473,
476-477, 486, 488-489, 494-500, 505,
510-511, 518-519, 537, 547, 559, 561, 608,
611, 615, 618-629
affirmative, 12-13, 114, 233, 235, 237, 239, 248,
250-251, 257, 284, 435, 473, 615,
618-619, 626-629
defined, 32, 112, 231, 311, 332, 608, 620-621, 626
dependent, 27, 623
expressed, 14-15, 32, 169, 211, 274-275, 279, 289,
346, 415-416, 421, 465, 488, 561
fallacy of exclusive, 233, 237, 250
independent, 43, 217, 340, 537, 608, 623-624, 627
major, 27, 54, 159, 211-214, 219, 226, 230-233,
235-236, 238, 241, 243-244, 246-251,
253-254, 256, 274-276, 619-625, 628
minor, 7, 211-214, 219, 226, 230-233, 235-236,
238, 241, 243-251, 253-254, 256,
274-276, 407, 619-625, 628
missing, 64, 111-112, 122, 124, 141, 159, 274-276,
385, 476, 489, 625
not in declarative form, 13
recognition of, 32, 217
universal, 27, 125, 159, 193, 222-224, 234-235,
241, 243, 246-248, 250-251, 254, 296,
453-454, 461-462, 473, 518, 615, 619,
622-624, 627-629
Preskill, John, 572
Presumption, 109, 111, 133, 138, 141-142, 151, 154,
158-159, 569, 623, 627
Presumption of innocence, 133
Probabilities, 26-27, 193, 342, 587, 589-591, 595-599,
601, 608, 612-614, 618-619, 627
Probability, 25-27, 228, 342, 487-488, 494-495, 510,
518, 524, 532, 545, 587-614, 615, 618-619,
622-624, 626-627
a priori theory of, 588-590, 606, 619
alternative conceptions of, 587, 608
conditional, 601, 618, 623-624
equiprobable, 605
induction and, 27
of alternative occurrences, 591, 595
of joint occurrences, 591
probability calculus, 587, 590, 597, 605, 608, 610,
627
relative frequency theory of, 589, 627
total, 524, 588-589, 592, 594, 599, 603-604, 606,
626-627
Probability calculus, 587, 590, 597, 605, 608, 610, 627
Probability theory, 228, 591, 601, 618, 622, 624, 626
Problem-solving, 562
Product, 73, 88, 93, 113, 122, 142, 201-202, 204-205,
220, 438, 492, 496, 509, 520, 560, 591-592,
596, 599, 603, 608, 612, 614, 623-624, 627
Product theorem, 591-592, 596, 599, 603, 608, 614,
623-624, 627
Proof, 56, 115, 132-133, 137, 141, 148, 153-154, 245,
272, 275, 278, 328, 339, 350, 365-366,
373-383, 392-396, 400, 402-408, 411-413,
415-417, 420-424, 431, 452-455, 457-460,
469-470, 473, 476-477, 516, 526-528, 539,
548-549, 583, 622-623
Proofs
conditional, 374, 389, 402, 406-407, 624
indirect, 365, 420, 422, 424
of invalidity, 365, 411
of validity, 365, 367, 373, 376, 379, 381-382, 388,
393, 395-396, 403, 411, 420, 422, 424,
451, 624
truth-functional, 420, 624
Propaganda, 106, 148, 156
Proposition, 2, 4-8, 13-19, 27, 42, 44-45, 52-53, 55-56,
80, 119, 121-123, 130, 133, 138, 142, 156,
159, 169-189, 194-206, 208, 210, 211-213,
219-221, 224, 229, 231-234, 242-248, 251,
254, 257, 259-266, 268, 273-275, 280,
283-285, 289, 312, 318, 323, 336-337, 339,
342, 345, 348, 369-370, 390, 435-447,
462-463, 465-468, 473-475, 517, 561-562,
588, 615, 618-629
compound, 5, 8, 265-266, 283-285, 318, 348, 435,
443, 447, 619-620, 622-625, 629
disjunctive, 5, 283-285, 289, 339, 370, 619-620,
622, 629
exceptive, 265-266, 466-468, 473, 622
exclusive, 233, 264, 312, 622, 624-625
simple, 2, 5-8, 55, 130, 133, 173, 186, 203, 243,
260, 265-266, 273, 283, 289, 348, 437,
440-441, 443, 446-447, 462-463, 475,
588, 615, 618-620, 624, 626-629
637

unstated, 16-17, 274-275, 339, 622
Propositional function, 436-440, 442-443, 445-446,
451-458, 463, 467, 473, 622-624, 627-629
Propositional logic, 7, 616
Protasis, 318, 618, 624, 627
Protocol, 51, 554
Proximate cause, 516, 627
Psychology
experimental, 552
Pure hypothetical syllogism, 284, 286, 302, 337, 627
Q
Quakers, 460
Qualifying, 207
Quality, 6-8, 51, 99, 168, 174-175, 177, 179-182,
185-187, 208-209, 257, 419, 434, 544, 553,
567, 626-627
Quantification, 296, 342, 433-483, 616, 622-624,
626-629
existential, 433, 437, 439-442, 445-446, 456-458,
461-462, 473, 478, 622-624, 626-627,
629
of A proposition, 342
universal, 296, 433, 437-443, 445-446, 451-455,
458, 461-462, 467, 473, 478, 622-624,
627-629
Quantification theory, 342, 433-483, 622-624, 627-628
singular propositions and, 473
universal and existential quantifiers, 433, 437, 441,
461-462
Quantifier, 175, 263-264, 438-441, 443, 446-448, 473,
622-624, 626-627, 629
Quantifiers, 214, 263, 265, 296, 433, 435, 437,
441-442, 444, 446-448, 460-462, 466, 473
universal, 296, 433, 437, 441-442, 446, 461-462,
473
Quantity, 48, 168, 174-176, 179-180, 182, 185, 187,
208-209, 263-265, 296, 538, 626-627
Quasi-ostensive definitions, 97
Question, 2, 4, 13-16, 20, 36, 54, 60-61, 65, 69, 85,
88, 90, 93, 99-100, 110-111, 118-119,
121-122, 127, 129, 134, 136, 138-142, 151,
155, 158-159, 162, 181, 189, 196, 218, 225,
228, 243, 270-271, 287, 303, 315, 334-335,
339, 344, 390, 394-395, 413, 416, 437, 454,
461-462, 498, 522, 526-528, 538, 546,
548-549, 560-561, 565, 571, 576, 579, 582,
587-589, 595, 610-612, 618-620, 626-628
Questions
begging, 140, 142
survey, 76, 114, 142
Quotations, 90, 104
Quotations from Chairman Mao, 104
Quoting, 90, 147, 556
R
Range, 6, 82, 180, 367, 515, 521, 539, 547, 560, 587,
589, 626
Rapone, Anita, 492
Rawls, John, 17, 33
Reagan, Ronald, 122
Reasonableness, 118, 145
Reasoning, 2-4, 8, 16, 28-29, 32, 36, 41, 44, 49, 51,
54-57, 59-61, 64-65, 69, 90-91, 109, 111,
118, 120, 122, 132, 134-138, 149, 158-159,
168, 173, 180, 183, 186, 194, 199, 211, 230,
232, 234, 242-243, 305, 354, 366, 372, 387,
434, 442, 485-511, 513-557, 559, 572,
597-598, 606, 615-616, 619, 622-623,
625-627
by analogy, 486-489, 494, 499, 507, 510, 518, 627
common errors, 230
deductive, 2, 4, 28, 32, 56, 168, 173, 211, 243, 305,
366, 372, 387, 434, 486-487, 505,
510-511, 517, 537, 546, 548, 615-616,
619, 622-623, 625-626
emotional, 158, 305
errors, 109, 230, 537
inductive, 2, 32, 134, 486-487, 490, 496, 505,
510-511, 514, 518, 520-522, 526, 532,
536-537, 540-541, 545, 547-549,
555-556, 615-616, 619, 625, 627
Reasons, 2, 6, 8, 11, 13, 15, 18, 52-53, 83, 87, 109,
112, 114, 130, 138, 160, 197, 290, 498, 504,
561, 606, 609, 611, 620, 626
and evidence, 87
definition, 83, 87, 112, 504, 620, 626
giving, 8, 18, 290
in real life, 13
Recognizing arguments, 2, 11
Red herring, 111, 115-117, 124, 158, 162, 627
Red herring fallacy, 627
Reducing the number of terms in a syllogism, 627
Reductio ad absurdum, 157, 420-421, 423
Reduction to standard form, 255-256, 627-629
Reed, Walter, 527
Reference, 13, 133, 145, 214, 238, 269, 271, 321,
335, 337, 394, 435, 442-443, 452, 456, 566,
589, 627
Reflection, 2, 50, 124, 188, 233, 265, 390
Reflective, 562
Refutation by logical analogy, 305, 328, 332, 460, 473,
486, 505-507, 511, 609, 611, 627
Refute, 122-123, 128, 218, 291-292, 303, 505-507,
609, 611
Rehnquist, William, 13
Reiss, Diana, 581
Relative frequency theory of probability, 589, 627
Relativism, 104
Relaxation, 523
Relevance, 44, 81, 109, 111-112, 122, 124-125, 128,
138, 154, 158, 496, 498, 500, 511, 568, 623,
627
fallacies of, 109, 111-112, 122, 124-125, 138, 154,
158, 623
Rembrandt, 205
Remote cause, 516, 627
Renaissance, 288
Repetition, 52-53
Replacement, Rule of, 627
Reports
published, 53-54
Research
claims, 578, 583
conducting, 114
process, 54, 527, 529, 534
review, 65, 164
source, 193, 531, 551
survey, 76, 114, 542
Residues, Method of, 627
Retrograde analysis, 59, 65, 627
Reynolds, Glenn, 50
Rhetorical power, 444
Rhetorical question, 13, 69, 627
Rhetorical questions, 14-15
Rice, Grantland, 76
Ridgeley, Stanley, 38
Risk factor, 550
Risks, 25, 156, 550, 601
Robertson, James, 23
Robin, Corey, 509
Roosevelt, Franklin, 46
Roosevelt, Theodore, 90
Rothstein, Edward, 509
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 74, 78
Rowe, Martin, 158
Rule of inference, 366, 369, 372-373, 386, 389,
392-395, 398, 400, 452, 455-457, 618-625,
628-629
Rule of replacement, 385-386, 424, 434-435, 446,
622, 627
Rules
of transformation, 259
Rules and fallacies for syllogisms, 627, 629
Rules of inference, 365-369, 371, 374, 376, 378-382,
385-386, 388, 390, 392-396, 399, 405, 411,
421, 423-424, 435, 446, 451-452, 454,
456-458, 468, 473, 476, 547, 623, 625, 627
order of, 388, 396
Rules of validity, 236
Ruskin, John, 75
Russell, Bertrand, 78, 198, 296, 342, 434, 438,
451-452, 616
Ruth, Babe, 7
Ryle, Gilbert, 105
S
Saddam Hussein, 338
Sample, 212, 494, 581, 588
Samples, 543-544, 553, 581
Sampling, 467
Santayana, George, 71, 125
Scalia, Antonin, 155, 490, 507, 511
Schiff, Stacy, 125
Schiraldi, Vincent, 47
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 501
Schrader, Harald, 530
Schuck, Victoria, 294
Schurz, Carl, 77
Science, 6, 8, 25, 31, 51, 53, 65, 74, 84, 87-88, 105,
108, 109-110, 129, 131, 139, 157, 164, 197,
273-274, 296, 342, 351, 420, 438, 490-491,
501, 503, 511, 517, 520, 522, 525, 528,
534-535, 538, 545, 547-550, 553, 555-556,
559-585, 587, 601, 611, 615
experimental, 53, 108, 566, 580
predictive power of, 569-570
theoretical, 31, 88, 164, 197, 559, 566, 568-569,
571, 573, 576-577
Scientific American, 104, 273, 288, 582, 584
Scientific explanation, 559, 562, 623, 627
Scientific investigation, 225, 520, 562, 585, 610, 627
Scientific method, 134, 585, 610-611, 627-628
Scriven, Michael, 65
Second-order enthymeme, 275, 628
Self-contradictory statement form, 344, 415, 628
Seligman, Daniel, 295
Semmelweis, Ignac, 548
Seneca, 45
Senses, 81, 90, 96, 186, 311, 313, 319-320, 351, 353,
390, 502, 514, 516, 587
Sentence, 2, 4-6, 8, 13, 16, 20, 38, 69-70, 75, 90, 147,
154, 264, 273, 313-314, 326, 352, 443, 447,
466, 468, 627-628
declarative, 2, 4, 13, 16, 69-70, 627-628
exclamatory, 69-70
imperative, 69-70
interrogative, 13, 69-70, 627
Sets, 64, 110, 184, 228, 240, 282, 308, 368, 405, 450,
521, 523, 531, 546, 551, 555, 560, 576, 590
Sextus Empiricus, 287, 294
Shakespeare, William, 22
Shapin, Steven, 532
Shepherd, Andrew, 538
Sheridan, Richard, 85
Silone, Ignazio, 126
Simple dilemma, 289, 620, 628
Simple predicate, 437, 441, 628
Simple predicates, 437, 440, 443, 446-447, 462, 626
Simple statement, 307-308, 330, 343, 628
Simple statements, 307, 309, 314-315, 317, 326,
328-329, 333, 338, 344, 365, 413-414, 417,
422-423, 434, 460, 463, 475
Simplicity, 173, 228, 570-571, 575, 584, 627
Simplification (Simp.), 369, 397, 628
Sine qua non, 626, 628
Singular proposition, 260-262, 264, 435-437, 439, 465,
618, 628
Singular propositions, 260-262, 265, 295-296, 433,
435-437, 439, 442-443, 461, 473
Skills, 9, 56, 60, 144, 450, 551-553
Slagar, Christina, 447
Sleep, 474-477, 505, 528-529, 543-544, 550
Slippery slope, 135-136, 157, 628
Slippery slope argument, 136
Smallpox, 580
Smith, Theobald, 74
Smoking, 127, 147-148, 486-487, 506, 511, 515, 522,
543, 554, 556
Social sciences, 575
Socrates, 3, 26, 49, 89, 115, 118, 126, 129, 151, 260,
294, 319, 411, 434-437, 439, 451, 472, 615
Solomon, 539
Solomon, Susan, 539
Solutions, 59, 64, 163, 209, 252, 297, 355, 425, 476,
478, 508, 611, 613
flawed, 611
Solzhenitsyn, Alexander, 134
Sommers, Christina, 128
Sophism, 144, 618, 628
Sophocles, 81
Sorites, 255, 279-282, 296, 302, 475, 477, 628
Sound, 2, 4, 8, 31, 80, 104, 117, 154, 271, 415, 424,
489, 524, 603, 628
Sound argument, 31
Soundness, 549, 604
Speaking
public, 21, 49
Specific form of a given argument, 330, 332, 343
Specific form of a given statement, 343, 628
Spencer, Herbert, 503
Spergel, David, 578
Spin, 49
Spinoza, Baruch, 56, 74-75, 105
Square of Opposition, 168, 180, 182-185, 194-197,
199, 202, 208, 439, 442, 473, 620-621, 626,
638

628-629
Aristotelian, 168, 194-197, 620, 628-629
Boolean, 194-195, 199, 202, 208, 621, 628
contradictories in, 202
contraries in, 621
diagram, 182, 628-629
traditional, 168, 180, 183, 185, 194-197, 199, 208,
439, 442, 620-621, 626, 628-629
Standard-form categorical propositions, 170, 173, 175,
177, 179-180, 183, 187, 196, 201-202,
205-206, 208, 211, 213, 219, 225, 257,
262-263, 265, 267-268, 624-626, 628
distribution and, 262
general schema of, 175
immediate inferences and, 183
quality and, 179, 257
quantity and, 175, 180
symbolism and diagrams for, 201
Standard-form categorical syllogism, 211-212, 230,
234-235, 241, 244, 248-251, 255-256, 266,
269, 476, 622, 628-629
mood and, 241, 248-249, 251, 269
terms of, 212, 249
Venn diagram technique for testing, 211, 249
Standard-form categorical syllogisms, 199, 211, 235,
249, 255, 259, 266-267, 269, 276, 295, 465,
619, 621, 623
Statement, 2, 4-7, 10, 13-15, 27, 29, 32, 42, 51-52, 56,
60-61, 69, 95, 129, 139, 141, 146-147, 152,
160, 162, 176, 181, 197, 263, 269, 283, 305,
307-311, 313-315, 318-322, 324, 326,
329-330, 333, 336-338, 341, 343-354,
366-367, 371, 373-374, 376-379, 381-382,
385, 388-391, 394-395, 400, 402-404,
406-407, 412-413, 415-416, 420, 423,
435-437, 443, 445, 454, 456, 459, 462, 466,
473-477, 508, 520, 560, 618-620, 622-629
defined, 32, 60, 307-308, 311, 322, 350-351,
353-354, 373, 620, 626
Statement form, 341, 343-344, 390, 394, 415,
619-620, 622, 626, 628-629
Statement variable, 329-330, 333, 338, 341, 343, 371,
391, 628-629
Statements, 5, 12, 14, 28, 42, 54, 62, 136, 138, 146,
160, 194, 263-264, 268-269, 295, 305,
307-315, 317-322, 324-326, 328-329, 333,
335-338, 341, 343-345, 347-354, 365-366,
373-374, 376-379, 381-382, 385-386,
388-391, 394-395, 399-400, 402-403,
412-414, 416-417, 420, 422-423, 434-435,
442-443, 447, 451, 453-454, 456, 460, 463,
468, 475-476, 490, 549, 559, 619-620,
622-629
ambiguous, 146, 305, 310, 312-315, 321, 350, 625
analysis of, 305, 350, 435, 549, 627
complex, 28, 138, 329, 376, 378-379, 382, 443,
549, 619-620
conditional, 5, 305, 318-322, 324-326, 333,
336-338, 341, 345, 374, 377, 389, 391,
402, 412, 442, 453, 456, 620, 623-625
consistent, 194, 628
contingent, 343-344, 347, 354, 620
contradictory, 310, 343-344, 347, 352-354, 414,
420, 620, 624, 628
corresponding, 194, 295, 311, 320, 623-624, 628
exceptive, 468, 622
if-then, 5, 319-321, 324, 336, 345, 350-351, 442
inconsistent, 414, 416, 624
logically equivalent, 325, 348-351, 354, 385-386,
388-391, 394, 463, 624-625, 627
particular affirmative, 442, 619, 626, 628
particular negative, 442, 619, 626, 628
quantification, 434-435, 442-443, 447, 451,
453-454, 456, 460, 463, 468, 475-476,
622-624, 626-629
singular, 264, 295, 435, 442-443, 453, 628
standard-form categorical, 263-264, 268-269, 295,
476, 619, 622-629
universal affirmative, 442-443, 619, 628-629
universal negative, 442, 619, 628-629
Statistics, 228, 522, 587
range, 587
Sten, Ray, 506, 511
Stephen, 28, 65, 77, 90, 164, 278, 508, 533, 572
Stereotypes, 137
Stipulations, 84, 87
Stipulative definition, 83-85, 90, 626, 628-629
Stipulative definitions, 83-85, 87, 107
Stoics, 7
Stoller, Robert, 106
Stone, Irving, 127
Strachey, John, 130
Strategy
rules of inference, 379-380, 396
Strauss, Leo, 293
Straw man, 111, 117-118, 124, 158, 162-163, 628
Straw man argument, 117
Straw man fallacy, 628
Strom, Stephanie, 144
Subaltern, 182, 185, 209, 241, 628
Subalternation, 182, 185, 189, 194, 199, 628-629
Subarguments, 64
Subcontraries, 181-182, 196, 199, 210, 441, 621, 628
Subject term, 171-173, 175-179, 186-187, 196, 209,
212, 214-216, 220, 229, 232, 249, 251-252,
256, 258, 261, 263, 309, 312, 435, 442-443,
620-621, 623, 625, 627
Subjective intension, 96, 100, 628
Subject-predicate propositions, 433, 442, 445, 628
Subjects, 3, 25, 132, 150, 435, 528-529, 532, 535, 553
Substitution instance, 329-330, 332-333, 335, 337,
339-340, 343-344, 346, 355, 360, 366-367,
388, 391, 394, 415, 437, 439, 443, 445,
451-452, 454-458, 463, 622, 628-629
Sufficient condition, 325-327, 351, 515-517, 522, 620,
625-626, 628
Sufficient conditions, 325, 514, 626
Suggestion, 135-136, 138, 143, 147, 510
Suicide, 136, 279, 309, 583
Sumner, Charles, 78, 155
Superaltern, 182, 208, 241, 629
Surowieki, James, 65, 544
Survey, 48, 76, 114, 129, 142, 342, 504, 542
conducting, 114
Surveys, 52
Swift, Jonathan, 153, 448
Syllogism, 153, 156, 211-219, 221-235, 238-252,
255-259, 261, 265-266, 268-269, 273-277,
279, 282-286, 295, 297-299, 302, 311, 320,
324, 334-335, 337-339, 366, 368, 371, 379,
386, 393, 395, 397-398, 416, 425, 453,
455-456, 465, 475-477, 486, 547, 618-629
Aristotelian, 234, 465, 619-620, 622, 625, 628-629
categorical, 211-219, 221-235, 238-252, 255-257,
259, 261, 265-266, 268-269, 274, 276,
279, 282-286, 295, 337, 465, 475-476,
618-629
conditional, 284-286, 320, 324, 337-338, 453, 456,
618, 620-621, 623-625
disjunctive, 255, 282-285, 299, 302, 311, 320, 324,
334-335, 339, 366, 368, 371, 379, 393,
397, 416, 619-620, 622, 629
hypothetical, 255, 282, 284-286, 302, 334,
337-338, 366, 368, 371, 379, 395,
397-398, 425, 453, 456, 477, 618-620,
623-627, 629
in ordinary language, 255-259, 261, 265-266,
268-269, 273-277, 279, 282-286, 295,
297-299, 302
principal kinds, 285
standard-form categorical, 211-213, 219, 221, 225,
230, 234-235, 241, 244, 248-251,
255-257, 259, 265-266, 268-269, 276,
295, 465, 476, 619, 621-629
Venn diagram technique for testing, 211, 219, 249
Syllogistic argument, 211, 216, 218, 225, 227,
255-257, 262, 268, 276, 295, 619, 629
enthymemes and, 276
in ordinary language, 255-257, 262, 268, 276, 295
uniform translation for, 268
Symbolic logic, 168, 193, 198, 207, 228, 296, 305-363,
392, 433-434, 443, 616, 622, 628-629
conditional statements and, 305, 318
conjunction in, 308
disjunction in, 306, 312
material implication and, 308, 629
statement forms and, 305, 341
Symbolic notation, 315, 382, 385, 405
Synonymous definition, 96, 100, 629
T
Tacitus, 77
Tautologies, 273, 345, 347, 352, 388, 625
Tautology, 273, 343-344, 346, 348-349, 351-352,
361-363, 387, 389-390, 397, 400, 402, 625,
629
Taylor, John, 39
Teehan, John, 23
Tegmark, Max, 579
Tell, David, 510
Teller, Edward, 134
Terms, 4, 6-7, 15, 25, 37, 45, 61, 75, 79-80, 83-84,
86-88, 91-99, 101-103, 107, 110, 114, 123,
145-146, 149, 152, 155, 170-186, 193-194,
196, 202, 204, 206, 208-209, 211-214, 217,
219-221, 224-226, 228, 230-233, 235-236,
246-251, 253, 255-259, 262, 268-269, 273,
292, 295, 298, 307, 309, 319, 353-354, 434,
436-437, 439, 441-442, 447, 465-466, 486,
501, 510, 537, 542, 560, 578, 590, 615-616,
619, 621-623, 625-627
common, 7, 37, 87, 91, 96, 98, 107, 110, 171, 185,
211, 217, 230, 233, 256, 319, 354, 436,
442, 542, 615, 621
middle, 212-214, 219, 226, 228, 230-233, 235-236,
246-247, 249-251, 253, 258, 273, 298,
353-354, 619, 621-623, 625
Testability, 568-569, 629
Testimony, 121, 416, 490
conflicting, 121
The Doctor, 115, 294, 490, 493
Theoretical definition, 89, 97, 629
Theoretical science, 576
Theories, 31, 38, 50, 193, 487, 551, 560, 567-573,
576, 584, 587, 589, 608, 615
Theory, 6, 45, 52, 88-89, 97, 104, 106-107, 129, 137,
157, 168-169, 193, 228, 243, 265, 278, 288,
290, 296, 303, 305, 342, 365, 433-483, 491,
496, 534, 537, 546, 559-561, 563-571, 575,
578, 582, 584-585, 587-591, 601, 606-608,
610-611, 615-616, 618-619, 622-624,
626-629
Thernstrom, Abigail, 9
Thinking
creative, 493
critical, 306
defined, 332, 351
Third-order enthymeme, 275-276, 299, 629
Thomas Aquinas, 9, 44, 65, 271, 287
Thorne, Kip, 572
Thucydides, 129
Tieck, Ludwig, 74
Tierney, John, 506, 509, 511
Tilde, 310, 621, 626, 629
Tobacco, 127, 147, 499-500
Tolstoi, Leo, 104
Torture, 103, 118
Total probability, 599, 604
Traditional square of opposition, 168, 180, 183, 185,
194-197, 199, 208, 439, 620-621, 628-629
Translations
Boolean, 260
Transposition (Trans.), 389, 391, 393, 397, 629
Trinity, 438, 451-452
Truth, 2, 4-6, 14, 17-19, 24, 27-32, 38, 61-62, 85,
104-105, 107, 112-113, 115, 118-122, 128,
130-131, 133, 138-142, 149, 159, 168-169,
178, 180-184, 189, 191-192, 195-196, 210,
217, 243, 273, 283-287, 289, 294, 305,
307-311, 313-315, 321-322, 324, 326, 329,
332-340, 342-354, 365-366, 369-371, 377,
385, 388, 390, 392, 395, 403-404, 412-418,
420, 422-424, 429, 434, 441, 443, 450-451,
453-454, 456, 458, 460-464, 468, 478-481,
486, 559, 561, 565, 579, 605, 611, 618-622,
624-625, 627-629
defined, 32, 85, 104, 107, 112, 149, 307-308, 311,
322, 332, 350-351, 353-354, 620-621
empty, 196, 210
Truth relations, 180
Truth table, 309-311, 321-322, 324, 332-339, 343-344,
346, 348-349, 365, 369, 371, 390, 395,
412-413, 415-416, 629
Truth tables, 305, 315, 326, 332-333, 336, 338-340,
342, 346-347, 352, 365, 395
for conjunction, 305
indirect, 365
Truth value, 4, 308-310, 314-315, 344, 347-349, 377,
385, 390, 412, 423, 461, 468, 619, 625, 629
Truth values, 308-309, 313-315, 333, 335, 343-344,
347, 349, 412-414, 417, 422-423, 461-464,
629
Truth-functional component, 308, 629
Truth-functional compound statement, 308, 315, 385,
629
Truth-functional connective, 307-308, 310-311, 322,
344, 353-354, 620-621, 624, 629
639

Truth-table, 315, 335, 338-339, 344, 354, 365-366,
412-413, 422-424
Tu quoque, 119-120, 629
Tuchman, Barbara, 231, 250
Turner, Joseph, 39
Twain, Mark, 143
Twins, 148
U
Uganda, 25, 525, 550
Ulrich, Frank, 502
Unbiased, 76
Uncertainties, 88, 538
Uncertainty, 76, 581, 618
Undistributed, 176-177, 179, 208-209, 231-232,
235-236, 238, 249-250, 261, 266, 276, 298,
624, 629
Undistributed middle, 231, 235-236, 238, 250, 261,
266, 298, 629
Undistributed middle, fallacy of, 629
Uniform translation, 255, 268, 296, 629
Unit class, 260, 629
Universal generalization, 455, 458, 473, 478, 629
Universal Generalization (U.G.), 455, 629
Universal Instantiation (U.I.), 452, 629
Universal proposition, 27, 182, 188, 195, 198, 200,
234, 628-629
Universal propositions, 176, 181, 193-194, 198, 208,
234, 241, 260, 296, 518, 619, 622, 624, 629
Universal quantification, 439, 442, 445, 451-455, 458,
467, 629
Universal quantifier, 438-439, 443, 473, 623-624, 629
Unless, 55, 70, 141, 270, 282, 288, 290-291, 312, 318,
327-328, 410, 418, 443, 448, 468, 471-472,
475, 569, 607, 622
Unstated propositions, 16
Utilitarianism, 153-154, 546
V
Vague, 86-88, 305
Vagueness, 86-88, 102, 107, 626, 629
of terms, 87-88
Valid, 24-32, 37, 61, 142, 145, 150-151, 168-169, 173,
184-190, 199-200, 211, 213-218, 222-223,
225, 227, 230-235, 237, 240-253, 256-258,
260-261, 266, 269-271, 273-277, 279,
281-286, 290, 297-302, 305-306, 311, 320,
324, 328, 332, 334-340, 346, 351, 354-359,
365-374, 376-377, 380, 382, 385-386, 388,
392-396, 399-400, 405, 411, 414-416, 420,
423-424, 433-435, 452, 455-456, 460-462,
465, 468, 475-476, 486, 488, 494, 537,
548-549, 587, 618-629
Valid argument form, 332, 335-336, 339-340, 346,
366-367, 396, 399-400, 622, 624
Valid arguments, 24, 29-31, 150, 168, 216, 242, 324,
328, 336, 339, 351, 366, 372, 376
Valid inferences, 189, 366, 627
Valid syllogisms, 216, 242-245, 271, 273, 297-298
Validity, 2-3, 24-30, 32, 37, 168, 170, 173, 194, 206,
212, 217-218, 224-225, 228-229, 235-236,
243, 249, 255, 258, 260, 262, 265-267,
269-270, 274-275, 280, 290, 305, 309, 324,
328-329, 332-333, 335-340, 346, 350-351,
354, 365-368, 371-373, 375-376, 378-379,
381-382, 385, 388, 392-396, 400, 403, 408,
411, 413-417, 420-424, 433-435, 451-457,
459-460, 465-466, 468-470, 472-473, 476,
510, 530, 615-616, 622-625, 627, 629
indirect proof of, 365, 420, 422, 424
technical, 433, 472
truth and, 27-29, 32, 351
Values, 81, 88, 104, 126, 154, 165, 308-309, 313-315,
333, 335, 343-344, 347, 349, 412-414, 417,
422-423, 461-464, 509, 587, 626, 629
definition of, 88, 126, 333, 414, 626, 629
Variables, 306, 329, 333-335, 337-338, 341, 391, 412,
619, 627-628
independent, 627
individual, 627-628
Vatican, 279
Venn diagram, 170, 206, 211, 219, 222, 224-229, 243,
249, 255, 258, 270, 297, 474, 476, 629
of categorical syllogisms, 206, 211
Venn diagram technique, 211, 219, 243, 249, 629
Venn diagrams, 170, 205-206, 208, 219, 223-225,
244, 255, 258, 260, 262, 267, 295, 474, 476,
616, 624, 629
Venn, John, 170, 205, 228, 616
Verbs, 263, 295, 436
Verification, 561, 564, 567
Vietnam War, 70, 452, 508
Violence
Islam, 33
Japan, 10
Visual representation, 41, 228
Visualization, 245
Vohs, Kathleen, 544, 555
Voltaire, 5
W
Wansink, Brian, 535
Washington, George, 78
Watergate, 294
Waxman, Stephen, 533
Weaver, Jeff, 507
Webster, Adrian, 582
Webster, Daniel, 72
Webster, Frank, 142
Webster, Noah, 10
Wedekind, Claus, 543
Wedge, 310-312, 314-315, 326, 333-334, 338,
344-345, 350, 353, 443, 475, 478, 622, 624,
629
Weeks, Jeffrey, 578
What is, 2, 4, 15-17, 19-20, 28, 39, 57, 59, 61, 80,
84-89, 91, 94, 97, 100-101, 104, 106-107,
109, 114, 119-122, 132, 134, 137, 139, 141,
150-151, 153, 161-162, 172, 185-186, 196,
222, 225, 233, 244, 259, 261, 269, 273-275,
280, 291, 293, 306, 310, 314, 354, 385, 416,
420, 435, 440-441, 446-447, 450, 455, 475,
488, 503-504, 514, 522, 526, 547, 559-560,
562, 564, 567-568, 570, 576-579, 591,
593-597, 600-601, 605-607, 610, 612-613,
615, 619-621, 627-629
Whately, Richard, 140, 615
Wilde, Oscar, 21
Will, 2-3, 5-6, 12-13, 15-16, 18, 20-22, 24-26, 29-30,
37-39, 45, 49-51, 53-54, 56-57, 63-65, 71,
73-74, 76, 78, 80, 82-83, 86-90, 92-93, 101,
103-104, 110-115, 117, 119, 123-124, 126,
128-132, 134-136, 139-141, 143, 145,
147-148, 151, 153, 156, 160, 162-163,
170-171, 173, 175, 177, 179-181, 185,
188-189, 196-198, 202, 204, 206-208,
211-215, 217, 221, 223, 225, 233-235,
241-245, 248, 255-256, 260, 263-265, 272,
279, 288-291, 293-294, 303, 305-307,
309-310, 312-315, 319-321, 324-328, 336,
338, 340-341, 344-346, 348-349, 351, 365,
369-371, 373-374, 376-380, 382-386,
388-390, 393, 400, 402-406, 409-415,
418-420, 422-424, 435-436, 439, 441,
445-446, 451, 454, 459, 465, 475-477,
487-489, 493-502, 507-509, 515, 517-521,
526-527, 540-542, 545, 548-549, 559-560,
562-572, 576-577, 579, 582, 587-592,
595-608, 610, 612-614, 615-616, 620
Will, George, 424
Williams, Maurice, 38
Wilson, E.O., 511
Wilson, Marjorie, 492
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 107, 452
Wolfe, Alan, 10
Words
key, 89, 95, 268, 446, 629
signal, 11
Writing, 6, 11, 36, 38, 60, 68, 85, 100, 110, 116, 164,
175, 211, 366-367, 379, 413, 436, 438, 450,
467, 488, 544, 546
Written language, 110
Z
Zedong, Mao, 104
Zen, 270
640

