
Introduction to 
Electrical Power Systems 

Books in the IEEE Press Series on Power Engineering 
Principles of Electric Machines with Power Electronic Applications, 
Second Edition 
M.E. El-Hawary 
Pulse Width Modulation for Power Converters: Principles and Practice 
D. Grahame Holmes and Thomas Lip0 
Analysis of Electric Machinev and Drive Systems, Second Edition 
Paul C. Krause, Oleg Wasynczuk, and Scott D. Sudhoff 
Risk Assessment for Power Systems: Models, Methods, and Applications 
Wenyuan Li 
Optimization Principles: Practical Applications to the Operations of Markets of 
the Electric Power Industry 
Narayan S. Rau 
Electric Economics: Regulation and Deregulation 
Geoffrey Rothwell and Tomas Gomez 
Electric Power Systems: Analysis and Control 
Fabio Saccomanno 
Electrical Insulation for Rotating Machines: Design, Evaluation, Aging, Testing, 
and Repair 
Greg Stone, Edward A. Boulter, Ian Culbert, and Hussein Dhirani 
Signal Processing of Power Quality Disturbances 
Math H. J. Bollen and Irene Y. H. Gu 
Instantaneous Power Theory and Applications to Power Conditioning 
Hirofumi Akagi, Edson H. Watanabe and Mauricio Aredes 
Maintaining Mission Critical Systems in a 24/7 Environment 
Peter M. Curtis 
Elements of Tidal-Electric Engineering 
Robert H. Clark 
Handbook of Large Turbo-Generator Operation and Maintenance, 
Second Edition 
Geoff Klempner and Isidor Kerszenbaum 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Mohamed E. El-Hawary 

Introduction to 
Electrical Power Systems 
Mohamed E. El-Hawary 
ON POWER 
ENGINEERING 
Mohamed E. El-Hawary, Series Editor 
IEEE 
IEEE Press 
WlLEY 
A JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC., PUBLICATION 

IEEE Press 
445 Hoes Lane 
Piscataway, NJ 08855 
IEEE Press Editorial Board 
Lajos Hanzo, Editor in Chief 
T. Chen 
0. Malik 
T. G. Croda 
S. Nahavandi 
S. Farshchi 
M. S. Newman 
B. M. Hammerli 
W. Reeve 
R. Abari 
J. Anderson 
S. Basu 
A. Chatterjee 
Kenneth Moore, Director of IEEE Book and Information Services (BIS) 
Steve Welch, IEEE Press Manager 
Jeanne Audino, Project Editor 
Copyright 0 
2008 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. All rights reserved. 
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey 
Published simultaneously in Canada. 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by 
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted 
under Section 107 or 108 ofthe 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written 
permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the 
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 
750-4470, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be 
addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 11 1 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, 
(201) 748-601 1, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permission. 
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in 
preparing this book, they make no representation or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness 
of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness 
for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales 
materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should 
consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss 
of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, 
or other damages. 
For general information on our other products and services please contact our Customer Care Department 
within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (3 17) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572- 
4002. 
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print, 
however, may not be available in electronic formats. For more information about Wiley products, visit our 
web site at www.wiley.com. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publieation Data is available. 
ISBN 978-0470-40863-6 
Printed in the United States of America 
I 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1  

CONTENTS 
Preface 
ix 
Chapter 1 - INTRODUCTION 
1.1 
A Brief History of Electric Power Systems 
1 
1.2 
The Structure of the Power System 
3 
1.3 
Outline of the Text 
7 
Chapter 2 - BASICS OF ELECTRIC ENERGY SYSTEM THEORY 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
2.6 
2.7 
2.8 
2.9 
2.10 
2.1 1 
2.12 
2.13 
2.14 
2.15 
2.16 
2.17 
~~ 
Introduction 
Concepts of Power in Alternating Current Systems 
Three-Phase Systems 
The Per Unit System 
Electromagnetism and Electromechanical Energy 
Conversion 
Permeability and Magnetic Field Intensity 
Flux Linkages, Induced Voltages, Inductance, and 
Energy 
Hysteresis Loop 
Eddy Current and Core Losses 
Energy Flow Approach 
Multiply Excited Systems 
Doubly Excited Systems 
Salient-Pole Machines 
Round or Smooth Air-Gap Machines 
Machine-Type Classification 
P-Pole Machines 
Power System Representation 
Problems 
9 
9 
15 
25 
28 
31 
34 
36 
38 
40 
44 
46 
47 
50 
52 
55 
59 
59 
Chapter 3 - POWER GENERATION AND THE SYNCHRONOUS 
MACHINE 
3.1 
Introduction 
69 
3.2 
The Synchronous Machine: Preliminaries 
69 
3.3 
Synchronous Machine Fields 
72 
3.4 
A Simple Equivalent Circuit 
74 
3.5 
Principal Steady-State Characteristics 
77 
3.6 
Power-Angle Characteristics and the Infinite Bus 
Concept 
79 
3.7 
Accounting for Saliency 
86 
3.8 
Salient-Pole Machine Power Angle Characteristics 
91 
Problems 
93 
Chapter 4 - THE TRANSFORMER 
4.1 
Introduction 
99 
4.2 
General Theory of Transformer Operation 
99 
V 

vi 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
4.3 
Transformer Connections 
Problems 
113 
123 
Chapter 5 - ELECTRIC POWER TRANSMISSION 
5.1 
Introduction 
129 
5.2 
Electric Transmission Line Parameters 
129 
5.3 
Line Inductance 
13 1 
5.4 
Line Capacitance 
149 
5.5 
Two-Port Networks 
165 
5.6 
Transmission Line Models 
167 
Problems 
183 
Chapter 6 - INDUCTION AND FRACTIONAL HORSEPOWER 
MOTORS 
6.1 
Introduction 
6.2 
Three-Phase Induction Motors 
6.3 
Torque Relations 
6.4 
Classification of Induction Motors 
6.5 
6.6 
6.7 
Power and Torque Relations 
6.8 
Starting Single-Phase Induction Motors 
6.9 
Single-Phase Induction Motor Types 
Rotating Magnetic Fields in Single-Phase Induction 
Motors 
Equivalent Circuits for Single-Phase Induction 
Motors 
Problems 
191 
191 
199 
204 
205 
210 
216 
222 
224 
23 1 
Chapter 7 - FAULTS AND PROTECTION OF ELECTRIC ENERGY 
SYSTEMS 
7.1 
7.2 
7.3 
7.4 
7.5 
7.6 
7.7 
7.8 
7.9 
7.10 
7.1 1 
7.12 
7.13 
7.14 
Introduction 
Transients during a Balanced Fault 
The Method of Symmetrical Components 
Sequence Networks 
Line-to-Ground Fault 
Double Line-to-Ground Fault 
Line-to-Line Fault 
The Balanced Three-Phase Fault 
System Protection, An Introduction 
Protective Relays 
Transformer Protection 
Transmission Line Protection 
Impedance-Based Protection Principles 
Computer Relaying 
Problems 
Chapter 8 - THE ENERGY CONTROL CENTER 
8.1 
Introduction 
8.2 
Overview of EMS Functions 
237 
23 8 
240 
245 
26 1 
264 
268 
27 1 
272 
273 
276 
282 
289 
297 
299 
305 
307 

Contents 
vii 
8.3 
8.4 
8.5 
8.6 
8.7 
8.8 
8.9 
8.10 
Power Flow Control 
Power Flow 
Stability Considerations 
Power System State Estimation 
Power System Security 
Contingency Analysis 
Optimal Preventive and Corrective Actions 
Dynamic Security Analysis 
315 
319 
332 
340 
344 
349 
3 54 
36 1 
Chapter 9 -THE PRESENT AND FUTURE OF ELECTRIC ENERGY 
9.1 
Introduction 
367 
9.2 
Challenges Facing the System 
367 
9.3 
Blackouts and their Impact 
371 
SYSTEMS 
9.4 
Mitigating and Coping 
379 
REFERENCES 
385 
INDEX 
391 

PREFACE 
This book is written primarily as an introduction to the basics of 
electrical power systems. It is intended as a general introduction to the area for 
students in all engineering disciplines, as well as being useful as a reference and 
self-study guide for those professionals who wish to have a succinct introduction 
to this important area. The coverage of the book is designed to allow its use in a 
number of ways including service courses taught to non-electrical majors. The 
organization and details of the material in this book enables maximum flexibility 
for the instructor to select topics to include in courses within the modem 
engineering curriculum. 
The book does not assume a level of mathematical sophistication 
beyond that acquired through completion of undergraduate courses in basic 
physics and introductory electric circuits. Emphasis is placed on providing an 
improved appreciation of the operational characteristics of the electrical 
apparatus discussed, on the basis of linear mathematical models. Almost every 
key concept is illustrated through the use of in-text examples that are worked out 
in detail to enforce the reader’s understanding. The text coverage includes some 
usage of MATLABTM to solve fundamental problems of evaluating basic 
performance characteristics to assist in understanding power system devices. 
The first chapter in this book offers a historical perspective on the t are 
development of electric power systems. While this topic is not an integral part 
of conventional coverage in texts and courses in this area, this chapter should 
provide interesting insights into the influence of these developments on present 
day civilization. It is through an appreciation of the past developments and 
achievements that we can understand our present and forge ahead with future 
advances. 
Much of the material in Chapters 2 to 7 is derived from the more 
detailed expose’ found in my earlier book on “Electrical Power System Design 
and Analysis. The present treatment deals with fimdamental topics to be covered 
in introductory courses in electric power systems. Emphasis is given to practical 
aspects such as the main performance characteristics of the apparatus discussed 
and system applications. 
In Chapter 2, a review of fundamentals of electric circuits that are 
necessary for the studies to follow. Chapter 3 discusses the basics of 
synchronous machines for steady state operations. This is followed by 
treatments of the transformer in Chapter 4 and power transmission lines in 
Chapter 5. Unlike the coverage of the more detailed “Electric Power Systems: 
Design and Analysis,” Chapter 6 of the present book deals with Induction 
Motors both polyphase and single phase machines. In addition, Chapter 7 
combines both fault analysis and protection. 
The importance of computer control in power system operations is 
highlighted in Chapter 8 where we discuss the structure and functions involved 
ix 

X 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
in a modern energy control center. The chapter includes a brief introduction to 
functions performed in the electric energy control centre. Naturally some 
functions that are discussed in detail in “Electric Power Systems: Design and 
Analysis” such as Power Flow, Stability, optimal operation of power systems, 
are discussed briefly in this chapter. 
Chapter 9 is new to this book, and offers a brief discussion of the 
Present and Future of Electric Energy Systems. 
Of specific interest is a 
discussion of the challenges facing the system designer and operator in view of 
blackout events that took place during the first decade of the 2lSt Century. 
I have attempted to make this book as self-containing as possible. As a 
result, the reader will find that many background topics such as the per unit 
system and three-phase circuits are included in the text’s main body as opposed 
to the recent trend toward including many appendices dealing with these topics. 
In studying and teaching electrical power systems it has been my experience that 
a problem solving approach is most effective in exploring this rich area. 
A textbook such as this could not have been written without the 
continuing input of the many students who have gone through many versions of 
its material as it was developed. I wish to thank the members of the many 
classes to whom I was privileged to teach this fascinating subject. I wish to 
acknowledge the able work of Elizabeth Sanford of Dalhousie University in 
putting this manuscript in a better form than I was able to produce. 
As has always been the case, the patience and understanding of my 
wife, Dr. Ferial El-Hawary, made this project another joy to look forward to 
completing. It goes without saying that the younger generation of our family 
deserves a greater share of my appreciation for their continuous understanding. 
MOHAMED 
E. EL-HAWARY 
Halifax, Nova Scotia 
May 1,2008 

Chapter 1 
INTRODUCTION 
This chapter has three objectives. We first offer a brief perspective on 
the development of electric power systems. This is not intended to be a detailed 
historical review, but rather it uses historical landmarks as a background to 
highlight the features and structure of the modern power systems, which are 
discussed in Section 1.2. The chapter concludes with an outline of the book. 
1.1 
A BRIEF HISTORY OF ELECTRIC POWER SYSTEMS 
The electric power industry shapes and contributes to the welfare, 
progress, and technological advances of humanity. 
The growth of electric 
energy consumption in the world has been phenomenal. In the United States, 
for example, electric energy sales have grown to well over 400 times in the 
period between the turn of the century and the early 1970s. This growth rate 
was 50 times as much as the growth rate in all other energy forms used during 
the same period. The installed kW capacity per capita in the U.S. is estimated to 
be close to 3 kW. 
Edison Electric Illuminating Company of New York inaugurated the 
Pearl Street Station in 188 1. The station had a capacity of four 250-hp boilers 
supplying steam to six engine-dynamo sets. Edison’s system used a 110-V dc 
underground distribution network with copper conductors insulated with a jute 
wrapping. 
In 1882, the first water wheel-driven generator was installed in 
Appleton, Wisconsin. The low voltage ofthe circuits limited the service area of 
a central station, and consequently, central stations proliferated throughout 
metropolitan areas. 
The invention of the transformer, then known as the “inductorium,” 
made ac systems possible. The first practical ac distribution system in the U.S. 
was installed by W. Stanley at Great Barrington, Massachusetts, in 1866 for 
Westinghouse, who acquired the American rights to the transformer from its 
British inventors Gaulard and Gibbs. Early ac distribution utilized 1000-V 
overhead lines. The Nikola Tesla invention of the induction motor in 1888 
helped replace dc motors and hastened the advance in use of ac systems. 
The first American single-phase ac system was installed in Oregon in 
1889. Southern California Edison Company established the first three phase 2.3 
kV system in 1893. 
By 1895, Philadelphia had about twenty electric companies with 
distribution systems operating at 100-V and 500-V two-wire dc and 220-V 
three-wire dc, single-phase, two-phase, and three-phase ac, with frequencies of 
60, 66, 125, and 133 cycles per second, and feeders at 1000- 1200 V and 2000- 
2400 V. 
Introduction to Electrical Power Engineering. By Mohamed E. El-Hawary 
Copyright 0 
2008 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. 
1 

2 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
The subsequent consolidation of electric companies enables the 
realization of economies of scale in generating facilities, the introduction of 
equipment standardization, and the utilization of the load diversity between 
areas. Generating unit sizes of up to 1300 MW are in service, an era that was 
started by the 1973 Cumberland Station of the Tennessee Valley Authority. 
Underground distribution at voltages up to 5 kV was made possible by 
the development of rubber-base insulated cables and paper-insulated, lead- 
covered cables in the early 1900s. Since then, higher distribution voltages have 
been necessitated by load growth that would otherwise overload low-voltage 
circuits and by the requirement to transmit large blocks of power over great 
distances. Common distribution voltages presently are in 5-, 15-, 25-, 35-, and 
69-kV voltage classes. 
The growth in size of power plants and in the higher voltage equipment 
was accompanied by interconnections of the generating facilities. 
These 
interconnections decreased the probability of service interruptions, made the 
utilization of the most economical units possible, and decreased the total reserve 
capacity required to meet equipment-forced outages. This was accompanied by 
use of sophisticated analysis tools such as the network analyzer. Central control 
of the interconnected systems was introduced for reasons of economy and 
safety. The advent of the load dispatcher heralded the dawn of power systems 
engineering, an exciting area that strives to provide the best system to meet the 
load requirements reliably, safely, and economically, utilizing state-of-the-art 
computer facilities. 
Extra higher voltage (EHV) has become dominant in electric power 
transmission over great distances. 
By 1896, an 1 I-kv three-phase line was 
transmitting 10 MW from Niagara Falls to Buffalo over a distance of 20 miles. 
Today, transmission voltages of 230 kV, 287 kV, 345 kV, 500 kV, 735 kV, and 
765 kV are commonplace, with the first 1100-kV line already energized in the 
early 1990s. The trend is motivated by economy of scale due to the higher 
transmission capacities possible, more efficient use of right-of-way, lower 
transmission losses, and reduced environmental impact. 
In 1954, the Swedish State Power Board energized the 60-mile, 100-kV 
dc submarine cable utilizing U. Lamm’s Mercury Arc valves at the sending and 
receiving ends of the world’s first high-voltage direct current (HVDC) link 
connecting the Baltic island of Gotland and the Swedish mainland. Currently, 
numerous installations with voltages up to 800-kV dc are in operation around 
the world. 
In North America, the majority of electricity generation is produced by 
investor-owned utilities with a certain portion done by federally and provincially 
(in Canada) owned entities. In the United States, the Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission (FERC) regulates the wholesale pricing of electricity and terms and 
conditions of service. 

Introduction 
3 
The North American transmission system is interconnected into a large 
power grid known as the North American Power Systems Interconnection. The 
grid is divided into several pools. The pools consist of several neighboring 
utilities which operate jointly to schedule generation in a cost-effective manner. 
A privately regulated organization called the North American Electric 
Reliability Council (NERC) is responsible for maintaining system standards and 
reliability. NERC works cooperatively with every provider and distributor of 
power to ensure reliability. NERC coordinates its efforts with FERC as well as 
other organizations such as the Edison Electric Institute (EEI). NERC currently 
has four distinct electrically separated areas. 
These areas are the Electric 
Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT), the Western States Coordination 
Council (WSCC), the Eastern Interconnect, which includes all the states and 
provinces of Canada east of the Rocky Mountains (excluding Texas), and 
Hydro-Quebec. These electrically separate areas exchange with each other but 
are not synchronized electrically. 
The electric power industry in the United States has undergone 
fundamental changes since the deregulation of the telecommunication, gas, and 
other industries. The generation business is rapidly becoming market-driven. 
The power industry was characterized by larger, vertically integrated entities. 
The advent of open transmission access has resulted in wholesale and retail 
markets. Utilities may be divided into power generation, transmission, and retail 
segments. 
Generating companies (GENCO) sell directly to an independent 
system operator (ISO). The IS0 is responsible for the operation of the grid and 
matching demand and generation dealing with transmission companies as well 
(TRANSCO). This scenario is not the only possibility, as the power industry 
continues to evolve to create a more competitive environment for electricity 
markets to promote greater efficiency. The industry now faces new challenges 
and problems associated with the interaction of power system entities in their 
efforts to make crucial technical decisions while striving to achieve the highest 
level of human welfare. 
7.2 
THE STRUCTURE OF THE POWER SYSTEM 
An interconnected power system is a complex enterprise that may be 
0 
Generation Subsystem 
0 
Transmission and Subtransmission Subsystem 
0 
Distribution Subsystem 
0 
Utilization Subsystem 
subdivided into the following major subsystems: 
Generation Subsystem 
This includes generators and transformers. 
Generators - An essential component of power systems is the three- 
phase ac generator known as synchronous generator or alternator. Synchronous 

4 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
generators have two synchronously rotating fields: One field is produced by the 
rotor driven at synchronous speed and excited by dc current. The other field is 
produced in the stator windings by the three-phase armature currents. The dc 
current for the rotor windings is provided by excitation systems. In the older 
units, the exciters are dc generators mounted on the same shaft, providing 
excitation through slip rings. Current systems use ac generators with rotating 
rectifiers, known as brushless excitation systems. 
The excitation system 
maintains generator voltage and controls the reactive power flow. Because they 
lack the commutator, ac generators can generate high power at high voltage, 
typically 30 kV. 
The source of the mechanical power, commonly known as the prime 
mover, may be hydraulic turbines, steam turbines whose energy comes from the 
burning of coal, gas and nuclear fuel, gas turbines, or occasionally internal 
combustion engines burning oil. 
Steam turbines operate at relatively high speeds of 3600 or 1800 rpm. 
The generators to which they are coupled are cylindrical rotor, two-pole for 
3600 rpm, or four-pole for 1800 rpm operation. Hydraulic turbines, particularly 
those operating with a low pressure, operate at low speed. Their generators are 
usually a salient type rotor with many poles. 
In a power station, several 
generators are operated in parallel in the power grid to provide the total power 
needed. They are connected at a common point called a bus. 
With concerns for the environment and conservation of fossil fuels, 
many alternate sources are considered for employing the untapped energy 
sources of the sun and the earth for generation of power. Some alternate sources 
used are solar power, geothermal power, wind power, tidal power, and biomass. 
Transformers - The transformer transfers power with very high 
efficiency from one level of voltage to another. The power transferred to the 
secondary is almost the same as the primary, except for losses in the 
transformer. Using a step-up transformer will reduce losses in the line, which 
makes the transmission of power over long distances possible. 
Insulation requirements and other practical design problems limit the 
generated voltage to low values, usually 30 kV. Thus, step-up transformers are 
used for transmission of power. At the receiving end of the transmission lines 
step-down transformers are used to reduce the voltage to suitable values for 
distribution or utilization. 
The electricity in an electric power system may 
undergo four or five transformations between generator and consumers. 
Transmission and Subtransmission Subsystem 
An overhead transmission network transfers electric power from 
generating units to the distribution system which ultimately supplies the load. 
Transmission lines also interconnect neighboring utilities which allow the 
economic dispatch of power within regions during normal conditions, and the 

Introduction 
5 
transfer of power between regions during emergencies. 
Standard transmission voltages are established in the United States by the 
American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
Transmission voltage lines 
operating at more than 60 kV are standardized at 69 kV, 115 kV, 138 kV, 161 
kV, 230 kV, 345 kV, 500 kV, and 765 kV line-to-line. Transmission voltages 
above 230 kV are usually referred to as extra-high voltage (EHV). 
High voltage transmission lines are terminated in substations, which are 
called high-voltage substations, receiving substations, or primary substations. 
The function of some substations is switching circuits in and out of service; 
they are referred to as switching stations. 
At the primary substations, the 
voltage is stepped down to a value more suitable for the next part of the flow 
toward the load. Very large industrial customers may be served directly from 
the transmission system. 
The portion of the transmission system that connects the high-voltage 
substations through step-down transformers to the distribution substations is 
called the subtransmission network. 
There is no clear distinction between 
transmission and subtransmission voltage levels. Typically, the subtransmission 
voltage level ranges from 69 to 138 kV. Some large industrial customers may 
be served from the subtransmission system. Capacitor banks and reactor banks 
are usually installed in the substations for maintaining the transmission line 
voltage. 
Distribution Subsystem 
The distribution system connects the distribution substations to the 
consumers’ service-entrance equipment. The primary distribution lines range 
from 4 to 34.5 kV and supply the load in a well-defined geographical area. 
Some small industrial customers are served directly by the primary feeders. 
The secondary distribution network reduces the voltage for utilization 
by commercial and residential consumers. Lines and cables not exceeding a few 
hundred feet in length then deliver power to the individual consumers. The 
secondary distribution serves most of the customers at levels of 240/120 V, 
single-phase, three-wire; 208Yl120 V, three-phase, four-wire; or 480Y/277 V, 
three-phase, four-wire. 
The power for a typical home is derived from a 
transformer that reduces the primary feeder voltage to 240/120 V using a three- 
wire line. 
Distribution 
systems 
utilize 
both 
overhead 
and 
underground 
conductors. The growth of underground distribution has been extremely rapid 
and as much as 70 percent of new residential construction in North America is 
via underground systems. 

6 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Load Subsystems 
Power systems loads are divided into industrial, commercial, and 
residential. Industrial loads are composite loads, and induction motors form a 
high proportion of these loads. These composite loads are functions of voltage 
and frequency and form a major part of the system load. Commercial and 
residential loads consist largely of lighting, heating, and cooking. These loads 
are independent of frequency and consume negligibly small reactive power. 
The load varies throughout the day, and power must be available to 
consumers on demand. The daily-load curve of a utility is a composite of 
demands made by various classes of users. The greatest value of load during a 
24-hr period is called the peak or maximum demand. To assess the usefulness of 
the generating plant the load factor is defined. The load factor is the ratio of 
average load over a designated period of time to the peak load occurring in that 
period. Load factors may be given for a day, a month, or a year. The yearly, or 
annual load factor is the most useful since a year represents a full cycle of time. 
The daily load factor is 
average load 
peak load 
Daily L.F.= 
Multiplying the numerator and denominator of (1.1) by a time period of 24 hr, 
we obtain 
average load x 24 hr 
peak load x 24 hr 
energy consumed during 24 hr 
peak loadx 24 hr 
(1.2) 
- 
Daily L.F.= 
- 
The annual load factor is 
total annual energy 
peak load x 8760 hr 
Annual L.F. = 
(1.3) 
Generally there is diversity in the peak load between different classes 
of loads, which improves the overall system load factor. In order for a power 
plant to operate economically, it must have a high system load factor. Typical 
system load factors are in the range of 55 to 70 percent. Load-forecasting at all 
levels is an important function in the operation, operational planning, and 
planning of an electric power system. Other devices and systems are required 
for the satisfactory operation and protection of a power system. Some of the 
protective devices directly connected to the circuits are called switchgear. They 
include instrument transformers, circuit breakers, disconnect switches, fuses and 
lightning arresters. These devices are necessary to deenergize either for normal 
operation or on the occurrence of faults. The associated control equipment and 
protective relays are placed on switchboards in control houses. 
For reliable and economical operation of the power system it is 

Introduction 
7 
necessary to monitor the entire system in a so-called control center. The modem 
control center is called the energy control center (ECC). Energy control centers 
are equipped with on-line computers performing all signal processing through 
the remote acquisition system. Computers work in a hierarchical structure to 
properly coordinate different functional requirements in normal as well as 
emergency conditions. Every energy control center contains control consoles 
which consist of a visual display unit (VDU), keyboard, and light pen. 
Computers may give alarms as advance warnings to the operators (dispatchers) 
when deviation from the normal state occurs. The dispatcher makes decisions 
and executes them with the aid of a computer. Simulation tools and software 
packages are implemented for efficient operation and reliable control of the 
system. In addition, SCADA, an acronym for “supervisory control and data 
acquisition,” systems are auxiliaries to the energy control center. 
1.3 
OUTLINE OF THE TEXT 
Chapter 2 lays the foundations for the development in the rest of the 
book. The intention of the discussion offered here is to provide a brief review of 
fundamentals including power concepts, three-phase systems, principles of 
electromagnetism, and electromechanical energy conversion. Chapter 3 treats 
the synchronous machine from an operational modeling point of view. 
Emphasis here is on performance characteristics of importance to the electric 
power specialist. 
Chapter 4 provides a comprehensive treatment of 
transformers. This is followed, in Chapter 5, by a brief coverage of induction 
motors including the fractional horsepower category. 
Chapter 6 is concerned with transmission lines starting from parameter 
evaluation for different circuit and conductor configurations. 
Various 
transmission line performance modeling approaches are covered. 
Faults on electric energy systems are considered in Chapter 7. Here we 
start with the transient phenomenon of a symmetrical short circuit, followed by a 
treatment of unbalanced and balanced faults. Realizing the crucial part that 
system protection plays in maintaining service integrity is the basis for the 
remainder of this chapter. Here an introduction to this important area is given. 
Chapter 8 is concerned with the Energy Control Center, its structure, 
and role in the operation of a modern power system. We outline the objectives 
and aims of many of the decision support hnctions adopted in these significant 
“smarts” of the power system. In chapter 9, we focus our attention on a number 
of technological challenges that face power system planners and operators. The 
major North East blackout of 8/14 in 2003 is discussed along with possible 
mitigation measures. Wherever relevant, we introduce MATLABTM scripts that 
allow the student to automate many of the computational details. This feature is 
deemed important for this textbook’s coverage. 

Chapter 2 
BASICS OF ELECTRIC ENERGY SYSTEM THEORY 
2.1 
INTRODUCTION 
This chapter lays the groundwork for the study of electric energy 
systems. 
We develop some basic tools involving fundamental concepts, 
definitions, and procedures. The chapter can be considered as simply a review of 
topics utilized throughout this work. 
We start by introducing the principal 
electrical quantities. 
2.2 
CONCEPTS OF POWER IN ALTERNATING 
CURRENT 
SYSTEMS 
Generally, the electric power systems specialist is more concerned with 
electric power in the circuit rather than the currents. The value of instantaneous 
power flowing into an element is the product of voltage across and current 
through it. It seems, then, reasonable to exchange the current for power without 
losing any information. In treating sinusoidal steady-state behavior of circuits, 
some further definitions are necessary. To illustrate the concepts, we use a 
cosine representation of the waveforms. 
Consider the impedance element Z = ZL$J . For a sinusoidal voltage, 
V(t) given by 
v(t) = v,, cos wt 
The instantaneous current in the circuit is 
i(t) = I ,  cos(wt - @) 
Here 
The instantaneous power into the element is given by 
p(t) = v(t)i(t) = v,,I,,[cos(wt)cos(wt-@)] 
This reduces to 
p(t) = ~ [ C O S $ J + C O S ( 2 ~  
2 
-#)I 
Introduction to Electrical Power Engineering. By Mohamed E. El-Hawary 
Copyright Q 2008 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. 
9 

10 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Since the average of cos (2un - Q) is zero, through 1 cycle, this term therefore 
contributes nothing to the average ofp, and the average powerp,, is given by 
pav = -cosQ 
v,, I ,  
2 
Using the effective (rms) values of voltage and current and substituting 
V,, = &(V,,) 
, and I,, = &(Ims), we get 
The power entering any network is the product of the effective values of 
terminal voltage and current and the cosine of the phase angle Q, which is, called 
the power factor (PF). This applies to sinusoidal voltages and currents only. 
When reactance and resistance are present, a component of the current in the 
circuit is engaged in conveying the energy that is periodically stored in and 
discharged from the reactance. This stored energy, being shuttled to and from 
the magnetic field of an inductance or the electric field of a capacitance, adds to 
the current in the circuit but does not add to the average power. 
The value of the average power consumed in a circuit is called active 
power, and the power that supplies the stored energy in reactive elements is 
called reactive power. Active power is P, and the reactive power, designated Q, 
are thus* 
P=VIcosQ 
(2.3) 
Q =  VIsin4 
(2.4) 
In both equations, V and I are rms values of terminal voltage and current, and Q 
is the phase angle by which the current lags the voltage. 
To emphasize that the Q represents the nonactive power, it is measured 
in reactive voltampere units (var). 
* 
If we write the instantaneous power as 
p(t) = Vn,,,I,,[cosQ(1+cos2ur)]+ 
VmsIms sinQsin2wt 
then it is seen that 
p(t) = P(1+ cos 2uf) + Qsin 2wt 
Thus P and Q are the average power and the amplitude of the pulsating power, 
respectively. 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
11 
Figure 2.1 shows the time variation of the various variables discussed. 
Assume that V, V cosq, and V sin@ all shown in Figure 2.2, are each 
multiplied by I, the rms values of current. When the components of voltage 
VcosQ and Vsinq are multiplied by current, they become P and Q, respectively. 
Similarly, if I, Ices@, and Isin@ are each multiplied by V, they become Vl, P, and 
Q, respectively. This defines a power triangle. 
We now define a quantity called the complex or apparent power, 
designated S, of which P and Q are components. By definition, 
s = P + j Q  
= Vl(cos 4 + j sin 4) 
Using Euler’s identity, we thus have 
or 
It is clear that an equivalent definition of complex or apparent power is 
s = VI* 
(2.5) 
We can write the complex power in two alternative forms by using the 
relationships 
v = ZI 
and 
I = Y V  
This leads to 
or 
2 
s = VY*V* = Y*IVI 
(2.7) 
Consider the series circuit shown in Figure 2.3. The applied voltage to 
the overall arrangement is equal to the sum of the voltage drops: 
v =I(Z,+Z2+ ...+ Z,) 

12 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 2.2 Phasor Diagrams Leading to Power Triangles. 
Multiplying both sides of this relation by f results in 
n 
s = c s ,  
r=l 
I 
with the individual element’s complex power. 
Equation (2.8) is known as the summation rule for complex powers. 
The rule also applies to parallel circuits. 
The phasor diagram shown in Figure 2.2 can be converted into complex 
power diagrams by simply following the definitions relating complex power to 
voltage and current. 
Consider an inductive circuit in which the current lags the voltage by 
the angle @. 
The conjugate of the current will be in the frst quadrant in the 
complex plane as shown in Figure 2.4(a). Multiplying the phasors by V, we 
obtain the complex power diagram shown in Figure 2.4(b). Inspection of the 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
13 
diagram as well as the previous development leads to a relation for the power 
factor of the circuit: 
P 
cosip = - 
PI 
‘
I
 
v 
Figure 2.3 Series Circuit 
\ 
I 
(a) 
Figure 2.4 Complex Power Diagram 
P=Vcos cb 
Example 2.1 
Consider the circuit composed of a series R-L branch in parallel with 
capacitance with the following parameters: 
R = 0.5 ohms 
X ,  0.8 ohms 
B,. = 0.6 siemens 
Assume that: 
v = 20010 v 
Calculate the input current and the active, reactive, and apparent power into the 
circuit. 
Solution 
The current into the R-L branch is given by 

14 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
I, = 
2oo 
=2121-57.99" A 
0.5+ j0.8 
The power factor (PF) of the R-L branch is 
PF, = cos 4, = cos 57.99" 
= 0.53 
The current into the capacitance is 
I ,  = j(0.6)(200) = 120L90" A 
The input current I, is 
Ir = I, + I ,  
= 2 12L - 57.99" + 120L90" 
= 127.281-28.01" 
The power factor (PF) of the overall circuit is 
PF, = C O S ~ ~  
= ~0~28.01" 
= 0.88 
Note that the magnitude of I, is less than that of Iz, and that C O S ~ ,  is higher 
than C O S ~ ,  . This is the effect of the capacitor, and its action is called power 
factor correction in power system terminology. 
The apparent power into the circuit is 
s, = VI,' 
= (20010)(127.28)128.0 1" 
= 25,456.00128.01"VA 
In rectangular coordinates we get 
S, =22,471.92+ jl1,955.04 
Thus, the active and reactive powers are 
P, = 22,471.92 W 
Q, = 11,955.04 var 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
15 
The major portion of all electric power presently used in generation, 
transmission, and distribution uses balanced three-phase systems. Three-phase 
operation makes more efficient use of generator copper and iron. Power flow in 
Reference Line 
I 
vbn 
Figure 2.5 A Y-Connected Three-Phase System and the Corresponding Phasor Diagram 
single-phase circuits was shown in the previous section to be pulsating. This 
drawback is not present in a three-phase system. Also, three-phase motors start 
more conveniently and, having constant torque, run more satisfactorily than 
single-phase motors. However, the complications of additional phases are not 
compensated for by the slight increase of operating efficiency when polyphase 
systems other than three-phase are used. 
A balanced three-phase voltage system consists of three single-phase 
voltages with the same magnitude and frequency but time-displaced from one 
another by 120". Figure 2.5(a) shows a schematic representation where the three 
single-phase voltage sources appear in a Y connection; a A configuration is also 
possible. A phasor diagram showing each of the phase voltages is also given in 
Figure 2.5(b). 
Phase Sequence 
As the phasors rotate at the angular frequency w with respect to the 

16 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
reference line in the counterclockwise (positive) direction, the positive 
maximum value first occurs for phase a and then in succession for phases b and 
c. Stated in a different way, to an observer in the phasor space, the voltage of 
phase a arrives first followed by that of b and then that of c. The three-phase 
voltage of Figure 2.5 is then said to have the phase sequence abc (order orphuse 
I b  - 
I b  - 
1, - 
1, - 
v b  
- 
1, 
Figure 2.6 A Three-Phase System. 
sequence or rotation are all synonymous terms). 
This is important for 
applications such as three-phase induction motors, where the phase sequence 
determines whether the motor turns clockwise or counterclockwise. 
With very few exceptions, synchronous generators (commonly referred 
to as alternators) are three-phase machines. To produce a set of three voltages 
phase-displaced by 120 electrical degrees in time, it follows that we must use a 
minimum of three coils phase-displaced 120 electrical degrees in space. 
It is convenient to consider representing each coil as a separate 
generator. An immediate extension of the single-phase circuits discussed above 
would be to carry the power from the three generators along six wires. 
However, instead of having a return wire from each load to each generator, a 
single wire is used for the return of all three. The current in the return wire will 
be I, + 1, + I,; and for a balanced load, these will cancel out. If the load is 
unbalanced, the value of the return current will still be small compared to either 
I,, I,, or I,. Thus the return wire could be made smaller than the other three. 
This connection is known as a four-wire three-phase system. It is desirable for 
safety and system protection to have a connection from the electrical system to 
the ground (equipotential surface at zero potential). 
A logical point for 
grounding is the generator neutral point. 
Current and Voltage Relations 
Balanced three-phase systems can be studied using techniques 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
17 
developed for single-phase circuits. The arrangement of the three single-phase 
voltages into a Y or a A configuration requires some modification in dealing with 
the overall system. 
Y Connection 
With reference to Figure 2.7, the common terminal n is called the 
neutral or star (0 point. The voltages appearing between any two of the line 
terminals a, b, and c have different relationships in magnitude and phase to the 
voltages appearing between any one line terminal and the neutral point n. The 
set of voltages Vah, V,,, and V,, are called the line voltages, and the set of 
voltages Van, V,,, and V,, are referred to as the phase voltages. Analysis of 
phasor diagrams provides the required relationships. 
The effective values of the phase voltages are shown in Figure 2.7 as 
V,,, Vh,, and Vcn. Each has the same magnitude, and each is displaced 120" from 
the other two phasors. 
Observe that the voltage existing from a to b is equal to the voltage 
from a to n (i.e., Van) plus the voltage from n to b. 
For a balanced system, each phase voltage has the same magnitude, and 
we define 
where V, denotes the effective magnitude of the phase voltage. 
We can show that 
v,, =V,(1-1L-120°) 
= &V,L30" 
(2.10) 
(2.1 1) 
Similarly, we obtain 

18 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
- / 
v,, 
= Vp/-120' 
Figure 2.7 Illustrating the Phase and Magnitude Relations Between the Phase and Line Voltage of a 
Y Connection 
V,, =&V,L-90' 
(2.12) 
V,, = &V,LI 
50" 
(2.13) 
The line voltages constitute a balanced three-phase voltage system whose 
magnitudes are 
times the phase voltages. Thus, we write 
v, = &v,, 
(2.14) 
A current flowing out of a line terminal a (or b or c) is the same as that 
flowing through the phase source voltage appearing between terminals n and a 
(or n and b, or n and c). We can thus conclude that for a Y-connected three- 
phase source, the line current equals the phase current. Thus, 
I ,  = I ,  
(2.15) 
Here 1, denotes the effective value of the line current and I, denotes the effective 
value for the phase current. 
A Connection 
Consider the case when the three single-phase sources are rearranged to 
form a three-phase A connection as shown in Figure 2.8. The line and phase 
voltages have the same magnitude: 
(2.16) 
The phase and line currents, however, are not identical, and the relationship 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
19 
I cc' 
C' 
- 
Figure 2.8 A A-Connected Three-Phase Source. 
between them can be obtained using Kirchhoff s current law at one of the line 
terminals. 
In a manner similar to that adopted for the Y-connected source, let us 
consider the phasor diagram shown in Figure 2.9. Assume the phase currents to 
be 
l,h 
/,LO 
I,, = I,L-120" 
I,, = I,L120" 
The current that flows in the line joining a to a' is denoted I,,,, and is 
given by 
'm' = 'a - l u h  
As a result, we have 
loof 
= &/,LI 50" 
Similarly, 
Note that a set of balanced three phase currents yields a corresponding 
set of balanced line currents that are & times the phase values: 
I, =&I, 
(2.17) 
where 11. denotes the magnitude of any of the three line currents. 

20 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 2.9 Illustrating Relation Between Phase and Line Currents in a A Connection. 
Power Relationships 
Assume that the three-phase generator is supplying a balanced load 
with the three sinusoidal phase voltages 
With the currents given by 
where 4 is the phase angle between the current and voltage in each phase. The 
total power flowing into the load is 
This turns out to be 
~ ; e ( t )  
= V,, I ,  (3 cos 4 -[cos(~@ - 4) + COS(~@ 
- 240 - 4) 
+~0~(2Ux+240-4)]} 
Note that the last three terms in the above equation are the reactive power terms 
and they add up to zero. Thus we obtain 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
21 
The relationship between the line and phase voltages in a Y-connected 
system is 
The power equation thus reads in terms of line quantities: 
The value of the total instantaneous power is constant, having a 
magnitude of three times the real power per phase. We may be tempted to 
assume that the reactive power is of no importance in a three-phase system since 
the Q terms cancel out. However, this situation is analogous to the summation 
of balanced three-phase currents and voltages that also cancel out. Although the 
sum cancels out, these quantities are still very much in evidence in each phase. 
We thus extend the concept of complex or apparent power (S) to three-phase 
systems by defining 
S,, = 3Vp1; 
(2.20) 
where the active power and reactive power are obtained from 
as 
(2.21) 
(2.22) 
and 
In specifying rated values for power system apparatus and equipment 
such as generators, transformers, circuit breakers, etc., we use the magnitude of 
the apparent power S3@ as well as line voltage for specification values. 
In 
specifying three-phase motor loads, we use the horsepower output rating and 

22 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
voltage. 
Example 2.2 
A Y-connected, balanced three-phase load consisting of three impedances of 
20130" ohms each as shown in Figure 2.10 is supplied with the balanced line- 
to-neutral voltages: 
v,, = 220LO v 
vcn = 2201120" v 
Vh, = 2201240" v 
A. Calculate the phase currents in each line. 
B. Calculate the line-to-line phasor voltages. 
C. Calculate the total active and reactive power supplied to the load. 
a 
220 iQ 
C 
., 
Figure 2.10 Load Connection for Example 2.2 
Solution 
A. The phase currents are obtained as 
B. The line-to-line voltages are obtained as 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
23 
vah = 'an - 'hn 
= 22010 - 220L240" 
= 22OhL30" 
vh, = 220JTL30-120 = 22OJ5L-90" 
v,, = 220fi.L - 2 10" 
C. The apparent power into phase a is given by 
S a  = V a o I t  
= (220)(11)L30" 
= 2420130" VA 
The total apparent power is three times the phase value: 
S, = 2 4 2 0 ~ 3 L 3 0 "  = 7260.00130" VA 
= 6287.35 + j3630.00 
Thus 
pl = 6287.35 W 
Q, = 3630.00 var 
Example 2.3 
Repeat Example 2.2 as if the same three impedances were connected in a A 
connection. 
Solution 
From Example 2.2 we have 
The currents in each of the impedances are 
I,, =11J5r-12O0 
I,, = 11J5L120" 

24 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
The line currents are obtained with reference to Figure 2.1 1 as 
'0 = 'oh - ',a 
= 1 1&0 
- 1 1AL - 120' 
= 33130" 
I h  = I h ,  - 'oh 
= 3 3 1  - 90" 
I ,  = I ,  - l h c  
= 3 3 L  -2 10" 
The apparent power in the impedance between a and b is 
sah = 'oh1Zb 
= (220&L3Oo)(22&LO) 
= 7260L30" 
The total three-phase power is then 
S, = 2 1780L30" 
= 18,862.02 +J10890.00 
As a result, 
P, = 31124.04 W 
Q, = 2 1780.00 var 
I b  
__c 
Figure 2.1 1 Load Connection for Example 2.3. 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
25 
2.4 
THE PER UNIT SYSTEM 
The per unit (P.u.) value representation of electrical variables in power 
system problems is favored in electric power systems. The numerical per unit 
value of any quantity is its ratio to a chosen base quantity of the same 
dimension. Thus a per unit quantity is a normalized quantity with respect to the 
chosen base value. The per unit value of a quantity is thus defined as 
Actual value 
Reference or base value of the same dimension 
p.u. value = 
(2.25) 
Five quantities are involved in the calculations. These are the current I, 
the voltage V, the complex power S, the impedance Z, and the phase angles. The 
angles are dimensionless; the other four quantities are completely described by 
knowledge of only two of them. An arbitrary choice of two base quantities will 
fix the other base quantities. Let I/,[ 
and lVhl represent the base current and 
base voltage expressed in kiloamperes and kilovolts, respectively. The product 
of the two yields the base complex power in megavoltamperes (MVA) 
The base impedance will also be given by 
(2.26) 
(2.27) 
The base admittance will naturally be the inverse of the base impedance. Thus, 
(2.28) 
The nominal voltage of lines and equipment is almost always known as 
well as the apparent (complex) power in megavoltamperes, so these two 
quantities are usually chosen for base value calculation. 
The same 
megavoltampere base is used in all parts of a given system. Once base voltage 
is chosen; all other base voltages must then be related to the one chosen by the 
turns ratios of the connecting transformers. 
From the definition of per unit impedance, we can express the ohmic 
impedance Z, in the per unit value ZP,". as 

26 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
As for admittances, we have 
(2.29) 
(2.30) 
Note that ZP.". can be interpreted as the ratio of the voltage drop across 
Z with base current injected to the base voltage. 
Example 2.4 
Consider a transmission line with Z = 3.346 + j77.299Q. Assume that 
We thus have 
= 1.851~10-~(2,) 
For R = 3.346 ohms we obtain 
Rp , = (3.346)(1.8 5 1 x 1 0-4 ) = 6.1 93 72 x 1 OP4 
For X = 77.299 ohms, we obtain 
Xp, = (77.299)(1.85 1 ~ 1 0 ~ ~ )  
= 1 . 4 3 ~ 1 0 ~ ~  
For the admittance we have 
= 5.4x103(YS) 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
21 
For Y =  1 .I06065 x 
siemens, we obtain 
Ypu = (5.40225x103~l.106065x10~3) 
= 5.97524 
Base Conversions 
Given an impedance in per unit on a given base sh,, and vhl, , it is sometimes 
required to obtain the per unit value referred to a new base set sh,, and Vhn . 
The conversion expression is obtained as: 
(2.31) 
which is the required conversion formula. The admittance case simply follows 
the inverse rule. Thus, 
(2.32) 
Example 2.5 
Convert the impedance and admittance values of Example 2.4 to the new base of 
200 MVA and 345 kV. 
Solution 
We have 
Zp-u-,l 
= 6.19372~10-~ 
+jl.430867~10-~ 
for a 100-MVA, 735-kV base. With a new base of 200 MVA and 345 kV, we 
have, using the impedance conversion formula, 
2 
200 
735 
ZP.11." = zp.u.u 
(100) .( G) 
= 9.0775Z,,u,0 
Thus, 
Z,,u.n = 5.6224~10-~ 
+jl.2989~10-' p.u. 

28 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Electrical 
energy 
Thus, 
- 
Electromechanical 
energy conversion 
Mechanical 
device 
energy 
For the admittance we have 
= 0.1 1016Y,,,,,1 
YP,,,, 
=(5.97524)(0.11016) 
= 0.65825 P.U. 
2.5 
ELECTROMAGNETISM AND ELECTROMECHANICAL 
ENERGY CONVERSION 
An electromechanical energy conversion device transfers energy between an 
input side and an output side, as shown in Figure 2.12. Within an electric motor, 
the input is electrical energy drawn from the supply and the output is the 
mechanical energy supplied to the load, which may be a pump, fan, hoist, or any 
other mechanical load. 
An electric generator converts mechanical energy 
supplied by a prime mover to electrical form at the output side. The operation of 
electromechanical energy conversion devices is based on fbndamental principles 
resulting from experimental work. 
input 
output 
Source 
Motor 
(A) 
Load 
Electromechanical 
energy conversion 
device 
Electrical 
energy 
Mechanical 
energy 
Source 
Generator 
Load 
(prime mover) 
(B) 
Figure 2.12 
Functional block diagram of electromechanical energy conversion devices as (A) 
motor, and (B) generator. 
The presence of stationary electric charges is associated with electric 
fields. On the other hand, a magnetic field is associated with moving charges 
and as a result we conclude that electric currents are sources of magnetic fields. 
A magnetic field is identified by a vector B called the magnetic flux density. 
The unit of B is the tesla (T). The magnetic flux @ = B.A. The unit of magnetic 

Basics of EIectric Energy System Theory 
29 
flux @ is the weber (Wb). 
The Lorentz Force Law 
A charged particle q, moving at a velocity V in a magnetic field of flux 
density B, is found experimentally to experience a force whose magnitude is 
proportional to the product of the magnitude of the charge q, its velocity, and the 
flux density B and to the sine of the angle between the vectors V and B and is 
given by a vector in the direction of the cross product V x B .  Thus we write 
F = q V x B  
(2.33) 
Equation (2.33) is known as the Lorentz force equation. The direction 
of the force is orthogonal to the plane of V and B and follows the right-hand 
rule. An interpretation of Eq. (2.33) is given in Figure 2.13. 
The tesla can then be defined as the magnetic flux density that exists 
when a charge q of 1 coulomb, moving normal to the field at a velocity of 1 m/s, 
experiences a force of 1 Newton. 
A distribution of charge experiences a differential force dF on each 
moving incremental charge element dq given by 
dF = dq (V x B) 
Moving charges over a line constitute a line current and thus: 
dF = ( I  x B) dl 
(2.34) 
Equation (2.34) simply states that a current element I dl in a magnetic field B 
will experience a force dF given by the cross product of I dl and B. A pictorial 
presentation of Eq. (2.34) is given in Figure 2.14. 
The current element I dl cannot exist by itself and must be a part of a 
complete circuit. The force on an entire loop can be obtained by integrating the 
current element 
(2.35) 
Equations (2.34) and (2.35) are hndamental in the analysis and design of 
electric motors. as will be seen later. 
The Biot-Savart law is based on Ampere’s work showing that electric 
currents exert forces on each other and that a magnet could be replaced by an 
equivalent current. 

30 
Figure 2.13 Lorentz force laa. 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
A 
B 
Figure 2.14 Interpreting the Biot-Savart law 
Consider a long straight wire carrying a current I as shown in Figure 
2.15. Application of the Biot-Savart law allows us to fmd the total field at P as: 
(2.36) 
The constant po is called the permeability of free space and in SI units is given 
by 
I 
p ,  =4nx10' 
The magnetic field is in the form of concentric circles about the wire, 
with a magnitude that increases in proportion to the current I and decreases as 
the distance from the wire is increased. 
The Biot-Savart law provides a relation between current and the 
resulting magnetic flux density B. An alternative to this relation is Ampere's 
circuital law, which says that the line integral of B about any closed path in free 
space is equal to the current enclosed by that path times ,&. 
poi path c encloses I 
0 
path c does not enclose I 
(2.37) 
Note that the path c can be arbitrarily shaped closed loop about the net current I. 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
31 
2.6 
PERMEABILITY AND MAGNETIC FIELD INTENSITY 
To extend magnetic field laws to materials that exhibit a linear 
variation of B with I, all expressions are valid provided that 
is replaced by the 
permeability corresponding to the material considered. From a B-I ~ 
variation 
point of view we divide materials into two classes: 
1. 
2. 
Nonmagnetic material such as all dielectrics and metals with 
permeability equal to lu, for all practical purposes. 
Magnetic material such as ferromagnetic material (the iron 
group), where a given current produces a much larger B field 
than in free space. The permeability in this case is much 
higher than that of free space and varies with current in a 
nonlinear manner over a wide range. Ferromagnetic material 
can be further categorized into two classes: 
a) Soft ferromagnetic material for which a linearization of 
the B-I variation in a region is possible. The source of B 
in the case of soft ferromagnetic material can be modeled 
as due to the current I. 
b) Hard ferromagnetic material for which it is difficult to 
give a meaning to the term permeability. Material in this 
group is suitable for permanent magnets. 
For hard ferromagnetic material, the source of B is a combined effect of 
current I and material magnetization M, which originates entirely in the medium. 
To separate the two sources of the magnetic B field, the concept of magnetic 
field intensity H is introduced. 
Path c 3  
tC) 
Figure 2.15 Illustrating Amptre’s circuital law: (A) path c1 is a circle enclosing current f, (B) path 
c? is not a circle but encloses current I, and (C) path c; does not enclose current I. 

32 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Magnetic Field Intensity 
The magnetic field intensity (or strength) denoted by H is a vector 
defined by the relation 
B = p H  
(2.38) 
For isotropic media (having the same properties in all directions), ,u is a scalar 
and thus B and H are in the same direction. On the basis of Eq. (2.38), we can 
write the statement of Amphe’s circuital law as 
I 
path c encloses I 
0 path c does not enclose I 
(2.39) 
The expression in Eq. (2.39) is independent of the medium and relates the 
magnetic field intensity H to the current causing it, 1. 
In general, permeability ,u is not a constant but is dependent on H and, 
strictly speaking, one should state this dependence in the form 
P = A H )  
(2.40) 
For nonmagnetic material, ,u is constant at a value equal to iu, = 4nx lo-’ for all 
practical purposes. The B-H characteristic of nonmagnetic materials is shown in 
Figure 2.16 
The B-H characteristics of soft ferromagnetic material, often called the 
magnetization curve, follow the typical pattern displayed in Figure 2.17. In 
accordance with Eq. (2.38,) the permeability of the material is the ratio of B to 
H and is a hnction of H, as indicated by Eq. (2.40). 
B 
,u=- 
H 
(2.41) 
Figure 2.16 B-H characteristic for nonmagnetic material 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
33 
The permeability at low values of H is called the initial permeability and is 
much lower than the permeability at higher values of H. The maximum value of 
,U occurs at the knee of the B-H characteristic. The permeability of soft 
ferromagnetic material p is much larger than ,uo and we define the relative 
permeability ,ur as: 
(2.42) 
P 
p =- 
PO 
A typical variation of pr with H for a ferromagnetic material is shown in Figure 
2.18. 
For practical electromechanical energy conversion devices, a linear 
approximation to the magnetization curve provides satisfactory answers in the 
normal region of operation. The main idea is to fit a straight line passing through 
the origin of the B-H curve that best fits the data points which is drawn and 
taken to represent the characteristics of the material considered. Within the 
acceptable range of H values, one may then use the following relation to model 
the ferromagnetic material: 
B = Pr,Pu,H 
(2.43) 
It should be noted that pr is in the order of thousands for magnetic materials 
used in electromechanical energy conversion devices (2000 to 80,000, 
typically). 
Properties of magnetic materials are discussed further in the 
following sections. Presently, we assume that pr is constant. 
Figure 2.17 B-H characteristic for a typical ferromagnetic material 
I 
* 
0 
H 
Figure 2.18 Typical variation ofprwith H for a ferromagnetic material 

34 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
2.7 
FLUX LINKAGES, INDUCED VOLTAGES, INDUCTANCE, 
AND ENERGY 
Faraday's experiments established that a change in a magnetic field 
causes an induced voltage, which is expressed by Faraday's law of 
electromagnetic induction. 
Consider a toroidal coil with N turns through which a current i flows 
producing a total flux@. Each turn encloses or links the total flux and we also 
note that the total flux links each of the N turns. Following Henry, we introduce 
the concept of flux linkages A as the product of the number of turns N and the 
flux @ linking each turn. 
A=N@ 
(2.44) 
The flux linkages A can be related to the current i in the coil by the 
definition of inductance L through the following relation conceived by Joseph 
Henry as an analog to momentum 
A = L i  
(2.45) 
Inductance is the passive circuit element that is related to the geometry 
and material properties of the structure. From this point of view, inductance is 
the ratio of total flux linkages to the current, which the flux links. 
The 
inductance L is related to the reluctance '31 of the magnetic structure of a single- 
loop structure. 
N 2  
L=- 
'31 
In the case of a toroid with a linear B-H curve, we have 
(2.46) 
(2.47) 
There is no single definition of inductance that is usefd in all cases for which 
the medium is not linear. The unit of inductance is the henry or weber-turns per 
ampere. 
In terms of flux linkages, Faraday's law is stated as 
(2.48) 
The electromotive force (EMF), or induced voltage, is thus equal to the rate of 
change of flux linkages in the structure. We also write: 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
35 
(2.49) 
d
.
 
e=-Li 
dt 
In electromechanical energy conversion devices, the reluctance varies with time 
and thus L also varies with time. In this case, 
di 
.dL 
e =  L-+I- 
dt 
dt 
(2.50) 
Note that if L is constant, we get the familiar equation for modeling an inductor 
in elementary circuit analysis. 
Power and energy relationships in a magnetic circuit are important in 
evaluating performance of electromechanical energy conversion devices. We 
treat some basic relationships, starting with the fundamental definition of power 
p(t) given by 
P W  = e(t>i(t> 
(2.51) 
The power into a component (the coil in the case of toroid) is given as the 
product of the voltage across its terminals e(t) and the current through i(t). 
Using Faraday’s law, see Eq. (2.50), we can write 
dA 
dt 
p(t) = i(t)- 
(2.52) 
The units of power are watts (or joules per second). 
Recall the basic relation stating that power p(t) is the rate of change of 
energy W(t): 
dW 
P W  = - 
dt 
(2.53) 
We can show that 
dW = (IA)H dB 
(2.54) 
Consider the case of a magnetic structure that experiences a change in 
state between the time instants tl and t2. Then, change in energy into the system 
is denoted by AW and is given by 
AW =W(t,) - W(t,) 
(2.55) 
We can show that 

36 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
* w = l A [ ; H d B  
(2.56) 
It is clear that the energy per unit volume expended between tI and t2 is the area 
between the B-H curve and the B axis between B, and B2. 
It is important to realize that the energy relations obtained thus far do 
not require linear characteristics. For a linear structure, we can develop these 
relations hrther and show that 
1 
2L 
AW =-($-4) 
or 
(2.57) 
(2.58) 
The energy expressions obtained provide us with measures of energy stored in 
the magnetic field treated. 
2.8 
HYSTERESIS LOOP 
Ferromagnetic materials are characterized by nonlinear and multi- 
valued B-H characteristics, which a hysteresis characteristic. To illustrate this 
phenomenon, we use the sequence of portraits of Figure 2.19 showing the 
evolution of a hysteresis loop for a toroid with virgin ferromagnetic core. 
Assume that the MMF (and hence H) is a slowly varying sinusoidal waveform 
with period T as shown in the lower portion graphs of Figure 2.19. We will 
discuss the evolution of the B-H hysteresis loop in the following intervals. 
Interval I: Between t = 0 and Tl4, the magnetic field intensity H is 
positive and increasing. The flux density increases along the initial 
curve (oa) up to the saturation value B,T. Increasing H beyond the 
saturation level does not result in an increase in B. 
Interval I t  Between t = TI4 and T12, the magnetic field intensity is 
positive but decreasing. The flux density B is seen to decrease along 
the segment ab. Note that ab is above oa and thus for the same value 
of H, we get a different value of B. This is true at b, where there is a 
value for B = B, different from zero even though H is zero at that point 
in time t = T/2. The value of B, is referred to as the residual field, 
remanence, or retentivity. If we leave the coil unenergized, the core 
will still be magnetized. 
Interval 111: Between t = TI2 and 3 Tl4, the magnetic field intensity H is 
reversed and increases in magnitude. B decreases to zero at point c. 
The value of H, at which magnetization is zero, is called the coercive 
force H,. Further decrease in H results in reversal of B up to point d, 
corresponding to t = 3 T14. 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
37 
Interval I V  Between t = 3Tl4 and T, the value of H is negative but 
increasing. The flux density B is negative and increases from d to e. 
Residual field is observed at e with H = 0. 
Interval V Between t = T and 5Tl4, H is increased from 0, and the flux 
density is negative but increasing up to J; where the material is 
demagnetized. BeyondJ; we find that B increases up to a again. 
A typical hysteresis loop is shown in Figure 2.20. On the same graph, 
the B-H characteristic for nonmagnetic material is superimposed to show the 
relative magnitudes involved. As shown in Figure 2.21, there is a steady-state 
loop for each maximum value of the ac magnetic field intensity cycle. The 
dashed curve connecting the tips of the loops in the figure is the dc 
magnetization curve for the material. Table 2.1 lists some typical values for Hc, 
B,., and B, for common magnetic materials. 
The energy supplied by the source per unit volume of the magnetic 
structure is given by 
dW = HdB 
and 
The energy supplied by the source in moving from a to b in the graph of Figure 
2.22(A) is negative since H is positive but B is decreasing. If we continue on 
from b to d through c, the energy is positive as H is negative but B is decreasing. 
The second half of the loop is treated in Figure 2.22(B) and is self- 
explanatory. Superimposing both halves of the loop, we obtain Figure 2.22(C), 
which clearly shows that the net energy per unit volume supplied by the source 
is the area enclosed by the hysteresis loop. This energy is expended in the 
magnetization-demagnetization process and is dissipated as heat loss. Note that 
the loop is described in one cycle and as a result, the hysteresis loss per second 
is equal to the product of the loop area and the frequency f of the waveform 
applied. The area of the loop depends on the maximum flux density and we 
assert that the power dissipated through hysteresis Ph is given by 
Here kh is a constant, f is the frequency, and B, is the maximum value of the 
flux density. 
The exponent n is determined from experimental results and 
ranges between 1.5 and 2.5. 

38 
2.9 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
EDDY CURRENT AND CORE LOSSES 
When the core is subject to a time-varying magnetic field (sinusoidal 
input was assumed), energy is extracted from the source in the form of 
hysteresis losses. There is another loss mechanism that arises in connection 
with the application of the-varying magnetic field, called eddy-current loss. A 
rigorous analysis of the eddy-current phenomenon is a complex process but the 
basic model can be explained in simple terms on the basis of Faraday's law. 
The change in flux induces voltages in the core material resulting in 
currents circulating in the core. The induced currents tend to establish a flux 
that opposes the original change imposed by the source. The induced currents, 
which are essentially the eddy currents, will result in power loss due to heating 
of the core material. To minimize eddy current losses, the magnetic core is made 
of stackings of sheet steel laminations, ideally separated by highly resistive 
material. It is clear that this effectively results in the actual area of the 
Figure 
I 
I 
I 
(1) 
2.19 Evolution 
ti 
(111) 
loop. 
01 
B ( T i  i 
Residual t,eld 
Hysteresis curve 
Figure 2.20 Hysteresis loop for a ferromagnetic material 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
39 
Figure 2.21 Family of hysteresis loops. 
I 
(C) 
Figure 2.22 Illustrating the concept of energy loss in the hysteresis process 

40 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Table 2.1 
magnetic material being less than the gross area presented by the stack. To 
account for this, a stacking factor is employed for practical circuit calculations. 
actual magnetic cross -sectional area 
gross cross -sectional area 
Stacking factor = 
Typically, lamination thickness ranges from 0.01 mm to 0.35 m with associated 
stacking factors ranging between 0.5 to 0.95. The eddy-current power loss per 
unit volume can be expressed by the empirical formula 
The eddy-current power loss per unit volume varies with the square of frequency 
f; maximum flux density B,, 
and the lamination thickness t,. 
K, is a 
proportionality constant. 
The term core loss is used to denote the combination of eddy-current 
and hysteresis power losses in the material. In practice, manufacturer-supplied 
data are used to estimate the core loss P, for given frequencies and flux densities 
for a particular type of material. 
2.10 
ENERGY FLOWAPPROACH 
From an energy flow point of view consider an electromechanical 
energy conversion device operating as a motor. We develop a model of the 
process that is practical and easy to follow and therefore take a macroscopic 
approach based on the principle of energy conservation. 
The situation is 
illustrated using the diagrams of Figure 2.23. We assume that an incremental 
change in electric energy supply dW, has taken place. This energy flow into the 
device can be visualized as being made up of three components, as shown in 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
41 
Figure 2.23(A). Part of the energy will be imparted to the magnetic field of the 
device and will result in an increase in the energy stored in the field, denoted by 
dW) A second component of energy will be expended as heat losses dW,,,,. The 
third and most important component is that output energy be made available to 
the load (dwmech). The heat losses are due to ohmic (I2@ losses in the stator 
(stationary member) and rotor (rotating member); iron or field losses through 
eddy current and hysteresis; and mechanical losses in the form of friction and 
windage. 
In part (B) of Figure 2.23, the energy flow is shown in a form that is 
closer to reality by visualizing Ampere's bonne homme making a trip through 
the machine. Starting in the stator, ohmic losses will be encountered, followed 
by field losses and a change in the energy stored in the magnetic field. Having 
crossed the air gap, our friend will witness ohmic losses in the rotor windings 
taking place, and in passing to the shaft, bearing frictional losses are also 
encountered. Finally, a mechanical energy output is available to the load. It is 
emphasized that the phenomena dealt with are distributed in nature and what we 
are doing is simply developing an understanding in the form of mathematical 
expressions called models. The trip by our Amperean friend can never take 
place in real life but is a helpful means of visualizing the process. 
We write the energy balance equation as: 
(2.59) 
To simplify matters assume that losses are negligible. 
The electric power input P,(t) to the device is given in terms of the 
terminal voltage e(t) and current i(t), and using it, we write Faraday's law: 
P,(t)dt = i(t)dA 
(2.60) 
We recognize the left-hand side of the equation as being the increment in 
electric energy dW,, and we therefore write 
dW, = idA 
(2.61) 
Assuming a lossless device, we can therefore write an energy balance 
equation which is a modification of Eq. (2.61). 
dW, = dw"d + dWmech 
(2.62) 
The increment in mechanical output energy can be expressed in the case of a 
translational (linear motion) increment dx and the associated force exerted by 
the field Ffld 
as 

42 
Eletlric energy 
"DUl (we) 
Y 
Y 
Erergy stored 
V 
in magnetic field 
X 
(W,) 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
energy output 
Energy 
7 lost as ?ea! 
(WIil,<i 
Winding o h m r  
lO5SCS 
If"" tosses 
F n c t m  losses 
Energy Flored 
m magncttc field 
R 
iB! 
Figure 2.23 Energy tlow in an electromechanical energy conversion device: (A) with losses 
segregated, and (B) more realistic representation. 
In the case of rotary motion, the force is replaced by torque Tfld and the linear 
increment dx is replaced by the angular increment dt? 
As a result, we have for the case of linear motion, 
And for rotary motion, 
dWfld = id2 - qldd8 
(2.66) 
The preceding results say that the net change in the field energy is obtained 
through knowledge of the incremental electric energy input (i dA) and the 
mechanical increment of work done. 
The field energy is a function of two states of the system. The first is 
the displacement variable x (or Bfor rotary motion), and the second is either the 
flux linkages A or the current i. This follows since knowledge of /z completely 
specifies i through the A-i characteristic. Let us first take dependence of W, on A 
and x, and write 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
43 
awl 
aw, 
an 
ax 
dw"d(n,x)=-dn+-& 
(2.67) 
The incremental increase in field energy W, is made up of two components. The 
first is the product of dA and a (gain factor) coefficient equal to the partial 
derivative of Wl with respect to A (x is held constant); the second component is 
equal to the product of dx and the partial derivative of Wj 
with respect to x (A is 
held constant). This is a consequence of Taylor's series for a function of two 
variables. We conclude that 
(2.68) 
(2.69) 
This result states that if the energy stored in the field is known as a function of A 
and x, then the electric force developed can be obtained by the partial 
differentiation shown in Eq. (2.69). 
For rotary motion, we replace x by 8 in the foregoing development to 
arrive at 
(2.70) 
Of course, W, 
as a function of A and Bmust be available to obtain the developed 
torque. 
Our next task, therefore, is to determine the variations of the field 
energy with il and x for linear motion and that with A and B for rotary motion. 
Field Energy 
To find the field force we need an expression for the field energy W/$, 
x,,) at a given state $ and x,,. This can be obtained by integrating the relation of 
Eq. (2.70) to obtain 
If the A-i characteristic is linear in i then 
(2.71) 
(2.72) 
Note that L can be a function ofx. 

44 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Coil Voltage 
Using Faraday's law, we have 
dA 
d 
. 
e(t) = - 
= - 
(Lz) 
dt 
dt 
Thus, since L is time dependent, we have 
di 
dL 
e(t) = L-+i- 
dt 
dt 
However, 
As a result, we assert that the coil voltage is given by 
di 
dL 
e(t) = L-+iv- 
dt 
dx 
where v = dxldt. 
(2.73) 
2.11 
MULTIPLY EXCITED SYSTEMS 
Some rotating electromechanical energy conversion devices have more 
than one exciting winding and are referred to as multiply excited systems. The 
torque produced can be obtained by a simple extension of the techniques 
discussed earlier. Consider a system with three windings as shown in Figure 
2.24. 
The differential electric energy input is 
dW, = ildi2, + i2d/22 + i3d4 
(2.74) 
The mechanical energy increment is given by 
Thus, the field energy increment is obtained as 
dW,d = dW, -dWmech 
(2.75) 
= i,d& + i 2 d 4  + i3d4 - Tfldd@ 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
45 
i l  
4 
N O  
i l  
4 
N O  
Lossless 
multiply excited 
electromechanical 
energy conversion 
device 
Lossless 
multiply excited 
electromechanical 
energy conversion 
device 
I 
I 
Figure 2.24 Lossless Multiply Excited Electromechanical Energy Conversion Device. 
If we express Wfld in terms of Al, A*, A3, and 8, we have 
Comparing Eqs. (2.75) and (2.76), we conclude: 
(2.76) 
(2.77) 
(2.78) 
Thc ficld cncrgy at a statc corresponding to point P, whcrc A1 = Alp, /2, = LIP, A3 
= &, and 6J = 8, is obtained as: 
3
1
 
w, (Af ? 4 , , J 3 p ? q  = CC;&~!/~,, 
(2.79) 
! I ,  1 -  
where 
The matrix r is the inverse of the inductance matrix L: 
r = L-I 
2.12 
DOUBLY EXCITED SYSTEMS 
(2.80) 
(2.81) 
(2.82) 
(2.83) 
Rotating electric machines are characterized by more than one exciting 
winding. In the system shown in Figure 2.25, a coil on the stator is fed by an 

46 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Source 1 
Figure 2.25 Doubly Excited Electromechanical Energy Conversion Device. 
electric energy source 1 and a second coil is mounted on the rotor and fed by 
source 2. For this doubly excited system, we write the relation between flux 
linkages and currents as 
A2 = M(B)i, + L22(B)i2 
(2.85) 
The self-inductances L,, and Lz2 and the mutual inductance M are given as 
functions of 8 as follows: 
hi($) = L, +AL, cos28 
(2.86) 
where 
(2.88) 
(2.89) 
L~~ (8) = L, + A L ~  
cos 2e 
(2.90) 
In many practical applications, AL? is considerably less than L2 and we may 
conclude that L22 is independent of the rotor position. 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theovy 
47 
Let us define 
T,< = i:AL, + iiAL, 
TM = i,i2M0 
(2.92) 
(2.93) 
Thus the torque developed by the field is written as 
T,, = -(TM sin 8 + T, sin 28) 
(2.94) 
Note that for a round rotor, the reluctance of the air gap is constant and hence 
the self-inductances Ll1 and L22 are constant, with the result that AL, = AL2 = 0. 
We therefore see that for a round rotor T, = 0, and in this case 
Tfld = -T, 
sin8 
(2.95) 
For an unsymmetrical rotor the torque is made up of a reluctance torque TRsin28 
and the primary torque Tdin8. 
2.13 
SALIENT-POLE MACHINES 
The majority of electromechanical energy conversion devices used in 
present-day 
applications are rotating electric machines category with 
symmetrical stator structure. From a broad geometric configuration point of 
view, such machines can be classified as being either of the salient-pole type, as 
this class is a simple extension of the discussion of the preceding section, or 
round-rotor. 
In a salient-pole machine, one member (the rotor in our discussion) has 
protruding or salient poles and thus the air gap between stator and rotor is not 
uniform, as shown in Figure 2.26. It is clear that results of Section 2.12 are 
applicable here and we simply modify these results to conform to common 
machine terminology, shown in Figure 2.26. Subscript 1 is replaced by s to 
represent stator quantities and subscript 2 is replaced by Y to represent rotor 
quantities. Thus we rewrite Eq. (2.84) as 
A, = (L, +hL, cos28)i,$ + ( M ,  cos8)ir 
(2.96) 
Similarly, Eq. (2.85) is rewritten as 
Ar = ( M ,  cos8)i,y + L,ir 
(2.97) 
Note that we assume that L22 is independent of 8 and is represented by L,. Thus, 
AL2 = 0 under this assumption. The developed torque given by Eq. (2.91) is 
written as 

48 
Stator 
magnetic 
axis 
A 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 2.26 Two-Pole 
I 
+ 
'> 
Single-Phase Salient-Pole Machine With Saliency On 
= -i,i,.Mo sin 0 - i;?AL, sin 20 
We define the primary or main torque T, by 
7; = -i\i7Mo sin 0 
We also define the reluctance torque T2 by 
T2 = -if AL? sin 20 
Thus we have 
The Rotor. 
Let us assume t,iit the source currents are sinusoid 
i,(l) = I ,  sin w,\r 
i,.(t) = I,sinw,t 
Assume also that the rotor is rotating at an angular speed m,,, 
and hence, 
O(t) = w,t + 0, 
(2.98) 
(2.99) 
(2.100) 
(2.10 1) 
(2.102) 
(2.103) 
(2.104) 
We examine the nature of the instantaneous torque developed under these 
conditions. 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
49 
The primary or main torque TI, expressed by Eq. (2.99), reduces to the 
following form under the assumptions of Eqs. (2.102) to (2.104): 
I I M ,  
4 
{[(on, 
+ w, - w, )t + 8,] + sin[(w,, - w, + w,)t + QO] 
T --L 
1 -  
-sin[(w,, +w, +w,)t+80]-sin[(w,,l 
-w, -wr)t+8,]]} 
(2.105) 
An important characteristic of an electric machine is the average torque 
developed. Examining Eq. (2.109, we note that TI is made of four sinusoidal 
components each of zero average value if the coefficient o f t  is different from 
zero. It thus follows that as a condition for non-zero average of TI, we must 
satisfy one of the following: 
w,, = fa,, 
f w, 
(2.106) 
For example, when 
w, = -a, +a, 
then 
and when 
then 
I I M , .  
T =-L 
sin 8, 
av 
4 
The reluctance torque T, of Eq. (2.100) can be written using Eqs. 
(2.102) to (2.104) as 
{2sin(2wn,t +28,)-sin[2(wm +u,,)t+ 
200] 
I ~ A L  
T2 =-U 
4 
(2.107) 
- sin[2(wn, - W, )t + 28,]} 
The reluctance torque will have an average value for 
w,, = f#,$ 
(2.108) 

50 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
When either of the two conditions is satisfied, 
12U, . 
T2," = -sin 
28, 
4 
2.14 
ROUND OR SMOOTH AIR-GAP MACHINES 
A round-rotor machine is a special case of the salient-pole machine 
where the air gap between the stator and rotor is (relatively) uniform. The term 
smooth air gap is an idealization of the situation illustrated in Figure 2.27. It is 
clear that for the case of a smooth air-gap machine the term AL, is zero, as the 
reluctance does not vary with the angular displacement8. Therefore, for the 
machine of Figure 2.27, we have 
A, = L,i, + M ,  cosOir 
(2.109) 
AT = M ,  cos 6iy + L,i, 
(2.1 10) 
Under the assumptions of Eqs. (2.102) to (2.104), we obtain 
Tfld = 
(2.1 11) 
where TI is as defined in Eq. (2.105). 
We have concluded that for an average value of TI to exist, one of the 
conditions of Eq. (2.106) must be satisfied: 
w, = fa,, 
* w, 
(2.112) 
We have seen that for 
w, = -a, + w, 
then 
I I M ,  . 
T =-L 
sin 8 
4 
av 
(2.113) 
(2.1 14) 
Now substituting Eq. (2.1 13) in to Eq. (2.109, we get 
T,,d = -~ 
I s I r  Mo {sino, +sin[2(wr -w,>t+6,]-sin(2wrt+8,) 
4 
(2.115) 
- sin(-2w,t + 8,)) 
The first term is a constant, whereas the other three terms are still sinusoidal 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
M,cosB 
M,sinB 
-MosinB 
0 
51 
0 
- ~ , ~ i n e  o 
MocosB 
L, 
L, 
Stator magnetic axis 
Figure 2.27 
tor magnetic axis 
+ i,, - 
- A, + 
Smooth Air-Gap Machine. 
time functions and each represents an alternating torque. Although these terms 
are of zero average value, they can cause speed pulsations and vibrations that 
may be harmful to the machine’s operation and life. The alternating torques can 
be eliminated by adding additional windings to the stator and rotor, as discussed 
presently. 
Two-Phase Machines 
Consider the machine of Figure 2.28, where each of the distributed 
windings is represented by a single coil. It is clear that this is an extension of 
the machine of Figure 2.27 by adding one additional stator winding (bs) and one 
additional rotor winding (br) with the relative orientation shown in Figure 
2.28(B). Our analysis of this machine requires fxst setting up the inductances 
required. This can be best done using vector terminology. We can write for this 
four-winding system: 
(2.1 16) 
The field energy is the same as given by Eq. (2.108). The torque is 
obtained in the usual manner. Let us now assume that the terminal currents are 
given by the balanced, two-phase current sources 
i,, = I,, cosu,t 
(2.1 17) 

52 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
ih, = I ,  s i n q t  
(2.1 IS) 
i,, = I ,  cosw,t 
(2.1 19) 
i,, = I ,  sin art 
(2.120) 
We also assume that 
B(t) = W,,t + B, 
(2.121) 
The torque is given by 
Tfld = A40[(iarib,5 - ihria, )cosB - (i,,i,,, + ihrih,, )sin 81 
(2.122) 
Substituting Eqs. (2.1 17) through (2.121) into (2.122), we obtain (after some 
manipulations) 
Tfld = A401,1r sin[(w,, -w, -w,)t+Bo] 
(2.123) 
The condition for nonzero average torque is given by 
w,, = w,y - w, 
(2.124) 
For this condition, we have 
Tfld = MOI,Ir sindo 
(2.125) 
The instantaneous torque in this case is constant in spite of the excitation being 
sinusoidal. 
2.15 
MACHINE-TYPE CLASSIFICATION 
The results of the preceding discussion provides a basis for defining 
conventional machine types. 
Synchronous Machines 
The two-phase machine of Figure 2.29 is excited with direct current 
applied to the rotor (ur, = 0) and balanced two-phase currents of frequency w 
applied to the stator. With ur, = 0 we get 
w, = w,s 
(2.126) 
Thus, the rotor of the machine should be running at the single value defined by 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
53 
Stator a-winding 
magnetic axis 
f 
Rotor a-winding 
" 
,, 
magnetic axis 
r b-v 
ietic 
,Stator 
magnt 
dnding 
axis 
b 
at1 
-wi 
c a  
ndir 
1x1s 
(5) 
Figure 2.28 Two-Phase Smooth Air-Gap Machine. 
the stator sources to produce a torque with nonzero average value. This mode of 
operation yields a synchronous machine which is so named because it can 
convert average power only at one mechanical speed - the synchronous speed, 
a. The synchronous machine is the main source of electric energy in modem 
power systems acting as a generator. 
Induction Machines 
Single-frequency alternating currents are fed into the stator circuits and 
the rotor circuits are all short circuited in a conventional induction machine. 
The machine in Figure 2.28 is used again for the analysis, Equations (2.1 17) 
and (2.1 18) still apply and are repeated here: 
iaS = I,$ C O S W , ~  
(2.127) 

54 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
i,, = I ,  sin u,t 
(2.1 28) 
With the rotor circuits short-circuited, 
v,, = v,, = 0 
and the rotor is running according to Eq. (2.121): 
8(t) = u,,t +so 
Conditions (2.129) are written as 
(2.129) 
(2.130) 
(2.131) 
d&r - 
v,, = R,i,, + - 
- 0 
dt 
dahr - 0 
v,, = Rrihr +- 
- 
dt 
(2.132) 
Here we assume that each rotor phase has a resistance of R@. We have, by Eq. 
(2.1 16), 
A,, = M ,  cos Bi,, + L,i,, + M ,  sin Bib, 
(2.133) 
A,, = -M, sin a,, 
+ M ,  cos&,, + L,i,, 
(2.134) 
As a result. we have 
diur 
d 
dt 
dt 
0 = R,i,, + L,-+M,l,,-[cosu,,tcos(wmt+8,)+sinw,tsin(w,nt+8,) 
(2.135) 
and 
dihr 
d 
dt 
dt 
0 = Rrihr + L, -+ 
M,I,, -[-cosqt 
sin(qnt +B,)+ sinu,$cos(u,t +8,) 
(2.136) 
A few manipulations provide us with 
diU, 
MoI,(w, -w,n)sin[(w, -u,)t -8,l = L,-+ 
Rriu, 
dt 
(2.137) 
(2.138) 
-Mol,,(w,-~,,)cos[(w, -w,,)t-8,]= 
L,-+Rrihr 
dihr 
dt 
The right-hand sides are identical linear first-order differential operators. The 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
55 
Figure 2.29 Two-Pole Configurations 
left sides are sinusoidal voltages of equal magnitude but 90" apart in phase. The 
rotor currents will have a frequency of (w - an), 
which satisfies condition 
(2.124), and thus an average power and an average torque will be produced by 
the induction machine. We emphasize the fact that currents induced in the rotor 
have a frequency of (a 
- q,,) 
and that average torque can be produced. 
2.16 
P-POLE MACHINES 
The configuration of the magnetic field resulting from coil placement 
in the magnetic structure determines the number of poles in an electric machine. 
An important point to consider is the convention adopted for assigning polarities 
in schematic diagrams, which is discussed presently. Consider the bar magnet 
of Figure 2.29(A). The magnetic flux lines are shown as closed loops oriented 
from the South Pole to the North Pole within the magnetic material. Figure 
2.29(B) shows a two-pole rotor with a single coil with current flowing in the 
direction indicated by the dot and cross convention. According to the right-hand 
rule, the flux lines are directed upward inside the rotor material, and as a result 
we assert that the south pole of the electromagnet is on the bottom part and tha't 
the North Pole is at the top, as shown. 
The situation with a two-pole stator is explained in Figure 2.29(C) and 
2.29(D). First consider 2.30(C), showing a pennanent magnet shaped as shown. 
According to our convention, the flux lines are oriented away from the South 
Pole toward the North Pole within the magnetic material (not in air gaps). For 

56 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
<A1 
(a) 
Figure 2.30 Four-pole configurations: (A) stator arrangement. and (B) rotor arrangement 
2.29(D), we have an electromagnet resulting from the insertion of a single coil 
in slots on the periphery of the stator as shown. The flux lines are oriented in 
accordance with the right-hand rule and we conclude that the North and South 
Pole orientations are as shown in the figure. 
Consider now the situation illustrated in Figure 2.30, where two coils 
are connected in series and placed on the periphery of the stator in part (a) and 
on the rotor in part (b). An extension of the prior arguments concerning a two- 
pole machine results from the combination of the stator and rotor of Figure 2.3 1 
and is shown in Figure 2.3 1 to illustrate the orientation of the magnetic axes of 
rotor and stator. 
It is clear that any arbitrary even number of poles can be achieved by 
placing the coils of a given phase in symmetry around the periphery of stator 
and rotor of a given machine. The number of poles is simply the number 
encountered in one round trip around the periphery of the air gap. It is necessary 
for successful operation of the machine to have the same number of poles on the 
stator and rotor. 
Consider the four-pole, single-phase machine of Figure 2.3 1. Because 
of the symmetries involved, the mutual inductance can be seen to be 
M(8) = Mo cos 28 
(2.139) 
Compared with Eq. (2.89) for a two-pole machine, we can immediately assert 
that for a P-pole machine, 
(2.140) 
P 8  
2 
M ( 8 )  = M ,  cos- 
where P is the number of poles. 
We note here that our treatment of the electric machines was focused 
on two-pole configurations. It is clear that extending our analytic results to a P- 
pole machine can easily be done by replacing the mechanical angle 8 in a 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theovy 
57 
Stator 
magnetic 
axis 
Rotor 
+ 
magnetic 
Figure 2.31 Four-Pole Single-Phase Machine. 
relation developed for a two-pole machine by the angle P632 to arrive at the 
corresponding relation for a P-pole machine. As an example, Eqs. (2.109) and 
(2.1 10) for a P-pole machine are written as 
A, = M cos- 
i,, + Lrir 
(
0
 '2") 
Similarly, the torque expression in Eq. (2.99) becomes 
PL9 
= -i$i,, M o  sin - 
2 
Note that L9 in the expressions above is in mechanical degrees. 
(2.141) 
(2.142) 
(2.143) 
The torque TI under the sinusoidal excitation conditions (2.102) and 
(2.103) given by Eq. (2.105) is rewritten for a P-pole machine as 

58 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
) p3 
T - - U { s i n [ ( % + w , - w ,  
I I M  
t+- 
4 
2 
1 -  
+ sin[ (3 
2 - w, + w, ) + q] 
- sin[ (3 
2 + w,s + wr)t + 
-sin[ ("- 2 
w, - w,.)t +?I} 
(2.144) 
The conditions for average torque production of Eq. (2.106) are written for a P- 
pole machine as 
(2.1 45) 
2 
P 
w, =-(-+U),fw,) 
Thus, for given electrical frequencies the mechanical speed is reduced as the 
number of poles is increased. 
A time saving and intuitively appealing concept in dealing with P-pole 
machines is that of electrical degrees. Let us define the angle 8, corresponding 
to take a mechanical angle@ in a P-pole machine the 
P 
2 
e, =--B 
(2.146) 
With this definition we see that all statements, including 0 for a two-pole 
machine apply to any P-pole machine with @taken as an electrical angle. 
Consider the first condition of Eq. (2.145) with @ = 0 corresponding to 
synchronous machine operation: 
(2.147) 
2 
P 
w, =-w 
The stator angular speed q. 
is related to frequencyA in hertz by 
The mechanical angular 
revolutions per minute by 
a, = 2MS 
(2.148) 
speed CQ,, 
is related to the mechanical speed n in 
2m 
60 
=- 
(2.149) 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
59 
Combining Eq. (2.147) with Eq. (2.149), we obtain 
Pn 
f ,  == 
(2.1 SO) 
This is an important relation in the analysis of rotating electrical machines. 
2.17 
POWER SYSTEM REPRESENTATION 
A major portion of the modem power system utilizes three-phase ac 
circuits and devices. A detailed representation of each of the three phases in the 
system is cumbersome and can also obscure information about the system. A 
balanced three-phase system is solved as a single-phase circuit made of one line 
and the neutral retum; thus a simpler representation would involve retaining one 
line to represent the three phases and omitting the neutral. Standard symbols are 
used to indicate the various components. A transmission line is represented by a 
single line between two ends. The simplified diagram is called the single-line 
diagram. 
The one-line diagram summarizes the relevant information about the 
system for the particular problem studied. 
For example, relays and circuit 
breakers are not important when dealing with a normal state problem. However, 
when fault conditions are considered, the location of relays and circuit breakers 
is important and is thus included in the single-line diagram. 
The International Electro technical Commission (IEC), the American 
National Standards Institute (ANSI), and the Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers (IEEE) have published a set of standard symbols for 
electrical diagrams. A basic symbol for a rotating machine is a circle. Figure 
2.32(A) shows rotating machine symbols. If the winding connection is desired, 
the connection symbols may be shown in the basic circle using the 
representations given in Figure 2.32(B). 
The symbols commonly used for 
transformer representation are given in Figure 2.33(A). The two-circle symbol 
is the symbol to be used on schematics for equipment having international usage 
according to IEC. Figure 2.33(B) shows symbols for a number of single-phase 
transformers, and Figure 2.34 shows both single-line symbols and three-line 
symbols for three-phase transformers. 
PROBLEMS 
Problem 2.1 
In the circuit shown in Figure 2.35, the source phasor voltage is V = 30115". 
Determine the phasor currents 1, and 1, and the impedance Z2. Assume that I ,  is 
equal to five A .  Calculate the apparent power produced by the source and the 
individual apparent powers consumed by the 1 -ohm resistor, the impedance Z2, 

60 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
and the resistance R3. Show that conservation of power holds true. 
Problem 2.2 
A three-phase transmission link is rated 100 kVA at 2300 V. When operating at 
rated load, the total resistive and reactive voltage drops in the link are, 
respectively, 2.4 and 3.6 YO of the rated voltage. Determine the input power and 
power factor when the link delivers 60 kW at 0.8 PF lagging at 2300 V. 
Problem 2.3 
A 60-hp, three-phase, 440-V induction motor operates at 0.8 PF lagging. 
a) 
b) 
Find the active, reactive, and apparent power consumed per phase. 
Suppose the motor is supplied from a 440-V source through a 
feeder whose impedance is 0.5 + j0.3 ohm per phase. 
Basic 
rE r> 
\.> 
@ 
@ 
s @  
!L& (3 
63 
I E c @  
@j 
Generator 
(general) 
OR 
Generator direct - current 
Generator alternating 
current 
Generator synchronous 
Motor 
(general) 
OH --. 
Motor direct -current 
~ 
/-\ 
itc \y,j 
Molor. allernatina current 
Molorsynchronous 
1 phase 
2 -phase 
3-phase wye (ungrounded) 
3-phase wye (grounded) 
3- phase delta 0 
6 -phase diametrical 
e 
6 - phase double -delta 
63 
(A) 
Figure 2.32 Symbols for Rotating Machines (A) and Their Winding Connections (B). 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
61 
- 
I EC - 
I-phase, 3-winding transformer 
OR 
OR 
OR 
With taps, 1 -phase 
Autotransformer, 1 -phase 
i 
OR 
i' 
IEC 
Adjustable 
OR 
Figure 2.33 (A) Transformer Symbols. and (B) Symbols for Single-Phase Transformers 

62 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
OR 
11 
Application: 3 - phase bank of 
I-phase, 2 -winding transformers 
with wye - delta connections 
OR 
Three phase transformer with 4 
taps with wye - wye connections 
Y-Y 
OR 
Polyphase transformer 
{FEZ 
11 
3 
11 
Figure 2.34 Symbols for Three-Phase Transformers. 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
63 
Figure 2.35 Circuit for Problem 2.1 
c) Calculate the voltage at the motor side, the source power factor, 
and the efficiency of transmission. 
Problem 2.4 
Repeat Problem 2.3 if the motor's efficiency is 85%. 
Problem 2.5 
Repeat Problem 2.4 if the PF is 0.7 lagging. 
Problem 2.6 
Consider a 100 kW load operating at a lagging power factor of 0.7. A capacitor 
is connected in parallel with the load to raise the source power factor to 0.9 p.f. 
lagging. Find the reactive power supplied by the capacitor assuming that the 
voltage remains constant. 
Problem 2.7 
A balanced Y-connected 3 phase source with voltage V,, = 240LO" V is 
connected to a balanced A load with Z ,  = 30135" R . Find the currents in each 
of the load phases and hence obtain the current through each phase of the 
source. 
Problem 2.8 
Assume that the load of Problem 2.7 is connected to the source using a line 
whose impedance is Z ,  = 1180" R for each phase. Calculate the line currents, 
the A-load currents, and the voltages at the load terminals. 
Problem 2.9 
A balanced, three-phase 240-V source supplies a balanced three-phase load. If 
the line current Id is measured to be 5 A, and is in phase with the line-to-line 
voltage VR(., find the per phase load impedance if the load is (a) Y-connected, 
and (b) A-connected. 
Problem 2.10 
Two balanced Y-connected loads, one drawing 20 kW at 0.8 p.f. lagging and the 
other 30 kW at 0.9 p.f. leading, are connected in parallel and supplied by a 
balanced three-phase Y-connected, 480-V source. Determine the impedance per 
phase of each load and the source currents. 

64 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Problem 2.1 1 
A load of 30 MW at 0.8 p.f. lagging is served by two lines from two generating 
sources. Source 1 supplies 15 MW at 0.8 p.f. lagging with a terminal voltage of 
4600 V line-to-line. The line impedance is (1.4 + jl.6) R per phase between 
source 1 and the load, and (0.8 + j l )  R per phase between source 2 and the load. 
Find 
a) The voltage at the load terminals 
b) The voltage at the terminals of source 2, and 
c) The active and reactive power supplied by source 2. 
Problem 2.12 
The impedance of a three-phase line is 0.3 +j2.4 per phase. The line feeds two 
balanced three-phase loads connected in parallel. The first load takes 600 kVA 
at 0.7 p.f. lagging. The second takes 150 kW at unity power factor. The line to 
line voltage at the load end of the line is 3810.5 V. Find 
a) The magnitude of the line voltage at the source end of the line. 
b) The total active and reactive power loss in the line. 
c) The active and reactive power supplied at the sending end of the 
line. 
Problem 2.13 
Three loads are connected in parallel across a 12.47 kV three-phase supply. The 
first is a resistive 60 kW load, the second is a motor (inductive) load of 60 kW 
and 660 kvar, and the third is a capacitive load drawing 240 kW at 0.8 p.f. Find 
the total apparent power, power factor, and supply current. 
Problem 2.14 
A Y-connected capacitor bank is connected in parallel with the loads of Problem 
2.13. Find 
a) 
b) The corresponding line current. 
The total kvar and capacitance per phase in ,uF to improve the 
overall power factor to 0.8 lagging. 
Problem 2.15 
Assume that 30 V and 5 A are chosen as base voltage and current for the circuit 
of Problem 2.1. 
a) Find the corresponding base impedance and VA. 
b) Find the phasor currents I2 and I3 in per unit. 
c) Determine the source apparent power in per unit. 
Problem 2.16 
Consider the transmission link of Problem 2.2 and choose 100 kVA and 2300 V 
as base kVA and voltage. Determine the input power in per unit under the 
conditions of Problem 2.2. 

Basics of Electric Energy System Theory 
65 
Problem 2.17 
Assume for the motor of Problem 2.3 that 50 kW and 440 V are taken as base 
values. Find the voltage in per unit at the motor side. 
Problem 2.18 
Assume that the base voltage is 4600 V in the system of Problem 2.1 1, and that 
50 MVA is the corresponding apparent power base. Repeat Problem 2.1 1 using 
per unit values. 
Problem 2.19 
Repeat Problem 2.12 using per unit values assuming that 1000 kVA is base 
apparent power and 3 R is the base impedance. 
Problem 2.20 
The following information is available about a 40 MVA 20-kV/400 kV, single- 
phase transformer: 
Z, = 0.9 +j1.8 R 
Z, = 128 +j288 R 
Using the transformer rating as base, determine the per unit impedance of the 
transformer from the ohmic value referred to the low voltage side. Find the per 
unit impedance using the ohmic value referred to the high voltage side. 
Problem 2.21 
Consider a toroidal coil with relative permeability of 1500 with a circular cross 
section whose radius is 0.025 cm. The outside radius of the toroid is 0.2 cm. 
Find the inductance of the coil assuming that N = 10 turns. 
Problem 2.22 
The eddy-current and hysteresis losses in a transformer are 450 and 550 W, 
respectively, when operating from a 6O-Hz supply with an increase of 10% in 
flux density. Find the change in core losses. 
Problem 2.23 
The relationship between current, displacement, and flux linkages in a 
conservative electromechanical device is given by 
i = A[0.7A + 2.0(x - 1)2] 
Find expressions for the stored energy and the magnetic field force in terms of h 
and x. Find the force for x = 0.9. 
Problem 2.24 
Repeat Problem 2.23 for the relationship 
i = A3 + A(0.2A + 0 . 9 ~ )  

66 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Problem 2.25 
A plunger-type solenoid is characterized by the relation 
8i 
a =  
1 + lo4 x/2.54 
Find the force exerted by the field for x = 2.54 x 10” and i = 12 A. 
Problem 2.26 
The inductance of a coil used with a plunger-type electromechanical device is 
given by 
1.75 x lo-’ 
L =  
X 
where x is the plunger displacement. Assume that the current in the coil is given 
by 
i(t) = 8sin ~a 
where w =  2z(60). Find the force exerted by the field for x = lo-’ m. Assume 
that x is fixed and find the necessary voltage applied to the coil terminals given 
that its resistance is 1 Q. 
Problem 2.27 
A rotating electromechanical conversion device has a stator and rotor, each with 
a single coil. The inductances of the device are 
LI1 10.5 H 
LIZ= 1.25 cos B H  
Lz2 = 2.5 H 
Where the subscript 1 refers to stator and the subscript 2 refers to rotor. The 
angle 8 is the rotor angular displacement from the stator coil axis. Express the 
torque as a fimction of currents il, i2 and Band compute the torque for il = 3 A 
and i2 = 1 A. 
Problem 2.28 
Assume for the device of Problem 2.27 that 
L, , = 0.3 + 0.2 cos 28 
All other parameters are unchanged. Find the torque in terms of B for il = 2.5 A 
and (a) i2 = 0; (b) i2 = 1.5 A. 
Problem 2.29 
Assume for the device of Problem 2.27 that the stator and rotor coils are 
connected in series, with the current being 

Basics ofElectric Energy System Theory 
67 
i(t) = I,,, sin ut 
Find the instantaneous torque and its average value over one cycle of the supply 
current in terms of I, and w. 
Problem 2.30 
A rotating electromechanical energy conversion device has the following 
inductances in terms of 8 in radians (angle between rotor and stator axes): 
L,, = 0.88 
L2, = -0.25 + 1.88 
L,2 = -0.75 + 1.48 
Find the torque developed for the following excitations. 
a) i, = 15 A, 
b) il = 0 A, 
c) il = 15 A, 
d) il = 15 A, 
i2 = 0. 
i2= 
15 A. 
i2 = 15 A. 
i2 = -15 A. 
Problem 2.31 
For the machine of Problem 2.27, assume that the rotor coil terminals are 
shorted (e2 = 0) and that the stator current is given by 
i, ( t )  = I sin ut 
Find the torque developed as a function of I, 8, and time. 
Problem 2.32 
For the device of Problem 2.3 1, the rotor coil terminals are connected to a 1042 
resistor. Find the rotor current in the steady state and the torque developed. 

Chapter 3 
POWER GENERATION AND 
THE SYNCHRONOUS MACHINE 
3.1 
INTRODUCTION 
The backbone of any electric power system is a number of generating 
stations operating in synchronism. 
At each station there may be several 
synchronous generators operating in parallel. Synchronous machines represent 
the largest single-unit electric machine in production. Generators with power 
ratings of several hundred to over a thousand megavoltamperes (MVA) are 
fairly common in many utility systems. A synchronous machine provides a 
reliable and efficient means for energy conversion. 
The operation of a synchronous generator is (like all other 
electromechanical energy conversion devices) based on Faraday’s law of 
electromagnetic induction. The term synchronous refers to the fact that this type 
of machine operates at constant speed and frequency under steady-state 
conditions. Synchronous machines are equally capable of operating as motors, 
in which case the electric energy supplied at the armature terminals of the unit is 
converted into mechanical form. 
3.2 
THE SYNCHRONOUS MACHINE: PRELIMINARIES 
The armature winding of a synchronous machine is on the stator, and 
the field winding is on the rotor as shown in Figure 3.1. The field is excited by 
the direct current that is conducted through carbon brushes bearing on slip (or 
collector) rings. The dc source is called the exciter and is often mounted on the 
same shaft as the synchronous machine. Various excitation systems with ac 
exciters and solid-state rectifiers are used with large turbine generators. The 
main advantages of these systems include the elimination of cooling and 
maintenance problems associated with slip rings, commutators, and brushes. 
The pole faces are shaped such that the radial distribution of the air-gap flux 
density B is approximately sinusoidal as shown in Figure 3.2. 
The armature winding includes many coils. One coil is shown in 
Figure 3.1 and has two coil sides (a and -a) placed in diametrically opposite 
slots on the inner periphery of the stator with conductors parallel to the shaft of 
the machine. 
The rotor is turned at a constant speed by a power mover 
connected to its shaft. As a result, the flux waveform sweeps by the coil sides a 
and -a. The induced voltage in the coil is a sinusoidal time function. For each 
revolution of the two poles, the coil voltage passes through a complete cycle of 
values. The frequency of the voltage in cycles per second (hertz) is the same as 
the rotor speed in revolutions per second. 
Thus, a two-pole synchronous 
machine must revolve at 3600 r/min to produce a 60-Hz voltage. 
Introduction to Electrical Power Engineering. By Moharned E. El-Hawary 
Copyright 0 
2008 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc 
69 

Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 3. I 
Windings 
Flux Density 
(B) 
Figure 3.2 Space Distribution of Flux Density in a Synchronous Generator 
P-Pole Machines 
Many synchronous machines have more than two poles. A P-pole 
machine is one with P poles. As an example, we consider an elementary, single- 
phase, four-pole generator shown in Figure 3.3. There are two complete cycles 
in the flux distribution around the periphery as shown in Figure 3.4. The 
armature winding in this case consists of two coils (a,. -al. and a2, -a2) 
connected in series. The generated voltage goes through two complete cycles 
per revolution o f  the rotor, and thus the fiequencyfin hertz is twice the speed in 
revolutions per second. In general, the coil voltage of a machine with P-poles 
passes through a complete cycle every time a pair of poles sweeps by, or PI2 
times for each revolution. The frequencyfis therefore given by 
+) 
2 60 
where n is the shaft speed in revolutions per minute (rlmin). 
In treating P-pole synchronous machines, it is more convenient to 
express angles in electrical degrees rather than in the more familiar mechanical 
units. Here we concentrate on a single pair of poles and recognize that the 
conditions associated with any other pair are simply repetitions of those of the 
pair under consideration. A full cycle of generated voltage will be described 
when the rotor of a four-pole machine has turned 180 mechanical degrees. This 

Power Generation and the Synchronous Machine 
71 
-a2 
a2 
Figure 3.3 Four-Pole Synchronous Machine. 
Electrical Radians 
Figure 3.4 Space Distribution of Flux Density in a Four-Pole Synchronous Machine. 
cycle represents 360 electrical degrees in the voltage wave. Extending this 
argument to a P-pole machine leads to the conclusion that 
where 0, and On, 
are angles in electrical and mechanical degrees, respectively. 
Cylindrical vs. Salient-Pole Construction 
Machines like the ones illustrated in Figures 3.1 and 3.3 have rotors 
with distinct or sulient poles. There is another type of rotor, which is shown in 
Figure 3.5. The machine with such a rotor is called a cylindrical rotor or 
nonsalient-pole machine. The choice between the two designs (salient or 
nonsalient) for a specific application depends on the prime mover. 
For 
hydroelectric generation, a salient-pole construction is employed, because 
hydraulic turbines run at relatively low speeds, and a large number of poles is 
required to produce the desired frequency as indicated by Eq. (3.1). Steam and 
gas turbines perform better at relatively high speeds, and two- or four-pole 
cylindrical rotor turboalternators are used to avoid the use of protruding parts on 
the rotor. 

72 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 3.5 A Cylindrical 
3.3 
SYNCHRONOUS MACHINE FIELDS 
An understanding of the nature of the magnetic field produced by a 
polyphase winding is necessary for the analysis of polyphase ac machines. We 
will consider a two-pole, three-phase machine. The windings of the individual 
phases are displaced spatially fkom each other by 120 electrical degrees. The 
magnetomotive forces developed in the air gap due to currents in the windings 
will also be displaced from each other by 120 electrical degrees in space. 
Assuming sinusoidal, balanced three-phase operation, the phase currents are 
displaced by 120 electrical degrees in time. 
Assume that I,, is the maximum value of the current, and the time 
origin is arbitrarily taken as the instant when the phase a current is a positive 
maximum. The phase sequence is assumed to be abc which means that any 
event such as the maximum of current will take place on phase a followed by 
phase b and then phase c. 
The magnetomotive force (MMF) of each phase is proportional to the 
corresponding current, and hence, the peak MMF is given by 
where K is a constant of proportionality that depends on the winding distribution 
and the number of series turns in the winding per phase. We thus have 
Ah(p) = 4nax 
cos(02-120") 
(3.3) 

Power Generation and the Synchronous Machine 
73 
where A,,, 
is the amplitude of the MMF component wave at time t. 
At time t, all three phases contribute to the air-gap MMF at a point P 
(whose spatial angle is 9. The resultant MMF is then given by 
This reduces to 
3 
2 
A, = -[ F,,, 
COS(@ - OX)] 
(3.6) 
The wave represented in Eq. (3.6) depends on the spatial position of the 
point P 0 as well as time. The angle M provides rotation of the entire wave 
around the air gap at the constant angular velocity u. At time t,, the wave is a 
sinusoid with its positive peak displaced 
from the point P (at 9; at a later 
instant (t2) the wave has its positive peak displaced ux2 from the same point. We 
thus see that a polyphase winding excited by balanced polyphase currents 
produces the same effect as a permanent magnet rotating within the stator. 
The MMF wave created by the three-phase armature current in a 
synchronous machine is commonly called armature-reaction MMF. It is a wave 
that rotates at synchronous speed and is directly opposite to phase a at the 
instant when phase a has its maximum current (t = 0). Due to the rotation, the 
dc field winding produces a sinusoid F on an axis which is 90" ahead of the axis 
of phase a in accordance with Faraday's law. 
The resultant magnetic field at any point in the machine is the sum of 
the two contributions from the field and armature reaction. Figure 3.6 shows a 
sketch of the armature and field windings of a cylindrical rotor generator. The 
space MMF produced by the field winding is shown by the sinusoid F. This is 
shown for the specific instant when the electromotive force (EMF) of phase a 
due to excitation is at its maximum value. The time rate of change of flux 
linkages with phase a is a maximum under these conditions, and thus the axis of 
the field is 90" ahead of phase a. The armature-reaction wave is shown as the 
sinusoid A in the figure. This is drawn opposite phase a because at this instant 
both I, and the EMF of the field EJ (also called excitation voltage) have their 
maximum value. The resultant magnetic field in the machine is denoted R and is 
obtained by graphically adding the F and A waves. 
Sinusoids can conveniently be handled using phasor methods. We can 
thus perform the addition of the A and F waves using phasor notation. Figure 
3.7 shows a space phasor diagram where the fluxes q$ (due to the field), 
(due 
to armature reaction), and q5r (the resultant flux) are represented. It is clear that 
under the assumption of a uniform air gap and no saturation, these are 
proportional to the MMF waves F, A, and R, respectively. The figure is drawn 
for the case when the armature current is in phase with the excitation voltage. 

74 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Axis of 
p h a s e a  , 
R 
Axis of 
field 
Figure 3.6 Spatial MMF Waves in a Cylindrical Rotor Synchronous Generator. 
Axis of 
0
)
r
 
1 
A + a r  
phase a 
Figure 3.7 A Space Phasor Diagram for Armature Current in Phase with Excitation Voltage 
3.4 
A SIMPLE EQUIVALENT ClRCUlT 
The simplest model of a synchronous machine with cylindrical rotor 
can be obtained if the effect of the armature-reaction flux is represented by an 
inductive reactance. The basis for this is shown in Figure 3.8, where the phasor 
diagram of component fluxes and corresponding voltages is given. The field 
flux @ is added to the armature-reaction flux $,? to yield the resultant air-gap 
flux &. The armature-reaction flux qUr is in phase with the armature current I(,. 
The excitation voltage Ef is generated by the field flux, and Ef lags fi by 90". 
Similarly, E,, and E,. are generated by @,,. and @,. respectively, with each of the 
voltages lagging the flux causing it by 90'. 
Introduce the constant of proportionality x6 to relate the rms values of 
E,, and I,, to write 

Power Generation and the Synchronous Machine 
75 
@fQ; 
la 
Figure 3.8 Phasor Diagram for Fluxes and Resulting Voltages in a Synchronous Machine. 
XI 
'a 
Ef - 
E
f
+
<
-
!
:
p
-
;
;
 
- 
+p7-3; 
- 
- 
- 
Figure 3.9 Two Equivalent Circuits for the Synchronous Machine. 
;p%T=%+ 
Ef - 
Figure 3.9 Two Equivalent Circuits for the Synchronous Machine. 
EaS = - jx@I, 
(3.7) 
where the -j represents the 90" lagging effect. We therefore have 
An equivalent circuit based on Eq. (3.8) is given in Figure 3.9. We thus 
conclude that the inductive reactance x, accounts for the armature-reaction 
effects. This reactance is known as the magnetizing reactance of the machine. 
The terminal voltage of the machine denoted by V, is the difference 
between the air-gap voltage E, and the voltage drops in the armature resistance 
r,,, and the leakage-reactance xI. Here x/ accounts for the effects of leakage flux 
as well as space harmonic field effects not accounted for by x6 
A simple 
impedance commonly known as the synchronous impedance Z, is obtained by 
combining x6 XI, and r, according to 
Z, = r, + j X ,  
(3.9) 
The synchronous reactance X, is given by 
x, 
= x, +xq 
(3.10) 
The model obtained here applies to an unsaturated cylindrical rotor 
machine supplying balanced polyphase currents to its load. 
The term 
unsaturated is used whenever the value of flux in the machine is in the linear 

76 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
region (unsaturated) of the magnetization characteristic of the core material. 
The voltage relationship is now given by 
E f  =V,+I,Z, 
(3.1 1) 
Example 3.1 
A 10 MVA, 13.8 kV, 60 Hz, two-pole, Y-connected, three-phase alternator has 
an armature winding resistance of 0.07 ohms per phase and a leakage reactance 
of 1.9 ohms per phase. The armature reaction EMF for the machine is related to 
the armature current by 
Ear =-j19.911a 
Assume that the generated EMF is related to the field current by 
E f  =601, 
A. 
B. 
Solution 
Compute the field current required to establish rated voltage across 
the terminals of a load when rated armature current is delivered at 
0.8 PF lagging. 
Compute the field current needed to provide rated terminal voltage 
to a load that draws 100 per cent of rated current at 0.85 PF 
lagging. 
The rated current is given by 
l a  = 1ox106 =418.37A 
3x13800 
The phase value of terminal voltage is 
13 800 
V, = - 
= 7967.43 V 
6 
With reference to the equivalent circuit of Figure 3.9, we have 
A. 
E, = V, + IaZ, 
= 7967.43 + +(418.371 - cos-' 0.8k0.07 + jl.9) 
= 8490.3514.18" 
E,, = -j(19.91)(418.37L-cos-' 0.8)= -8329.75153.13" 
The required field excitation voltage El is therefore, 

Power Generation and the Synchronous Machine 
77 
E ,  = E, - E,, 
= 8490.35L4.18" +8329.75L53.13" 
= 15308.61L28.4" V 
Consequently, using the given field voltage versus current relation, 
E 
60 
I ,  = l = 2 5 5 . 1 4 A  
B. With conditions given, we have 
I ,  = (418.37)(lL-cos-'0.85)=418.37L-31.79" 
E, = 7967.43 + (4 18.37L - 3 1.79" 10.07 + jl.9) 
E,, =-j(I9.91)(418.37L-31.79") 
= 8436.9414.49" V 
= -8329.74158.21" 
E, 1 
E, - E,, 
= 8436.9414.48" + 8329.74158.21" 
= 14.957.72L31.16" V 
We therefore calculate the required field current as 
3.5 
PRlNClPA L STEAD Y-S TA TE CHA RA CTERIS TICS 
Consider a synchronous generator delivering power to a constant power 
factor load at a constant frequency. A compounding curve shows the variation 
of the field current required to maintain rated terminal voltage with the load. 
Typical compounding curves for various power factors are shown in Figure 
3.10. The computation of points on the curve follows easily from applying Eq. 
(3.1 1). 
Figure 3.1 1 shows phasor diagram representations for three different 
power factors. 
Example 3.2 
A 1,250-kVA, three-phase, Y-connected, 4,160-V (line-to-line), ten-pole, 60-Hz 
generator has an armature resistance of 0.126 ohms per phase and a synchronous 
reactance of 3 ohms per phase. Find the full load generated voltage per phase at 
a power factor of 0.8 lagging. 

78 
0 
U 
w 
'- ? -  
> 
3 
0-v 
$ 2  
._ 
2 5  
G g  
C K  
.o - .- 
E 
0 .5 
I! 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
I 
0.8 pf Lag 
! 
0.8 pf Lead 
!- Rated Load 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Figure 3.10 
Solution 
The magnitude of full load current is obtained as 
The terminal voltage per phase is taken as reference 
1; - 4,160 = 2,40 I .77LO V 
+ -  
The synchronous impedance is obtained as 
Z,s = r, + jX,s 
= 0.126 + j 3  
= 3.0026L87.59" ohms per phase 
The generated voltage per phase is obtained for a power factor of 0.8 lagging 
using Eq. (3.11) as: 
I ,  = 173.48L - 36.87" A 
E,. = 2,401.77+(173.48~-36.87*~3.0026~87.59°) 
= 2,76 1.137L8.397" V 
A significant characteristic of the synchronous machine is the reactive- 
capability curves. These give the maximum allowed reactive power loadings 
corresponding to various active power loadings for rated voltage operation. 
Armature heating constraints govern the machine for power factors from rated to 
unity. Field heating represents the constraints for lower power factors. Figure 
3.12 shows a typical set of curves for a large turbine generator. 

Power Generation and the Synchronous Machine 
79 
Ef2 
-9’ 
,I 
‘a2 
.’, 
,
I
 
< -  
* 
- ,  
r
,
 
.* 
, 
.
I
 
,’ 
/ 
,,,’ Ef 
,- 
A\+ 
+@ 
VT ‘* 
(c) 
(b) 
Figure 3.1 I Phasor Diagrams for a Synchronous Machine Operating at Different Power Factors are 
(a) Unity PF Loads. (b) Laggmg PF Loads. and (c) Leading PF Loads 
3.6 
POWER-ANGLE CHARACTERISTICS AND THE INFINITE 
BUS CONCEPT 
Consider the simple circuit shown in Figure 3.13. The impedance Z 
connects the sending end, whose voltage is E and receiving end, with voltage V. 
Let us assume that in polar form we have 
E = EL6 
v = VLO 
Z = Z L y /  
We therefore conclude that the current I is given by 
The complex power S1 at the sending end is given by 
s; = E*I 
Similarly, the complex power S, at the receiving end is 

80 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 3.12 
Per - unit power 
Generator Reactive-Capabiliiy Curves 
E 
Figure 3.13 Equivalent Circuit and Phasor Diagram for a Simple Link 
*
*
 
s, = v I 
Therefore, 
(3.12) 
(3.13) 
Recall that 
S* = P -  j Q  

Power Generation and the Synchronous Machine 
81 
When the resistance is negligible; then 
I,V = 90" 
z=x 
and the active and reactive power equations are obtained as: 
EV 
x 
4 =P2 =-sin8 
E2 -EVcosS 
QI = 
EV cos6- V2 
Q2 = 
(3.14) 
(3.15) 
(3.16) 
In large-scale power systems, a three-phase synchronous machine is 
represented as a voltage source connected through an equivalent system 
reactance (X,) to the network which has a high generation capacity relative to 
any single unit. We often refer to the network or system as an infinite bus when 
a change in input mechanical power or in field excitation to the unit does not 
cause an appreciable change in system frequency or terminal voltage. Figure 
3.14 shows such a situation, where V is the infinite bus voltage. 
The previous analysis shows that in the present case we have for power 
transfer, 
P = P,, 
sin S 
with 
(3.17) 
(3.18) 
and 
x, 
= x,y 
+ x, 
(3.19) 
If we try to advance Sfurther than 90" (corresponding to maximum 
power transfer) by increasing the mechanical power input, the electrical power 
output would decrease from the P,,, 
point. Therefore the angle Sincreases 
hrther as the machine accelerates. This drives the machine and system apart 
electrically. The value P,,, 
is called the steady-state stability limit or pull-out 
power. 

82 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Example 3.3 
A synchronous generator with a synchronous reactance of 1. I5 p.u. is connected 
to an infmite bus whose voltage is one p.u. through an equivalent reactance of 
0.15 p.u. The maximum permissible active power output is 1.2 p.u. 
A. Compute the excitation voltage E. 
B. The power output is gradually reduced to 0.7 p.u. with fixed field 
excitation. Find the new current and power angle d 
Solution 
A. The total reactance is 
x, 
=l.15+0.15=1.3 
Thus we have, 
EC’ 
1.2=- x, 
Therefore, 
E = 1.56 P.U. 
B. We have for any angle S, 
P = P,,, sin 6 
Therefore, 
This results in 

Power Generation and the Synchronous Machine 
83 
6 = 35.69" 
The current is 
Substituting the given values, we obtain 
1.56135.69" - 1 .O 
I =  
jl.3 
= 0.72961- 16.35" A 
The following is a MATLABTM script to solve problems of the type 
presented in Example 3.3. 
% example 3.3 
% enter the data 
Xs=1.25; % synchronous reactance 
Xe=0.25; % equivalent reactance 
Pm=1.2; % max permisible output 
V=l; % infinite bus voltage 
% to find the total reactance 
Xt=Xs+Xe; 
% A. To compute the exitation voltage 
% from Pm=E*V/Xt 
E=Pm*Xt 
/V 
% B. The power output is gradually 
reduced to 0.7 p.u. 
% with fixed field excitation. 
% to find power angle delta 
P=0.7; % power output 
% from P=Pm*sin(delta) 
delta=asin (P/Pm) ; 
delta_deg=delta*18O/pi 
E-complex=E*(cos(delta)+i*sin(delta)); 
% To find the new current 
% modulus and argumen 
I=(E complex-V)/Xt*i; 
moduius-I=abs (I) 
eta=atan(imag(I) 
/real (I)) ; 
argumen_I=eta*180/pi 

84 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
The solution is obtained by running the script as follows 
EDU>> 
E = 1.5600 
delta-deg = 35.6853 
modulus-I = 0.7296 
argumen-I = -16.3500' 
Reactive Power Generation 
Eq. (3.16) suggests that the generator produces reactive power (Q2 > 0) 
if 
In this case, the generator appears to the network as if it is a capacitor or a 
reactive power source. This condition applies for high magnitude E, and the 
machine is said to be overexcited. On the other hand, the machine is called 
underexcited if it consumes reactive power (Q2 < 0). Here we have 
In this case the machine absorbs reactive power from the system. Figure 3.15 
shows phasor diagrams for both cases. The overexcited synchronous machine is 
normally employed to provide synchronous condenser action, where usually no 
real load is carried by the machine (6= 0). In this case we have 
V(E - V )  
Q2 = 
(3.20) 
Control of reactive power generation is carried out by simply changing E, by 
varying the dc excitation. 
Example 3.4 
Compute the reactive power generated by the machine of Example 3.3 under the 
conditions in part (b). If the machine is required to generate a reactive power of 
0.4 p.u. while supplying the same active power by changing the field excitation, 
find the new excitation voltage and power angle 6. 
Solution 
The reactive power generated is obtained according to Eq. (3.16) as 
l(1.56~0~35.69-1) 
1.3 
= 0.205 
Q2 = 
With a new excitation voltage and stated active and reactive powers, we have 

Power Generation and the Synchronous Machine 
85 
0 < 6 < 9 O 0  
-goo.=# c 0 
Overexcited generator 
Underexcited generator 
PG > 0 
PG ' 
0 
Q G >  0 
Q G <  0 
Figure 3.15 Phasor Diagrams for Overexcited and Underexcited Synchronous Machines 
using Eq. (3.14) and (3.16) 
1(E cos 6 - 1) 
0.4 = 
1.3 
We thus obtain 
(1.3)(0.7) 
(I .52) 
tan 6 = 
d = 30.9083" 
From the above we get 
The following script implements the solution of this example in 
MATLABTM environment. 

86 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
% example 3.4 
% enter the data 
Xs=1.15; % synchronous reactance 
Xe=0.15; % equivalent reactance 
Pm=1.2; % max permisible output 
V=l; % infinite bus voltage 
% to find the total reactance 
Xt=Xs+Xe ; 
% A. To compute the exitation vctage 
% from Pm=E*V/Xt 
E=Pm*Xt/V; 
P=0.7; % power output 
% from P=Pm*sin(delta) 
delta=asin (P/Pm) ; 
% to compute reactive power generated 
Q2= (E*V*cos (delta) 
-VA2) 
/Xt; 
% If the machine is required to 
generate a reactive power 
% of 0.4 p.u. while supplying the same 
active power 
% to find the new power angle (deltal) 
Q2-required=0.4; 
% with a new excitation voltage 
% and stated active and reactive powers 
% using the equation 
% P= (E*V/Xt) 
sin(delta1) and 
Q2= (E*V*cos (deltal) 
-VA2) 
/Xt 
deltal=atan(P/(Q2-required+VA2/Xt)) 
; 
deltal deg=deltal*180/pi 
% to fTnd the new field exitation 
E-new=P*Xt/sin(deltal) 
% 
0, 
The solution is obtained as 
EDU>> 
deltal-deg = 30.9083 1
E n e w  = 1.7716 
3.7 
ACCOUNTING FOR SALIENCY 
Field poles in a salient-pole machine cause nonuniformity of the 

Power Generation and the Synchronous Machine 
87 
Figure 3.16 Resolution of Armature Current in Tw-o Components. 
Axis of 
Field Pole 
Axis of 
Field Pole 
Figure 3.1 7 
Machine. 
Direct-Axis and Quadrature-Axis Air-Gap Fluxes in a Salient-Pole Synchronous 
magnetic reluctance of the air gap. The reluctance along the polar axis is 
appreciably less than that along the interpolar axis. We often refer to the polar 
axis as the direct axis and the interpolar as the quadruture axis. This effect can 
be taken into account by resolving the armature current I, into two components, 
one in time phase and the other in time quadrature with the excitation voltage as 
shown in Figure 3.16. The component Id of the armature current is along the 
direct axis (the axis of the field poles), and the component Iy is along the 
quadrature axis. 
Let us consider the effect of the direct-axis component alone. With l,, lagging 
the excitation EMF Ef by 90°, the resulting armature-reaction flux Q,d is directly 
opposite the field poles as shown in Figure 3.17. The effect of the quadrature- 
axis component is to produce an armature-reaction flux &, which is in the 
quadrature-axis direction as shown in Figure 3.17. The phasor diagram with 
both components present is shown in Figure 3.18. 
In the cylindrical rotor machine, we employed the synchronous reactance x, to 
account for the armature-reaction EMF in an equivalent circuit. The same 

88 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 3.18 Phasor Diagram for a Salient-Pole S) nchronous Machine. 
argument can be extended to the salient-pole case. With each of the component 
currents Id and I,, we associated component synchronous-reactance voltage 
drops, jI&, and j&xq respectively. The direct-axis synchronous reactance xd and 
the quadrature-axis synchronous reactance x, are given by 
xr/ = x, + x&j 
x = x/ + X@, 
Y 
where xI is the armature leakage reactance and is assumed to be the same for 
direct-axis and quadrature-axis currents. The direct-axis and quadrature-axis 
magnetizing reactances xu and x& account for the inductive effects of the 
respective armature-reaction flux. 
Figure 3.19 shows a phasor diagram 
implementing the result. 
E ,  = V, + Iara + jIdxd + jI,xd 
(3.21) 
In many instances, the power factor angle 4 at the machine terminals is 
explicitly known rather than the internal power factor angle (4 + 4, which is 
required for the resolution of I, into its direct-axis and quadrature-axis 
components. We can avoid this difficulty by recalling that in phasor notation, 
I, =I +I, 
(3.22) 
Y 
Substitution of Eq. (3.22) into Eq. (3.21) for I, and rearranging, we 
obtain 
E ,  =Vt+Ia(ra+jxq)+ jZd(xd - x q )  
Let us define 
E> = + Ia(ro + j x , )  
(3.23) 
(3.24) 
E; as defined is in the same direction as Efsince jTd is also along the same 

Power Generation and the Synchronous Machine 
89 
Id 
Ia 
Figure 3.19 Phasor Diagram for a Synchronous Machine. 
I d  
Figure 3.20 A Modified Phasor Diagram for a Salient-Pole Synchronous Machine. 
angle. 
direction. Our procedure then is to obtain E> as given by Eq. (3.24) and then 
obtain the component Id based on the phase angle of E> . Finally, we find .El as 
a result of 
E ,  = E; + j / , ( X d  
- x q )  
(3.25) 
This is shown in Figure 3.20. 
Example 3.5 
A 5-kVA, 220-V, Y-connected, three-phase, salient-pole synchronous generator 
is used to supply power to a unity PF load. The direct-axis synchronous 
reactance is 12 ohms and the quadrature-axis synchronous reactance is 7 ohms. 
Assume that rated current is delivered to the load at rated voltage and that 

90 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
armature resistance is negligible. Compute the excitation voltage and power 
angle 
Solution 
V, = 127.02 V 
I ,  =-- 5x103 -13.12A 
220J5 
We calculate 
E;. = V, + jI,xL, 
=127.02+ j(l3.12)(7)=156.75L35.87" 
Moreover, 
I ,  = I, sin 35.87 = 7.69 A 
( E t  I = (p; I + 11, ( X d  - xq)( 
= 156.75+7.69(12-7)=195.2OV 
6 = 35.87" 
The following script uses MATLABTM 
to solve Example 3.5. 
% Example 3.5 
% A 5 kVA, 220 Volts, Y connected, 3 
phase, 
% salient pole synchronous generator 
PF=1; 
UL=220; % Volts 
xd=12 ; 
xq=7 ; 
P=5*10A3; % VA 
Ut=UL/3^.5; 
I ~ = P /  
( v L * ~ ~ .  
5 )  
% We calculate 
Ef-prime=Vt+i*Ia*xq; 
abs (Ef-prime) 
angle (Efsrime) 
*180/pi 
Id=Ia*sin (angle (Ef-prime) ) ; 
Ef=abs(Ef-prime)+abs(Id*(xd-xq)) 
delta=angle(Ef_prime)*18O/pi 

Power Generation and the Synchronous Machine 
91 
The solution is 
EDU>> 
Ia = 1 3 . 1 2 1 6  
ans = 1 5 6 . 7 4 8 1  
ans = 3 5 . 8 7 2 2  
delta =35.8722 
E f  = 1 9 5 . 1 9 3 1  
3.8 
SALIENT-POLE MACHINE POWER ANGLE 
CHA RA CTERlS TICS 
The power angle characteristics for a salient-pole machine connected to 
an infinite bus of voltage V through a series reactance of x, can be arrived at by 
considering the phasor diagram shown in Figure 3.21. 
The active power 
delivered to the bus is 
(3.26) 
P = (I, sin 6 + I ,  cos S)V 
Similarly, the delivered reactive power Q is 
Q = (I, cos 6 - I ,  sin S)V 
(3.27) 
To eliminate 1, and I,, we need the following identities obtained from inspection 
of the phasor diagram: 
E f  - V C O S ~  
I, = 
X d  
(3.28) 
(3.29) 
where 
x, = Xd + x, 
(3.30) 
x 
q = x q + x ,  
(3.31) 
Substitution of Eqs. (3.28) and (3.29) into Eqs. (3.26) and (3.27) yields 
equations that contain six quantities - the two variables P and 6and the four 
parameters Eb V, Xd, and X, - and can be written in many different ways. The 
following form illustrates the effect of saliency. Define Pd and Qd as 

92 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Y 
JIdXe 
Figure 3.21 A Salient-Pole Machine Connected to an Infinite Bus through an External impedance 
Figure 3.22 Power Angle Characteristics ofa Saiient-Pole Synchronous Machine. 
and 
VEf 
V 2  
Q d  =-COS6-- 
X d  
X d  
(3.32) 
(3.33) 
The above equations give the active and reactive power generated by a round 
rotor machine with synchronous reactance X',. We thus have 
(3.34) 
(3.35) 
The second term in the preceding two equations introduces the effect of 

Power Generation and the Synchronous Machine 
93 
salient poles, and in the power equation the term corresponds to reluctance 
torque. Note that if X, = X,, as in a uniform air-gap machine, the second terms 
in both equations are zero. Figure 3.22 shows the power angle characteristics of 
a typical salient-pole machine. 
The pull-out power and power angle Gfor the salient-pole machine can 
be obtained by solving equation (3.36) requiring the partial derivative of P with 
respect to 6to be equal to zero. 
(3.36) 
The actual value of pull-out power can be shown to be higher than that obtained 
assuming nonsaliency. 
Example 3.6 
A salient-pole synchronous machine is connected to an infinite bus through a 
link with reactance of 0.2 p.u. The direct-axis and quadrature-axis reactances of 
the machine are 0.9 and 0.65 p . ~ . ,  respectively. The excitation voltage is 1.3 
P.u., and the voltage of the infinite bus is maintained at 1 p.u. For a power angle 
of 30°, compute the active and reactive power supplied to the bus. 
Solution 
We calculate Xd and X, as 
X ,  = x d + x ,  =0.9+0.2=1.1 
X ,  = x, + x, = 0.65 + 0.2 = 0.85 
Therefore, 
= 0.7067 P.U. 
Similarly, the reactive power is obtained using Eq. (3.32) as: 
(1.3)(1) cos30" 
cos2 30" 
sin2 30" 
( 
1.1 +-) 
0.85 
Q=- 
1.1 
= 0.0475 PA. 
PROBLEMS 
Problem 3.1 
A 5-k VA, 220-V, 60-Hz, six-pole, Y-connected synchronous generator has a 
leakage reactance per phase of 0.78 ohms and negligible armature resistance. 
The armature-reaction EMF for this machine is related to the armature current 

94 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
E,, = -j16.88(1,) 
Assume that the generated EMF is related to field current by 
A. Compute the field current required to establish rated voltage across 
the terminals of a unity power factor load that draws rated 
generator armature current. 
B. Determine the field current needed to provide rated terminal 
voltage to a load that draws 125 percent of rated current at 0.8 PF 
lagging. 
Problem 3.2 
A 9375 kVA, 13,800 kV, 60 Hz, two pole, Y-connected synchronous generator 
is delivering rated current at rated voltage and unity PF. Find the armature 
resistance and synchronous reactance given that the field excitation voltage is 
11935.44 V and leads the terminal voltage by an angle 47.96". 
Problem 3.3 
The magnitude of the field excitation voltage for the generator of Problem (3.2) 
is maintained constant at the value specified above. Find the terminal voltage 
when the generator is delivering rated current at 0.8 PF lagging. 
Problem 3.4 
A 180 kVA, three-phase, Y-connected, 440 V, 60 Hz synchronous generator has 
a synchronous reactance of 1.6 ohms and a negligible armature resistance. Find 
the full load generated voltage per phase at 0.8 PF lagging. 
Problem 3.5 
The synchronous reactance of a cylindrical rotor synchronous generator is 0.9 
p.u. If the machine is delivering active power of 1 p.u. to an infinite bus whose 
voltage is 1 p.u. at unity PF, calculate the excitation voltage and the power 
angle. 
Problem 3.6 
The synchronous reactance of a cylindrical rotor machine is 1.2 p.u. 
The 
machine is connected to an infinite bus whose voltage is 1 p.u. through an 
equivalent reactance of 0.3 p.u. For a power output of 0.7 P.u., the power angle 
is found to be 30". 
A. Find the excitation voltage E'and the pull-out power. 
B. For the same power output the power angle is to be reduced to 25". 
Find the value of the reduced equivalent reactance connecting the 
machine to the bus to achieve this. What would be the new pull- 

Power Generation and the Synchronous Machine 
95 
out power? 
Problem 3.7 
Solve Problem 3.5 using MATLABTM 
Problem 3.8 
A cylindrical rotor machine is delivering active power of 0.8 p.u. and reactive 
power of 0.6 p.u. at a terminal voltage of 1 p.u. If the power angle is 20", 
compute the excitation voltage and the machine's synchronous reactance. 
Problem 3.9 
A cylindrical rotor machine is delivering active power of 0.8 p.u. and reactive 
power of 0.6 p.u. when the excitation voltage is I .2 p.u. and the power angle is 
25". Find the terminal voltage and synchronous reactance of the machine. 
Problem 3.10 
A cylindrical rotor machine is supplying a load of 0.8 PF lagging at an infinite 
bus. The ratio of the excitation voltage to the infinite bus voltage is found to be 
1.25. Compute the power angle 6. 
Problem 3.11 
The synchronous reactance of a cylindrical rotor machine is 0.8 p.u. 
The 
machine is connected to an infinite bus through two parallel identical 
transmission links with reactance of 0.4 p.u. each. The excitation voltage is 1.4 
p.u. and the machine is supplying a load of 0.8 p.u. 
A. Compute the power angle Gfor the outlined conditions. 
B. If one link is opened with the excitation voltage maintained at 1.4 
p.u. Find the new power angle to supply the same load as in (a). 
Problem 3.12 
The synchronous reactance of a cylindrical rotor generator is 1 p.u. and its 
terminal voltage is 1 p.u. when connected to an infmite bus through a reactance 
0.4 p.u. Find the minimum permissible output vars for zero output active power 
and unity output active power. 
Problem 3.13 
The apparent power delivered by a cylindrical rotor synchronous machine to an 
infinite bus is 1.2 p.u. The excitation voltage is 1.3 p.u. and the power angle is 
20". Compute the synchronous reactance of the machine, given that the infinite 
bus voltage is 1 p.u. 
Problem 3.14 
The synchronous reactance of a cylindrical rotor machine is 0.9 p.u. 
The 
machine is connected to an infinite bus through two parallel identical 
transmission links with reactance of 0.6 p.u. each. The excitation voltage is 1.5 
P.u., and the machine is supplying a load of 0.8 p.u. 

96 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Condition A 
Condition B 
Condition C 
A. Compute the power angle Gfor the given conditions. 
B. If one link is opened with the excitation voltage maintained at 1.5 
P.u., find the new power angle to supply the same load as in part 
( 4 .  
P 
Q2 
E 
s 
? 
0.0 
1.12 
? 
2.25 
0 .o 
? 
? 
? 
? 
I .25 
17.5" 
Problem 3.15 
A round rotor synchronous machine is connected to an infinite bus whose 
voltage is kept constant at 1 .OO p.u. The synchronous reactance of the machine 
is 0.375. The table given below relates to three operating conditions of the 
machine. (Q2 is the reactive power at machine terminals) Complete the table 
neglecting armature reaction. 
Problem 3.16 
The reactances xd and xq of a salient-pole synchronous generator are 0.95 and 0.7 
per unit, respectively. The armature resistance is negligible. The generator 
delivers rated kVA at unity PF and rated terminal voltage. 
Calculate the 
excitation voltage. 
Problem 3.17 
The machine of Problem 3.16 is connected to an infinite bus through a link with 
reactance of 0.2 p.u. The excitation voltage is 1.3 p.u. and the infinite bus 
voltage is maintained at 1 p.u. For a power angle of 25", compute the active and 
reactive power supplied to the bus. 
Problem 3.18 
A salient pole machine supplies a load of 1.2 p.u. at unity power factor to an 
infinite bus whose voltage is maintained at 1.05 p.u. The machine excitation 
voltage is computed to be 1.4 p.u. when the power angle is 25". Evaluate the 
direct-axis and quadrature-axis synchronous reactances. 
Problem 3.19 
Solve Problem 3.18 using MATLABTM. 
Problem 3.20 
The reactances xd and xy of a salient-pole synchronous generator are 1 .OO and 0.6 
per unit respectively. The excitation voltage is 1.77 p.u. and the infinite bus 
voltage is maintained at 1 p.u. For a power angle of 19.4", compute the active 
and reactive power supplied to the bus. 
Problem 3.21 
For the machine of Problem 3.18, assume that the active power supplied to the 
bus is 0.8 p.u. compute the power angle and the reactive power supplied to the 

Power Generation and the Synchronous Machine 
P 
Condition A 
? 
97 
Q2 
E 
s 
? 
1.3 
40" 
bus. (Hint: assume cos 8~ 1 for an approximation). 
Problem 3.22 
A salient-pole synchronous machine is connected to an infinite bus whose 
voltage is kept constant at 1.05 p.u. The direct axis reactance of the machine is 
0.95 p.u. and the quadrature axis reactance is 0.4 p.u. respectively. Neglect 
armature reaction. The table given relates to two operating conditions of the 
machine. Complete the table. 

Chapter 4 
THE TRANSFORMER 
4.1 
INTRODUCTION 
The transformer is a valuable apparatus in electrical power systems, for 
it enables us to utilize different voltage levels across the system for the most 
economical value. Generation of power at the synchronous machine level is 
normally at a relatively low voltage, typically 20 kV, which is most desirable 
economically. Stepping up of this generated voltage to high voltage, extra-high 
voltage, or even to ultra-high voltage is done through power transformers to suit 
the power transmission requirement to minimize losses and increase the 
transmission capacity of the lines. This transmission voltage level, typically 
ranging from 115 to 750 kV, is then stepped down in many stages for 
distribution and utilization purposes in the range of 115/230 v for home use to 
13,200 v in large industrial equipment. 
4.2 
GENERAL THEORY OF TRANSFORMER OPERATION 
A transformer contains two or more windings linked by a mutual field. 
The primary winding is connected to an alternating voltage source, which results 
in the flow of an alternating flux whose magnitude depends on the voltage and 
number of turns of the primary winding. 
The alternating flux links the 
secondary winding and induces a voltage in it with a value that depends on the 
number of turns of the secondary winding. The operation of the transformer 
depends on Faraday’s voltage law and Ampere’s law. If the primary voltage is 
vI, the core flux 4 is established such that the counter EMF e equals the 
impressed voltage (neglecting winding resistance). Thus, 
v, = el = N ,  (5) 
(4.1) 
Here N I  is the number of turns of the primary winding. The EMF e2 is induced 
in the secondary by the alternating core flux 4 
Taking the ratio of Eqs. (4.1) to (4.2), we obtain 
Introduction to Electrical Power Engineering. By Mohamed E. El-Hawary 
Copyright 0 
2008 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. 
(4.3) 
99 

100 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Neglecting losses, the instantaneous power is equal on both sides of the 
transformer, as shown below: 
vli, = v2i2 
Combining Eqs. (4.3) and (4.4), we get 
(4.4) 
(4.5) 
Thus the current ratio is the inverse of the voltage ratio. We can conclude that 
almost any desired voltage ratio, or ratio of transformation, can be obtained by 
adjusting the number of turns of the transformer winding. 
Transformer action requires a flux to link the two windings. This will 
be obtained more effectively if an iron core is used because an iron core 
confines the flux to a definite path linking both windings. A magnetic material 
such as iron undergoes a loss of energy due to the application of alternating 
voltage to its B-H loop. The losses are composed of two parts. The first is 
called the eddy-current loss, and the second is the hysteresis loss. Eddy-current 
loss is basically an 12R loss due to the induced currents in the magnetic material. 
To reduce these losses, the magnetic circuit is usually made of a stack of thin 
iron-alloy laminations. Hysteresis loss is caused by the energy used in orienting 
the magnetic domains of the material along the field. The loss depends on the 
material used. 
Two types of construction are used, as shown in Figure 4.1. The first is 
called the core type, which is a single ring encircled by one or more groups of 
windings. The mean length of the magnetic circuit for this type is long, 
Figure 4.1 (A) Core-Type and (B) Shell-Type Transformer Construction 

The Transformer 
101 
9) 
Figure 4.2 Transformer on No-Load. 
whereas the mean length of windings is short. The reverse is true for the shell 
ype, where the magnetic circuit encloses the windings. 
Due to the nonlinearity of the B-H curve of the magnetic material, the 
primary current on no-load (for illustration purposes) will not be a sinusoid but 
rather a certain distorted version, which is still periodic. For analysis purposes, 
a Fourier analysis shows that the fundamental component is out of phase with 
the applied voltage. This fundamental primary current is basically made of two 
components. The first is in phase with the voltage and is attributed to the active 
power taken by eddy-current and hysteresis losses and is called the core-loss 
component I, of the exciting current I, The current component that lags e by 90" 
is called the magnetizing current I,. 
Higher harmonics are neglected. Figure 
4.2 shows the no-load phasor diagram for a single-phase transformer. 
Consider an ideal transformer (with negligible winding resistances and 
reactances and no exciting losses) connected to a load as shown in Figure 4.3. 
Clearly Eqs. (4.1)-(4.5) apply. 
The dot markings indicate terminals of 
corresponding polarity in the sense that both windings encircle the core in the 
same direction if we begin at the dots. Thus comparing the voltage of the two 
windings shows that the voltages from a dot-marked terminal to an unmarked 
terminal will be of the same polarity for the primary and secondary windings 
(i.e., vI and 
are in phase). From Eqs. (4.3) and (4.5) we can write for 
sinusoidal steady state operation 

102 
But the load impedance Z2 is 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Thus, 
The result is that Z2 can be replaced by an equivalent impedance Z; in the 
primary circuit. Thus, 
(4.6) 
The equivalence is shown in Figure 4.3. 
Representations of the transformer that are more realistic must account 
for winding parameters as well as the exciting current. The equivalent circuit of 
the transformer can be visualized by following the chain of events as we proceed 
:i:i 
2 ,  (":)7 - = z; 
b 
(D) 
Figure 4.3 Ideal Transformer and Load and Three Equivalent Representations. 

The Transformer 
103 
from the primary winding to the secondary winding in Figure 4.4. First the 
impressed voltage Vl will be reduced by a drop llRl due to the primary winding 
resistance as well as a dropjllXI due to the primary leakage represented by the 
inductive reactance XI. The resulting voltage is denoted El. The current I ,  will 
supply the exciting current I, as well as the current I ; ,  which will be 
transformed through to the secondary winding. Thus 
I ,  = I ,  + 1; 
Since I, has two components (I, in phase with El and I, lagging El by 90°), we 
can model its effect by the parallel combination of the elements G, and B, as 
shown in the circuit. Next El and I I  are transformed by an ideal transformer 
with turns ratio NIIN2. As a result, E2 and l2 emerge on the secondary side. E2 
undergoes drops I;R2 and j I ; X 2  in the secondary winding to result in the 
terminal voltage V,. 
Figure 4.4(B) shows the transformer’s equivalent circuit in terms of 
variables referred to the primary. This circuit is called “circuit referred to the 
primary side.” Note that 
v; =-(v,) 
Nl 
N2 
1; =-(z2) 
N2 
Nl 
2 
2 
x; =x*[%) 
(4.7) 
(4.9) 
(4.10) 
Although the equivalent circuit illustrated above is simply a T-network, 
it is customary to use approximate circuits such as shown in Figure 4.5. In the 
first two circuits we move the shunt branch either to the secondary or primary 
sides to form inverted L-circuits. Further simplifications are shown where the 
shunt branch is neglected in Figure 4.5(C) and finally with the resistances 
neglected in Figure 4.5(D). These last two circuits are of sufficient accuracy in 
most power system applications. In Figure 4.5 note that 

104 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 4.4 Equivalent Circuits of Transformer. 
x"q 
0 
mr- 
0 
t.; 
- 
+t 
I,= 1; 
-t, 
v1 
v2 
(0) 
Figure 4.5 Approximate Equivalent Circuits for the Transformer. 

The Transformer 
Re, = R, + R; 
x,, = x, + x; 
10s 
Example 4.1 
A 100-kVA, 400/2000 V, single-phase transformer has the following parameters 
R1 = 0.0 1 
XI = 0.03 ohms X ,  = 0.75 ohms 
G,.=2.2 mS 
B,,=6.7 mS 
R2 = 0.25 ohms 
Note that G,. and B, are given in terms of primary reference. The transformer 
supplies a load of 90 kVA at 2000 V and 0.8 PF lagging. Calculate the primary 
voltage and current using the equivalent circuits shown in Figure 4.5. Verify 
your solution using MATLABTM. 
Solution 
Let us refer all the data to the primary (400 V) side: 
RI = 0.01 ohm 
X ,  = 0.03 ohms 
= 0.0 1 ohms 
= 0.03 ohm 
Thus, the equivalent series resistance Re, and series reactance Xcq are 
Re, = R, + R; 
x,, = x, + x; 
= 0.02 ohm 
= 0.06 ohm 
The voltage V2 = 2000 V; thus 
V; = 2000(400) = 400 V 
2000 
The current 1; is obtained from the VA rating and voltage as: 
The power factor of 0.8 lagging implies that 
I ;  = 2251 - 36.87" A 

106 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
For ease of computation, we start with the simplest circuit of Figure 
4 3 D ) .  Let us denote the primary voltage calculated through this circuit by Vid . 
It is clear then that 
FCi = V; + jG (xeq 
1 
= 400LO+ j(225L -36.87Ok0.06) 
Thus, 
qcf = 408.24311.5 16" V 
I ] ,  = 225L - 36.87" A 
Comparing circuits (C) and (D) in Figure 4.5, we deduce that 
vIc = V; + 1; kq 
+ jxeq 
) = ~1~~ + 1; kq 
1 
Thus, 
V, = 408.24311.5 16" + (2251 - 36.8710.04) 
= 41 1.78L1.127" V 
I1 = 1; = 2251 - 36.87" A 
Let us consider circuit (A) in Figure 4.5. We can see that 
V, =V, =411.78Ll.l27"V 
But 
I ,  = I ;  +(G, + jBrn)V," 
= 2251 - 36.87" + ( 2 . 2 ~  - j 6 . 7 ~  141 1.7811.127) 
=227.418L-37.277" A 
Circuit (B) is a bit different since we start with V; impressed on the 
shunt branch. Thus, 
Iih = I; + (G, + jBrn)V; 
=2251-36.87" + ( 2 . 2 ~ l O - ~  
- j6.7~10-~)(400LO) 
= 227.37L - 37.277" 
Now 

The Transformer 
107 
% Example 4-1 
% To enter the data 
R1=0.01; 
X1=0.03 ; 
Gc=2.2*10A(-3); 
R2=0.25 ; 
x2=0.75; 
Bm= - 6 .7 * l o A  ( - 3 
) ; 
v2=2000; 
N1=400; 
N2=2000 ; 
pf = O  .8 ; 
S=9O*1OA3; 
% To refer all the data to the primary 
side 
R2_prime=R2* (Nl/N2) 
^2; 
X2grime=X2* (Nl/N2) 
*2; 
Req=Rl+R2grime; 
~eq=Xl+X2_prirne; 
%The voltage V2=2000 V; thus 
V2_prime=V2* (Nl/N2) ; 
% To find 12' complex 
% Power factor of 0.8 lagging 
theta=acos (pf) ; 
theta_deg=theta*180/pi; 
12_prime=abs (S/V2grime) ; 
12 primecom=I2jrime* (cos 
( -  
theta) +i*sin(-theta) ; 
12srimearg=-theta_deg; 
% From the figure 5-5(d). The primary 
voltage Vld is 
Vld=V2_prime+i*I2_primecom*Xeq; 
delta=angle (Vld) ; 
delta - deg=delta*180/pi; 
Ild=I2_primecom; 
% Comparing circuit ( c )  and (d) in 
figure 4.5 we have 
Vlc _ compl=V2_prime+I2~rimecom* 
(Req+i*X 
Vlc mod=abs (Vlc-compl) ; 
VlcIarg=angle (vlc-compl) ; 
eq) ; 

108 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
MATLABTM con’t. 
Vlc - argdeg=Vlc_arg*180/pi; 
Ilc=I2--primecom; 
% Consider to the circuit (a) in figure 
4.5 
Vla-compl=Vlc-compl; 
Ila~compl=I2~primecom+(Gc+i*Bm)*Vla~com 
pl; 
Ila-mod=abs(Ila-compl); 
Ila-arg=angle(Ila-compl); 
Ila argdeg=Ila_arg*l80/pi; 
% Consider to the circuit (b) in figure 
4.5 
Ilb~compl=I2~primecom+(Gc+i*Bm)*V2 
- prim 
Ilb - mod=abs(Ilb-compl); 
Ilb-arg=angle (Ilb-compl) ; 
Ilb argdeg=Ilb_arg*l80/pi; 
V1 b-comp 
- 
1 =V2_pr ime + I 1 b-comp 1 * ( Req+ i * Xeq 
1 ;  
Vlb mod=abs (Vlb-compl) ; 
Vlb-arg=angle (Vlb-compl) ; 
VlbIargdeg=Vlb_arg*l8 
0 /pi ; 
% The exact equivalent circuit is now 
considered 
% as shown in Figure 4.4 (b. First we 
calculate El 
El~compl=V2~prime+I2~primecom* 
(R23rime 
+i*X2_prime) ; 
El mod=abs (El-compl) ; 
ElIarg=angle (El-compl) ; 
El - argdeg=El_arg*l80/pi; 
% Now we calculate I1 
Il~compl=I2~primecom+El~compl*(Gc+i*Bm) 
11-mod=abs(Il-compl) 
e; 
Il-arg=angle (11-compl) ; 
I1 - argdeg=Il_arg*18O/pi 
% Thus, we have 
V1 compl=El-compl+Il-compl* (Rl+i*Xl) 
VlImod=abs (Vl-compl ) 
V1 arg=angle (Vl-compl) ; 
Vl-argdeg=Vl-arg*l80/pi 
- 

The Transformer 
109 
The solution is 
EDU>> 
11-compl = 1.8092et002 - 1.3771e+002i 
I1 - mod = 227.3679 
11-argdeg = -37.2772 
Vl-compl = 4.1179e+002 + 8.1005e+0001 
V1 - mod = 411.8702 
Vl-argdeg = 1.1269 
Transformer Performance Measures 
Two important performance measures are of interest when selecting 
transformers. These are the voltage regulation and efficiency of the transformer. 
The voltage regulation measures the variation in the secondary voltage when the 
load is varied from zero to rated value at a constant power factor. The 
percentage voltage regulation (P.V.R) is thus given by 
(4.11) 
If we neglect the exciting current and refer the equivalent circuit to the 
secondary side, we have by inspection of Figure 4.6, 
(:) 
- Iv2 I 
P.V.R. = 100 
Iv2 I 
where a is the transformer ratio: 
From the phasor diagram we have approximately in terms of transformer 
constants: 

110 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
I 
- 1  
Figure 4.6 
Voltage Regulation Derivation. 
Transformer Approximate Equivalent Circuit and Associated Phasor Diagrams for 
The efficiency of the transformer is the ratio of output (secondary) 
power to the input (primary) power. Formally the efficiency is 7: 
(4.13) 
Let 1,. be the load current. The input power is the sum of output power P2 and 
losses P,. 
The power loss in the transformer is made of two parts: the 12R loss and the core 
loss P,. 
As a result, the efficiency is obtained as: 

The Transformer 
111 
(4.14) 
The following example utilizes results of Example 4.1 to illustrate the 
computations involved in evaluating the efficiency. 
Example 4.2 
Find the P.V.R. and efficiency for the transformer of Example 4.1. 
Solution 
Let us apply the basic formula of Eq. (4.12). We have from Example 4.1 : 
v2 =2ooov 
IL, =45A 
Reg, = 0.02( =) 
2000 
= 0.5 ohm 
Thus substituting in Eq. (4.12), we get 
45[0.5(0.8) + 1.5(0.6)] 
1 45[1.5(0.8) - 0.5(0.6)] 
{ 
2000 
+-[ 
2 
2000 
P.V.R. = 100 
= 2.9455 percent 
To calculate the efficiency of the transformer, we need only to apply 
the basic definition. Take the results of the exact circuit. The input power is 
4 = v,z, cos4 
= (41 1.77)(227.418)(cos38.404) 
= 73,385.66 W 
P2 = v21, COS(b2 
= 9 0 ~ 1 0 ~  
~ 0 . 8  
= 72,000 W 
Thus, 
72’000 = 0.98 I 12 
17= 73,385.66 
The efficiency of a transformer varies with the load current I,,. It 

112 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
attains a maximum when 
The maximum efficiency can be shown to occur for 
That is, when the r2R losses equal the core losses, maximum efficiency is 
attained. 
Example 4.3 
Find the maximum efficiency of the transformer of Example 4.1 under the same 
power factor and voltage conditions. 
Solution 
We need first the core losses. These are obtained from the exact equivalent 
circuit of Figure 4.4 
El = V; + /;[I?; + j X ; ]  
= 400 + 2251 -36.87(0.01+ j0.03) 
= 405.87L0.57174" 
e, = 14 l2 (Gc) 
= (405.87)2(2.2x 
= 362.407 W 
For maximum efficiency, 
Referred to the primary, we thus have 
362.407 = /:(0.02) 
Thus for maximum efficiency, 

The Transformer 
I,, = 134.612 A 
q/,lcos h 
71Ilm = v;I/,IcOs(b, +2p, 
- 
(400)(134.6 12)(0.8) 
= 0.98345 
- 
(400)(134.612)(0.8) + 2(362.407) 
113 
4.3 
TRANSFORMER CONNECTIONS 
Single-phase transformers can be connected many ways. To start with, 
consider two single-phase transformers A and B. They can be connected in four 
different combinations provided that the polarities are observed. Figure 4.7 
illustrates a series-series connection where the primaries of the two transformers 
are connected in series whereas the secondaries are connected in series. Figure 
4.8 illustrates the series-parallel connection and the parallel-series connection. 
Note that when windings are connected in parallel, those having the same 
voltage and polarity are paralleled. When connected in series, windings of 
opposite polarity are joined in one junction. Coils of unequal voltage ratings 
may be series-connected with polarities either aiding or opposing. 
(A) 
"1 
N11, 
N2" 
(6) 
Figure 4.7 Two Transforniers with Primaries in Series and Secondaries in Series. (A) Connection 
Diagram, and (B) Exact Equivalent Circuit. 

114 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Transformer A 
Transformer A 
Transioriner B 
(B) 
Figure 4.8 Series-Parallel and Parallel-Series Connections for Single-Phase Transformers 
Three-Winding Transformers 
In many parts of the power system, the three winding transformer is 
used. The three windings are housed on a common core to achieve economic 
savings 
Figure 4.9 shows a three-winding transformer with a practical 
equivalent circuit. The impedances Z,, Z2, and Z; are calculated from the three 
impedances obtained by considering each pair of windings separately with 
2, = z12 
+z13 
-z23 
2 
4
2
 + 2 2 3  - 2 1 3  
z, 
= 
2 
'I3 
"23 
-'I2 
2 
z3 = 
(4.16) 
(4.17) 
(4.18) 

The Transformer 
115 
3 
+ t  
I 
VS 
- I 
0 
0 
Figure 4.9 Three- Winding Transformer and Its Practical Equivalent Circuit. 
The I’R or load loss for a three-winding transformer can be obtained from 
analysis of the equivalent circuit shown. 
The Autotransformer 
The basic idea of the autotransformer is permitting the interconnection 
of the windings electrically. Figure 4.10 shows a two-winding transformer 
connected in an autotransformer step-up configuration. We will assume that 
each winding will have the same voltage per turn, i.e., 
The rating of the transformer when connected in a two-winding configuration is 
In the configuration chosen, the apparent power into the load is given by 
= V , l ,  1+’ 
The input apparent power is 
s, = c; ( I ,  + I ,  ) 
(4.20) 
Thus the rating of the autotransformer is higher than the original rating of the 
two-winding configuration. Note that in both configurations, the same current 
passes in each winding, and as a result the losses remain the same. Due to the 
increased power rating, the efficiency is thus improved. 

116 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Autotransformers are generally used when the transformation ratio is 
3:1 or less. Two disadvantages of the autotransformer are the lack of electric 
isolation between primary and secondary and the increased short-circuit current 
over that of the corresponding two-winding configuration. 
Example 4.4 
A 50-kVA, 2.410.6-kV transformer is connected as a step-up autotransformer 
from a 2.4-kV supply. Calculate the currents in each part of the transformer and 
the load rating. Neglect losses. Verify your solution using MATLABTM. 
Solution 
With reference to Figure 4.10, the primary winding rated current is 
50 
2.4 
1, = - 
= 20.83 A 
The secondary rated current is 
50 
0.6 
I, =-=83.33A 
Thus the load current is 
I ,  =83.33A 
The load voltage is 
v, = r;, + r/, = 3 kV 
As a result, the load rating is 
S ,  = Vl,Il, = 250 kVA 
Note that 
Figure 4. I0 Step-up Autotransformer 

The Transformer 
EDU>> 
I1 = 12.5000 
I2 = 50 
IL = 50 
VL = 3 
i SL = 150 
117 
I, = I ,  +I, 
=104.16A 
V, =V, =2.4kV 
Thus, 
S, = (2.4)(104.16) = 150 kVA 
A MATLABTM script implementing Example 4.4 is shown here 
% Example 4-4 
% Autotransformer 
KVA= 3 0 ; 
KVp=2.4 ; 
KVS=O. 
6 ; 
% The primary winding rated current is 
% The secondary rated current is 
12=KVA/KVS 
% The load current is 
IL=I2 
% the load voltage is 
VL = KVp+KVS 
% The load rating is 
SL=VL*IL 
I~=KVA/KV~ 
The solution is obtained as 
Three-Phase Transformer Connections 
For three-phase system applications it is possible to install three-phase 
transformer units or banks made of three single-phase transformers connected in 
the desired three-phase configurations. The latter arrangement is advantageous 
from a reliability standpoint since it allows installing a single standby single- 

118 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
phase transformer instead of a three-phase unit. This provides a considerable 
cost saving. We have seen that there are two possible three-phase connections; 
the Y-connection and the A-connection. 
We thus see that three-phase 
transformers can be connected in four different ways. In the YIY connection, 
both primary and secondary windings are connected in Y. In addition, we have 
NA, YIA, or N Y  connections. The Y-connected windings may or may not be 
grounded. 
The YIA configuration is used for stepping down from a high voltage to 
a medium or low voltage. This provides a grounding neutral on the high-voltage 
side. Conversely, the N Y  configuration is used in stepping up to a high voltage. 
The NA connection enables one to remove one transformer for maintenance 
while the other two continue to fbnction as a three-phase bank (with reduced 
rating) in an open-delta or V-connection. 
The difficulties arising from the 
harmonic contents of the exciting current associated with the YIY connection 
make it seldom used. 
In Figure 4.1 1, the four common three-phase transformer connections 
are shown along with the voltage and current relations associated with the 
transformation. It is important to realize that the line-to-ground voltages on the 
A side lead the corresponding Y-side values by 30" and that the line currents on 
the A side also lead the currents on the Y side by 30". 
Consider the YIA three-phase transformer shown in Figure 4.12. We 
can show that 
That is the A-side line-to-ground secondary voltage V,, leads the Y-side line-to- 
ground primary voltage VA, by 30". 
Turning our attention now to the current relations, we have 
N 
I ,  = 1 & I A L 3 O "  
N2 
Thus the secondary line current leads the primary current by 30". 
Three-phase autotransformers are usually Y-Y connected with the 
neutral grounded. A third (tertiary) A-connected set of windings is included to 
carry the third harmonic component of the exciting current. 
A schematic 
diagram of a three-phase autotransformer with a A-tertiary is shown in Figure 
4.13. 

The Transformer 
I I9 
6 
I 
1 
*-I 
I 
Figure 4.1 I Three-Phase Transfornier Connections 
Control Transformers 
Transformers are used not only to step up or step down bulk power 
voltages but also to control the operations of the power system in terms of 
voltage levels and hence power flow. Two examples of control transformer 
applications involve ( I )  tap changing under load (TCUL) transformers, and (2) 
the regulating transformer. 
Tap Changing under Load 
The TCUL transformer maintains a prescribed voltage at a point in the 
system by changing the transformation ratio by increasing or decreasing the 
number of active turns in one winding with respect to another winding. 'This is 
performed while not interfering with the load. In practice, a voltage measuring 
device actuates the motor that drives the tap changer. If the actual voltage is 
higher than a desired upper limit, the motor will change to the next lower tap 

120 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 4.12 A Y-A Transformer and a Phasor Diagram. 
, 
Figure 4.13 Schematic Diagram o f a  Three-Winding Autotransformer. 

The Transformer 
121 
voltage; similarly, a voltage lower than the desired will cause a change to the 
next higher up. 
The Regulating Transformer 
The regulating transformer changes (by a small amount) the voltage 
magnitude and phase angle at a certain point in the system. Figure 4.14 shows 
the arrangement of a regulating transformer. Assume that: 
van = VLO 
v,, = V L  - 120" 
v,, = V L  + 120' 
The primary windings of the transformers A, B, and C are connected in 
A. The secondary windings 1, 3, and 5 are connected in Y with their voltages 
adjustable. From the phase-shift property in A-Y transformers, we have 
vnl 
V,, = -1150" 
J5 
The magnitude of V,,, can be controlled in a small range and is utilized for 
adjusting the magnitude of the three-phase voltage V,, , Vbe, and V,, . The 
tertiary windings 2,4, and 6 have voltages 
V,, = V,+,L30" 
(4.21) 
V , ,  = V,+,L -90" 
(4.22) 
F k  = VdL150" 
(4.23) 
The magnitude V$ is adjustable and is used for control of the phase angle of the 
voltages Vap, Vbn, and V,, . 
We can derive the voltages vk,, 
v/k, Vml from vk,, V,,, V,,,, as 

122 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 4.14 Schematic of Regulating Transformer 
V,, = V,LO 
V/k = V,, L - 120" 
Vnl/ = T;,,L+ 120" 
Note that Vk,, 
V,k, and Vfn, are in phase with the system voltages V,,, V,,, and 
V,,. The voltages V,, V,,, and V,, are 90" out of phase with the same voltages. 
The incremental voltages AVO, AYb, and AV< are given by 
AV, = V,, 
AV,, = V,, 
AV, = V,, 
or 
AV, = Vt,,, -If,./ = V,,,L + 120" - V,L30' 
(1.26) 
The AV values are added in series in each phase to give 
V,;, = VO, + AVO 
(1.27) 

The Transformer 
123 
Figure 4.15 Output Voltages of Regulating Transformer. 
Vc;, = Vcn + AVc 
(4.29) 
A phasor diagram of the voltages in the system is shown in Figure 4.15. 
PROBLEMS 
Problem 4.1 
A 50-kVA, 400/2000 V, single-phase transformer has the following parameters: 
R1= 0.02 ohm 
Rz = 0.5 ohm 
Xl = 0.06 ohm 
Gc=2mS 
Bm = -6 mS 
X, = 1.5 ohm 
Note that G,. and B, are given in terms of primary reference. The transformer 
supplies a load of 40 kVA at 2000 V and 0.8 PF lagging. Calculate the primary 
voltage and current using the equivalent circuits shown in Figure 4.5 and that of 
Figure 4.4. Verify your solution using MATLABTM. 
Problem 4.2 
Find the P.V.R. and efficiency for the transformer of Problem 4.1 
Problem 4.3 
Find the maximum efficiency of the transformer of Problem 4. I, under the same 
conditions. Verify your solution using MATLABTM. 

124 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Problem 4.4 
The equivalent impedance referred to the primary of a 23001230-V, 500-kVA, 
single-phase transformer is 
Z= 0.2 +j0.6 ohm 
Calculate the percentage voltage regulation (P.V.R.) when the transformer 
delivers rated capacity at 0.8 power factor lagging at rated secondary voltage. 
Find the efficiency of the transformer at this condition given that core losses at 
rated voltage are 2 kW. 
Problem 4.5 
A 500/100 V, two-winding transformer is rated at 5 kVA. 
information is available: 
The following 
A. 
B. 
The maximum efficiency of the transformer occurs when the output 
of the transformer is 3 kVA. 
The transformer draws a current of 3 A, and the power is 100 W 
when a 100-V supply is impressed on the low-voltage winding with 
the high-voltage winding open-circuit. 
Find the rated efficiency of the transformer at 0.8 PF lagging. 
solution using MATLABTM. 
Verify your 
Problem 4.6 
The no-load input power to a 50-kVA, 23001230-V, single-phase transformer is 
200 VA at 0.15 PF at rated voltage. The voltage drops due to resistance and 
leakage reactance are 0.012 and 0.01 8 times rated voltage when the transformer 
is operated at rated load. Calculate the input power and power factor when the 
load is 30 kW at 0.8 PF lagging at rated voltage. Verifj, your solution using 
MATLABTM. 
Problem 4.7 
A 500 KVA, 23001230 V single phase transformer delivers full rated KVA at 
0.8 p.f. lagging to a load at rated secondary voltage. The primary voltage 
magnitude is 2400 V under these conditions and the efficiency is 0.97. Find the 
equivalent circuit parameters of this transformer neglecting the no load circuit. 
Problem 4.8 
Solve Problem 4.7 using MATLABTM for a power factor of 0.7. 
Problem 4.9 
A single phase transformer has a turns ratio of 2: I, and an equivalent reactance 
,Ye, = 4 ohms. The primary voltage is 2020 V at 0.75 p.f. lagging. The voltage 
regulation for this power factor is found to be 0.09, and the efficiency is 95% 
under these conditions. Neglect the no load circuit. 
A. Find the transformer’s equivalent circuit resistance Re, referred to 

The Transformer 
125 
the primary side. 
B. Find the current drawn by the transformer referred to the primary 
side. 
C. If the load power factor is changed to 0.9 lagging with the load's 
active power and voltage magnitude unchanged, find the required 
primary voltage. 
Problem 4.10 
Two 2400/600 V single phase transformers are rated at 300 and 200 KVA 
respectively. Find the rating of the transformers' combination if one uses the 
following connections: 
A. Series-series 
B. Parallel-series 
C. Parallel-parallel 
Problem 4.1 1 
A 30-kVA, 2.410.6-kV transformer is connected as a step-up autotransformer 
from a 2.4-kV supply. Calculate the currents in each part of the transformer and 
the load rating. Neglect losses. 
Problem 4.12 
A three-phase bank of three single-phase transformers steps up the three-phase 
generator voltage of 13.8 kV (line-to-line) to a transmission voltage of 138 kV 
(line-to-line). The generator rating is 83 MVA. Specify the voltage, current and 
kVA ratings of each transformer for the following connections: 
A. Low-voltage windings A, high-voltage windings Y 
B. Low-voltage windings Y, high-voltage windings A 
C. Low-voltage windings Y, high-voltage windings Y 
D. Low-voltage windings A, high-voltage windings A 
Problem 4.1 3 
The load at the secondary end of a transformer consists of two parallel branches: 
Load 1: an impedance Zgiven by 
Z = 0.75145" 
Load 2: inductive load with P = 1 .O PA., and S = 1.5 p.u. 
The load voltage magnitude is an unknown. The transformer is fed by a feeder, 
whose sending end voltage is kept at 1 p.u. Assume that the load voltage is the 
reference. The combined impedance of transformer and feeder is given by: 
Z = 0.02 + jO.08 p.u. 
A. Find the value of the load voltage. 

126 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
B. If the load contains induction motors requiring at least 0.85 p.u. 
voltage to start, will it be possible to start the motors? If not, 
suggest a solution. 
Problem 4.14 
A three phase transformer delivers a load of 66 MW at 0.8 p.f. lagging and 138 
KV (line-to-line). The primary voltage under these conditions is 14.34 KV 
(line-to-line), the apparent power is 86 MVA and the power factor is 0.78 
1 agg ing . 
A. Find the transformer ratio. 
B. Find the series impedance representation of the transformer. 
C. Find the primary voltage when the load is 75 MVA at 0.7 p.f. 
lagging at a voltage of 138 KV. 
Problem 4.15 
A three phase transformer delivers a load of 83 MVA at 0.8 p.f. lagging and 138 
KV (line-to-line). 
The primary voltage under these conditions is 14.34 KV 
(line-to-line), the apparent power is 86 MVA and the power factor is 0.78 
lagging. 
A. Find the transformer ratio. 
B. Find the series impedance representation of the transformer. 
C. Find the primary apparent power and power factor as well as the 
voltage when the load is 75 MVA at 0.7 p.f. lagging at a voltage of 
138 KV. 
Problem 4.16 
A two winding transformer is rated at 50 kVA. The maximum efficiency of the 
transformer occurs when the output of the transformer is 35 kVA. Find the rated 
efficiency of the transformer at 0.8 PF lagging given that the no load losses are 
200 w. 
Problem 4.17 
The no-load input to a 5 kVA, 500/100-V, single-phase transformer is 100 W at 
0.15 PF at rated voltage. The voltage drops due to resistance and leakage 
reactance are 0.01 and 0.02 times the rated voltage when the transformer 
operates at rated load. Calculate the input power and power factor when the 
load is 3 kW at 0.8 PF lagging at rated voltage. 
Problem 4.18 
A 25 kVA, 2200/220 V, 60 Hz, single-phase transformer has the following 
equivalent-circuit parameters referred to the high-voltage side. 
RI = 3.0 R 
x,, 
= 12 R 
R; = 3 . 0 R  
x;, 
= 12 n 

The Transformer 
127 
x, 
= 20,000 R 
R, = 50,000 C2 
The transformer is supplying 17.5 kVA at 220 V and a lagging power factor of 
0.8. Use the equivalent Cantilever model circuit of the transformer shown in 
Figure 4.16. Determine: 
A. The magnitude of the required primary voltage. 
B. The power factor of the primary side, the input kVA, and the efficiency 
of the transformer. 
- 
Figure 4.16 Equivalent Circuit of Transformer for Problem 4.18. 
Problem 4.19 
Consider the circuit of Problem 4.18. 
A. 
B. 
C. 
A short circuit test is conducted on the transformer with 22 volts 
applied to the secondary side with the primary short circuited. 
Determine the readings of the ammeter and wattmeter connected to the 
secondary side for this test. 
An open circuit test is conducted on the transformer with 2200 volts 
applied to the primary side with the secondary side left open. 
Determine the readings of the ammeter and wattmeter connected to the 
primary for this open circuit test. 
The transformer is supplying 15 kVA at 220-V and a lagging power 
factor of 0.85. Determine the primary voltage. 
Problem 4.20 
Consider a three-winding transformer, as shown in Figure 4.9, with the 
following particulars: 
ZI = 0.02 + j0.08 
Z2 = 0.02 + j0.08 
Z, = 0.02 + j0.08 
V, = 400 
I ,  = 601-30” 
I ,  = 501-40” 
Assume that V2 is the reference phasor, calculate: 
A. The intermediate voltage Vo 

128 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
B. The primary current I ,  and the primary voltage VI 
C. The tertiary voltage V3 referred to the primary side 
D. The apparent powers and power factors at the primary, secondary and 
tertiary terminals. 
E. The transformer efficiency. 

Chapter 5 
ELECTRIC POWER TRANSMISSION 
5.1 
INTRODUCTION 
Electric energy is produced at electric power generating stations and 
transported over high-voltage transmission lines to utilization points. The trend 
toward using higher voltages is motivated by the increased line capacity while 
reducing line losses per unit of power transmitted. The reduction in losses is 
significant and is an important aspect of energy conservation. Better use of land 
is a benefit of the larger transmission capacity of the lines. 
This chapter develops a fundamental understanding of modeling the 
performance of electric power transmission systems. 
5.2 
ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION LINE PARAMETERS 
An electric transmission line is modeled using series resistance, series 
inductance, shunt (parallel to ground) capacitance, and shunt conductance. The 
line resistance and inductive reactance are important. For some studies it is 
possible to omit the shunt capacitance and conductance and thus simplify the 
equivalent circuit considerably. 
We deal here with aspects of determining these parameters on the basis 
of line length, type of conductor used, and the spacing of the conductors as they 
are mounted on the supporting structure of the transmission towers. 
A wire or combination of wires not insulated from one another is called 
a conductor. A stranded conductor consists of a group of wires, usually twisted 
or braided together. In a concentrically stranded conductor, each successive 
layer contains six more wires than the preceding one. There are two basic 
constructions: the one-wire core and the three-wire core. 
Types of Conductors and Conductor Materials 
Phase conductors in extra high voltage - ultra high voltage EHV-UHV 
transmission systems employ aluminum conductors and aluminum or steel 
conductors for overhead ground wires. Many types of conductors are available. 
These include: 
A. Aluminum Conductors 
There are five designs: 
1. 
Homogeneous designs: These are denoted as All-Aluminum- 
Conductors (AAC) or All-Aluminum-Alloy Conductors 
(AAAC). 
Introduction to Electrical Power Engineering. By Mohamed E. El-Hawary 
Copyright 0 
2008 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. 
129 

130 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
2. 
Composite designs: 
These are 
essentially 
aluminum- 
conductor-steel-reinforced conductors (ACSR) with steel core 
material. 
3. Expanded ASCR: These use solid aluminum strands with a 
steel core. Expansion is by open helices of aluminum wire, 
flexible concentric tubes, or combinations of aluminum wires 
and fibrous ropes. 
4. 
Aluminum-clad conductor (Alumoweld). 
5. Aluminum-coated conductors. 
B. Steel Conductors 
Galvanized steel conductors with various thicknesses of zinc 
coatings are used. 
Line Resistance 
The resistance of the conductor is the most important cause of power 
loss in a power line. Direct-current resistance is given by the familiar formula: 
PI 
Rd, = -ohms 
A 
where 
p = resistivity of conductor 
I = length 
A = cross-sectional area 
Any consistent set of units may be used in the calculation of resistance. 
In the SI system of units, p is expressed in ohm-meters, length in meters, and 
area in square meters. A system commonly used by power systems engineers 
expresses resistivity in ohms circular mils per foot, length in feet, and area in 
circular mils. 
There are certain limitations in the use of this equation for calculating 
the resistance of transmission line conductors. The following factors need to be 
considered: 
1. Effect of conductor stranding. 
2. 
When ac flows in a conductor, the current is not distributed 
uniformly over the conductor cross-sectional area. This is called 
skin effect and is a result of the nonuniform flux distribution in the 
conductor. This increases the resistance of the conductor. 
3. 
The resistance of magnetic conductors varies with current 
magnitude. 
4. 
In a transmission line there is a nonuniformity of current 
distribution caused by a higher current density in the elements of 
adjacent conductors nearest each other than in the elements farther 

Electric Power Transmission 
131 
apart. The phenomenon is known as proxirnity effect. It is present 
for three-phase as well as single-phase circuits. For the usual 
spacing of overhead lines at 60 Hz, the proximity effect is 
neglected. 
5.3 
LINE INDUCTANCE 
In transmission lines the inductive reactance is by far the most 
dominating impedance element. 
Inductance of a Single-Phase Two-Wire Line 
The inductance of a simple two-wire line consisting of two solid cylindrical 
conductors of radii r i  and r2 shown in Figure 5.1 is considered frst. 
The total inductance of the circuit due to the current in conductor 1 only is given 
by : 
Similarly, the inductance due to the current in conductor 2 is 
(5.1) 
(5.2) 
Thus L ,  and L2 are the phase inductances. For the complete circuit we have 
L, = r, + L, 
(5.3) 
where 
(= 4
1
4
 
= 0.77885 
(5.5) 
I- 
D 
Figure 5.1 Single-Phase Two-Wire Line Configuration. 

132 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
We compensate for the internal flux by using an adjusted value for the radius of 
the conductor. The quantity r’ is commonly referred to as the solid conductor’s 
geometric mean radius (GMR). 
An inductive voltage drop approach can be used to get the same results 
V, =.iw(414 + L I ~ , )  
(5.6) 
where V I  and V2 are the voltage drops per unit length along conductors 1 and 2 
respectively. The self-inductances L I  and L2* correspond to conductor 
geometries: 
The mutual inductance LI2 
corresponds to the conductor separation D. Thus 
Now we have 
I ,  =-I1 
The complete circuit’s voltage drop is 
In terms of the geometric configuration, we have 
AV=V,-V, 
AV = j w ( 2 ~ 1 0 - ~ )  
(5.8) 
(5.9) 
(5.10) 
(5.11) 
Thus 

Electric Power Transmission 
133 
(5.12) 
where 
L, =L,,+L2,-2L,, 
We recognize this as the inductance of two series-connected magnetically 
coupled coils, each with self-inductance LI1 and LZ2, respectively, and having a 
mutual inductance LIZ. 
The phase inductance expressions given in Eqs. (5.1) and (5.2) can be 
obtained from the voltage drop equations as follows: 
However, 
Thus, 
I2 =-I, 
In terms of phase inductance we have 
V, = jwL,I, 
Thus for phase one, 
4 = ( 2 ~ l O - ~ ) l n  henriedmeter 
[:I 
Similarly, for phase two, 
(5.13) 
(5.14) 
Normally, we have identical line conductors. 

134 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
In North American practice, we deal with the inductive reactance of the 
line per phase per mile and use the logarithm to the base 10. Performing this 
conversion, we obtain 
(5.15) 
D 
r 
X = k log, 
ohms per conductor per mile 
where 
k = 4 . 6 5 7 x w 3  f 
= 0.2794 at 60 Hz 
assuming identical line conductors. 
Expanding the logarithm in the expression of Eq. (5.15), we get 
(5.16) 
(5.17) 
The first term is called X, and the second is X,. Thus 
X ,  = k log D inductive reactance spacing 
(5.18) 
factor in ohms per mile 
1 
r 
(5.19) 
X ,  = k log, 
inductive reactance at 1 - ft 
spacing in ohms per mile 
Factors X, and X, may be obtained from tables available in many handbooks. 
Example 5.1 
Find the inductive reactance per mile per phase for a single-phase line with 
phase separation of 25 ft and conductor radius of 0.08 ft. 
Solution 
We first find r’, as follows: 
I 
-114 
r = r e  
= (0.08)(0.7788) 
= 0.0623 ft 
We therefore calculate 

Electric Power Transmission 
135 
1 
0.0623 
X ,  = 0.2794 log- 
= 0.3368 
X ,  = 0.2794 log 25 
= 0.3906 
X = X ,  + X ,  = 0.7274 ohms per mile 
The following MATLABTM script implements Example 5.1 based on Eqs. (5.17) 
to (5.19) 
% Example 5-1 
r=O. 08 
r-prime=0.7788*r 
X a = 0 . 2 7 9 4 * ( l o g 1 0 ( 1 / ( r _ p r i m e ) ) )  
Xb=0.2794* (log10 (D) 
) 
X=Xa+Xb 
D=25 
The answers obtained from MATLABTM are as follows: 
EDU, 
r = 0.0800 
r-prime = 0.0623 
Xa = 0.3368 
D = 2 5  
Xb = 0.3906 
X = 0.7274 
Bundle Conductors 
At voltages above 230 kV (extra high voltage) and with circuits with 
only one conductor per phase, the corona effect becomes more excessive. 
Associated with this phenomenon is a power loss as well as interference with 
communication links. Corona is the direct result of high-voltage gradient at the 
conductor surface. The gradient can be reduced considerably by using more than 
one conductor per phase. The conductors are in close proximity compared with 
the spacing between phases. A line such as this is called a bundle-conductor 
line. The bundle consists of two or more conductors (subconductors) arran'ged 
on the perimeter of a circle called the bundle circle as shown in Figure 5.2. 
Another important advantage of bundling is the attendant reduction in line 
reactances, both series and shunt. The analysis of bundle-conductor lines is a 
specific case of the general multiconductor configuration problem. 

136 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 5.2 Bundle Conductor. 
Figure 5.3 Single-Phase Symmetrical Bundle-Conductor Circuit 
Inductance of a Single-Phase Symmetrical Bundle-Conductor Line 
Consider a symmetrical bundle with N subconductors arranged in a 
The 
circle of radius A. The angle between two subconductors is 2 d N .  
arrangement is shown in Figure 5.3. 
We define the geometric mean distance (GMD) by 
(5.20) 
Let us observe that practically the distances Dl(K+l), 
Dl(v+2), . . . , are all almost 
equal in value to the distance D between the bundle centers. As a result, 
GMD = D 
(5.21) 
Also, define the geometric mean radius as 
(5.22) 
The inductance is then obtained as 

Electric Power Transmission 
137 
(5.23) 
In many instances, the subconductor spacing S in the bundle circle is 
given. It is easy to find the radius A using the formula 
S = ,Asin(;) 
(5.21) 
which is a consequence of the geometry of the bundle as shown in Figure 5.4. 
Example 5.2 
Figure 5.5 shows a 1 000-kv, single-phase, bundle-conductor line with eight 
subconductors per phase. The phase spacing is D, 
= 18 m, and the subconductor 
spacing is S = 50 cm. Each subconductor has a diameter of 5 cm. Calculate the 
line inductance. 
Solution 
We first evaluate the bundle radius A. Thus, 
0.5 = 2Asin(;) 
3
r
 
1-A- 
Figure 5.4 Conductor Geometry. 

138 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 5.5 1000-kV Single-Phase Bundle-Conductor Line 
Therefore, 
A = 0.6533 in 
Assume that the following practical approximation holds: 
G M D = D I = 1 8 m  
The subconductor’s geometric mean radius is 
r,‘= 0.7788( :x 
lo-’) 
= 1.947x10-’ m 
Thus we have 
18 
[(8)(1.947~10-~)(0.6533)~]I’* 
= ( 2  x I o - ~  
)in 
The result of the above calculation is 
L = 6 . 9 9 ~  
lo-’ henriedmeter 

Electric Power Transmission 
139 
The following MATLABTM script implements Example 5.2 based on Eqs. (5.21) 
to (5.24) 
% Example 5-2 
% 
N= 8 
S=O. 5 
d=O. 05 
r=d/2 
r-prime=0.7788*r 
A= ( S / 2 )  /sin(pi/N) 
GMR=(N * r-prime *(A)*(N 
L= 2 * le - 7 * log (GMD/GMR) 
GMD=18 
The answers obtained from MATLABTM are as follows: 
EDU, 
N = 8  
S = 0.5000 
d = 0.0500 
r = 0.0250 
rjrime = 0.0195 
GMD = 18 
A = 0.6533 
GMR = 0.5461 
L = 6.9907e-007 
Inductance of a Balanced Three-Phase Single-Circuit Line 
We consider a three-phase line whose phase conductors have the 
general arrangement shown in Figure 5.6. We use the voltage drop per unit 
length concept. This is a consequence of Faraday’s law. In engineering practice 
we have a preference for this method. In our three-phase system, we can write 
Here we generalize the expressions of Eqs. (5.8) and (5.10) to give 
(5.25) 

140 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 5.6 A Balanced Three-Phase Line. 
(5.26) 
We now substitute for the inductances in the voltage drops equations and use the 
condition of balanced operation to eliminate one current from each equation. 
The result is 
(5.27) 
Here, 
v,‘= 
K 
j ~ ( 2  
x 1 o - ~ )  
We note that for this general case, the voltage drop in phase one, for example, 
depends on the current in phase two in addition to its dependence on I I .  Thus 
the voltage drops will not be part of a balanced three phase system. This 
situation is undesirable. 
Consider the case of equilaterally spaced conductors generally referred 
to as the delta configuration; that is 

Electric Power Transmission 
141 
The voltage drops will thus be given by 
(5.28) 
And in this case the voltage drops will form a balanced three-phase system. 
Consider the so often called H-type configuration. The conductors are 
placed in one horizontal plane as shown in Figure 5.7. The distances between 
conductors are thus 
and the voltage drops are given by 
(5.29) 
We note that only conductor number two has a voltage drop proportional to its 
current. 
1 
2 
3 
Figure 5 7 /
~
D
-
-
D
-
-
c
/
 
H-Type Line. 

142 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
C 
h 
a 
. A  
-I+ 
-
1
1
4
 
r---iII----, 
Figure 5.8 Transposed Line. 
Transposition of Line Conductors 
The equilateral triangular spacing configuration is not the only 
configuration commonly used in practice. Thus the need exists for equalizing 
the mutual inductances. One means for doing this is to construct transpositions 
or rotations of overhead line wires. A transposition is a physical rotation of the 
conductors, arranged so that each conductor is moved to occupy the next 
physical position in a regular sequence such as a-b-c, b-c-a, c-a-b, etc. Such a 
transposition arrangement is shown in Figure 5.8. If a section of line is divided 
into three segments of equal length separated by rotations, we say that the line is 
“completely transposed.” 
Consider a completely transposed three-phase line. 
We can 
demonstrate that by completely transposing a line, the mutual inductance terms 
disappear, and the voltage drops are proportional to the current in each phase. 
Defrne the geometric mean distance GMD as 
and the geometric mean radius GMR as 
(5.30) 
GMR = r’ 
(5.31) 
we attain 

Electric Power Transmission 
143 
L = (2x I O-7)i.( %) 
GMD henrieshneter 
(5.32) 
Example 5.3 
Calculate the inductance per phase of the three-phase solid conductor line shown 
in Figure 5.9. Assume that the conductor diameter is 5 cm and the phase 
separation D, is 8 m. Assume that the line is transposed. 
Figure 5.9 A Three-Phase Line. 
Solution 
The geometric mean distance is given by 
GMD = [D, 
D, ( 2 4  )]1’3 
= 1 .2599D, 
= 10.08 m 
The geometric mean radius is 
114 5x lo-* 
r’=(e- )
,
-
 
L 
= 0.0195 m 
Therefore, 
= 1.25 x 1 0-6 henriedmeter 
Inductance of Multiconductor Three-Phase Systems 
Consider a single-circuit, three-phase system with multiconductor- 
configured phase conductors as shown in Figure 5.10. Assume equal current 

144 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
I 
/ 
/ 
1 
\ 
cn f, 
\ 
\ 
I 
I 
0 . 0  
0 . 0  
I- 
72 fl, -4 
Figure 5.10 Multiconductor Single-Circuit Three-Phase Line. 
distribution in the phase subconductors and complete transposition. We can 
show that the phase inductance for the system is the following expression: 
(5.33) 
In this case, the geometric mean distance is given by 
where DAB, DB(., and D(:4 are the distances between phase centers. 
The 
geometric mean radius (GMR) is obtained using the same expression as that for 
the single-phase system. Thus, 
(5.35) 
For the case of symmetrical bundle conductors, we have 
The inductive reactance per mile per phase XL in the case of a three- 
phase, bundle-conductor line can be obtained using 
x, = x, + x,, 
(5.37) 
where as before for 60 Hz operation, 

Electric Power Transmission 
1 
GMR 
X ,  = 0.2794 log- 
X ,  = 0.2794 log GMD 
145 
(5.38) 
(5.39) 
The GMD and GMR are defined by Eqs. (5.34) and (5.36). 
Example 5.4 
Consider a three-phase line with an eight subconductor-bundle delta 
arrangement with a 42 in. diameter. The subconductors are ACSR 84/19 
(Chukar) with r' = 0.0534 ft. The horizontal phase separation is 75 ft, and the 
vertical separation is 60 ft. Calculate the inductive reactance of the line in ohms 
per mile per phase. 
Solution 
From the geometry of the phase arrangements, we have 
36 
tanB=- 60 
e = 30.960 
60 
cos30.96" 
DAB = 
= 69.97 fi 
Thus, 
GMD = [(69.97)(69.97)(75)1'/" = 71 .577 ft 
For the subconductors we have r' = 0.0534 ft. The bundle particulars are N = 8 
and A = (4212) in. Therefore, 
L 
= 1.4672 ft 
Thus, 
1 
1.4672 
X ,  = 0.2794 log- 
= -0.0465 
X ,  = 0.2794 log 71.577 
=0.518 

146 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
As a result, 
X ,  = X ,  + X ,  = 0.47 15 ohms per mile 
Inductance of Three-Phase, Double-Circuit Lines 
A three-phase, double-circuit line is essentially two three-phase circuits 
connected in parallel. Normal practice calls for identical construction for the 
two circuits. If the two circuits are widely separated, then we can obtain the line 
reactance as simply half that of one single-circuit line. For the situation where 
the two circuits are on the same tower, the above approach may not produce 
results of sufficient accuracy. The error introduced is mainly due to neglecting 
the effect of mutual inductance between the two circuits. Here we give a simple 
but more accurate expression for calculating the reactance of double-circuit 
lines. 
We consider a three-phase, double-circuit line with full line 
transposition such that in segment I, the relative phase positions are as shown in 
Figure 5.1 1. 
The inductance per phase per unit length is given by 
GMD 
GMR 
where the double-circuit geometric mean distance is given by 
with mean distances defined by 
B.2 
2
’
.
 
B’ 
(5.40) 
(5.41) 
(5.42) 
is 
c03 
l‘.A‘ 
Figure 5.1 1 Double-Circuit Conductors’ Relative Positions in Segment I of Transposition 

Electric Power Transmission 
147 
where subscript eq. refers to equivalent spacing. The GMR 
GMR = [(GMR, )(GMR,)(GMR,-.)~’/’ 
with phase GMR’s defined by 
GMR, = [r’(D, ,,)y/2 
GMR , 
= [ F ’ ( D ~ ~ , ) ~ ’ ~  
GMR,, = [ Y ’ ( D ~ ~ , ) ~ / ~  
(5.43) 
(5.44) 
We see from the above result that the same methodology adopted for 
the single-circuit case can be utilized for the double-circuit case. 
Example 5.5 
Calculate the inductance per phase for the three-phase, double-circuit line whose 
phase conductors have a GMR of 0.06 fi, with the horizontal conductor 
configuration as shown in Figure 5.12. 
A 
B 
C 
A‘ 
8’ 
c‘ 
1 
2 
1‘ 
2‘ 
3‘ 
i--I 
2 5 f l  
- 2 5 f t  
- 2 5 f t  
~
2
5
f
t
 
---&26fi 
-1 
0 
0 
6 
0 
0 
0 
Figure 5.12 Configuration for Example 5 5 
Solution 
We use Eq. (5.42): 
As a result, 
G M D  = [(42.04)(42.04)(52.87)1’3 
= 45.381 ft 
The equivalent GMR is obtained using Eq. (5.44) as 

148 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
re, = [(0.06)3(75)3 
=2.121ft 
As a result. 
= 0.6 1 2 6 ~  
lo6 henriedmeter 
The following MATLABTM script implements Example 5.5 based on Eqs. (5.40) 
to (5.44) 
% Example 5-5 
% 
r-prime=O. 06; 
D_AAprime=75; 
D_BBprime=75; 
D_CCprime=75; 
D_AB=25 ; 
D-BC=D-AB; 
D-CAprime=DAB; 
D-AprimeBprime=D-AB; 
D-BprimeCprime=D-AB; 
D-BCprime=D-BC+D-CAprime+D-AprimeBprime 
+D - BprimeCprime; 
D-CBprime=D-CAprime+D-AprimeBprime; 
D-ABprime=D-AB+D-BC+D-CAprime+D - 
AprimeB 
prime ; 
D-BAprime=D BC+D-CAprime; 
D-CA=D-AB+D:BC 
; 
D-CprimeAprime=D-AprimeBprime+D-BprimeC 
prime ; 
D-ACprime=D-ABprime+D-BprimeCprime; 
D-ABeq= (D-BC*D-BCprime*D-BprimeCprime*D 
- CBprime) 
A (1/4) 
D-BCeq=(D_AprimeBprime*D-ABprime*D - 
AB*D 
- BAprime) 
A (1/4) 
D ACeq=(D CA*D CprimeAprime*D-CAprime*D 
- 
A ~ p r  
ime ) 
( 1 /4) 
GMD= (D ABeq*D-BCeq*D-ACeq) A (1/3) 
% The equivalent GMR 
r eq= (r_primeA3*D AAprimeA3) 
A (1/6) 
L= (2 * 10 
A - 7 ) *log (GMD/r-eq) 

Electric Power Transmission 
149 
The results of running the script are shown below: 
EDU>> 
D-ABeq = 
42.0448 
D-BCeq = 
42.0448 
D-ACeq = 
52.8686 
GMD = 
45.3810 
r-eq = 
2.1213 
L = 
6.1261e-007 
5.4 
LINE CAPACITANCE 
The previous sections treated two line parameters that constitute the 
series impedance of the transmission line. 
The line inductance normally 
dominates the series resistance and determines the power transmission capacity 
of the line. 
There are two other line-parameters whose effects can be 
appreciable for high transmission voltages and line length. The line’s shunt 
admittance consists of the conductance (g) and the capacitive susceptance (6). 
The conductance of a line is usually not a major factor since it is dominated by 
the capacitive susceptance b = WC. The line capacitance is a leakage (or 
charging) path for the ac line currents. 
The capacitance of a transmission line is the result of the potential 
differences between the conductors themselves as well as potential differences 
between the conductors and ground. Charges on conductors arise, and the 
capacitance is the charge per unit potential difference. Because we are dealing 
with alternating voltages, we would expect that the charges on the conductors 
are also alternating (i.e., time varying). The time variation of the charges results 
in what is called line-charging currents. In this section we treat line capacitance 
for a number of conductor configurations. 
Capacitance of Single-Phase Line 
Consider a single-phase, two-wire line of infinite length with conductor 
radii of rl and r2 and separation D as shown in Figure 5.13. The potential at an 
arbitrary point P at distances r, and r b  from A and B, respectively, is given by 
where q is the charge density in coulombs per unit length. 
(5.45) 
The potential VA on the conductor A of radius r1 is therefore obtained 
by setting r, = rI and rh = D to yield 

150 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 5.13 Single-Phake, Two-Wire Line 
Likewise for conductor B of radius rz, we have 
The potential difference between the two conductors is therefore 
(5.46) 
(5.47) 
(5.48) 
The capacitance between the two conductors is defined as the charge on 
one conductor per unit of potential difference between the two conductors. As a 
result, 
c,, =-- c l -  
nEo 
farads per meter 
(5.49) 
v,, 
If Y, = r2 = Y, we have 
ZE, 
c,, =- 
In( e) 
(5.50) 
Converting to microfarads (pF) per mile and changing the base of the 
logarithmic term, we have 

Electric Power Transmission 
151 
(5.51) 
Equation (5.5 1) gives the line-to-line capacitance between the 
conductors. The capacitance to neutral for conductor A is defined as 
Likewise, observing that the charge on conductor B is 9, 
we have 
For rl = r2, we have 
Converting to ,uF per mile, we obtain 
,uF per mile to neutral 
0.0388 
CAN = D  
log - 
r 
The capacitive reactance X,. is given by 
1 
D 
2@C 
r 
X ,  =-= 
k’log-ohms.miletoneutral 
where the factor k’is given by 
, 4.1X1O6 
k =- 
f 
(5.52) 
(5.53) 
(5.54) 
(5.55) 
(5.56) 
(5.57) 
(5.58) 

152 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Expanding the logarithm, we have 
(5.59) 
1 
X ,  = k’log D+ k‘log- 
r 
The first term is called X d t ,  the capacitive reactance spacing factor, and the 
second is called Xu, , the capacitive reactance at 1 -A spacing. 
X d ,  = k’log D 
(5.60) 
(5.61) 
x, = x,. +xu. 
(5.62) 
The last relationships are very similar in form to those given for the inductance 
case. One difference that should be noted is that the conductor radius for the 
capacitance formula is the actual outside radius of the conductor and not the 
modified value r’. 
Example 5.6 
Find the capacitive reactance in ohms . mile per phase for a single-phase line 
with phase separation of 25 ft and conductor radius of 0.08 ft for 60-Hz 
operation. 
Solution 
Note that this is the same line of Example 5.1. We have for f = 60 Hz: 
, 4.1x106 
k =- 
= 0.06833~ 
1 O6 
f 
We calculate 
XJ = k’l0g25 
= 9 5 . 5 2 ~  
lo3 
1 
0.08 
= 74.95 x lo3 
Xu, = k’log- 
As a result, 
x, = x,. + x,. 
X ,  =170.47x103 ohms.miletoneutral 

Electric Power Transmission 
153 
The following MATLABTM script implements Example 5.6 based on equations 
(5.60) to (5.62) 
% Example 5-6 
% Data 
f=60; % HZ 
D=25; % phase separation (ft) 
r=0.08;% conductor radius (ft) 
% To calculate the capacitive reactance 
% in ohms.mile per phase 
kp=4.1*10A6/f; 
Xdp=kp*loglO (D) 
Xap=kp*loglO (l/r) 
Xc=Xdp+Xap 
The results of running the script are as shown below: 
EDU>> 
Xdp = 
9.5526e+004 
Xap = 
7.4956e+004 
Xc = 
1.7048e+005 
Including the Effect of Earth 
The effect of ground needs to be considered if the conductors are not 
high enough above ground. This can be done using the theory of image charges. 
These are imaginary charges of the same magnitude as the physical charges but 
of opposite sign and are situated below the ground at a distance equal to that 
between the physical charge and ground. The potential at ground due to the 
charge and its image is zero, which is consistent with the usual assumption that 
ground is a plane of zero potential. 
General Multiconductor Configurations 
Considering a system of n parallel and very long conductors with 
charges q,,ql,. . .,qn, respectively, we can state that the potential at point P 
having distances q,r2, ..., r,, to the conductor as shown in Figure 5.14 is given 
by 
(5.63) 
This is a simple extension of the two-conductor case. 

154 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
P 
Figure 5.14 A Multiconductor Configuration. 
If we consider the same n parallel long conductors and wish to account 
for the presence of ground, we use the theory of images. As a result, we will 
have n images charges -q1,-q2,...,-q,, situated below the ground at distance 
rl-,r2-, ...,rn- from P. This is shown in Figure 5.15. The potential at P is 
therefore 
The use of this relationship in finding the capacitance for many systems will be 
treated next. 
Capacitance of a Single-Phase Line Considering the Effect of 
Ground 
Consider a single-phase line with conductors A and B as before. To 
account for ground effects, we introduce the image conductors A' and B'. The 
situation is shown in Figure 5.16. 
Figure 5.15 A Multiconductor Configuration Accounting for Ground Effect 

Electric Power Transmission 
155 
Figure 5.16 Single-Phase Line and Its Image 
The voltage of phase A is given according to Eq. (5.64) by 
The voltage of phase B is 
The voltage difference between A and B is thus 
YAB = v, - VB 
The capacitance between the two conductors is thus 
(5.65) 
(5.66) 
(5.67) 
(5.68) 
The capacitance to neutral is obtained using 

156 
C A N  =- 
“A 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
(5.69) 
27c&() 
- 
- 
farads per meter 
In 
Observe that again 
Let us examine the effect of including ground on the capacitance for a 
single-phase line in the following example. 
Example 5.7 
Find the capacitance to neutral for a single-phase line with phase separation of 
20 ft and conductor radius of 0.075 ft. Assume that the height of the conductor 
above ground is 80 ft. 
Solution 
We have 
D = 2 0 f t  
r = 0.075 ft 
H =  160 ft 
As a result, 
HA,, = d(160)’ +(20)2 = 161.2452 ft 
Therefore we have 
2X&() 
‘ A N ,  = 
27c& 
5.578 
= 3 
farads per meter 
If we neglect earth effect, we have 

Electric Power Transmission 
157 
2?T& 
5.586 
= 2 
farads per meter 
The relative error involved if we neglect earth effect is: 
C,N, --CA,V* - 
CAN, 
- 0.0014 
which is clearly less than 1 %. 
Capacitance of a Single-Circuit, Three-Phase Line 
We consider the case of a three-phase line with conductors not 
equilaterally spaced. We assume that the line is transposed and as a result can 
assume that the capacitance to neutral in each phase is equal to the average 
value. This approach provides us with results of sufficient accuracy for our 
purposes. This configuration is shown in Figure 5.17. 
We use the three-phase balanced condition that the sinusoidally varying charges 
satisfy 
The average potential on phase A is given by 
The capacitance to neutral is therefore given by 
(5.70) 
Figure 5.17 Three-Phase Line writh General Spacing. 

158 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
9, 
c,, =- 
V A  
(5.71) 
where 
Observe that D,, is the same as the geometric mean distance obtained in the case 
of inductance. Moreover, we have the same expression for the capacitance as 
that for a single-phase line. Thus, 
2Z&o 
c,, = 
farad per meter 
(5.73) 
If we account for ground effect (the influence of earth), we come up 
with a slightly modified expression for the capacitance. Consider the same 
three-phase line with the attendant image line shown in Figure 5.18. The line is 
assumed to be transposed. As a result, the average phase A voltage will be given 
by 
From the above, 
(5.74) 
Figure 5.18 Three-Phase Line with Ground Effect Included 

Electric Power Transmission 
159 
2XE0 
C A N  = 
in[+( 
H l H 2 H 3  
3H23 
or 
We define the mean distances 
H ,  = (H,H2H3)’l3 
Then the capacitance expression reduces to 
(5.73 
(5.76) 
(5.77) 
(5.78) 
We can thus conclude that including the effect of ground will give a higher 
value for the capacitance than that obtained by neglecting the ground effect. 
Example 5.8 
Find the capacitance to neutral for the single-circuit, three-phase, 345-kV line 
with conductors having an outside diameter of 1.063 in. with phase 
configuration as shown in Figure 5.19. Repeat including the effect of earth, 
assuming the height of the conductors is 50 ft. 
+-- 23ft 6in 
-23ft 
6in 
Figure 5.19 Conductor Layout for Example 5.8. 

160 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Solution 
GMD = [(23.5)(23.S)(47)p” 
= 29.61 ft 
2?T&() 
CAN = 
in( F) 
= 8.5404~ 
1 O-’* farads per meter 
H I  = H, = H3 =2~5O=lOOft 
H I ,  = H,, = d(23.5), +(loo), = 102.72 
HI, = ,/(47), + (loo), = 1 10.49 
= -0.05 12 
Thus, 
1 
(1 8x 1O9)(6.5OS - 0.05 12) 
CAN = 
= 8.6082 x 1 0-l2 farads per meter 
The following MATLABTM script implements Example 5.8. 
% Example 5-8 
% data 
D12=23.5; % ft 
D23=23.5; % ft 
D13=47; % ft 
r=0.0443; % ft 
eo= (1/ (36*pi) 
) * 1 0 A - 9 ;  
% To find the capacitance to neutral in 
farads/m 
CAN= (2*pi*eo) / (log(GMD/r) 
) 
% To calculate the capacitance to 
neutral, 
% including the effect of earth 
GMD= (D12*D23*D13) 
* (1/3) 
H1=2*50; % ft 
H2=H1; 

Electric Power Transmission 
161 
MATLABTM con't. 
H3=H1; 
H12=(D12^2+HlA2) 
^ . 5 ;  
H23=H12 ; 
H13=(D13^2+H3^2) 
^.5; 
Hs= (Hl*H2*H3) 
* (1/3) ; 
Hm= (H12*H23*H13) 
* (1/3) ; 
CAN= (2*pi*eo) 
/ (log(GMD/r) 
-log(Hm/Hs) 
) 
The results of running the script are as shown below: 
EDU, 
GMD = 
29.6081 
CAN = 
8.5407e-012 
CAN = 
8.6084e-012 
Capacitance of Double-Circuit Lines 
The calculation of capacitance of a double-circuit line can be quite 
involved if rigorous analysis is followed. In practice, however, sufficient 
accuracy is obtained if we assume that the charges are uniformly distributed and 
that the charge q, is divided equally between the two phase A conductors. We 
further assume that the line is transposed. As a result, we obtain capacitance 
formulae similar in nature to those for the single-circuit line. 
Consider a double-circuit line with phases, A, B, C, A', B', and C' 
placed in positions 1, 2, 3, l', 2', and 3', respectively, in segment I of the 
transposition cycle. The situation is shown in Figure 5.20. 
The average voltage of phase A can be shown to be given by 
Figure 5.20 Double-Circuit 
C.3 
Line Conductor 
1l.A' 
Configuration in Cycle Segment I of Transposition 

162 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
(5.79) 
As a result, 
The GMR is given by 
with 
(5.80) 
(5.81) 
(5.82) 
(5.83) 
(5.84) 
(5.85) 
r, = (rDl ],)112 
(5.86) 
rH = (rD22.)112 
(5.87) 
r,. = (rD33,)1’2 
(5.88) 
If we wish to include the effect of the earth in the calculation, a simple 
extension will do the job. 
As a result, we have 
(5.89) 

Electric Power Transmission 
163 
Figure 5.21 Double-Circuit Line with Ground Effect 
where GMD and GMR are as given by Eqs. (5.81) and (5.8.5). Also, we defined 
(5.90) 
with 
and 

164 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Capacitance of Bundle-Conductor Lines 
It is sufficient to consider a single-phase line to reach conclusions that 
can be readily extended to the three-phase case. We use this in the present 
discussion pertaining to bundle-conductor lines. 
Consider a single-phase line with bundle conductor having N 
subconductors on a circle of radius A. Each subconductor has a radius of r. 
We have 
The extension of the above result to the three-phase case is clearly 
obtained by replacing D by the GMD. Thus 
(5.100) 
with 
The capacitive reactance in megaohms calculated for 60 Hz and 1 mile 
of line using the base 10 logarithm would be as follows: 
(5.102) 
x, = x:, 
+x; 
(5.103) 
This capacitive reactive reactance can be divided into two parts 

Electric Power Transmission 
165 
(5.104) 
and 
X i  = 0.0683 log(GMD) 
(5.105) 
If the bundle spacing S is specified rather than the radius A of the circle 
on which the conductors lie, then as before, 
(5.106) 
5.5 
TWO-PORT NETWORKS 
A network can have two terminals or more, but many important 
networks in electric energy systems are those with four terminals arranged in 
two pairs. A two-terminal pair network might contain a transmission line model 
or a transformer model, to name a few in our power system applications. The 
box is sometimes called a coupling network, or four-pole, or a two-terminal 
pair. The term two-port network is in common use. It is a common mistake to 
call it a four-terminal network. In fact, the two-port network is a restricted four- 
terminal network since we require that the current at one terminal of a pair must 
be equal and opposite to the current at the other terminal of the pair. 
An important problem arises in the application of two-port network 
theory to electric energy systems, which is called the transmission problem. It is 
required to find voltage and current at one pair of terminals in terms of 
quantities at the other pair. 
The transmission problem is handled by assuming a pair of equations 
of the form 
V, = AV, + BI, 
(5.107) 
I ,  = CV, + DI, 
(5.108) 
to represent the two-port network. In matrix form, we therefore have 
[::.I=[: 
;][I;'] 
(5.109) 

166 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
+o 
v 
For bilateral networks we have 
- * 
O+ 
AD-BC=I 
(5.1 10) 
__t 
'L 
Thus, there are but three independent parameters in the ABCD set as well. 
'r 
Symmetry of a two-port network reduces the number of independent 
parameters to two. The network is symmetrical if it can be turned end for end in 
a system without altering the behavior of the rest of the system. An example is 
the transmission line, as will be seen later on. To satisfy this definition, a 
symmetrical network must have 
- 
A = D  
(5.1 11) 
- 
We consider an important two-port network that plays a hndamental 
role in power system analysis -this is the symmetrical n-network. Figure 5.22 
shows a symmetrical n-network. We can show that 
A = (1 + F) 
(5.112) 
B = Z  
(5.113) 
C = Y( I + $) 
(5.114) 
D = A  
(5.1 1 5) 
One of the most valued aspects of the ABCD parameters is that they are 
readily combined to find overall parameters when networks are connected in 
cascade. Figure 5.23 shows two cascaded two-part networks. We can write 

Electric Power Transmission 
167 
"r 
;i..1::: 
~i 
I, 
Figure 5.23 A Cascade of Two two-Port Networks. 
From which, eliminating (L'*<, 
I,,), we obtain 
Thus the equivalent ABCD parameters of the cascade are 
A = A, A2 + BlC2 
(5.1 16) 
B = A,B2 + BID2 
(5.117) 
C = Cl A, + DlC2 
(5.1 18) 
D = ClB2 + DID2 
(5.119) 
If three networks or more are cascaded, the equivalent ABCD parameters can be 
obtained most easily by matrix multiplications as was done above. 
5.6 
TRANSMISSION LINE MODELS 
The line parameters discussed in the preceding sections were obtained 
on a per-phase, per unit length basis. We are interested in the perfonnance of 
lines with arbitrary length, say 1. To be exact, one must take an infinite number 
of incremental lines, each with a differential length. Figure 5.24 shows the line 
with details of one incremental portion (A) 
at a distance (x) from the receiving 
end. 
The assumptions used in subsequent analyses are: 
I. The line is operating under sinusoidal, balanced, steady-state 

I68 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
k- 
AX -* 
X ---+ 
Figure 5.24 Incremental Length of the Transmission Line. 
conditions. 
2. The line is transposed. 
With these assumptions, we analyze the line on a per phase basis. Application 
of Kirchhoff s voltage and current relations yields 
AV = Z(x)zAx 
Al = V(x)yhx 
Let us introduce the propagation constant defined as 
The series impedance per-unit length is defined by 
z = R+ jwL 
The shunt admittance per-unit length is defined by 
y=G+jwC 
(5.120) 
(5.1 2 I )  
(5.122) 
R and L are series resistance and inductance per unit length, and G and C are 
shunt conductance and capacitance to neutral per unit length. 
Tn the limit, as Ax + 0, we can show that 
(5.123) 
(5.124) 
Equation (5.123) can be solved as an ordinary differential equation in 

Electric Power Transmission 
169 
V. The solution turns out to be 
V ( x )  = A, exp(m)+ A, exp(-m) 
Now taking the derivative of V with respect to x to obtain Z(x) as 
A, exp(m)- A, exp(-m) 
/(x) = 
zc 
Here we introduce 
Z, =E 
(5.125) 
(5.126) 
(5.127) 
Z,. is the characteristic (wave) impedance of the line. 
The constants A l  and A2 may be evaluated in terms of the initial 
conditions at x = 0 (the receiving end). Thus we have 
from which we can write 
Equations (5.128) and (5.129) can be used for calculating the voltage 
and current at any distance x from the receiving end along the line. A more 
convenient form of these equations is found by using hyperbolic functions. 
We recall that 
exp(6') - exp(-8) 
2 
exp(6') + exp(-6') 
2 
sinh B = 
cosh 6' = 
By rearranging Eqs. (5.128) and (5.129) and substituting the hyperbolic hnction 
for the exponential terms, a new set of equations is found. These are 

170 
and 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
V(x) = V(O)coshm+Z,I(O)sinhux 
(5.130) 
I ( x ) =  I ( O ) c o s h m + ~ s i n h u w  
z,. 
We define the following ABCD parameters: 
A(x) = cosh ux 
B(x) = Z, sinh ux 
1 
C(x) = -sinh 
a 
z c  
D(x) = cosh ux 
(5.131) 
(5.132) 
(5.1 33) 
(5.134) 
(5.135) 
As a result, we have 
V(x) = A(x)V(O)+ B(x)/(O) 
l ( x )  = C(x)V(O)+ D(x)l(O) 
For evaluation of the voltage and current at the sending end x = I, it is 
common to write 
v, = V(1) 
I., = I ( 0  
v, = V(0) 
I ,  = I(0) 
Thus we have 
V, = A V, + BI, 
(5.136) 
I,, = CV, + DI, 
(5.137) 
The subscripts s and Y stand for sending and receiving values, respectively. We 
have from above: 
A = A(1) = cosh ~l 
(5.138) 
B = B(1) = Z, sinh vl 
(5.139) 

Electric Power Transmission 
171 
1 
C = C(1) = -sinh 
vl 
z,. 
(5.140) 
D = D(1) = cosh ~l 
(5.1 41) 
It is practical to introduce the complex variable B in the definition of 
the ABCD parameters. We define 
B = V l = J z u  
(5.142) 
As a result, 
A = cosh B 
(5.143) 
B=Z,sinhB 
(5.144) 
I 
C =-sinhB 
z c  
(5.145) 
D = A  
(5.146) 
Observe that the total line series impedance and shunt admittance are given by 
z = zl 
(5.147) 
Y = yl 
(5.148) 
Evaluating ABCD Parameters 
If your calculator can not perform hyperbolic function evaluation with 
complex arguments, then you may want to use the process discussed here. Two 
methods can be employed to calculate the ABCD parameters of a transmission 
line exactly. Both assume that B is calculated in the rectangular form 
The first method proceeds by expanding the hyperbolic functions as follows: 

172 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
1 
2 
= - (esI L 0, - e-'l L - 0,) 
B =  -sslnhB 
K. 
C = g s i n h  13 
(5.149) 
(5.150) 
(5.151) 
Note that 6 is in radians to start with in the decomposition of 8. 
The second method uses two well-known identities to arrive at the 
parameter of interest. 
A = cosh(0, +jo2) 
cosh 8 = cosh 0, COSS, 
+ j sinh 8, sin 19, 
(5.152) 
We also have 
sinhe = sinhe, c0sQ2 + jcoshe, sine, 
(5.1 53) 
Example 5.9 
Find the exact ABCD parameters for a 235.92-mile long, 735-kV, bundle- 
conductor line with four subconductors per phase with subconductor resistance 
of 0.1004 ohms per mile. Assume that the series inductive reactance per phase 
is 0.5541 ohms per mile and shunt capacitive susceptance of 7.4722 x 
siemens per mile to neutral. Neglect shunt conductance. 
Solution 
The resistance per phase is 
0.1004 
4 
r=- 
= 0.025 1 ohmsimile 
Thus the series impedance in ohms per mile is 
z = 0.025 1 + j0.5541 ohmdmile 

Electric Power Transmission 
The shunt admittance is 
I73 
y = j7.4722~ 
1 0-6 siemensimile 
For the line length, 
Z = zl= (0.0251+j0.5541)(235.92) = 130.86L87.41" 
Y = yl= j(7.4722~10-~)(235.92) = 1.7628~10~~L90' 
We calculate Bas 
B = f i  
= [(130.86L87.41"~l.7628x10-'L90°)]'2 
=0.0109+j0.4802 
Thus, 
0, = 0.0109 
B2 =0.4802 
We change 6 to degrees. Therefore, 
8, = (0.4802) - 
= 27.5 1 17" 
(I:) 
Using Eq. (5.149), we then get 
1 
2 
coshB =-(e0~0'09L27.51 17" +e-'.'Io9L-27.51 
17") 
= 0.8870L0.3242" 
From the above, 
D = A = 0.8870L0.3242" 
We now calculate sinh 8as 
1 
2 
sinhB =-(e0.0'09L27.51 17" -e-00'09L-27.51 17') 
= 0.462 lL88.8033" 
We have 

174 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
= - = 
130.86L87.41" 
f [ 1.7628~10-~L90~ 
= (74234.17L-2.59)"2 
= 272.461 - 1.295" 
As a result, 
B = Z, sinh 6' 
= 125.904L87.508" 
Also, 
I 
C = -sinh 
8 
zc 
= 1.696x 10-'L90.098" 
Let us employ the second method to evaluate the parameters. We find 
the hyperbolic functions: 
cosh8, = cosh(0.0109) 
e0.0109 + ,-0.0109 
- 
- 
2 
= 1.000059 
e 0 0109 - ,-0 
0109 
sinh8, = 
2 
= 1.09002 x 1 OK2 
(Most calculators have built-in hyperbolic functions, so you can skip the 
intermediate steps). We also have 
cos8, =cos (0.4802) - 
[ "31 
= 0.8869 
sin02 =sin (0.4802) - 
[ "31 
= 0.4619566 
Therefore, we have 

Electric Power Transmission 
175 
cosh B = cosh Bl cos 8, + j sinh 0, sin 8, 
= (1.000059)(0.8869) + j(l.09002~10-~)(0.4619566) 
= 0.886969510.32527" 
sinh B = sinh Bl cos 8, + j cosh 19, sin 8, 
= (1.09002~ 10-2)(0.8869) + j(l.000059)(0.4619566) 
= 0.462085 1L88.801" 
These results agree with the ones obtained using the first method. 
Example 5.10 
Find the voltage, current, and power at the sending end of the line of Example 
5.9 and the transmission efficiency given that the receiving-end load is 1500 
MVA at 700 kV with 0.95 PF lagging. 
Solution 
We have the apparent power given by 
S, = 1 5 0 0 ~ 1 0 ~  
VA 
The voltage to neutral is 
7 0 0 ~ 1 0 ~  
J;; 
V, = 
Therefore. 
= 1237.18L-l8.19" A 
From Example 5.9 we have the values of the A, B, and C parameters. Thus the 
sending-end voltage (to neutral) is obtained as 
V, = AV, + BI, 
= (0.8870L0.3253'( 700x 1 O3 ) 
+ (125.904L87.50~0~1237.18L-18.190) 
= 439.0938119.66" kV 
The line-to-line value is obtained by multiplying the above value by 

176 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
45, giving 
V, = 760.533 kV 
1. 
The sending-end current is obtained as 
I, = CV, + DI, 
7 0 0 ~ 1 0 ~  
= (I .696x 1 OP3 L90.098" [ 
~ 
] 
+ (0.887L0.3253"~1237.18L- 18.19") 
= 1 100.05L18.49" 
The sending-end power factor is 
C O S ~ ,  = co~(19.66-18.49) 
= COS(~. 
17) = 0.99979 
As a result, the sending-end power is 
P, = 3(439.O938x1O3)(1 100.05)(0.99979) 
= 1448.77~10~ 
MW 
The efficiency is 
- 1500x lo6 x0.95 
- 
1448.77~1 
O6 
= 0.9836 
Lumped Parameter Transmission Line Models 
Lumped parameter representations of transmission lines are needed for 
hrther analysis of interconnected electric power systems. Their use enables the 
development of simpler algorithms for the solution of complex networks that 
involve transmission lines. 
Here we are interested in obtaining values of the circuit elements of a n 
circuit, to represent accurately the terminal characteristics of the line given by 

Electric Power Transmission 
177 
V, = A V, + B/, 
I,, = CIJr + DI, 
It is easy to verify that the elements of the equivalent circuit are given in terms 
of the ABCD parameters of the line by 
Z, = B 
(5.154) 
and 
A-1 
B 
Y, =- 
The circuit is shown in Figure 5.25. 
Example 5.11 
Find the equivalent ncircuit elements for the line of Example 5.9. 
Solution 
From Example 5.9, we have 
A = 0.8870L0.3242" 
B = 125.904L87.508" 
As a result, we have 
2, = 125.904L87.508' ohms 
0.8870L0.3242' - 1 
Y, = 
125.904L87.508" 
= 8.985 1 x I 0-4L89.94 I" siemens 
Z,= 
B 
-
y
 
-A-l+ 
7 -  B 
Figure 5.25 Equivalent nMode1 ofa Transmission Line. 
(5.1 55) 

178 
The following MATLABTM Script implements Examples 5.9,5.10, and 5.1 1 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
% Example 5-9 
% To enter the data 
r=O. 0251 ; 
x=O. 
5541 ; 
1=235.92; 
y=i*7.4722*10A-6; 
Sr=1500*10A6; 
Vr= (7O0*1OA3) 
/3^.5; 
% €or the line length 
z=r+i*x; 
z=z*1; 
Y=y*l; 
% To calculate theta 
theta= (Z*Y) 5 ; 
theta2=imag (theta) 
*180/pi; 
% To calculate A and D 
D=cosh (theta) 
A-mod=abs (A) 
delta=angle (A) 
*180/pi 
% To calculate B and C 
B=Zc*sinh (theta) 
B - mod=abs (B) deltal=angle (B) *180/pi 
C=l/Zc*sinh (theta) 
C mod=abs(C) 
delta2=angle (C) 
*180/pi 
% To evaluate the parameters. 
% We find the hyperbolic functions 
cosh(rea1 (theta) 
) ; 
sinh(rea1 (theta) 
) ; 
%Example 5-10 
Ir=Sr/ (3*Vr) ; 
% power factor 0.95 lagging 
alpha=acos (0.95) ; 
alpha_deg=alpha*180/pi; 
Pr=Sr*cos (alpha) ; 
Ir-compl=Ir* (cos (-alpha) 
+i*sin ( -  
alpha) 
) ; 
% To calculate sending end voltage (to 
neut ra 1 ) 
Vs=A*Vr+B*Ir-compl 
Vs-mod=abs (Vs) 
A=D 
Zc=(Z/Y)^.5; 
9- 
9- 

Electric Power Transmission 
179 
MATLABTM con’t. 
Vs_arg=angle(Vs)*l80/pi 
% line to line voltage 
Vsl=Vs*3^.5 
% To calculate sending end current 
Is=C*Vr+D*Ir-compl 
Is-mod=abs (Is) 
Is-arg=angle (Is) 
*180/pi 
% To calculate sending end power factor 
pf-sending=cos (angle (Vs) -angle (Is) 
) 
% To calculate sending end power 
Ps=3*abs(Vs)*abs(Is)*pf_sending 
% 
To calculate the efficiency 
ef f =Pr/Ps 
%example 5-11 
% To find the equivalent pi-circuit 
elements 
Zpi=B 
Zpi-mod=abs(Zpi) 
Zpi_arg=angle(Zpi)*l80/pi 
Ypi= (A-1) 
/B 
Ypi-mod=abs (Ypi) 
Ypi_arq=angle(Ypi)*l8O/pi 
0 0 
9- 
The results of running the script are as shown below: 
EDU>> 
D = 
0.8870+ 0.005Oi 
A = 
0.8870+ 0.005Oi 
A-mod = 
0.8870 
delta = 
0.3244 
B = 
5.4745e+000 + 1.2577e+002i 
B-mod = 
125.8891 
delta1 = 
87.5076 
c =  
O . O O O O +  0.0017i 
C-mod = 
0.0017 
delta2 = 
90.1012 
Vs = 
4.1348e+005 + 1.4773e+005i 
Approximations to the ABCD Parameters of Transmission Lines 
Consider the series expansion of the hyperbolic functions defining the 

180 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
1 
vS 
1 y'2 
y12 i 
Figure 5.26 Nominal lrModel ofa Medium Transmission Line. 
A, B, C, and D parameters using 8 = fi . 
Usually no more than three terms are required. For overhead lines less 
than 500 km in length, the following approximate expressions are satisfactory: 
ZY 
2 
A = D=l+- 
(5.1 56) 
B = z( I+$) 
C =  Y(1.F) 
(5.157) 
(5.158) 
If only the first term of the expansions is used, then 
B = Z  
(5.1 59) 
A-l 
Y 
B
2
 
(5.1 60) 
- 
~- 
- 
In this case, the equivalent n circuit reduces to the nominal n, which is used 
generally for lines classified as medium lines (up to 250 km). Figure 5.26 shows 
the nominal n model of a medium transmission line. The result we obtained 
analytically could have been obtained easily by the intuitive assumption that the 
line's series impedance is lumped together and the shunt admittance Y is divided 
equally with each half placed at each end of the line. 
A final model is the short-line (up to 80 km) model, and in this case the 
shunt admittance is neglected altogether. The line is thus represented only by its 

Electric Power Transmission 
181 
series impedance. 
Example 5.12 
Find the nominal n and short-line representations for the line of Example 5.9. 
Calculate the sending-end voltage and current of the transmission line using the 
two representations under the conditions of Example 5.10. 
Solution 
For this line we have 
Z = 130.86L87.41" 
Y = 1.7628~10-~L90' 
As a result, we have the representations shown in Figure 5.26. 
From Example 5.10, we have 
V 
7 0 0 ~ 1 0 ~  
J5 
v, = 
I ,  =1237.18L-18.19" 
A 
For the short-line representation we have 
v, = v, + I,Z 
= 485.7682~ 
1 03L1 8.16" V 
For the nominal n w e  have 
= (1237.181 - 18.19') + 700:]03 
(0.88 14x 
190") 
=1175.74L-1.4619" 
A 
Thus. 

182 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
v, = v, +I,,Z 
- 
- 700x1 
IT O3 + (1 175.741 - 1.461 9")(130.86L87.4 I") 
43 
= 442.484~lO~L20.2943" 
V 
Referring back to the exact values calculated in Example 5.10, we find 
that the short-line approximation results in an error in the voltage magnitude of 
439.0938 - 485.7682 
AV= 
439.0938 
= -0.1 1 
For the nominal n w e  have the error of 
439.0938 -442.484 
A V =  
439.0938 
= -0.00772 
which is less than 1 percent. 
The sending-end current with the nominal nmodel is 
= 1 175.741 - 1.46 19' 
+ (442.484L20.2943")(0.88 14x 1O3L9Oo) 
= 1092.95L17.89" A 
The following MATLABTM Script implements Example 5.12 
% Example 5-12 
% From example 5-9, we have 
Z=130.86* (cos(87.41*pi/180)+i*s1n(87.41 
*pi/180) 
) ; 
Y=i*1.7628*10A-3; 
% From example 5-10, we have 
Vr=700*10A3/ (3A. 
5) ; 
Ir=1237.18* (cos (-18.19*pi/180) 
+i*sin( - 
18.19*pi/180) 
) ; 
% For the short-line representation we 
have 
Vs=Vr+Ir*Z; 

Electric Power Transmission 
EDU, 
Vs-mod = 
4.8577e+005 
Vs-arg = 
18.1557 
IL-mod = 
1.1757e+003 
, IL-arg = 
-1.4619 
, Vs-mod = 
4.4248e+005 
Vs-arg = 
20.2943 
Is = 1.0401e+003 + 3.3580e+002i 
Is-mod = 
1.0929e+003 
Is-arg = 
17.8931 
183 
MATLABTM con’t. 
Vs - mod=abs (Vs) 
Vs-arg=angle (Vs) 
*180/pi 
% €or the nominal pi, we have 
IL=Ir+Vr* (Y/2) ; 
IL mod=abs (IL) 
IL-arg=angle 
- 
(IL) 
*180/pi 
% Thus 
Vs=Vr+IL*Z; 
Vs mod=abs (Vs) 
Vs arg=angle (Vs) 
*180/pi 
% The sending-end current with the 
nominal pi model is 
Is mod=abs (Is) 
IsIarg=angle (Is) 
*180/pi 
- 
- 
Is=IL+Vs* (Y/2) 
PROBLEMS 
Problem 5.1 
Determine the inductive reactance in ohms/mile/phase for a 345-kV, single- 
circuit line with ACSR 84/19 conductor for which the geometric mean radius is 
0.0588 ft. Assume a horizontal phase configuration with 26-ft phase separation. 
Problem 5.2 
Calculate the inductive reactance in ohmsimileiphase for a 500-kV, single- 
circuit, two-subconductor bundle line with ACSR 84/19 subconductor for which 
the GMR is 0.0534 ft. Assume horizontal phase configuration with 33.5-ft phase 
separation. Assume bundle separation is 18 in. 

184 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Problem 5.3 
Repeat Problem 5.2 for a phase separation of 35 ft. 
Problem 5.4 
Repeat Problem 5.3 with an ACSR 76/19 subconductor for which the GMR is 
0.0595 ft. 
Problem 5.5 
Find the inductive reactance in ohms/mile/phase for a 500-kV, single-circuit, 
two-subconductor bundle line with ACSR 84/ 19 conductor for which the GMR 
is 0.0588 ft. Assume horizontal phase configuration with separation of 32 ft. 
Bundle spacing is 18 in. 
Problem 5.6 
Find the inductive reactance in ohms/mile/phase for the 765-kV, single-circuit, 
bundle-conductor line with four subconductors per bundle at a spacing of 18 in., 
given that the subconductor GMR is 0.0385 fi. Assume horizontal phase 
configuration with 44.5-ft phase separation. 
Problem 5.7 
Repeat Problem 5.6 for bundle spacing of 24 in. and subconductor GMR of 
0.05 15 ft. Assume phase separation is 45 ft. 
Problem 5.8 
Calculate the inductance in henries per meter per phase for the I lOO-kV, bundle- 
conductor line shown in Figure 5.27. Assume phase spacing D, 
= 15.24 m, 
bundle separation S = 45.72 cm, and conductor diameter is 3.556 cm. 
o o o  
o o o  
o o o  
0 
0 
0 
0 
O 0 0  
O
O
0
 
OO 
O
0
T
 
Figure 5.27 Line for Problem 5.8 
1- 
56.667 ' -4 
0
0
 
0
0
 
0 
0 
T 
25' 
0
0
 
0
0
 
0 0  
0 
0 
10 
0 0 
25' -k28.667'++ 
25' -T 
Figure 5.28 Line for Problem 5.9. 

Electric Power Transmission 
185 
Problem 5.9 
Calculate the inductive reactance in ohms per mile for the 500-kV, double- 
circuit, bundle-conductor line with three subconductors of 0.043 1 -ft GMR and 
with 18-in. bundle separation. Assume conductor configurations as shown in 
Figure 5.28. 
Problem 5.10 
Calculate the inductive reactance in ohms per mile for 345-kV, double-circuit, 
bundle-conductor line with two subconductors per bundle at 18-in. bundle 
spacing. Assume subconductor's GMR is 0.0373 ft, and conductor configuration 
is as shown in Figure 5.29. 
Problem 5.1 I 
Calculate the inductive reactance in ohms per mile for the 345-kV double- 
circuit, bundle-conductor line with two subconductors per bundle at 18%. 
bundle spacing. Assume subconductor's GMR is 0.0497 ft, and conductor 
configuration is as shown in Figure 5.30. 
Problem 5.12 
Determine the capacitive reactance in ohm miles for the line of Problem 5.1. 
Assume the conductor's outside diameter is 1.76 in. Repeat by including earth 
effects given that the ground clearance is 45 ft. 
Problem 5.13 
Determine the capacitive reactance in ohm miles for the line of Problem 5.2. 
Assume the conductor's outside diameter is 1.602 in. Repeat by including earth 
effects given that the ground clearance is 82 ft. 

186 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 5.30 Line for 
l
i
 \ 
\ 
Problem 5.1 I .  
Problem 5.14 
Determine the capacitive reactance in ohm miles for the line of Problem 5.3. 
Assume the conductor’s outside diameter is 1,602 in. Repeat by including earth 
effects given that the ground clearance is 136 ft. 
Problem 5.15 
Determine the capacitive reactance in ohm miles for the line of Problem 5.4. 
Assume the conductor‘s outside diameter is 1.7 in. Neglect earth effects. 
Problem 5.16 
Determine the capacitive reactance in ohm miles for the line of Problem 5.5. 
Assume the conductor’s outside diameter is 1.762 in. Repeat by including earth 
effects given that the ground clearance is 63 ft. 
Problem 5.17 
Determine the capacitive reactance in ohm miles for the line of Problem 5.6. 
Assume the conductor’s outside diameter is I .  165 in. 
Problem 5.18 
Determine the capacitive reactance in ohm miles for the line of Problem 5.7. 
Assume the conductor’s outside diameter is 1.6 in. Repeat by including earth 
effects given that the ground clearance is 90 ft. 
Problem 5.19 
Calculate the capacitance in farads per meter per phase neglecting earth effect 
for the IIOO-kV, bundle-conductor line of Problem 5.8. Assume the conductor 
diameter is 3.556 cm. Repeat including earth effects with h, = 21.34 m. 

Electric Power Transmission 
187 
Problem 5.20 
Determine the capacitive reactance in ohm mile for the line of Problem 5.9. 
Assume the conductor’s outside diameter is 1.302 in. Neglect earth effect. 
Problem 5.21 
Determine the capacitive reactance in ohm mile for the line of Problem 5.10. 
Assume the conductor’s outside diameter is I .  165 in. 
Problem 5.22 
Determine the capacitive reactance in ohm mile for the line of Problem 5.1 1. 
Assume the conductor’s outside diameter is 1.302 in. 
Problem 5.23 
Assume that the 345-kV line of Problems 5.1 and 5.12 is 14 miles long and that 
the conductor’s resistance is 0.0466 ohmsimile. 
A. Calculate the exact ABCD parameters for the line. 
B. Find the circuit elements of the equivalent z model for the line. 
Neglect earth effects. 
Problem 5.24 
Assume that the 1100-kV line of Problems 5.8 and 5.19 is 400 km long and that 
the subconductor’s resistance is 0.0435 ohmskm. 
A. Calculate the exact ABCD parameters for the line. 
B. Find the circuit elements of the equivalent n model for the line. 
Neglect earth effects. 
Problem 5.25 
The following information is available for a single-circuit, three-phase, 345-kV, 
360 mega volt amperes (MVA) transmission line: 
Line length = 413 miles. 
Number of conductors per phase = 2. 
Bundle spacing = 18 in. 
Outside conductor diameter = 1.165 in. 
Conductor’s GMR = 0.0374 ft. 
Conductor’s resistance = 0.1062 ohmsimile. 
Phase separation = 30 ft. 
Phase configuration is equilateral triangle. 
Minimum ground clearance = 80 ft. 
A. Calculate the line’s inductive reactance in ohms per mile per 
phase. 
B. Calculate the capacitive reactance including earth effects in ohm 
miles per phase. 
C. Calculate the exact A and B parameters of the line. 
D. Find the voltage at the sending end of the line if normal rating 

188 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
power at 0.9 PF is delivered at 345-kV at the receiving end. Use 
the exact formulation. 
E. Repeat (d) using the short-line approximation. 
Find the error 
involved in computing the magnitude of the sending-end voltage 
between this method and the exact one. 
Problem 5.26 
For the transmission line of Problem 5.24, calculate the sending-end voltage, 
sending-end current, power, and power factor when the line is delivering 4500 
MVA at 0.9 PF lagging at rated voltage, using the following: 
A. Exact formulation. 
B. Nominal napproximation. 
C. Short-line approximation. 
Problem 5.27 
A 650-km, 765 kV, 60 Hz three phase transmission line has a series impedance z 
= 0.02 +j0.32 Q k m  and a shunt admittance y = j 5 ~ 1 0 - ~  
Skm. At the sending 
end of the line an apparent power of 2700 MVA is delivered at a lagging power 
factor of 0.9 at rated voltage. Determine: 
A. The ABCD parameters of the line using the nominal x 
approximation expressions. 
B. The receiving end voltage, current, and power factor. 
Problem 5.28 
A 650-km, 765-kV, 60 Hz three phase transmission line has a series impedance 
z = 0.0185 +j0.3170 Q/km and a shunt admittancey = j  4.875~10-~ 
Skm. The 
full load at the receiving end is 2500 MVA at a lagging power factor of 0.85 and 
at 95% rated voltage. Determine: 
A. The ABCD parameters of the line using exact long line hyperbolic 
expressions. 
B. The sending end voltage, current, and power factor. 
Problem 5.29 
A. Results of tests conducted at the receiving end of a 500 kV, 60 Hz, 
three phase line involving open circuit (f, = 0) and short circuit (V,. 
= 0) are given by: 
Find the line parameters A, B, and C. 

Electric Power Transmission 
189 
B. Suppose that the load at the receiving end of the line of part A is 
750 MVA at nominal voltage, and lagging power factor of 0.83 at 
rated voltage. Determine the sending end voltage, current, active 
and reactive power and power factor. 
Problem 5.30 
A. An open circuit test is conducted at the receiving end of a 500 kV, 
60 Hz, three phase line, (G = 0), with the receiving end voltage 
maintained at 500 kV (line-to-line value). The sending end voltage 
is found to be 450 kV (line-to-line value) and leads the receiving 
end voltage by 1.3". The sending end active power input to the 
line is 5.18 MW at 0.021-power factor leading. 
Find the line 
parameters A, B, and C. 
B. Suppose that the load at the receiving end of the line of part A is 
500 MVA at nominal voltage, and lagging power factor of 0.8 at 
rated voltage. Determine the sending end voltage, current, active 
and reactive power and power factor. 
Problem 5.31 
A 500-kV, 60 Hz three-phase transmission line is modeled using the exact A, B, 
C, and D parameters. It is known that: 
A = 0.93/= 
Z = 1 1 0 / ~  
Z is the total series impedance of the line. 
A. Find the values of the parameters B and C. 
B. Suppose that the load at the receiving end of the line is 750 MVA 
at a lagging power factor of 0.9 at rated voltage. Determine the 
sending end voltage, current, active and reactive power and power 
factor. 

Chapter 6 
INDUCTION AND FRACTIONAL 
HORSEPOWER MOTORS 
6.1 
INTRODUCTION 
In this chapter, we will discuss three-phase induction motors and their 
performance characteristics. 
We will then discuss motors of the fractional- 
horsepower class used for applications requiring low power output, small size, 
and reliability. Standard ratings for this class range from go to 1 hp. Motors 
rated for less than go hp are called subfractional-horsepower motors and are 
rated in millihorsepower and range from 1 to 35 mhp. These small motors 
provide power for all types of equipment in the home, office, and commercial 
installations. The majority are of the induction-motor type and operate from a 
single-phase supply. 
6.2 
THREE-PHASE INDUCTION MOTORS 
The induction motor is characterized by simplicity, reliability, and low 
cost, 
combined with 
reasonable 
overload 
capacity, 
minimal 
service 
requirements, and good efficiency. An induction motor utilizes alternating 
current supplied to the stator directly. The rotor receives power by induction 
effects. The stator windings of an induction motor are similar to those of the 
synchronous machine. The rotor may be one of two types. In the wound rotor 
motor, windings similar to those of the stator are employed with terminals 
connected to insulated slip rings mounted on the shaft. The rotor terminals are 
made available through carbon brushes bearing on the slip rings. The second 
type is called the squirrel-cage rotor, where the windings are simply conducting 
bars embedded in the rotor and short-circuited at each end by conducting end 
rings. 
When the stator of the motor is supplied by a balanced three-phase 
alternating current source, it will produce a magnetic field that rotates at 
synchronous speed as determined by the number of poles and applied frequency 
f;. 
n,\ = - 
120f, r/min 
P 
In steady state, the rotor runs at a steady speed n, r/min in the same direction as 
the rotating stator field. The speed n, is very close to n, when the motor is 
running slow, and runs slower as the mechanical load is increased. The speed 
difference (n, - n,) is termed the slip and is commonly defined as a per unit 
value s. 
Introduction to Electrical Power Engineering. By Mohamed E. El-Hawary 
Copyright 0 
2008 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc 
191 

192 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Because of the relative motion between stator and rotor, induced voltages will 
appear in the rotor with a frequencyf, called the slip frequency. 
From the above we observe that the induction motor is simply a transformer but 
that it has a secondary fi-equencyf,. 
Example 6.1 
Determine the number of poles, the slip, and the frequency of the rotor currents 
at rated load for three-phase, induction motors rated at: 
A. 2200 V, 60 Hz, 588 r/min. 
B. 
120V, 600 Hz, 873 r/min. 
Solution 
We use P = 120jln, to obtain P, using n,, the rotor speed given to obtain the slip. 
A 
But P should be an even number. Therefore, take P = 12. Hence 
The slip is thus given by 
n, - n, - 600 - 588 
n, 
600 
s=- 
- 
= 0.02 
The rotor frequency is 
f ,  =sfv =0.02~60=1.2Hz 
B. 
Take P = 82. 

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
193 
n, = 120x600 = 878.05 r/min 
82 
s = 0.006 
f, = 0 . 0 0 6 ~  
600 = 3.6 Hz 
Equivalent Circuits 
An equivalent circuit of the three-phase induction motor can be 
developed on the basis of the above considerations and transformer models. 
Looking into the stator terminals, the applied voltage V, will supply the resistive 
drop I,RI as well as the inductive voltage j I J ,  and the counter EMF El where I, 
is the stator current and RI and XI are the stator effective resistance and 
inductive reactance respectively. In a manner similar to that employed for the 
analysis of the transformer, we model the magnetizing circuit by the shunt 
conductance G, and inductive susceptance -jBm. 
The rotor’s induced voltage E2, is related to the stator EMF El by 
This is due simply to the relative motion between stator and rotor. The rotor 
current I,, is equal to the current I, in the stator circuit. The induced EMF E2, 
supplies the resistive voltage component I,Rz and inductive component jl,(sXz). 
R2 is the rotor resistance, and X2 is the rotor inductive reactance on the basis of 
the stator frequency. 
or 
sE, = I,R2 + jI,(sX,) 
(6.5) 
From the above we conclude that the equivalent rotor impedance seen from the 
stator is given by: 
The complete equivalent circuit of the induction motor is shown in Figure 6.1 
Considering the active power flow into the induction machine, we find 
that the input power P, supplies the stator I2R losses and the core losses. The 
remaining power denoted by the air-gap power Pg is that transferred to the rotor 
circuit. 
Part of the air-gap power is expended as rotor 12R losses with the 
remainder being the mechanical power delivered to the motor shaft. We can 
express the air-gap power as 

194 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 
R l  
ix 1 
x2 
Is 
0 
- 
w 
rn 
- 
S 
V1 
Gc 
0 
6.1 Equivalent Circuit for a Three-Phase Induction Motor. 
* - 
Pg = 3z;( $) 
The rotor 12R losses are given by 
As a result, the mechanical power output (neglecting mechanical losses) is 
The last formula suggests a splitting of R3/s into the sum of R2 representing the 
rotor resistance and a resistance 
1-s 
-(Rd 
S 
which is the equivalent resistance of the mechanical load. As a result, it is 
customary to modify the equivalent circuit to the form shown in Figure 6.2. 
Motor Torque 
The torque Tdeveloped by the motor is related to P, by 
with a,. 
being the angular speed of the rotor. Thus, 

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
195 
I 
V1 
A 
Figure 6.2 Modified Equivalent Circuit of the Induction Motor. 
w, =w,(l-s) 
The angular synchronous speed ug is given by 
2 m  
w, =- 60 
As a result, the torque is given by 
(6.10) 
(6.11) 
(6.12) 
The torque is slip-dependent. It is customary to utilize a simplified equivalent 
circuit for the induction motor in which the shunt branch is moved to the voltage 
source side. This situation is shown in Figure 6.3. The stator resistance and 
shunt branch can be neglected in many instances. 
Rotor Current 
On the basis of the approximate equivalent circuit, we can find the rotor 
Figure 6.3 Approximate Equivalent Circuit of the lnduction Motor. 

196 
current as 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
v, 
R2 
I, = 
R, +-+ 
j X ,  
S 
(6.13) 
At starting, we have 
= 0; thus s = 1. The rotor starting current is hence given 
by 
(6.14) 
The starting current in much higher than the normal (or full-load) current. 
Depending on the motor type, the starting current can be as high as six to seven 
times the normal current. The power factor at starting is low compared to its 
value at full-load. 
Example 6.2 
A 15-hp, 220-V, three-phase, 60-Hz, six-pole, Y-connected induction motor has 
the following parameters per phase: 
R, = 0.15 ohm 
R2 = 0.1 ohm 
X ,  = 0.5 ohm 
G, = 6 x 
B, = 0.15 s 
The rotational losses are equal to the stator hysteresis and eddy-current losses. 
For a slip of 3 percent, find the following: 
A. the line current and power factor; 
B. the horsepower output; 
C. the starting torque. 
Solution 
A. The voltage specified is line-to-line value as usual. Utilizing the 
approximate equivalent circuit of Figure 6.3, the rotor current can 
be seen to be given by 
220 
(0.15+&)+ 
jO.5 
~ 
I ,  = 
h 
= 36.09L - 8.17" A 
The no-load current I, is obtained as 

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
197 
I --(6xw3 
220 
-jO.l5) 
@
-
 6 
= 0.762 1 - j19.05 A 
As a result, the line current (stator current) is 
I,s = I ,  i- 
I@ 
= 43.7721 -33.535" 
Since V, is taken as reference, we conclude that 
& =33.53s 
cos fiY = 0.8334 
B. The air-gap power is given by 
P 's =31r '( ) =3(36.09)2 (g) 
= 13,024.881 W 
The mechanical power to the shaft is 
Pm =(l-s)P, 
=12,634.135 W 
The core losses are 
P, = 3E: (G,) = 290.4 W 
The rotational losses are thus 
Pr/ = 290.4 W 
As a result, the net output mechanical power is 
Pout = Pm - Pr/ 
= 12,343.735 W 
Therefore, in terms of horsepower, we get 
C. At starting, s = 1: 

198 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
4 3  
= 227.2 15 A 
I r r l  = I(0.15 + 0.1) + jO.51 
PK = 3(227.2 1 5)2 (0.1) = 15,487.997 W 
2n(60) 
W ,  = - 
= 4 0 ~  
3 
T = 5 = ‘5’487.997 = 123.25 N.m. 
w, 
40n 
The following script implements Example 6.2 in MATLABTM: 
% Example 6-2 
% 
V=220/3^.5; 
s = O .  03 ; 
f=60; 
R1=0.15 ; 
R2=0.1; 
Xt=O .5 ; 
Gc=6*10^-3; 
Bm=0.15; 
Ir=V/ ( (Rl+R2/s) 
+i*Xt) ; 
abs (Ir) 
angle (Ir) 
*180/pi 
Iphi =V* (Gc 
- i *Bm) 
Is=Ir+Iphi ; 
abs (Is) 
angle (Is) 
*180/pi 
% V1 is taken as reference 
phi - s=-angle (Is) ; 
pf =cos (phi-s) 
% B. The airgap power 
Pg=3* (abs (Ir) 
) *2* ( R 2 / s )  
% The mechanical power to the shaft 
Pm= (1-s) 
*Pg 
% The core loss 
El=V; 
Pc=3*ElA2*Gc 
% The rotational losses 
Prl=Pc 
% The net output mechanical power 
Pout=Pm-Prl 
hpout=Pout/746 

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
199 
MATLABTM con’t. 
% A t  starting s=l 
s=l; 
Ir=V/ ( (Rl+R2/s) 
+i*Xt) ; 
abs (Ir) 
angle (Ir) 
*180/pi 
Pg=3* (abs (Ir) 
) *2* (R2/s) 
omegaPs=2*pi*f/3; 
T=Pg/omega-s 
The results obtained from MATLABTM are as follows: 
EDU>> 
ans = 
36.0943 
Iphi = 
0.7621-19.0526i 
ans = 
43.7750 
ans = 
-33.5313 
Pg = 
1.3028e+004 
Pm = 
1.2637e+004 
Pc = 
290.4000 
PrL = 
290.4000 
Pout = 
1.2347e+004 
ans = 
227.2150 
ans = 
-63.4349 
Pg = 
15488 
T = 
123.2496 
ans = 
-8.1685 
pf = 
0.8336 
hpout = 
16.5506 
6.3 
TORQUE RELATIONS 
The torque developed by the motor can be derived in terms of the 
motor parameters and slip using the expressions given before. 
Neglecting stator resistance, we have 

200 
T 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 6.4 Torque-Slip Characteristics for induction Motor. 
The slip at which maximum torque occurs as 
The value of maximum torque is 
(6. IS) 
(6.16) 
The torque-slip variations are shown in Figure 6.4. 
Example 6.3 
The resistance and reactance of a squirrel-cage induction motor rotor at 
standstill are 0.125 ohm per phase and 0.75 ohm per phase, respectively. 
Assuming a transformer ratio of unity, from the eight-pole stator having a phase 
voltage of 120 V at 60 Hz to the rotor secondary, calculate the following: 
A. rotor starting current per phase, and 
B. the value of slip producing maximum torque. 
Solution 
A. At starting, s = 1: 

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
201 
120 
0.125 + j0.75 
I ,  = 
= 157.8231 - 80.538 A 
B. 
0 125 
Rr - - 
= 0.1667 
X,. 
0.75 
s,llax, =-- 
The following script implements Example 6.3 in MATLABTM: 
% Example 6-3 
% A squirrel cage induction motor 
Rr=0.125; % ohm 
XT=0.75; % ohm 
v=120; % Volt 
f=60; % Hz 
% A. Rotor starting current per phase 
% At starting s=l 
Ir= V/ (Rr+i*XT) 
abs (Ir) 
angle (Ir) 
*180/pi 
% B. The value of slip producing 
maximum torque 
smaxT=Rr/XT 
~ ~ _ _ _ _ _  
The results obtained from MATLABTM are as follows: 
~ 
EDU, 
Ir = 
2.5946e+001 - 1.5568e+0021 
ans = 
157.8230 
ans = 
-80.5377 
s-maxT = 
0.1667 
Example 6.4 
The full-load slip of a squirrel-cage induction motor is 0.05, and the starting 
current is five times the fill-load current. Neglecting the stator core and copper 
losses as well as the rotational losses, obtain: 
A. the ratio of starting torque (st) to the full-load torque (fld), and 

202 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
B. the ratio of maximum (max) to full-load torque and the 
corresponding slip. 
Solution 
Sfld = 0.05 
and 
I,, = 51fld 
This gives 
A. 
0.05 
1 
2 
= $!-(:) 
= (5)2 - 
= 1.25 
B. 
smaXT 
= 3 
= 0.25 
x7 
0.05 (5)* +1 
-- - 
- 0.25[ 
2 1 
Thus, 

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
2 03 
The following script implements Example 6.4 in MATLABTM: 
% Example 6-4 
% A squirrel cage induction motor 
sfld=0.05; 
sst=l; 
% I~t=5*Ifld; 
% ratiol=Ist/Ifld=5 
ratiol=5; 
% 
(ratiol) 
^2= ( (R2/sfld) 
^2+ (XT 
XT) ^2 ) 
ratio1^2)=ratio1^2-l 
% ratio2=R2/XT 
% (R2/XT)^2* ((l/sfld)^2- 
^2) / (R2^2+ 
( 
f= [ ( (l/sfldj ^2-ratiolA2) o - (ratiolA2- 
1) 
1 
ratio2=roots (f) ; 
ratio2=ratio2 (1) 
% A. T=3*IrA2*R2/(sfld*ws) 
% ratio3=Tst/Tfld 
ratio3=ratiolA2* 
(sfld/sst) 
% B. 
s_maxT=ratio2 
%Tmax/Tfld=(Imax/Ifld)A2*(sfld/s~maxT) 
%=(sfld/s-maxT)*( (R2/sf1d)^2+XTA2)/(2*X 
TA2 
) 
% 
(Tmax/Tfld) 
= (sfld/s-maxT) * ( (s-maxT/sfld 
% ratio4=Tmax/Tfld 
ratio4=(sfld/s~maxT)*((s~maxT/sfld)A2+l 
) ^2+1) /2 
) /2 
The results obtained from MATLABTM are as follows: 
EDU>> 
ratio2 = 
0.2530 
ratio3 = 
1.2500 
s-maxT = 
0.2530 
ratio4 = 
2.6286 
f =  
375 
0 
-24 

204 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
6.4 
CLASSIFICATION OF INDUCTION MOTORS 
Integral-horsepower, three-phase, squirrel-cage motors are available 
from manufacturers’ stock in a range of standard ratings up to 200 hp at standard 
frequencies, voltages, and speeds. (Larger motors are regarded as special- 
purposed.) Several standard designs are available to meet various starting and 
running requirements. 
Representative torque-speed characteristics of four 
designs are shown in Figure 6.5. These curves are typical of 1,800 r/min 
(synchronous-speed) motors in ratings from 7.5 to 200 hp. 
The induction motor meets the requirements of substantially constant- 
speed drives. Many motor applications, however, require several speeds or a 
continuously adjustable range o f  speeds. The synchronous speed of an induction 
motor can be changed by (I) changing the number of poles, (2) varying the rotor 
resistance, or (3) inserting voltages of the appropriate frequency in the rotor 
circuits. A discussion of the details of speed control mechanisms is beyond the 
scope of this work. A common classification of induction motors is as follows. 
Class A 
Normal starting torque, normal starting current, low slip. This design 
has a low-resistance, single-cage rotor. It provides good running performance at 
the expense of starting. The full-load slip is low and the full-load efficiency is 
high. The maximum torque usually is over 200 percent of full-load torque and 
occurs at a small slip (less than 20 percent). The starting torque at full voltage 
300 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Y 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Pcrcent of ryochroriou\ speed 
Figure 6.5 Typical Torque-Speed Curves for 1.800 rimin General-Purpose Induction Motors 

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
205 
varies from about 200 percent of full-load torque in small motors to about 100 
percent in large motors. The high starting current (500 to 800 percent of full- 
load current when started at rated voltage) is the disadvantage of this design. 
Class B 
Normal starting torque, low starting current, low slip. This design has 
approximately the same starting torque as the Class A with only 75 percent of 
the starting current. The full-load slip and efficiency are good (about the same 
as for the Class A). However, it has a slightly decreased power factor and a 
lower maximum torque (usually only slightly over 200 percent of full-load 
torque being obtainable). This is the commonest design in the 7.5 to 200-hp 
range of sizes used for constant-speed drives where starting-torque requirements 
are not severe. 
Class C 
High starting torque, low starting current. This design has a higher 
starting torque with low starting current but somewhat lower running efficiency 
and higher slip than the Class A and Class B designs. 
Class D 
High starting torque, high slip. This design produces very high starting 
torque at low starting current and high maximum torque at 50 to 100-percent 
slip, but runs at a high slip at full load (7 to 1 1  percent) and consequently has 
low running efficiency. 
6.5 
ROTATING MAGENTIC FIELDS IN SINGLE-PHASE 
INDUCTION MOTORS 
To understand the operation of common single-phase induction motors, 
it is necessary to start by discussing two-phase induction machines. In a true 
two-phase machine two stator windings, labeled AA' and BE, are placed at 90" 
spatial displacement as shown in Figure 6.6. The voltages uA and vH form a set 
of balanced two-phase voltages with a 90" time (or phase) displacement. 
Assuming that the two windings are identical, then the resulting flux 4, and q5H 
are given by 
= GM coswt 
(6.17) 
= QM cos(ccn - 90") = q5u sin 
(6.18) 
where @,,, 
is the peak value of the flux. In Figure 6.6(B), the flux 
is shown to 
be at right angles to q5H in space. It is clear that because of Eqs. (6.17) and 
(6.1 S), the phasor relation between 
and QH is shown in Figure 6.6(C) with 4, 

206 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
taken as the reference phasor. 
The resultant flux qb at a point P displaced by a spatial angle Bii-om the 
reference is given by 
where @,11:4 is the component of QA along the OP axis and &,B is the component of 
QB along the OP axis, as shown in Figure 6.6(D). Here we have 
4rA = 4'4 C O S ~  
4P8 = 48 sin@ 
As a result, we have 
qbP = 
(cosuf cosB + sin uf sin 0) 
The relationship above can be written alternatively as 
(? 
0 0 0  
Rotor 
I 
OA 
Figure 6.6 Rotating magnetic field in a balanced two-phase stator: (A) winding schematic; (B) 
flux orientation; (C) phasor diagram; and (D) space phasor diagram. 

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
207 
q p  = q M  cos(8 - ut) 
(6.19) 
The flux at point P is a function of time and the spatial angle 8, and has a 
constant amplitude &. this result is similar to that obtained earlier for the 
balanced three-phase induction motor. 
The flux @+ can be represented by a phasor & that is coincident with 
the axis of phase a at t = 0. The value of & is & cos Bat that instant as shown 
in Figure 6.7(A). At the instant t = t,, the phasor $,,, has rotated an angle of axi 
in the positive direction of 0, as shown in Figure 6.7(B). The value of & is seen 
to be & cos (0- w!,) at that instant. It is thus clear that the flux waveform is a 
rotating field that travels at an angular velocity w in the forward direction of 
increase in 8. 
The result obtained here for a two-phase stator winding set and for a 
three-phase stator winding set can be extended to an N-phase system. In this 
case the N windings are placed at spatial angles of 2 d N  and excited by 
sinusoidal voltages of time displacement 2dN. Our analysis proceeds as 
follows. The flux waveforms are given by 
q2 =qMcos(w-$) 
4, =qM cos w!-(i-l)- 
[ 
:
I
 
The resultant flux at a point P can be shown to be given by : 
(6.20) 
From (6.20), it is evident that a rotating magnetic field of constant 
magnitude will be produced by an N-phase winding excited by balanced N- 
phase currents when each phase is displaced 2 d N  electrical degrees from the 
next phase in space. 

208 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
(A) 
(B) 
Figure 6.7 Illustrating forward rotating magnetic field: (A) f = 0; (B) I = ti. 
Figure 6.8 Schematic ofa single-phase induction motor. 
In order to understand the operation of a single-phase induction motor, 
we consider the configuration shown in Figure 6.8. The stator carries a single- 
phase winding and the rotor is of the squirrel-cage type. This configuration 
corresponds to a motor that has been brought up to speed, as is discussed 
presently. 
Let us now consider a single-phase stator winding as shown in Figure 
6.9(A). The flux 
is given by 
@A = 
coswl 
(6.21) 
The flux at point P displaced by angle 8 from the axis of phase a is clearly given 
by 
Using Eq. (6.21), we obtain 

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
209 
(A) 
Figure 6.9 (A) Single-phase winding; (B) the flux at a point P. 
(bP = -[cos(B-~)+cos(B+UX)] 
4bf 
(6.22) 
2 
The flux at point P can therefore be seen to be the sum of two waveforms @and 
& given by 
(6.23) 
qjf = -cos(6)-wt) 
4M 
2 
(6.24) 
qh =-cos(B+ux) 
@A4 
2 
The waveform 4 
is of the same form as that obtained in Eq. (6.19), which was 
shown to be rotating in the forward direction (increase in B from the axis of 
phase a). The only difference between Eqs. (6.23) and (6.21) is that the 
amplitude of &is half of that of @ in Eq. (6.21). The subscript.fin Eq. (6.23) 
signifies the fact that cos (0- UX) is a forward rotating wave. 
Consider now the waveform @h of Eq. (6.24). At t = 0, the value of @, 
is (&/2) cosBand is represented by the phasor (&/2), which is coincident with 
the axis of phase a as shown in Figure 6. IO(a). Note that at t = 0, both 4 and & 
are equal in value. At a time instant t = I , ,  the phasor (&/2) is seen to be at 
angle UX, with the axis of phase a, as shown in Figure 6.9(B). The waveform @, 
can therefore be seen to be rotating at an angular velocity w in a direction 
opposite to that of @and we refer to @, as a backward-rotating magnetic field. 
The subscript (b) in Eq. (6.24) signifies the fact that cos (B+ UX) is a backward- 
rotating wave. 
The preceding discussion reveals that in a single-phase induction 
machine there are two magnetic fields rotating in opposite directions. Each field 
produces an induction-motor torque in a direction opposite to the other. When 
the rotor is at rest, the forward torque is equal and opposite to the backward 
torque and the resulting torque is zero. 
A single-phase induction motor 

210 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
therefore cannot produce a torque when it is at rest and therefore it is not a self- 
starting machine. If the rotor is made to rotate by an external means, each of the 
two fields would produce a torque-speed characteristic similar to that of a 
balanced three-phase (or two-phase) induction motor, as shown in Figure 6.1 1 in 
the dashed curves. The resultant torque-speed characteristic is shown using a 
solid line. The foregoing argument will be confrrmed once we develop an 
equivalent circuit for the single-phase induction motor. 
6.6 
EQUIVALENT CIRCUITS FOR SINGLE-PHASE INDUCTION 
MOTORS 
In a single-phase induction motor, the pulsating flux wave resulting 
from a single winding stator MMF is equal to the sum of two rotating flux 
components. The first component is referred to as the forward field and has a 
constant amplitude equal to half of that of the stator waveform. The forward 
field rotates at synchronous speed. The second component, referred to as the 
backward field, is of the same constant amplitude but rotates in the opposite (or 
backward) direction at synchronous speed. Each component induces its own 
rotor current and creates induction motor action in the same manner as in a 
balanced three-phase induction motor. It is on this basis that we conceive of the 
circuit model of Figure 6.12(A). Note that R, and X ,  are the stator resistance 
and leakage reactance, respectively, and Vl is the stator input voltage. The EMF 
El is assumed to be the sum of two components, E, and Elh , corresponding to 
the forward and backward field waves, respectively. Note that since the two 
waves have the same amplitude, we have 
I 
(6.25) 
The rotor circuit is modeled as the two blocks shown in Figure 6.12(A), 
representing the rotor forward circuit model Z, and the rotor backward circuit 
model Z,, respectively. 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 6.10 Showing that 
is a backward-rotating wave: (A) I = 0: (B) t = I , .  

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
211 
Figure 6.1 1 
/ - - - - - -  
Backward 
torque 
Torque-speed characteristics of a single-phase induction motor. 
The model of the rotor circuit for the forward rotating wave Z, is simple 
since we are essentially dealing with induction-motor action and the rotor is set 
in motion in the same direction as the stator synchronous speed. The model of 
Z, is shown in Figure 6.12(B) and is similar to that of the rotor of a balanced 
three-phase induction motor. The impedances dealt with are half of the actual 
values to account for the division of E, into two equal voltages. In this model, 
X,,, 
is the magnetizing reactance, and R; and X; are rotor resistance and 
leakage reactance, both referring to the stator side. The slip sj is given by 
(6.26) 
This is the standard definition of slip as the rotor is revolving in the same 
direction as that of the forward flux wave. 
The model of the rotor circuit for the backward-rotating wave 2, is 
shown in Figure 6.12(C) and is similar to that of Z,, with the exception of the 
backward slip, denoted by sb. The backward wave is rotating at a speed of -nr, 
and the rotor is rotating at n,.. We thus have 
Using Eq. (6.26), we have 
" r  
"\ 
s, =1-- 
(6.27) 
(6.28) 
As a result, we conclude that the slip of the rotor with respect to the backward 

212 
wave is related to its slip with respect to the forward wave by 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Sh = 2 - Sf 
We now let s be the forward slip, 
s, = s  
(6.29) 
(6.30) 
and thus 
Sh =2-s 
(6.31) 
On the basis of Eqs. (6.30) and (6.3 I), a complete equivalent circuit as shown in 
Figure 6.12(D) is now available. The core losses in the present model are 
treated separately in the same manner as the rotational losses. 
Rotor 
t 
forward 
Rotor 
t 
backward 
E., 
circuit 
Rotor 
’ model 
(D) 
Figure 6.12 Developing an equivalent circuit of for single-phase induction motors: (A) basic 
concept; (B) forward model; ( C )  backward model; and (D) complete equibalent circuit. 

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
213 
The forward impedance Z, is obtained as the parallel combination of 
(jXrn/2) and [(R; /2s) + j ( X ;  /2)], given by 
(6.32) 
(6.33) 
Note that with the rotor at rest, n, = 0, and thus with s = I, we get Z, = Z,. 
Example 6.5 
The following parameters are available for a 60-Hz four-pole single-phase 1 10- 
V %-hp induction motor: 
R1 = 1.5 R 
Xi = 2.4 R 
x, = 73.4 R 
R; = 3 R  
X ;  = 2.4 R 
Calculate Z, Z,, and the input impedance of the motor at a slip of 0.05. 
Solution 
j36.7(30 + j1.2) 
30+ j37.9 
z, 
= 
= 22.796140.654" 
= 17.294+j14.851 R 
The result above is a direct application of Eq. (6.32). Similarly, using Eq. 
(6.33), we get 
We observe here that IZ,rI is much larger than IZ,I at this slip, in contrast to the 
situation at starting (s = l), for which Zf= Zh. 
The input impedance Z, is obtained as 
z, =z,+z,, +z, 
=19.515+j18.428 
= 26.841143.36" R 
Equations (6.32) and (6.33) yield the forward and backward 

214 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
impedances on the basis of complex number arithmetic. The results can be 
written in the rectangular forms 
Zt = Rt + jX, 
(6.34) 
and 
Using Eq. (6.32), we can write 
and 
where 
R; 
a,/. = - 
S 
x, 
= x; + x,, 
In a similar manner we have, using Eq. (6.33), 
where 
(6.36) 
(6.37) 
(6.38) 
(6.39) 
(6.40) 
(6.41) 
(6.42) 
It is often desirable to introduce some approximations in the formulas 
just derived. As is the usual case, for X, > 10 ah, we can write an approximation 
to Eq. (6.40) as 

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
2 
2 4  G *,(%) 
As a result, by substitution in Eq. (6.41), we get 
215 
(6.43) 
(6.44) 
We can introduce fkrther simplifications by assuming that X,,,/X, 2 1, to 
obtain from Eq. (6.43) 
Equation (6.44) reduces to the approximate form 
X ;  
a: 
x, E-+- 
2 
2x, 
(6.45) 
(6.46) 
Neglecting the second term in Eq. (6.46), we obtain the most simplified 
representation of the backward impedance as 
x; 
x, =- 2 
(6.47) 
(6.48) 
Equations (6.47) and (6.48) imply that Xm/2 is considered an open circuit in the 
backward field circuit, as shown in Figure 6.13. 
2 s  
2 
"1 
" 
Figure 6.13 Approximate equivalent circuit of a single-phase induction motor. 

216 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
6.7 
POWER AND TORQUE RELATIONS 
The development of an equivalent-circuit model of a running single- 
phase induction motor enables us to quantifj, power and torque relations in a 
simple way. The power input to the stator P, is given by 
4 = v,r, cosh 
(6.49) 
where 
dissipated in stator ohmic losses, Pr , given by 
is the phase angle between V, and I,. Part of this power will be 
S 
Pi = I:R, 
(6.50) 
\ 
The core losses will be accounted for as a fixed loss and is treated in the same 
manner as the rotational losses at the end of the analysis. The air-gap power Pg 
is thus given by 
Pg = 4 -Pi 
(6.51) 
S 
The air-gap power is the power input to the rotor circuit and can be 
visualized to be made up of two components. The fust component is the power 
taken up by the forward field and is denoted by PR1, and the second is the 
backward field power denoted by Pgh. Thus we have 
Pg = Pxr -k Pgb 
(6.52) 
As we have modeled the forward field circuit by an impedance Z3 it is natural to 
write 
Pgf = 1I,I2 Rf 
(6.53) 
Similarly, we write 
2 
'gh = 1'11 
' h  
(6.54) 
The ohmic losses in the rotor circuit are treated in a similar manner. 
The losses in the rotor circuit due to the forward field Pc 
can be written as 
rf 
Perf = S f  P.f 
(6.55) 
Similarly, the losses in the rotor circuit due to the backward field are written as 
pt rh = shpgh 
(6.56) 

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
217 
Equations (6.55) and (6.56) are based on arguments similar to those used with 
the balanced three-phase induction motor. Specifically, the total rotor equivalent 
resistance in the forward circuit is given by 
(6.57) 
This is written as 
(6.58) 
The first term corresponds to the rotor ohmic loss due to the forward field and 
the second represents the power to mechanical load and fixed losses. It is clear 
from Figure 6.14 that 
and 
(6.59) 
(6.60) 
Combining Eqs. (6.59) and (6.60), we get Eq. (6.55). A similar argument leads 
to Eq. (6.56). It is noted here that Eqs. (6.53) and (6.60) are equivalent, since 
the active power to the rotor circuit is consumed only in the right-hand branch, 
withjXJ2 being a reactive element. 
R;/2 
jX;/2 
Figure 6.1 4 Equivalent circuit of single-phase induction motor showing rotor loss components in 
the forward and backward circuits. 

218 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
The net power form the rotor circuit is denoted by P, and is given by 
'ni = prn/ i- 'nih 
(6.61) 
The component Pnll is due to the forward circuit and is given by 
(6.62) 
rl 
'nil = Pg/ - Pi 
Using Eq. (6.55), we get 
Pnif = (I-sf )Pgf 
Similarly, Pnlh is due to the backward circuit and is given by 
'nib = 'gh - 'lrh 
Using Eq. (6.56), we get 
Pnih = (l-sb)pgh 
Recall that 
S f  = s  
s h  = 2-s 
(6.63) 
(6.64) 
(6.65) 
As a result, 
Pmh = (s - 1)Pgh 
(6.67) 
We now substitute Eqs. (6.66) and (6.67) into Eq. (6.61), to obtain 
Pni =(l-s)(pgf 
-pgb) 
(6.68) 
The shaft power output P, can now be written as 
4 = Pni - P,ot - Pcore 
(6.69) 
The rotational losses are denoted by Pro, and the core losses are denoted by P,,,,. 
The output torque TJ is obtained as 

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
If fixed losses are neglected, then 
As a result, using Eq. (6.68), we get 
The torque due to the forward field is 
The torque due to the backward field is 
219 
(6.70) 
(6.71) 
(6.72) 
(6.73) 
(6.74) 
It is thus clear that the net mechanical torque is the algebraic sum of a forward 
torque TFf (positive) and a backward torque Tmb (negative). Note that at starting, 
s = 1 and R, = Rh, and as a result P~ = Pgb, giving zero output torque. This 
confirms our earlier statements about the need for starting mechanisms for a 
single-phase induction motor. This is discussed in the next section. 
Example 6.6 
For the single-phase induction motor of Example 6.5, it is necessary to find the 
power and torque output and the efficiency when running at a slip of 5 percent. 
Neglect core and rotational losses. 
Solution 
In Example 6.5 we obtained 
Z, = 26.841143.36" 
As a result, with V, = 1 1010, we obtain 
I ,  = 
loL0 
= 4.098L-43.36" A 
26.84 1143.36" 

220 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
The power factor is thus 
cosh = cos43.36" = 0.727 
The power input is 
6 = V,Il C O S ~  
= 327.76 W 
We have from Example 6.5 for s = 0.05, 
R/ = 17.294 R 
Rh = 0.721 R 
Thus we have 
PK, =11,1'R, = (4.098)*(17.294) = 290.46 W 
pgb = I ~ l ) ' R ~  
=(4.098)2(0.721)= 12.109W 
The output power is thus obtained as 
As we have a four-pole machine, we get 
120(60) - I 800 r/min 
n, =-- 
w, =- 2mRn, 
= 188.5 radls 
4 
60 
The output torque is therefore obtained as 
290.46-12.109 
- 
- 
= 1.4767 N .m 
188.5 
The efficiency is now calculated as 
pm - 264.43 
6 327.76 
17 = - 
-- 
= 0.8068 
It is instructive to account for the losses in the motor. Here we have the 
stator ohmic losses obtained as 

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
22 1 
2 
Pr = 
R, = (4.098)2(l .5) = 25.193 W 
The forward rotor losses are 
P( 
= sPgt = 0.05(290.46) = 14.523 W 
rl 
The backward rotor losses are 
PL 
= (2 - S) Pgh = 1.95( 1 2.1 09) = 23.6 1 3 W 
rh 
The sum of the losses is 
Pc =25.193+14.523+23.613 = 63.329 W 
The power output and losses should match the power input 
P,,+Pc =264.43+63.33=327.76 W 
which is indeed the case. 
Example 6.7 
A single-phase induction motor takes an input power of 490 W at a power factor 
of 0.57 lagging from a 110-V supply when running at a slip of 5 percent. 
Assume that the rotor resistance and reactance are .1.78 R and 1.28 R, 
respectively, and that the magnetizing reactance is 25 R. Find the resistance and 
reactance of the stator. 
Solution 
The equivalent circuit of the motor yields 
As a result of the problem specifications 
P, = 490 W 
cos I$= 0.57 
V = 1.10 
590 
= 7.815L-55.2488' 
P 
/,=A= 
VcosI$ 
1 lO(0.57) 
Thus the input impedance is 

222 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
z , =-=- 
' l o  155.2498" =8.023+jl1.5651 
I ,  
7.815 
The stator impedance is obtained as 
6.8 
STARTING SINGLE-PHASE INDUCTION MOTORS 
We have shown earlier that a single-phase induction motor with one 
stator winding is not capable of producing a torque at starting [see, for example, 
Eq. (6.68) with s = I]. Once the motor is running, it will continue to do so, since 
the forward field torque dominates that of the backward field component. We 
have also seen that with two stator windings that are displaced by 90" in space 
and with two-phase excitation a purely forward rotating field is produced, and 
this form of a motor (like the balanced three-phase motor) is self-starting. 
Methods of starting a single-phase induction motor rely on the fact that 
given two stator windings displaced by 90" in space, a starting torque will result 
if the flux in one of the windings lags that of the other by a certain phase angle 
To verify this, we consider the situation shown in Figure 6.15. Assume that 
Clearly, the flux at P is given by the sum of 
and @,H 
$/, = --[cos(8 
@M 
- a) + cos(8 + a)] 
A
2
 
(6.77) 
@/, = -{cos~sin(8+ux>+sin(8-m)] 
@M 
8
2
 
(6.78) 
+ sin flcos(8 - ccx) - cos(8 + a)]} 
The flux at P is therefore obtained as 
=2[afr 
@M 
cos(8-ux)+af, sin(8-ux) 
+ ah cos(8 + ux) + a, sin(8 + a)] 
r 
r 
(6.79) 
where we have 

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
223 
Winding B 
Figure 6.15 Two stator windings to explain the starting mechanism of single-phase induction 
motors. 
a,f, = 1 +sin 
" f ,  = 
a,, = 1-shy 
= cOsty 
Note that we can also define the magnitudes arand ah by 
u; =a;r+a* f r  =2(1+siny) 
The angles a, and 
are defmed next by 
ah 
cos ly 
2(1 -sin ty) 
We can now write the flux h, as 
qP =-[ar 
h r  
cos(~-d+a,)+uhcos(B+d-ah)] 
2 
(6.80) 
(6.81) 
(6.82) 

224 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
It is clear that @,, is the sum of a forward rotating component 4 and a backward 
rotating component 4 given by 
where 
@/ ( t )  = - 
cos(8 - ux + " f  ) 
2 
(6.83) 
(6.84) 
(6.85) 
Let us note here that from Eqs. (6.80) and (6.81), we can see that 
af 'ah 
(6.86) 
As a result, the magnitude of the forward rotating wave is larger than that of the 
backward rotating wave. It is clear that for the arrangement of Figure 6.15, a 
starting torque should result. This is the basis of the starting mechanisms for 
single-phase induction motors. 
6.9 
SINGLE-PHASE INDUCTION MOTOR TYPES 
Single-phase induction motors are referred to by names that describe 
the method of starting. A number of types of single-phase induction motors are 
now discussed. 
Split-Phase Motors 
A single-phase induction motor with two distinct windings on the stator 
that are displaced in space by 90 electrical degrees is called a split-phase motor. 
The main (or running) winding has a lower RIX ratio than the auxiliary (or 
starting) winding. A starting switch disconnects the auxiliary windings when 
the motor is running at approximately 75 to 80 percent of synchronous speed. 
The switch is centrifugally operated. The rotor of a split-phase motor is of the 
squirrel-cage type. At starting, the two windings are connected in parallel across 
the line as shown in Figure 6.16. 
The split-phase design is one of the oldest single-phase motors and is 
most widely used in the ratings of 0.05 to 0.33 hp. A split-phase motor is used 
in machine tools, washing machines, oil burners, and blowers, to name just a 
few of its applications. 
The torque-speed characteristic of a typical split-phase induction motor 

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
225 
Auxiliary winding 
Figure 6.16 Schematic diagram of a split-phase induction motor. 
I 
I 
I1 
..A 
_ -  
., 
n 
n, - 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1 
Figure 6.17 Torque-speed characteristic of a split-phase induction motor. 
is shown in Figure 6.17. At starting the torque is about 150 percent of its full- 
load value. As the motor speed picks up, the torque is increased (except for a 
slight decrease at low speed) and may reach higher than 250 percent of full-load 
value. The switch is opened and the motor runs on its main winding alone and 
the motor reaches its equilibrium speed when the torque developed is matched 
by the load. 
Capacitor-Start Motors 
The class of single-phase induction motors in which the auxiliary 
winding is connected in series with a capacitor is referred to as that of capacitor 
motors. The auxiliary winding is placed 90 electrical degrees form the main 
winding. There are three distinct types of capacitor motors in common practice. 
The first type, which we discuss presently, employs the auxiliary winding and 
capacitor only during starting and is thus called a capacitor-start motor. It is 
thus clear that a centrifugal switch that opens at 75 to 80 percent of synchronous 
speed is used in the auxiliary winding circuit (sometimes called the capacitor 
phase). A sketch of the capacitor-start motor connection is shown in Figure 
6.1 8. A commercial capacitor-start motor is not simply a split-phase motor with 

226 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
a capacitor inserted in the auxiliary circuit but is a specially designed motor that 
produces higher torque than the corresponding split-phase version. 
Capacitor-start motors are extremely popular and are available in all 
ratings from 0.125 hp up. For ratings at 1/3 hp and above, capacitor-start motors 
are wound as dual-voltage so that they can be operated on either a 1 15- or a 230- 
V supply. In this case, the main winding is made of two sections that are 
connected in series for 230-V operation or in parallel for 1 15-V operation. The 
auxiliary winding in a dual-voltage motor is made of one section which is 
connected in parallel with one section o f  the main winding for 230-V operation. 
The auxiliary winding in a dual-voltage motor is made of one section which is 
connected in parallel with one section of the main winding for 230-V operation. 
It is important to realize that the capacitor voltage increases rapidly 
above the switch-open speed and the capacitor can be damaged if the centrifugal 
switch fails to open at the designed speed. It is also important that switches not 
flutter, as this causes a dangerous rise in the voltage across the capacitor. 
A typical torque-speed characteristic for a capacitor-start single-phase 
induction motor is shown in Figure 6.19. The starting torque is very high, which 
is a desirable feature of this type of motor. 
Permanent-Split Capacitor Motors 
The second type of capacitor motors is referred to as the permanent- 
split capacitor motor, where the auxiliary winding and the capacitor are retained 
at normal running speed. This motor is used for special-purpose applications 
requiring high torque and is available in ratings from 
to X - x h p .  A 
schematic of the permanent-split capacitor motor is shown in Figure 6.20. 
A typical torque-speed characteristic for a permanent-split capacitor 
motor is shown in Figure 6.2 1. The starting torque is noticeably low since the 
capacitance is a compromise between best running and starting conditions. The 
next type of motor overcomes this difficulty. 
Capacitoi 
Centrifugal 
switch 
Auxiliary winding 
Figure 6.18 Capacitor-start motor 

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
2.0 
1.5- 
1.0- 
0.5- 
221 
Main and 
- 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
, 
, 
, 
/ 
Main winding 
c , 
only 
, 
. 
0 
0 0 
0 
c- 
*- 
I 
I 
c 
Capacitor 
Auxiliary winding 
Figure 6.20 Permanent-split capacitor motor. 
0.5 
* 
n, - 
1 
"i 
Figure 6.21 Torque-speed characteristic of a permanent-split single-phase induction motor. 

228 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Two-Value Capacitor Motors 
A two-value capacitor motor starts with one value of capacitors in 
series with the auxiliary winding and runs with a different capacitance value. 
This change can be done either using two separate capacitors or through the use 
of an autotransformer. 
This motor has been replaced by the capacitor-start 
motor for applications such as refrigerators and compressors. 
For the motor using an autotransformer, a transfer switch is used to 
change the tap on the autotransformer, as shown in Figure 6.22(A). This 
arrangement appears to be obsolete now and the two-capacitor mechanism 
illustrated in Figure 6.22(B) is used. 
A typical torque-speed characteristic for a two-value capacitor motor is 
shown in Figure 6.23. Note that optimum starting and running conditions can be 
accomplished in this type of motor. 
Repulsion-Type Motors 
A repulsion motor is a single-phase motor with power connected to the 
stator winding and a rotor whose winding is connected to a commutator. The 
brushes on the commutator are short-circuited and are positioned such that there 
is an angle of 20 to 30" between the magnetic axis of the stator winding and the 
magnetic axis of the rotor winding. A representative torque-speed characteristic 
for a repulsion motor is shown in Figure 6.24. A repulsion motor is a variable- 
speed motor. 
If in addition to the repulsion winding, a squirrel-cage type of winding 
is embedded in the rotor, we have a repulsion-induction motor. The torque- 
speed characteristic for a repulsion-induction motor is shown in Figure 6.25 and 
can be thought of as a combination of the characteristics of a single-phase 
induction motor and that of a straight repulsion motor. 
A repulsion-start induction motor is a single-phase motor with the same 
windings as a repulsion motor, but at a certain speed the rotor winding is short 
circuited to give the equivalent of a squirrel-cage winding. The repulsion-start 
motor is the first type of single-phase motors that gained wide acceptance. In 
recent years, however, it has been replaced by capacitor-type motors. A typical 
torque-speed characteristic of a repulsion-start induction motor is shown in 
Figure 6.26. 
Shaded-Pole Induction Motors 
For applications requiring low power of 1/4 hp or less, a shaded-pole 
induction motor is the standard general-purpose device for constant-speed 
applications. The torque characteristics of a shaded-pole motor are similar to 
those of a permanent-split capacitor motor as shown in Figure 6.27. 

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
Tfid 
229 
Starting 
connection 
Capacitor 
I I  
' Autotransformer 
Transfer 
switch 
Main 
winding 
m 
Auxiliary winding 
(A) 
Running capacitor 
Starting 
switch 
v 
Main 
winding 
rrm 
Auxiliary winding 
(B) 
Figure 6.22 Two-value capacitor motor: (A) autotransformer type; (B) two-capacitor type. 
Figure 6.23 Torque-speed characteristic of a two-value capacitor motor 

230 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
- 
ni 
ns - 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
Figure 6.24 Torque-speed characteristic ofa repulsion motor. 
__ 
"3 
Figure 6.25 Torque-speed characteristic ofa repulsion-induction motor. 
\ 
Short- 
Induction 
motor 
___c 
"r 
"s - 
Figure 6.26 Torque-speed characteristic ofa repulsion-start single-phase induction motor 

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
231 
‘t 
nr 
Figure 6.27 Torque-speed characteristic of a shaded-pole induction motor. 
PROBLEMS 
Problem 6.1 
Determine the number of poles, the slip, and the frequency of the rotor currents 
at rated load for three-phase, induction motors rated at: 
A. 220 V, 50 Hz, 1440 rlmin. 
B. 120 V, 400 Hz, 3800 r/min. 
Problem 6.2 
A 50-HP, 440-V, three-phase, 60-Hz, six-pole, Y-connected induction motor has 
the following parameters per phase: 
Rz = 0.15 ohm 
R1= 0.12 ohm 
C, = 6 x lo” s’ iemens 
B, = 0.07 siemens 
Xi =0.75 ohm 
The rotational losses are equal to the stator hysteresis and eddy-current losses. 
For a slip of 4 percent, find the following 
A. the line current and power factor. 
B. the horsepower output. 
C. the starting torque. 
Problem 6.3 
Use MATLABTM to verify the results of Problem 6.2. 

232 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Problem 6.4 
The rotor resistance and reactance of a squirrel-cage induction motor rotor at 
standstill are 0.14 ohm per phase and 0.8 ohm per phase respectively. Assuming 
a transformer ratio of unity, from the eight-pole stator having a phase voltage of 
254 at 60 Hz to the rotor secondary, calculate the following 
A. rotor starting current per phase. 
B. the value of slip producing maximum torque. 
Problem 6.5 
The full-load slip of a squirrel-cage induction motor is 0.06, and the starting 
current is five times the full-load current. Neglecting the stator core and copper 
losses as well as the rotational losses, obtain: 
A. the ratio of starting torque to the full-load torque. 
B. the ratio of maximum to full-load torque and the corresponding 
slip. 
Problem 6.6 
The rotor resistance and reactance of a wound-rotor induction motor at standstill 
are 0.14 ohm per phase and 0.8 ohm per phase, respectively. Assuming a 
transformer ratio of unity, from the eight-pole stator having a phase voltage of 
254 V at 60 Hz to the rotor secondary, find the additional rotor resistance 
required to produce maximum torque at: 
A. starting s = 1. 
B. a speed of 450 r/min. 
Problem 6.7 
A two-pole 60-Hz induction motor develops a maximum torque of twice the 
full-load torque. The starting torque is equal to the full load torque. Determine 
the full load speed. 
Problem 6.8 
The starting torque of a three-phase induction motor is 165 percent and its 
maximum torque is 215 percent of full-load torque. Determine the slips at full 
load and at maximum torque. Find the rotor current at starting in per unit of 
full-load rotor current. 
Problem 6.9 
Consider a 25-hp, 230-V three-phase, 60-Hz squirrel cage induction motor 
operating at rated voltage and ftequency. The rotor t2R loss at maximum torque 
is 9.0 times that at full-load torque, and the slip at full load torque is 0.028. 
Neglect stator resistance and rotational losses. Find the maximum torque in per 
unit of full load torque and the slip at which it takes place. Find the starting 
torque in per unit of full load torque. 

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
233 
Problem 6.10 
The slip at full load for a three-phase induction motor is 0.04 and the rotor 
current at starting is 5 times its value at full load. Find the starting torque in per 
unit of full-load torque and the ratio of the maximum torque to full load torque 
and the slip at which it takes place. 
Problem 6.1 1 
A 220-V three phase four-pole 60 Hz squirrel-cage induction motor develops a 
maximum torque of 250 percent at a slip of 14 percent when operating at rated 
voltage and frequency. Now, assume that the motor is operated at 180 V and 50 
Hz. Determine the maximum torque and the speed at which it takes place. 
Problem 6.1 2 
A six-pole, 60-Hz three-phase wound rotor induction motor has a rotor 
resistance of 0.8 R and runs at 1150 rpm at a given load. The motor drives a 
constant torque load. Suppose that we need the motor to run at 950 rpm while 
driving the same load. Find the additional resistance required to be inserted in 
the rotor circuit to fulfill this requirement. 
Problem 6.1 3 
Assume for a 3-phase induction motor that for a certain operating condition the 
stator Z2R = rotor Z2R = core loss = rotational loss and that the output is 30 KW at 
86% efficiency. Determine the slip under this operating condition. 
Problem 6.14 
Find the required additional rotor resistance to limit starting current to 45 A for a 
3-phase 600-V induction motor with RT = 1.66 R and X ,  = 4.1 R. 
Problem 6.1 5 
The rotor Z2R at starting are 6.25 times that at full load with slip of 0.035 for a 
three-phase induction motor. Find the slip at maximum torque and the ratio of 
starting to full-load torques. 
Problem 6.16 
The following parameters are available for a single-phase induction motor 
Rl = 1 S R  
R; =3.4R 
XI =x; 
= 3 R  
x, = l00R 
Calculate Zb Z,, and the input impedance of the motor for a slip of 0.06. 
Problem 6.17 
The induction motor of Problem 6.16 is a 60-Hz 1 10-V four-pole machine. Find 
the output power and torque under the conditions of Problem 6.16 assuming that 
the core losses are 66 W. Neglect rotational losses. 

234 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Problem 6.18 
A four-pole 110-V 60-Hz single-phase induction motor has the following 
parameters: 
R, = 0.8 R 
X ,  = X i  =1.92R 
R; =1R 
X,,, = 42 R 
The core losses are equal to the rotational losses, which are given by 40 W. 
Find the output power and efficiency at a slip of 0.05. 
Problem 6.19 
The following parameters are available for a single-phase 110-V induction 
motor: 
R, = R; = 2.7 R 
X, 
= X i  =2.7R 
X,, = 72 R 
The core losses are 18.5 W and rotational losses are 17 W. Assume that the 
machine has four poles and operates on a 60-Hz supply. Find the rotor ohmic 
losses, output power, and torque for a slip of 5%. 
Problem 6.20 
The stator resistance of a single-phase induction motor is 1.96 R and the rotor 
resistance referred to the stator is 3.6 Q. The motor takes a current of 4.2 A 
from the 110-V supply at a power factor of 0.624 when running at slip of 0.05. 
Assume that the core loss is 36 W and that the approximation of Eq. (6.47) is 
applicable. Find the motor’s output power and efficiency neglecting rotational 
losses. 
Problem 6.21 
A single-phase induction motor takes an input power of 280 W at a power factor 
of 0.6 lagging from a 1 10-V supply when running at a slip of 5 percent. Assume 
that the rotor resistance and reactance are 3.38 and 2.6 R, respectively, and that 
the magnetizing reactance is 60 R. Find the resistance and the reactance of the 
motor. 
Problem 6.22 
For the motor of Problem 6.21, assume that the core losses are 35 W and the 
rotational losses are 14 W. Find the output power and efficiency when running 
at a slip of 5 percent. 
Problem 6.23 
The output torque of a single-phase induction motor is 0.82 N . m at a speed of 
1710 rpm. The efficiency is 60 percent and the fixed losses are 37 W. Assume 
that the motor operates on a 110-V supply and that the stator resistance is 2 R. 

Induction and Fractional Horsepower Motors 
235 
Find the input power factor and input impedance. Assume that the rotor ohmic 
losses are 35.26 W. Find the forward and backward gap power and the values of 
Rfand Rh. Assume a four-pole machine. 
Problem 6.24 
The forward field impedance of a 1 
-hp four-pole 110-V 60-Hz single-phase 
induction motor for a slip of 0.05 is given by 
4 
Z,, = 12.4+j16.98R 
Assume that 
x,, 
= 53.5 R 
Find the values of the rotor resistance and reactance. 
Problem 6.25 
For the motor of Problem 6.24, assume that the stator impedance is given by 
Z, = 1.86 + j2.56 R 
Find the internal mechanical power, output power, power factor, input power, 
developed torque, and efficiency, assuming that friction losses are 15 W. 

Chapter 7 
FAULTS AND PROTECTION OF ELECTRIC ENERGY SYSTEMS 
7.1 
IN TRODUC TlON 
A short-circuit fault takes place when two or more conductors come in 
contact with each other when normally they operate with a potential difference 
between them. The contact may be a physical metallic one, or it may occur 
through an arc. In the metal-to-metal contact case, the voltage between the two 
parts is reduced to zero. On the other hand, the voltage through an arc will be of 
a very small value. Short-circuit faults in three-phase systems are classified as: 
1. 
2. 
Single line-to-ground faults. 
3. Line-to-line faults. 
4. 
Double line-to-ground faults. 
Balanced or symmetrical three-phase faults. 
Generator failure is caused by insulation breakdown between turns in 
the same slot or between the winding and the steel structure of the machine. The 
same can take place in transformers. 
The breakdown is due to insulation 
deterioration combined with switching andor lightning overvoltages. Overhead 
lines are constructed of bare conductors. 
Wind, sleet, trees, cranes, kites, 
airplanes, birds, or damage to supporting structure are causes for accidental 
faults on overhead lines. Contamination of insulators and lightning overvoltages 
will in general result in short-circuit faults. 
Deterioration of insulation in 
underground cables results in short circuit faults. This is mainly attributed to 
aging combined with overloading. About 75 percent of the energy system’s 
faults are due to single-line-to-ground faults and result from insulator flashover 
during electrical storms. Only one in twenty faults is due to the balanced 
category. 
A fault will cause currents of high value to flow through the network to 
the faulted point. The amount of current may be much greater than the designed 
thermal ability of the conductors in the power lines or machines feeding the 
fault. 
As a result, temperature rise may cause damage by annealing of 
conductors and insulation charring. 
In addition, the low voltage in the 
neighborhood of the fault will cause equipment malfunction. 
Short-circuit and protection studies are an essential tool for the electric 
energy systems engineer. The task is to calculate the fault conditions and to 
provide protective equipment designed to isolate the faulted zone from the 
remainder of the system in the appropriate time. 
The least complex fault 
category computationally is the balanced fault. It is possible that a balanced 
fault could (in some locations) result in currents smaller than that due to some 
other type of fault. The interrupting capacity of breakers should be chosen to 
accommodate the largest of fault currents, and hence, care must be taken not to 
Introduction to Electrical Power Engineering. By Mohamed E. El-Hawary 
Copyright 0 
2008 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. 
231 

238 
base protection decisions on the results of a balanced three phase fault. 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
7.2 
TRANSIENTS DURING A BALANCED FAULT 
The value and severity of short-circuit current in the electric power 
system depends on the instant in the cycle at which the short circuit occurs. This 
can be verified using a simple model, consisting of a generator with series 
resistance R and inductance L as shown in Figure 7.1. The voltage of the 
generator is assumed to vary as 
e(t) = En, sin(wt+a) 
(7.1) 
A dc term will in general exist when a balanced fault is placed on the generator 
terminals at t = 0. The initial magnitude may be equal to the magnitude of the 
steady-state current term. 
The worst possible case of transient current occurs for the value of 
short circuit time placement corresponding to agiven by 
R 
ma=-- 
WL 
Here, the current magnitude will approach twice the steady-state 
maximum value immediately after the short circuit. The transient current is 
given in this case by the small t approximation 
i(t) =-(l-coswl) 
E m  
Z 
It is clear that 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
239 
(b) 
Figure 7.2 (a) Short-circuit Current Wave Shape for tan a = - ( R / d ) ;  (b) Short-circuit Current 
Wave Shape for tan a= ( d / R ) .  
I/ 
I 
I 
Machine. 
Figure 7.3 
I 
I 
Subtranrwll ' 
Tr~r1,Ient 
Steady Slate 
Symmetrical Short-circuit Current and Reactances for a Synchronous 
This waveform is shown in Figure 7.2(a). 
For the case of short circuit application corresponding to 
WL 
tana=- R 

240 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
we have 
(7.3) 
This waveform is shown in Figure 7.2(b). 
It is clear that the reactance of the machine appears to be time-varying, 
if we assume a fixed voltage source E. For our power system purposes, we let 
the reactance vary in a stepwise fashion X ; ,  X i ,  and X ,  as shown in Figure 
7.3. 
The current history i(t) can be approximated considering three time 
segments by three different expressions. The first is called the subtransient 
interval and lasts up to two cycles, the current is I " .  This defines the direct-axis 
subtransient reactance: 
E 
I 
x; = y  
The second, denoted the transient interval, gives rise to 
E 
I 
x; = y  
(7.4) 
(7.5) 
where I' is the transient current and X i  is direct-axis transient reactance. The 
transient interval lasts for about 30 cycles. 
The steady-state condition gives the direct-axis synchronous reactance: 
E 
I 
x, =- 
Table 7.1 list typical values of the reactances defined in Eqs. (7.4), (7.5), and 
(7.6). Note that the subtransient reactance can be as low as 7 percent of the 
synchronous reactance. 
7.3 
THE METHOD OF SYMMETRICAL COMPONENTS 
The method of symmetrical components is used to transform an 
unbalanced three-phase system into three sets of balanced three-phase phasors. 
The basic idea of the transformations is simple. Given three voltage phasors V,, 
VH, and V(., it is possible to express each as the sum of three phasors as follows: 
v, = v,, + v,- + v,, 
(7.7) 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
241 
Table 7.1 
vc - 
VB 
vc - 
"EO 
VB 
Figure 7.4 An Unbalanced Set of Voltage Phasors and a Possible Decomposition 
&. = v,, + 5,- + v,, 
(7.9) 
Figure 7.4 shows the phasors Y4, V,, and Vc- as well as a particular possible 
choice of the decompositions. 
Obviously there are many possible decompositions. For notational 
simplicity, we introduce the complex operator adefrned by 
(7.10) 
a = p
o
 
We require that the sequence voltages VA+, VRA, and V,, form a 
balanced positively rotating system. Thus the phasor magnitudes are equal, and 
the phasors are 120" apart in a sequence A-B-C. 
VH+ d V A +  
(7.11) 

242 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Similarly, we require that the sequence voltages VA-, VB-, and V,. form a 
balanced negatively rotating system. This requires that the sequence is C-B-A 
VB- = avA- 
(7.13) 
(7.14) 
2 
v,- =a VA- 
The sequence voltages VAo V,, , Vco are required to be equal in 
magnitude and phase. Thus, 
‘BO = ‘A0 
(7.15) 
‘CO = ‘A0 
(7.16) 
The original phasor voltages VA, VB, and Vc are expressed in terms of the 
sequence voltages as 
The inverse relation giving the positive sequence voltage VA+, the 
negative sequence voltage VA-, and the zero sequence voltage VAo is obtained by 
solving the above three simultaneous equations to give 
(7.20) 
vA, 
=-(vA 
1 
+av, + a 2 ~ c )  
3 
(7.22) 
Some of the properties of the operator aare as follows: 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
243 
For clarity, we will drop the suffix A from the sequence voltage 
symbols, and we have 
VA = v+ + v- + v, 
(7.23) 
vH =a'V++aV_+V, 
(7.24) 
(7.25) 
2 
V,. =aV++a U+V, 
/ 
vAo / 
vBo 
"co / 
(c) 
Figure 7.5 (a) Positive Sequence Voltage Phasors, (b) Negative Sequence Voltage Phasors; and 
(c) Zero Sequence Voltage Phasors. 

244 
and 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
(7.26) 
3 
(7.27) 
v- =-(v, 
1 
+a2vB+av(.) 
3 
The ideas of symmetrical components apply to currents in the same manner. 
We have the following two examples: 
Example 7.1 
The following currents were recorded under fault conditions in a three-phase 
system: 
I ,  = 150145" A 
I ,  = 250L150" A 
1,. = lOOL300" A 
Calculate the values of the positive, negative, and zero phase sequence 
components for each line. 
Solution 
1 
3 
1 
3 
1, = - ( [ A  + 1, + Ic) 
= -(106.04+ j106.07 + j106.07 -216.51 + j125.00+ 50 -j86.6) 
= 52.211 12.7" 
I ,  = - ( I A  
1 
+dH 
+a21,.)=-(150L45" 
1 
+250L270" +100L180°) 
I- = - (I, + a21, + al(J 
3 
3 
= 48.021 - 87.6" 
1 
3 
= 163.21L40.45" 
Example 7.2 
Given that 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
245 
v, =I00 
V+ =200L6O0 
v- = 1OOLl20" 
find the phase voltage V,, V,, and Vc. 
Solution 
VA = v+ + v- + VO 
= 200L - 120" + 1 O O L  - 60" + 100 = 300L60" 
v, =a2V++aV-+V, 
= (1L240" 1200L6Oo)+ (1L120"~1OOLl20")+ 100 
= 3001 - 60" 
v,. =avt +a2V- +vo 
= (lL120"~20OL60")+ 
(lL240" 1100L12Oo)+ 100 
= O  
Power in Symmetrical Components 
The total power in a three-phase network is given in terms of phase 
variables by 
s = VAIi + v/& + 4.I;. 
(7.29) 
where the asterisk denotes complex conjugation. 
corresponding expression in terms of sequence variables is given by 
We can show that the 
S = 3(VtI: + V-f + V,I;) 
(7.30) 
The total power is three times the sum of powers in individual sequence 
networks. 
7.4 
SEQUENCE NETWORKS 
Positive Sequence Networks 
For a given power system the positive sequence network shows all the 
paths for the flow of positive sequence currents in the system. The one-line 
diagram of the system is converted to an impedance diagram that shows the 
equivalent circuit of each component under balanced operating conditions. 

246 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Each generator in the system is represented by a source voltage in 
series with the appropriate reactance and resistance. 
To simplify the 
calculations, all resistance and the magnetizing current for each transformer are 
neglected. For transmission lines, the line’s shunt capacitance and resistance are 
neglected. Motor loads, whether synchronous or induction, are included in the 
network as generated EMF’S in series with the appropriate reactance. Static 
loads are mostly neglected in fault studies. 
Negative Sequence Networks 
Balanced three-phase generators and motors have only positive 
sequence-generated voltages. Thus, the negative sequence network model will 
not contain voltage sources associated with rotating machinery. Note that the 
negative sequence impedance will in general be different from the positive 
sequence values. For static devices such as transmission lines and transformers, 
the negative sequence impedances have the same values as the corresponding 
positive sequence impedances. 
The current-limiting impedances between the generator’s neutral and 
ground will not appear in either the positive or negative sequence network. This 
arises simply because positive and negative sequence currents are balanced. 
Zero Sequence Networks 
connections of the three-phase windings for each of the system’s components. 
Delta-Connected Winding 
connection. However, since we have the requirement 
The zero sequence network of a system depends on the nature of the 
Zero sequence currents can exist in the phase windings of the delta 
I,, = I,, = I(., = I ,  
we conclude that the line currents coming out of a delta winding are zero. For 
example, 
I,, = I,, - I,, = 0 
This situation is shown in Figure 7.6. 
The single-phase equivalent zero sequence network for a delta- 
connected load with zero sequence impedance Z, is shown in Figure 7.7. 
Wye-Connected Winding 
When a neutral return wire is present, zero sequence currents will pass 
both in the phase windings as well as on the lines. The neutral current 1, will be 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
247 
- 
I CA=O 
Ice 
c _ _  
I I 
Figure 7.6 Delta-Connected Winding and Zero Sequence Currents. 
PA  no^ 
PB 
PC 
 no^ 
PB 
PC 
Figure 7.7 Zero Sequence Equivalent of a Delta-Connected Load. 
f Ao I 
I N  
3 
. _ _ I  
I, = 0 i 
NO 
PO 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 7.8 Wye-Connected Winding with and without Neutral Return. 
I ,  = I,, + I,, + I(-., 
= 31, 
This is shown in Figure 7.8(a). In the case of a system with no neutral return, Ih' 
= 0 shows that no zero sequence currents can exist. This is shown in Figure 
7.8(b). Zero sequence equivalents are shown in Figure 7.9. 

248 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
~
~
Z O  
PO 
20 
PB 
pc 
Figure 7.9 Zero Sequence Networks for Y-Connected Loads 
Transformer’s Zero Sequence Equivalents 
There are various possible combinations of the primary and secondary 
connections for three-phase transformers. These change the corresponding zero 
sequence network. 
Delta-delta Bank 
In a delta circuit no return path for zero sequence current exists, and 
thus no zero sequence current can flow into a delta-delta bank, although it can 
circulate within the delta windings. The equivalent circuit connections are 
shown in Figure 7.10. 
Wye-delta Bank, Ungrounded Wye 
For an ungrounded wye connection, no path exists for zero sequence 
current to the neutral. The equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 7.1 1. 
Wye-delta Bank, Grounded Wye 
Zero sequence currents will pass through the wye winding to ground. 
As a result, secondary zero sequence currents will circulate through the delta 
winding. No zero sequence current will exist on the lines of the delta secondary. 
The equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 7.12. 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
249 
P 
Figure 7.10 
delta-delta. 
I 
NO 
Q 
Q 
v 
P n 
Zero Sequence Equivalent Circuits for a Three-Phase Transformer Bank Connected in 
Y
A
 3 
I 
I '< 
I 
I 
Po 
Qo - 
(c) 
Figure 7.1 1 Zero Sequence Equivalent Circuits for a Three-Phase Transformer Bank Connected in 
Wye-delta. 

250 
I 
I 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
No 
(c) 
Figure 7.12 Zero Sequence Equivalent Circuit for a Three-Phase Transformer Bank Connected in 
Wye-Delta Bank with Grounded Y. 
P 
Q 
I 
I 
I 
\ .  
N O  
20 
Po --------E77---. 
--Qo 
(c) 
Figure 7.13 Zero Sequence Equivalent Circuit for a Three-Phase Transformer Bank Connected in 
Wye-Wye with One Grounded Neutral. 
Wye-Wye Bank, One Neutral Grounded 
With an ungrounded wye, no zero sequence current can flow. No 
current in one winding means that no current exists in the other. Figure 7.13 
illustrates the situation. 

Faults and Protection of EIectric Energy Systems 
251 
P 7 
I 
No 
zo 
(4 
Figure 7.14 Zero Sequence Equivalent Circuit for a Three-Phase Transformer Bank Connected in 
Wye-Wye with Neutrals Grounded. 
Wye-Wye Bank, Both Neutrals Grounded 
With both wyes grounded, zero sequence current can flow. The 
presence of the current in one winding means that secondary current exists in the 
other. Figure 7.14 illustrates the situation. 
Sequence Impedances for Synchronous Machines 
For a synchronous machine, sequence impedances are essentially 
reactive. The positive, negative, and zero sequence impedances have in general 
different values. 
Positive Sequence Impedance 
Depending on the time interval of interest, one of three reactances may 
be used: 
1. For the subtransient interval, we use the subtransient reactance: 
2. For the transient interval, we use the corresponding reactance: 
3. In the steady state, we have 
Z, = j X ,  

252 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Negative Sequence Impedance 
The MMF produced by negative sequence armature three-phase current 
rotates in a direction opposite to the rotor and hence opposite to the dc field 
winding. Therefore the reactance of the machine will be different from that for 
the positively rotating sequence. 
Zero Sequence Impedance 
The zero sequence impedance of the synchronous machine is quite 
variable and depends on the nature of the stator windings. In general, these will 
be much smaller than the corresponding positive and negative sequence 
reactance. 
Sequence Impedances for a Transmission Link 
Consider a three-phase transmission link of impedance Z ,  per phase. 
The return (or neutral) impedance is ZN. If the system voltages are unbalanced, 
we have a neutral current IN. Thus, 
I ,  = I ,  + I n  + I ( .  
The voltage drops AV,, AVH, and AV,. across the link are as shown below: 
In terms of sequence voltages and currents, we have 
AV+ = I,Z, 
AV- = I-Z, 
AVO = lo(Zl, +3Z,) 
Therefore the sequence impedances are given by: 
z, = z, +3z, 
z- =z,. 
z+ = ZI’ 
The impedance of the neutral path enters into the calculation of zero sequence 
impedance in addition to the link’s impedance Z,. However, for the positive and 
negative sequence impedances, only the link’s impedance appears. 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
253 
Figure 7.15 System for Example 7.3 
Example 7.3 
Draw the zero sequence network for the system shown in Figure 7.15. 
Solution 
The zero sequence network is shown in Figure 7.16. 
Figure 7.16 Zero Skquence Network for Example 7.3 

254 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Example 7.4 
Obtain the sequence networks for the system shown in Figure 7.17. Assume the 
following data in p.u. on the same base. 
Generator GI: 
XA = 0.2 p.u. 
x. 
= 0.12 p.u. 
X- = 0.33 p.u. 
X. 
0.22 p.u, 
Xo = 0.06 P.U. 
Generator G2: 
Xo 
0.066 P.U. 
Transformer TI: X+ 
= X. = Xo = 0.2 P.U. 
Transformer T2: X’, =X. = X, = 0.225 p.u. 
Transformer T3: A‘- =X 
=XO = 0.27 P.U. 
Transformer T,: X+ 
= X. = XO 
= 0.16 p.u. 
X, = 0.3 p.u. 
Line L,: 
Line Lz: 
Line Lj: 
X+=X.=O.15 p.u. 
Load: 
A; = x. = 0.14 p.u. 
A’+ = x. = 0.20 p.u. 
X, = 0.2 p.u. 
X ,  = 1.2 p.u. 
Xo 
0.4 P.U. 
XA 
= X. = 0.9 p.u. 
Assume an unbalanced fault occurs at F. Find the equivalent sequence networks 
for this condition. 
Figure 7.17 Network for Example 7 4 
Solution 
The positive sequence network is as shown in Figure 7.18(A). One step in the 
reduction can be made, the result of which is shown in Figure 7.1 8(B). To avoid 
tedious work we utilize Thevenin’s theorem to obtain the positive sequence 
network in reduced form. We assign currents I,, 12, and 1, as shown in Figure 
7. I8(B) and proceed to solve for the open-circuit voltage between F+ and N+. 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
(B) 
Figure 7.18 Positive Sequence Network for Example 7.4. 
Consider loop A. We can write 
110 = j[O.21, + 0.36(1, - 13)+ 0.9(1, + 1, )] 
For loop B, we have 
0 = j[0.5651, +0.42(1, + /3)-0.36(/l - 13)] 
For loop C, we have 
I L O  = j[0.33/, +0.42(/, +1,)+0.9(1, + I,)] 
The above three equations are rearranged to give 
1LO = j(1.46Z, +0.91, -0.361,) 
1LO = j(o.91, + 1 .651, + 0.421,) 
0 = 0.3611 - 0.421, - 1.34513 
255 
Solving the three equations we obtain the current values as follows: 

256 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
I ,  =-j0.4839 
I ,  = -j0.3357 
I, = -j0.0247 
Step 4 
Figure 7.19 Steps in Positive Sequence Impedance Reduction. 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
257 
Figure 7.19 (Cort.) 

258 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 7.20 Positive Sequence Network Equivalent for Example 7.4. 
Figure 7.21 Steps in Reduction of the Negative Sequence Network for Example 7.4. 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
259 
Figure 7.21 (Cont.) 

260 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 7.22 Steps in Reducing the Zero Sequence Network for Example 7.4. 
As a result, we get 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
261 
Vb+N+ 
= K,H = I - j0.21, - j0.16(1, - Z,) 
= 1 -(02)(0.4839)-(0.16)(0.4839-0.0247) 
= 0.82975 
We now turn our attention to the Thevenin's equivalent impedance, 
which is obtained by shorting out the sources and using network reduction. The 
steps are shown in Figure 7.19. As a result, we get 
Z, = j0.224 
The positive sequence equivalent is shown in Figure 7.20. 
The negative sequence and zero sequence impedance networks and 
steps in their reduction are shown in Figure 7.21 and Figure 7.22. As a result, 
we get 
Z- = j0.1864 
Z, =j0.1315 
7.5 
LINE-TO-GROUND FAULT 
Assume that phase A is shorted to ground at the fault point F as shown 
in Figure 7.23. The phase B and C currents into the fault are zero, and we can 
thus write fB = 0, lc- = 0. The sequence currents are obtained as: 
A 
I F  
Figure 7.23 Line-to-Ground Fault Schematic. 

262 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
(7.31) 
With the generators normally producing balanced three-phase voltages, 
which are positive sequence only, we can write 
E+ = E, 
(7.32) 
E- = O  
(7.33) 
Eo = 0 
(7.34) 
Let us assume that the sequence impedances from the source to the fault are 
given by Z+, Z-, Z,. 
We can write the following expressions for sequence 
voltages at the fault: 
V, = E+ - I+Z+ 
(7.35) 
v- = 0- 1 - 2  
(7.36) 
v, = 0- IOZ, 
(7.37) 
The fact that phase A is shorted to ground is used. Thus, 
v, = o  
This leads to 
0 = E+ - Io(Z+ + Z- + Zo) 
or 
E+ 
z+ 
+ z- 
+ z, 
I, = 
(7.38) 
The resulting equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 7.24. 
We can now state the solution in terms of phase currents: 
I ,  = 
3E+ 
z+ + z- + z, 
I ,  = o  
I,. = o  
(7.39) 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
Figure 7.24 Equivalent circuit tor Single Line-to-Ground Fault. 
For phase voltages we have 
2 63 
(7.40) 
Example 7.5 
Consider a system with sequence impedances given by Z+ = j0.2577, Z- = 
j0.2085, and Zo =j0.14; find the voltages and currents at the fault point for a 
single line-to-ground fault. 
Solution 
The sequence networks are connected in series for a single line-to-ground fault. 
The sequence currents are given by 
1 
j(0.2577 + 0.2085 + 0.14) 
[ = [  = [  - 
+ 
~ 
0 -  
= I .65L - 90" P.U. 
Therefore, 

264 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
I ,  = 31, = 4.951-90" P.U. 
I ,  = I,. = 0 
The sequence voltages are as follows: 
V+ = E+ - I+Z+ 
= 110 - (1.65L - 90" 10.2577L90") 
= 0.57 P.U. 
= -(1.65L - 90"~0.2085L90") 
v- = -1-z- 
= -0.34 P.U. 
v, = 4 , Z o  
= -(1.65L - 90" 10.14L90") 
= -0.23 P.U. 
The phase voltages are thus 
v, = v+ + v- + v, = 0 
v, =a2V++aV-+V, 
= (1L240'~0.57)+(lA2O0~-0.34)+(-0.23) 
=0.86L-113.64" P.U. 
V(. = av, + a2v- 
+ v, 
= (11120"~0.57)+(11240"~-0.34)+(-0.23) 
= 0.8611 13.64" P.U. 
7.6 
DOUBLE LINE-TO-GROUND FAULT 
We will consider a general fault condition. In this case we assume that 
phase B has fault impedance of Zj phase C has a fault impedance of Zj and the 
common line-to-ground fault impedance is Z,. 
This is shown in Figure 7.25. 
The boundary conditions are as follows: 
I ,  = o  
v,, =I,(zf+z,)+lrzg 
v,, = I,Z, + (Zf + z, )I(~ 
We can demonstrate that 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
265 
(7.41) 
Figure 7.25 Circuit with Double Line-to-Ground fault 
Figure 7.26 Sequence Network for Double Line-to-Ground Fault 
The equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 7.26. It is clear from Eq. (7.41) that 
the sequence networks are connected in parallel. From the equivalent circuit we 
can obtain the positive, negative, and zero sequence currents easily. 

266 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Example 7.6 
For the system of Example 7.5 find the voltages and currents at the fault point 
for a double line-to-ground fault. Assume 
Z ,  = j0.05p.u. 
Z, = j0.033p.u. 
Solution 
The sequence network connection is as shown in Figure 7.27. Steps of the 
network reduction are also shown. From the figure, sequence currents are as 
follows: 
I+ = 'lo = 2.241-90" 
0.45190" 
I- = -I, (0.29:?2.585) 
= - 1.1 S L  - 90" 
1, = -1.061 - 90" 
The sequence voltages are calculated as follows. 
V+ = E+ - I+Z+ 
= 110-(2.241-90"~0.26L-90") 
= 0.42 
v- = -1-z- 
= +(I. 18)(0.2085) = 0.25 
v, = -I0Zo 
=(1.06)(0.14)=0.15 
The phase currents are obtained as 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
I ,  = o  
I ,  =a21,+al-+I, 
= (1L240)(2.24L-90")+(1A20)(-1.18L-90'') 
+ (- 1.06L - 90") 
= 3.361151.77" 
I,,. =d+ 
+a21- 
+ I ,  
= (1L120)(2.241-9O0)+(IL240)(- 1.18L-90") 
+(-1.06L-90G) 
= 3.36128.23" 
267 
Figure 7.27 Sequence Network for Example 7.6. 
The phase voltages are found as 

268 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
v, = v+ + v- + v, 
= 0.42 + 0.25 + 0.15 
= 0.82 
v, = a= v+ + av- + v, 
= (IL240"~0.42)+(lL120"~0.25)+(0.15) 
=0.24L-l41.49" 
V(. = av, + a2 v- + v, 
= (1L12Oo10.42)+ (1L240°~0.25)+0.15 
= 0.24L141.49" 
7.7 
LINE- TO-LINE FAULT 
Let phase A be the unfaulted phase. Figure 7.28 shows a three-phase 
system with a line-to-line short circuit between phases B and C. The boundary 
conditions in this case are 
I ,  = o  
I ,  = -I(. 
VB - v,. = I,Z 
f 
The first two conditions yield 
I, = 0 
1 
I+ = -1- =-(a-a2)lA 
3 
The voltage conditions give 
v+ - v- = Z,fl+ 
(7.42) 
The equivalent circuit will take on the form shown in Figure 7.29. 
Note that the zero sequence network is not included since lo = 0. 
Example 7.7 
For the system of Example 7.5, find the voltages and currents at the fault point 
for a line-to-line fault through an impedance Zf =j0.05 p.u. 
Solution 
The sequence network connection is as shown in Figure 7.30. 
diagram, 
From the 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
Figure 7.28 Example ofa Line-to-Line Fault. 
Figure 7.29 Line-to-Line Equivalent Circuit 
110 
0.5 1 85190'' 
I =-I 
~ = 
= 1.931-90" P.U. 
I ,  = o  
The phase currents are thus 
I ,  = o  
I H -  --I,. 
= (012 -&+ 
= (11240' - 1L120" 11.93L - 90") 
= 3.34L - 180" P.U. 
269 
The sequence voltages are 

270 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
j0.05 
Figure 7.30 Sequence Network Connection for Example 7.7. 
V, = E, - I,Z, 
= 110 - (1.931 - 90" 10.26L90") 
= 0.5 P.U. 
= -(1.93L-90"~0.2O85L9O0) 
= 0.4 P.U. 
v- = -1-Z- 
v, = -1,Zo 
= O  
The phase voltages are obtained as shown below: 
y4 = v+ + v- + v, 
= 0.9 P.U. 
v, = dv+ 
+av- 
+I/, 
= (11240" k0.5)+ (1LI2O0)(0.4) 
= 0.461 - 169.1 1" 
v,. =aV++a2v-+v, 
= (1~120ok0.5)+ (1~2400k0.4) 
= 0.461169.11" 
As a check, we calculate 
Hence, 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
271 
v, - v,. = I,Z , 
7.8 
THE BALANCED THREE-PHASE FAULT 
Let us now consider the situation with a balanced three-phase fault on 
phases A, B, and C, all through the same fault impedance Zp 
This fault 
condition is shown in Figure 7.3 1. It is clear from inspection in Figure 7.3 1 that 
the phase voltage at the faults are given by 
(7.43) 
Figure 7.31 A Balanced Three-Phase Fault. 
vB = ‘Bz/ 
(7.44) 
v,. = ICZf 
(7.45) 
We can show that 
(7.46) 
E 
I ,  =- z+ 
+z, 
I- = o  
(7.47) 
I, = 0 
(7.48) 
The implications of Eqs. (7.47) and (7.48) are obvious. No zero sequence nor 
negative sequence components of the current exist. Instead, only positive 
sequence quantities are obtained in the case of a balanced three-phase fault. 
Example 7.8 
For the system of Example 7.5, find the short-circuit currents at the fault point 

212 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
for a balanced three-phase fault through three impedances each having a value 
of Z, = j0.05 p.u. 
Solution 
= 3.231-90" 
110 
J(0.26 + 0.05) 
I& = I, = 
7.9 
SYSTEM PROTECTION, AN INTRODUCTION 
The result of the preceding section provides a basis to determine the 
conditions that exist in the system under fault conditions. It is important to take 
the necessary action to prevent the faults, and if they do occur, to minimize 
possible damage or possible power disruption. 
A protection system 
continuously monitors the power system to ensure maximum continuity of 
electrical supply with minimum damage to life, equipment, and property. 
The following are some consequences of faults: 
1. 
Abnormally large currents will flow in parts of system with 
associated overheating of components. 
2. 
System voltages will be off their normal acceptable levels, 
resulting in possible equipment damage. 
3. 
Parts of the system will be caused to operate as unbalanced three- 
phase systems, which will mean improper operation of some or all 
of the equipment. 
A number of requirements for protective systems provide the basis for 
design criteria. 
1. Reliability: 
Provide both dependability (guaranteed correct 
operation in response to faults) and security (avoiding unnecessary 
operation). 
Reliability requires that relay systems perform 
correctly under adverse system and environmental conditions. 
Speed Relays should respond to abnormal conditions in the least 
possible time. This usually means that the operation time should 
not exceed three cycles on a 60-Hz base. 
3. Selectivity: A relay system should provide maximum possible 
service continuity with minimum system disconnection. 
4. Simplicity and economy: The requirements of simplicity and 
economy are common in any engineering design, and relay 
systems are no exception. 
2. 
A protective system detects fault conditions by continuously 
monitoring variables such as current, voltage, power, frequency, and impedance. 
Measuring currents and voltages is performed by instrument transformers of the 
potential type (P.T.) or current type (C.T.). Instrument transformers feed the 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
2 73 
measured variables to the relay system, which in turn, upon detecting a fault, 
commands a circuit-interrupting device known as the circuit breaker (C.B.) to 
disconnect the faulted section of the system. 
An electric power system is divided into protective zones for each 
apparatus in the system. The division is such that zones are given adequate 
protection while keeping service interruption to a minimum. A single-line 
diagram of a part of a power system with its zones of protection is given in 
Figure 7.32. It is to be noted that each zone is overlapped to avoid unprotected 
(blind) areas. 
7.10 
PROTECTIVE RELAYS 
A relay is a device that opens and closes electrical contacts to cause the 
operation of other devices under electric control. The relay detects intolerable 
or undesirable conditions within an assigned area. The relay acts to operate the 
appropriate circuit breakers to disconnect the area affected to prevent damage to 
personnel and property. 
We classify relays according to their function, that is, as measuring or 
on-off relays. The latter class is also known as all-or-nothing and includes 
relays such as time-lag relays, auxiliary relays, and tripping relays. Here the 
relay does not have a specified setting and is energized by a quantity that is 
Figure 7.32 Typical Zones of Protection in Part of an Electric Power System. 

274 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
either higher than that at which it operates or lower than that at which it resets. 
The class of measuring relays includes a number of types with the 
common feature that they operate at a predetermined setting. Examples are as 
follows: 
0 
Current relays: Operate at a predetermined threshold value of 
current. These include overcurrent and undercurrent relays. 
0 
Voltage relays: Operate at a predetermined value of voltage. 
These include overvoltage and undervoltage relays. 
Power relays: Operate at a predetermined value of power. These 
include overpower and underpower relays. 
Directional relays: 
(i) 
Alternating current: 
Operate according to the phase 
relationship between alternating quantities. 
(ii) 
Direct current: 
Operate according to the direction of the 
current and are usually of the permanent-magnetic, moving- 
coil pattern. 
Differential relays: Operate according to the scalar or vectorial 
difference between two quantities such as current, voltage, etc. 
Distance relays: Operate according to the “distance” between the 
relay’s current transformer and the fault. 
The “distance” is 
measured in terms of resistance, reactance, or impedance. 
Relays are made up of one or more fault-detecting units along with the 
necessary auxiliary units. Basic units for relay systems can be classified as 
being electromechanical units, sequence networks, solid-state units, or 
computer-based units. 
The electromechanical types include those based on 
magnetic attraction, magnetic induction, D’Arsonval, and thermal principles. 
Static networks with three-phase inputs can provide a single-phase output 
proportional to positive, negative, or zero sequence quantities. These are used 
as fault sensors and are known as sequence filters. Solid-state relays use low 
power components, which are designed into logic units used in many relays. 
Electromechanical Relays 
We consider some electromechanical type relays such as the plunger 
unit, the clapper unit, the polar unit, and the induction disc types. 
The plunger type has cylindrical coils with an external magnetic 
structure and a center plunger. The plunger moves upward to operate a set of 
contacts when the current or voltage applied to the coil exceeds a certain value. 
The moving force is proportional to the square of the current in the coil. These 
units operate instantaneously since no delay is intentionally introduced. 
Clapper units have a U-shaped magnetic frame with a movable 
armature across the open end. The armature is hinged at one side and spring- 
restrained at the other. When the coil is energized, the armature moves toward 
the magnetic core, opening or closing a set of contacts with a torque 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
215 
proportional to the square of the coil current. Clapper units are less accurate 
than plunger units and are primarily applied as auxiliary or “goho go” units. 
Polar units use direct current applied to a coil wound around the hinged 
armature in the center of the magnetic structure. A permanent magnet across the 
structure polarizes the armature-gap poles. Two nonmagnetic spacers, located at 
the rear of the magnetic frames, are bridged by two adjustable magnetic shunts. 
This arrangement enables the magnetic flux paths to be adjusted for pickup and 
contact action. With balanced air gaps the armature will float in the center with 
the coil deenergized. With the gaps unbalanced, polarization holds the armature 
against one pole with the coil deenergized. The coil is arranged so that its 
magnetic axis is in line with the armature and at a right angle to the permanent 
magnet axis. Current in the coil magnetizes the armature either north or south, 
increasing or decreasing any prior polarization of the armature. If the magnetic 
shunt adjustment normally makes the armature a north pole, it will move to the 
right. Direct current in the operating coil, which tends to make the contact end a 
south pole, will overcome this tendency, and the armature will move to the left 
to close the contacts. 
Induction disc units employ the watt hour meter design and use the 
same operating principles. They operate by torque resulting from the interaction 
of fluxes produced by an electromagnet with those from induced currents in the 
plane of a rotatable aluminum disc. The unit shown in Figure 7.33 has three 
poles on one side of the disc and a common magnetic keeper on the opposite 
side. The main coil is on the center leg. Current (I> in the main coil produces 
flux (@), which passes through the air gap and disc to the keeper. The flux @ is 
divided into q$ through the left-hand leg and @H through the right-hand leg. A 
short-circuited lagging coil on the left leg causes 4, to lag both fi? and 4, 
producing a split-phase motor action. The flux @,, 
induces a voltage V,, and 
current I, flows, in phase, in the shorted lag coil. The flux 4, is the total flux 
produced by the main coil current (I>. The three fluxes cross the disc air gap and 
produce eddy currents in the disc. As a result, the eddy currents set up counter 
fluxes, and the interaction of the two sets of fluxes produces the torque that 
rotates the disc. 
A spiral spring on the disc shaft conducts current to the moving contact. 
This spring, together with the shape of the disc and the design of electromagnet, 
provides a constant minimum operating current over the contact’s travel range. 
A permanent magnet with adjustable keeper (shunt) damps the disc, and the 
magnetic plugs in the electromagnet control the degree of saturation. The spring 
tension, the damping magnet, and the magnetic plugs allow separate and 
relatively independent adjustment of the unit’s inversi time overcurrent 
characteristics. 
Solid-state Units 
Solid-state, linear, and digital-integrated circuit logic units are 
combined in a variety of ways to provide modules for relays and relay systems. 

276 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Magnet 
Plugs 
Figure 7.33 Induction Disc-Type Relay Unit 
Three major categories of circuits can be identified: (1) fault-sensing and data- 
processing logic units, (2) amplification logic units, and (3) auxiliary logic units. 
Logic circuits in the fault-sensing and data-processing category employ 
comparison units to perform conventional fault-detection duties. Magnitude 
comparison logic units are used for overcurrent detection both of instantaneous 
and time overcurrent categories. For instantaneous overcurrent protection, a dc 
level detector, or a fixed reference magnitude comparator, is used. A variable 
reference magnitude comparator circuit is used for ground-distance protection. 
Phase-angle comparison logic circuits produce an output when the phase angle 
between two quantities is in the critical range. These circuits are useful for 
phase, distance, and directional relays. 
7.1 1 
TRANSFORMER PROTECTION 
A number of fault conditions can arise within a power transformer. 
These include: 
1. 
Earrh faults: A fault on a transformer winding will result in 
currents that depend on the source, neutral grounding impedance, 
leakage reactance of the transformer, and the position of the fault 
in the windings. The winding connections also influence the 
magnitude of fault current. In the case of a Y-connected winding 
with neutral point connected to ground through an impedance Z,, 
the fault current depends on Z, and is proportional to the distance 
of the fault from the neutral point. If the neutral is solidly 
grounded, the fault current is controlled by the leakage reactance, 
which depends on fault location. The reactance decreases as the 
fault becomes closer to the neutral point. As a result, the fault 
current is highest for a fault close to the neutral point. In the case 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
277 
of a fault in a A-connected winding, the range of fault current is 
less than that for a Y-connected winding, with the actual value 
being controlled by the method of grounding used in the system. 
Phase fault currents may be low for a A-connected winding due to 
the high impedance to fault of the A winding. This factor should 
be considered in designing the protection scheme for such a 
winding. 
Core faults due to insulation breakdown can permit sufficient 
eddy-current to flow to cause overheating, which may reach a 
magnitude sufficient to damage the winding. 
Interturn faults occur due to winding flashovers caused by line 
surges. A short circuit of a few turns of the winding will give rise 
to high currents in the short-circuited loops, but the terminal 
currents will be low. 
Phase-to-phase faults are rare in occurrence but will result in 
substantial currents of magnitudes similar to those caused by earth 
faults. 
Tank faults resulting in loss of oil reduce winding insulation as 
well as producing abnormal temperature rises. 
2. 
3. 
1. 
5 .  
In addition to fault conditions within the transformer, abnormal 
conditions due to external factors result in stresses on the transformer. These 
conditions 
include: 
overloading, 
system faults, 
overvoltages, 
and 
underfrequency operation. 
When a transformer is switched into the circuit at any point of the 
supply voltage wave, the peak values of the core flux wave will depend on the 
residual flux as well as on the time of switching. The peak value of the flux will 
be higher than the corresponding steady-state value and will be limited by core 
saturation. The magnetizing current necessary to produce the core flux can have 
a peak of eight to ten times the normal full-load peak and has no equivalent on 
the secondary side. This phenomenon is called magnetizing inrush current and 
appears to the system as an internal fault. 
Maximum inrush occurs if the 
transformer is switched in when the supply voltage is zero. Realizing this, is 
important for the design of differential relays for transformer protection so that 
no tripping takes place due to the magnetizing inrush current. A number of 
schemes based on the harmonic properties of the inrush current are used to 
prevent tripping due to large inrush currents. 
Overheating protection is provided for transformers by placing a 
thermal-sensing element in the transformer tank. Overcurrent relays are used as 
a backup protection with time delay higher than that for the main protection. 
Restricted earth fault protection is utilized for Y-connected windings. This 
scheme is shown in Figure 7.34. The sum of the phase currents is balanced 
against the neutral current, and hence the relay will not respond to faults outside 
the winding. 

278 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 7.34 Restricted Ground Fault Protection for a Y Winding 
Differential protection is the main scheme used for transformers. The 
principle of a differential protection system is simple. Here the currents on each 
side of the protected apparatus for each phase are compared in a differential 
circuit. Any difference in currents will operate a relay. Figure 7.35 shows the 
relay circuit for one phase only. On normal operation, only the difference 
between the current transformer magnetizing currents i,, 
and in,, passes 
through the relay. This is due to the fact that with no faults within the protected 
apparatus, the currents entering and leaving are equal to i. If a fault occurs 
between the two sets of current transformers, one or more of the currents (in a 
three-phase system) on the left-hand side will suddenly increase, while that on 
the right-hand side may decrease or increase with a direction reversal. In both 
instances, the total fault current will flow through the relay, causing it to operate. 
In units where the neutral ends are inaccessible, differential relays are not used, 
but reverse power relays are employed instead. 
A number of considerations should be dealt with in applying 
differential protection, including: 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
219 
Figure 7.35 Basic Differential Connection 
1. 
Transformer ratio: The current transformers should have ratings to 
match the rated currents of the transformer winding to which they 
are applied. 
2. Due to the 30O-phase change between Y- and A-connected 
windings and the fact that zero sequence quantities on the Y side 
do not appear on the terminals of the A side, the current 
transformers should be connected in Y for a A winding and in A for 
a Y winding. Figure 7.36 shows the differential protection scheme 
applied to a UY transformer. When current transformers are 
connected in A, their secondary ratings must be reduced to (I/&) 
times the secondary rating of Y-connected transformers. 
3. Allowance should be made for tap changing by providing 
restraining coils (bias). The bias should exceed the effect of the 
maximum ratio deviation. 
Example 7.9 
Consider a UY-connected, 20-MVA, 33/11 -kV transformer with differential 
protection applied, for the current transformer ratios shown in Figure 7.37. 
Calculate the relay currents on full load. Find the minimum relay current setting 
to allow 125 percent overload. 
Solution 
The primary line current is given by 
2ox'06 
=349.91 A 
' p = ( J S k 3 x l O i )  
The secondary line current is 

280 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 7.36 Differential Protection of a MY Transformer. 
Figure 7.37 Transformer for Example 7.9. 
2ox lo6 
= 1049.73 A 
= (Jsk1X103) 
The C.T. current on the primary side is thus 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
281 
i, = 349.91 - 
= 5.832 A 
(3blo J 
The C.T. current in the secondary side is 
i,$ = 1049.73 [2ioo)& 
- = 4.545 A 
Note that we multiply by 6 
to obtain the values on the line side of the A- 
connected C.T.’s. The relay current on normal load is therefore 
.
.
 
I ,  = I ,  - i,v = 5.832 - 4.545 = 1.287 A 
With 1.25 overload ratio, the relay setting should be 
I, = (1.25)(1.287) = 1.61 A 
Buchholz (Gas Relay) Protection 
In addition to the preceding protection schemes, it is common practice 
in transformer protection to employ gas-actuated relays for alarm and tripping. 
One such a relay is the Buchholz relay. 
Faults within a transformer will result in heating and decomposing of 
the oil in the transformer tank. The decomposition produces gases such as 
hydrogen, carbon monoxide, and light hydrocarbons, which are released slowly 
for minor faults and rapidly for severe arcing faults. The relay is connected into 
the pipe leading to the conservator tank. As the gas accumulates, the oil level 
falls and a float F is lowered and operates a mercury switch to sound an alarm. 
Sampling the gas and performing a chemical analysis provide a means for 
classifying the type of fault. In the case of a winding fault, the arc generates gas 
at a high release rate that moves a vane V to cause tripping through contacts 
attached to the vane. 
Buchholz protection provides an alarm for a number of fault conditions 
including: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Faulty joints. 
4. 
Core bolt insulation failure. 
Interturn faults or winding faults involving only lower power 
levels. 
Core hot spots due to short circuits on the lamiriation insulation. 

282 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
7.12 
TRANSMISSION LINE PROTECTION 
The excessive currents accompanying a fault, are the basis of 
overcurrent protection schemes. 
For transmission 
line protection in 
interconnected systems, it is necessary to provide the desired selectivity such 
that relay operation results in the least service interruption while isolating the 
fault. This is referred to as relay coordination. Many methods exist to achieve 
the desired selectivity. 
Time/current gradings are involved in three basic 
methods discussed below for radial or loop circuits where there are several line 
sections in series. 
Three Methods of Relay Grading 
A) Time Grading 
Time grading ensures that the breaker nearest to the fault opens first, by 
choosing an appropriate time setting for each of the relays. The time settings 
increase as the relay gets closer to the source. A simple radial system shown in 
Figure 7.38 demonstrates this principle. 
A protection unit consisting of a definite time-delay overcurrent relay is 
placed at each of the points 2, 3,4, and 5. The time-delay of the relay provides 
the means for selectivity. The relay at circuit breaker 2 is set at the shortest 
possible time necessary for the breaker to operate (typically 0.25 second). The 
relay setting at 3 is chosen here as 0.5 second, that of the relay at 4 at 1 second, 
and so on. In the event of a fault at F, the relay at 2 will operate and the fault 
will be isolated before the relays at 3, 4, and 5 have sufficient time to operate. 
The shortcoming of the method is that the longest fault-clearing time is 
associated with the sections closest to the source where the faults are most 
severe. 
6) Current Grading 
Fault currents are higher the closer the fault is to the source and this is 
utilized in the current-grading method. Relays are set to operate at a suitably 
graded current setting that decreases as the distance from the source is increased. 
Figure 7.39 shows an example of a radial system with current grading. 
C) Inverse-Time Overcurrent Relaying 
The inverse-time overcurrent relay method evolved because of the 
limitations imposed by the use of either current or time alone. With this method, 
the time of operation is inversely proportional to the fault current level, and the 
actual characteristics are a function of both time and current settings. Figure 
7.40 shows some typical inverse-time relay characteristics. Relay type CO-7 is 
in common use. Figure 7.4 1 shows a radial system with time-graded inverse 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
283 
(A) Radial system 
Time t 
5 
4 
3 
2 
.l 
(B) 
Figure 7.38 Principles of Time Grading. 
relays applied at breakers 1,2, and 3. 
For faults close to the relaying points, the inverse-time overcurrent 
method can achieve appreciable reductions in fault-clearing times. 
The operating time of the time-overcurrent relay varies with the current 
magnitude. There are two settings for this type of relay: 
1. 
Pickup current is determined by adjusted current coil taps or 
current tap settings (C.T.S.). The pickup current is the current that 
causes the relay to operate and close the contacts. 
Time dial refers to the reset position of the moving contact, and it 
2. 

284 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
varies the time of operation at a given tap setting and current 
magnitude. 
The time characteristics are plotted in terms of time versus multiples of 
current tap (pickup) settings, for a given time dial position. There are five 
different curve shapes referred to by the manufacturer: 
co-11 
Extreme inverse 
CO-9 
Very inverse 
CO-8 
Inverse 
CO-7 
Moderately inverse 
CO-6 
Definite minimum 
These shapes are given in Figure 7.40. 
1 .o 
0.8 
v) 
U 
0 0.6 
If: 
C 
.- 
0.4 
I= 
0.2 
I 
I I co-9 ' \co-11 
1 
I I  
\ \  
\ 
CO-11 Extremely inverse 
CO-9 Very inverse 
CO-8 Inverse 
CO-7 Moderately Inverse 
CO-6 Definite minimum 
I 
0 
5 
I 0  
15 
20 
Multiples of pickup 
Figure 7.40 Comparison of CO Curve Shapes. 
Example 7.10 
Consider the I 1-kV radial system shown in Figure 7.42. Assume that all loads 
have the same power factor. Determine relay settings to protect the system 
assuming relay type CO-7 (with characteristics shown in Figure 7.43) is used. 
Solution 
The load currents are calculated as follows: 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
Figure 7.41 Time-Graded Inverse Relaying Applied to a Radial System. 
L 3 = 6.75 MVA 
L2= 2.5 MVA 
L I Z  4 MVA 
lSc3= 3200 A 
Isc2= 3000 A 
I sc ,= 2500 A 
Figure 7.42 An Example Radial System. 
4x106 = 209.95 A 
2.5x106 =131.22A 
6 . 7 5 ~ 1 0 ~  
= 354.28 A 
The normal currents through the sections are calculated as 
285 
With the current transformer ratios given, the normal relay currents are 

286 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
7 
6 
5 
2 
1 
0 
Figui 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 8 9 1 0 1 2 1 4 1 ~ 1 8 2 0  
Current as a multiple of tap setting 
re 7.43 CO-7 Time-Delay Overcurrent Relay Characteristics 
. 
209.92 
121 = - 
= 5.25 A 
200 
5 
. 
341.16 
132 =-=8.53A 
200 
5 
. 
695.44 
I S  = - 
= 8.69 A 
400 
5 
We can now obtain the current tap settings (C.T.S.) or pickup current in 
such a manner that the relay does not trip under normal currents. For this type 
of relay, the current tap settings available are 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, and 12 amperes. 
For position 1, the normal current in the relay is 5.25 A; we thus choose 
(C.T.S.)I = 6 A 
For position 2, the normal relay current is 8.53 A, and we choose 
(C.T.S.)I = 10 A 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
287 
Similarly for position 3, 
(C.T.S.), = 10 A 
Observe that we have chosen the nearest setting higher than the normal current. 
The next task is to select the intentional delay indicated by the time dial 
setting (T.D.S.). We utilize the short-circuit currents calculated to coordinate 
the relays. The current in the relay at 1 on a short circuit at that location is 
2500 
Expressed as a multiple of the pickup or C.T.S. value, we have 
l . y ,  
-62.5 - 10.42 
(C.T.S.), 
6 
We choose the lowest T.D.S. for this relay for fastest action. Thus 
1 
(T.D.S.), = - 
2 
By reference to the relay characteristic, we get the operating time for relay 1 for 
a fault at 1 as 
To set the relay at 2 responding to a fault at 1, we allow 0.1 second for 
breaker operation and an error margin of 0.3 second in addition to q, . Thus, 
T2, = 7i2 + 0.1 + 0.3 = 0.55 s 
The short circuit for a fault at 1 as a multiple of the C.T.S. at 2 is 
= 6.25 
lsr, - 62.5 
-- 
(C.T.S.), 
10 
From the characteristics for 0.55-second operating time and 6.25 ratio, we get 
(T.D.S.), = 2 
The final steps involve setting the relay at 3. For a fault at bus 2, the 

288 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
short-circuit current is 3000 A, for which relay 2 responds in a time T,, obtained 
as follows: 
For the (T.D.S.)2 = 2, we get from the relay’s characteristic, 
T22 = 0.50 s 
Thus allowing the same margin for relay 3 to respond to a fault at 2, as for relay 
2 responding to a fault at 1, we have 
T32 =T22+0.1+0.3 
= 0.90 s 
The current in the relay expressed as a multiple of pickup is 
Thus for T3 = 0.90, and the above ratio, we get from the relay’s characteristic, 
(T.D.S.), G 2.5 
We note here that our calculations did not account for load starting currents that 
can be as high as five to seven times rated values. In practice, this should be 
accounted for. 
Pilot-Wire Feeder Protection 
Graded overcurrent feeder protection has two disadvantages. First, the 
grading settings may lead to tripping times that are too long to prevent damage 
and service interruption. Second, satisfactory grading for complex networks is 
quite difficult to attain. This led to the concept of “unit protection” involving 
the measurement of fault currents at each end of a limited zone of the feeder and 
the transmission of information between the equipment at zone boundaries. The 
principle utilized here is the differential (often referred to as Merz-Price) 
protection scheme. For short feeders, pilot-wire schemes are used to transmit 
the information. 
Pilot-wire differential systems of feeder protection are 
classified into three types: (1) the circulating-current systems, (2) the balanced- 
voltage systems, and (3) the phase-comparison (Casson-Last) system. All three 
systems depend on the fact that, capacitance current neglected, the instantaneous 
value of the current flowing into a healthy conductor at one end of the circuit is 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
289 
equal to the instantaneous current flowing out of the conductor at the other end, 
so that the net instantaneous current flowing into or out of the conductor is zero 
if the conductor is healthy. If, on the other hand, the conductor is short-circuited 
to earth or to another conductor at some point, then the net current flowing into 
or out of the conductor is equal to the instantaneous value of the current flowing 
out of or into the conductor at the point of fault. 
7.13 
IMPEDANCE-BASED PROTECTION PRINCIPLES 
This section discusses the principles involved in protecting components 
such as transmission lines on the basis of measuring the input impedance of the 
component. We first discuss the idea of an X-R diagram which is an excellent 
graphical tool to demonstrate principles of impedance protection systems. The 
concept of relay comparators is then introduced. The specific parameter choices 
to allow for the creation of impedance relays based on either amplitude or phase 
comparisons are then discussed. The section concludes with a discussion of 
distance protection. 
A) The X-R Diagram 
Consider a transmission line with series impedance Z, and negligible 
shunt admittance. At the receiving end, a load of impedance ZR is assumed. The 
phasor diagram shown in Figure 7.44 is constructed with I taken as the 
reference. The phasor diagram represents the relation 
vs = IZ, +I.; 
(7.49) 
giving rise to the heavy-lines diagram rather than the usual one shown by the 
dashed line. On the diagram, d is the torque angle, which is the angle between 
Vy and V,. 
If the phasor diagram, Eq. (7.49), is divided by the current I, we obtain 
the impedance equation 
z., 
= z, 
+ z, 
(7.50) 
I 
\ 
Figure 7.44 Voltage Phasor Diagram. 

290 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 7.15 Impedance Diagram. 
where 
V 
z, 
=' 
I 
An impedance diagram is shown in Figure 7.45. This is called the X-R diagram 
since the real axis represents a resistive component (R), and the imaginary axis 
corresponds to a reactive component (X). The angle Gappears on the impedance 
diagram as that between Z, and Z,. 
The evaluation of Z, from complex power SR 
and voltage V, is straightforward. 
B) Relay Comparators 
Relay comparators can have any number of input signals. However, we 
discuss the two-input comparator shown schematically in Figure 7.46. The 
input to the two transformer circuits 1 and 2 includes the line voltage VL and 
current IL. The output of transformer 1 is Vl, and that of transformer 2 is V,. 
Both V, and V2 are input to the comparator, which produces a trip (operate) 
signal whenever IV2) > lV,l in an amplitude comparison mode. 
We assume that the line voltage V ,  is the reference phasor and that the 
line current lags V ,  by and angle 6,. Thus, 
The impedance ZL is thus 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
291 
Figure 7.46 Schematic of Relay Comparator Circuit 
v/, 
z/, 
=- 
' I '  
The transformers' output voltages V ,  and V, are assumed to be linear 
combinations of the input quantities 
v, = k1V, + ZJ, 
(7.51) 
v2 = k2VI. + Z2"' 
(7.52) 
The impedances Z, and Z, are expressed in the polar form: 
ZI = IZIILWI 
z2 =JZ2ILv* 
The comparator input voltages V1 and V, are thus given by 
v, = II/,l(k,IZ/,I+IZlILCv, -@/I 
C) Amplitude Comparison 
The trip signal is produced for an amplitude comparator when 
(7.53) 
(7.54) 
(7.55) 
The operation condition is obtained as 

292 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
This is the general equation for an amplitude comparison relay. The choices of 
kl, k2, Z1, and Z2 provide different relay characteristics. 
Ohm Relay 
The following parameter choice is made: 
k l = k  
k, = -k 
ZI = o  
z, = z 
w =  w =  
cv 
The relay threshold equation becomes 
R ,  cosy+ X ,  sin I+Y I - 
IZI 
(7.57) 
2k 
This is a straight line in the X,,-R[, plane as shown in Figure 7.47. The shaded 
area is the restrain area; an operate signal is produced in the nonshaded area. 
Mho Relay 
The mho relay characteristic is obtained with the choice 
ki = -k 
z, = z, = z 
wl= w =  w 
k2 = 0 
~ R , , - ~ c o s w ~ + ( X ~ - ~ s i n w ~  
2% 
(7.58) 
The threshold condition with equality sign is a circle as show in Figure 7.48. 
Impedance Relay 
Here we set 
The threshold equation is 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
293 
-19 
IZI 
2k sin yf 
1- 
2k cosy 7 
Figure 7.47 Ohm Relay Characteristic. 
Figure 7.48 Mlio Relay Characteristic 
(7.59) 
The threshold condition is a circle with center at 12, I/kL yl and radius IZ,l/k as 
shown in Figure 7.49. 
Phase Comparison 
Let us now consider the comparator operating in the phase comparison 
mode. Assume that 

294 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 7.49 Impedance Relay Charactkristic 
Let the phase difference be defined as 
0 = 0, -02 
A criterion for operation of the k90" phase comparator implies that 
COSB 2 0 
We can demonstrate that the general equation for the +90° phase comparator is 
given by 
By assigning values to the parameters kl, k3, Z,, and Z,, different relay 
characteristics such as the ohm and mho relays are obtained. 
D) Distance Protection 
Protection of lines and feeders based on comparison of the current 
values at both ends of the line can become uneconomical. Distance protection 
utilizes the current and voltage at the beginning of the line in a comparison 
scheme that essentially determines the fault position. Impedance measurement 
is performed using relay comparators. One input is proportional to the fault 
current and the other supplied by a current proportional to the fault loop voltage. 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
295 
The characteristic of a plain impedance relay is shown in Figure 7.49. 
It will thus respond to faults behind it (third quadrant) in the X-R diagram as 
well as in front of it. One way to prevent this is to add a separate directional 
relay that will restrain tripping for faults behind the protected zone. 
The 
reactance or mho relay with characteristics as shown in Figure 7.48 combines 
the distance-measuring ability and the directional property. The term mho is 
given to the relay where the circumference of the circle passes through the 
origin, and the term was originally derived from the fact that the mho 
characteristic (ohm spelled backward) is a straight line in the admittance plane. 
Early applications of distance protection utilized relay operating times 
that were a hnction of the impedance for the fault. The nearer the fault, the 
shorter the operating time. This is shown in Figure 7.50. This has the same 
disadvantages as overcurrent protection discussed earlier. Present practice is to 
set the relay to operate simultaneously for faults that occur in the first 80 percent 
of the feeder length (known as the first zone). Faults beyond this point and up to 
a point midway along the next feeder are cleared by arranging for the zone 
setting of the relay to be extended from the first zone value to the second zone 
value after a time delay of about 0.5 to 1 second. The second zone for the first 
relay should never be less than 20 percent of the first feeder length. The zone 
setting extension is done by increasing the impedance in series with the relay 
voltage coil current. A third zone is provided (using a starting relay) extending 
from the middle of the second feeder into the third feeder up to 25 percent of the 
length with a hrther delay of 1 or 2 seconds. This provides backup protection 
as well. The time-distance characteristics for a three-feeder system are shown in 
Figure 7.5 1. 
Distance relaying schemes employ several relay units that are arranged 
to give response characteristics such as that shown in Figure 7.52. A typical 
system consists of: 
1. 
Two offset mho units (with three elements each). 
The first 
operates as earth-fault starting and third zone measuring relay, and 
the second operates as phase-fault starting and third zone 
measuring relay. 
Two polarized mho units (with three elements each). The first unit 
acts as first and second zone earth-fault measuring relay, and the 
second unit acts as first and second zone phase-fault measuring 
relay. 
3. Two time-delay relays for second and third zone time 
measurement. 
2. 
The main difference between earth-fault and phase-fault relays is in the 
potential transformer (P.T.) and C.T. connections, which are designed to cause 
the relay to respond to the type of fault concerned. 

296 
125% 
I 
80% 
' 
50% 
I 
I
1
 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Distance 
v --T 
I 
I 
I 
Figure 7.50 Principle of Time-Distance Protection. 
Figure 7.52 Characteristics of a Three-Zone Offset Mho-Relaying Scheme. 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
297 
E) Power Line Carrier Protection 
The overhead transmission lines are used as pilot circuits in carrier- 
current protection systems. A carrier-frequency signal (30-200 kHz) is carried 
by two of the line conductors to provide communication means between ends of 
the line. The carrier signal is applied to the conductors via carrier coupling into 
units comprising inductance/capacitor circuits tuned to the carrier signal 
frequency to perform a number of functions. The carrier signals thus travel 
mainly into the power line and not into undesired parts of the system such as the 
bus bars. The communication equipment that operates at impedance levels of 
the order of 50-150 R is to be matched to the power line that typically has a 
characteristic impedance is the range of 240-500 R. 
Power line carrier systems are used for two purposes. 
The first 
involves measurements, and the second conveys signals fiom one end of the line 
to the other with the measurement being done at each end by relays. When the 
carrier channel is used for measurement, it is not practical to transmit amplitude 
measurements from one end to the other since signal attenuation beyond the 
control of the system takes place. As a result, the only feasible measurement 
carrier system compares the phase angle of a derived current at each end of the 
system in a manner similar to differential protection. 
Radio and microwave links are applied in power systems to provide 
communication channels for teleprotection as well as for supervisory control and 
data acquisition. 
7.14 
COMPUTER RELAYING 
In the electric power industry computer-based systems have evolved to 
perform many complex tasks in energy control centers (treated in Chapter 8). 
Research efforts directed at the prospect of using digital computers to perform 
the tasks involved in power system protection date back to the mid-sixties and 
were motivated by the emergence of process-control computers. Computer 
relaying systems are now available. The availability of microprocessors used as 
a replacement for electromechanical and solid-state relays provides a number of 
advantages while meeting the basic protection philosophy requirement of 
decentralization. 
There are many benefits of a digital relaying system: 
1. Economics: With lower digital hardware cost; coupled with the 
increase in cost of conventional relaying, computer relaying is 
attractive. Software development cost is evened out by utilizing 
economies of scale in producing microprocessors dedicated to 
basic relaying tasks. 
2. Reliability: A digital system is continuously active providing a 
high level of self-diagnosis to detect accidental failures within the 

298 
3. 
4. 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
digital relaying system. The maintenance costs are low. 
Flexibility: 
Revisions or modifications made necessary by 
changing operational conditions can be accommodated by utilizing 
the programmability features of a digital system. This would lead 
to reduced inventories of parts for repair and maintenance 
purposes. 
System interaction: The availability of digital hardware that 
monitors continuously the system performance at remote 
substations can enhance the level of information available to the 
control center. 
Postfault analysis of transient data can be 
performed on the basis of system variables monitored by the digital 
relay and recorded by the peripherals. 
The main elements of a digital-computer-based relay include: 
1. Analog input subsystem 
2. 
Digital input subsystem 
3. Digital output subsystem 
4. Relay logic and settings 
5. Digital filters 
The input signals to the relay are analog (continuous) and digital power system 
variables. The digital inputs are of the order of five to ten and include status 
changes (on-off) of contacts and changes in voltage levels in a circuit. The 
analog signals are the 60-Hz currents and voltages. The number of analog 
signals needed depends on the relay function but is in the range of 3 to 30 in all 
cases. The analog signals are scaled down to acceptable computer input levels 
(f10 volts maximum) and then converted to digital (discrete) form through 
analogidigital converters (ADC). These functions are performed in the “Analog 
Input Subsystem” block. 
The digital output of the relay is available through the computer’s 
parallel output port. 
Five-to-ten digital outputs are sufficient for most 
applications. The analog signals are sampled at a rate between 240 Hz to about 
2000 Hz. The sampled signals are entered into the scratch pad [random access 
memory (RAM)] and are stored in a secondary data file for historical recording. 
A digital filter removes noise effects from the sampled signals. The relay logic 
program determines the functional operations of the relay and uses the filtered 
sampled signals to arrive at a trip or no trip decision, which is then 
communicated to the system. 
The heart of the relay logic program is a relaying algorithm that is 
designed to perform the intended relay function such as overcurrent detection, 
differential protection, or distance protection, etc. 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
299 
PROBLEMS 
Problem 7.1 
Consider the case of an open-line fault on phase B of a three-phase system, such 
that 
I ,  = I  
I, = o  
I,. =a/ 
Find the sequence currents I,, I-, and I,,. 
Problem 7.2 
Consider the case of a three-phase system supplied by a two-phase source such 
that 
v, = v 
v,. = 0 
V, = j V  
Find the sequence voltages V+, V-, and V,. 
Problem 7.3 
Calculate the phase currents and voltages for an unbalanced system with the 
following sequence values: 
I +
-
 
= I  =I, =-jl.0 
V+ = 0.50 
V_ =-0.30 
v, =-0.20 
Problem 7.4 
Calculate the apparent power consumed in the system of Problem 7.3 using 
sequence quantities and phase quantities. 
Problem 7.5 
The zero and positive sequence components of an unbalanced set of voltages are 
v+ = 2 
Vo = 0.5 - j0.866 
The phase A voltage is 
v, = 3  

300 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Obtain the negative sequence component and the B and C phase voltages. 
Problem 7.6 
The following are the line currents at the terminals of a Y connected three phase 
source operating under unbalanced conditions. 
The sequence values of the line to neutral voltages are given by: 
v, = 1 
V- = 0.5eJ6' 
V,. = 0.5e-J60 
A. Determine the positive, negative and zero sequence currents. Is the 
neutral of the source grounded? Why? 
B. Determine the phase coordinate values of the line to neutral voltages. 
C. Find the total apparent power delivered by the source using both phase 
and sequence values obtained in parts A and B. 
Problem 7.7 
Obtain the sequence networks for the system shown in Figure 7.53 in the case of 
a fault at F. Assume the following data in pu on the same base are given: 
Generator GI : 
X+ = 0.2 p.u. 
X. = 0.12 p.u. 
X. = 0.22 p.u. 
Xo = 0.06 P.U. 
Generator G2: 
X+ = 0.33 p.u. 
Xo 1 
0.066 P.U. 
Transformer TI: X+ = X. = Xo = 0.2 p.u. 
Transformer T2: X+ =X. = Xo = 0.225 p.u. 
Transformer T3: A'+ = X. = Xo = 0.27 p.u. 
Transformer T4: X, = X. = Xo = 0.16 p.u. 
Line L,: 
X+ =X. = 0.14 p.u. 
Line L2: 
X+ =X. = 0.35 p.u. 
Xo = 0.3 P.U. 
Xo = 0.6 P.U. 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
301 
Figure 7.53 System for Problem 7.7 
Problem 7.8 
Assume an unbalanced fault occurs on the line bus of transformer T, in the 
system of Problem 7.7. 
Find the equivalent sequence networks for this 
condition. 
Problem 7.9 
Repeat Problem 7.8 for a fault on the generator bus of GZ. 
Problem 7.10 
Repeat Problem 7.8 for the fault in the middle ofthe line L,. 
Problem 7.11 
Calculate the fault current for a single line-to-ground fault on phase A for a fault 
location as in Problem 7.8. 
Problem 7.12 
Repeat Problem 7.1 1 for a fault location in Problem 7.10. 
Problem 7.13 
Calculate the fault current in phase B for a double line-to-ground fault for a fault 
location as in Problem 7.8. 
Problem 7.14 
Repeat Problem 7.13 for a fault location as in Problem 7.9. 
Problem 7.15 
Repeat Problem 7.13 for a fault location in Problem 7.10. 
Problem 7.16 
Calculate the fault current in phase B for a line-to-line fault for a fault location 
as in Problem 7.8. 
Problem 7.17 
Repeat Problem 7.16 for a fault location as in Problem 7.9. 

302 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Problem 7.18 
Repeat Problem 7.16 for a fault location as in Problem 7.10. 
Problem 7.19 
Consider the system shown in the single-line diagram of Figure 7.54. All 
reactances are shown in per unit to the same base. It is required to find the fault 
current due to a bolted-three-phase short circuit at bus 4. 
3 
1 
0.225 p.u. 
Figure 7.54 Single-line diagram for Problem 7.19 
Problem 7.20 
For the system of Figure 7.54 
A. Find the fault current due to a bolted-three-phase short circuit in the 
middle of line 1-3. 
B. Find the voltages at buses 1 and 2 under the fault conditions of part A 
above. 
Problem 7.21 
The following sequence voltages were recorded on an unbalanced fault: 
V+ = 0.5 P.U. 
V- = -0.4 P.U. 
v, = -0.1 p.u. 
Given that the positive sequence fault current is j l ,  calculate the sequence 
impedances. Assume E = 1. 
Problem 7.22 
The positive sequence current for a double line-to-ground fault in a system is -jl 
P.u., and the corresponding negative sequence current isj0.333 p.u. Given that 
the positive sequence impedance is 0.8 P.u., find the negative and zero sequence 
impedances. 

Faults and Protection of Electric Energy Systems 
3 03 
Problem 7.23 
The positive sequence current on a single line-to-ground fault on phase A at the 
load end of a radial transmission system is -j2 p.u. For a double line-to-ground 
fault on phases B and C, the positive sequence current is j3.57 P.u., and for a 
double-line fault between phases B and C, its value is 9'2.67. Assuming the 
sending-end voltage E = 1.2, find the sequence impedances for this system. 
Problem 7.24 
A turbine generator has the following sequence reactances: 
x, = 0.1 
X- =0.13 
X ,  = 0.04 
Compare the fault currents for a three-phase fault and a single line-to-ground 
fault. Find the value of an inductive reactance to be inserted in the neutral 
connection to limit the current for a single line-to-ground fault to that for a 
three-phase fault. 
Problem 7.25 
A simultaneous fault occurs at the load end of a radial line. The fault consists of 
a line-to-ground fault on phase A and a line-to-line fault on phases B and C. The 
current in phase A is -j5 P.u., whereas that in phase B is IH = -3.46 p.u. Given 
that E = 110 and Z+ = j0.25, find Z. and Z,. 
Problem 7.26 
Repeat Example 7.9, for a transformer rating of 12-MVA. 
Problem 7.27 
Consider the system of Example 7.10. Assume now that the load at the far end 
of the system is increased to 
Determine the relay settings to protect the system using relay type CO-7. 
Problem 7.28 
Consider the radial system of Example 7.10. It is required to construct the relay 
response time-distance characteristics on the basis of the design obtained as 
follows: 
A. Assuming the line's impedance is purely reactive, calculate the 
source reactance and the reactances between bus bars 3 and 2, and 
2 and 1. 
B. Find the current on a short circuit midway between buses 3 and 2 
and between 2 and 1. 
C. Calculate the relay response times for faults identified in Example 

304 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
7.10 and part (B) above and sketch the relay response time- 
distance characteristics. 
Problem 7.29 
Consider a system with lVrl = 1 P.u.. Assume that the load is given by 
S, = 1 + j0.4 p.u. 
Find Z,, Z,, and the angle Gfor this operating condition. 
Problem 7.30 
Assume that a line has an impedance Z ,  = 0.1 + j0.3 p.u. The load is S, = 2 + 
j0.8 pa., IV,.l= 1 p.u. 
This line is to be provided with 80 percent distance 
protection using an ohm relay with w= 45". Find the relay's impedance Z 
assuming k = 1 and that magnitude comparison is used. 
Problem 7.31 
The line of Problem 7.30 is to be provided with 80 percent distance protection 
using either a resistance or a reactance ohm relay. 
Find the relay design 
parameters in each case, assuming that magnitude comparison is used. 

Chapter 8 
THE ENERGY CONTROL CENTER 
8.1 
INTRODUCTION 
The following criteria govern the operation of any electric power 
system: 
Safety 
0 
Quality 
0 
Reliability 
Economy 
The first criterion is the most important consideration and aims to 
ensure the safety of personnel, environment, and property in every aspect of 
system operations. Quality is defined in terms of variables, such as frequency 
and voltage, that must conform to certain standards to accommodate the 
requirements for proper operation of all loads connected to the system. 
Reliability of supply does not have to mean a constant supply of power, but it 
means that any break in the supply of power is one that is agreed to and tolerated 
by both supplier and consumer of electric power. Making the generation cost 
and losses at a minimum motivates the economy criterion while mitigating the 
adverse impact of power system operation on the environment. 
Within an operating power system, the following tasks are performed in 
order to meet the preceding criteria: 
0 
0 
0 
Maintain the balance between load and generation. 
Maintain the reactive power balance in order to control the voltage 
profile. 
Maintain an optimum generation schedule to control the cost and 
environmental impact of the power generation. 
Ensure the security of the network against credible contingencies. 
This requires protecting the network against reasonable failure of 
equipment or outages. 
The fact that the state of the power network is ever changing because 
loads and networks configuration change, makes operating the system difficult. 
Moreover, the response of many power network apparatus is not instantaneous. 
For example, the startup of a thermal generating unit takes a few hours. This 
essentially makes it not possible to implement normal feed-forward control. 
Decisions will have to be made on the basis of predicted future states of the 
system. 
Several trends have increased the need for computer-based operator 
support in interconnected power systems. Economy energy transactions, reliance 
Introduction to Electrical Power Engineering. By Mohamed E. El-Hawary 
Copyright 0 
2008 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. 
305 

306 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
on external sources of capacity, and competition for transmission resources have 
all resulted in higher loading of the transmission system. Transmission lines 
bring large quantities of bulk power. But increasingly, these same circuits are 
being used for other purposes as well: to permit sharing surplus generating 
capacity between adjacent utility systems, to ship large blocks of power from 
low-energy-cost areas to high-energy cost areas, and to provide emergency 
reserves in the event of weather-related outages. Although such transfers have 
helped to keep electricity rates lower, they have also added greatly to the burden 
on transmission facilities and increased the reliance on control. 
Heavier loading of tie-lines which were originally built to improve 
reliability, and were not intended for normal use at heavy loading levels, has 
increased interdependence among neighboring utilities. With greater emphasis 
on economy, there has been an increased use of large economic generating units. 
This has also affected reliability. 
These trends allow systems to be operated much closer to security 
limits (thermal, voltage and stability). On some systems, transmission links are 
being operated at or near limits 24 hours a day, with the following consequences 
The trends have adversely affected system dynamic performance. 
A power network stressed by heavy loading has a substantially 
different response to disturbances from that of a non-stressed 
system. 
The potential size and effect of contingencies has increased 
dramatically. When a power system is operated closer to the limit, 
a relatively small disturbance may cause a system upset. 
The 
situation is further complicated by the fact that the largest size 
contingency is increasing. Thus, to support operating functions 
many more scenarios must be anticipated and analyzed. 
In 
addition, bigger areas of the interconnected system may be affected 
by a disturbance. 
Where adequate bulk power system facilities are not available, 
special controls are employed to maintain system integrity. 
Overall, systems are more complex to analyze to ensure reliability 
and security. 
Some scenarios encountered cannot be anticipated ahead of time. 
Since they cannot be analyzed off-line, operating guidelines for 
these conditions may not be available, and the system operator 
may have to “improvise” to deal with them (and often does). As a 
result, there is an ever increasing need for mechanisms to support 
dispatchers in the decision making process. Indeed, there is a risk 
of human operators being unable to manage certain functions 
unless their awareness and understanding of the network state is 
enhanced. 
To automate the operation of an electric power system electric utilities 
rely on a highly sophisticated integrated system for monitoring and control. 

The Energy Control Center 
307 
Such a system has a multi-tier structure with many levels of elements. The 
bottom tier (level 0) is the high-reliability switchgear, which includes facilities 
for remote monitoring and control. 
This level also includes automatic 
equipment such as protective relays and automatic transformer tap-changers. 
Tier 1 consists of telecontrol cabinets mounted locally to the switchgear, and 
provides facilities for actuator control, interlocking, and voltage and current 
measurement. At tier 2, is the data concentrators/master remote terminal unit 
which typically includes a madmachine interface giving the operator access to 
data produced by the lower tier equipment. 
The top tier (level 3) is the 
supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) system. The SCADA system 
accepts telemetered values and displays them in a meaningful way to operators, 
usually via a one-line mimic diagram. The other main component of a SCADA 
system is an alarm management subsystem that automatically monitors all the 
inputs and informs the operators of abnormal conditions. 
Two control centers are normally implemented in an electric utility, 
one for the operation of the generation-transmission system, and the other for 
the operation of the distribution system. We refer to the former as the energy 
management system (EMS), while the latter is referred to as the distribution 
management system (DMS). 
The two systems are intended to help the 
dispatchers in better monitoring and control of the power system. The simplest 
of such systems perform data acquisition and supervisory control, but many also 
have sophisticated power application functions available to assist the operator. 
Since the early 1960s, electric utilities have been monitoring and controlling 
their power networks via SCADA, EMS, and DMS. These systems provide the 
“smarts” needed for optimization, security, and accounting. 
Today’s EMS 
software captures and archives live data and records information especially 
during emergencies and system disturbances. 
An energy control center represents a large investment by the power 
system ownership. Major benefits flowing from the introduction of this system 
include more reliable system operation and improved efficiency of usage of 
generation resources. In addition, power system operators are offered more in- 
depth information quickly. It has been suggested that at Houston Lighting & 
Power Co., system dispatchers’ use of network application functions (such as 
Power Flow, Optimal Power Flow, and Security Analysis) has resulted in 
considerable economic and intangible benefits. A specific example of $ 70,000 
in savings achieved through avoiding field crew overtime cost, and by leaving 
equipment out of service overnight is reported for 1993. This is part of a total of 
$ 340,000 savings in addition to increased system safety, security and reliability 
has been achieved through regular and extensive use of just some network 
analysis functions. 
8.2 
OVERVIEW OF EMS FUNCTIONS 
System dispatchers at the EMS are required to make short-term (next 
day) and long-term (prolonged) decisions on operational and outage scheduling 

308 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
on a daily basis. Moreover, they have to be always alert and prepared to deal 
with contingencies that may arise. Many software and hardware functions are 
required as operational support tools for the operator. Broadly speaking, we can 
classify these functions in the following manner: 
0 
Base functions 
Generation functions 
Network functions 
Each of these functions is discussed briefly in this section. 
Base Functions 
The required base functions of the EMS include: 
0 
The ability to acquire real time data from monitoring equipment 
throughout the power system. 
Process the raw data and distribute the processed data within the 
central control system. 
The data acquisition fimction (DA) acquires data from remote terminal 
units (RTUs) installed throughout the system using special hardware connected 
to the real time data servers installed at the control center. Alarms that occur at 
the substations are processed and distributed by the DA function. In addition, 
protection and operation of main circuit breakers, some line isolators, 
transformer tap changers and other miscellaneous substation devices are 
provided with a sequence of events time resolution. 
Data Acquisition 
The data acquisition function collects, manages, and processes 
information from the RTUs by periodically scanning the RTUs and presenting 
the raw analog data and digital status points to a data processing function. This 
function converts analog values into engineering units and checks the digital 
status points for change since the previous scan so that an alarm can be raised if 
status has changed. Computations can be carried out and operating limits can be 
applied against any analog value such that an alarm message is created if a limit 
is violated. 
Supervisory Control 
Supervisory control allows the operator to remotely control all circuit 
breakers on the system together with some line isolators. Control of devices can 
be performed as single actions or a line circuit can be switched in or out of 
service. 

The Energy Control Center 
309 
Alarm Processor 
The alarm processor software is responsible to notify the operator of 
changes in the power system or the computer control system. 
Many 
classification and detection techniques are used to direct the alarms to the 
appropriate operator with the appropriate priorities assigned to each alarm. 
Logical Alarming 
This predetermines a typical set of alarm operations, which would 
result from a single cause. For example, a faulted transmission line would be 
automatically taken out of service by the operation of protective and tripping 
relays in the substation at each end of the line and the automatic opening of 
circuit breakers. The coverage would identify the protection relays involved, the 
trip relays involved and the circuit breakers that open. If these were defined to 
the system in advance, the alarm processor would combine these logically to 
issue a priority 1 alarm that the particular power circuit had tripped correctly on 
protection. 
The individual alarms would then be given a lower priority for 
display. If no logical combination is viable for the particular circumstance, then 
all the alarms are individually presented to the dispatcher with high priority. It 
is also possible to use the output of a logical alarm as the indicator for a 
sequence-switching procedure. 
Thus, the EMS would read the particular 
protection relays which had operated and restore a line to service following a 
transient fault. 
Sequence of Events Function 
The sequence of events function is extremely useful for post-mortem 
analysis of protection and circuit breaker operations. Every protection relay, trip 
relay, and circuit breaker is designated as a sequence of events digital point. 
This data is collected, and time stamped accurately so that a specified resolution 
between points is possible within any substation and across the system. 
Sequence of events data is buffered on each RTU until collected by data 
acquisition automatically or on demand. 
Historical Database 
This function takes any data obtained by the system and stores it in a 
historical database. 
It then can be viewed by a tabular or graphical trend 
display. 
The data is immediately stored within the on-line system and 
transferred to a standard relational data base system periodically. Generally, this 
function allows all features of such database to be used to perform queries and 
provide reports. 
Automatic Data Collection 
This function is specified to define the process taken when there is a 
major system disturbance. Any value or status monitored by the system can be 

310 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
defined as a trigger. This will then create a disturbance archive, which will 
contain a pre-disturbance and a post-disturbance snapshots to be produced. 
Load Shedding Function 
This facility makes it possible to identify that particular load block and 
instruct the system to automatically open the correct circuit breakers involved. 
It is also possible to predetermine a list of load blocks available for load 
shedding. The amount of load involved within each block is monitored so that 
when a particular amount of load is required to shed in a system emergency, the 
operator can enter this value and instruct the system to shed the appropriate 
blocks. 
Safety Management 
Safety management provided by an EMS is specific to each utility. A 
system may be specified to provide the equivalent of diagram labeling and paper 
based system on the operator’s screen. The software allows the engineer, having 
opened isolators and closed ground switches on the transmission system, to 
designate this as safety secured. In addition, free-placed ground symbols can be 
applied to the screen-based diagram. A database is linked to the diagram system 
and records the request for plant outage and safety document details. The 
computer system automatically marks each isolator and ground switch being 
presently quoted on a safety document and records all safety documents using 
each isolator or ground switch. These details are immediately available at any 
operating position when the substation diagram is displayed. 
Generation Functions 
The main functions that are related to operational scheduling of the 
generating subsystem involve the following: 
0 
Load forecasting 
0 
Unit commitment 
0 
Interchange transaction scheduling 
Economic dispatch and automatic generation control (AGC) 
Each of these functions is discussed briefly here. 
Load Forecasting 
The total load demand, which is met by centrally dispatched generating 
units, can be decomposed into base load and controlled load. In some systems, 
there is significant demand from storage heaters supplied under an economy 
tariff. The times at which these supplies are made available can be altered using 
radio tele-switching. This enables the utility to shape the total demand curve by 
altering times of supply to these customers. This is done with the objective of 
making the overall generation cost as economic and environmentally compatible 

The Energy Control Center 
31 1 
as possible. The other part of the demand consists of the uncontrolled use of 
electricity, which is referred to as the natural demand. It is necessary to be able 
to predict both of these separately. The base demand is predicted using historic 
load and weather data and a weather forecast. 
Unit Commitment 
The unit commitment function determines schedules for generation 
operation, load management blocks and interchange transactions that can be 
dispatched. 
It is an optimization problem, whose goal is to determine unit 
startup and shutdown and when on-line, what is the most economic output for 
each unit during each time step. The function also determines transfer levels on 
interconnections and the schedule of load management blocks. The software 
takes into account startup and shutdown costs, minimum up and down times and 
constraints imposed by spinning reserve requirements. 
The unit commitment software produces schedules in advance for the 
next time period (up to as many as seven days, at 15-minute intervals). The 
algorithm takes the predicted base demand from the load forecasting function 
and the predicted sizes of the load management blocks. It then places the load 
management blocks onto the base demand curve, essentially to smooth it 
optimally. 
The operator is able to use the software to evaluate proposed 
interchange transactions by comparing operating costs with and without the 
proposed energy exchange. The software also enables the operator to compute 
different plant schedules where there are options on plant availability 
Economic Dispatch and AGC 
The economic dispatch (ED) fimction allocates generation outputs of 
the committed generating units to minimize fuel cost, while meeting system 
constraints such as spinning reserve. 
The ED functions to compute 
recommended economic base points for all manually controlled units as well as 
economic base points for units which may be controlled directly by the EMS. 
The Automatic Generation Control (AGC) part of the software 
performs dispatching functions including the regulation of power output of 
generators and monitoring generation costs and system reserves. 
It creates 
control commands to change generation set points in response to changes in 
system frequency brought about by load fluctuations. 
Interchange Transaction Scheduling Function 
This function allows the operator to define power transfer schedules on 
tie-lines with neighboring utilities. In many instances, the function evaluates the 
economics and loading implications of such transfers. 

312 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Current Operating Plan (COP) 
As part of the generation and fuel dispatch functions on the EMS at a 
typical utility is a set of information called the Current Operating Plan (COP) 
which contains the latest load forecast, unit commitment schedule, and hourly 
average generation for all generating units with their forecast operating status. 
The COP is typically updated every 4 to 8 hours, or as needed following major 
changes in load forecast and/or generating unit availability. 
Network Analysis Functions 
Network applications can be subdivided into real-time applications and 
study functions. The real time hnctions are controlled by real time sequence 
control that allows for a particular function or functions to be executed 
periodically or by a defined event manually. The network study functions 
essentially duplicate the real time function and are used to study any number of 
“what if’ situations. The functions that can be executed are: 
Topology Processing (Model Update) Function. 
State Estimation Function. 
Network Parameter Adaptation Function. 
Dispatcher Power Flow (DPF.) 
Network Sensitivity Function. 
Security Analysis Function. 
Security Dispatch Function. 
Voltage Control Function. 
Optimal Power Flow Function. 
Topology Processing (Model Update) Function 
The topology processing (model-updating) module establishes the 
current configuration of the network, by processing the telemetered switch 
(breakers and isolators) status to determine existing connections and thus 
establish a node-branch representation of the system. 
State Estimation function 
The state estimator function takes all the power system measurements 
telemetered via SCADA, and provides an accurate power flow solution for the 
network. 
It then determines whether bad or missing measurements using 
redundant measurements are present in its calculation. The output from the state 
estimator is given on the one-line diagram and is used as input to other 
applications such as Optimal Power Flow. 
Network Parameter Adaptation function 
This module generates forecasts of busbar voltages and loads. The 

The Energy Control Center 
313 
forecasts are updated periodically in real time. This allows the state estimator to 
schedule voltages and loads at busbars where no measurements are available. 
Dispatcher Power Flow (DPF) 
A DPF is employed to examine the steady state conditions of the 
network. The solution provides information on network bus voltages (kV), and 
transmission line and transformer flows (MVA). The control center dispatchers 
use this information to detect system violations (overhnder-voltages, branch 
overloads) following load, generation, and topology changes in the system. 
Network Sensitivity Function 
In this function, the output of the state estimator is used to determine 
the sensitivity of network losses to changes in generation patterns or tie-line 
exchanges. The sensitivity parameters are then converted to penalty factors for 
economic dispatch purposes. 
Security Analysis Function 
The SA is one of the main applications of the real time network 
analysis set. It is designed to assist system dispatchers in determining system 
security under specified single contingency and multiple contingency criteria. It 
helps the operator study system behavior under contingency conditions. The 
security analysis function performs a power flow solution for each contingency 
and advises of possible overloads or voltage limit violations. The function 
automatically reviews a list of potential problems, rank them as to their effect 
and advise on possible reallocation of generation. The objective of SA is to 
operate the network closer to its full capability and allow the proper assessment 
of risks during maintenance or unexpected outages. 
Security Dispatch Function 
The security dispatch function gives the operator the capability of 
reducing or eliminating overloads by rearranging the generation pattern. The 
tool operates in real-time on the network in its current state, rather than for each 
contingency. The function uses optimal power flow and constrains economic 
dispatch to offer a viable security dispatch of the generating resources of the 
system. 
Voltage Control Function 
The voltage control (VC) study is used to eliminate or reduce voltage 
violations, MVA overloads and/or minimize transmission line losses using 
transformer set point controls, generator MVAR, capacitorireactor switching, 
load shedding, and transaction MW. 

314 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Optimal Power Flow Function 
The purpose of the Optimal Power Flow (OPF) is to calculate 
recommended set points for power system controls that are a trade-off between 
security and economy. The primary task is to find a set of system states within a 
region defined by the operating constraints such as voltage limits and branch 
flow limits. The secondary task is to optimize a cost function within this region. 
Typically, this cost function is defined to include economic dispatch of active 
power while recognizing network-operating constraints. An important limitation 
of OPF is that it does not optimize switching configurations. 
Optimal power flow can be integrated with other EMS functions in 
either a preventive or corrective mode. In the preventive mode, the OPF is used 
to provide suggested improvements for selected contingency cases. These may 
be the worst cases found by contingency analysis or planned outages. 
In the corrective mode, an OPF is run after significant changes in the 
topology of the system. This is the situation when the state estimation output 
indicates serious violations requiring the OPF to reschedule the active and 
reactive controls. 
It is important to recognize that optimization is only possible if the 
network is controllable, i.e., the control center must have control of equipment 
such as generating units or tap-changer set points. This may present a challenge 
to an EMS that does not have direct control of all generators. To obtain the full 
benefit of optimization of the reactive power flows and the voltage profile, it is 
important to be able to control all voltage regulating devices as well as 
generators. 
The EMS network analysis functions (e.g., Dispatcher Power Flow and 
Security Analysis) are the typical tools for making many decisions such as 
outage scheduling. These tools can precisely predict whether the outage of a 
specific apparatus (i.e., transformer, generator, or transmission line) would cause 
any system violations in terms of abnormal voltages or branch overloads. 
In a typical utility system, outage requests are screened based on the 
system violation indications from DPF and SA studies. The final approval for 
crew scheduling is granted after the results from DPF and SA are reviewed. 
Operator Training Simulator 
An energy management system includes a training simulator that 
allows system operators to be trained under normal operating conditions and 
simulated power system emergencies. 
System restoration may also be 
exercised. 
It is important to realize that major power system events are 
relatively rare, and usually involve only one shift team out of six, real 
experience with emergencies builds rather slowly. 
The interface to the operator appears identical to the normal control 
interface. The simulator relies on two models: one of the power system and the 

The Energy Control Center 
315 
other represents the control center. Other software is identical to that used in 
real time. A scenario builder is available such that various contingencies can be 
simulated through a training session. The instructor controls the scenarios and 
plays the role of an operator within the system. 
8.3 
POWER FLOW CONTROL 
The power system operator has the following means to control system 
power flows: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
FACTS based technology. 
Prime mover and excitation control of generators. 
Switching of shunt capacitor banks, shunt reactors, and static var 
systems. 
Control of tap-changing and regulating transformers. 
A simple model of a generator operating under balanced steady-state 
conditions is given by the Thevenin equivalent of a round rotor synchronous 
machine connected to an infinite bus as discussed in Chapter 3. 
V is the 
generator terminal voltage, E is the excitation voltage, 6is the power angle, and 
Xis the positive-sequence synchronous reactance. We have shown that: 
EV 
P = -sin 
6 
X 
V 
X 
Q = -[E cos 6 - V ]  
The active power equation shows that the active power P increases 
when the power angle Gincreases. From an operational point of view, when the 
operator increases the output of the prime mover to the generator while holding 
the excitation voltage constant, the rotor speed increases. As the rotor speed 
increases, the power angle 6 also increases, causing an increase in generator 
active power output P. There is also a decrease in reactive power output Q, 
given by the reactive power equation. However, when 6 is less than 15", the 
increase in P is much larger than the decrease in Q. From the power-flow point 
of view, an increase in prime-mover power corresponds to an increase in P at 
the constant-voltage bus to which the generator is connected. A power-flow 
program will compute the increase in Galong with the small change in Q. 
The reactive power equation demonstrates that reactive power output Q 
increases when the excitation voltage E increases. From the operational point of 
view, when the generator exciter output increases while holding the prime- 
mover power constant, the rotor current increases. 
As the rotor current 
increases, the excitation voltage E also increases, causing an increase in 
generator reactive power output Q. There is also a small decrease in 6required 
to hold P constant in the active power equation. From the power-flow point of 

316 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
view, an increase in generator excitation corresponds to an increase in voltage 
magnitude at the infinite bus (constant voltage) to which the generator is 
connected. 
The power-flow program will compute the increase in reactive 
power Q supplied by the generator along with the small change in 6: 
The effect of adding a shunt capacitor bank to a power-system bus can 
be explained by considering the Thevenin equivalent of the system at that bus. 
This is simply a voltage source Vyh in series with the impedance Zsys. The bus 
voltage V before connecting the capacitor is equal to VTh. After the bank is 
connected, the capacitor current l(. leads the bus voltage V by 90". Constructing 
a phasor diagram of the network with the capacitor connected to the bus reveals 
that V is larger than V7.h. From the power-flow standpoint, the addition of a 
shunt capacitor bank to a load bus corresponds to the addition of a reactive 
generating source (negative reactive load), since a capacitor produces positive 
reactive power (absorbs negative reactive power). The power-flow program 
computes the increase in bus voltage magnitude along with a small change in 6: 
Similarly, the addition of a shunt reactor corresponds to the addition of a 
positive reactive load, wherein the power flow program computes the decrease 
in voltage magnitude. 
Tap-changing and voltage-magnitude-regulating transformers are used 
to control bus voltages as well as reactive power flows on lines to which they 
are connected. 
In a similar manner, phase-angle-regulating transformers are 
used to control bus angles as well as real power flows on lines to which they are 
connected. Both tap changing and regulating transformers are modeled by a 
transformer with an off-nominal turns ratio. From the power flow point of view, 
a change in tap setting or voltage regulation corresponds to a change in tap ratio. 
The power-flow program computes the changes in Yh?,, bus voltage magnitudes 
and angles, and branch flows. 
FACTS is an acronym for flexible AC transmission systems. They use 
power electronic controlled devices to control power flows in a transmission 
network so as to increase power transfer capability and enhance controllability. 
The concept of flexibility of electric power transmission involves the ability to 
accommodate changes in the electric transmission system or operating 
conditions while maintaining sufficient steady state and transient margins. 
A FACTS controller is a power electronic-based system and other static 
equipment that provide control of one or more ac transmission system 
parameters. FACTS controllers can be classified according to the mode of their 
connection to the transmission system as: 
1. 
Series-Connected Controllers. 
2. 
Shunt-Connected Controllers. 
3. 
Combined Shunt and Series-Connected Controllers. 
The family of series-connected controllers includes the following 
devices: 

The Energy Control Center 
317 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5 .  
6. 
7. 
The Static Synchronous Series Compensator (S3C) is a static, 
synchronous generator operated without an external electric energy 
source as a series compensator whose output voltage is in 
quadrature with, and controllable independently of, the line current 
for the purpose of increasing or decreasing the overall reactive 
voltage drop across the line and thereby controlling the transmitted 
electric power. 
The S3C may include transiently rated energy 
storage or energy absorbing devices to enhance the dynamic 
behavior of the power system by additional temporary real power 
compensation, to increase or decrease momentarily, the overall real 
(resistive) voltage drop across the line. 
Thyristor Controlled Series Compensation is offered by an 
impedance compensator, which is applied in series on an ac 
transmission system to provide smooth control of series reactance. 
Thyristor Switched Series Compensation is offered by an 
impedance compensator, which is applied in series on an ac 
transmission system to provide step-wise control of series 
reactance. 
The Thyristor Controlled Series Capacitor (TCSC) is a capacitive 
reactance compensator which consists of a series capacitor bank 
shunted by thyristor controlled reactor in order to provide a 
smoothly variable series capacitive reactance. 
The Thyristor Switched Series Capacitor (TSSC) is a capacitive 
reactance compensator which consists of a series capacitor bank 
shunted by thyristor controlled reactor in order to provide a 
stepwise control of series capacitive reactance. 
The Thyristor Controlled Series Reactor (TCSR) is an inductive 
reactance compensator which consists of a series reactor shunted 
by thyristor controlled reactor in order to provide a smoothly 
variable series inductive reactance. 
The Thyristor Switched Series Reactor (TSSR) is an inductive 
reactance compensator which consists of a series reactor shunted 
by thyristor controlled reactor in order to provide a stepwise 
control of series inductive reactance. 
Shunt-connected Controllers include the following categories: 
1. A Static Var Compensator (SVC) is a shunt connected static var 
generator or absorber whose output is adjusted to exchange 
capacitive or inductive current so as to maintain or control specific 
parameters of the electric power system (typically bus voltage). 
SVCs have been in use since the early 1960s. The SVC application 
for transmission voltage control began in the late 1970s. 
A Static Synchronous Generator (SSG) is a static, self-commutated 
switching power converter supplied from an appropriate electric 
energy source and operated to produce a set of adjustable multi- 
phase output voltages, which may be coupled to an ac power 
2. 

318 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
system for the purpose of exchanging independently controllable 
real and reactive power. 
A Static Synchronous Compensator (SSC or STATCOM) is a 
static synchronous generator operated as a shunt connected static 
var compensator whose capacitive or inductive output current can 
be controlled independent of the ac system voltage. 
The Thyristor Controlled Braking Resistor (TCBR) is a shunt- 
connected, thyristor-switched resistor, which is controlled to aid 
stabilization of a power system or to minimize power acceleration 
of a generating unit during a disturbance. 
The Thyristor Controlled Reactor (TCR) is a shunt-connected, 
thyristor-switched inductor whose effective reactance is varied in a 
continuous manner by partial conduction control of the thyristor 
valve. 
The Thyristor Switched Capacitor (TSC) is a shunt-connected, 
thyristor-switched capacitor whose effective reactance is varied in 
a stepwise manner by full or zero-conduction operation of the 
thyristor valve. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
The term Combined Shunt and Series-Connected Controllers is used to 
describe controllers such as: 
1. 
The Unified Power Flow Controller (UPFC) can be used to control 
active and reactive line flows. It is a combination of a static 
synchronous compensator (STATCOM) and a static synchronous 
series compensator (S3C) which are coupled via a common dc link. 
This allows bi-directional flow of real power between the series 
output terminals of the S3C and the shunt output terminals of the 
STATCOM, and are controlled to provide concurrent real and 
reactive series line compensation without an external electric 
energy source. The UPFC, by means of angularly unconstrained 
series voltage injection, is capable of controlling, concurrently or 
selectively, the transmission line voltage, impedance, and angle or, 
alternatively, the real and reactive power flow in the line. The 
UPFC may also provide independently controllable shunt reactive 
compensation. 
The Thyristor Controlled Phase Shifting Transformer (TCPST) is a 
phase shifting transformer, adjusted by thyristor switches to 
provide a rapidly variable phase angle. 
1. 
The lnterphase Power Controller (IPC) is a series-connected 
controller of active and reactive power consisting, in each phase, of 
inductive and capacitive branches subjected to separately phase- 
shifted voltages. 
The active and reactive power can be set 
independently by adjusting the phase shifts and/or the branch 
impedances, using mechanical or electronic switches. 
In the 
particular case where the inductive and capacitive impedances 
form a conjugate pair, each terminal of the IPC is a passive current 
source dependent on the voltage at the other terminal. 
2. 

The Energy Control Center 
319 
The significant impact that FACTS devices will make on transmission 
systems arises because of their ability to effect high-speed control. Present 
control actions in a power system, such as changing transformer taps, switching 
current or governing turbine steam pressure, are achieved through the use of 
mechanical devices, that impose a limit on the speed at which control action can 
be made. FACTS devices are capable of control actions at far higher speeds. 
The three parameters that control transmission line power flow are line 
impedance and the magnitude and phase of line end voltages. Conventional 
control of these parameters is not fast enough for dealing with dynamic system 
conditions. FACTS technology enhances the capability to control the system. 
The accelerated use of FACTS is motivated by the deregulation/ 
competitive environment in contemporary utility business. 
FACTS allow 
operators to control the path of the flow of electric power, and the ability to 
effectively join electric power networks that are not well interconnected. 
8.4 
POWER FLOW 
Earlier chapters of this book treated modeling major components of an 
electric power system for analysis and design purposes. 
In this section we 
consider the system as a whole. An ubiquitous EMS application software is the 
power flow program, which solves for network state given specified conditions 
throughout the system. While there are many possible ways for formulating the 
power flow equations, the most popular formulation of the network equations is 
based on the nodal admittance form. The nature of the system specifications 
dictates that the network equations are nonlinear and hence no direct solution is 
possible. Instead, iterative techniques have to be employed to obtain a solution. 
As will become evident, good initial estimates of the solution are important, and 
a technique for getting started is discussed. There are many excellent numerical 
solution methods for solving the power flow problem. 
We choose here to 
introduce the Newton-Raphson method. 
Network Nodal Admittance Formulation 
Consider a power system network shown in Figure 8.1 with generating 
Buses 1, 2, and 3 are buses having 
Bus 3 is a load bus with no real 
capabilities as well as loads indicated. 
generation capabilities as well as loads. 
generation. Bus 4 is a net generation bus. 
Using the zequivalent representation for each of the lines, we obtain 

320 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Figure 8.1 Single-Line Diagram to Illustrate Nodal Matrix Formulation 
the network shown in Figure 8.2. Let us examine this network in which we 
exclude the generator and load branches. We can write the current equations as 
We introduce the following admittances: 

The Energy Control Center 
321 
Thus the current equations reduce to 
I, = Y, ,v, + Y,,V, + Y , y 3  +oc; 
I ,  = Y,,V,+Y,,V,+Y,,V,+OV, 
13 = y,,4 + Y23V2 + 63V: + YMV4 
I ,  = 05 + ov, + Y4p3 + Y,,V4 
Note that YI4 = Y4, = 0, since buses 1 and 4 are not connected; also Yz4 = Y42 = 0 
since buses 2 and 4 are not connected. 
The preceding set of equations can be written in the nodal-matrix 
current equation form: 
(8.1) 
'bus = ybusvbus 
where the current vector is defined as 
'bus = 
The voltage vector is defmed as 
Figure8.2 Equivalent Circuit for System ofFigure 8.1 

322 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
The admittance matrix is defined as 
6, 5 2  
5 3  
6 4  
6 3  y23 53 54 
6 2  
'22 
'23 
'24 
5 4  
y24 
54 
'44 
We note that the bus admittance matrix Ybus is symmetric. 
The General Form of the Load-Flow Equations 
The result obtained for the 4 bus network can be generalized to the case 
of n buses. Here, each of vectors Ibus and Vbus are n x 1 vectors. The bus 
admittance matrix becomes an n x n matrix with elements 
(8.3) 
/=0 
The summation is over the set of all buses connected to bus i including the 
ground (node 0). 
We recall that bus powers S, rather than the bus currents I, are, in 
practice, specified. We thus use 
As a result, we have 
(i= 1, ..., n )  
These are the static power flow equations. 
therefore we have 2n real equations. 
Each equation is complex, and 

The Energy Control Center 
323 
The nodal admittance matrix current equation can be written in the 
power form: 
(8.5) 
The bus voltages on the right-hand side can be substituted for using 
either the rectangular form, 
or the polar form: 
Rectangular Form 
If we choose the rectangular form, then we have by substitution, 
where the admittance is expressed in the rectangular form: 
YJ = GV + jBV 
Polar Form 
On the other hand, if we choose the polar form, then we have 
(8.9) 
(8.10) 

324 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
where the admittance is expressed in the polar form: 
Hybrid Form 
The hybrid form is essentially the polar form with the admittances 
expressed in rectangular form. Expanding the trigonometric functions, we have 
Now we use 
Separating the real and imaginary parts of (8.14), we obtain 
so that the power-flow equations become 
The Power Flow Problem 
(8.14) 
(8.15) 
(8.16) 
(8.17) 
(8.18) 
The power-flow (or load-flow) problem is concerned with finding the 
static operating conditions of an electric power transmission system while 
satisfying constraints specified for power and/or voltage at the network buses. 
Generally, buses are classified as follows: 

The Energy Control Center 
325 
6. 
7. 
8. 
A load bus (P-Q bus) is one at which S, = P, +jQ, is specified. 
A generator bus (P-V bus) is a bus with specified injected active 
power and a fixed voltage magnitude. 
A system reference or slack (swing) bus is one at which both the 
magnitude and phase angle of the voltage are specified. 
It is 
customary to choose one of the available P- V buses as slack and to 
regard its active power as the unknown. 
As we have seen before, each bus is modeled by two equations. In all, 
we have 2n equations in 2n unknowns. These are (V( and Bat the load buses, Q 
and Bat the generator buses, and the P and Q at the slack bus. 
Let us emphasize here that due to the bus classifications, it is not 
necessary for us to solve the 2n equations simultaneously. We can reduce the 
required number of equations by designating the unknown voltage magnitudes 
IV,l and angles 8, at load buses and 8, at generator buses as primary unknowns. 
Once these values are obtained, then we can evaluate the secondary unknowns 
P, and Q, at the slack bus and the reactive powers for the generator buses. This 
leads us to specifiing the necessary equations for a full solution: 
1. At load buses, two equations for active and reactive powers are 
needed. 
2. 
At generator buses, with lV,l 
specified, only the active power 
equation is needed. 
Nonlinearity of the Power Flow Problem 
Consider the power flow problem for a two-bus system with bus 1 
being the reference bus and bus 2 is the load bus. The unknown is IV21, and is 
replaced by x. 
x = IV21 
Y = (ssp P 
(8.19) 
(8.20) 
(8.21) 
(8.22) 

326 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
We can demonstrate that the power flow equations reduce to the following 
equation: 
ax4 +px2 + y =  0 
(8.23) 
The solution to the fourth order equation is straightforward since we 
can solve first for x2 as 
2 
-pfJp2 -4ay 
x =  
(8.24) 
2a 
Since x2 cannot be imaginary, we have a first condition for the 
existence of a solution requiring that 
From the definitions of a, p, and 3: we can show that for a meaningfid solution 
to exist, we need to satisfy the condition: 
A second condition can be obtained if we observe that x cannot be 
imaginary, requiring that x2 be positive. Observing that a and yare positive by 
their definition leads us to conclude that 
For x2 to be positive, we need 
or 
We can therefore conclude the following: 
There may be some specified operating conditions for which no 
solution exists. 
More than one solution can exist. The choice can be narrowed 
down to a practical answer using further considerations. 
Except for very simple networks, the load-flow problem results in a set of 

The Energy Control Center 
321 
simultaneous algebraic equations that cannot be solved in closed form. It is 
necessary to employ numerical iterative techniques that start by assuming a set 
of values of the unknowns and then repeatedly improve on their values in an 
organized fashion until (hopefdly) a solution satisfying the power flow 
equations is reached. 
The next section considers the question of getting 
estimates (initial guess) for the unknowns. 
Generating Initial Guess Solution 
It is important to have a good approximation to the load-flow solution, 
which is then used as a starting estimate (or initial guess) in the iterative 
procedure. 
A fairly simple process can be used to evaluate a good 
approximation to the unknown voltages and phase angles. 
The process is 
implemented in two stages: the first calculates the approximate angles, and the 
second calculates the approximate voltage magnitudes. 
Busbar Voltage Angles Approximation 
In this stage we make the following assumptions: 
1. 
2. 
All angles are small, so that sin I3= 13, cos I3= 1. 
All voltage magnitudes are 1 p.u. 
Applying these assumptions to the active power equations for the 
generator buses and load buses in hybrid form, we obtain 
This is a system of N- 1 simultaneous linear equations in e,, which is then solved 
to obtain the busbar voltage angle approximations. 
Busbar Voltage Magnitude Approximation 
The calculation of voltage magnitudes employs the angles provided by the 
above procedure. The calculation is needed only for load buses. We represent 
each unknown voltage magnitude as 
We also assume that 
By considering all load buses we obtain a linear system of simultaneous 

328 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
equations in the unknowns AV, . The results are much more reliable than the 
commonly used flat-start process where all voltages are assumed to be 110 . 
Newton-Raphson Method 
The Newton-Raphson (NR) method is widely used for solving 
nonlinear equations. 
It transforms the original nonlinear problem into a 
sequence of linear problems whose solutions approach the solution of the 
original problem. The method can be applied to one equation in one unknown or 
to a system of simultaneous equations with as many unknowns as equations. 
One-Dimensional Case 
Let F(x) be a nonlinear equation. Any value of x that satisfies F(x) = 0 
is a root of F(x). To find a particular root, an initial guess for x in the vicinity of 
the root is needed. Let this initial guess be xo. Thus 
where AFo is the error since xo is not a root. A tangent is drawn at the point on 
the curve corresponding to xo, and is projected until it intercepts the x-axis to 
determine a second estimate of the root. Again the derivative is evaluated, and a 
tangent line is formed to proceed to the third estimate of x. The line generated 
in this process is given by 
which, when y(x) = 0, gives the recursion formula for iterative estimates of the 
root: 
(8.28) 
N-Dimensional Case 
The single dimensional concept of the Newton-Raphson method can be 
extended to N dimensions. All that is needed is an N-dimensional analog of the 
first derivative. The Jacobian matrix provides this. Each of the y1 rows of the 
Jacobian matrix consists of the partial derivatives of one of the equations of the 
system with respect to each of the N variables. 
An understanding of the general case can be gained from the specific 
example N = 2. Assume that we are given the two nonlinear equations FI, F2. 
Thus, 
FI(X,,X,) = 0 
F2(x1,x2)=0 
(8.29) 
The Jacobian matrix for this 2 x 2 system is 

The Energy Control Center 
329 
(8.30) 
If the Jacobian matrix is numerically evaluated at some point ( ~ l ( ~ )  
, x i k )  ), the 
following linear relationship is established for small displacements (Ax, , Ax, ): 
(8.31) 
A recursive algorithm can be developed for computing the vector 
displacements ( Axl , Ax2 ). Each displacement is a solution to the related linear 
problem. With a good initial guess and other favorable conditions, the algorithm 
will converge to a solution of the nonlinear problem. We let ( xl(’), ~5’)) be the 
initial guess. Then the errors are 
The Jacobian matrix is then evaluated at the trial solution point [XI(’), 
xio)]. 
Each element of the Jacobian matrix is computed from an algebraic formula for 
the appropriate partial derivative using x1(’), xi’) . Thus, 
(8.33) 
This system of linear equations is then solved directly for the first correction. 
The correction is then added to the initial guess to complete the first iteration: 
(8.34) 
Equations (8.33) and (8.34) are rewritten using matrix symbols and a general 

330 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
superscript h for the iteration count; 
(8.35) 
The algorithm is repeated until AFh satisfies some tolerance. In most solvable 
problems it can be made practically zero. 
The Newton-Raphson Method for Load-Flow Solution 
There are different ways to apply the Newton-Raphson method to 
solving the load-flow equations. We illustrate a popular version employing the 
polar form. For each generator bus (except for the slack bus), we have the 
active power equation and the corresponding unknown phase 8,. We write this 
equation in the form 
For each load bus we have the active and reactive equations and the 
unknowns (V,( and 8,. We write the two equations in the form 
In the above equations, the superscript "sch" denotes the scheduled or specified 
bus active or reactive powers. We use the polar form to illustrate the process. 
We show the application of the Newton-Raphson method to solve the 
power flow problem. The incremental corrections to estimates of the unknowns 
are obtained as the solution to the linear system of equations. Thus, for the 
example network we have: 

The Energy Control Center 
33 1 
To simplify the calculation, the third term in each of the equations is 
We therefore have in matrix 
modified so that we solve for (A1V31/lV31). 
notation: 
Solving for A@, A@ and (AlV31/IV3/), we thus obtain the new estimates at the (h 
+1lth iteration: 
The application in the general case assumes that bus 1 is the slack bus, 
that buses 2, . . ., rn are generator buses, and that buses rn + 1, m + 2, . . ., n are 
load buses. We introduce the Van Ness variables: 
In condensed form. we have 

332 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
For the standpoint of computation, we use the rectangular form of the 
power equations. We introduce 
In terms of the a,, and b, variables, we have 
n 
n 
To summarize the expressions for the Van Ness variables are given by: 
(i # j off diagonals) 
A tremendous number of iterative techniques have been proposed to 
solve the power flow problem. It is beyond the scope of this text to outline 
many of the proposed variations. The Newton-Raphson method has gained a 
wide acceptability in industry circles, and as a result there are a number of 
available computer packages that are based on this powerful method and 
sparsity-directed programming. 
8.5 
S TA BlLlTY CONSIDERA TIONS 
We are interested in the behavior of the system immediately following 
a disturbance such as a short circuit on a transmission line, the opening of a line, 
or the switching on of a large block of loads. Studies of this nature are called 
transient stability analysis. The term stability is used in the sense of the ability 

The Energy Control Center 
333 
of the system machines to recover from small random perturbing forces and still 
maintain synchronism. In this section we give an introduction to transient 
stability in electric power systems. 
We treat the case of a single machine 
operating to supply an infinite bus. We do not deal with the analysis of the more 
complex problem of large electric power networks with the interconnections 
taken into consideration. 
The Swing Equation 
The dynamic equation relating the inertial torque to the net accelerating 
torque of the synchronous machine rotor is called the swing equation. This 
simply states 
J - 
=T,N.m 
(21 
(8.37) 
The left-hand side is the inertial torque, which is the product of the inertia (in 
kg. m2) of all rotating masses attached to the rotor shaft and the angular 
acceleration. 
The accelerating torque T, is in Newton meters and can be 
expressed as 
T, = T, - T, 
(8.38) 
In the above, T, is the driving mechanical torque, and T, is the retarding or load 
electrical torque. 
The angular position of the rotor @may be expressed as: 
B =a+ WRt + s 
(8.39) 
The angle a is a constant that is needed if the angle Sis measured from an axis 
different from the angular reference. The angle a t  is the result of the rotor 
angular motion at rated speed. The angle 6 is time varying and represents 
deviations fiom the rated angular displacements. This is the basis for the new 
re1 at i on 
It is more convenient to make the following substitution of the dot notation: 
(8.40) 

334 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Therefore we have 
J6 = T,, - T, 
(8.41) 
An alternative form of Eq. (8.41) is the power form obtained by 
multiplying both sides of Eq. (8.41) by w and recalling that the product of the 
torque T and angular velocity is the shaft power. This results in 
The quantity JO is called the inertia constant and is truly an angular momentum 
denoted by M (Jsirad). As a result, 
M = J u  
(8.42) 
Thus, the power form is 
M 8  = P,, - & 
(8.43) 
Concepts in Transient Stability 
In order to gain an understanding of the concepts involved in transient 
stability prediction, we will concentrate on the simplified network consisting of 
a series reactance X connecting the machine and the infinite bus. Under these 
conditions the active power expression is given by: 
EV 
p, =-sin 
6 
X 
This yields the power angle curve shown in Figure 8.3. 
(8.44) 
Figure 8.3 Power Angle Curve Corresponding to Eq. (8.44). 

The Energy Control Center 
335 
P 
t 
Figure 8.1 Stable and Unstable Equilibrium Points. 
P 
T 
Figure 8.5 System Reaction to Sudden Change 
We assume that the electric changes involved are much faster than the 
resulting mechanical changes produced by the generatorhrbine speed control. 
Thus we assume that the mechanical power is a constant for the purpose of 
transient stability calculations. The functions P,n and P, are plotted in Figure 
8.4. The intersection of these two functions defines two values for d The lower 
value is denoted 8; consequently, the higher is n-8 
according to the symmetry 
of the curve. At both points P, = P,; that is, dad? = 0, and we say that the 
system is in equilibrium. 
Assume that a change in operation of the system occurs such that 6 is 
increased by a small amount Ad Now for operation near 8, P ,  > P,,, and d'adr' 
becomes negative according to the swing equation, Eq. (8.43). Thus 6 is 
decreased, and the system responds by returning to 8. We refer to this as a 
stuble equilibrium point. On the other hand, operating at K -8 results in a 

336 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
system response that will increase 6 and moving further from n -8. For this 
reason, we call n- 8 an unstable equilibrium point. 
If the system is operating in an equilibrium state supplying an electric 
power P,,, with the corresponding mechanical power input P,, , then 
and the corresponding rotor angle is 4. Suppose the mechanical power P, is 
changed to P,, 
at a fast rate, which the angle 6cannot follow as shown in 
Figure 8.5. In this case, P, > P, and acceleration occurs so that 6increases. 
This goes on until the point 6, where P, = P,, and the acceleration is zero. The 
speed, however, is not zero at that point, and 6continues to increase beyond 6,. 
In this region, P, < P, and rotor retardation takes place. The rotor will stop at 
4, where the speed is zero and retardation will bring 6down. This process 
continues on as oscillations around the new equilibrium point 6,. This serves to 
illustrate what happens when the system is subjected to a sudden change in the 
power balance of the right-hand side of the swing equation. 
Changes in the network configuration between the two sides (sending 
and receiving) will alter the value of&, and hence the expression for the electric 
power transfer. 
For example, opening one circuit of a double circuit line 
increases the equivalent reactance between the sending and receiving ends and 
therefore reduces the maximum transfer capacity - 
. 
EV 
&, 
A Method for Stability Assessment 
In order to predict whether a particular system is stable after a 
disturbance it is necessary to solve the dynamic equation describing the behavior 
of the angle Gimmediately following an imbalance or disturbance to the system. 
The system is said to be unstable if the angle between any two machines tends to 
increase without limit. On the other hand, if under disturbance effects, the 
angles between every possible pair reach maximum value and decrease 
thereafter, the system is deemed stable. 
Assuming as we have already done that the input is constant, with 
negligible damping and constant source voltage behind the transient reactance, 
the angle between two machines either increases indefinitely or oscillates after 
all disturbances have occurred. Therefore, in the case of two machines, the two 
machines either fall out of step on the first swing or never. Here the observation 
that the machines’ angular differences stay constant can be taken as an 
indication of system stability. A simple method for determining stability known 
as the equal-urea method is available, and is discussed in the following. 

The Energy Control Center 
337 
The Equal-Area Method 
The swing equation for a machine connected to an infinite bus can be 
written as 
d w  - Po 
dt 
A4 
(8.45) 
where w = d s d t  and P, is the accelerating power. We would like to obtain an 
expression for the variation of the angular speed wwith P,. We observe that Eq. 
(8.45) can be written in the alternate form 
or 
ukz‘w = L ( d 6 )  
M 
Integrating, we obtain 
Note that we may assume a 
= 0; consequently, 
2
2
 
w =- 
Po(d6) 
A4 
or 
(8.46) 
The above equation gives the relative speed of the machine with respect to a 
reference from moving at a constant speed (by the definition of the angle 6). 
If the system is stable, then the speed must’be zero when the 
acceleration is either zero or is opposing the rotor motion. Thus for a rotor that 
is accelerating, the condition for stability is that a value of S, exists such that 

338 
and 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
This condition is applied graphically in Figure 8.6 where the net area under the 
P,, - 6curve reaches zero at the angle S, as shown. Observe that at S,, P, is 
negative, and consequently the system is stable. Also observe that area A ,  
equals A2 as indicated. 
The accelerating power need not be plotted to assess stability. Instead, 
the same information can be obtained i?om a plot of electrical and mechanical 
powers. The former is the power angle curve, and the latter is assumed constant. 
In this case, the integral may be interpreted as the area between the P, curve and 
the curve of P,,,, 
both plotted versus 6. The area to be equal to zero must consist 
of a positive portion A l ,  for which P,, 
P,, and an equal and opposite negative 
portion A2, for which P, < P,. This explains the term equal-area criterion for 
transient stability. This situation is shown in Figure 8.7. 
If the accelerating power reverses sign before the two areas A l  and A2 
are equal, synchronism is lost. This situation is illustrated in Figure 8.8. The 
area A2 is smaller that A , ,  and as 6increases beyond the value where P, reverses 
sign again, the area A3 is added to A l .  
Figure 8.6 The Equal-Area Criterion for Stability for a Stable S)stem. 
I 
I 
! 
I 
I 
+ 6  
I 
I 
6 ,  
6 m  
Figure 8.7 The Equal-Area Criterion for Stability. 

The Energy Control Center 
339 
A 
Figure 8.8 The Equal-Area Criterion for an Unstable System. 
Improving System Stability 
The stability of the electric power system can be affected by changes in 
the network or changes in the mechanical (steam or hydraulic) system. Network 
changes that adversely affect system stability can either decrease the amplitude 
of the power curve or raise the load line. Examples of events that decrease the 
amplitude of the power curve are: short circuits on tie lines, connecting a shunt 
reactor, disconnecting a shunt capacitor, or opening a tie line. Events that raise 
the load line include: 
disconnecting a resistive load in a sending area, 
connecting a resistive load in a receiving area, the sudden loss of a large load in 
a sending area, or the sudden loss of a generator in a receiving area. Changes in 
a steam or hydraulic system that can affect stability include raising the load line 
by either closing valves or gates in receiving areas or opening valves or gates in 
sending areas. 
There are several corrective actions that can be taken in order to 
enhance the stability of the system following a disturbance. These measures can 
be classified according to the type of disturbance - depending on whether it is a 
loss of generation or a loss of load. 
In the case of a loss of load, the system will have an excess power 
supply. Among the measures that can be taken are: 
1. Resistor braking. 
2. Generator dropping. 
3. Initiation along with braking, fast steam valve closures, bypassing 
of steam, or reduction of water acceptance for hydro units. 
In the case of loss of generation, countermeasures are: 
1. Load shedding. 
2. Fast control of valve opening in steam elect& plants; and in the 
case of hydro, increasing the water acceptance. 
The measures mentioned above are taken at either the generation or the load 
sides in the system. Measures that involve the interties (the lines) can be taken 
to enhance the stability of the system. Among these we have the switching of 

340 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
series capacitors into the lines, the switching of shunt capacitors or reactors, or 
the boosting of power on HVDC lines. 
Resistor braking relies on the connection of a bank of resistors in shunt 
with the three-phase bus in a generation plant in a sending area through a 
suitable switch. This switch is normally open and will be closed only upon the 
activation of a control device that detects the increase in kinetic energy 
exceeding a certain threshold. Resistive brakes have short time ratings to make 
the cost much less than that of a continuous-duty resistor of the same rating. If 
the clearing of the short circuit is delayed for more than the normal time (about 
three cycles), the brakes should be disconnected and some generation should be 
dropped. 
Generator dropping is used to counteract the loss of a large load in a 
sending area. This is sometimes used as a cheap substitute for resistor braking 
to counteract short circuits in sending systems. It should be noted that better 
control is achieved with resistor braking than with generator dropping. 
To counteract the loss of generation, load shedding is employed. In 
this instance, a rapid opening of selected feeder circuit breakers in selected load 
areas is arranged. This disconnects the customer’s premises with interruptible 
loads such as heating, air conditioning, air compressors, pumps where storage is 
provided in tanks, or reservoirs. Aluminum reduction plants are among loads 
that can be interrupted with only minor inconvenience. 
Load shedding by 
temporary depression of voltage can also be employed. 
This reduction of 
voltage can be achieved either by an intentional short circuit or by the 
connection of a shunt reactor. 
The insertion of switched series capacitors can counteract faults on ac 
interties or permanent faults on dc interties in parallel with ac lines. In either 
case, the insertion of the switched series capacitor decreases the transfer 
reactance between the sending and receiving ends of the interconnection and 
consequently increases the amplitude of the sine curve and therefore enhances 
the stability of the system. It should be noted that the effect of a shunt capacitor 
inserted in the middle of the intertie or the switching off of a shunt reactor in the 
middle of the intertie is equivalent to the insertion of a series capacitor (this can 
be verified by means of a Y-A transformation). 
To relieve ac lines of some of the overload and therefore provide a 
larger margin of stability, the power transfer on a dc line may be boosted. This 
is one of the major advantages of HVDC transmission. 
8.6 
POWER SYSTEM STATE ESTIMATION 
Within the framework of an energy control center, there are three types 
of real-time measurements: 

The Energy Control Center 
34 1 
Analog measurements that include real and reactive power flows 
through transmission lines, real and reactive power injections 
(generation or demand at buses), and bus voltage magnitudes. 
Logic measurements that consist of the status of switchesibreakers, 
and transformer LTC positions. 
Pseudo-measurements that may include predicted bus loads and 
generation. 
Analog and logic measurements are telemetered to the control center. 
Errors and noise may be contained in the data. Data errors are due to failures in 
measuring and telemetry equipment, noise in the communication system, and 
delays in the transmission of data. 
The state of a system is described by a set of variables that at time to 
contains all information about the system, which allows us to determine 
completely the system behavior at a future time t , .  A convenient choice is the 
selection of a minimum set of variables, thus defining a minimum, but sufficient 
set of state variables. Note that the state variables are not necessarily directly 
accessible, measurable, or observable. Since the system model used is based on 
a nodal representation, the choice of the state variables is rather obvious. 
Assuming that line impedances are known, the state variables are the voltage 
magnitudes and angles. This follows because all other values can be uniquely 
defined once the state values are known. 
State estimation is a mathematical procedure to yield a description of 
the power system by computing the best estimate of the state variables (bus 
voltages and angles) of the power system based on the received noisy data. 
Once state variables are estimated, secondary quantities (e.g., line flows) can 
readily be derived. 
The network topology module processes the logic 
measurements to determine the network configuration. 
The state estimator 
processes the set of analog measurements to determine the system state; it also 
uses data such as the network parameters (e.g., line impedance), network 
configuration supplied by the network topology, and sometimes, pseudo- 
measurements. 
Since it not practical to make extensive measurements of 
network parameters in the field, manufacturers data and one line drawings are 
used to determine parameter values. This may then introduce another source of 
error. 
The mathematical formulation of the basic power system state 
estimator assumes that the power system is static. Consider a system, which is 
characterized by n state variables, denoted by x, , with i = 1, ..., n. Let m 
measurements be available. The measurement vector is denoted z and the state 
vector is x. If the noise is denoted by v, then the relation between measurements 
and states denoted by h is given by: 
z, = h, (x) + v, 
(8.47) 

342 
or in compact form: 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
z = h ( x ) + v  
Let us linearize h(x), and we thus deal with: 
z =  Hx+v 
(8.48) 
H is called the measurement matrix and is independent of the state variables. 
There are many techniques for finding the best estimate of x, denoted 
by 2 .  We discuss the most popular approach based on the weighted least 
squares WLS concept. The method aims to minimize the deviations between the 
measurements and the corresponding equations. This requires minimizing the 
following objective hnction: 
We can demonstrate that the optimal estimates are obtained using the 
following recursive equation : 
xk+l = x k  + [ H k 7 W H k r i  Hk'W[z-h(xk)] 
(8.50) 
This means that the state variables are successively approximated 
closer and closer to some value and a convergence criterion determines when the 
iteration is stopped. The matrix W is called the weighting matrix, and relates the 
measurements individually to each other. The results are influenced by the 
choice of the elements of W. If one chooses W = I, all measurements are of 
equal quality. 
0 bserva bi I ity 
If the number of measurements is sufficient and well-distributed 
geographically, the state estimator will give an estimate of system state (i.e., the 
state estimation equations are solvable). In this case, the network is said to be 
observable. Observability depends on the number of measurements available 
and their geographic distribution. Usually a measurement system is designed to 
be observable for most operating conditions. Temporary unobservability may 
still occur due to unexpected changes in network topology or failures in the 
telecommunication systems. 
Before applying state estimation in power system operation, we need to 
conduct an observability analysis study. The aim here is to ensure that there are 
enough real-time measurements to make state estimation possible. If not, we 
need to determine where additional meters should be placed so that state 
estimation is possible. Moreover, we need to determine how are the states of 

The Energy Control Center 
343 
these observable 
islands are estimated, and how additional pseudo- 
measurements are included in the measurement set to make state estimation 
possible. Finally, we need to be able to guarantee that the inclusion of the 
additional pseudo-measurements will not contaminate the result of the state 
estimation. Observability analysis includes observability testing, identification 
of observable islands, and measurement placement. 
Bad Data Detection and Identification 
State estimation is formulated as a weighted least square error problem, 
and implicitly assumes that the errors are small. Large errors or bad data 
occasionally occur. The residual (the Weighted Least Square error) will be large 
if bad data or structural error is present. Action is needed to detect the bad data; 
identify which measurements are bad; and to remove all bad data so that they do 
not corrupt the state estimates. Detecting bad data is based on techniques of 
hypothesis testing to determine when the residual or the error is too large. Note, 
however, that a switch indicating other than its true position can cause larger 
error and hence we may end up discarding a valid analog reading. In practice, a 
major benefit of state estimation is identifying bad data in the system. 
Benefits of Implementing a State Estimator 
Implementation of a state estimator establishes the following data: 
The correct impedance data for all modeled facilities. This might 
seem to be information which should be readily available from the 
system plans of any given power system. Note, however, that 
between the time a facility is planned and placed in service, 
distances for transmission lines change due to right-of-way 
realignment, or the assumed conductor configuration is changed, or 
the conductor selected is not as assumed, etc. The net result is that 
the impedance according to the system plan may be up to 10 
percent off from the present actual values. 
The correct fixed tap position for all transformers in the modeled 
network. 
The correct load tap changing information for all modeled Load 
Tap Changing (LTC) transformers. 
The correct polarity of all MW and MVAR flow meters. 
Detect bad meters as they go bad. As a result, more confidence is 
established in the entire active meter set if meters are corrected as 
they are detected to be bad. 
When an unusual event occurs, the active mete'r set can be believed 
before the power system security process has been rerun. This 
saves time for the system operators. 
External Network Modeling 
In an interconnected system, the responsibility of each energy control 

344 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
center is to operate its own part of the system. 
A control center receives 
telemetered real-time measurements of its own system; referred to as the internal 
system. Neighboring systems are called the external system. Any unmonitored 
portions of the internal system such as distributionhub-transmission networks or 
unmonitored substations must also be incorporated in the “external” mode. Data 
exchange between utilities is often a difficult and sensitive issue, and this 
impacts the state estimation function. It is not always clear how much of the 
neighboring systems need to be measured for satisfactory performance of the 
state estimator. 
To determine the current status of the internal system using a state 
estimator, it is not necessary to know more about the external system. It is 
important, however, to include the response of the external system in evaluating 
the consequence of various contingencies for security assessment. An external 
model is constructed either on-line or off-line, or using a combination of both. 
This model can be a full or a reduced power flow model, or a combination of 
both. The external model is then attached to the internal system as the power 
flow model to evaluate the response of the internal system to various 
contingencies. A reduced power flow model of the external system is called an 
external equivalent. 
There may be portions of the transmission or sub-transmission system 
for which there is no direct telemetry. The choices are whether to neglect this 
portion, or put it into an equivalent form. It is often practical to eliminate a 
portion of the network if its most direct through-path directly paralleling a 
modeled transmission path is ten times or more the impedance of the modeled 
path. If, on the other hand, the step-down transformers to that portion are to be 
monitored, then the underlying system must be at least modeled as an equivalent 
path. 
8.7 
POWER SYSTEM SECURITY 
By power system security, we understand a qualified absence of risk of 
disruption of continued system operation. 
Security may be defined from a 
control point of view as the probability of the system’s operating point remaining 
in a viable state space, given the probabilities of changes in the system 
(contingencies) and its environment (weather, customer demands, etc.). 
Security can be defined in terms of how it is monitored or measured, as the 
ability of a system to withstand without serious consequences any one of a pre- 
selected list of “credible” disturbances (“contingencies”). 
Conversely, 
insecurity at any point in time can be defined as the level of risk of disruption of 
a system’s continued operation. 
Power systems are interconnected for improved economy and 
availability of supplies across extensive areas. Small individual systems would 
be individually more at risk, but widespread disruptions would not be possible. 
On the other hand, interconnections make widespread disruptions possible. 

The Energy Control Center 
345 
Operation of interconnected power systems demands nearly precise 
synchronism in the rotational speed of many thousands of large interconnected 
generating units, even as they are controlled to continuously follow significant 
changes in customer demand. There is considerable rotational energy involved, 
and the result of any cascading loss of synchronism among major system 
elements or subsystems can be disastrous. Regardless of changes in system load 
or sudden disconnection of equipment from the system, synchronized operation 
requires proper functioning of machine governors, and that operating conditions 
of all equipment remain within physical capabilities. 
The risk of cascading outages still exists, despite improvements made 
because many factors increase the risks involved in interconnected system 
operation : 
Wide swings in the costs of fuels result in significant changes in 
the geographic patterns of generation relative to load. This leads to 
transmission of electric energy over longer distances in patterns 
other than those for which the transmission networks had been 
originally designed. 
Rising costs due to inflation and increasing environmental 
concerns constrain any relief through further transmission 
construction. Thus, transmission, as well as generation, must be 
operated closer to design limits, with smaller safety (security) 
margins. 
Relaxation of energy regulation to permit sales of electric energy 
by independent power producers, together with increasing pressure 
for essentially uncontrolled access to the bulk power transmission 
network. 
Development of the Concept of Security 
Prior to the 1965 Northeast blackout, system security was part of 
reliability assured at the system planning stage by providing a strong system that 
could ride out any “credible” disturbances without serious disruption. It is no 
longer economically feasible to design systems to this standard. At that time, 
power system operators made sure that sufficient spinning reserve was on line to 
cover unexpected load increases or potential loss of generation and to examine 
the impact of removing a line or other apparatus for maintenance. Whenever 
possible, the operator attempted to maintain a desirable voltage profile by 
balancing VARs in the system. 
Security monitoring is perceived as that of monitoring, through 
contingency analysis, the conditional transition of the system into an emergency 
state. 
Two Perspectives of Security Assessment 
There is a need to clarify the roles of security assessment in the 

346 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
planning and real-time operation environments. The possible ambiguity is the 
result of the shift of focus from that of system robustness designed at the 
planning stage as part of reliability, to that of risk avoidance that is a matter 
operators must deal with in real time. The planner is removed from the time- 
varying real world environment within which the system will ultimately 
function. The term “security” within a planning context refers to those aspects 
of reliability analysis that deal with the ability of the system, as it is expected to 
be constituted at some future time, to withstand unexpected losses of certain 
system components. Reliability has frequently been considered to consist of 
adequacy and security. Adequacy is the ability to supply energy to satisfy load 
demand. 
Security is the ability to withstand sudden disturbances. 
This 
perspective overlooks the fact that the most reliable system will ultimately 
experience periods of severe insecurity from the operator’s perspective. System 
operations is concerned with security as it is constituted at the moment, with a 
miscellaneous variety of elements out for maintenance, repair, etc., and exposed 
to environmental conditions that may be very different from the normal 
conditions considered in system planning. In operations, systems nearly always 
have less than their full complement of equipment in service. As a result, an 
operator must often improvise to improve security in ways that are outside the 
horizon of planners. 
Security Assessment Defined 
Security assessment involves using available data to estimate the 
relative security level of the system currently or at some near-term future state. 
Approaches to security assessment are classified as either direct or indirect. 
0 
The direct approach: This approach evaluates the likelihood of 
the system operating point entering the emergency state. 
It 
calculates the probability that the power System State will move 
from normal state to emergency state, conditioned on its current 
state, projected load variations, and ambient conditions. 
It is 
common practice to assess security by analyzing a fixed set of 
contingencies. The system is declared as insecure if any member 
of the set would result in transition to the emergency state. This is 
a limiting form of direct assessment, since it implies a probability 
of the system being in the emergency state conditioned on the 
occurrence of any of the defined contingencies. 
The indirect approach: Here a number of reserve margins are 
tracked relative to predetermined levels deemed adequate to 
maintain system robustness vis-a-vis pre-selected 
potential 
disturbances. An indirect method of security assessment defines a 
set of system “security” variables that should be maintained with 
predefined 
limits 
to 
provide 
adequate 
reserve 
margins. 
Appropriate variables might include, MW reserves, equipment 
emergency ratings (line, transformer, etc.), or VAR reserves within 
defined regions. The reserve margins to be maintained for each of 
the security variables could be determined by offline studies for an 
0 

The Energy Control Center 
347 
appropriate number of conditions with due consideration to the 
degree to which random events can change the security level of a 
system in real time. Security assessment then would consist of 
tracking all such reserve margins relative to system conditions. 
For a number of years, security concerns dealt with potential post- 
contingency line overloads and because line MW loading can be studied 
effectively by means of a linear system network model, it was possible to study 
the effects of contingencies using linear participation or distribution factors. 
Once derived for a given system configuration, they could be applied without 
further power flow analysis to determine post-contingency line loading even, by 
superposition, for multiple contingencies. 
Such a computationally simple 
method of analysis made on-line contingency assessment practicable for 
“thermal security,” where reactive flows were not of concern. 
More recently, post-contingency voltage behavior has become a 
prominent element in security assessment. Assessment of “voltage security” is a 
complex process because the behavior of a system undergoing voltage collapse 
cannot be completely explained on the basis of static analysis alone. 
Implications of Security 
The trend towards reducing the costs associated with robust systems 
has lead to heightened requirements of active security control. This necessitates 
an increase in the responsibilities of the system operator. 
Accordingly, it 
requires operator training and the development and provision of tools that will 
enable the operator to hnction effectively in the new environment. 
Security Analysis 
On-line security analysis and control involve the following three 
ingredients: 
Monitoring 
0 
Assessment 
0 
Control 
The following framework relates the three modules: 
Step 1. Security Monitoring: Identify whether the system is in the 
normal state or not using real-time system measurements. If the system 
is in an emergency state, go to step 4. If load has been lost, go to step 
5 .  
Step2. Security Assessment: If the system is in the normal state, 
determine whether the system is secure or insecure with respect to a set 
of next contingencies. 

348 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Step 3. Security Enhancement: If insecure, i.e., there is at least one 
contingency, which can cause an emergency, determine what action to 
take to make the system secure through preventive actions. 
Step 4. Emergency Control (remedial action): Perform proper 
corrective action to bring the system back to the normal state following 
a contingency, which causes the system to enter an emergency state. 
Step 5. Restorative Control: Restore service to system loads. 
Security analysis and control have been implemented in modem energy 
control centers. The major components of on-line security analysis are shown in 
Fig. 8.9. 
The monitoring module starts with real-time measurements of physical 
quantities such as line power and current flows, power injections, bus voltage 
magnitudes, and the status of breakers and switches. 
Measured data are 
telemetered from various locations to the control center computer. A simple 
check of the transmitted data for reasonability and consistency allows filtering 
of bad measurement data, which are then rejected. 
Healthy data are 
systematically processed to determine network topology, i.e., the system 
configuration. The available data are further processed to obtain an estimate of 
the system state variables (bus voltage magnitudes and phase angles for normal 
steady state). State estimation is a mathematical procedure for computing the 
“best” estimate of the state variables of the system based on the available data, 
which are in general corrupted with errors. Prior to state estimation one would 
I 
Enerny Manazement System 
I 
- 
Data Acquisition 
- 
Supervisory Control 
- 
Alarm Processor 
- 
Logical Alarm 
- 
Sequence of Events Function 
- 
Historical Data Base 
Interchange Transaction Scheduling 
- 
Topology Processing 
- 
State Estimator 
- Network Parameter Adaptation 
- 
Dispatcher Power Flow 
- 
Network Sensitivity Function 
Security Analysis Function 
I
)
 
I 
I
I
 
I 
k 
Load Shedding Function 
I
I
 
I 
Figure 8.9 Functional Structure of Energy Management Centers. 

The Energy Control Center 
349 
like to know: 
1) Whether state estimation of the system is possible (enough of the 
network is observable), and if not, for which part of the system 
state estimation is still possible. 
2) Whether there is any bad data present, and if so, which data is bad 
and should be discarded. 
Observability analysis and bad data detection and identification are 
parts of the state estimation function. 
We need a set of contingencies to assess whether a normal operating 
state is secure or not. The contingency selection process employs a scheme to 
select a set of important and plausible disturbances. 
Security assessment 
involves primarily steady-state power flow analysis. Stability constraints are 
expressed in terms of the limits on line flows and bus voltages. As a result, to 
assess system response to contingencies, a contingency evaluation is carried out 
using on-line power flows. The on-line power flow uses the actual power flow 
model of the system under study (from the state estimation solution) together 
with a system representation of the unmonitored network and neighboring 
systems, i.e., an external network model. 
Since the contingencies are hture events, a bus-load forecast is needed. 
Certain implementations of the state estimator render the external model 
observable by strategic placement of pseudo-measurements. 
Then the state 
estimate is performed on the entire model in one step. 
8.8 
CONTINGENCY ANALYSIS 
Contingency analysis indicates to the operator what might happen to 
the system in the event of unplanned equipment outage. It essentially offers 
answers to questions such as “What will be the state of the system if an outage 
on part of the major transmission system takes place?’ The answer might be 
that power flows and voltages will readjust and remain within acceptable limits, 
or that severe overloads and under-voltages will occur with potentially severe 
consequences should the outage take place. 
A severe overload, persisting long enough, can damage equipment of 
the system, but usually relays are activated to isolate the affected equipment 
once it fails. The outage of a second component due to relay action is more 
serious and often results in yet more readjustment of power flows and bus 
voltages. 
This can in turn cause more overloads and further removal of 
equipment. 
An uncontrollable cascading series of overloads and equipment 
removals may then take place, resulting in the shutting down of a significant 
portion of the system. 
The motivation to use contingency analysis tools in an EMS is that 
when forewarned the operator can initiate preventive action before the event to 
avoid problems should an outage take place. From an economic point of view, 

350 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
the operator strives to avoid overloads that might directly damage equipment, or 
worse, might cause the system to lose a number of components due to relay 
action and then cause system-wide outages. 
Insulation breakdown, over-temperature relay action, or simply 
incorrect operation of relay devices are internal causes of contingencies. 
External contingencies are caused by environmental effects such as lightning, 
high winds and ice conditions or else are related to some non-weather related 
events such as vehicle or aircraft coming into contact with equipment, or even 
human or animal direct contact. 
These causes are treated as unscheduled, 
random events, which operators can not anticipate, but for which they must be 
prepared. 
The operator must play an active role in maintaining system security. 
The first step is to perform contingency analysis studies frequently enough to 
assure that system conditions have not changed significantly from the last 
execution. The outcome of contingency analysis is a series of warnings or 
alarms to the operators alerting them that loss of component A will result in an 
overload of P A  on line T1. To achieve an accurate picture of the system’s 
exposure to outage events several points need to be considered: 
A) 
System Model 
Contingency analysis is carried out using a power flow model of the 
system. Additional information about system dynamics is needed to assess 
stability as well. Voltage levels and the geographic extent to include in the 
model are issues to be considered. In practice, all voltage levels that have any 
possibility of connecting circuits in parallel with the high voltage system are 
included. This leaves out those that are radial to it such as distribution networks. 
While the geographical extent is difficult to evaluate, it is common to model the 
system to the extent real-time measurement data is available to support the 
model. 
6) 
Contingency Definition 
Each modeled contingency has to be specified on its own. The simplest 
definition is to name a single component. This implies that when the model of 
the system is set up, this contingency will be modeled by removing the single 
component specified. 
Another important consideration is the means of 
specifying the component outage. The component can be specified by name, 
such as a transmission line name, or more accurately, a list of circuit breakers 
can be specified as needing to be operated to correctly model the outage of the 
component. Contingencies that require more than one component to be taken 
out together must be defined as well. There is an advantage here to using a “list 
of breakers” in that the list is simply expanded to include all breakers necessary 
to remove all relevant equipment. 

The Energy Control Center 
351 
C) 
Double Contingencies 
A double contingency is the overlapping occurrence of two 
independent contingent events. To be specific, one outside event causes an 
outage and while this outage is still in effect, a second totally independent event 
causes another component to be taken out. The overlap of the two outages often 
causes overloads and under-voltages that would not occur if either happened 
separately, As a result, many operators require that a contingency analysis 
program be able to take two independent contingencies and model them as if 
they had happened in an overlapping manner. 
D) 
Contingency List 
Generally, contingency analysis programs are executed based on a list 
of valid contingencies. The list might consist of all single component outages 
including all transmission lines, transformers, substation buses, and all generator 
units. For a large interconnected power system just this list alone could result in 
thousands of contingency events being tested. If the operator wished to model 
double contingencies, the number becomes millions of possible events. 
Methods of selecting a limited set of priority contingencies are then needed. 
E) 
Speed 
Generally, operators need to have results from a contingency analysis 
program in the order of a few minutes up to fifteen minutes. Anything longer 
means that the analysis is running on a system model that does not reflect 
current system status and the results may not be meaningful. 
F) 
Modeling Detail 
The detail required for a contingency case is usually the same as that 
used in a study power flow. That is, each contingency case requires a hlly 
converged power flow that correctly models each generator's VAR limits and 
each tap adjusting transformer's control of voltage. 
Historical Methods of Contingency Analysis 
There is a conflict between the accuracy with which the power system 
is modeled and the speed required for modeling all the contingencies specified 
by the operator. If the contingencies can be evaluated fast enough, then all cases 
specified on the contingency list are run periodically and alarms reported to the 
operators. This is possible if the computation for each outage case can be 
performed very fast or else the number of contingencies to be run is very small. 
The number of contingency cases to be solved in common energy management 
systems is usually a few hundred to a few thousand cases. This coupled with the 
fact that the results are to be as accurate as if run with a full power flow program 
make the execution of a contingency analysis program within an acceptable time 
frame extremely difficult. 

352 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Selection of Contingencies to be Studied 
A full power flow must be used to solve for the resulting flows and 
voltages in a power system with serious reactive flow or voltage problems when 
an outage occurs. In this case, the operators of large systems looking at a large 
number of contingency cases may not be able to get results soon enough. A 
significant speed increase could be obtained by simply studying only the 
important cases, since most outages do not cause overloads or under-voltages. 
7) 
Fixed List 
Many operators can identify important outage cases and they can get 
acceptable performance. The operator chooses the cases based on experience 
and then builds a list for the contingency analysis program to use. It is possible 
that one of the cases that were assumed to be safe may present a problem 
because some assumptions used in making the list are no longer true. 
2) 
lndirect Methods (Sensitivity-Based Ranking Methods) 
An alternative way to produce a reduced contingency list is to perform 
a computation to indicate the possible bad cases and perform it as often as the 
contingency analysis itself is run. This builds the list of cases dynamically and 
the cases that are included in the list may change as conditions on the power 
system change. This requires a fast approximate evaluation to discover those 
outage cases that might present a real problem and require further detailed 
evaluation by a full power flow. Normally, a sensitivity method based on the 
concept of a network performance index is employed. The idea is to calculate a 
scalar index that reflects the loading on the entire system. 
3) 
Comparison of Direct and lndirect Methods 
Direct methods are more accurate and selective than the indirect ones at 
the expense of increased CPU requirements. The challenge is to improve the 
efficiency of the direct methods without sacrificing their strengths. Direct 
methods assemble severity indices using monitored quantities (bus voltages, 
branch flows, and reactive generation), that have to be calculated first. In 
contrast, the indirect methods calculate severity indices explicitly without 
evaluating the individual quantities. Therefore, indirect methods are usually less 
computationally demanding. 
Knowing the individual monitored quantities 
enables one to calculate severity indices of any desired complexity without 
significantly affecting the numerical performance of direct methods. Therefore, 
more attention has been paid recently to direct methods for their superior 
accuracy (selectivity). This has lead to drastic improvements in their efficiency 
and reliability. 
4) 
Fast Contingency Screening Methods 
To build a reduced list of contingencies one uses a fast solution 

The Energy Control Center 
353 
(normally an approximate one) and ranks the contingencies according to its 
results. Direct contingency screening methods can be classified by the 
imbedded modeling assumptions. Two distinct classes of methods can be 
identified: 
a) 
b) 
Linear methods specifically intended to screen contingencies 
for possible real power (branch MW overload) problems. 
Nonlinear methods intended to detect both real and reactive 
power problems (including voltage problems). 
Bounding methods offer the best combination of numerical efficiency 
and adaptability to system topology changes. These methods determine the 
parts of the network in which branch MW flow limit violations may occur. A 
linear incremental solution is performed only for the selected system areas rather 
than for the entire network. The accuracy of the bounding methods is limited 
only by the accuracy of the incremental linear power flow. 
Nonlinear methods are designed to screen the contingencies for reactive 
power and voltage problems. They can also screen for branch flow problems 
(both MW and MVNAMP). Recent proposed enhancements include attempts 
to localize the outage effects, and speeding the nonlinear solution of the entire 
system. 
An early localization method is the “concentric relaxation” which 
solves a small portion of the system in the vicinity of the contingency while 
treating the remainder of the network as an “infinite expanse.” The area to be 
solved is concentrically expanded until the incremental voltage changes along 
the last solved tier of buses are not significantly affected by the inclusion of an 
additional tier of buses. The method suffered from unreliable convergence, lack 
of consistent criteria for the selection of buses to be included in the small 
network; and the need to solve a number of different systems of increasing size 
resulting from concentric expansion of the small network (relaxation). 
Different attempts have been made at improving the efficiency of the 
large system solution. They can be classified as speeding up the solution by 
means of: 
1) Approximations andor partial (incomplete) solutions. 
2) Using network equivalents (reduced network representation). 
The first approach involves the “single iteration” concept to take 
advantage of the speed and reasonably fast convergence of the Fast Decoupled 
Power Flow to limit the number of iterations to one. Theaapproximate, first 
iteration solution can be used to check for major limit violations and the 
calculation of different contingency severity measures. 
The single iteration 
approach can be combined with other techniques like the use of the reduced 
network representations to improve numerical efficiency. 
An alternative approach is based upon bounding of outage effects. 

354 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Similar to the bounding in linear contingency screening, an attempt is made to 
perform a solution only in the stressed areas of the system. A set of bounding 
quantities is created to identify buses that can potentially have large reactive 
mismatches. 
The actual mismatches are then calculated and the forward 
solution is performed only for those with significant mismatches. 
All bus 
voltages are known following the backward substitution step and a number of 
different severity indices can be calculated. 
The zero mismatch (ZM) method extends the application of localization 
ideas from contingency screening to full iterative simulation. Advantage is 
taken of the fact that most contingencies significantly affect only small portions 
(areas) of the system. Significant mismatches occur in only very few areas of 
the system being modeled. There is a definite pattern of very small mismatches 
throughout the rest of the system model. This is particularly true for localizable 
contingencies, e.g., branch outages, bus section faults. Consequently, it should 
be possible to utilize this knowledge and significantly speed up the solution of 
such contingencies. The following is a framework for the approach: 
1) Bound the outage effects for the first iteration using for example a 
version of the complete boundary. 
2) Determine the set of buses with significant mismatches resulting 
from angle and magnitude increments. 
3) Calculate mismatches and solve for new increments. 
4) Repeat the last two steps until convergence occurs. 
The main difference between the zero mismatch and the concentric 
relaxation methods is in the network representation. The zero mismatch method 
uses the complete network model while a small cutoff representation is used in 
the latter one. The zero mismatch approach is highly reliable and produces 
results of acceptable accuracy because of the accuracy of the network 
representation and the ability to expand the solution to any desired bus. 
8.9 
OPTIMAL PREVENTIVE AND CORRECTIVE ACTIONS 
For contingencies found to cause overloads, voltage limit violations, or 
stability problems, preventive actions are required. If a feasible solution exists 
to a given security control problem, then it is highly likely that other feasible 
solutions exist as well. 
In this instance, one solution must be chosen from 
among the feasible candidates. If a feasible solution does not exist (which is 
also common), a solution must be chosen from the infeasible candidates. 
Security optimization is a broad term to describe the process of selecting a 
preferred solution from a set of (feasible or infeasible) candidate solutions. The 
term Optimal Power Flow (OPF) is used to describe the computer application 
that performs security optimization within an Energy Management System. 

The Energy Control Center 
355 
Optimization in Security Control 
To address a given security problem, an operator will have more than 
one control scheme. Not all schemes will be equally preferred and the operator 
will thus have to choose the best or “optimal” control scheme. It is desirable to 
find the control actions that represent the optimal balance between security, 
economy, and other operational considerations. 
The need is for an optimal 
solution that takes all operational aspects into consideration. Security 
optimization programs may not have the capability to incorporate all operational 
considerations into the solution, but this limitation does not prevent security 
optimization programs from being usehl. 
The solution of the security optimization program is called an “optimal 
solution” if the control actions achieve the balance between security, economy, 
and other operational considerations. 
The main problem of security 
optimization seeks to distinguish the preferred of two possible solutions. A 
method that chooses correctly between any given pair of candidate solutions is 
capable of finding the optimal solution out of the set of all possible solutions. 
There are two categories of methods for distinguishing between candidate 
solutions: one class relies on an objective function, the other class relies on 
rules. 
1) 
The Objective Function 
The objective function method assumes that it is possible to assign a 
single numerical value to each possible solution, and that the solution with the 
lowest value is the optimal solution. The objective function is this numerical 
assignment. In general, the objective function value is an explicit function of 
the controls and state variables, for all the networks in the problem. 
Optimization methods that use an objective function typically exploit its 
analytical properties, solving for control actions that represent the minimum. 
The conventional optimal power flow (OPF) is an example of an optimization 
method that uses an objective function. 
The advantages of using an objective function method are: 
0 
Analytical expressions can be found to represent MW production 
costs and transmission losses, which are, at least from an economic 
view point, desirable quantities to minimize. 
The objective function imparts a value to every possible solution. 
Thus all candidate solutions can, in principle, be compared on the 
basis of their objective function value. 
The objective function method assures that the present optimal 
solution can be recognized by virtue of its having the minimum 
value. 
0 
Typical objective functions used in OPF include MW production costs 
or expressions for active (or reactive) power transmission losses. However, 

356 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
when the OPF is used to generate control strategies that are intended to keep the 
power system secure, it is typical for the objective function to be an expression 
of the MW production costs, augmented with fictitious control costs that 
represent other operational considerations. This is especially the case when 
security against contingencies is part of the problem definition. Thus when 
security constrained OPF is implemented to support real-time operations, the 
objective function tends to be a device whose purpose is to guide the OPF to 
find the solution that is optimal ffom an operational perspective, rather than one 
which represents a quantity to be minimized. 
Some examples of non-economic operational considerations that a 
utility might put into its objective function are: 
0 
a preference for a small number of control actions; 
0 
a preference to keep a control away from its limit; 
0 
the relative preference or reluctance for preventive versus post- 
contingent action when treating contingencies; and 
0 
a preference for tolerating small constraint violations rather than 
taking control action. 
The most significant shortcoming of the objective function method is 
that it is difficult (sometimes impossible) to establish an objective function that 
consistently reflects true production costs and other non-economic operational 
considerat ions. 
Rules are used in methods relying on expert systems techniques. A 
rule-based method is appropriate when it is possible to specify rules for 
choosing between candidate solutions easier than by modeling these choices via 
an objective function. Optimization methods that use rules typically search for a 
rule that matches the problem addressed. The rule indicates the appropriate 
decision (e.g., control action) for the situation. The main weakness of a rule- 
based approach is that the rule base does not provide a continuum in the solution 
space. Therefore, it may be difficult to offer guidance for the OPF from the rule 
base when the predefined situations do not exist in the present power system 
state. 
Rules can play another important role when the OPF is used in the real- 
time environment. The real-time OPF problem definition itself can be ill 
defined and rules may be used to adapt the OPF problem definition to the 
current state of the power system. 
Optimization Subject to Security Constraints 
The conventional OPF formulation seeks to minimize an objective 
function subject to security constraints, often presented as “hard constraints,” for 
which even small violations are not acceptable. A purely analytical formulation 

The Energy Control Center 
357 
might not always lead to solutions that are optimal from an operational 
perspective. Therefore, the OPF formulation should be regarded as a framework 
in which to understand and discuss security optimization problems, rather than 
as a fundamental representation of the problem itself. 
7) 
Security Optimization for the Base Case State 
Consider the security optimization problem for the base case state 
ignoring contingencies. The power system is considered secure if there are no 
constraint violations in the base case state. Thus any control action required will 
be corrective action. The aim of the OPF is to find the optimal corrective action. 
When the objective function is defined to be the MW production costs, 
the problem becomes the classical active and reactive power constrained 
dispatch. 
When the objective function is defined to be the active power 
transmission 
losses, the problem becomes one of active power loss 
minimization. 
2) 
Security Optimization for Base Case and Contingency States 
Now consider the security optimization problem for the base case and 
contingency states. The power system is considered secure if there are no 
constraint violations in the base case state, and all contingencies are manageable 
with post-contingent control action. In general, this means that base case control 
action will be a combination of corrective and preventive actions and that post- 
contingent control action will be provided in a set of contingency plans. The 
aim of the OPF is then to find the set of base case control actions plus 
contingency plans that is optimal. 
Dealing with contingencies requires solving OPF involving multiple 
networks, consisting of the base case network and each contingency network. 
To obtain an optimal solution, these individual network problems must be 
formulated as a multiple network problem and solved in an integrated fashion. 
The integrated solution is needed because any base case control action will 
affect all contingency states, and the more a given contingency can be addressed 
with post-contingency control action, the less preventive action is needed for 
that contingency. 
When an operator is not willing to take preventive action, then all 
contingencies must be addressed with post-contingent control action. 
The 
absence of base case control action decouples the multiple network problems 
into a single network problem for each contingency. When an operator is not 
willing to rely on post-contingency control action, then all contingencies must 
be addressed with preventive action. In this instance, the cost of the preventive 
action is preferred over the risk of having to take control action in the post- 
contingency state. The absence of post-contingency control action means that 
the multiple network problem may be represented as the single network problem 
for the base case, augmented with post-contingent constraints. 

358 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Security optimization for base case and contingency states will involve 
base case corrective and preventive action, as well as contingency plans for 
post-contingency action. To facilitate finding the optimal solution, the objective 
function and rules that reflect operating policy are required. For example, if it is 
preferred to address contingencies with post-contingency action rather than 
preventive action, then post-contingent controls may be modeled as having a 
lower cost in the objective function. Similarly, a preference for preventive 
action over contingency plans could be modeled by assigning the post- 
contingent controls a higher cost than the base case controls. Some 
contingencies are best addressed with post-contingent network switching. This 
can be modeled as a rule that for a given contingency, switching is to be 
considered before other post-contingency controls. 
3) 
Soft Constraints 
Another form of security optimization involves ‘‘soft” security 
constraints that may be violated but at the cost of incurring a penalty. This is a 
more sophisticated method that allows a true security/economy trade-off. Its 
disadvantage is requiring a modeling of the penalty function consistent with the 
objective function. When a feasible solution is not possible, this is perhaps the 
best way to guide the algorithm toward finding an “optimal infeasible” solution. 
4) 
Security versus Economy 
As a general rule, economy must be compromised for security. 
However, in some cases security can be traded off for economy. 
If the 
constraint violations are small enough, it may be preferable to tolerate them in 
return for not having to make the control moves. Many constraint limits are not 
truly rigid and can be relaxed. 
Thus, in general, the security optimization 
problem seeks to determine the proper balance of security and economy. When 
security and economy are treated on the same basis, it is necessary to have a 
measure of the relative value of a secure, expensive state relative to a less 
secure, but also less expensive state. 
5) 
In feasibility 
If a secure state cannot be achieved, there is still a need for the least 
insecure operating point. For OPF, this means that when a feasible solution 
cannot be found, it is still important that OPF reach a solution, and that this 
solution be “optimal” in some sense, even though it is infeasible. 
This is 
especially appropriate for OPF problems that include contingencies in their 
definition. The OPF program needs to be capable of obtaining the “optimal 
infeasible” solution. There are several approaches to this problem. Perhaps the 
best approach is one that allows the user to model the relative importance of 
specific violations, with this modeling then reflected in the OPF solution. This 
modeling may involve the objective hnction (i.e., penalty function) or rules, or 
both. 

The Energy Control Center 
359 
The Time Variable 
The preceding discussion assumes that all network states are based on 
the same (constant) frequency, and all transient effects due to switching and 
outages are assumed to have died out. While bus voltages and branch flows are, 
in general, sinusoidal functions of time, only the amplitudes and phase 
relationships are used to describe network state. 
Load, generation, and 
interchange schedules change slowly with time, but are treated as constant in the 
steady state approximation. There are still some aspects of the time variable that 
need to be accounted for in the security optimization problem. 
1) 
Time Restrictions on Violations and Controls 
The limited amount of time to correct constraint violations is a security 
concern. This is because branch flow thermal limits typically have several 
levels of rating (normal, emergency, etc.), each with its maximum time of 
violation. (The higher the rating, the shorter the maximum time of violation.) 
Voltage limits have a similar rating structure and there is very little time to 
recover from a violation of an emergency voltage rating. 
Constraint violations need to be corrected within a specific amount of 
time. This applies to violations in contingency states as well as actual violations 
in the base case state. 
Base case violations, however, have the added 
seriousness of the elapsed time of violation: a constraint that has been violated 
for a period of time has less time to be corrected than a constraint that has just 
gone into violation. 
The situation is further complicated by the fact that controls cannot 
move instantaneously. For some controls, the time required for movement is 
significant. Generator ramp rates can restrict the speed with which active power 
is rerouted in the network. Delay times for switching capacitors and reactors 
and transformer tap changing mechanisms can preclude the immediate 
correction of serious voltage violations. If the violation is severe enough, slow 
controls that would otherwise be preferred may be rejected in favor of fast, less 
preferred controls. When the violation is in the contingency state, the time 
criticality may require the solution to select preventive action even though a 
contingency plan for post-contingent corrective action might have been possible 
for a less severe violation. 
2) 
Time in the Objective Function 
It is common for the MW production costs to dominate the character of 
the objective hnction for OPF users. The objective function involves the time 
variable to the extent that the OPF is minimizing a time rate of change. This is 
also the case when the OPF is used to minimize the cost of imported power or 
active power transmission losses. Not all controls in the OPF can be “costs” in 
terms of dollars per hour. The start-up cost for a combustion turbine, for 
example, is expressed in dollars, not dollars per hour. The costing of reactive 

360 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
controls is even more difficult, since the unwillingness to move these controls is 
not easily expressed in either dollars or dollars per hour. OPF technology 
requires a single objective function, which means that all control costs must be 
expressed in the same units. There are two approaches to this problem: 
0 
Convert dollar per hour costs into dollar costs by specifying a time 
interval for which the optimization is to be valid. Thus control 
costs in dollars per hour multiplied by the time interval, yield 
control costs in dollars. This is now in the same units as controls 
whose costs are “naturally” in dollars. 
This approach thus 
“integrates” the time variable out of the objective function 
completely. This may be appropriate when the OPF solution is 
intended for a well-defined (finite) period of time. 
Regard all fixed control costs (expressed in dollars) as occurring 
repeatedly in time and thus having a justified conversion into 
dollars per hour. For example, the expected number of times per 
year that a combustion turbine is started defines a cost per unit 
time for the start-up of the unit. Similarly, the unwillingness to 
move reactive controls can be thought of as reluctance over and 
above an acceptable amount of movement per year. This approach 
may be appropriate when the OPF is used to optimize over a 
relatively long period of time. 
Simply adjust the objective function empirically so that the OPF 
provides acceptable solutions. This method can be regarded as an 
example of either of the first two approaches. 
0 
Using an Optimal Power Flow Program 
OPF programs are used both in on-line and in off-line (study mode) 
studies. The two modes are not the same. 
1) 
On-line Optimal Power Flow 
The solution speed of an on-line OPF should be high enough so that the 
program converges to a solution before the power system configuration has 
changed appreciably. Thus the on-line OPF should be fast enough to run several 
times per hour. The values of the algorithm’s input parameters should be valid 
over a wide range of operating states, such that the program continues to 
function as the state of the system changes. Moreover, the application needs to 
address the correct security optimization problem and that the solutions conform 
to current operating policy. 
21 
Advisory Mode versus Closed Loop Control 
On-line OPF programs are implemented in either advisory or closed 
loop mode. 
In advisory mode, the control actions that constitute the OPF 
solution are presented as recommendations to the operator. For closed loop 
OPF, the control actions are actually implemented in the power system, typically 

The Energy Control Center 
361 
via the SCADA subsystem of the Energy Management System. The advisory 
mode is appropriate when the control actions need review by the dispatcher 
before their implementation. Closed loop control for security optimization is 
appropriate for problems that are so well defined that dispatcher review of the 
control actions is not necessary. An example of closed loop on-line OPF is the 
Constrained Economic Dispatch (CED) function. Here, the constraints are the 
active power flows on transmission lines, and the controls are the MW output of 
generators on automatic generation control (AGC). 
When the conventional 
Economic Dispatch would otherwise tend to overload the transmission lines in 
its effort to minimize production costs, the CED function supplies a correction 
to the controls to avoid the overloads. Security optimization programs that 
include active and reactive power constraints and controls, in contingency states 
as well as in the base case, are implemented in an advisory mode. Thus the 
results of the on-line OPF are communicated to the dispatchers via EMS 
displays. 
Considering the typical demands on the dispatchers’ time and 
attention in the control center, the user interface for on-line OPF needs to be 
designed such that the relevant information is communicated to the dispatchers 
“at-a-glance.’’ 
3) 
Defining the Real-time Security Optimization Problem 
As the power system state changes through time, the various aspects of 
the security optimization problem definition can change their relative 
importance. For example, concern for security against contingencies may be a 
function of how secure the base case is. If the base case state has serious 
constraint violations, one may prefer to concentrate on corrective action alone, 
ignoring the risk of contingencies. In addition, the optimal balance of security 
and economy may depend on the current security state of the power system. 
During times of emergency, cost may play little or no role in determining the 
optimal control action. Thus the security optimization problem definition itself 
can be dynamic and sometimes not well defined. 
8.10 
DYNAMIC SECURITY ANALYSIS 
The North American Electric Reliability Council (NERC) defines 
security as “the prevention of cascading outages when the bulk power supply is 
subjected to severe disturbances.” To assure that cascading outages will not 
take place, the power system is planned and operated such that the following 
conditions are met at all times in the bulk power supply: 
0 
0 
No equipment or transmission circuits are overdoaded; 
No buses are outside the permissible voltage limits (usually within 
+5 percent of nominal); and 
When any of a specified set of disturbances occurs, the transient 
will be followed by acceptable steady-state conditions (i.e., 
instability will not occur). 

362 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Security analysis is carried out to ensure that these conditions are met. 
The first two require only steady-state analysis; but the third requires transient 
analysis (e.g., using a transient stability application). It has also been recognized 
that some of the voltage instability phenomena are dynamic in nature, and 
require new analysis tools. 
Generally, security analysis is concerned with the system's response to 
disturbances. In steady-state analysis the transition to a new operating condition 
is assumed to have taken place, and the analysis ascertains that operating 
constraints are met in this condition (thermal, voltage, etc.). In dynamic security 
analysis the transition itself is of interest, i.e., the analysis checks that the 
transition will lead to an acceptable operating condition. Examples of possible 
concern include loss of synchronism by some generators, transient voltage at a 
key bus ( e g ,  a sensitive load) falling below a certain level, and operation of an 
out-of-step relay resulting in the opening of a heavily loaded tie-line. 
The computational capability of some control centers may limit 
security analysis to steady state calculations. The post-contingency steady-state 
conditions are computed and limit checked for flow or voltage violations. The 
dynamics of the system may then be ignored and whether the post-contingency 
state was reached without losing synchronism in any part of the system remains 
unknown. 
As a result, instead of considering actual disturbances, the 
contingencies are defined in terms of outages of equipment and steady-state 
analysis is done for these outages. This assumes that the disturbance did not 
cause any instability and that simple protective relaying caused the outage. 
Normally, any loss of synchronism will cause additional outages thus making 
the present steady-state analysis of the post-contingency condition inadequate 
for unstable cases. It is clear that dynamic analysis is needed. 
In practice, we define a list of equipment losses for static analysis. 
Such a list usually consists of all single outages and a careful choice of multiple 
outages. Ideally, the outages should be chosen according to their probability of 
occurrence but these probabilities are usually not known. In some instance the 
available probabilities are so small that comparisons are usually meaningless. 
The choice of single outages is reasonable because they are more likely to occur 
than multiple ones. Including some multiple outages is needed because certain 
outages are likely to occur together because of proximity (e.g., double lines on 
the same tower) or because of protection schemes (e.g., a generator may be 
relayed out when a line is on outage). The size of this list is usually several 
hundred and can be a couple of thousand. 
For dynamic security analysis, contingencies are considered in terms of 
the total disturbance. All faults can be represented as three phase faults, with or 
without impedances, and the list of contingencies is a list of locations where this 
can take place. This is a different way of looking at contingencies where the 
post-contingency outages are determined by the dynamics of the system 
including the protection system. 
Obviously, if all possible locations are 
considered, this list can be very large. 

The Energy Control Center 
363 
In steady-state security analysis, it is not necessary to treat all of the 
hundreds of outage cases using power flow calculations, because the operator is 
interested in worst possibilities rather than all possibilities. It is practical to use 
some approximate but faster calculations to filter out these worst outages, which 
can then be analyzed by a power flow. This screening of several hundred 
outages to find the few tens of the worst ones has been the major breakthrough 
that made steady-state security analysis feasible. Generally, this contingency 
screening is done for the very large list of single outages while the multiple 
outages are generally included in the short list for full power flow analysis. The 
trend is to use several different filters (voltage filter versus line overload filter) 
for contingency screening. It is also necessary to develop fast filtering schemes 
for dynamic security analysis to find the few tens of worst disturbances for 
which detailed dynamic analysis will have to be done. 
The filters are 
substantially different from those used for static security. 
From a dispatcher’s point of view, static and dynamic security analyses 
are closely related. The worst disturbances and their effects on the system are to 
be examined. The effects considered include the resulting outages and the limit 
violations in the post-contingency condition. In addition, it would be useful to 
know the mechanism that caused the outages, whether they were due to distance 
relay settings or loss of synchronism or other reasons. This latter information is 
particularly useful for preventive action. 
The stability mechanism that causes the outages is referred to as the 
“mode of disturbance.” A number of modes exist. A single generating unit may 
go out of synchronism on the first swing (cycle). A single unit may lose 
synchronism after several cycles, up to a few seconds. Relays may operate to 
cause transmission line outages. 
Finally, periodic oscillations may occur 
between large areas of load and/or generation. These oscillations may continue 
undamped to a point of loss of synchronism. All of these types of events are 
called modes of disturbances. 
Motivation for Dynamic Security Analysis 
Ascertaining power system security involves considering all possible 
(and credible) conditions and scenarios; analysis is then performed on all of 
them to determine the security limits for these conditions. The results are given 
to the operating personnel in the form of “operating guides,” establishing the 
“safe” regions of operation. The key power system parameter or quantity is 
monitored (in real time) and compared with the available (usually pre- 
computed) limit. If the monitored quantity is outside the limit, the situation is 
alerted or flagged for some corrective action. 
Recent trends in operating power systems close to their security limits 
(thermal, voltage and stability) have added greatly to the burden on transmission 
facilities and increased the reliance on control. 
Simultaneously, they have 
increased the need for on-line dynamic security analysis. 

364 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
For on-line dynamic security analysis, what is given is a base case 
steady-state solution (the real time conditions are obtained from the state 
estimator and external model computation, or a study case as set up by the 
operator) and a list of fault locations. The effects of these faults have to be 
determined and, specifically, the expected outages have to be identified. 
Examining the dynamic behavior of the system can do this. Some form of fast 
approximate screening is required such that the few tens of worst disturbances 
can be determined quickly. 
Traditionally, for off-line studies, a transient stability program is used 
to examine the dynamic behavior. This program, in the very least, models the 
dynamic behavior of the machines together with their interconnection through 
the electrical network. Most production grade programs have elaborate models 
for the machines and their controls together with dynamic models of other 
components like loads, dc lines, static VAR compensators, etc. These models 
are simulated in time using some integration algorithm and the dynamic 
behavior of the system can be studied. If instability (loss of synchronism) is 
detected, the exact mode of instability (the separation boundary) can be 
identified. Many programs have relay models that can also pinpoint the outages 
caused by relay operation due to the dynamic behavior. 
To perform the analysis in on-line mode the time required for the 
computation is a crucial consideration. That is, the analysis itself by a pure time 
domain simulation is known to be feasible but whether this analysis can be 
completed within the time frame needed in the control center environment is the 
real challenge. The time taken for time domain analysis of power system 
dynamics depends on many factors. The most obvious one is the length of 
simulation or the time period for which the simulation needs to be done so that 
all the significant effects of the disturbance can be captured. Other factors 
include the size of the power system, and the size and type of the models used. 
Additional factors like the severity of the disturbance and the solution algorithm 
used also influence the computation time. 
Determining the vulnerability of the present system conditions to 
disturbances does not complete the picture because the solution to any existing 
problems must also be found. Quite often the post-contingency overloads and 
out-of limit voltage conditions are such that they can be corrected after the 
occurrence of the fault. Sometimes, and especially for unstable faults, the post- 
contingency condition is not at all desirable and preventive remedial action is 
needed. 
This usually means finding new limits for operating conditions or 
arming of special protective devices. Although remedial action is considered, as 
a separate function from security analysis, operators of stability limited systems 
need both. 
Approaches to DSA 
A number of approaches to the on-line dynamic stability analysis 
To date, engineers perform a large number of 
problem have been studied. 

The Energy Control Center 
365 
studies off-line to establish operating guidelines, modified by judgement and 
experience. Conventional wisdom has it that computer capability will continue 
to make it more economically feasible to do on-line dynamic security 
assessment (DSA) as long as the appropriate methods are developed. 
The most obvious method for on-line DSA is to implement the off-line 
time domain techniques on faster, more powerful and less expensive computers. 
Equivalencing and localization techniques are ways to speed up the time domain 
solutions. 
Also parallel and array processors show promise in accelerating 
portions of the time domain solution. 
Direct methods of transient stability, e.g., the transient energy function 
(TEF) method, have emerged with the potential of meeting some of the needs 
for DSA. They offer the possibility of conducting stability studies in near real- 
time, provide a qualitative judgement on stability, and they are suitable for use 
in sensitivity assessments. The TEF methods are limited to first swing analysis. 
An advantage, however, is that the TEF methods provide energy margins to 
indicate the margin to instability. 
Eigenvalue and related methods, and frequency response methods are 
used as part of off-line studies, for example, using frequency response methods 
to design power system stabilizers, but are not currently thought of as part of an 
on-line DSA. Probabilistic methods have the advantage of providing a measure 
of the likelihood of a stability problem. Their application in dynamic security 
assessment appears to be in the areas of contingency screening and in 
quantiQing the probability of the next state of the system. 
Artificial intelligence techniques including computational neural 
networks, fuzzy logic, and expert systems have proven to be appropriate 
solutions to other power system operations problems, and there is speculation 
that these technologies will play a major role in DSA. 

Chapter 9 
THE PRESENT AND FUTURE OF ELECTRIC ENERGY SYSTEMS 
9.1 
INTRODUCTION 
An electric power grid is a complex interconnected arrangement of 
systems that have to work together to deliver electricity, while maintaining 
synchronized operation of all its generating units. A power grid is a sprawling 
network involving many separate utilities; each independent in its own control 
area and regulated by local bodies, to meet the demand for electricity reliably 
and economically. 
These organizations have to coordinate to operate the 
interconnected system, and this coordination can take many forms, from a loose 
agreement of operational principles to a strong pooling arrangement of operating 
together. In a loosely coordinated grid, each balancing utility is responsible for 
operating its own portion while exchanging all relevant information with its 
partners. Alternatively, groups of utilities may set up a pool where operational 
decisions may be made centrally and then implemented by each utility. 
The electrical power infrastructure in the United States represents an 
enormous investment, including over 15,000 generators in 10,000 power plants 
and hundreds of thousands of miles of transmission lines and distribution 
networks. 
9.2 
CHALLENGES FACING THE SYSTEM 
Historically, the electric power business was structured such that 
generation and transmission, and in many cases distribution facilities, were 
owned and operated by the same company. 
This structure is known as a 
vertically integrated business, whose objective is to deliver bulk power from 
generation to load areas while centrally optimizing the generation schedules in a 
secure and reliable manner. 
Many publicly and privately owned individual power companies were 
interconnected, often across national boundaries, to form electric power grids 
with the intent of improving network reliability by enabling neighboring utilities 
to share generation reserves to support each other during emergency (stressed) 
conditions, and making economic transactions when load diversities and 
generation scheduling plans create opportunities. The first interconnection in 
the United States was constructed in the late 1920s, in the Pennsylvania-New 
Jersey-Maryland area (now referred to as the PJM system). Electric power grids 
are hailed as the 20th century’s engineering innovation most beneficial to human 
civilization. 
Introduction to Electrical Power Engineering. By Mohamed E. El-Hawary 
Copyright 0 
2008 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. 
367 

Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Deregulation 
There has been a worldwide trend since the latter part of the twentieth 
century toward deregulating the electric power industry, which has had a 
profound impact on how the electric grid is operated. Under deregulation, many 
different organizations are responsible for different portions of the operation and 
control of the generation-transmission-distribution networks. 
Because 
deregulation involves separating ownership of generating, transmission and 
distribution facilities, new operational procedures are needed to ensure the 
reliability and security of electricity supply. Presently, many jurisdictions have 
deregulated ownership of generation sources. 
In such cases, generation 
companies have to compete in the electricity markets to sell their supply. As a 
result, market transactions 
determine generation production while the 
transmission operator is mainly concerned with the reliability of the grid. 
In contrast with the case of a vertically integrated utility where the 
economic goal of minimizing the cost of supply is achieved by optimizing the 
dispatch and scheduling of its generators, in deregulated regions the electricity 
markets optimize the cost of the electricity supply. The market determines the 
levels of power sales and purchases for the long and short terms and after the 
markets clear, the generating companies can schedule hydro resources, fossil 
fuels, and equipment maintenance over many weeks, and the commitment (start- 
up and shutdown) of generating units over many hours. The computerized tools 
needed to run the market and those used by the generation companies to 
determine their bid strategies are getting more sophisticated all the time. The 
transmission operator has to run contingency (what-if) studies using these 
schedules to ensure that all reliability criteria are met or else the purchase-sale 
transactions have to be changed to meet reliability criteria requirements. 
The Nature of the Electric Power System 
Power-system operations can be divided into three stages: operations 
planning, real-time control, and after-the-fact accounting. A basic requirement 
is the ability to forecast load demand in the next few hours, days, weeks, or 
months that allows the market to determine the schedules and the transmission 
operator to approve these schedules if they meet the reliability requirements. 
The aim of real-time control is to respond to the actual demand, which always 
deviates from the forecast, and any unforeseen contingencies (equipment 
outages). Maintaining reliability of the system so that a possible contingency 
cannot disrupt power supply is an integral part of real-time control function. 
After-the-fact accounting tracks the actual delivery of energy between 
organizations to allow billing. 
All of this requires significant data 
communication as well as engineering computation within an individual 
company and between companies. 
Superior communication and computation technology play a vital role 
and the heart of monitoring and control of system operations in a utility is the 

The Present and Future of Electric Energy Systems 
369 
energy control or management system, which became the operations 
headquarters for each utility. Although these centers have greatly advanced 
technology, their basic control objective of maintaining reliability and security 
remain the same. 
Implementing deregulation would not be feasible without these 
advanced technologies. The trends in separating the economic functions from 
the reliability functions are happening at different rates in different parts of the 
world and best practices for operating these deregulated systems are still 
emerging. 
The Challenges of the Electric Business 
The nature of all electric power grids is that transmission lines connect 
all the electric generation sources and distribution points within their respective 
territories. Although electric power grids are highly reliable, the same systems 
are subject to many challenges that have the potential to adversely impact their 
reliability. 
While some might argue that the challenges may be broadly 
classified as being caused either by natural evolution or by the advent of electric 
power deregulation, there are sufficient overlaps between the two categories that 
discourage such classification. 
The power grid evolved over the past 100 years without a conscious 
awareness of how its evolution would affect its operation under deregulation, the 
digital economy, and interaction with other infrastructures. Competition and 
deregulation created multiple energy entities that must share the same regulated 
energy-delivery network, while imposing additional requirements of high 
transfers from new generation sources to the load areas. Grid planning faces a 
difficult task given the requirement to achieve resource adequacy in the electric 
power industry, where market economics and local concerns often drive short- 
term decisions. 
Load Growth 
Demand is already out-pacing available resources in several regions 
because the economy, population, and technological achievements continue to 
grow. During the last decade of the twentieth century, actual US demand for 
electricity increased some 35%, while capacity increased only 18%. Meeting 
the growing load in the more densely populated heavy load areas requires 
transmission and generation expansions be added to handle load increases. 
Public pressure based on environmental and other considerations such 
as the “not in my backyard” sentiment make it difficult to site transmission lines 
or major local generation sources. This makes system expansion very expensive 
and difficult. 
It is becoming increasingly harder for power generators and 
delivery entities to get permits and ensure that their return on investment is 
acceptable. 

370 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Thus fewer total circuit miles are being added and the complex systems 
that relieve bottlenecks and clear disturbances during peak demand are now 
closer to the edge and at greater risk of serious disruption. 
Aging Infrastructure 
In many regions of the world the amortizatioddepreciation rate has 
exceeded utility construction expenditures. Consequently utility construction 
expenditures have lagged behind asset depreciation. 
As a result of these 
diminished “shock absorbers,” the electric grid is becoming increasingly 
stressed, and whether the carrying capacity or safety margin will exist to support 
anticipated demand is questionable. 
Knowledge Attrition 
Knowledgeable and skilled human resources require training and 
experience that take time to develop. With an aging power engineering force, a 
major challenge that faces the electric power industry is to replace the retirees. 
This situation is not helped by trends in electrical engineering education that 
have not favored the electric power engineering stream. 
Requirement for Quality 
Digital computer technology users require a much higher quality of 
electricity. Some experts indicate that reliability will need to go from 99.9% 
(roughly 8 hours of power loss per year) to 99.99999999% reliability (32 
seconds of power loss per year). The industry will also need new equipment to 
protect against sags and disruptions. 
Grid Complexity 
The power grid involves many interaction points (operators, power 
consumers and producers, and several layers including power plants, control 
centers, and transmission, distribution, and corporate networks). 
Additional 
complexity developed because the interaction of these elements further 
increased the number of possible outcomes. 
Regulatory or Legislative Issues 
Given the complexities of an interconnected power system, these 
challenges have arisen, as the bulk grids were originally not designed to transfer 
large amounts of power between neighboring systems. Enacting regulatory 
requirements for planning and operational standards have not kept pace with the 
changes in the nature of the electric business. 

The Present and Future of Electric Energy Systems 
371 
Outages and Blackouts 
Widespread outages and huge price spikes during the recent past have 
raised public concern about grid reliability at the national level. The potential 
for larger scale and more frequent power disruptions is considered higher now 
than at any time since the great Northeast blackout in 1965. The ramifications 
of network failure have never been greater, as all the other infrastructures 
depend more and more on the power grid to energize and control their 
operations. 
Times and Scales 
The time and operational scales at which the electric grid operates are 
an important part of its complexity. The time scale for various power grid 
control and operation tasks can be anywhere from microseconds to a decade, 
which greatly complicates modeling, analysis, simulation, control, and 
operations tasks. 
The key elements and principles of operation for 
interconnected power systems were established prior to the emergence of 
extensive computer and communication networks. 
Coordination across the network happens on slower timescales. Some 
coordination occurs under computer control, but much of it is still based on 
telephone calls between system operators at the utility control centers (even, or 
especially, during an emergency). 
9.3 
BLACKOUTS AND THEIR IMPACT 
The term blackout is used to describe a widespread cutoff or loss of 
supply of electrical power, especially as a result of a shortage, a mechanical 
failure, or overuse by consumers. It is well known that blackouts happen only 
rarely and they are usually caused by a sequence of low probability outages. 
Common electric power system design practice strives to have the system 
remain functional for (N- I )  contingency (one major power system element taken 
out of service: a transmission line, major generation source, or transmission 
transformer) and not for the sequence of low probability disturbances. Most 
disturbances associated with major blackouts have occurred following a series of 
successive unscheduled equipment outages beyond (N-2) subsequent to the 
occurrence of extremely low-probability events. Blackouts are caused by a 
variety of phenomena. The causes include weaknesses in the infrastructure, 
storms, the general climate and human error. The consequences can be far 
ranging: disruption to industry, transport problems and a variety of social and 
political effects. 
“2003 was the year of the blackout.”’ Major wide area blackouts included: 
0 
10th June - Athens 

372 
Introduction to Electricul Power Systems 
26th June - Rome 
14th August - Northeast US and Central Canada 
23rd August - Helsinki 
27th August - Shanghai 
28th August - London 
23rd September - Sweden and Denmark 
23rd September - Georgia 
28th September - Italy 
Selected Blackout Events 
The August 14, 2003 North American Blackout 
The U.S.-Canadian blackout of August 14, 2003 involved a general 
area covering eight U.S. states and two Canadian provinces and affected 
approximately 50 million people while interrupting 63 GW of load and tripping 
over 400 transmission lines and 531 generating units at 261 power plants. The 
earlier indicators of potential difficulties included: 
0 
Many generators in FirstEnergy’s (FE) Northern Ohio service area 
were required to generate high levels of reactive power which 
continued to increase throughout the day. 
The Midwest Independent System Operator (MISO) state estimator 
(SE) and real time contingency analysis software were not functioning 
properly from 12:15 to 16:04. 
This prevented the MISO from 
performing proper “early warning” assessments of the system. 
At the FirstEnergy (FE) control center, a number a€ camputer s~Rwae 
failures occurred on their Energy Management System (EMS) software 
starting at 14:14. This prevented FE from having adequate knowledge 
of the events taking place on its own system until approximately 15:45. 
0 
0 
This major blackout evolved in the following manner: 
0 
The first major event was that the voltage regulator of the FE’s 
Eastlake unit 5 generator tripped to manual because of over-excitation. 
The generator tripped at 13:3 1:34 as the operator attempted to place the 
generator back under automatic voltage control. 
The Chamberlin-Harding 345-kV line tripped at 15:05 in FE’s system 
due to tree contact; the line was loaded to only 44% of summer 
normal/emergency rating. 
0 
The Hanna-Juniper 345-kV line loaded to 88% of its summer 
emergency rating and tripped due to tree contact at 15:32. 
0 
The Star-Canton 345-kV line loaded to 93% of its rating and tripped 
due to tree contact at 15:4 1. 
0 
During this period due to EMS failures at FE and MISO control 
centers, no proper operational actions were being taken due to lack of 
0 

The Present and Future of Electric Energy Systems 
313 
situation awareness. This cascading loss of lines continued while little 
load was being shed or lost. 
At 16:05:57 the Sammis-Star 345-kV line tripped by Sammis end zone 
3 relay operating on real and reactive current overload, and depressed 
voltage. This is deemed to be the critical event leading to widespread 
cascading in Ohio and beyond. 
Tripping of many additional lines in Ohio and Michigan by zone 3 
relays or zone 2 relays set similar to zone 3 relays followed. Prior to 
the Sammis-Star tripping, the blackout could have been prevented by 
load shedding in northeast Ohio. 
The power transfer between the U.S. and Canada on the Michigan 
border shifted at approximately 16:10, due to the cascading loss of 
major tie lines in Ohio and Michigan. This means that power started 
flowing counterclockwise from Pennsylvania, through New York and 
then Ontario and finally into Michigan and Ohio. This huge (3700 
MW) reverse power flow was to serve load in the Michigan and Ohio 
system, which was at this stage severed from all other systems except 
Ontario. 
0 
Voltage collapsed due to extremely heavily loaded transmission and a 
cascading outage of several hundred lines and generators ensued culminating in 
a blackout of the entire region. 
The September 23, 2003 Blackout in Southern Sweden and Eastern 
Denmark 
During this blackout, a total of 4700 MW of load was lost in Sweden 
affecting 1.6 million people and 1850 MW in Denmark affecting 2.4 million 
people. It is customary during this time of the year to conduct a significant 
amount of annual maintenance work before the winter peak load period. Prior to 
the blackout two 400-kV lines and three HVDC links connecting the Nordel 
system with Poland and Germany were out of service for scheduled annual 
maintenance. The system was not stressed because the load levels were 
moderate. 
The first major event was the loss of a 1200-MW nuclear unit at 
Oskarshamn in southern Sweden at 12:30 due to internal valve problems in the 
feedwater circuits. 
This increased power transfer from the north. System 
security was still acceptable after this contingency. Loss of a single 1200 MW 
unit on this system is a routine event and is regarded as a standard contingency. 
Real and reactive reserves and available transmission capacity are available to 
cope with this level of disturbance severity. These conditions were well under 
control and the system is able to handle this outage without any immediate 
serious consequences. Following a normal transient in frequency and automatic 
activation of the instantaneous spinning reserves the system returned to stable 
operating conditions within less than a minute. Voltages in the southern part 
had dropped around 5 kV, but remained within 405-409 kV, which is not 

314 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
critical. 
Frequency was automatically stabilized slightly below the normal 
operating limit of 49.90 Hz. Actions were therefore initiated to raise the 
frequency. The power flow was redistributed in the grid due to the loss of 
generation on the southeastern side. More power was flowing on the western 
side to supply the demand in the south. 
Around 12:35 an unusual thermal overload overheated one of the 
mechanical joints of an isolator (disconnecting device) located in a 400 kV 
substation on the western coast of Sweden. Two 900 MW units in the nuclear 
power station of Ringhals normally supply this substation over two radial lines, 
connected to separate busbars. The busbars are connected to each other through 
interconnector bays, equipped with circuit breakers that are designed to 
sectionalize and split the substation in order to contain a fault on one busbar and 
leave the other intact with its connected lines in service. With the joint broken, 
the vertical structure of the isolator collapsed and it fell to the side in the 
direction of the other parallel busbar. Falling down, the contact with its own 
busbar opened with the load current still flowing. This created an arc initially 
between the busbar contact and the isolator parts. Eventually the arc flashed 
over to the nearest phase of the adjacent busbar. Two different phases from the 
two busbars were short-circuited through the arc. 
This fault was directly 
detected by the separate busbar protection devices, immediately tripping the 
circuit-breakers for all incoming lines to both busbars. 
The disconnection of the busbars caused the two nuclear units to trip 
and the loss of a number of lines. The grid then lost its transmission capacity 
along the west coast. Initially this triggered heavy power oscillations in the 
system, very low voltages and a further drop in frequency down to a level 
slightly over 49.00 where under-frequency load-shedding schemes start to 
operate. 
The grid was then heavily overloaded on the remaining southeast and 
south-central parts in terms of capability to sustain the voltages. This part of the 
grid had no major generation connected and thus the reactive power support was 
weak. 
Within 90 seconds after the busbar fault the oscillations subsided and 
the system appeared to stabilize. Meanwhile the demand in the area recovered 
gradually from the initial reduction following the voltage drop by action of the 
numerous feeder transformer tap-changers. This lowered the voltage further on 
the 400 kV grid down to critical levels. Finally the situation developed into a 
voltage collapse in a section of the grid southwest of the area around Stockholm 
the capital of Sweden. 
When the voltage collapsed to very low levels, circuit breakers in the 
critical grid section were tripped by distance protection action. Thus the grid 
split up into two parts. The southern part, consisting of Sweden and eastern 
Denmark, initially remained interconnected but sustained a considerable 

The Present and Future of Electric Energy Systems 
375 
generation shortage. Within seconds, the frequency and voltage had dropped to 
levels where generator and other grid protection systems reacted and this entire 
subsystem collapsed. 
The September 28, 2003 Italian Blackout 
On Sunday, September 28,2003, the Italian Power System experienced 
a blackout that affected an area with close to 60 million people and load 
variation in the continental grid from about 24 GW in the early morning hours 
increasing to 50 GW during the day. The event that caused the blackout began 
at 3:Ol .OO a.m. and proceeded up to 3:28.00 a.m. 
The security and reliability standards of the operation of the European 
interconnected electricity system are set by the Union for the Coordination of 
Electricity Transmission (UCTE), which is the association of Transmission 
System Operators (TSOs) in continental Europe. The main function of the 
European interconnected systems is to assure the security of supply at a 
reasonable cost. The system has been developed to assure mutual assistance 
between national subsystems including common use of reserve capacities and to 
optimize the use of energy resources by allowing exchanges between these 
systems. 
Recent market development with its high level of cross-border 
exchanges was out of the scope of the original system design. It has led the 
TSOs to operate the system close to its limits as allowed by the security criteria. 
The cross border exchange was improved recently by using several measures 
such as: computerized control and data acquisition, phase shifting transformers, 
coordination mechanisms and electronic data exchange among operators. The 
appropriate countermeasure for the loss of interconnection lines is the shutting 
down of the pumps, in the Italian pumped storage hydro plants. The pumping 
load in Italy is about 3500 MW. Another countermeasure is actual automatic 
load shedding. 
The total power imported into Italy at 03:OO was 6.65 GW mainly 
generated in France, Germany and Poland with a highly loaded transmission 
grid in the proximity of Italy’s northern borders. Before the blackout, because 
of the nightly energy trading requirements, the Swiss grid was also in a highly 
stressed condition, operated very close to the N-l security limit. The Italian 
system had a large amount of active power reserve, greater than the power 
imported. 
Moreover, 1.2 GW of “without notice” interruptible load was 
available within 1 to 2 minute delay. 
The most significant dynamic phenomena leading to the separation of 
Italy from the UCTE happened from 03:25:21 up to 03:26:39 and their 
description requires the subdivision of that time interval (lasting 78 s) into three 
stages (A, B, and C). 

376 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Cascadinq Line Trippinq Begins 
The Swiss 380 kV line (Mettlen-Lavorgo) was loaded at approximately 
86% of its maximum capacity. 
Due to tree contact caused by increased 
conductor sag a single phase to ground fault occurred at 03:O 1 :2 1. Because the 
power imported into Italy was high, the phase angle difference across the line 
was too large which caused the automatic breaker controls to prevent reclosing. 
At 03:08 the operators attempt to manually restore this line into service failed 
again because of a too high phase angle (42"), caused by the high power flow to 
Italy. 
Since the connection was not restored, this caused an overload (at 
around 110% of its nominal capacity) on a parallel path on the other Swiss 380 
kV line (Sils-Soazza.) 
To reduce the load on this line the following measures were taken: 
At 03:21, the Swiss and Italian operators decided to reduce the Italian 
imported power by about 300 MW. 
One 3801220 kV transformer in Soazza was switched off at 03: 18. 
At 03:22:02 the transformer tap of 220 kV in Lavorgo was changed 
which slightly reduced the transformer load in Soazza. 
After 24 minutes this line also tripped at 03:25:21 due to tree contact 
which interrupted 1783 MW following a single phase to ground fault. 
Immediately after the second line tripping an internal 220kV line in 
Switzerland took over a significant part of the power flow and was 
highly overloaded. After 4 seconds at 03:25:25 the protection triggered 
at Airolo, interrupting a 740 MW power flow to Italy (Ponte). 
Immediately after the third line tripped, the nearest (West side) 
interconnection line 220kV between Riddes in Switzerland and 
Valpelline in Italy which was already overloaded, assumed an 
additional significant portion of the power flow toward Italy and 
subsequently tripped at 03:25:27. 
Simultaneously the other line from Riddes to Avise and Valpelline 
overloaded and tripped, thus interrupting about 600 MW of power flow 
to Italy. At the same time the 220kV line Cislago-Sondrio overloaded 
and tripped interrupting half of the total power flow from Sils to Italy 
of about 260 MW. 
The tripping of this fifth line concluded Stage A which involved a total 
power flow interruption from Switzerland to Italy of 2523 MW. While 
the frequency recovered to nominal value, the voltages in some areas 
near Turin became very low (350kV). 
Further Cascading Line Tripping due to Voltage Instability 
The electrical link between the Italian and UCTE grids became weaker 
and relied mainly on the interconnection with France. Most of the remaining 

The Present and Future of Electric Energy Systems 
311 
lines came very close to their safe limits. It is noted that during Stage A the 
voltage decreases stop at each frequency recovery, whereas during Stage B the 
voltage continued to decrease despite the frequency recovery to 50 Hz. This 
voltage drop increased the reactive power import from France and lowered the 
voltages at the border with Italy. Meanwhile, at the border with Slovenia, to the 
east of Italy, the voltages dropped but the imported reactive power from Croatia 
and Hungary partially moderated the progressive voltage reduction. 
The 
northwest Italian grid was in a very critical situation due to wide area very low 
voltages which caused the following events: 
At 03:25:30 a distance relay at Rondissone in Italy operated in 0.26 s 
opening the 380 kV France-Italy line number 1 from Albertville 
interrupting the flow of 841MW from France. The probable cause is 
low voltage. This event is deemed to have initiated Stage B involving 
voltage instability. 
At 03:25:32 a local distance relay opened the 400 kV La Coche-Pranz 
line in France probably due to lower voltage values, which continued to 
decrease under the voltage instability in progress. This was the seventh 
line tripping in this cascade. 
0 
The Italian voltage instability also affected all neighboring countries 
which progressively increased the reactive power transferred to Italy and 
reduced the voltages at the border busses. 
From Voltaqe lnstabilitv to Anale lnstabilitv 
During Stage B the frequency recovered to nominal value but most of 
the voltages in north Italy were dropping. During Stage B the Milan area was 
apparently not affected by the incoming problems mainly seen by the northwest 
area and northeast edge with Slovenia which were practically lost at 3:25:32. 
This may have been prevented by timely local voltage based load shedding, 
which was not part of the Italian security plan. The voltage instability would 
naturally have led to the loss of synchronism of the Italian generators. 
0 
The current on the remaining interconnection lines with France 
increased and the 400 kV Albertville-Rondissone line 2 tripped at 
03:25:33 interrupting 682 MW import from France. This is the eighth 
line interruption. 
The reduced voltage value and the increased current caused the local 
distance relay operation with the opening of the 220 kV line from 
Broccarros (France) to Camporosso (Italy) at 03:25:33 interrupting 248 
MW from France. 
The tenth line tripping took place at 03:25:34 between Linz (Austria) 
and Soverzene (Italy). The disconnecting device at Linz opened the 
interconnection of 220kV line, interrupting 209 MW, ahead of the fast 
and heavy frequency transient and low voltages at the connection with 
Italy. 
0 

318 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
0 
The loss of synchronism of the Italian system with respect to UCTE 
grid started Stage C, characterized by frequency decay (slope of 
between 3 and 1 Hz per second) and the voltages step rising at either 
the northwest or northeast of Italy as well as in the surrounding 
countries. 
At 03:25:34 the remaining operating interconnections 
between Italy and Europe were delivering a total of about 1650 MW, 
which was not enough to meet the required import of 6600 MW. 
The sudden lack of active power feeding the Italian loads initiated an 
electromechanical transient characterized by angle instability and 
frequency collapse. This angle instability resulted in additional cascade 
of lines tripping which worsened the situation. The Italian protection 
system began to operate based on frequency and its derivative 
thresholds at 03:25:33/34. This tripped the pumping load amounting to 
3500 MW. This impacted on the frequency transient with a positive 
overshoot and a reduction of the frequency decay slope. The UCTE 
system reacted in the opposite direction with a fast frequency growth, 
therefore confuming the separation at that time. 
The persistent instability caused electromechanical oscillations between 
northeast Italy and eastern Europe which lasted from 03:25:34 up to the 
total opening of the tie with Slovenia, reached at 03:26:39 signaling the 
end of Stage C. 
During Stage C a number of Italian power plants and lines tripped 
including the remaining interconnections with UCTE. Simultaneously 
the load shedding protection operated on the Italian North system. At 
03:25:35 two and two 220 kV lines tripped and at 03:25:42 a 220 kV 
line tripped due to overload. 
These trips increased the frequency of the electromechanical oscillation 
until, when, at 03:26:39 the tie with Slovenia was definitely open with 
the consequent extinction of the oscillation. 
During 
Stage 
C 
the 
persistent 
electromechanical 
oscillation 
significantly seen by northeast power system, caused most of the unit 
trips before 03:26:39 for a total amount of 3055 MW. Moreover the 
power plants operating at the distribution grid were lost at about 
03:25:38, for a total of 1700 MW. 
0 
From the Total Separation from UCTE at 03:26:39 up to the General 
Blackout at 03:28:00 
This last stage follows the separation from Slovenia, at the time the 
angle instability disappeared either in Italy or in the surrounding countries. The 
voltages were high everywhere in Italy and the frequency was low but greater 
than 48 Hz. Stage D process is characterized by a slow decrease in frequency, 
accompanied by further tripping of generators out of service, load shedding 
determined by reaching low frequency thresholds and lines opening. 
At 
03:26:39 all available active power contributions forced by the speed regulators 
were already reached and probably at that time active power control loops at 
some power plants were beginning to recover the extra power produced by the 

The Present and Future of Electric Energy Systems 
379 
primary frequency regulation. 
considered as a cause for further frequency decay. 
unbalance between generated power and load was: 
Also this active power recovery has to be 
In conclusion, the total 
Loss of Generated Power 
0 
6664 MW due to the separation from UCTE; 
1700 MW due to generators on distribution grid; 
4000 MW loss of 25 out of 50 main generators. 
Loss of Loads 
0 
3500 MW automatic pumping shedding; 
7000 MW load shedding by EAC; 
1400 MW contribution of primary frequency control. 
The voltages of all the Italian busses went down at 03:28:00 and all the 
Italian loads lost their supply as soon as the frequency reached 47.5 Hz. Thus, 
over the course of several minutes, the entire Italian system collapsed causing a 
nationwide blackout. This was the worst blackout in the history of the nation. 
9.4 
MlTlGA TlNG AND COPING 
It has been suggested that blackouts cannot be avoided and that future 
efforts should be directed at coping with, and minimizing the effects of any 
failures, and particularly cascading failures. Some people believe, however, that 
we currently possess the technical know-how necessary to upgrade the electric 
power grid to meet higher mitigation and avoidance standards than is currently 
available. It is important to note that the two visions complement each other 
because it is impractical to maintain power system reliability and security at 
100%. Of course, there must always be a balance between improved system 
security and increased capital investment. The discussion of the present section 
is based on recommendations of the joint U.S. and Canadian Task Force" 
investigating the August 14, 2003 event and the recommendations of an 
international panel of experts based on their experience with recent blackouts 
and the lessons learned"'. A common observation is that large disturbances often 
stem from a sequence of interrelated events that would otherwise be manageable 
if they have taken place individually. The final report of the U.S.-Canada Power 
System Outage Task Force cited the following as some root causes of the 
blackout of August 2003. 
Inadequate Understanding of the System 
A significant finding was that prior to the August 2003 events, the 
Electric Utility did not conduct necessary long-term planning studies and did not 
conduct sufficient voltage stability analyses of its control area. The situation 

380 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
was exacerbated by employing operational voltage criteria that did not reflect 
actual system behavior and needs. 
Moreover, there was no subsequent 
independent review of the original analysis. In addition, some NERC planning 
standards were interpreted in ways that reduced the level of system operational 
re1 iabi li ty . 
Inadequate Level of Situational Awareness 
The Electric Utility failed to ensure security of its system after 
significant unforeseen contingencies due to the failure of various EMS system 
components. 
Inadequate Level of Vegetation Management (Tree Trimming) 
The Electric Utility failed to adequately manage tree growth in its 
transmission rights-of-way, which caused outages to take place on three 345-kV 
lines and one 138-kV line. 
Inadequate Level of Support from the Reliability Coordinator (RC) 
Failure of the state-estimator at the Independent System Operator and 
other real-time data deficiencies, caused the IS0 not to become aware of the 
Electric Utility’s system problems early enough and as a result was not in a 
position to offer assistance to the Electric Utility. 
In addition, neighboring 
systems did not have adequate levels of procedures and guidelines on how and 
when to coordinate a security limit violation observed by one of them in an 
external area, due to a contingency near their common boundary. 
Based on the preceding observations, recommendations to mitigate 
The recommendations can be 
blackouts were proposed in many reports. 
categorized as follows: 
Policy level 
0 
Planning level 
Operational level 
Data management level 
Policy Level Recommendations 
The following general regulatory policy level measures can assist in 
reducing the risk of blackouts by improving system reliability. 
National and regional reliability oversight organizations with statutory 
authority to enforce planning and operating reliability standards and levying ef- 
fective penalties for noncompliance with the standards should be set up. These 
organizations must be independent from the entities (such as utilities) that they 
oversee. 
The idea of a Power System Regulatory Commission (PSRC) 

The Present and Future of Electric Energy Systems 
381 
suggested by B. F. Wollenberg" is modeled after the US Nuclear Regulatory 
Commission (NRC), whose mandate is to require strict adherence to the 
necessary safety and reliability standards in the US nuclear industry. The U.S. 
Energy Policy Act of 2005 designates the North American Electric Reliability 
Council (NERC) as a self-regulating electric power organization, subject to 
review by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, with the authority to 
enforce reliability rules and regulations. Mexican and Canadian authorities will 
back NERC's regulations with the force of law. 
Industry and government 
funded research 
in power systems 
engineering to meet the challenges presented by the ever growing and complex 
power grids and their evolving loads should be promoted. 
Planning Level Recommendations 
A general trend in all recent blackouts is the increased failure of aging 
equipment which may be driven by changing priorities for expenditures on 
maintenance and reinforcement of the transmission system. The following are 
planning level recommendations to improve the reliability of the system: 
0 
Review and develop enforceable standards for transmission line ratings. 
0 
Promote the requirement for investing in bulk system reliability 
enhancements (including the implementation of new technologies) and 
design transmission rates that allow investors to recover reliability- 
enhancement expenditures. 
Improve training and certification requirements for operators, reliability 
coordinators, and operator support staff by offering regular refresher 
training and live drills on system restoration to ensure that they remain 
familiar with best procedures and practices. 
Periodically review and reevaluate existing reliability standards and 
their development process. The standards should evolve continually to 
incorporate state-of-the-art practices and technological developments, 
taking into account experiences from major system incidents. 
0 
0 
Operational Level Recommendations 
Taking immediate and remedial action against system events to prevent 
cascading requires reliable real-time data in sufficient time to allow taking 
decisive and appropriate remedial action by utilizing properly automated and 
coordinated controls. The following requirements need to be met: 
Mandate regular inspection, testing, maintenance, refurbishing, and 
replacement of existing substations and critical components are vital to 
successful mitigation and minimization of cascading events. This is 
motivated by the fact that cascading failures often result from 
equipment failure or poor coordination. 

382 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Evaluate and adopt better real-time tools for operators and reliability 
coordinators. 
Maintain a relatively flat voltage profile to enhance voltage stability 
and hence ensure system reliability. 
A poor voltage profile causes 
generators to operate near limits with reduced reactive power reserves 
for contingencies, contributes to transmission lines sagging into trees 
due to increased line heating and increases transmission reactive power 
losses. Proper reactive power and voltage management require proper 
deployment of power plant controls to tightly regulate transmission 
side voltage, using under-voltage load shedding schemes and shunt 
reactive compensation to protect against severe disturbances. 
0 
For generators, 
require the 
application 
of automatic 
control 
mechanisms such as automatic voltage regulators, and where applicable 
power system stabilizers. A modem excitation system automatically 
returns to voltage control when conditions permit. This suggests the 
need for prioritized replacement of old control and protection with 
modern digital equipment. 
Employ automatic load shedding. Operators who initiate load shedding 
pursuant to approved guidelines should be shielded against liability or 
retaliation. 
Track implementation of recommended actions to improve reliability. 
0 
The use and enhancement of special protection systems can be quite 
effective at times in preventing cascading outages. In the past, undesirable zone 
3 relay and other generation and transmission backup relay operations have 
contributed to major blackouts. Many suggestions were made to deal with this 
issue ranging from complete elimination of third zone protection, to requiring 
that no third zone shall operate under “extreme” loading conditions. Horowitz 
and Phadke’ note that it is essential to find alternatives to the third zone at 
critical system locations where restrictive loadability limits would be harmful 
from the point of view of cascading failures, and not a whole-sale revision of 
third zone settings on all protection systems. They offer technical solutions 
which relieve some of the loadability restrictions such that at critical locations 
the added expenditure of installing such newer protection systems (available in 
computer based relays) may well be justified. 
Rapid system restoration is extremely important in order to minimize 
the impact of a blackout on society. Thus, means should be put into place to 
measure and reduce restoration times. 
Data Management Level Recommendations 
It is important to incorporate lessons learned from past experience into 
new procedures and use such lessons to develop new and improved technologies 
for system control and monitoring. 

The Present and Future of Electric Energy Systems 
383 
Improve the calibration of recording instruments, especially in 
establishing time synchronization. 
Establish predefined data reporting requirements and standardized data 
formats. 
Establish predefined commercial logistics, such as confidentiality 
agreements. 
Ensure the redundancy and reliability of remote control and 
telecommunication devices. 
The following recommendations are intended to facilitate a smoother 
and faster process to collect, manage, and disseminate information following a 
blackout to allow postmortem analysis and information dissemination regarding 
probable causes and corrective actions being taken. 
0 
Automate the means of disturbance reporting. 
Develop wide area measurement systems (WAMS)"'. 
Establish 
an 
infrastructure to support a centralized blackout 
investigation. 
Extend the collection of benchmark events and dynamic signatures to 
determine the range of normal system behavior and perform related 
studies to assist proper interpretation of observed system behavior. 
New Technology Adoption Recommendations 
New technologies such as Distributed Generation (DG), Flexible AC 
Transmission Systems (FACTS) and High Voltage DC (HVDC) can offer 
assistance in minimizing the occurrence and impact of widespread blackouts. 
Distributed generation 
Distributed generation (DG) units are interfaced by power electronic 
converters, which can support active and reactive power locally and even 
provide local black-start functions, if appropriate regulatory and market 
conditions permit it. DG is connected to the medium-voltage and low-voltage 
networks providing generation support where it is most needed, in case of higher 
voltage network failures. Line overloading at higher voltage levels can therefore 
be potentially relieved during the restoration phase. However, the limitations of 
the energy sources (wind, sun), the link to industrial process for co-generation 
and the inability to control frequency and voltage (depending on the type of 
generation technology) may often limit the contribution of the associated forms 
of distributed generation in highly perturbed situations. 
The potential for 
distributed resources to provide support at lower voltage levels needs to be 
recognized in the development of interconnection standards for distributed 
generation. 

384 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Flexible AC Transmission Systems 
Shunt FACTS devices such as static VAr compensators (SVCs) can 
improve voltage control particularly in regions where old generation assets are 
being retired leaving large load pockets with little to no dynamic reactive 
support in the immediate vicinity. 
Another family of static compensators 
(STATCOM) is based on voltage source converter technology. It presents 
additional benefits since once at its reactive limit a STATCOM is a constant 
current device, while an SVC tends is a constant impedance device. 
Fast 
automatic switching of large shunt capacitor banks can also improve voltage 
stabi 1 ity . 
Series devices such as thyristor controlled and conventional series 
capacitors improve transient stability margins on long extra-high voltage 
transmission corridors. 
More traditional devices such as phase-shifting 
transformers can also often be applied for controlling power flow on parallel 
paths. 
Technologies such as Unified Power Flow Controllers (UPFC) can also 
control power flow on parallel transmission corridors. 
High Voltage DC 
HVDC 
voltage 
source 
converters 
(VSC) 
allow 
independent 
controllability of active and reactive power and this type of HVDC system can 
black-start an islanded region of the system and can be applied in very weak 
systems. Due to the controllability of power flow, an HVDC system will not be 
overloaded in an emergency system condition, which significantly reduces the 
risk of cascading outages. Reactive power control, available with VSC, also 
improves voltage regulation and control and thus improving system stability by 
reducing the risk of voltage collapse. 
’ Brayley, H., Redfern, M. A,, and Boo, Z. Q., “The public perception of power blackouts,”, in Proc. 
PES Asia and Pacific Transmission and Distribution Conf., 2005, pp. 1-5 
“ U.S.-Canada Power System Outage Task Force. (2004) Final Report on the August 14, 2003 
Blackout in the United States and Canada: Causes and Recommendations. [Online]. Available: 
http:/lwww.nerc.com. 
‘I’ Anderson, G.; Donalek, P.: Farmer, R.; Hatziargyriou, N.; Kamwa, 1.; Kundur, P.; Martins, N.; 
Paserba, J.; Pourbeik, P.; Sanchez-Gasca, J.; Schulz, R.; Stankovic, A,; Taylor, C.; Vittal, V, 
”Causes of the 2003 major grid blackouts in North America and Europe, and recommended means to 
improve system dynamic performance,” Power Systems, IEEE Transactions on, Volume 20, Issue 4, 
I‘ Wollenberg, B. F., “From Blackout to Blackout: 1965 to 2003: how far have we come with 
reliability?’ IEEE Power and Energy Magazine, pp. 88, January/February 2004. 
‘ S.H. Horowitz and A.G. Phadke, “Third zone revisited,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. Delivery, pp. 
23-29, Jan. 2006. 
‘I J. F. Hauer, N. B. Bhatt, K. Shah, and S. Kolluri, “Performance of WAMS East in providing 
dynamic information for the North East blackout of August 14, 2003,” in Proc. IEEE PES General 
Meeting, Denver, CO, 2004, pp. 1685-1690. 
Nov. 2005 pp. 1922-1928. 

REFERENCES 
Anderson, P.M. Analysis of Faulted Power Systems. New York: IEEE Press, 
1973. 
Anderson, P.M. and Fouad. A.A Power System Control and Stability. Ames, 
Iowa: The Iowa State University Press, 1977. 
Andersson, G.; Donalek, P.; Farmer, R.; Hatziargyriou, N.; Kamwa, I.; Kundur, 
P.; Martins, N.; Paserba, J.; Pourbeik, P.; Sanchez-Gasca, J.; Schulz, 
R.; Stankovic, A.; Taylor, C.; Vittal, V. “Causes of the 2003 major grid 
blackouts in North America and Europe, and recommended means to 
improve system dynamic performance,” Power Systems, IEEE 
Transactions on, Volume 20, Issue 4, Nov. 2005 Page(s): 1922- 1928. 
Arrillaga, J., Arnold, C.P., and Harker, B.J. Computer Modeling of Electrical 
Power Systems. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1986. 
Bergen, AR. Power Systems Analysis. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: 
Prentice-Hall, 1970. 
Bergseth, F.R. and Venkata, S.S. Introduction to Electric Energy Devices. 
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1987. 
Blackburn, J.L. Protective Relaying. New York: Dekker, 1987. 
Blackbum, J. L.. Applied Protective Relaying. Coral Springs, FL, 
Westinghouse Electric Corporation, 1979. 
Blackwell, W. A and Grigsby, L. L. Introductory Network Theory. Boston: 
PWS, 1985. 
Clarke, E. Circuit Analysis ofAC Power Systems. New York: John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc., 1958. 
Concordia, C. Synchronous Machine - Theory and Performance. New York: 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 195 1. 
Crary, S. Power System Stability, Vol. I/. New York: John Wiley & Sons, lnc., 
1955. 
Elgered, 0. J. Electric Energy Systems Theory, Second Edition. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1982. 
El-Abiad, A.H. Digital Calculation of Line-to-Ground Short-circuits by Matrix 
Method. AIEE Trans., 79, 323-332, 1960. 
Introduction to Electrical Power Engineering. By Moharned E. El-Hawary 
Copyright 0 
2008 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc 
385 

386 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
El-Hawary, M.E. Electrical Power Systems Design and Analysis. New York: 
IEEE Press, 1996. 
EPRI. Transmission Line Reference Book, 345 kV and Above. Palo Alto, 
California: Electric Power Research Institute, 1982. 
Feinberg, R. Modern Power Transformer Practice. New York: John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc., 1979. 
Fink, D.G. and Beaty, H.W. Standard Handbook for Electrical Engineers. New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1987. 
Fitzgerald, A.E., Higginbotham, D.E., and Grabel, A. Basic Electrical 
Engineering. New York: McGraw-Hill, 198 1. 
Fitzgerald, A.E., Kingsley, C., and Umans, S. Electric Machinery (Fourth 
Edition). New York: McGraw-Hill, 1982. 
Fortescue, C.L. Method of Symmetrical Components Applied to the Solution of 
Polyphase Networks. AIEE Trans., 37,1027-1 140, 1918. 
Fouad, A.A. and Vijay, V. Power System Transient Stability Analysis Using the 
Transient Energy Function Method. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: 
Prentice-Hall, 1992. 
Franklin, A.C. and Franklin, D.P. The J & P Transformer Book (1 1th Ed). 
London: Butterworths, 1983. 
General Electric Company. Electric Utility Systems and Practices (4th Ed). 
New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1983. 
General Electric Company. Transmission Line Reference Book - 345 kV and 
Above (2nd Ed). Palo Alto, California: Electric Power Research Institute, 
1982. 
Glover, J.D. Power System Analysis and Design (Second Edition). Boston: 
PWS Publishing Company, 1994. 
Gonen, T. Electric Power Distribution Systems Engineering. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1986. 
Gross, C.A. Power System Analysis (Second Edition). New York: John Wiley 
& Sons, 1983. 
Guile, A.E. and Paterson, W. Electrical Power Systems. Edinburgh: Oliver & 
Boyd, 1969. 

References 
387 
Gungor, B.R. Power Systems. New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, Inc., 
1988. 
Hauer, J. F., Bhatt, N. B. Shah, K. and Kolluri, S. “Performance of WAMS East 
in providing dynamic information for the North East blackout of 
August 14, 2003,” in Proc. IEEE PES General Meeting, Denver, CO, 
2004. 
Hayt, W.H. Jr. and Kemmerly, J.E. Engineering Circuit Analysis (3rd Ed). 
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1978. 
Heydt, G.T. Computer Analysis Methods for Power Systems. New York: 
MacMillan Publishing Company, 1986. 
Horowitz, S.H. and A.G. Phadke, “Third zone revisited,” IEEE Trans. Power 
Syst. Delivery, pp. 23-29, Jan. 2006. 
Kimbark, E.W. Power System Stability, Vol. 1: Elements of Stability 
Calculations. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1948. 
Kimbark, E.W. Power System Stability, Vol. 2: Power Circuit Breakers and 
Protective Relays. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1950. 
Kimbark, E.W. Power System Stability, Vol. 3: Synchronous Machines. New 
York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1956. 
Kirchmayer, L.K. Economic Operation of Power Systems. New York: John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1958. 
Kirchmayer, L.K. Economic Control of Interconnected Systems. New York: 
John Wiley & Sons, 1959. 
Knable, A. Electrical Power Systems Engineering. New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1967. 
Kundur, P. Power System Stability and Control. New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1994. 
Kusic, G.L. Computer Aided Power System Analysis. Englewood Cliffs, New 
Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1986. 
Nasar, S.A. Electric Energy Conversion and Transmission. New York: 
MacMillan Publishing Company, 1985. 
Neuenswander, J.R. Modern Power Systems. Scranton, Pennsylvania: 
International Textbook Company, 197 1. 

388 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
Phadke, AG. and Thorpe, J.S. Computer Relaying for Power Systems. New 
York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1988. 
Rustebakke, H.M. Electric Utility Systems and Practices. New York: John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1983. 
Sarma, M.S. Electric Machines. Dubuque, Iowa: Brown, 1985. 
Sauer, P.W. and Pai, M.A. Power System Dynamics and Stability. Englewood 
Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1998. 
Singh, L.P. Advanced Power System Analysis and Design. New York: Halsted 
Press, 1983. 
Stagg, G.W. and El-Abiad, A.H. Computer Methods in Power System Analysis. 
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1968. 
Stevenson, W.D. Jr. Elements of Power System Analysis, (4th Ed.). New York: 
McGraw-Hill. 1982. 
Stevenson, W.D. and Grainger, 1 .J. Power System Analysis. New York: 
McGraw-Hill. 1994. 
Stott, B. Decoupled Newton Load Flow. IEEE Trans. Power Apparatus and 
Systems, PAS-9 I ,  1955-1 959, October 1972. 
Stott, 9. and Alsac, 0. Fast Decoupled Load Flow. IEEE Trans. Power 
Apparatus and Systems, PAS-93, 859-869, May-June 1974. 
Sullivan, R. Power System Planning. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1977. 
Taylor, C.W. Power System Voltage Stability. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1977. 
U.S.-Canada Power System Outage Task Force. (2004) Final Report on the 
August 14, 2003 Blackout in the United States and Canada: Causes and 
Recommendations. [Online]. Available: http://www.nerc.com. 
Wadhwa, C.L. Electrical Power Systems. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 
1983. 
Wagner, C.F. and Evens, R.D. Symmetrical Components. New York: 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1933. 
Wallach, Y. Calculations and Programs for Power System Networks. 
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1986. 
Weedy, B.M. Electric Power Systems, (Third Edition). New York: John Wiley 
& Sons, Inc., 1979. 

References 
389 
Weeks, W.L. Transmission and Distribution of Electrical Energy. New York: 
Harper & Row Publishers, 198 1 .  
Westinghouse Electric Corporation. Applied Protective Relaying. Newark, 
New Jersey: Westinghouse, 1976. 
Westinghouse Electric Corporation. Electric Transmission and Distribution 
Reference Book. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania: Westinghouse, 1964. 
Wollenberg, B. F., “From Blackout to Blackout: 1965 to 2003: how far have we 
come with reliability?” IEEE Power and Energy Magazine, pp. 88, 
JanuaryIFebruary 2004. 
Wood, AJ. and Wollenberg, B.F. Power Generation Operation and Control. 
New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1974. 
Yamayee, Z.A. Electromechanical Energy Devices and Power Systems. New 
York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1994. 
Yu, Yao-nan. Electric Power Systems Dynamics. New York: Academic Press, 
1983. 

INDEX 
A 
A connection 18 
ABCD parameters 166 
active power 10 
alarm processor 309 
alternating current systems 9 
alternators 16 
aluminum conductors 129 
amplitude comparison 290 
apparent power 11 
armature reaction 73 
automatic data collection 309 
automatic generation control 3 10 
autotransformer 1 15 
B 
bad data detection 343 
balanced three-phase fault 271 
base conversions 27 
base functions 308 
Biot-Savart law 29 
Buchholz protection 282 
bundle circle 135 
bundle conductors 135 
bundle-conductor line 135 
busbar voltage angles approximation 
busbar voltage magnitude approximation 
B-H loop 100 
327 
327 
C 
capacitive susceptance 149 
capacitor-start motors 226 
clapper unit 274 
complex power 11 
compounding curve 77 
computer relaying 297 
conductor 129 
contingency analysis 3 14 
control houses 6 
control transformers 1 19 
core faults 277 
core type winding I00 
core-loss component 10 1 
corona 135 
current grading 282 
current operating plan 3 12 
current relays 274 
current tap settings 286 
cylindrical rotor 7 1 
D 
data acquisition 308 
delta configuration 140 
delta-connected windings 246 
delta-delta bank 248 
differential relays 274 
direct axis 87 
directional relays 274 
dispatcher power flow 3 12 
distance protection 294 
distance relays 274 
distribution subsystem 5 
double line-to-ground fault 264 
double-circuit line 161 
dynamic security analysis 362 
E 
earth faults 277 
economic dispatch 3 1 1 
eddy-current loss 100 
eddy-current phenomenon 38 
effect of earth 153 
electromechanical energy conversion 28 
electromechanical relays 274 
energy control center 7,305 
energy flow approach 40 
equal-area criterion 338 
equal-area method 336 
equivalent circuits 193 
Introduction to Electrical Power Engineering. By Mohamed E. El-Hawary 
Copyright 0 
2008 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc 
391 

392 
Introduction to Electrical Power Systems 
exciter 69 
external network modeling 343 
F 
Faraday’s law of electromagnetic 
field energy 42 
flexible ac transmission systems 3 16 
formulation 3 19 
four-pole network 165 
induction 34 
G 
generation functions 3 10 
generation subsystem 3 
generator 4 
generator failure 237 
geometric mean radius 132 
H 
historical database 309 
H-type configuration 141 
hybrid form 324 
hysteresis loop 36 
hysteresis loss 100 
I 
impedance relay 292 
induction disc unit 275 
induction machines 53 
inductorium I 
infinite bus 8 I 
Interchange transaction scheduling 
function 3 1 1 
interturn faults 277 
inverse-time overcurrent relaying 282 
L 
line capacitance 149 
line inductance I3 1 
line resistance 130 
line voltages I7 
line-to-ground fault 26 1 
line-to-line fault 268 
load factor 6 
load forecasting 3 I0 
load shedding function 3 10 
load subsystem 6 
load tap changing 1 19 
load-flow equations 322 
load-flow solution 327 
logical alarming 309 
Lorentz force law 29 
lumped parameter representations 176 
M 
magnetic field intensity 3 1 
magnetizing inrush current 277 
magnetizing reactance 75 
magnetomotive force 72 
maximum demand 6 
Mercury Arc valves 2 
mho relay 292 
motor torque 194 
N 
n-dimensional case 328 
negative sequence impedance 252 
network analysis functions 3 12 
network nodal admittance formulation 3 19 
network parameter adaptation function 
network sensitivity function 3 13 
neutral point 16 
Newton-Raphson method 328 
nonsalient pole machine 71 
312 
0 
observability 342 
ohm relay 292 
one-dimensional case 328 
operating training simulator 3 14 
optimal power flow function 3 14 
optimal power flow program 360 
order rotation 16 
order sequence 16 
P 
parallel-series connection 1 13 
per unit system 25 
percentage voltage regulation 109 
permanent -split capacitor motors 226 

Index 
393 
permeability 3 I 
phase comparison 293 
phase rotation 16 
phase sequence 15 
phase voltages 17 
phase-to-phase faults 277 
pickup current 283 
pilot-wire feed protection 289 
plunger unit 274 
polar form 323 
polar unit 275 
positive sequence impedance 25 1 
positive sequence networks 245 
power factor 10 
power factor correction 14 
power flow 3 19 
power flow control 3 15 
power flow problem 324 
power relationships 20 
power relays 274 
power system state estimation 340 
power-line carrier protection 297 
p-pole machines 55,70 
protection studies 237 
protective relays 273 
proximity effect 13 1 
pull-out power 8 1 
Q 
quadrature axis 87 
R 
reactive power 10 
rectangular form 323 
relay comparators 290 
relay coordination 282 
repulsion-type motors 228 
rotor current 195 
S 
safety management 3 10 
salient-pole machines 47 
salient poles 7 1 
security analysis 347 
security analysis function 3 13 
security assessment 346 
security dispatch function 3 13 
sequence of events functions 3 10 
series-parallel connection 1 13 
series-series connection 1 13 
shaded-pole induction motors 228 
shell type winding 101 
short-circuit fault 237 
shunt admittance 149 
single-line diagram 59 
single-phase induction motor 205 
single-phase line 149 
sinusoids 73 
skin effect I3 I 
slip 191 
slip frequency 192 
smooth air gap 50 
solid-state unit 275 
split-phase motors 224 
squirrel-cage rotor 191 
stability assessment 336 
stable equilibrium point 336 
star point 17 
state estimation function 3 12 
steady-state stability limit 8 1 
steel conductors 129 
subtransmission subsystem 4 
supervisory control 309 
swing equation 333 
switchboard 6 
switchgear 6 
symmetrical bundle 136 
symmetrical components 240 
synchronous impedance 75 
synchronous machines 52 
system protection 272 
T 
tank faults 277 
three-phase systems 15 
three-winding transformers 1 14 
time dial 283 
time grading 282 
time variable 359 
topology processing imodel update) 
function 3 12 
transformer 4,99 
transformer protection 276 
transient stability 334 
transient stability analysis 332 
transmission problem 165 

394 
transmission substytem 4 
transposition 142 
two-phase induction machine 206 
two-phase machines 5 1 
two-port networks 165 
two-terminal pair 165 
two-value capacitor motors 228 
U 
unit commitment 3 1 1 
unstable equilibrium point 336 
Introduction to Eleclrical Power Systems 
wye-connected windings 246 
wye-delta bank, grounded wye 248 
wye-delta bank, ungrounded wye 248 
wye-wye bank, one neutral grounded 
wyw-wye bank, both neutrals grounded 
250 
25 1 
X 
x-r diagram 289 
Y 
V 
Y connection 17 
voltage control function 3 13 
voltage relays 274 
W 
wound rotor motor 19 1 
Z 
zero sequence equivalents 248 
zero sequence impedance 252 
zero sequence networks 246 

