
Christina Wodtke
Introduction to OKRs
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing

978-1-491-96027-1
[LSI]
Introduction to OKRs
by Christina Wodtke
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Laurel Ruma
Production Editor: Kristen Brown
Copyeditor: Octal Publishing, Inc.
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
June 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2016-05-26: First Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Introduction to
OKRs, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media,
Inc.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without limi‐
tation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work.
Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If
any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to
open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsi‐
bility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.

Table of Contents
1. Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
2. An Extremely Short History of OKRs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
What Are OKRs?                                                                                  4
Why Use OKRs?                                                                                   8
Living Your OKRs                                                                              10
3. How to Hold a Meeting to Set OKRs for the Quarter. . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
4. Improve Weekly Status Emails with OKRs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
Tracking and Evaluating OKRs                                                       22
5. Getting Started with OKRs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
Quick Tips for Using OKRs                                                              31
iii


CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Why is there so much interest in Objectives and Key Results, or
OKRs? After all, OKRs are just a goal-setting methodology. When
Silicon Valley startups discovered OKRs were behind the meteoric
rise of companies such as Google, LinkedIn, Twitter, and Zynga,
company after company decided to adopt OKRs, hoping to catch
even a fraction of that success. But they struggled. The knowledge of
how to use OKRs effectively was lore, passed on from employees
who often had a partial understanding of how and why they worked.
Many companies failed to use them successfully and then aban‐
doned them with the same alacrity with which they adopted them.
There is no question that OKRs work. The mystery is why they don’t
work for everyone. This report will share how the best companies
use them to create focus, unity, and velocity.
OKR is an acronym, and like most acronyms, the words behind the
letters are often forgotten. This is a deadly mistake. The words
behind the acronym are where the power of the simple system lies.
O stands for objective. What do you want your company to achieve?
KR stands for key results. How would you measure that objective if
you made it? What numbers would move?
Is your objective to create a thriving business? What do you mean
by thriving? Growing your user base? By how much? Revenues
climbing? By how much? Retention? For how long? The combina‐
tion of the aspirational objective and quantitative results creates a
goal that is both inspiring and measurable. It’s a SMART goal, but
1

also short and clear enough that every employee can remember it
and make decisions by it.
A great goal is a powerful tool, but it’s not enough. A leader needs a
way to ensure that her organization lives that goal. The real power of
the OKR system is figuring out how to live that goal every day, as a
team. OKRs are best achieved if they are baked into the daily and
weekly cadence of a company, from planning meetings and status
emails.
2 
| 
Chapter 1: Introduction

CHAPTER 2
An Extremely Short History
of OKRs
Since the rise of “management science” in the 1950s, business lead‐
ers have embraced a variety of techniques designed to improve their
company’s performance. Peter Drucker introduced Management by
Objectives (MBOs), a process during which management and
employees define and agree upon objectives and what they need to
do to achieve them.
MBOs are the clear forerunner of Objectives and Key Results
(OKRs). The idea that a manager would set an objective and then
trust his team to accomplish it without micromanaging them was a
huge and efficient shift from the more controlling approaches of the
industrial age. In many ways, it was the first management philoso‐
phy truly aligned with the new information age.
In the early 1980s, SMART goals, developed by George T. Doran,
and Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) became popular methods
for organizations to set objectives. KPIs introduced metric-validated
performance evaluation for companies. There is an old joke in
advertising that “Half our advertising is working. I just don’t know
which half.” But the rise of the Internet and data science changed all
that. Now, it was possible to know what was working and learn what
caused those KPIs to grow.
SMART stands for Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Results-
focused, and Time-bound. Elements of this approach went into
OKRs, particularly results-focused and time-bound.
3

In 1999, John Doerr introduced the OKRs goal-setting methodology
to Google, a model he first learned about at while he was at Intel.
I was first exposed to OKRs at Intel in the 1970s. At the time, Intel
was transitioning from a memory company to a microprocessor
company, and Andy Grove and the management team needed
employees to focus on a set of priorities in order to make a success‐
ful transition. Creating the OKR system helped tremendously and
we all bought into it. I remember being intrigued with the idea of
having a beacon or north star every quarter, which helped set my
priorities. It was also incredibly powerful for me to see Andy’s
OKRs, my manager’s OKRs, and the OKRs for my peers. I was
quickly able to tie my work directly to the company’s goals. I kept
my OKRs pinned up in my office and wrote new OKRs every quar‐
ter, and the system has stayed with me ever since.
In Grove’s famous management manual High Output Management
(Penguin Random House, 1995), he introduces OKRs by answering
two simple questions: 1) Where do I want to go? and 2) How will I
know I’m getting there? In essence, what are my objectives, and
what key results do I need to keep tabs on to make sure I’m making
progress? And thus OKRs were born.
From Google and Zynga—companies Doerr both invested in and
advised—the OKR goal-setting methodology has spread to
LinkedIn, GoPro, Flipboard, Spotify, Box, Paperless Post, Eventbrite,
Edmunds.com, Oracle, Sears, Twitter, GE, and more.
What Are OKRs?
The acronym OKR stands for Objective and Key Results. The Objec‐
tive is qualitative, and the Key Results (most often three) are quanti‐
tative. They are used to focus a group or individual on a bold goal.
The Objective establishes a goal for a set period of time, usually a
quarter. The Key Results indicate whether the Objective has been
met by the end of the time.
4 
| 
Chapter 2: An Extremely Short History of OKRs

Objectives
Your Objective is a single sentence that is:
Qualitative and inspirational
The Objective is designed to get people jumping out of bed in
the morning with excitement. And while CEOs and VCs might
jump out of bed in the morning with joy over a three percent‐
gain in conversion, most mere mortals get excited by a sense of
meaning and progress. Use the language of your team. If they
want to use slang and say “pwn it” or “kill it,” use that wording.
Time-bound
For example, something that is achievable in a month or a quar‐
ter. You want it to be a clear sprint toward a goal. If it takes a
year, your Objective might be a strategy or maybe even a
mission.
Actionable by the team independently
This is less a problem for startups, but bigger companies often
struggle because of interdependence. Your Objective has to be
truly yours, and you can’t have the excuse of “Marketing didn’t
market it.”
Pusher, a startup using OKRs to accelerate its growth in the API as a
service business, writes about its first OKR retrospective (“How We
Make OKRs Work”):
We learned things like:
• Don’t create objectives that rely on the input of other teams
unless you’ve agreed with them that you share priorities.
• Don’t create objectives that will require people we haven’t
hired yet!
• Be realistic about how much time you will have to achieve
your goals.
An Objective is like a mission statement, only for a shorter period of
time. A great Objective inspires the team, is hard (but not impossi‐
ble) to do in a set time frame, and can be done by the person or peo‐
ple who have set it, independently.
What Are OKRs? 
| 
5

Here are some good Objectives:
• Own the direct-to-business coffee retail market in the South
Bay.
• Launch an awesome MVP.
• Transform Palo Alto’s coupon-using habits.
• Close a round that lets us kill it next quarter.
And here are some poor Objectives:
• Sales numbers up 30 percent.
• Double users.
• Raise a Series B of $5 million.
Why are those bad Objectives bad? Probably because they are
actually Key Results.
Key Results
Key Results take all that inspirational language and quantify it. You
create them by asking a couple of simple questions:
How would we know if we met our Objective? What numbers would
change?
This forces you to define what you mean by “awesome,” “kill it,” or
“pwn.” Does “killing it” mean visitor growth? Revenue? Satisfaction?
Or is it a combination of these things?
A company should have about three Key Results for an objective.
Key Results can be based on anything you can measure. Here are
some examples:
• Growth
• Engagement
• Revenue
• Performance
• Quality
That last one can throw people. It seems hard to measure quality.
But with tools like Net Promoter Score (NPS), you can do it. NPS is
a number based on a customer’s willingness to recommend a given
6 
| 
Chapter 2: An Extremely Short History of OKRs

product to friends and family. (See “The Only Number You Need to
Grow”. Harvard Business Review, December 2003.)
If you select your KRs wisely, you can balance forces like growth and
performance, or revenue and quality, by making sure you have the
potentially opposing forces represented.
In Work Rules!, Laszlo Bock writes:
It’s important to have both a quality and an efficiency measure,
because otherwise engineers could just solve for one at the expense
of the other. It’s not enough to give you a perfect result if it takes
three minutes. We have to be both relevant and fast.
As an Objective, “Launch an awesome MVP” might have KRs like
the following:
• Forty percent of users come back two times in one week
• Recommendation score of eight
• Fifteen percent conversion
Notice how hard those are?
KRs should be difficult, not impossible
OKRs always stretch goals. A great way to do this is to set a confi‐
dence level of 5 of 10 on the OKR. By confidence level of 5 out of 10,
I mean, “I have confidence I only have a 50/50 shot of making this
goal.” A confidence level of one means, “It would take a miracle.”
As you set the KR, you are looking for the sweet spot where you are
pushing yourself and your team to do bigger things, yet not making
it impossible. I think that sweet spot is when you have a 50/50 shot
of failing.
A confidence level of 10 means, “Yeah, gonna nail this one.” It also
means you are setting your goals way too low, which is often called
sandbagging. In companies where failure is punished, employees
quickly learn not to try. If you want to achieve great things, you have
to find a way to make it safe for your employees to aim higher and
to reach further than anyone has before.
Take a look at your KRs. If you are getting a funny little feeling in
the pit of your stomach saying, “We are really going to have to all
bring our A game to hit these,” you are probably setting them cor‐
rectly. If you look at them and think, “We’re doomed,” they’re too
What Are OKRs? 
| 
7

hard. If you look them and think, “I can do that with some hard
work,” they are too easy.
Why Use OKRs?
Ben Lamorte, founder of okrs.com, tells this story:
My mentor and advisor, Jeff Walker, the guy who introduced me to
OKRs, once asked me, “When you go on a hike, do you have a des‐
tination?” I paused since I was not sure where Jeff was going with
this, so Jeff picked up, “When you hike with your family in the
mountains, it’s fine if you like to just walk around and see where
you go, but when you’re here at work, you need to be crystal clear
about the destination; otherwise, you’re wasting your time, my
time, and the time of everyone who works with you.
Your OKRs set the destination for the team so no one wastes their
time.
OKRs are adopted by companies for one of three key reasons:
Focus
What do we do and what do we not do as a company?
Alignment
How do we make sure the entire company focuses on what mat‐
ters most?
Acceleration
Is your team really reaching its potential?
Focus
At Duxter, a social network for gamers, the team adopted OKRs to
solve a classic startup problem: shiny object syndrome. CEO Adam
Lieb writes:
Like all startups we struggle with priorities. Possibly the most used/
overused saying at Duxter is “bigger fish to fry.” We had two big
“fish problems.” The first was having competing views of which fish
we should be frying. Often times, these drastically different views
caused conflict and inefficiency.
The second was that our biggest fish seemed to change on a weekly
or even daily basis. It became more and more difficult to keep
everyone in the company apprised of where their individual focus
should be.
8 
| 
Chapter 2: An Extremely Short History of OKRs

Instituting OKRs have helped significantly with both of these
problems.
Alignment
In an interview, Dick Costolo, former Googler and former CEO of
Twitter, was asked what he learned from Google that he applied to
Twitter. He shared the following:
The thing that I saw at Google that I definitely have applied at Twit‐
ter are OKRs—Objectives and Key Results. Those are a great way to
help everyone in the company understand what’s important and
how you’re going to measure what’s important. It’s essentially a
great way to communicate strategy and how you’re going to meas‐
ure strategy. And that’s how we try to use them. As you grow a
company, the single hardest thing to scale is communication. It’s
remarkably difficult. OKRs are a great way to make sure everyone
understands how you’re going to measure success and strategy.
OKRs are more effective at uniting a company than KPIs because
they combine qualitative and quantitative goals. The Objective,
which is inspiring, can fire up employees who might be less metrics-
oriented, such as design or customer service. The KRs bring the
point home for the numbers-driven folks like accounting and sales.
Thus, a strong OKR set can unite an entire company around a criti‐
cal initiative.
Acceleration
From Re:Work, Google’s official guide to OKRs:
Google often sets goals that are just beyond the threshold of what
seems possible, sometimes referred to as “stretch goals.” Creating
unachievable goals is tricky as it could be seen as setting a team up
for failure. However, more often than not, such goals can tend to
attract the best people and create the most exciting work environ‐
ments. Moreover, when aiming high, even failed goals tend to result
in substantial advancements.
The key is clearly communicating the nature of stretch goals and
what the thresholds for success are. Google likes to set OKRs such
that success means achieving 70 percent of the objectives, while fully
reaching them is considered extraordinary performance.
Such stretch goals are the building blocks for remarkable achieve‐
ments in the long term, or “moonshots.”
Why Use OKRs? 
| 
9

Because OKRs are always stretch goals, they encourage employees to
continually push the envelope. You never know what you are capa‐
ble of until you shoot for the moon.
That said, this is the trickiest aspect of OKRs. But, while we’re talk‐
ing about moonshots, let me use a Star Trek metaphor.
Scottie always implored, “The engines can’t take it anymore.” Yet
somehow he always pulled a miracle out of his hat and made the
engines perform anyway.
Geordie would say, “You have five minutes before the engines give
out,” and five minutes later the engines would give out. If he knew of
a way around it, he’d tell you, but you knew what was going on and
could plan for it.
As a captain, do you want someone who likes to be a hero or some‐
one who knows what the company can actually do? I know what
kind of captain I’d like to be.
If you tie OKRs to performance reviews and bonuses, employees will
always underestimate what they can do. It’s too dangerous to aim
high, because what if you are wrong? But if you encourage bold
OKRs and then carry out your review based on actual performance,
employees are rewarded based on what they do, not how well they
lie.
After all, on the way to the moon, sometimes we get Tang, Sharpies,
and Velcro. Isn’t that worth rewarding?
Living Your OKRs
Many companies who try OKRs fail, and they blame the system. But
no system works if you don’t actually keep to it. Setting a goal at the
beginning of a quarter and expecting it to magically be achieved by
the end is naïve. It’s important to have a cadence of commitment
and celebration.
Scrum is a technique used by engineers to commit to progress and
hold each other both accountable and to support each other. Each
week an engineer shares what happened last week, explains what
shecommits to do in the upcoming week, and points out any block‐
ers that might keep her from her goals. In larger organizations, they
hold a “scrum of scrums” to assure that teams are also holding each
10 
| 
Chapter 2: An Extremely Short History of OKRs

other accountable for meeting goals. There is no reason multidisci‐
plinary groups can’t do the same.
Monday Commitments
Each Monday, the team should meet to check in on progress against
OKRs, and commit to the tasks that will help the company meet its
Objective. I recommend a format with four key quadrants (see
Figure 2-1):
Intention for the week
What are the three to four most important things you must get
done this week toward the Objective? Discuss whether these
priorities will get you closer to the OKRs.
Forecast for month
What should your team know is coming up that it can help with
or prepare for?
Status toward OKRs
If you set a confidence of 5 out of 10, has that moved up or
down? Have a discussion about why. Are there any blockers
endangering your OKRs?
Health metrics
Pick two things that you want to protect as you strive toward
greatness. What can you not afford to mess up? Key relation‐
ships with customers? Code stability? Team well-being? Now
mark when things start to go sideways and discuss it.
Figure 2-1. Example of a quadrant outlining goals
Living Your OKRs 
| 
11

This document is first and last a conversation tool. You want to talk
about issues like these:
• Do the priorities lead to our hitting our OKRs?
• Why is confidence dropping in our ability to make our OKRs?
Can anyone help?
• Are we prepared for major new efforts? Does Marketing know
what Product is up to?
• Are we burning out our people or letting hacks become part of
the code bases?
When you meet, you could discuss only the four-square
(Figure 2-1), or you can use it to provide a status overview and then
supplement with other detailed documents covering metrics, a pipe‐
line of projects, or related updates. Each company has a higher or
lower tolerance for status meetings.
Try to keep things as simple as possible. Too many status meetings
are about team members trying to justify their existence by listing
every little thing they’ve done. Trust that your team makes good
choices in their everyday lives. Set the tone of the meeting to be
about team members helping each other to meet the shared goals to
which they all have committed.
Have fewer priorities and shorter updates.
Make time for the conversations. If only a quarter of the time allot‐
ted for the Monday meeting is presentations and the rest is discus‐
sing next steps, you are doing it right. If you end early, it’s a good
sign. Just because you’ve set aside an hour doesn’t mean you have to
use it.
Jeff Weiner, CEO of LinkedIn, does things a little differently. He
opens his staff meeting with “wins.” Before delving into metrics or
the business at hand, he goes around the room and asks each of his
direct reports to share one personal victory and one professional
achievement from the previous week. This sets up a mood of success
and celebration before dicing into hard talks about why one key
result or another might be slipping.
12 
| 
Chapter 2: An Extremely Short History of OKRs

Fridays Are for Winners
When teams are aiming high, they fail a lot. Although it’s good to
aim high, missing your goals without also seeing how far you’ve
come is often depressing. That’s why committing to the Friday wins
session is so critical.
In the Friday wins session, teams all demonstrate whatever they can.
Engineers show bits of code they’ve got working, and designers
show mockups and maps. Every team should share something. Sales
can talk about who they’ve closed, Customer Service can talk about
customers they’ve rescued, Business Development shares deals. This
has several benefits. One, you begin to feel like you are part of a
pretty special winning team. Two, the team begins looking forward
to having something to share. They seek wins. And lastly, the com‐
pany begins to appreciate what each discipline is going through and
understands what everyone does all day.
Providing beer, wine, cake, or whatever is appropriate to your team
on a Friday is also important to making the team feel cared for. If
the team is really small and can’t afford anything, you can have a
“Friday Wins Jar” to which everyone contributes. But as the team
becomes bigger, the company should pay for the celebration nibbles
as a signal of support. Consider this: the humans who work on the
project are the biggest asset. Shouldn’t you invest in them?
OKRs are great for setting goals, but without a system to achieve
them, they are as likely to fail as any other process that is in fashion.
Commit to your team, commit to each other, and commit to your
shared future. And renew those vows every week.
Living Your OKRs 
| 
13


CHAPTER 3
How to Hold a Meeting to Set OKRs
for the Quarter
Setting OKRs is hard. It involves taking a close look at your com‐
pany, and it involves having difficult conversations about the choices
that shape the direction the company should go. Be sure to structure
the meeting thoughtfully to get the best results. You will be living
these OKRs for the next quarter.
Keep the meeting small—10 or fewer people if possible. It should be
run by the CEO, and must include the senior executive team. Take
away phones and computers. It will encourage people to move
quickly and pay attention.
A few days before the meeting, solicit all of the employees to submit
the Objective they think the company should focus on. Be sure to
give them a very small window to do it in; 24 hours is plenty. You
don’t want to slow down your process and, in a busy company, later
means never.
Have someone (a consultant, the department heads) collect and
bring forward the best and most popular Objectives.
Set aside four and a half hours to meet: two 2-hour sessions, with a
30-minute break between.
Your goal: cancel the second session. Be focused.
Each executive head should have an Objective or two in mind to
bring to the meeting. Have the best employee-generated Objectives
15

written out on Post-it notes, and have your executives add theirs. I
recommend having a variety of sizes available, and use the large
ones for the Objectives. Cramped writing is difficult to read.
Now, have the team place the Post-its up on the wall. Combine
duplicates, and look for patterns that suggest people are worried
about a particular goal. Combine similar Objectives. Stack rank
them. Finally, narrow them down to three.
Discuss. Debate. Fight. Stack. Rank. Pick.
Depending on the team you have, you have either hit the break or
you have another hour left.
Next, have all of the members of the executive team freelist as many
metrics as they can think of to measure the Objective. Freelisting is a
design-thinking technique. It means to simply write down as many
ideas on a topic as you can, one idea per Post-it. You put one idea on
each Post-it so that you can rearrange, discard, and otherwise
manipulate the data you have generated (see Figure 3-1).
Figure 3-1. Freelisting in practice
It is a far more effective way to brainstorm, and it results in better
and more diverse ideas. Give the team slightly more time than is
16 
| 
Chapter 3: How to Hold a Meeting to Set OKRs for the Quarter

comfortable, perhaps 10 minutes. You want to get as many interest‐
ing ideas as possible.
Next, you will affinity map them. This is another design-thinking
technique. All it means is that you group Post-its with like Post-its.
If two people both write daily active users (DAU), you can put those
on top of each other. It’s two votes for that metric. DAU, MAU, and
WAU are all engagement metrics, and you can put them next to one
another. Finally, you can pick your three types of metrics.
Write the KRs as an X first; that is, “X revenue” or “X acquisitions”
or “X DAU.” It’s easier to first discuss what to measure than what the
value should be and if it’s really a “shoot for the moon” goal. One
fight at a time.
As a rule of thumb, I recommend having a usage metric, a revenue
metric, and a satisfaction metric for the KRs; however, obviously
that won’t always be the right choice for your Objective. The goal is
to find different ways to measure success, in order to have sustained
success across quarters. For example, two revenue metrics means
that you might have an unbalanced approach to success. Focusing
only on revenue can lead to employees gaming the system and
developing short-term approaches that can damage retention.
Next, set the values for the KRs. Make sure they really are “shoot for
the moon” goals. You should have only 50 percent confidence that
you can make them. Challenge one another. Is someone sandbag‐
ging? Is someone playing it safe? Is someone foolhardy? Now is the
time for debate, not halfway through the quarter.
Finally, take five minutes to discuss the final OKR set. Is the Objec‐
tive aspirational and inspirational? Do the KRs make sense? Are
they difficult? Can you live with this for a full quarter?
Tweak until they feel right. Then, go live them.
You’ll find a worksheet to help you out at http://eleganthack.com/an-
okr-worksheet.
How to Hold a Meeting to Set OKRs for the Quarter 
| 
17


CHAPTER 4
Improve Weekly Status Emails
with OKRs
I remember the first time I had to write a status email. I had just
been promoted to manager at Yahoo! back in 2000 and was running
a small team. I was told to “write a status email covering what your
team has done that week, due Friday.” Well, you can easily imagine
how I felt. I had to prove my team was getting things done! Not only
to justify our existence, but to prove we needed more people.
Because, you know, more people, amiright?
So I did what everyone does: I listed every single thing my reports
did, and made a truly unreadable report. Then, I began managing
managers, and had them send me the same, which I collated into an
even longer more horrible report. This I sent to my design manager,
Irene Au, and my general manager, Jeff Weiner (who sensibly
requested that I put a summary at the beginning).
And so it went, as I moved from job to job, writing long, tedious
reports that, at best, were skimmed. At one job, I stopped authoring
them. I had my managers send them to my project manager, who
collated them, and then sent it to me for review. After checking for
anything embarrassing, I forwarded it on to my boss. One week I
forgot to read it, and didn’t hear anything about it. It was a waste of
everybody’s time.
Then, in 2010, I got to Zynga. Now, say what you want about Zynga,
but it was really good at some critical things that make an organiza‐
tion run well. One was the status report. All reports were sent to the
19

entire management team, and I enjoyed reading them. Yes, you
heard me right: I enjoyed reading them, even when were 20 of them.
Why? Because they had important information laid out in a digesti‐
ble format. I used them to understand what I needed to do and learn
from what was going right. Please note that Zynga, in the early days,
grew faster than any company I’ve seen. I suspect the efficiency of
communication was a big part of that.
When I left Zynga, I started to consult. I adapted the status mail to
suit the various companies I worked with, throwing in some tricks
from Agile. Now I have a simple, solid format that works across any
organization, big or small.
1. Lead with your team’s OKRs, and how much confidence you
have that you are going to hit them this quarter.
You list OKRs to remind everyone (and sometimes yourself)
why you are doing the things you do.
Your confidence is your guess of how likely you feel you will
meet your Key Results, on a scale from 1 to 10. Mark your con‐
fidence red when it falls below 3, green as it passes 7. Color
makes it scannable, making your boss and teammates happy.
Listing confidence helps you and your teammates track pro‐
gress and make corrections early if needed.
2. List last week’s prioritized tasks and whether they were
achieved. If they were not, include a few words to explain why.
The goal here is to learn what keeps the organization from
accomplishing what it needs to accomplish. See Figure 4-1 for
format.
3. Next, list next week’s priorities. List only three P1s (priority #1),
and make them meaty accomplishments that encompass multi‐
ple steps. For example, “Finalize spec for project xeno” is a good
P1. It probably encompasses writing, reviews with multiple
groups and sign off. It also gives a heads up to other teams and
your boss that you’ll be coming by.
“Talk to legal” is a bad P1. This priority takes about half hour,
has no clear outcome, feels like a subtask and, not only that, you
didn’t even tell us what you were talking about!
You can add a couple of P2s, but they should also be meaty,
worthy of being next week’s P2s. You want fewer, bigger items.
20 
| 
Chapter 4: Improve Weekly Status Emails with OKRs

4. List any risks or blockers. Just as in an Agile standup, note any‐
thing you could use help on that you can’t solve yourself. Do not
play the blame game. Your manager does not want to play mom,
listening to you and a fellow executive say “it’s his fault.”
As well, list anything you know of that could keep you from
accomplishing what you set out to do—a business partner play‐
ing hard-to-schedule or a tricky bit of technology that might
take longer than planned to sort out. Bosses do not like to be
surprised. Don’t surprise them.
5. Notes. Finally, if you have anything that doesn’t fit in these cate‐
gories, but that you absolutely want to include, add a note.
“Hired that fantastic guy from Amazon that Jim sent over.
Thanks, Jim!” is a decent note, as is, “Reminder: team out Fri‐
day for offsite to Giants game.” Make them short, timely and
useful. Do not use notes for excuses, therapy or novel writing
practice (see Figure 4-1).
Figure 4-1. Listing of priorities
Improve Weekly Status Emails with OKRs 
| 
21

This format also fixes another key challenge large organizations
face: coordination. To write a status report the old way, I had to have
team status in by Thursday night in order to collate, fact-check, and
edit everything. But with this system, I know what my priorities are,
and I use my reports’ statuses only as a way to ensure that their pri‐
orities are mine. I send out my report Friday, as I receive my reports.
We stay committed to one another, honest and focused.
Work should not be a chore list, but a collective push forward
toward shared goals. The status email reminds everyone of this fact
and helps us avoid slipping into checkbox thinking.
Coordinating organizational efforts is critical to a company’s ability
to compete and innovate. Giving up on the status email is a strategic
error. It can be a task that wastes key resources, or it can be a way
that teams connect and support one another.
Tracking and Evaluating OKRs
Two weeks before the end of each quarter, it’s time to grade your
OKRs and plan for the next cycle. After all, you want to hit the
ground running on day one of Q2, right?
There are two common systems for managing OKRs: confidence
ratings and grading. Each has its benefits and downsides. We’ll begin
with confidence ratings, the system I’ve outlined earlier. Confidence
ratings are a simple system best used by startups and smaller teams,
or teams at the beginning of OKR adoption. When you decide on
your objective and three KRs, you set a difficult number you have a
50 percent confidence in achieving. This is typically noted by a 5/10
rating on the status-four square.
In your Monday commitment meeting, everyone reports on
whether and how their confidence levels have changed. This is not a
science, it’s an art. You do not want your folks wasting time trying to
track down every bit of data to give a perfect answer; you just want
to make sure efforts are directionally correct. During the first couple
of weeks of OKRs, it’s pretty difficult to know whether you are mak‐
ing progress on achieving your Key results. But somewhere in week
three or four, it becomes very clear whether you are getting closer or
slipping. All of the team leaders (or team members, if a very small
company) will begin to adjust the confidence rating as they begin to
feel confident.
22 
| 
Chapter 4: Improve Weekly Status Emails with OKRs

Then, the confidence rating will start to swing wildly up and down
as progress or setbacks show up. Eventually, around two months, the
confidence levels settle into the likely outcome. By two weeks from
the end of the quarter you can usually call the OKRs. If they were
truly tough goals—the kind you only have a 50/50 chance of making
—there is no miracle that can occur in the last two weeks to change
the results. The sooner you can call the results, the sooner you can
make plans for the next quarter and begin your next cycle.
The advantage of this approach is two-fold. First, the team doesn’t
forget about OKRs because they need to constantly update the con‐
fidence level. Because the confidence level is a gut check, it’s quick
and painless, which is key for getting a young company in the habit
of tracking success. The second advantage is that this approach
prompts key conversations. If confidence drops, other leads can
question why it is happening and brainstorm ways to correct the
drop. OKRs are set and shared by the team; any team member’s
struggle is a danger to the entire company. A leader should feel com‐
fortable bringing a loss of confidence to the leadership team and
know that he’ll have help.
At two weeks before the end of the quarter you mark your confi‐
dence as 10 or 0. Success is making two of the three key results. This
style of grading leads to doubling down on the possible goals and
abandoning efforts on goals that are clearly out of range. The benefit
of this is to stop people spinning their wheels on the impossible and
focus on what can be done. However, the downside is some people
will sandbag by setting one impossible goal, one difficult goal, and
one easy goal. It’s the job of the manager to keep an eye out for this.
The second approach to OKRs ratings is the grading approach. Goo‐
gle is the most famous for using the grading approach. At the end of
the quarter, the team and individual grade their results with data
collected. 0.0 means the result was a failure, and 1.0 means the result
was a complete success. Most results should land in the 0.6 to 0.7
range. From the Google official site on using OKRs, ReWork:
The sweet spot for OKRs is somewhere in the 60–70 percent range.
Scoring lower may mean the organization is not achieving enough
of what it could be. Scoring higher may mean the aspirational goals
are not being set high enough. With Google’s 0.0–1.0 scale, the
expectation is to get an average of 0.6 to 0.7 across all OKRs. For
organizations that are new to OKRs, this tolerance for “failure” to
hit the uncomfortable goals is itself uncomfortable.
Tracking and Evaluating OKRs 
| 
23

Ben Lamorte is a coach who helps large organizations get started
and sustain their OKR projects. He regularly uses a grading
approach rather than confidence approach. From his article, “A Brief
History of Scoring Objectives and Key Results”:
As an OKRs coach, I find most organizations that implement a
scoring system either score the Key Results at the end of the quarter
only or at several intervals during the quarter. However, they gener‐
ally do not define scoring criteria as part of the definition of the
Key Result. If you want to use a standardized scoring system, the
scoring criteria for each Key Result MUST be defined as part of the
creation of the Key Result. In these cases, I would argue that a Key
Result is not finalized until the team agrees on the scoring criteria.
The conversation about what makes a “.3” or a “.7” is also not very
interesting unless we translate the “.3” and the “.7” into English.
I’ve arrived on the following guidelines that my clients are finding
very useful (see Figure 4-2).
Figure 4-2. Guidelines for grading OKRs
Here’s an example showing the power of defining scoring criteria
upfront for a Key Result.
Key Result: Launch new product ABC with 10 active users by end of
Q3.
• Grade 0.3 = Prototype tested by three internal users
• Grade 0.7 = Prototype tested and approved with launch date in
Q4
• Grade 1.0 = Product launched with 10 active users
This forces a conversation about what is aspirational versus realistic.
The engineering team might come back and say that even the 0.3
score is going to be difficult. Having these conversations before
24 
| 
Chapter 4: Improve Weekly Status Emails with OKRs

finalizing the Key Result ensures that everyone’s on the same page
from the start.
As well as precision, Google sets high value on transparency. All
OKRs, individual and team, are posted on the intranet, and team
progress is shared throughout. Again, from ReWork:
Publicly grade organizational OKRs. At Google, organizational
OKRs are typically shared and graded annually and quarterly. At
the start of the year, there is a company-wide meeting where the
grades for the prior OKRs are shared and the new OKRs are shared
both for the year and for the upcoming quarter. Then the company
meets quarterly to review grades and set new OKRs. At these com‐
pany meetings, the owner for each OKR (usually the leader from
the relevant team) explains the grade and any adjustments for the
upcoming quarter.
And ReWork: warns against the danger of set and forget:
Check in throughout the quarter. Prior to assigning a final grade, it
can be helpful to have a mid-quarter check-in for all levels of OKRs
to give both individuals and teams a sense of where they are. An
end of quarter check-in can be used to prepare ahead of the final
grading.
This is also done differently across teams. Some do a midpoint
check, like a midterm grade; others check in monthly. Google has
always embraced the approach of “hire smart people, give them a
goal, and then leave them alone to accomplish it.” As it’s grown,
OKRs are implemented unevenly, but OKRs continue to allow that
philosophy to live on.
Ben Lamorte also shares a simple technique to keep OKR progress
visible: progress posters. Several of his clients have set up posters in
the hallway that are updated regularly with progress. Not only does
this make OKRs more transparent and visible across teams, it can be
effective for communicating scores on Key Results and really creat‐
ing more accountability. It just doesn’t look good if your team hasn’t
updated any scores when you’re already a month into the quarter.
Most of these posters include placeholders to update scores at four
to eight planned check-ins throughout the quarter. Certainly OKR
posters are not for all organizations, but they can be quite effective
in some cases.
No matter whether you use confidence check-ins or formal grading
(or a combination of both), there is one last piece of advice from
ReWork: that is important to keep in mind:
Tracking and Evaluating OKRs 
| 
25

OKRs are not synonymous with performance evaluation. This means
OKRs are not a comprehensive means to evaluate an individual (or
an organization). Rather, they can be used as a summary of what an
individual has worked on in the last period of time and can show
contributions and impact to the larger organizational OKRs.
Use the accomplishments of each person to determine bonuses and
raises. If you use the status report system described in this report, it
should be easy for individuals to review their work and write up a
short summary of their accomplishments. This report can guide
your performance review conversations. Some things shouldn’t be
automated, and the most important part of being a manager is hav‐
ing real conversations about what an employee has contributed—
and what he hasn’t.
If you rely on OKR results to guide your decisions, you will encour‐
age sandbagging and punish your biggest dreamers. Reward what
people do, not how good they are at working the system.
A Short Note on OKR Software
When you set a resolution, what is the first thing you do? Want to
lose weight? Buy an expensive treadmill. Want to start running? Buy
fancy shoes. Plan to diet? Buy the best scale on the market. Or
maybe you just buy 15 diet books. Sadly, adopting OKRs is treated
the same way. People buy software, and hope it’ll do the hard work
of setting and managing your goals.
There are a ton of tools for OKRs out there, and many are quite
good. But buying a tool is the last step you want to take, not the first.
The right way to adopt OKRs is to adopt them in a lightweight fash‐
ion, then experiment with different approaches until you find the
system that gets you results.
Begin with these tools first:
• A whiteboard, to write ideas of what your objectives will be
• Post-it notes, to brainstorm good KRs
• PowerPoint/Keynote, to track confidence and efforts against the
objectives
• Email, to send out statuses
• Excel, if you decide you want to do formal grading (Google
offers a tool for grading on its Rework website
26 
| 
Chapter 4: Improve Weekly Status Emails with OKRs

The first quarter that you feel you have truly mastered OKRs, go
shopping.
Tracking and Evaluating OKRs 
| 
27


CHAPTER 5
Getting Started with OKRs
Just like new technologies, methodologies can suffer from the hype
cycle. OKRs are no exception; I’ve met a number of people deeply
disillusioned with OKRs and unwilling to give them a second
chance. But just like Lean or Agile, simply because a given company
implements the approach badly does not mean the approach has no
value.
When a company first hears about the Objective and Key Result
approach, they are excited.
“Now I know what the secret of success is!” and they rush to imple‐
ment it across the entire company. Often a manager thinks this is the
silver bullet she’s been seeking. This feeling is well documented by
Gartner—it’s called a Hype Curve (see Figure 5-1).
But the first time you try OKRs, you are likely to fail. Although
OKRs are not complicated, they are difficult work and often require
cultural change. Failure can be a dangerous situation, as your team
can become disillusioned with the approach and be unwilling to try
them again. You don’t want to lose a powerful tool just because it
takes a little time to master.
29

Figure 5-1. Gartner’s Hype Curve
There are three approaches you can use to reduce this risk:
Start with only one OKR for the company
By setting a simple goal for the company, your team sees the
executive team holding itself to a high standard. It won’t be sur‐
prising when next quarter it is asked to the do the same. And by
not cascading it, you both simplify implementation and see who
chooses to adopt OKRs and who will need coaching.
Have one team adopt OKRs before the entire company does
Choose an independent team that has all the skills to achieve its
goals. You can then trumpet its success if it happens, or wait a
cycle or two until it perfects its approach and then roll out
OKRs across the company.
Start out by applying OKRs to projects to train people on the objective-
result approach
The company GatherContent is a great example. Every time it
has a major project, it first asks what the objective is for this
project and how we will know if we’ve succeeded. (This case
study is included in my new book, Radical Focus (Boxes &
Arrows, 2016).
In all these approaches, avoid the deadly OKR mistakes and focus
on learning what works in your company culture. By starting small
and tracking how OKRs will work in your organization, you
30 
| 
Chapter 5: Getting Started with OKRs

increase the chances of your company adopting a results-based
approach, and reduce the danger of a disillusioned team.
OKRs are not a silver bullet. They should be part of a suite of
approaches a company adopts. They exist to create focus while
increasing employee satisfaction and productivity. Combined with
Lean, Agile, and a strong management approach, OKRs will help get
you out of the trough of disillusionment to the plateau of productiv‐
ity.
Quick Tips for Using OKRs
• Set only one OKR for the company, unless you have multiple
business lines. It’s about focus.
• Give yourself three months for an OKR to have an effect. How
bold is it if you can do it in a week?
• Keep the metrics out of the Objective. The Objective is inspira‐
tional.
• In the weekly check-in, open with the company OKR, and then
do groups. Don’t do every individual; that’s better in private
one-on-ones, which you do have every week, right?
• OKRs cascade; set company OKRs, and then groups/roles, and
then individuals.
• OKRs are not the only thing you do; they are the one thing you
must do. Trust people to keep the ship running, and don’t jam
every task into your OKRs.
• The Monday OKR check in is a conversation. Be sure to discuss
change in confidence, health metrics, and priorities.
• Encourage employees to suggest company OKRs. OKRs are
great bottom up, not just top down.
• Make OKRs available publicly. Google has them on their intra‐
net.
• Friday celebrations are an antidote to Monday’s grim business.
Keep it upbeat!
Quick Tips for Using OKRs 
| 
31

About the Author
Christina Wodtke trains companies to move from insight to execu‐
tion as principal of her firm, Wodtke Consulting, and teaches the
next generation of entrepreneurs at California College of the Arts
and Stanford Continuing Education.
Christina has led redesigns and initial product offerings for such
companies as LinkedIn, Myspace, Zynga, Yahoo!, Hot Studio, and
eGreetings. She has founded two consulting startups: a product
startup, and Boxes and Arrows, an online magazine of design; and
she cofounded the Information Architecture Institute. She’s the
author of 101 Theses on Design, Information Architecture: Blueprints
for the Web, and her new book about OKRs, Radical Focus.
She speaks everywhere from conferences to universities to board‐
rooms, and opines across the Internet, but most often on
eleganthack.com.

