
Introduction  
to Statistics  
and Data Analysis


Introduction  
to Statistics  
and Data Analysis
Roxy Peck
California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo
Chris Olsen
Grinnell College, Grinnell, Iowa
Jay L. Devore
California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo
Australia ● Brazil ● Mexico ● Singapore ● United Kingdom ● United States
e d i t i o n  5

This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions, some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial 
review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the right to 
remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For valuable information on pricing, previous
editions, changes to current editions, and alternate formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by
ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for materials in your areas of interest.

© 2016, 2012, 2009 Cengage Learning
WCN: 02-200-203
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright herein 
may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by any means 
graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to photocopying, 
recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, web distribution, information networks, 
or information storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted under 
Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2014946319
Student Edition: 
ISBN: 978-1-305-11534-7
Cengage Learning 
20 Channel Center Street 
Boston, MA 02210 
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions with 
office locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United Kingdom, 
Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. Locate your local office at  
www.cengage.com/global.
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd.
To learn more about Cengage Learning Solutions, visit www.cengage.com.
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our preferred 
online store www.cengagebrain.com.
Introduction to Statistics and Data Analysis, 
Fifth Edition
Roxy Peck, Chris Olsen, Jay L. Devore
Senior Product Team Manager: Richard Stratton
Senior Product Manager:  Molly Taylor
Senior Content Developer: Jay Campbell
Associate Content Developer: Danielle Hallock
Product Assistant: Spencer Arritt
Media Developer: Andrew Coppola
Marketing Manager: Ryan Ahern
Content Project Manager: Jill Quinn
Senior Art Director: Linda May
Manufacturing Planner: Sandee Milewski
IP Analyst: Christina Ciaramella
IP Project Manager: Farah Fard
Production Service: MPS Limited
Compositor: MPS Limited
Text Designer: Dale Porter
Cover Designer: Travis Hoffman
Cover Image: © 2009-2014 Gravity Glue
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at 
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product, 
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions. 
Further permissions questions can be emailed to 
permissionrequest@cengage.com.
Printed in the United States of America 
Print Number: 01  Print Year: 2014

To Lygia and Kyle
R. P.
To my wife, Sally, and my daughter, Anna
C. O.
To Carol, Allie, and Teri
J. D.

About the Authors
Roxy Peck is Emerita Associate Dean of 
the College of Science and Mathematics 
and Professor of Statistics Emerita at Cali-
fornia Polytechnic State University, San 
Luis Obispo. A faculty member at Cal Poly 
from 1979 until 2009, Roxy served for  
6 years as Chair of the Statistics Department before becom-
ing Associate Dean, a position she held for 13 years. She 
received an M.S. in Mathematics and a Ph.D. in Applied 
Statistics from the University of California, Riverside. Roxy 
is nationally known in the area of statistics education, and 
she was presented with the Lifetime Achievement Award in 
Statistics Education at the U.S. Conference on Teaching 
Statistics in 2009. In 2003 she received the American Statis-
tical Association’s Founder’s Award, recognizing her contri-
butions to K–12 and undergraduate statistics education. 
She is a Fellow of the American Statistical Association and 
an elected member of the International Statistics Institute. 
Roxy served for 5 years as the Chief Reader for the Ad-
vanced Placement Statistics Exam and has chaired the 
American Statistical Association’s Joint Committee with  
the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics on Cur-
riculum in Statistics and Probability for Grades K–12 and 
the Section on Statistics Education. In addition to her texts 
in introductory statistics, Roxy is also co-editor of Statistical 
Case Studies: A Collaboration Between Academe and Industry 
and a member of the editorial board for Statistics: A Guide 
to the Unknown, 4th edition. Outside the classroom, Roxy 
likes to travel and spends her spare time reading mystery 
novels. She also collects Navajo rugs and heads to Arizona 
and New Mexico whenever she can ﬁnd the time.
Chris Olsen taught statistics in  
Cedar Rapids, Iowa, for over 25 years, 
and at Cornell College and Grinnell Col-
lege. Chris is a past member (twice!) of 
the Advanced Placement Statistics Test 
Development Committee and has been a 
table leader and question leader at the AP Statistics read-
ing for 11 years. He is a long-time consultant to the 
College Board, Chris has led workshops and institutes 
for AP Statistics teachers in the United States and inter-
nationally. Chris was the Iowa recipient of the Presidential 
Award for Excellence in Science and Mathematics Teach-
ing in 1986, a regional awardee of the IBM Computer 
Teacher of the Year in 1988, and received the Siemens 
Award for Advanced Placement in mathematics in 1999. 
Chris is a frequent contributor to and is moderator of the 
AP Statistics Teacher Community online. He is currently 
a member of the editorial board of Teaching Statistics. 
Chris graduated from Iowa State University with a major 
in mathematics. While acquiring graduate degrees at the 
University of Iowa, he concentrated on statistics, com-
puter programming and psychometrics. In his spare time 
he enjoys reading and hiking. He and his wife have a 
daughter, Anna, a Caltech graduate in Civil Engineering. 
She is cofounder and principal engineer at Geosynergy, 
specializing in the quantification of uncertainty in seis-
mic risk.
Jay L. Devore is Professor Emeritus of 
Statistics at California Polytechnic State 
University. He earned his undergraduate 
degree in Engineering Science from the 
University of California, Berkeley; spent a 
year at the University of Shefﬁeld in En­
gland; and ﬁnished his Ph.D. in statistics at Stanford Uni-
versity. Jay previously taught at the University of Florida 
and at Oberlin College and has had visiting appointments 
at Stanford, Harvard, the University of Washington, New 
York University, and Columbia. From 1998 to 2006, he 
served as Chair of the Statistics Department. In addition to 
this book, Jay has written several widely used engineering 
statistics texts and a book in applied mathematical statis-
tics. He recently coauthored a text in probability and sto-
chastic processes. He is the recipient of a distinguished 
teaching award from Cal Poly, is a Fellow of the American 
Statistical Association, and has served several terms as an 
Associate Editor of the Journal of the American Statistical 
Association. In his spare time, he enjoys reading, cooking 
and eating good food, playing tennis, and traveling to far-
away places. He is especially proud of his wife, Carol, a 
retired elementary school teacher; his daughter Allison, 
who has held several high-level positions in nonprofit orga-
nizations in Boston and New York City; and his daughter 
Teresa, an ESL teacher in New York City.
vi

Brief Contents
vii
C h a p t e r  1
C h a p t e r  2
C h a p t e r  3
C h a p t e r  4
C h a p t e r  5
C h a p t e r  6
C h a p t e r  7
C h a p t e r  8
C h a p t e r  9
C h a p t e r  1 0
C h a p t e r  1 1
C h a p t e r  1 2
C h a p t e r  1 3
C h a p t e r  1 4
C h a p t e r  1 5
C h a p t e r  1 6
The Role of Statistics and the Data Analysis Process 1
Collecting Data Sensibly 29
Graphical Methods for Describing Data 80
Numerical Methods for Describing Data 152
Summarizing Bivariate Data 202
Probability 283
Random Variables and Probability Distributions 352
Sampling Variability and Sampling Distributions 437
Estimation Using a Single Sample 461
Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample 505
Comparing Two Populations or Treatments 561
The Analysis of Categorical Data and Goodness-of-Fit Tests 624
Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods 662
Multiple Regression Analysis 702
Analysis of Variance 732
Nonparametric (Distribution-Free) Statistical Methods 16-1
Appendix A: Statistical Tables 759
Appendix B: References 779
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises 783
Index 805
Sections and/or chapter numbers shaded in color can be found at  
www.cengagebrain.com

Contents
The Role of Statistics and the Data Analysis Process 1
1.1	
Why Study Statistics? 2
1.2	
The Nature and Role of Variability 3
1.3	
Statistics and the Data Analysis Process 5
1.4	
Types of Data and Some Simple Graphical Displays 9
Activity 1.1 Head Sizes: Understanding Variability 22
Activity 1.2 Estimating Sizes 23
Activity 1.3 A Meaningful Paragraph 24
Summary Key Concepts and Formulas 25
Chapter Review Exercises 25
Technology Notes 27
Collecting Data Sensibly 29
2.1	
Statistical Studies: Observation and Experimentation 30
2.2	
Sampling 35
2.3	
Simple Comparative Experiments 46
2.4	
More on Experimental Design 61
2.5	
Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses 66
Activity 2.1 Facebook Friending 69
Activity 2.2 An Experiment to Test for the Stroop Effect 70
Activity 2.3 McDonald’s and the Next 100 Billion Burgers 70
Activity 2.4 Video Games and Pain Management 71
Activity 2.5 Be Careful with Random Assignment! 71
Summary Key Concepts and Formulas 72
Chapter Review Exercises 73
Technology Notes 76
Want to Know More? See Chapter 2 Online Material for coverage of 
Survey Design and Graphing Calculator Explorations.
Graphical Methods for Describing Data 80
3.1	
Displaying Categorical Data: Comparative Bar Charts and Pie Charts 81
3.2	
Displaying Numerical Data: Stem-and-Leaf Displays 91
3.3	
Displaying Numerical Data: Frequency Distributions and 
Histograms 99
3.4	
Displaying Bivariate Numerical Data 119
3.5	
Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses 127
Activity 3.1 Locating States 137
Activity 3.2 Bean Counters! 137
Summary Key Concepts and Formulas 138
Chapter Review Exercises 138
Technology Notes 143
Cumulative Review Exercises 148
See Chapter 3 online materials for Graphing Calculator Explorations.
C h a p t e r  1
C h a p t e r  2
C h a p t e r  3
viii

	
Contents 
●  ix
Numerical Methods for Describing Data 152
4.1	
Describing the Center of a Data Set 153
4.2	
Describing Variability in a Data Set 163
4.3	
Summarizing a Data Set: Boxplots 171
4.4	
Interpreting Center and Variability: Chebyshev’s Rule, the Empirical 
Rule, and z Scores 178
4.5	
Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses 186
Activity 4.1 Collecting and Summarizing Numerical Data 191
Activity 4.2 Airline Passenger Weights 191
Activity 4.3 Boxplot Shapes 192
Summary Key Concepts and Formulas 192
Chapter Review Exercises 193
Technology Notes 196
See Chapter 4 online materials for Graphing Calculator Explorations.
Summarizing Bivariate Data 202
5.1	
Correlation 203
5.2	
Linear Regression: Fitting a Line to Bivariate Data 214
5.3	
Assessing the Fit of a Line 224
5.4	
Nonlinear Relationships and Transformations 244
5.5	
Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses 263
Activity 5.1 Exploring Correlation and Regression Technology Activity 
(Applets) 268
Activity 5.2 Age and Flexibility 269
Summary Key Concepts and Formulas 269
Chapter Review Exercises 270
Technology Notes 273
Cumulative Review Exercises 278
See Chapter 5 online materials for coverage of logistic regression 
and Graphing Calculator Explorations.
Probability 283
6.1	
Chance Experiments and Events 284
6.2	
Definition of Probability 291
6.3	
Basic Properties of Probability 297
6.4	
Conditional Probability 305
6.5	
Independence 315
6.6	
Some General Probability Rules 324
6.7	
Estimating Probabilities Empirically Using Simulation 336
Activity 6.1 Kisses 347
Activity 6.2 A Crisis for European Sports Fans? 347
Activity 6.3 The “Hot Hand” in Basketball 347
Summary Key Concepts and Formulas 348
Chapter Review Exercises 349
See Chapter 6 online materials for Graphing Calculator Explorations.
Want briefer, more informal coverage of probability? See pages xii – xiii 
for a listing of custom probability material.
Random Variables and Probability Distributions 352
7.1	
Random Variables 353
7.2	
Probability Distributions for Discrete Random Variables 356
C h a p t e r  4
C h a p t e r  5
C h a p t e r  6
C h a p t e r  7

x 
●  Contents
7.3	
Probability Distributions for Continuous Random Variables 363
7.4	
Mean and Standard Deviation of a Random Variable 367
7.5	
Binomial and Geometric Distributions 381
7.6	
Normal Distributions 393
7.7	
Checking for Normality and Normalizing Transformations 409
7.8	
Using the Normal Distribution to Approximate a Discrete 
Distribution (Optional) 419
Activity 7.1 Is it Real? 424
Activity 7.2 Rotten Eggs? 425
Summary Key Concepts and Formulas 426
Chapter Review Exercises 426
Technology Notes 429
Cumulative Review Exercises 433
See Chapter 7 online materials for Graphing Calculator 
Explorations.
Want briefer, more informal coverage of probability? See 
pages xii–xiii for a listing of custom probability material.
Sampling Variability and Sampling Distributions 437
8.1	
Statistics and Sampling Variability 438
8.2	
The Sampling Distribution of a Sample Mean 442
8.3	
The Sampling Distribution of a Sample Proportion 452
Activity 8.1 Do Students Who Take the SATs Multiple Times Have an 
Advantage in College Admissions? 458
Summary Key Concepts and Formulas 459
Chapter Review Exercises 459
See Chapter 8 online materials for Graphing Calculator Explorations.
Estimation Using a Single Sample 461
9.1	
Point Estimation 462
9.2	
Large-Sample Confidence Interval for a Population Proportion 467
9.3	
Confidence Interval for a Population Mean 479
9.4	
Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses 492
Activity 9.1 Getting a Feel for Confidence Level 497
Activity 9.2 An Alternative Confidence Interval for a Population 
Proportion 498
Activity 9.3 Verifying Signatures on a Recall Petition 499
Activity 9.4 A Meaningful Paragraph 499
Summary Key Concepts and Formulas 500
Chapter Review Exercises 500
Technology Notes 502
See Chapter 9 online materials for Graphing Calculator Explorations.
Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample 505
10.1	 Hypotheses and Test Procedures 506
10.2	 Errors in Hypothesis Testing 510
10.3	 Large-Sample Hypothesis Tests for a Population Proportion 516
10.4	 Hypothesis Tests for a Population Mean 528
10.5	 Power and Probability of Type II Error 539
10.6	 Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses 548
Activity 10.1 Comparing the t and z Distributions 551
Activity 10.2 A Meaningful Paragraph 552
C h a p t e r  8
C h a p t e r  9
C h a p t e r  1 0

Summary Key Concepts and Formulas 553
Chapter Review Exercises 553
Technology Notes 555
Cumulative Review Exercises 558
See Chapter 10 online materials for Graphing Calculator Explorations.
Comparing Two Populations or Treatments 561
11.1	 Inferences Concerning the Difference Between Two Population or 
Treatment Means Using Independent Samples 562
11.2	 Inferences Concerning the Difference Between Two Population or 
Treatment Means Using Paired Samples 582
11.3	 Large-Sample Inferences Concerning the Difference Between Two 
Population or Treatment Proportions 594
11.4	 Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical 
Analyses 605
Activity 11.1 Helium-Filled Footballs? 609
Activity 11.2 Thinking About Data Collection 609
Activity 11.3 A Meaningful Paragraph 609
Summary Key Concepts and Formulas 610
Chapter Review Exercises 611
Technology Notes 616
See Chapter 11 online materials for Graphing Calculator 
Explorations.
The Analysis of Categorical Data and Goodness-of-Fit Tests 624
12.1	 Chi-Square Tests for Univariate Data 625
12.2	 Tests for Homogeneity and Independence in a Two-way Table 635
12.3	 Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical 
Analyses 650
Activity 12.1 Pick a Number, Any Number ... 654
Activity 12.2 Color and Perceived Taste 654
Summary Key Concepts and Formulas 655
Chapter Review Exercises 655
Technology Notes 658
See Chapter 12 online materials for Graphing Calculator 
Explorations.
Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods 662
13.1	 Simple Linear Regression Model 663
13.2	 Inferences About the Slope of the Population Regression Line 675
13.3	 Checking Model Adequacy 686
Technology Notes 695
Activity 13.1 Are Tall Women from “Big” Families? 696
Summary Key Concepts and Formulas 697
13.4	 Inferences Based on the Estimated Regression Line (Optional) 13-1
13.5	 Inferences About the Population Correlation Coefficient 
(Optional) 13-8
13.6	 Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical 
Analyses 13-11
Graphing Calculator Exploration 13-17
Cumulative Review Exercises 697
C h a p t e r  1 1
C h a p t e r  1 2
C h a p t e r  1 3
	
Contents 
●  xi

Multiple Regression Analysis 702
14.1	 Multiple Regression Models 703
14.2	 Fitting a Model and Assessing Its Utility 715
Activity 14.1 Exploring the Relationship Between Number of 
Predictors and Sample Size 730
Summary Key Concepts and Formulas 731
14.3	 Inferences Based on an Estimated Model 14-1
14.4	 Other Issues in Multiple Regression 14-12
14.5	 Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical 
Analyses 14-23
Chapter Review Exercises 14-24
Analysis of Variance 732
15.1	 Single-Factor ANOVA and the F Test 733
15.2	 Multiple Comparisons 746
Activity 15.1 Exploring Single-Factor ANOVA 754
Summary Key Concepts and Formulas 756
Technology Notes 756
15.3	 The F Test for a Randomized Block Experiment 15-1
15.4	 Two-Factor ANOVA 15-8
15.5	 Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical 
Analyses 15-18
Chapter Review Exercises 15-23
Nonparametric (Distribution-Free) Statistical Methods 16-1
16.1	 Distribution-Free Procedures for Inferences About a Difference 
Between Two Population or Treatment Means Using Independent 
Samples (Optional) 16-2
16.2	 Distribution-Free Procedures for Inferences About a Difference Between 
Two Population or Treatment Means Using Paired Samples 16-9
16.3	 Distribution-Free ANOVA 16-19
Summary Key Concepts and Formulas 16-26
Appendix A: Statistical Tables 759
Appendix B: References 779
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises 783
Index 805
Probability
6.1	
Interpreting Probabilities and Basic Probability Rules
6.2	
Probability as a Basis for Making Decisions
6.3	
Estimating Probabilities Empirically and by Using Simulation
Population Distributions
7.1	
Describing the Distribution of Values in a Population
7.2	
Population Models for Continuous Numerical Variables
C h a p t e r  1 4
C h a p t e r  1 5
C h a p t e r  1 6
C u s to m  p r o b a b i l i t y 
m at e r i a l
C h a p t e r  6
C h a p t e r  7
xii 
●  Contents

7.3	
Normal Distributions
7.4	
Checking for Normality and Normalizing Transformations
Sections and/or chapter numbers shaded in color can be found at  
www.cengagebrain.com
	
Contents 
●  xiii

Preface
In a nutshell, statistics is about understanding the role that variability plays in draw-
ing conclusions based on data. Introduction to Statistics and Data Analysis, Fifth 
Edition, develops this crucial understanding of variability through its focus on the 
data analysis process.
Students are introduced early to the idea that data analysis is a process that begins 
with careful planning, followed by data collection, data description using graphical 
and numerical summaries, data analysis, and ﬁnally interpretation of results. This 
process is described in detail in Chapter 1, and the ordering of topics in the ﬁrst ten 
chapters of the book mirrors this process: data collection, then data description, then 
statistical inference.
The logical order in the data analysis process can be pictured as shown in the 
following ﬁgure.
Unlike many introductory texts, Introduction to Statistics and Data Analysis, 
Fifth Edition, is organized in a manner consistent with the natural order of the data 
analysis process:
	
An Organization That Reflects the Data Analysis Process
Step 1:
Acknowledging
Variability—
Collecting
Data Sensibly
Step 2:
Describing
Variability
in the Data—
Descriptive
Statistics
Step 3:
Drawing
Conclusions
in a Way That 
Recognizes
Variability in
the Data
xiv

Statistics is not about numbers; it is about data—numbers in context. It is the context 
that makes a problem meaningful and something worth considering. For example, 
exercises that ask students to compute the mean of 10 numbers or to construct a 
dotplot or boxplot of 20 numbers without context are arithmetic and graphing exer-
cises. They become statistics problems only when a context gives them meaning and 
allows for interpretation. While this makes for a text that may appear “wordy” when 
compared to traditional mathematics texts, it is a critical and necessary component of 
a modern statistics text.
Examples and exercises with overly simple settings do not allow students to prac-
tice interpreting results in authentic situations or give students the experience neces-
sary to be able to use statistical methods in real settings. We believe that the exercises 
and examples are a particular strength of this text, and we invite you to compare the 
examples and exercises with those in other introductory statistics texts.
Many students are skeptical of the relevance and importance of statistics. Con-
trived problem situations and artiﬁcial data often reinforce this skepticism. A strategy 
that we have employed successfully to motivate students is to present examples and 
exercises that involve data extracted from journal articles, newspapers, and other pub-
lished sources. Most examples and exercises in the book are of this nature; they cover 
a very wide range of disciplines and subject areas. These include, but are not limited 
to, health and ﬁtness, consumer research, psychology and aging, environmental re-
search, law and criminal justice, and entertainment.
Most chapters include a section titled “Interpreting and Communicating the Results 
of Statistical Analyses.” These sections include advice on how to best communicate 
the results of a statistical analysis and also consider how to interpret statistical 
Step 1:
Acknowledging
Variability—
Collecting Data
Sensibly
Step 2:
Describing 
Variability
in the Data—
Descriptive
Statistics
Probability Supports
the Connection
Step 3:
Drawing
Conclusions
in a Way That
Recognizes
Variability in
the Data
Chapters 1–2
Chapters 3–5
Chapters 8–15
Chapters 6–7
	
The Importance of Context and Real Data
	
A Focus on Interpretation and Communication
	
Preface 
●  xv

xvi 
●  Preface
summaries found in journals and other published sources. A subsection titled “A 
Word to the Wise” reminds readers of things that must be considered in order to 
ensure that statistical methods are employed in reasonable and appropriate ways.
In 2005, the American Statistical Association endorsed the report “College Guide-
lines in Assessment and Instruction for Statistics Education (GAISE Guidelines),” 
which included the following six recommendations for the introductory statistics 
course:
	1.	 Emphasize statistical literacy and develop statistical thinking.
	2.	 Use real data.
	3.	 Stress conceptual understanding rather than mere knowledge of procedures.
	4.	 Foster active learning in the classroom.
	5.	 Use technology for developing conceptual understanding and analyzing data.
	6.	 Use assessments to improve and evaluate student learning.
Introduction to Statistics and Data Analysis, Fifth Edition, is consistent with these 
recommendations and supports the GAISE guidelines in the following ways:
	1.	 Emphasize statistical literacy and develop statistical thinking.
	 	 Statistical literacy is promoted throughout the text in the many examples and 
exercises that are drawn from the popular press. In addition, a focus on the role 
of variability, consistent use of context, and an emphasis on interpreting and 
communicating results in context work together to help students develop skills 
in statistical thinking.
	2.	 Use real data.
	 	 The examples and exercises from Introduction to Statistics and Data Analysis, 
Fifth Edition, are context driven, and the reference sources  include the popular 
press as well as journal articles.
	3.	 Stress conceptual understanding rather than mere knowledge of procedures.
	 	 Nearly all exercises in Introduction to Statistics and Data Analysis, Fifth Edition, 
are multipart and ask students to go beyond just computation. They focus on 
interpretation and communication, not just in the chapter sections speciﬁcally 
devoted to this topic, but throughout the text. The examples and explanations 
are designed to promote conceptual understanding. Hands-on activities in each 
chapter are also constructed to strengthen conceptual understanding. Which 
brings us to . . .
	4.	 Foster active learning in the classroom.
	 	 While this recommendation speaks more to pedagogy and classroom practice, Intro-
duction to Statistics and Data Analysis, Fifth Edition, provides more than 30 hands-
on activities in the text and additional activities in the accompanying instructor re-
sources that can be used in class or assigned to be completed outside of class.
	5.	 Use technology for developing conceptual understanding and analyzing 
data.
	 	 The computer brings incredible statistical power to the desktop of every investi-
gator. The wide availability of statistical computer packages such as Minitab, 
	
Consistent with Recommendations for the Introductory 
Statistics Course Endorsed by the American Statistical 
Association

JMP, and SPSS, and the graphical capabilities of the modern microcomputer 
have transformed both the teaching and learning of statistics. To highlight the 
role of the computer in contemporary statistics, we have included sample output 
throughout the book. In addition, numerous exercises contain data that can eas-
ily be analyzed using statistical software. However, access to a particular statistical 
package is not assumed. Technology manuals for speciﬁc software packages and 
for the graphing calculator are available in the online materials that accompany 
this text.
	 	 	
The appearance of handheld calculators with signiﬁcant statistical and graph-
ing capability has also changed statistics instruction in classrooms where access to 
computers is still limited. There is not universal or even wide agreement about 
the proper role for the graphing calculator in college statistics classes, where ac-
cess to a computer is more common. At the same time, for tens of thousands of 
students in Advanced Placement Statistics in our high schools, the graphing cal-
culator is the only dependable access to statistical technology.
	 	 	
This text allows the instructor to balance the use of computers and calcula-
tors in a manner consistent with his or her philosophy and presents the power of 
the calculator in a series of Graphing Calculator Explorations. These are part of 
the online materials that accompany this text. As with computer packages, our 
exposition avoids assuming the use of a particular calculator and presents the 
calculator capabilities in a generic format. For those using a TI graphing calcula-
tor, there is a technology manual available in the online materials that accompany 
this text. As much as possible, the calculator explorations are independent of each 
other, allowing instructors to pick and choose calculator topics that are most 
relevant to their particular courses.
	6.	 Use assessments to improve and evaluate student learning.
	 	 Assessment materials in the form of a test bank, quizzes, and chapter exams are 
available in the instructor resources that accompany this text. The items in the 
test bank reﬂect the data-in-context philosophy of the text’s exercises and 
examples.
We have designed this book with a particular eye toward the syllabus of the Ad-
vanced Placement Statistics course and the needs of high school teachers and stu-
dents. Concerns expressed and questions asked in teacher workshops and on the AP 
Statistics Teacher Community have strongly inﬂuenced our explanation of certain 
topics, especially in the area of experimental design and probability. We have taken 
great care to provide precise deﬁnitions and clear examples of concepts that Advanced 
Placement Statistics instructors have acknowledged as difﬁcult for their students. We 
have also expanded the variety of examples and exercises, recognizing the diverse 
potential futures envisioned by very capable students who have not yet focused on a 
college major.
Our book can be used in courses as short as one quarter or as long as one year in dura-
tion. Particularly in shorter courses, an instructor will need to be selective in deciding 
which topics to include and which to set aside. The book divides naturally into four 
major sections: collecting data and descriptive methods (Chapters 1–5), probability 
	
Advanced Placement Statistics
	
Topic Coverage
	
Preface 
●  xvii

(Chapters 6–8), the basic one- and two-sample inferential techniques (Chapters 
9–12), and more advanced inferential methodology (Chapters 13–16).
We include an early chapter (Chapter 5) on descriptive methods for bivariate nu-
merical data. This early exposure raises questions and issues that should stimulate stu-
dent interest in the subject. It is also advantageous for those teaching courses in which 
time constraints preclude covering advanced inferential material. However, this chap-
ter can easily be postponed until the basics of inference have been covered, and then 
combined with Chapter 13 for a uniﬁed treatment of regression and correlation.
With the possible exception of Chapter 5, Chapters 1 through 10 should be 
covered in order. We anticipate that most instructors will then continue with two-
sample inference (Chapter 11) and methods for categorical data analysis (Chapter 12), 
although regression could be covered before either of these topics. Optional portions of 
Chapter 14 (multiple regression) and Chapter 15 (analysis of variance) and Chapter 16 
(nonparametric methods) are included in the online materials that accompany this text.
The content of the probability chapters is consistent with the Advanced Placement 
Statistics course description. It includes both a traditional treatment of probability and 
probability distributions at an introductory level, as well as a section on the use of simu-
lation as a tool for estimating probabilities. For those who prefer a briefer and more 
informal treatment of probability, two chapters previously from the book Statistics: The 
Exploration and Analysis of Data, by Roxy Peck and Jay Devore are available as a 
custom option. Please contact your Cengage learning consultant for more information 
about this alternative and other alternative customized options available to you.
Look for the following in the Fifth Edition:
●	 NEW A more informal writing style. In this revision, an effort was made to 
accommodate a broader range of student reading levels.
●	 NEW Helpful hints in exercises. To help students who might be having 
trouble getting started, hints have been added to many of the exercises directing 
students to relevant examples in the text.
●	 NEW Changes in exercise layout. Many of the multistep exercises carried over 
from the previous edition have now been broken into parts to make them more 
manageable and to help students organize their thinking about the solution.
●	 NEW Margin notes to highlight the importance of context and the process 
of data analysis. Margin notations have been added in appropriate places in 
the examples. These include Understanding the context, Consider the data, Formu-
late a plan, Do the work, and Interpret the results. These notes are designed to 
increase student awareness of the steps in the data analysis process.
●	 Updated examples and exercises that use data from current newspapers and 
journals are included. In addition, more of the exercises speciﬁcally ask students 
to write (for example, by requiring students to explain their reasoning, interpret 
results, and comment on important features of an analysis).
●	 Activities at the end of each chapter. These activities can be used as a chapter 
capstone or can be integrated at appropriate places as the chapter material is 
covered in class.
	
A Note on Probability
	
In This Edition
xviii 
●  Preface

●	 Students can now go online with Aplia and CourseMate to further their un-
derstanding of the material covered in each chapter.
●	 Advanced topics that are often omitted in a one-quarter or one-semester course, 
such as survey design (Section 2.6), logistic regression (Section 5.6), inference 
based on the estimated regression line (Sections 13.4 and 13.5), inference and 
variable selection methods in multiple regression (Sections 14.3 and 14.4), analy-
sis of variance for randomized block and two-factor designs (Sections 15.3 and 
15.4), and distribution-free procedures (Chapter 16) are available in the online 
materials that accompany this text.
●	 Updated materials for instructors are included. In addition to the usual instruc-
tor supplements such as a complete solutions manual and a test bank, the follow-
ing are also available to instructors:
●	 An Instructor’s Resource Binder, which contains additional examples that 
can be incorporated into classroom presentations and cross-references to re-
sources such as Fathom, Workshop Statistics, and Against All Odds. Of par-
ticular interest to those teaching Advanced Placement Statistics, the binder 
also includes additional data analysis questions of the type encountered on the 
free response portion of the Advanced Placement exam, as well as a collection 
of model responses.
●	 For those who use student-response systems in class, a set of “clicker” ques-
tions (see JoinIn™ on TurningPoint® under Instructor Resources—Media) 
for assessing student understanding is available.
Instructor and Student Resources
MindTap™
New for the fifth edition, available via Aplia, is MindTapTM Reader, Cengage 
­Learning’s next-generation eBook. MindTap Reader provides robust opportunities 
for students to annotate, take notes, navigate, and interact with the text (e.g., Read-
Speaker). Annotations captured in MindTap Reader are automatically tied to the 
Notepad app, where they can be viewed chronologically and in a cogent, linear 
­fashion. Instructors also can edit the text and assets in the Reader, as well as add 
­videos or URLs.
  Go to http://www.cengage.com/mindtap for more information.
Aplia™
Content
Aplia™ is an online interactive learning solution that improves comprehension and 
outcomes by increasing student effort and engagement. Founded by a professor to 
enhance his own courses, Aplia provides automatically graded assignments with 
detailed, immediate explanations for every question, along with innovative teaching 
materials. Our easy-to-use system has been used by more than 1,000,000 students at 
over 1,800 institutions. Exercises are taken directly from text.
Aplia homework engages students in critical thinking, requiring them to synthe-
size and apply knowledge, not simply recall it. The diverse types of questions reflect 
the types of exercises that help students learn. All homework is written by subject 
matter experts in the field who have taught the course before.
Aplia contains a robust course management system with powerful analytics, en-
abling professors to track student performance easily.
	
Preface 
●  xix

Service
Your adoption of Aplia® includes CourseCare, Cengage Learning’s industry leading 
service and training program designed to ensure that you have everything that you need 
to make the most of your use of Aplia. CourseCare provides one-on-one service, from 
finding the right solutions for your course to training and support. A team of Cengage 
representatives, including Digital Solutions Managers and Coordinators as well as 
Service and Training Consultants assist you every step of the way. For additional infor-
mation about CourseCare, please visit http://www.cengage.com/coursecare.
Our Aplia training program provides a comprehensive curriculum of beginner, 
intermediate, and advanced sessions, designed to get you started and effectively inte-
grate Aplia into your course. We offer a flexible online and recorded training program 
designed to accommodate your busy schedule. Whether you are using Aplia for the 
first time or are an experienced user, there is a training option to meet your needs.
JMP Statistical Software
JMP is a statistics software for Windows and Macintosh computers from SAS, the 
market leader in analytics software and services for industry. JMP Student Edition is 
a streamlined, easy-to-use version that provides all the statistical analysis and graphics 
covered in this textbook. Once data is imported, students will find that most proce-
dures require just two or three mouse clicks. JMP can import data from a variety of 
formats, including Excel and other statistical packages, and you can easily copy and 
paste graphs and output into documents. 
JMP also provides an interface to explore data visually and interactively, which 
will help your students develop a healthy relationship with their data, work more 
efficiently with data, and tackle difficult statistical problems more easily. Because 
its output provides both statistics and graphs together, the student will better see 
and understand the application of concepts covered in this book as well. JMP 
Student Edition also contains some unique platforms for student projects, such as 
mapping and scripting. JMP functions in the same way on both Windows and 
Mac platforms and instructions contained with this book apply to both 
platforms.
Access to this software is available for free with new copies of the book and avail-
able for purchase standalone at CengageBrain.com or http://www.jmp.com/getse. 
Find out more at www.jmp.com.
Digital
To access additional course materials and companion resources, please visit  
www.cengagebrain.com. At the CengageBrain.com home page, search for the ISBN 
of your title (from the back cover of your book) using the search box at the top of 
the page. This will take you to the product page where free companion resources can 
be found.
  	
Complete step-by-step instructions for JMP, TI-84 Graphing Calculators, Excel, 
Minitab, and SPSS indicated by the 
 icon throughout the text.
Access to JMP is free with 
the purchase of a new book.
xx 
●  Preface
	
Student Resources

  	
Data sets in JMP, TI-84, Excel, Minitab, SPSS, SAS, and ASCII file formats indicated 
by the  icon throughout the text.
  	
Applets used in the Activities found in the text.
Print
Student Solutions Manual (ISBN: 978-1-3052-6582-0): The Student Solutions 
Manual, prepared by Michael Allwood, contains fully worked-out solutions to all of the 
odd-numbered exercises in the text, giving students a way to check their answers and 
ensure that they took the correct steps to arrive at an answer.
Print
Annotated Instructor’s Edition (ISBN: 978-1-3052-5252-3): The Annotated In-
structor’s Edition contains answers for all exercises, including those not found in the 
answer section of the student edition. There also are suggested assignments and teach-
ing tips for each section in the book written by Kathy Fritz, an experienced AP Sta-
tistics teacher, along with an annotated table of contents with comments written by 
Roxy Peck.
Teacher’s Resource Binder (ISBN: 978-1-3052-6605-6): The Teacher’s Resource 
Binder, prepared by Chris Olsen, is full of wonderful resources for both college pro-
fessors and AP Statistics teachers. These include
●	 Additional examples from published sources (with references), classified by chap-
ter in the text. These examples can be used to enrich your classroom discussions.
●	 Model responses—examples of responses that can serve as a model for work that 
would be likely to receive a high mark on the AP exam.
●	 A collection of data explorations written by Chris Olsen that can be used 
throughout the year to help students prepare for the types of questions that they 
may encounter on the investigative task on the AP Statistics Exam.
●	 Advice to AP Statistics teachers on preparing students for the AP Exam, written 
by Brian Kotz.
●	 Activity worksheets, prepared by Carol Marchetti, that can be duplicated and 
used in class.
●	 A list of additional resources for activities, videos, and computer demonstrations, 
cross-referenced by chapter.
●	 A test bank that includes assessment items, quizzes, and chapter exams written by 
Chris Olsen, Josh Tabor, and Peter Flannigan-Hyde.
Online
●	 Instructor Companion Site: Everything you need for your course in one place! 
This collection of book-specific lecture and class tools is available online via 
www.cengage.com/login. Access and download PowerPoint presentations, 
images, instructor’s manual, and more. 
●	 JoinIn™ on TurningPoint®: The easiest student classroom response system to 
use, JoinIn features instant classroom assessment and learning.
	
Instructor Resources
	
Preface 
●  xxi

●	 Cengage Learning Testing Powered by Cognero (ISBN: 978-1-3052-6589-9) 
is a flexible, online system that allows you to author, edit, and manage test bank 
content, create multiple test versions in an instant, and deliver tests from your 
LMS, your classroom or wherever you want. This is available online via www 
.cengage.com/login.
●	 Complete Solutions Manual  This manual contains solutions to all exercises 
from the text, including Chapter Review Exercises and Cumulative Review Ex-
ercises. This manual can be found on the Instructors Companion Site.
We are grateful for the thoughtful feedback from the following reviewers that has 
helped to shape this text over the last three editions:
Reviewers for the Fifth Edition
	
Acknowledgments
Kathleen Dale
Eastern Connecticut State University
Kendra Mhoon
University of Houston-Downtown
Mamunur Rashid
Indiana University-Purdue University 
Indianapolis
Leah Rathbun
Colorado State University
Cathleen ZuccoTeveloff 
Rider University 
Reviewers for the Fourth,  Third, and Second Editions
Arun K. Agarwal, Jacob Amidon, Holly Ashton, Barb Barnet, Eddie Bevilacqua, 
Piotr Bialas, Kelly Black, Jim Bohan, Pat Buchanan, Gabriel Chandler, Andy 
Chang, Jerry Chen, Richard Chilcoat, Mary Christman, Marvin Creech, Ron 
Degged, Hemangini Deshmukh, Ann Evans, Guangxiong Fang, Sharon B. Finger, 
Donna Flint, Steven Garren, Mark Glickman, Rick Gumina, Debra Hall, Tyler 
Haynes, Sonja Hensler, Trish Hutchinson, John Imbrie, Bessie Kirkwood, Jeff 
Kollath, Christopher Lacke, Austin Lampros, Michael Leitner, Zia Mahmood, Art 
Mark, Pam Martin, David Mathiason, Bob Mattson, C. Mark Miller, Megan 
Mocko, Paul Myers, Kane Nashimoto, Helen Noble, Douglas Noe, Broderick 
Oluyede, Elaine Paris, Shelly Ray Parsons, Deanna Payton, Judy Pennington-Price, 
Michael Phelan, Alan Polansky, Michael Ratliff, David Rauth, Kevin J. Reeves, 
Lawrence D. Ries, Hazel Shedd, Robb Sinn, Greg Sliwa, Angela Stabley, Jeffery 
D. Sykes, Yolanda Tra, Joe Ward, Nathan Wetzel, Mark Wilson, Yong Yu, and 
Toshiyuki Yuasa, Cathleen Zucco-Teveloff.
We would also like to express our thanks and gratitude to those whose support made 
this fifth edition possible:
●	 Molly Taylor, our editor, for her support and guidance.
●	 Jay Campbell, our developmental editor, for his kindness and humor as he kept 
us on track and moving forward.
xxii 
●  Preface
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

●	 Danielle Hallock for leading the development of all of the supporting 
ancillaries.
●	 Jill Quinn, our Cengage production editor.
●	 Edward Dionne, our project editor at MPS Limited.
●	 Christine Sabooni for her careful manuscript review and copyediting.
●	 Michael Allwood for his work in creating new student and instructor solutions 
manuals to accompany the text.
●	 Kathy Fritz for creating the new interactive PowerPoint presentations that ac-
company the text and also for sharing her insight in writing the Teaching Tips 
that accompany each chapter in the annotated instructor editions.
●	 Stephen Miller for checking the accuracy of examples and solutions.
●	 Josh Tabor and Peter-Flannagan Hyde for their contributions to the test bank 
that accompanies the book.
●	 Beth Chance and Francisco Garcia for producing the applet used in the confi-
dence interval activities.
●	 Gary McClelland for producing the applets from Seeing Statistics used in the 
regression activities.
●	 Carolyn Crockett, our former editor at Cengage, for her support on the previous 
editions of this book.
And, as always, we thank our families, friends, and colleagues for their continued 
support.
Roxy Peck
Chris Olsen
Jay Devore
	
Preface 
●  xxiii
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Context-Driven ­Applications
Real data examples and exercises throughout 
the text are drawn from the popular press, 
as well as journal articles. Data sources are 
in a colored font for easy identification.
Focus on Interpreting 
and Communicating
Chapter sections on interpreting and communicat-
ing results are designed to emphasize the impor-
tance of being able to interpret statistical output 
and communicate its meaning to non-­statisticians. 
A subsection titled “A Word to the Wise” reminds 
students of things that must be considered in order 
to ensure that statistical methods are used in rea-
sonable and appropriate ways.
. . . Emphasizes ­Statistical Literacy 
and Statistical Thinking 
Page 33
EXERCISES 2.1 - 2.12
2.1 The article “How Dangerous Is a Day in the Hospital?” 
(Medical Care [2011]: 1068–1075) describes a study to 
determine if the risk of an infection is related to the 
length of a hospital stay. The researchers looked at a 
large number of hospitalized patients and compared 
the proportion who got an infection for two groups 
of patients—those who were hospitalized overnight 
and those who were hospitalized for more than one 
night. Indicate whether the study is an observational 
study or an experiment. Give a brief explanation for 
your choice.
2.2 The authors of the paper “Fudging the Numbers: 
Distributing Chocolate Influences Student Evaluations 
of an Undergraduate Course” (Teaching in Psychology 
[2007]: 245–247) carried out a study to see if events 
unrelated to an undergraduate course could affect 
chocolate prior to having them ﬁll out course evalu-
ations. Students in the other three sections were not 
offered chocolate. 
The researchers concluded that “Overall, students 
offered chocolate gave more positive evaluations than 
students not offered chocolate.” Indicate whether the 
study is an observational study or an experiment. 
Give a brief explanation for your choice.
2.3 The article “Why We Fall for This” (AARP Magazine, 
May/June 2011) described a study in which a busi-
ness professor divided his class into two groups. He 
showed students a mug and then asked students in 
one of the groups how much they would pay for the 
mug. Students in the other group were asked how 
much they would sell the mug for if it belonged to 
them. Surprisingly, the average value assigned to the 
EXaMPLE 2.2 
Think Before You Order That Burger!
The article “What People Buy from Fast-Food Restaurants: Caloric Content and Menu Item 
Selection” (Obesity [2009]: 1369–1374) reported that the average number of calories con-
sumed at lunch in New York City fast-food restaurants was 827. The researchers selected 
267 fast-food locations at random. The paper states that at each of these locations “adult 
customers were approached as they entered the restaurant and asked to provide their food 
receipt when exiting and to complete a brief survey.”
Approaching customers as they entered the restaurant and before they ordered may have 
inﬂuenced what they purchased. This introduces the potential for response bias. In addi-
tion, some people chose not to participate when approached. If those who chose not to 
participate differed from those who did participate, the researchers also need to be con-
cerned about nonresponse bias. Both of these potential sources of bias limit the researchers’ 
ability to generalize conclusions based on data from this study. 
■
Page 37
 3.5  
 Interpreting and Communicating the Results  
of Statistical Analyses
A graphical display, when used appropriately, can be a powerful tool for organizing and 
summarizing data. By sacriﬁcing some of the detail of a complete listing of a data set, 
important features of the data distribution are more easily seen and more easily communi-
cated to others.
Page 127
Interpreting the Results of Statistical Analyses
When someone uses a web search engine, do they rely on the ranking of the search results 
returned or do they ﬁrst scan the results looking for the most relevant? The authors of the 
paper “learning User Interaction models for predicting Web Search Result preferences” (Proceed-
ings of the 29th Annual ACM Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 2006) 
attempted to answer this question by observing user behavior when they varied the position 
of the most relevant result in the list of resources returned in response to a web search. 
They concluded that people clicked more often on results near the top of the list, even 
when they were not relevant. They supported this conclusion with the comparative bar 
graph in Figure 3.37.
Page 128
What to Look for in Published Data
Here are some questions you might ask yourself when attempting to extract information 
from a graphical data display:
 
●Is the chosen display appropriate for the type of data collected?
 
●For graphical displays of univariate numerical data, how would you describe the shape 
of the distribution, and what does this say about the variable being  summarized?
 
●Are there any outliers (noticeably unusual values) in the data set? Is there any 
plausible explanation for why these values differ from the rest of the data? (The 
presence of outliers often leads to further avenues of investigation.)
 
●Where do most of the data values fall? What is a typical value for the data set? What 
does this say about the variable being summarized?
 
●Is there much variability in the data values? What does this say about the variable 
being summarized?
Page 130
A Word to the Wise: Cautions and Limitations
When constructing and interpreting graphical displays, you need to keep in mind these 
things:
1. Areas should be proportional to frequency, relative frequency, or magnitude 
of the number being represented. The eye is naturally drawn to large areas in 
graphical displays, and it is natural for the observer to make informal compari-
sons based on area. Correctly constructed graphical displays, such as pie charts, 
b
h
d h
d
d
h
h
f h
l
h
Page 131



Peck, Olsen, Devore’s
Introduction to Statistics and Data Analysis, Fifth Edition . . .
xxv
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Hands-on Activities in  
Every Chapter
More than 30 hands-on activities 
in the text, and additional activities 
in the accompanying instructor  
resources, can be used to encourage 
active learning inside or outside the 
classroom.
. . . Encourages Conceptual 
Understanding and Active 
Learning
Page 69
aC TIVIT Y 2.1 
Facebook Friending
Background: The article “Professors Prefer Face Time to 
Facebook” appeared in the student newspaper at Cal Poly, 
San Luis Obispo (Mustang Daily, august 27, 2009). The arti-
cle examines how professors and students felt about using 
Facebook as a means of faculty-student communication. The 
student who wrote this article got mixed opinions when she 
interviewed students to ask whether they wanted to become 
Facebook friends with their professors. Two student com-
ments included in the article were
“I think the younger the professor is, the more you can 
relate to them and the less awkward it would be if you 
were to become friends on Facebook. The older the 
professor, you just would have to wonder, ‘Why are they 
friending me?’ ”
and
“I think becoming friends with professors on Facebook is really 
awkward. I don’t want them being able to see into my personal 
TECHNOlOGY NOTES
Confidence Intervals for proportions
JmP
Summarized data
1.  Enter the data table into the JMP data table with catego-
ries in the first column and counts in the second column
2.  Click Analyze and select Distribution
3.  Click and drag the first column name from the box un-
der Select Columns to the box next to Y, Columns
4.  Click and drag the second column name from the box 
under Select Columns to the box next to Freq
5. Click OK
6.  Click the red arrow next to the column name and click 
Confidence Interval then select the appropriate level or 
select Other to input a level that is not listed
3.  Click and drag the first column na
der Select Columns to the box nex
4. Click OK
5.  Click the red arrow next to the col
Confidence Interval then select th
select Other to input a level that is 
minitab
Summarized data
1.  Click Stat then click Basic St
1 Proportion…
2. Click the radio button next to Sum
3.  In the box next to Number of Tria
n, the total number of trials
4.  In the box next to Number of even
the number of successes
5. Click Options…
6.  Input the appropriate confidence le
Confidence Level
7.  Check the box next to Use test an
normal distribution
8. Click OK
9. Click OK
Raw data
© Cengage Learning® 
Page 502


Technology Notes
Technology Notes appear at the end of most 
chapters and give students helpful hints and 
guidance on completing tasks associated with a 
particular chapter. The following technologies 
are included in the notes: JMP, Minitab, 
SPSS, Microsoft Excel, and TI-83/84.
xxvi
Peck, Olsen, Devore’s
Introduction to Statistics and Data Analysis, Fifth Edition . . .
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Applets Allow Students to  
See the Concepts
Within the Activities, applets are 
used to illustrate and promote a
deeper understanding of the key 
statistical concepts.
. . . And Analyze Data
Real Data Sets
Real data sets promote statistical analysis, as 
well as technology use. They are formatted for 
JMP, Minitab, SPSS, Microsoft Excel, 
TI-83/84, and ASCII and are indicated by the 
 icon throughout the text.
. . . Uses Technology 
to Develop Conceptual 
Understanding
Page 497
Page 95
3.21 ● The percentage of teens not in school or working 
in 2010 for the 50 states were given in the 2012 Kids 
Count Data Book (www.aecf.org) and are shown in the 
following table:
State
rate
Alabama
11%
Alaska
11%
Arizona
12%
Arkansas
12%
California
 8%
Colorado
 7%
Connecticut
 5%
delaware
 9%
Florida
10%
Georgia
12%
Hawaii
12%
State
rate
Kansas
 6%
Kentucky
11%
louisiana
14%
Maine
 7%
Maryland
 8%
Massachusetts
 5%
Michigan
 9%
Minnesota
 5%
Mississippi
13%
Missouri
 9%
Montana
 9%
Page 98
Page 105


Step-by-Step Technology Instructions
Complete online step-by-step instructions for JMP, 
Minitab, SPSS, Microsoft Excel, and TI-83/84 are 
indicated by the 
 icon throughout the text.
Technology activity (applet): Open the applet (avail-
able at www.cengagebrain.com) called ConfidenceIntervals. 
You should see a screen like the one shown here.
the interval is drawn in green; if 100 is not in the confidence 
interval, the interval is shown in red. Your screen should look 
something like the following.
part 1: Click on the “Sample” button several more times, 
and notice how the confidence interval estimate changes 
from sample to sample. Also notice that at the bottom of 
the left-hand side of the display, the applet is keeping track 
of the proportion of all the intervals calculated so far that 
include the actual value of m. If we were to construct a 
large number of intervals, this proportion should closely 
approximate the capture rate for the confidence interval 
method.
To look at more than one interval at a time, change the 
“Intervals” box from 1 to 100, and then click the sample but-
ton. You should see a screen similar to the one at the top left 
of the next page, with 100 intervals in the display on the 
right-hand side. Again, intervals containing 100 (the value 
of m in this case) will be green and those that do not contain 
100 will be red. Also note that the capture proportion on 
the left-hand side has also been updated to reflect what hap-
pened with the 100 newly generated intervals.
Getting Started: If the “Method” box does not say 
“Means,” use the drop-down menu to select Means. In the 
box just below, select “t’ from the drop-down menu. This 
applet will select a random sample from a specified nor-
mal population distribution and then use the sample to 
construct a confidence interval for the population mean. 
The interval is then plotted on the display, and you can 
see if the resulting interval contains the actual value of the 
population mean.
For purposes of this activity, we will sample from a normal 
population with mean 100 and standard deviation 5. We will 
begin with a sample size of n 5 10. In the applet window, set 
m 5 100, s 5 5, and n 5 10. Leave the conf-level box set 
at 95%. Click the “Recalculate” button to rescale the picture 
on the right. Now click on the sample button. You should 
see a confidence interval appear on the display on the right-
hand side. If the interval contains the actual mean of 100, 
ExamplE 3.11 
progress for Children
● The report “progress for Children” (UNICEF, april 2005) included the accompanying data on 
the percentage of primary-school-age children who were enrolled in school for 19 coun-
tries in Northern Africa and for 23 countries in Central Africa.
Northern Africa
54.6
34.3
48.9
77.8
59.6
88.5
97.4
92.5
83.9
96.9
88.9
98.8
91.6
97.8
96.1
92.2
94.9
98.6
86.6
Central Africa
58.3
34.6
35.5
45.4
38.6
63.8
53.9
61.9
69.9
43.0
85.0
63.4
58.4
61.9
40.9
73.9
34.8
74.4
97.4
61.0
66.7
79.6
98.9
We will construct a comparative stem-and-leaf display using the ﬁrst digit of each observa-
tion as the stem and the remaining two digits as the leaf. To keep the display simple the leaves 
will be truncated to one digit. For example, the observation 54.6 would be processed as
ExamplE 3.16 
TV Viewing Habits of Children
The article “Early Television Exposure and Subsequent attention problems in Children” (Pediat-
rics, april 2004) investigated the television viewing habits of children in the United States. 
Table 3.5 gives approximate relative frequencies (read from graphs that appeared in the 
article) for the number of hours spent watching TV per day for a sample of children at age 
1 year and a sample of children at age 3 years. The data summarized in the article were 
obtained as part of a large-scale national survey.
Step-by-step technology  
instructions available online
Understand the data ❭

xxvii
Peck, Olsen, Devore’s
Introduction to Statistics and Data Analysis, Fifth Edition . . .
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Evaluate as You Teach  
Using Clickers
Using clicker content authored by Roxy 
Peck, evaluate your students’ understanding 
immediately—in class—after teaching a con-
cept. Whether it’s a quick quiz, a poll to be 
used for in-class data, or just checking in to 
see if it is time to move on, our quality, tested 
content creates truly interactive classrooms 
with students’ responses shaping the lecture  
as you teach.
APLIATM Online Interactive Learning 
Solution
Aplia provides automatically graded assignments 
with detailed, immediate explanations for every 
question, along with innovative teaching materials.
. . . Evaluates Students’ 
Understanding
Page 90


Video Solutions Motivate Student 
Understanding
More than 90 exercises have video solutions,  
presented by Brian Kotz of Montgomery College, which 
can be viewed online or downloaded for later viewing. 
These exercises are designated by the ▼ in the text.
3.11 ▼ Poor ﬁt ness in adolescents and adults increases 
the risk of cardiovascular disease. In a study of 3110 
adolescents and 2205 adults (Journal of the American 
Medical Association, De cem ber 21, 2005), researchers 
found 33.6% of adolescents and 13.9% of adults 
were unﬁt; the percentage was similar in adolescent 
males (32.9%) and females (34.4%), but was 
higher in adult females (16.2%) than in adult males 
(11.8%).
a. Summarize this information using a comparative 
bar graph that shows differences between males 
and females within the two different age groups.
b. Comment on the interesting features of your 
graphical display.

xxviii
Peck, Olsen, Devore’s
Introduction to Statistics and Data Analysis, Fifth Edition . . .
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Resources for Students*
Digital
MindTapTM
 Cengagebrain.com
•  Step-by-step instructions for JMP, TI-84 
Graphing Calculators, Excel, Minitab, and SPSS
•  Data sets formatted for JMP, TI-84, Excel, 
Minitab, SPSS, SAS, and ASCII
•  Video solutions
•  Applets used in the Activities
 Aplia™
 Enhanced WebAssign
JMP statistical software
Print
Student Solutions Manual
(978-1-3052-6582-0)
Resources for Instructors*
Digital
MindTapTM
 Aplia™
Companion website: cengage.com/login
•  PowerPoint presentations
•  Images
•  Complete solutions manual
•  Cengage Learning Testing by Cognero
•  JoinIn on TurningPoint
JMP statistical software
Print
Annotated Instructor’s Edition
(978-1-3052-5252-3)
Teacher’s Resource Binder
(978-1-3052-6605-6)
* See the full preface for complete descriptions.
xxix
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Options That SAVE Your Students Money
ONLINE LEARNING 
WITH INTERACTIVE 
EBOOK
BOOK RENTALS 
UP TO 60% OFF
CUSTOM 
SOLUTIONS
Teach more, grade less 
with Aplia.
Aplia™ is an online interactive 
learning solution that improves 
comprehension and outcomes 
by increasing student effort and 
engagement. 
 
Founded by a professor to 
enhance his own courses, Aplia 
provides automatically graded 
assignments with detailed, 
immediate explanations on 
every question, and innovative 
teaching materials. Our easy to 
use system has been used by 
more than 1,000,000 students 
at over 1800 institutions.
Students have the CHOICE to 
purchase the eBook 
or rent the text at 
CengageBrain.com
OR
an eTextbook in PDF format is 
also available for instant access 
for your students at   
www.coursesmart.com.
Custom Solutions to Fit 
Every Need
2-Semester Slim Pack
ISBN: 0-538-73475-2
Aplia can be bundled with the text.
Contact your Cengage Learning 
representative to find out more 
about bundling options.
Students can rent Peck/Olsen/ 
Devore’s Introduction to Statistics 
and Data Analysis, 
 Fifth Edition , for  
up to 60% off list price. 
•  Adapt existing Cengage Learning 
content by adding or removing  
chapters
 
•  Incorporate your own materials
 
urce Code: 12M-MA0010
Contact your Cengage Learning 
representative to learn more 
about what custom solutions are 
available to meet your course 
needs.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
We encounter data and make conclusions based on  
data every day. Statistics is the sci­en­tiﬁc discipline that 
provides methods to help us make sense of data. Statistical 
methods, used intelligently, offer a set of powerful tools for 
gaining insight into the world around us. The widespread 
use of statistical analyses in diverse ﬁelds such as business, 
medicine, agriculture, social sciences, natural sciences, and 
engineering has led to increased recognition that statisti-
cal literacy—a familiarity with the goals and methods of 
statistics—should be a basic component of a well-rounded 
educational program.
The ﬁeld of statistics helps us to make intelligent judg-
ments and informed decisions in the presence of uncer-
tainty and variation. In this chapter, we consider the nature 
and role of variability in statistical settings, introduce some 
basic terminology, and look at some simple graphical dis-
plays for summarizing data.
The Role of Statistics  
and the Data Analysis Process
Chapter 1: Learning Objectives
Students will understand:
●
●the steps in the data analysis process.
Students will be able to:
●
●distinguish between a population and a sample.
●
●distinguish between categorical, discrete numerical, and continuous 
numerical data.
●
●construct a frequency distribution and a bar chart and describe the 
distribution of a categorical variable.
●
●construct a dotplot and describe the distribution of a numerical variable.
© Andresr/Shutterstock.com
CHAPTER 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2 
●  Chapter 1  The Role of Statistics and the Data Analysis Process
 1.1  
Why Study Statistics?
There is an old saying that “without data, you are just another person with an opinion.” 
While anecdotes and coincidences may make for interesting stories, you wouldn’t want to 
make important decisions on the basis of anecdotes alone. For example, just because a 
friend of a friend ate 16 apricots and then experienced relief from joint pain doesn’t mean 
that this is all you need to know to help one of your parents choose a treatment for arthritis! 
Before recommending apricots, you would definitely want to consider relevant data—that 
is, data that would allow you to investigate the effectiveness of apricots as a treatment for 
arthritis.
It is difficult to function in today’s world without a basic understanding of statistics. For 
example, here are just a few headlines from articles that draw conclusions based on data 
that all appeared over two days in USA Today (December 19 and 20, 2013):
●
●The article “American Attitudes Toward Global Warming” summarized data from a nation-
wide survey of adults. A variety of graphs and charts provide information on opinions 
regarding the existence of global warming, the impact of global warming, and what 
actions should be taken in response to global warming.
●
●
“Standardized Testing Fails College Students” is the title of an article describing the use 
of standardized tests to place college students into appropriate college mathematics 
courses. The article concludes that many students are not aware of the importance of 
these exams and do not prepare for them. This results in many students being placed 
in developmental mathematics courses that slow their progress toward getting their 
degree.
●
●The article “Shoppers Say Ho-Hum to Discounts” describes conclusions drawn from 
a study of how consumers respond to e-mail advertising campaigns that offer 
discounts. The article concludes that this practice has become so widespread that 
shoppers largely ignore these e-mails and delete them without even reading them. 
This is information that retailers should consider when planning future advertising 
campaigns.
●
●
“Older Americans Could Opt Out of Blood Pressure Meds” is the title of an article describ-
ing a study of the effect of high blood pressure on health for those over age 60. Data 
from this study lead to the conclusion that for older Americans, there is no further 
benefit to reducing blood pressure below 150/90. This is of interest to doctors because 
the previous recommendation was that blood pressure should be 140/90 or lower.
●
●The article “College Coaching Gender Gap Persists” reported data from a study of col-
leges in six large NCAA sports conferences. The study found that only 39.6% of the 
coaches of women’s sports teams in 2013 were women, which is even lower than in 
previous years. The article concluded that although Title IX increased opportunities 
for participation of women in collegiate sports, it has not yet resulted in increased 
opportunities for women as coaches.
To be an informed consumer of reports such as those described above, you 
must be able to do the following:
1.	 Extract information from tables, charts, and graphs.
2.	 Follow numerical arguments.
3.	 Understand the basics of how data should be gathered, summarized, and 
analyzed to draw statistical conclusions.
Your statistics course will help prepare you to perform these tasks.
Studying statistics will also enable you to collect data in a sensible way and then use 
the data to answer questions of interest. In addition, studying statistics will allow you to 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 1.2   The Nature and Role of Variability 
●  3
We hope that this textbook will help you to understand the logic behind statistical rea-
soning, prepare you to apply statistical methods appropriately, and enable you to recognize 
when statistical arguments are faulty.
Throughout your personal and professional life, you will need to understand and 
use data to make decisions. To do this, you must be able to
1.	 Decide whether existing data is adequate or whether additional information 
is required.
2.	 If necessary, collect more information in a reasonable and thoughtful way.
3.	 Summarize the available data in a useful and informative manner.
4.	 Analyze the available data.
5.	 Draw conclusions, make decisions, and assess the risk of an incorrect decision.
These are the steps in the data analysis process. These steps will be considered in 
more detail in Section 1.3.
 1.2  
The Nature and Role of Variability
Statistical methods allow us to collect, describe, analyze, and draw conclusions from data. 
If we lived in a world where all measurements were identical for every individual, these 
tasks would be simple. Imagine a population consisting of all students at a particular uni-
versity. Suppose that every student was enrolled in the same number of courses, spent 
exactly the same amount of money on textbooks this semester, and favored increasing stu-
dent fees to support expanding library services. For this population, there is no variability 
in number of courses, amount spent on books, or student opinion on the fee increase. A 
researcher studying students from this population in order to draw conclusions about these 
three variables would have a particularly easy task. It would not matter how many students 
the researcher studied or how the students were selected. In fact, the researcher could col-
lect information on number of courses, amount spent on books, and opinion on the fee 
increase by just stopping the next student who happened to walk by the library. Because 
there is no variability in the population, this one individual would provide complete and 
accurate information about the population. The researcher could draw conclusions with 
no risk of error.
The situation just described is obviously unrealistic. Populations with no variability are 
rare. In fact, variability is almost universal. We need to understand variability to be able to 
collect, describe, analyze, and draw conclusions from data in a sensible way.
Examples 1.1 and 1.2 illustrate how describing and understanding variability are important.
Example 1.1 
If the Shoe Fits
The graphs in Figure 1.1 are examples of a type of graph called a histogram. (The con-
struction and interpretation of such graphs is discussed in Chapter 3.) Figure 1.1(a) 
shows the distribution of the heights of female basketball players who played at a par-
ticular university between 2005 and 2013. The height of each bar in the graph indicates 
how many players’ heights were in the corresponding interval. For example, 40 basketball 
players had heights between 72 inches and 74 inches, whereas only 2 players had heights 
between 66 inches and 68 inches. Figure 1.1(b) shows the distribution of heights for 
members of the women’s gymnastics team. Both histograms are based on the heights of 
100 women.
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
critically evaluate the work of others by providing you with the tools you need to make 
informed judgments.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4 
●  Chapter 1  The Role of Statistics and the Data Analysis Process
The ﬁrst histogram shows that the heights of female basketball players varied, with most 
heights falling between 68 inches and 76 inches. In the second histogram we see that the 
heights of female gymnasts also varied, with most heights in the range of 60 inches to 
72 inches. It is also clear that there is more variation in the heights of the gymnasts than 
in the heights of the basketball players, because the gymnast histogram spreads out more 
about its center than does the basketball histogram.
Now suppose that a tall woman (5 feet 11 inches) tells you she is looking for her sister 
who is practicing with her team at the gym. Would you direct her to where the basketball 
team is practicing or to where the gymnastics team is practicing? What reasoning would 
you use to decide? If you found a pair of size 6 shoes left in the locker room, would you 
ﬁrst try to return them by checking with members of the basketball team or the gymnastics 
team?
You probably answered that you would send the woman looking for her sister  
to the basketball practice and that you would try to return the shoes to a gymnastics team 
member. To reach these conclusions, you informally used statistical reasoning that com-
bined your own knowledge of the relationship between heights of siblings and between 
shoe size and height with the information about the distributions of heights presented in 
Figure 1.1. You might have reasoned that heights of siblings tend to be similar and that a 
height as great as 5 feet 11 inches, although not impossible, would be unusual for a gym-
nast. On the other hand, a height as tall as 5 feet 11 inches would be a common occurrence 
for a basketball player. 
Similarly, you might have reasoned that tall people tend to have bigger feet and that short 
people tend to have smaller feet. The shoes found were a small size, so it is more likely that 
they belong to a gymnast than to a basketball player, because small heights are usual for 
gymnasts and unusual for basketball players.	
■
Example 1.2 
Monitoring Water Quality
As part of its regular water quality monitoring efforts, an envi-
ronmental control board selects ﬁve water specimens from a par-
ticular well each day. The concentration of contaminants in parts 
per million (ppm) is measured for each of the ﬁve specimens, 
and then the average of the ﬁve measurements is calculated. The 
histogram in Figure 1.2 summarizes the average contamination 
values for 200 days.
Now suppose that a chemical spill has occurred at a manu-
facturing plant 1 mile from the well. It is not known whether a 
spill of this nature would contaminate groundwater in the area 
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
74
10
20
30
40
0
60
58
62
64
66
68
70
72
76
78
Height
Frequency
(a)
74
10
20
30
40
0
60
58
62
64
66
68
70
72
76
78
Height
Frequency
(b)
Figure  1.1
Histograms of heights (in inches) of 
female athletes:  
(a) 100 basketball players;  
(b) 100 gymnasts.
David Chasey/Photodisc/Getty Images
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 1.3   Statistics and the Data Analysis Process 
●  5
of the spill and, if so, whether a spill this distance from the well would affect the quality 
of well water.
One month after the spill, ﬁve water specimens are collected from the well, and the 
average contamination is 15.5 ppm. Considering the variation before the spill, would you 
interpret this as convincing evidence that the well water was affected by the spill? What 
if the calculated average was 17.4 ppm? 22.0 ppm? How is your reasoning related to the 
histogram in Figure 1.2?
18
10
40
20
30
0
11
10
12
13
14
15
16
17
19
Average contamination
Frequency
Before the spill, the average contaminant concentration varied from day to day. An aver-
age of 15.5 ppm would not have been an unusual value, so seeing an average of 15.5 ppm 
after the spill isn’t necessarily an indication that contamination has increased. On the other 
hand, an average as large as 17.4 ppm is less common, and an average as large as 22.0 ppm 
is not at all typical of the pre-spill values. In this case, we would probably conclude that the 
well contamination level has increased.
■
In these two examples, reaching a conclusion required an understanding of variability. 
Understanding variability allows us to distinguish between usual and unusual values. The 
ability to recognize unusual values in the presence of variability is an important aspect of 
most statistical procedures. It also enables us to quantify the chance of being incorrect 
when a conclusion is based on data. These concepts will be developed further in subse-
quent chapters.
Consider the data ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Figure  1.2
Average contamination 
concentration (in parts per million) 
measured each day for 200 days.
 1.3  
Statistics and the Data Analysis Process
Statistics involves collecting, summarizing, and analyzing data. All three tasks are critical. 
Without summarization and analysis, raw data are of little value. Even sophisticated 
analyses can’t produce meaningful information from data that were not collected in a 
sensible way.
Statistical studies are undertaken to answer questions about our world. Is a new 
ﬂu vaccine effective in preventing illness? Is the use of bicycle helmets on the rise? 
Are injuries that result from bicycle accidents less severe for riders who wear helmets 
than for those who do not? Do engineering students pay more for textbooks than 
psychology students? Data collection and analysis allow researchers to answer such 
questions.
The data analysis process can be viewed as a sequence of steps that lead from planning 
to data collection to making informed conclusions based on the resulting data. The process 
can be organized into six steps described in the following box.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6 
●  Chapter 1  The Role of Statistics and the Data Analysis Process
1.	 Understanding the nature of the problem. Effective data analysis 
requires an understanding of the research problem. We must know the 
goal of the research and what questions we hope to answer. It is important 
to have a clear direction before gathering data to ensure that we will be 
able to answer the questions of interest using the data collected.
2.	 Deciding what to measure and how to measure it. The next step in the pro-
cess is deciding what information is needed to answer the questions of interest. 
In some cases, the choice is obvious. For example, in a study of the relationship 
between the weight of a Division I football player and position played, you 
would need to collect data on player weight and position. In other cases the 
choice of information is not as straightforward. For example, in a study of the 
relationship between preferred learning style and intelligence, how would you 
de­ﬁne learning style and measure it? What measure of intelligence would you 
use? It is important to carefully de­ﬁne the variables to be studied and to develop 
appropriate methods for determining their values.
3.	 Data collection. The data collection step is crucial. The researcher must 
ﬁrst decide whether an existing data source is adequate or whether new data 
must be collected. If a decision is made to use existing data, it is important 
to understand how the data were collected and for what purpose, so that 
any resulting limitations are also fully understood. If new data are to be 
collected, a careful plan must be developed, because the type of analysis that 
is appropriate and the subsequent conclusions that can be drawn depend 
on how the data are collected.
4.	 Data summarization and preliminary analysis. After the data are collected, 
the next step is usually a preliminary analysis that includes summarizing the 
data graphically and numerically. This initial analysis provides insight into 
important characteristics of the data and can provide guidance in selecting 
appropriate methods for further analysis.
5.	 Formal data analysis. The data analysis step requires the researcher to 
select and apply statistical methods. Much of this textbook is devoted to 
methods that can be used to carry out this step.
6.	 Interpretation of results. Several questions should be addressed in this ﬁ­nal 
step. Some examples are: What can we learn from the data? What conclusions 
can be drawn from the analysis? How can our results guide future research? The 
interpretation step often leads to the formulation of new research questions. 
These new questions lead back to the ﬁrst step. In this way, good data analysis 
is often an iterative process.
The Data Analysis Process
To illustrate these steps, consider the following example. The admissions director at a 
large university might be interested in learning why some applicants who were accepted for 
the fall 2014 term failed to enroll at the university. The population of interest to the director 
consists of all accepted applicants who did not enroll in the fall 2014 term. Because this pop-
ulation is large and it may be dif­ﬁ­cult to contact all the individuals, the director might decide 
to collect data from only 300 selected students. These 300 students constitute a sample.
Population: The entire collection of individuals or objects about which 
information is desired is called the population of interest. 
Sample: A sample is a subset of the population, selected for study.
DEFINITION
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 1.3   Statistics and the Data Analysis Process 
●  7
Deciding how to select the 300 students and what data should be collected from each 
student are steps 2 and 3 in the data analysis process. Step 4 in the process involves 
organizing and summarizing data. Methods for organizing and summarizing data, such 
as the use of tables, graphs, or numerical summaries, make up the branch of statistics 
called descriptive statistics. The second major branch of statistics, inferential statistics, 
involves generalizing from a sample to the population from which it was selected. When 
we generalize in this way, we run the risk of an incorrect conclusion, because a conclusion 
about the population is based on incomplete information. An important aspect in the devel-
opment of inferential techniques involves quantifying the chance of an incorrect conclusion.
Descriptive statistics: The branch of statistics that includes methods for 
organizing and summarizing data. 
Inferential statistics: The branch of statistics that involves generalizing from a 
sample to the population from which the sample was selected and assessing 
the reliability of such generalizations.
DEFINITION
Example 1.3 illustrates the steps in the data analysis process.
Example 1.3 
The Benefits of Acting Out
A number of studies have reached the conclusion that stimulating mental activities can lead 
to improved memory and psychological wellness in older adults. The article “A Short-Term In-
tervention to Enhance Cognitive and Affective Functioning in Older Adults” (Journal of Aging and 
Health [2004]: 562–585) describes a study to investigate whether training in acting has similar 
benefits. Acting requires a person to consider the goals of the characters in the story, to re-
member lines of dialogue, to move on stage as scripted, and to do all of this at the same time. 
The researchers conducting the study wanted to see if participation in this type of complex 
multitasking would lead to an improvement in the ability to function independently. 
Participants in the study were assigned to one of three groups. One group took part in 
an acting class for 4 weeks. One group spent a similar amount of time in a class on visual 
arts. The third group was a comparison group (called the “no-treatment group”) that did 
not take either class. A total of 124 adults age 60 to 86 participated in the study.
At the beginning of the 4-week study period and again at the end of the 4-week study pe-
riod, each participant took several tests designed to measure problem-solving ability, memory 
span, self-esteem, and psychological well-being. After analyzing the data from this study, the 
researchers concluded that those in the acting group showed greater gains than both the visual 
arts group and the no-treatment group in both problem solving and psychological well-being. 
Several new areas of research were suggested in the discussion that followed the analysis. 
The researchers wondered whether the effect of studying writing or music would be similar 
to what was observed for acting and described plans to investigate this further. They also 
noted that the participants in this study were generally well educated and recommended 
study of a more diverse group before generalizing conclusions about the benefits of study-
ing acting to the larger population of all older adults.
This study illustrates the nature of the data analysis process. A clearly de­ﬁned research 
question and an appropriate choice of how to measure the variables of interest (the tests 
used to measure problem solving, memory span, self-esteem, and psychological well-being) 
preceded the data collection. Assuming that a reasonable method was used to collect the 
data (we will see how this can be evaluated in Chapter 2) and that appropriate methods of 
analysis were employed, the investigators reached the conclusion that the study of acting 
showed promise. However, they recognized the limitations of the study, which in turn led 
to plans for further research. As is often the case, the data analysis cycle led to new research 
questions, and the process began again.	
■
Understand the context ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8 
●  Chapter 1  The Role of Statistics and the Data Analysis Process
owners is undertaken. Describe the population and 
sample for this problem.
1.8	 A consumer group conducts crash tests of new 
model cars. To determine the severity of damage to 
2014 Toyota Camrys resulting from a 10-mph crash 
into a concrete wall, the research group tests six 
cars of this type and assesses the amount of dam-
age. Describe the population and sample for this 
problem.
1.9	 A building contractor has a chance to buy an odd lot 
of 5000 used bricks at an auction. She is interested in 
determining the proportion of bricks in the lot that 
are cracked and therefore unusable for her current 
project, but she does not have enough time to inspect 
all 5000 bricks. Instead, she checks 100 bricks to 
determine whether each is cracked. Describe the 
population and sample for this problem.
1.10	 The article “Brain Shunt Tested to Treat Alzheimer’s” 
(San Francisco Chronicle, October 23, 2002) summa-
rizes the findings of a study that appeared in the 
journal Neurology. Doctors at Stanford Medical 
Center were interested in determining whether 
a new surgical approach to treating Alzheimer’s 
disease results in improved memory functioning. 
The surgical procedure involves implanting a thin 
tube, called a shunt, which is designed to drain 
toxins from the fluid-filled space that cushions the 
brain. Eleven patients had shunts implanted and 
were followed for a year, receiving quarterly tests of 
memory function. Another sample of Alzheimer’s 
patients was used as a comparison group. Those in 
the comparison group received the standard care 
for Alzheimer’s disease. After analyzing the data 
from this study, the investigators concluded that the 
“results suggested the treated patients essentially 
held their own in the cognitive tests while the pa-
tients in the control group steadily declined. How-
ever, the study was too small to produce conclusive 
statistical evidence.”
a.	 What were the researchers trying to learn? What 
questions motivated their research?
b.	Do you think that the study was conducted in 
a reasonable way? What additional information 
would you want in order to evaluate this study? 
(Hint: See Example 1.3.)
1.11	 In a study of whether taking a garlic supplement 
reduces the risk of getting a cold, participants were 
assigned to either a garlic supplement group or 
to a group that did not take a garlic supplement 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
1.1	 Give a brief deﬁ­ni­tion of the terms descriptive statistics 
and inferential statistics.
1.2	 Give a brief deﬁ­ni­tion of the terms population and 
sample.
1.3	 The following conclusion from a study appeared 
in the article “Smartphone Nation” (AARP Bulletin, 
September 2009): “If you love your smart phone, 
you are not alone. Half of all boomers sleep with 
their cell phone within arm’s length. Two of three 
people age 50 to 64 use a cell phone to take 
photos, according to a 2010 Pew Research Center 
report.” Are the given proportions (half and two of 
three) population values, or were they calculated 
from a sample? 
1.4	 Based on a study of 2121 children between the 
ages of 1 and 4, researchers at the Medical College 
of Wisconsin concluded that there was an associa-
tion between iron de­ﬁ­ciency and the length of time 
that a child is bottle-fed (Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, 
November 26, 2005). Describe the sample and the 
population of interest for this study.
1.5	 The student senate at a university with 15,000 stu-
dents is interested in the proportion of students who 
favor a change in the grading system to allow for plus 
and minus grades (e.g., B1, B, B2, rather than just 
B). Two hundred students are interviewed to deter-
mine their attitude toward this proposed change. 
a.	 What is the population of interest? 
b.	What group of students constitutes the sample in 
this problem?
1.6	 The increasing popularity of online shopping has 
many consumers using Internet access at work to 
browse and shop online. In fact, the Monday after 
Thanksgiving has been nicknamed “Cyber Monday” 
because of the large increase in online purchases 
that occurs on that day. Data from a large-scale 
survey by a market research firm (Detroit Free Press, 
November 26, 2005) was used to compute estimates 
of the percent of men and women who shop online 
while at work. The resulting estimates probably won’t 
make most employers happy—42% of the men and 
32% of the women in the sample were shopping 
online at work!
Are the estimates given computed using data from 
a sample or for the entire population? 
1.7	 The supervisors of a rural county are interested in the 
proportion of property owners who support the con-
struction of a sewer system. Because it is too costly 
to contact all 7000 property owners, a survey of 500 
EXERCISES 1.1 - 1.11
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 1.4   Types of Data and Some Simple Graphical Displays 
●  9
(“Garlic for the Common Cold,” Cochrane Database  
of Systematic Reviews, 2009). Based on the study, it  
was concluded that the proportion of people  
taking a garlic supplement who get a cold is lower 
than the proportion of those not taking a garlic 
supplement who get a cold.
a.	 What were the researchers trying to learn? What 
questions motivated their research?
b.	Do you think that the study was conducted in 
a reasonable way? What additional information 
would you want in order to evaluate this study?
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
 1.4  
Types of Data and Some Simple Graphical Displays
Every discipline has its own particular way of using common words, and statistics is no 
exception. You will recognize some of the terminology from previous math and science 
courses, but much of the language of statistics will be new to you. In this section, you will 
learn some of the terminology used to describe data.
Types of Data
The individuals or objects in any particular population typically possess many character-
istics that might be studied. Consider a group of students currently enrolled in a statistics 
course at a particular college. One characteristic of the students in the population is the 
brand of calculator owned (Casio, Hewlett-Packard, Sharp, Texas Instruments, and so on). 
Another characteristic is the number of textbooks purchased that semester, and yet another 
is the distance from the college to each student’s permanent residence. A variable is any 
characteristic whose value may change from one individual or object to another. For ex-
ample, calculator brand is a variable, and so are number of textbooks purchased and distance to 
the college. Data result from making observations either on a single variable or simultane-
ously on two or more variables.
Variable: A characteristic whose value may change from one observation to 
another.
Data: A collection of observations on one or more variables.
DEFINITION
A univariate data set consists of observations on a single variable made on individu-
als in a sample or population. There are two types of univariate data sets: categorical and 
numerical. In the previous example, calculator brand is a categorical variable, because each 
student’s response to the query, “What brand of calculator do you own?” is a category. The 
collection of responses from all these students forms a categorical data set. The other two 
variables, number of textbooks purchased and distance to the college, are both numerical in 
nature. Determining the value of such a numerical variable (by counting or measuring) for 
each student results in a numerical data set.
Univariate data set: A data set consisting of observations on a single 
characteristic is a univariate data set.
Categorical data set: A univariate data set is categorical (or qualitative) if the 
individual observations are categorical responses. 
Numerical data set: A univariate data set is numerical (or quantitative) if each 
observation is a number.
DEFINITION
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10 
●  Chapter 1  The Role of Statistics and the Data Analysis Process
Example 1.4 
College Choice Do-Over?
The Higher Education Research Institute at UCLA surveys over 20,000 college seniors each 
year. One question on the 2008 survey asked seniors the following question: If you could 
make your college choice over, would you still choose to enroll at your current college? 
Possible responses were definitely yes (DY), probably yes (PY), probably no (PN), and defi-
nitely no (DN). Responses for 20 students were:
DY
PN
DN
DY
PY
PY
PN
PY
PY
DY
DY
PY
DY
DY
PY
PY
DY
DY
PN
DY
(These data are just a small subset of the data from the survey. For a description of the full 
data set, see Exercise 1.18). Because the response to the question about college choice is 
categorical, this is a univariate categorical data set.
■
In Example 1.4, the data set consisted of observations on a single variable (college choice 
response), so this is a univariate data set. In some studies, attention focuses simultane-
ously on two different characteristics. For example, both height (in inches) and weight (in 
pounds) might be recorded for each individual in a group. The resulting data set consists 
of pairs of numbers, such as (68, 146). This is called a bivariate data set. Multivariate 
data result from obtaining a category or value for each of two or more attributes (so bi-
variate data are a special case of multivariate data). For example, multivariate data would 
result from determining height, weight, pulse rate, and systolic blood pressure for each 
individual in a group. Example 1.5 illustrates a bivariate data set.
Example 1.5 
How Safe Are College Campuses?
  Consider the accompanying data on violent crime on college campuses in Florida dur-
ing 2012. http://www.fbi.gov/
University/College
Student Enrollment
Number of Violent Crimes
Reported in 2012
Edison State College
17,107
4
Florida A&M University
13,204
14
Florida Atlantic University
25,246
4
Florida Gulf Coast University
12,851
3
Florida International University
44,616
9
Florida State University
41,067
31
New College of Florida
845
1
Pensacola State College
11,531
3
Santa Fe College
15,493
1
Tallahassee Community College
15,090
2
University of Central Florida
58,465
26
University of Florida
49,589
18
University of North Florida
16,198
2
University of South Florida
4,310
2
University of West Florida
11,982
2
Consider the data ❭
Here two variables—student enrollment and number of violent crimes reported—were recorded 
for each of the 15 schools. Because this data set consists of values of two variables for each 
school, it is a bivariate data set. Each of the two variables considered here is numerical 
(rather than categorical).
■
Understand the context ❭
Consider the context ❭
Understand the context ❭
 Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 1.4   Types of Data and Some Simple Graphical Displays 
●  11
Two Types of Numerical Data
There are two different types of numerical data: discrete and continuous. Consider a num-
ber line (Figure 1.3) for locating values of the numerical variable being studied. Each possi-
ble number (2, 3.125, 8.12976, etc.) corresponds to exactly one point on the number line. 
Suppose that the variable of interest is the number of courses in which a student is en-
rolled. If no student is enrolled in more than eight courses, the possible values are 1, 2, 
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. These values are iden­ti­ﬁed in Figure 1.4(a) by the dots at the points 
marked 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. These possible values are isolated from one another on 
the number line. We can place an interval around any possible value that is small enough 
that no other possible value is included in the interval. On the other hand, the line seg-
ment in Figure 1.4(b) iden­ti­ﬁes a plausible set of possible values for the time (in seconds) 
it takes for the first kernel in a bag of microwave popcorn to pop. Here the possible values 
make up an entire interval on the number line, and no possible value is isolated from other 
possible values.
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
0
2
4
6
8
0
10
20
30
40
(a)
(b)
Figure  1.3
A number line.
Figure  1.4
Possible values of a variable:  
(a) number of courses;  
(b) popping time.
Discrete numerical variable: A numerical variable results in discrete data if the 
possible values of the variable correspond to isolated points on the number line. 
Continuous numerical variable: A numerical variable results in continuous 
data if the set of possible values forms an entire interval on the number line.
DEFINITION
Discrete data usually arise when observations are determined by counting (for example, the 
number of roommates a student has or the number of petals on a ﬂower).
Example 1.6 
Do U Txt?
  The number of text messages sent on a particular day is recorded for each of 12 students. 
The resulting data set is
23
0
14
13
15
0
60
82
0
40
41
22
Possible values for the variable number of text messages sent are 0, 1, 2, 3. . . . These are 
isolated points on the number line, so this data set consists of discrete numerical data.
Suppose that instead of the number of text messages sent, the time spent texting 
had been recorded. Even though time spent may have been reported rounded to the nearest 
minute, the actual time spent could have been 6 minutes, 6.2 minutes, 6.28 minutes, or 
any other value in an entire interval. So, recording values of time spent texting would result 
in continuous data.
■
In general, data are continuous when observations involve making measurements, as 
opposed to counting. In practice, measuring instruments do not have in­ﬁ­nite accuracy, so 
possible measured values, strictly speaking, do not form a continuum on the number line. 
However, any number in the continuum could be a value of the variable. The distinction 
between discrete and continuous data will be important in our discussion of probability 
models in Chapter 6.
 Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12 
●  Chapter 1  The Role of Statistics and the Data Analysis Process
Frequency Distributions and Bar Charts for Categorical Data
An appropriate graphical or tabular display of data can be an effective way to summarize 
and communicate information. When the data set is categorical, a common way to present 
the data is in the form of a table, called a frequency distribution.
Frequency distribution for categorical data: A table that displays the possible 
categories along with the associated frequencies and/or relative frequencies. 
Frequency: The frequency for a particu­lar category is the number of times the 
category appears in the data set. 
Relative frequency: The relative frequency for a particular category is 
calculated as
relative frequency 5
frequency
number of obervations in the data set
The relative frequency for a particular category is the proporton of the observa-
tions that belong to that category. 
Relative frequency distribution: A frequency distribution that includes relative 
frequencies.
DEFINITION
Example 1.7 
Motorcycle Helmets—Can You See Those Ears?
The U.S. Department of Transportation establishes standards for motorcycle helmets. To 
ensure a certain degree of safety, helmets should reach the bottom of the motorcyclist’s ears. 
The report “Motorcycle Helmet Use in 2005—Overall Results” (National Highway Trafﬁc Safety 
Administration, Au­gust 2005) summarized data collected in June of 2005 by observing 1700 
motorcyclists nationwide at selected roadway locations. Each time a motorcyclist passed by, 
the observer noted whether the rider was wearing no helmet, a noncompliant helmet, or a 
compliant helmet. Using the coding
NH 5 noncompliant helmet
	 CH 5 compliant helmet
	 N 5 no helmet
a few of the observations were
CH
N
CH
NH
N
CH
CH
CH
N
N
There were also 1690 additional observations, which we didn’t reproduce here. In total, 
there were 731 riders who wore no helmet, 153 who wore a noncompliant helmet, and 816 
who wore a compliant helmet.
The corresponding frequency distribution is given in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1  Frequency Distribution for Helmet Use
Helmet Use Category 
Frequency 
Relative Frequency
No helmet 
   731
0.430
Noncompliant helmet 
  153
0.090 
Compliant helmet 
  816
0.480
1700
1.000 
 
 
 
Total number of 
observations
731/1700
153/1700
Should total 1, but in 
some cases may be 
slightly off due to 
rounding
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Do the work ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 1.4   Types of Data and Some Simple Graphical Displays 
●  13
From the frequency distribution, we can see that a large percentage of riders (43%) were 
not wearing a helmet, but most of those who wore a helmet were wearing one that met the 
Department of Transportation safety standard.
■
A frequency distribution displays a data set in a table. It is also common to display 
categorical data graphically. A bar chart is one of the most widely used types of graphical 
displays for categorical data.
Bar Charts
A bar chart is a graph of a frequency distribution of categorical data. Each category in the 
frequency distribution is represented by a bar or rectangle, and the picture is constructed 
in such a way that the area of each bar is proportional to the correspond­ing frequency or 
relative frequency.
When to Use  Categorical data.
How to Construct
1.	 Draw a horizontal axis, and write the category names or labels below the 
line at regularly spaced intervals.
2.	 Draw a vertical axis, and label the scale using either frequency or relative 
frequency.
3.	 Place a rectangular bar above each category label. The height is determined 
by the category’s frequency or relative frequency, and all bars should have 
the same width. With the same width, both the height and the area of the 
bar are proportional to frequency and relative frequency.
What to Look For
●
●Frequently and infrequently occurring categories.
Bar Charts
Example 1.8 
Revisiting Motorcycle Helmets
Example 1.7 used data on helmet use from a sample of 1700 motorcyclists to construct a 
frequency distribution (Table 1.1). Figure 1.5 shows the bar chart corre­sponding to this 
frequency distribution.
No helmet
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Frequency
Noncompliant helmet
Helmet Use Category
Compliant helmet
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
Figure  1.5
Bar chart of helmet use.
Consider the data ❭
Step-by-step technology  
instructions available  
online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14 
●  Chapter 1  The Role of Statistics and the Data Analysis Process
The bar chart provides a visual representation of the information in the frequency distribu-
tion. From the bar chart, it is easy to see that the compliant helmet use category occurred 
most often in the data set. The bar for compliant helmets is about ﬁve times as tall (and 
therefore has ﬁve times the area) as the bar for noncompliant helmets because approxi-
mately ﬁve times as many motorcyclists wore compliant helmets than wore noncompliant 
helmets.	
■
Dotplots for Numerical Data
A dotplot is a simple way to display numerical data when the data set is reasonably small. 
Each observation is represented by a dot above the location corresponding to its value on a 
horizontal measurement scale. When a value occurs more than once, there is a dot for each 
occurrence and these dots are stacked vertically.
When to Use  Small numerical data sets.
How to Construct
1.	 Draw a horizontal line and mark it with an appropriate measurement scale.
2.	 Locate each value in the data set along the measurement scale, and repre-
sent it by a dot. If there are two or more observations with the same value, 
stack the dots vertically.
What to Look for
Dotplots convey information about:
●
●A representative or typical value in the data set.
●
●The extent to which the data values spread out.
●
●The nature of the distribution of values along the number line.
●
●The presence of unusual values in the data set.
Dotplots
Example 1.9 
Making It to Graduation . . .
 The article “Keeping Score When It Counts: Graduation Success and Academic Progress Rates 
for the 2013 NCAA Men’s Division I Basketball Tournament Teams” (The Institute for Diversity and 
Ethics in Sport, University of Central Florida, March 2013) compared graduation rates of basket-
ball players to those of all student athletes for the universities and colleges that sent teams 
to the 2013 Division I playoffs. The graduation rates in the accompanying table represent 
the percentage of athletes who started college in 2006 who had graduated by the end of 
2012. Also shown are the differences between the graduation rate for all student athletes 
and the graduation rate for basketball student athletes. 
Minitab, a computer software package for statistical analysis, was used to construct a 
dotplot of the graduation rates for basketball players (see Figure 1.6). From this dotplot, 
we see that basketball graduation rates varied a great deal from school to school, ranging 
from a low of 17% to a high of 100%. 
We can also see that the graduation rates seem to cluster in several groups, denoted by the 
colored ovals that have been added to the dotplot. There are quite a few schools with gradu-
ation rates of 100% (excellent!) and another group of 17 schools with graduation rates that 
are higher than most. The majority of schools are in the large cluster with graduation rates 
from about 40% to about 76%. And then there is that bottom group of four schools with 
embarrassingly low graduation rates for basketball players: University of Florida (17%), 
North Carolina A&T (25%), Southern University (27%), and New Mexico State (29%).
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Interpret the results ❭
 Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 1.4   Types of Data and Some Simple Graphical Displays 
●  15
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Graduation rates for basketball players (%)
Figure  1.6
Minitab dotplot of graduation rates 
for basketball players.
Graduation Rates (%)
Basketball
All  
Athletes
Difference
(All – BB)
Basketball
All  
Athletes
Difference
(All – BB)
Basketball
All  
Athletes
Difference
(All – BB)
100
92
28
29
70
41
75
80
5
79
76
23
25
55
30
50
81
31
100
99
21
73
77
4
87
93
6
80
83
3
75
68
27
64
84
20
53
82
29
50
77
27
54
83
29
91
94
3
64
87
23
56
76
20
100
97
23
92
92
0
67
84
17
100
98
22
62
73
11
73
80
7
73
73
0
44
83
39
92
76
216
80
94
14
27
51
24
50
75
25
90
96
6
58
87
29
91
88
23
100
98
22
43
78
35
100
99
21
43
80
37
45
85
40
70
72
2
60
81
21
60
75
15
85
80
25
50
80
30
57
73
16
54
78
24
60
83
23
82
82
0
100
84
216
58
77
19
54
68
14
40
83
43
64
91
27
70
84
14
80
94
14
58
74
16
50
80
30
100
94
26
85
83
22
56
78
22
73
80
7
87
91
4
17
82
65
100
79
221
89
85
24
100
89
211
90
83
27
83
78
25
100
85
215
Figure 1.7 shows two dotplots of graduation rates—one for basketball players and one 
for all student athletes. There are some striking differences that are easy to see when the 
data is displayed in this way. The graduation rates for all student athletes tend to be higher 
and to vary less from school to school than the graduation rates for basketball players.
10
20
30
Basketball
All Athletes
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Graduation rates (%)
Figure  1.7
Minitab dotplot of graduation rates 
for basketball players and for all 
athletes.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16 
●  Chapter 1  The Role of Statistics and the Data Analysis Process
The dotplots in Figure 1.7 are informative, but we can do even better. The data given 
here are an example of paired data. Each basketball graduation rate is paired with a gradu-
ation rate for all student athletes from the same school. When data are paired in this way, 
it is usually more informative to look at differences—in this case, the difference between 
the graduation rate for all student athletes and for basketball players for each school. These 
differences (all 2 basketball) are also shown in the data table. 
Figure 1.8 gives a dotplot of the differences. Notice that three differences are equal to 0. 
This corresponds to schools for which the basketball graduation rate is equal to the gradu-
ation rate of all student athletes. There are 20 schools for which the difference is negative. 
Negative differences correspond to schools that have a graduation rate for basketball play-
ers that is higher than the graduation rate for all student athletes. 
The most interesting features of the difference dotplot are the very large number of posi-
tive differences and the wide spread. Positive differences correspond to schools that have a 
lower graduation rate for basketball players. There is a lot of variability in the graduation 
rate difference from school to school, and one school has a difference that is noticeably 
higher than the rest. (In case you were wondering, this school is the University of Florida 
with a difference of 65%.)
20
30
40
50
60
70
10
210
220
230
0
Defference in graduation rates (all athletes–basketball players)
	
■
Interpret the results ❭
Figure  1.8
Dotplot of graduation rate 
differences (all athletes 2 basketball 
players).
EXERCISES 1.12 - 1.31
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
1.12	 Classify each of the following variables as either cat-
egorical or numerical. For those that are numerical, 
determine whether they are discrete or continuous.
a.	 Number of students in a class of 35 who turn in a 
term paper before the due date 
b.	Gender of the next baby born at a particular hospital
c.	 Amount of ﬂuid (in ounces) dispensed by a 
machine used to ﬁll bottles with soda pop
d.	Thickness of the gelatin coating of a vitamin E capsule
e.	 Birth order clas­si­ﬁ­ca­tion (only child, ﬁrstborn, 
middle child, lastborn) of a math major 
1.13	 Classify each of the following variables as either cat-
egorical or numerical. For those that are numerical, 
determine whether they are discrete or continuous.
a.	 Brand of computer purchased by a customer
b.	State of birth for someone born in the United States
c.	 Price of a textbook 
d.	Concentration of a contaminant (micrograms per 
cubic centimeter) in a water sample 
e.	 Zip code (Think carefully about this one.) 
f.	 Actual weight of coffee in a 1-pound can 
1.14	 For the following numerical variables, state whether 
each is discrete or continuous.
a.	 The number of in­suf­ﬁ­cient-funds checks received 
by a grocery store during a given month 
b.	The amount by which a 1-pound package of 
ground beef decreases in weight (because of mois-
ture loss) before purchase 
c.	 The number of New York Yankees during a given 
year who will not play for the Yankees the next 
year 
d.	The number of students in a class of 35 who have 
purchased a used copy of the textbook 
1.15	 For the following numerical variables, state whether 
each is discrete or continuous.
a.	 The length of a 1-year-old rattlesnake 
b.	The altitude of a location in California selected 
randomly by throwing a dart at a map of the  
state
c.	 The distance from the left edge at which a 12-inch 
plastic ruler snaps when bent suf­ﬁ­ciently to break
d.	The price per gallon paid by the next customer to 
buy gas at a particular station 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 1.4   Types of Data and Some Simple Graphical Displays 
●  17
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
1.16	 For each of the following situations, give a set of pos-
sible data values that might arise from making the  
observations described.
a.	 The manufacturer for each of the next 10 automo-
biles to pass through a given intersection is noted.
b.	The grade point average for each of the 15 seniors 
in a statistics class is determined.
c.	 The number of gas pumps in use at each of 20 gas 
stations at a particular time is determined.
d.	The actual net weight of each of 12 bags of fertil-
izer having a labeled weight of 50 pounds is 
determined.
e.	 Fifteen different radio stations are monitored 
during a 1-hour period, and the amount of time 
devoted to commercials is determined for each.
1.17	 In a survey of 100 people who had recently 
purchased motorcycles, data on the following 
variables were recorded:
	
	 Gender of purchaser
	
	 Brand of motorcycle purchased
	
	 Number of previous motorcycles owned by purchaser
	
	 Telephone area code of purchaser
	
	 Weight of motorcycle as equipped at purchase
a.	 Which of these variables are categorical?
b.	Which of these variables are discrete numerical?
c.	 Which type of graphical display would be an ap-
propriate choice for summarizing the gender data, 
a bar chart or a dotplot? 
d.	Which type of graphical display would be an 
appropriate choice for summarizing the weight 
data, a bar chart or a dotplot? 
1.18	 The report “Findings from the 2008 Administra-
tion of the College Senior Survey” (Higher Education 
Research Institute, UCLA, June 2009) gave the following 
relative frequency distribution summarizing student 
responses to the question “If you could make your 
college choice over, would you still choose to enroll 
at your current college?”
Response
Relative Frequency
Definitely yes
0.447
Probably yes
0.373
Probably no
0.134
Definitely no
0.046
a.	 Use this information to construct a bar chart for 
the response data.
b.	If you were going to use the response data and the 
bar chart from Part (a) as the basis for an article 
for your student paper, what would be a good 
headline for your article?
1.19	
 The article “Feasting on Protein” (AARP Bulletin, 
September 2009) gave the cost (in cents per gram) of 
protein for 19 common food sources of protein.
Food
Cost
Food
Cost
Chicken
1.8
Yogurt
5.0
Salmon
5.8
Milk
2.5
Turkey
1.5
Peas
5.2
Soybeans
3.1
Tofu
6.9
Roast beef
2.7
Cheddar cheese
3.6
Cottage cheese
3.1
Nuts
5.2
Ground beef
2.3
Eggs
5.7
Ham
2.1
Peanut butter
1.8
Lentils
3.3
Ice cream
5.3
Beans
2.9
a.	 Construct a dotplot of the cost data. (Hint: See 
Example 1.9.)
b.	Locate the cost for meat and poultry items in 
your dotplot and highlight them in a different 
color. Based on the dotplot, do meat and poultry 
items appear to be a good value? That is, do they 
appear to be relatively low cost compared to other 
sources of protein?
1.20	
 Box Office Mojo (www.boxofficemojo.com) tracks 
movie ticket sales. Ticket sales (in millions of dollars) 
for each of the top 20 movies in 2007 and 2008 are 
shown in the accompanying table.
Movie (2007)
2007 Sales (millions of dollars)
Spider-Man 3
336.5
Shrek the Third
322.7
Transformers
319.2
Pirates of the Caribbean: At 
World’s End
309.4
Harry Potter and the Order of 
the Phoenix
292.0
I Am Legend
256.4
The Bourne Ultimatum
227.5
National Treasure: Book 
of Secrets
220.0
Alvin and the Chipmunks
217.3
300
210.6
Ratatouille
206.4
The Simpsons Movie
183.1
Wild Hogs
168.3
Knocked Up
148.8
Juno
143.5
Rush Hour 3
140.1
Live Free or Die Hard
134.5
continued
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

18 
●  Chapter 1  The Role of Statistics and the Data Analysis Process
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Movie (2007)
2007 Sales (millions of dollars)
Fantastic Four: Rise of the 
Silver Surfer
131.9
American Gangster
130.2
Enchanted
127.8
Movie (2008)
2008 Sales (millions of dollars)
The Dark Knight
533.3
Iron Man
318.4
Indiana Jones and the 
Kingdom of the Crystal Skull
317.1
Hancock
227.9
WALL-E
223.8
Kung Fu Panda
215.4
Twilight
192.8
Madagascar: Escape 2 Africa
180.0
Quantum of Solace
168.4
Dr. Suess’ Horton Hears a Who!
154.5
Sex and the City
152.6
Gran Torino
148.1
Mamma Mia!
144.1
Marley and Me
143.2
The Chronicles of Narnia: 
Prince Caspian
141.6
Slumdog Millionaire
141.3
The Incredible Hulk
134.8
Wanted
134.5
Get Smart
130.3
The Curious Case of Benjamin 
Button
127.5
a.	 Construct a dotplot of the 2008 ticket sales data. 
Comment on any interesting features of the 
dotplot. (Hint: See “What to Look For” in the 
Dotplots box on page 14.)
b.	Construct a dotplot of the 2007 ticket sales data. 
Comment on any interesting features of the 
dotplot. 
c. In what ways are the distributions of the 2007 and 
2008 ticket sales observations similar? In what 
ways are they different?
1.21	
 About 38,000 students attend Grant MacEwan 
College in Edmonton, Canada. In 2004, the college 
surveyed non-returning students to find out why 
they did not complete their degree (Grant MacEwan 
College Early Leaver Survey Report, 2004). Sixty-three 
students gave a personal (rather than an academic) 
reason for leaving. The accompanying frequency 
distribution summarizes the primary reason for 
leaving for these 63 students.
Primary Reason for Leaving
Frequency
Financial 
19
Health
12
Employment
  8
Family issues
  6
Wanted to take a break
  4
Moving
  2
Travel
  2
Other personal reasons
10
a. Summarize the reason for leaving data using a bar 
chart.
b. Write a few sentences commenting on the most 
common reasons for leaving.
1.22	 Figure EX-1.22 is a graph similar to one that 
­appeared in USA Today (June 29, 2009). This graph is 
meant to be a bar graph of responses to the question 
shown in the graph.
a.	 Is response to the question a categorical or nu-
merical variable?
b.	Explain why a bar chart rather than a dotplot was 
used to display the response data.
c. 	There must have been an error made in construct-
ing this graph. How can you tell that the graph is 
not a correct representation of the response data?
Figure EX-1.22
Source: Bank of America Consumer Purchasing  and Savings
Habits survey of 1,000 adults 18 and older. Margin of error 
±4 percentage points. 
Put it in 
general 
savings
Pay off 
credit 
card debt
Put it in 
children’s 
education 
fund
Use it for 
health 
care 
expenses
Put it 
toward 
vacation
48%
27%
10%
10%
If you were given 
$1,000, what
would you do?
12%
Source: USA Today. June 29, 2009.
1.23	
 The online article “Social Networks: Facebook Takes 
Over Top Spot, Twitter Climbs” (Compete.com, February 9, 
2009) included the accompanying data on number of 
unique visitors and total number of visits for January 
2009 for the top 25 online social network sites. The data 
on total visits and unique visitors were used to compute 
the values in the final column of the data table, in which
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 1.4   Types of Data and Some Simple Graphical Displays 
●  19
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
visits per unique visitor 5
total visits
number of unique visitors
0
Total visits
1,200,000,000
1,000,000,000
800,000,000
600,000,000
400,000,000
200,000,000
Figure EX-1.23a
a.	 A dotplot of the total visits data is shown in 
Figure EX-1.23a. What are the most obvious 
features of the dotplot? What does it tell you 
about the online social networking sites?
b.	A dotplot for the number of unique visitors is 
shown in Figure EX-1.23b. In what way is this 
dotplot different from the dotplot for total visits in 
Part (a)? What does this tell you about the online 
social networking sites?
c.	 A dotplot for the visits per unique visitor data is 
shown in Figure EX-1.23c. What new information 
about the online social networks is provided by 
this dotplot?
1.24	 Heal the Bay is an environmental organization that 
releases an annual beach report card based on water 
quality (Heal the Bay Beach Report Card, May 2009). The 
2009 ratings for 14 beaches in San Francisco County 
during wet weather were: 
A1   C   B   A   A1   A1   A   A1   B   D   C   D   F   F
a.	 Would it be appropriate to display the ratings data 
using a dotplot? Explain why or why not.
Figure EX-1.23b
Figure EX-1.23c
0
Unique visitors
70,000,000
60,000,000
50,000,000
40,000,000
30,000,000
20,000,000
10,000,000
0
Visits per unique visitor
20
15
10
5
Site
Unique 
Visitors
Total Visits
Visits per 
Unique 
Visitor
facebook.com
68,557,534 
1,191,373,339 
17.3777
myspace.com
58,555,800 
   810,153,536 
13.8356
twitter.com
  5,979,052 
    54,218,731 
	 9.0681
fixter.com
  7,645,423 
   53,389,974 
	 6.9833
linkedin.com
11,274,160 
	 42,744,438 
	 3.7914
tagged.com
  4,448,915 
	 39,630,927 
	 8.9080
classmates.com
17,296,524 
	 35,219,210 
	 2.0362
myyearbook.com
  3,312,898 
	 33,121,821 
	 9.9978
livejournal.com
  4,720,720 
	 25,221,354 
	 5.3427
imeem.com
  9,047,491 
	 22,993,608 
	 2.5414
reunion.com
13,704,990 
	 20,278,100 
	 1.4796
ning.com
  5,673,549 
	 19,511,682 
	 3.4391
blackplanet.com
  1,530,329 
	 10,173,342 
	 6.6478
bebo.com
  2,997,929 
	 9,849,137 
	 3.2853
hi5.com
  2,398,323 
	 9,416,265 
	 3.9262
yuku.com
  1,317,551 
	 9,358,966 
	 7.1033
cafemom.com
  1,647,336 
	 8,586,261 
	 5.2122
friendster.com
  1,568,439 
	 7,279,050 
	 4.6410
xanga.com
  1,831,376 
	 7,009,577 
	 3.8275
continued
Site
Unique 
Visitors
Total Visits
Visits per 
Unique 
Visitor
360.yahoo.com
  1,499,057 
	 5,199,702 
	 3.4686
orkut.com
     494,464
	 5,081,235 
10.2762
urbanchat.com
     329,041 
	 2,961,250 
	 8.9996
fubar.com
   452,090
	 2,170,315 
	 4.8006
asiantown.net
     81,245 
	 1,118,245 
13.7639
tickle.com
     96,155 
	 109,492 
	 1.1387
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

20 
●  Chapter 1  The Role of Statistics and the Data Analysis Process
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
b.	Summarize the wet weather ratings by 
constructing a relative frequency distribution and 
a bar chart.
c.	 The dry weather ratings for these same beaches 
were:
A   B   B   A1   A   F   A   A   A   A   A   A   B   A
	
Construct a bar graph for the dry weather ratings.
d.	Do the bar graphs from Parts (b) and (c) support 
the statement that beach water quality tends to be 
better in dry weather conditions? Explain.
1.25	
 The article “Going Wireless” (AARP Bulletin, June 2009) 
reported the estimated percentage of households 
with only wireless phone service (no landline) for the 
50 states and the District of Columbia. In the accom-
panying data table, each state was also classified into 
one of three geographical regions—West (W), Middle 
states (M), and East (E).
Wireless %
Region
State
13.9
M
AL
11.7
W
AK
18.9
W
AZ
22.6
M
AR
  9.0
W
CA
16.7
W
CO
  5.6
E
CN
  5.7
E
DE
20.0
E
DC
16.8
E
FL
16.5
E
GA
  8.0
W
HI
22.1
W
ID
16.5
M
IL
13.8
M
IN
22.2
M
IA
16.8
M
KA
21.4
M
KY
15.0
M
LA
13.4
E
ME
10.8
E
MD
  9.3
E
MA
16.3
M
MI
Wireless %
Region
State
17.4
M
MN
19.1
M
MS
  9.9
M
MO
  9.2
W
MT
23.2
M
NE
10.8
W
NV
16.9
M
ND
11.6
E
NH
  8.0
E
NJ
21.1
W
NM
11.4
E
NY
16.3
E
NC
14.0
E
OH
23.2
M
OK
17.7
W
OR
10.8
E
PA
  7.9
E
RI
20.6
E
SC
  6.4
M
SD
20.3
M
TN
20.9
M
TX
25.5
W
UT
10.8
E
VA
  5.1
E
VT
16.3
W
WA
11.6
E
WV
15.2
M
WI
11.4
W
WY
a.	 Display the data graphically in a way that makes it 
possible to compare wireless percent for the three 
geographical regions.
b.	Does the graphical display in Part  (a) reveal any 
striking differences in wireless percent for the 
three geographical regions or are the distributions 
of wireless percent observations similar for the 
three regions?
1.26	
 Example 1.5 gave the accompanying data on 
violent crime on college campuses in Florida during 
2012 (from the FBI web site):
continued
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 1.4   Types of Data and Some Simple Graphical Displays 
●  21
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
University/College
Student 
Enrollment
Number of 
Violent Crimes
Reported in 2012
Edison State College
 17,107
  4
Florida A&M University
13,204
14
Florida Atlantic University
25,246
  4
Florida Gulf Coast 
University
12,851
  3
Florida International 
University
44,616
  9
Florida State University
41,067
31
New College of Florida
   845
  1
Pensacola State College
11,531
  3
Santa Fe College
15,493
  1
Tallahassee Community 
College
15,090
  2
University of Central Florida
58,465
26
University of Florida
49,589
18
University of North Florida
16,198
  2
University of South Florida
  4,310
  2
University of West Florida
11,982
  2
a.	 Construct a dotplot using the 15 observations on 
number of violent crimes reported. Which schools 
stand out from the rest?
b.	One of the Florida schools has only 845 students 
and a few of the schools are quite a bit larger than 
the rest. Because of this, it might make more sense 
to consider a crime rate by calculating the number 
of violent crimes reported per 1000 students. For 
example, for Florida A&M University the violent 
crime rate would be
14
13,204
 s1000d 5 s0.0011ds1000d 5 1.1
	
Calculate the violent crime rate for the other 14 schools 
and then use those values to construct a dotplot. Do 
the same schools stand out as unusual in this dotplot? 
c.	 Based on your answers from Parts (a) and (b), 
write a couple of sentences commenting on 
violent crimes reported at Florida universities and 
colleges in 2012.
1.27	
 The article “Fliers Trapped on Tarmac Push for 
Rules on Release” (USA Today, July 28, 2009) gave 
the following data for 17 airlines on number of 
flights that were delayed on the tarmac for at 
least 3 hours for the period from October 2008 to 
May 2009: 
Airline
Number  
of Delays
Rate per  
10,000 Flights
ExpressJet
93
4.9
Continental
72
4.1
Delta
81
2.8
Comair
29
2.7
American Eagle
44
1.6
US Airways
46
1.6
JetBlue
18
1.4
American
48
1.3
Northwest
24
1.2
Mesa
17
1.1
United
29
1.1
Frontier
  5
0.9
SkyWest
29
0.8
Pinnacle
13
0.7
Atlantic Southeast
11
0.6
AirTran
  7
0.4
Southwest
11
0.1
	
Figure EX-1.27 shows two dotplots: one displays the 
number of delays data, and one displays the rate per 
10,000 flights data.
a.	 If you were going to rank airlines based on flights 
delayed on the tarmac for at least 3 hours, would 
you use the total number of flights data or the rate 
per 10,000 flights data? Explain the reason for your 
choice.
Figure EX-1.27
0
Number of delays
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0.0
Rate per 10,000 ﬂights
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

22 
●  Chapter 1  The Role of Statistics and the Data Analysis Process
b.	Write a short paragraph that could be used as part 
of a newspaper article on flight delays that could 
accompany the dotplot of the rate per 10,000 
flights data.
1.28	 The report “Trends in Education 2010: Community 
Colleges” (www.collegeboard.com/trends) included 
the accompanying information on student debt for 
students graduating with an AA degree from a public 
community college in 2008.
Debt
Relative Frequency
None
0.62
Less than $10,000
0.23
Between $10,000 and 
$20,000
0.10
More than $20,000
0.05
a. Use the given information to construct a bar chart.
b. Write a few sentences commenting on student 
debt for public community college graduates.
1.29	 The article “Where College Students Buy Textbooks” 
(USA Today, October 14, 2010) gave data on where 
students purchased books. The accompanying 
frequency table summarizes data from a sample of 
1152 full-time college students.
Where Books Purchased
Frequency
Campus bookstore
576
Campus bookstore web site
 48
Online bookstore other than 
campus bookstore
240
Off-campus bookstore
168
Rented textbooks
 36
Purchased mostly eBooks
 12
Didn’t buy any textbooks
 72
a. Construct a bar chart to summarize the data 
distribution. 
b. Write a few sentences commenting on where 
students are buying textbooks. 
1.30	 ▼ The article “Americans Drowsy on the Job and the 
Road” (Associated Press, March 28, 2001) summarized 
data from the 2001 Sleep in America poll. Each 
individual in a sample of 1004 adults was asked 
questions about his or her sleep habits. The article 
states that 
“40 percent of those surveyed say they get sleepy on 
the job and their work suffers at least a few days each 
month, while 22 percent said the problems occur a few 
days each week. And 7 percent say sleepiness on the 
job is a daily occurrence.”
	
Assuming that everyone else reported that sleepiness 
on the job was not a problem, summarize the given 
information by constructing a relative frequency bar 
chart.
1.31	 “Ozzie and Harriet Don’t Live Here Anymore” (San 
Luis Obispo Tribune, Feb­ru­ary 26, 2002) is the title of 
an article that looked at the changing makeup of 
America’s suburbs. The article states that nonfamily 
households (for example, homes headed by a single 
professional or an elderly widow) now outnumber 
married couples with children in suburbs of the 
nation’s largest metropolitan areas. The article goes 
on to state:
In the nation’s 102 largest metropolitan areas, “nonfa-
milies” comprised 29 percent of households in 2000, 
up from 27 percent in 1990. While the number of mar-
ried-with-children homes grew too, the share did not 
keep pace. It declined from 28 percent to 27 percent. 
Married couples without children at home live in an-
other 29 percent of suburban households. The remain-
ing 15 percent are single-parent homes.
	
Use the given information on type of household in 
2000 to construct a frequency distribution and a bar 
chart. (Be careful to extract the 2000 percentages from 
the given information).
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
AC TIVIT Y 1.1 
Head Sizes: Understanding Variability
Materials needed: Each team will need a measuring tape.
For this activity, you will work in teams of 6 to 10 people.
1.	 Designate a team leader for your team by choosing 
the person on your team who celebrated his or her 
last birthday most recently.
2.	 The team leader should measure and record the head 
size (measured as the circumference at the widest 
part of the forehead) of each of the other members of 
his or her team.
3.	 Record the head sizes for the individuals on your 
team as measured by the team leader.
4.	 Next, each individual on the team should measure 
the head size of the team leader. Do not share your 
measurement with the other team members until 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

all team members have measured the team leader’s 
head size.
5.	 After all team members have measured the team 
leader’s head, record the different team leader head 
size measurements obtained by the individuals on 
your team.
6.	 Using the data from Step 3, construct a dotplot of the 
team leader’s measurements of team head sizes. Then, 
­using the same scale, construct a separate dotplot of 
the different measurements of the team leader’s head 
size (from Step 5).
Now use the available information to answer the following 
questions:
7.	 Do you think the team leader’s head size changed 
in between measurements? If not, explain why the 
measurements of the team leader’s head size are not 
all the same.
8.	 Which data set was more variable—head size mea-
surements of the different individuals on your team 
or the different measurements of the team leader’s 
head size? Explain the basis for your choice.
9.	 Consider the following scheme (you don’t actually 
have to carry this out): Suppose that a group of  
10 people mea­sured head sizes by ﬁrst assigning  
each person in the group a number between 1 and  
10. Then person 1 mea­sured person 2’s head size, 
person 2 measured person 3’s head size, and so on, 
with person 10 ﬁ­nally measuring person 1’s head 
size. Do you think that the resulting head size mea­
surements would be more variable, less variable, or 
show about the same amount of variability as a set of 
10 mea­surements resulting from a single individual 
mea­suring the head size of all 10 people in the group? 
Explain.
AC TIVIT Y 1.2 
Estimating Sizes
1.	 Construct an activity sheet that consists of a table 
that has 6 columns and 10 rows. Label the columns 
of the table with the following six headings:  
(1) Shape, (2) Estimated Size, (3) Actual Size,  
(4) Difference (Estimated 2 Actual), (5) Absolute 
Difference, and (6) Squared Dif­ference. Enter the 
numbers from 1 to 10 in the “Shape” column.
2.	 Next you will be visually estimating the sizes of the 
shapes in Figure 1.9. Size will be described as the 
number of squares of this size
	
that would ﬁt in the shape. For example, the shape
	
would be size 3, as illustrated by
	
You should now quickly visually estimate the sizes of 
the shapes in Figure 1.9. Do not draw on the ﬁg­ure—
these are to be quick visual estimates. Record your es-
timates in the “Estimated Size” column of the activity 
sheet.
3.	 Your instructor will provide the actual sizes for the 
10 shapes, which should be entered into the “Actual 
Size” column of the activity sheet. Now complete the 
“Difference” column by subtracting the actual value 
from your estimate for each of the 10 shapes.
4.	 What would cause a difference to be negative? What 
would cause a difference to be positive?
5.	 Would the sum of the differences tell you if the 
estimates and actual values were in close agreement? 
Does a sum of 0 for the differences indicate that all 
the estimates were equal to the actual value? Explain.
6.	 Compare your estimates with those of another person 
in the class by comparing the sum of the absolute 
values of the differences between estimates and corre-
sponding actual values. Who was better at estimating 
shape sizes? How can you tell?
7.	 Use the last column of the activity sheet to record 
the squared differences (for example, if the difference 
for shape 1 was 23, the squared difference would be 
(23)2 5 9. Explain why the sum of the squared dif-
ferences can also be used to assess how accurate your 
shape estimates were.
8.	 For this step, work with three or four other students 
from your class. For each of the 10 shapes, form a 
new size estimate by computing the average of the 
size estimates for that shape made by the individuals 
in your group. Is this new set of estimates more 
accurate than your own individual estimates were? 
How can you tell?
9.	 Does your answer from Step 8 surprise you? Explain 
why or why not.
Activities 
●  23
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

24 
●  Chapter 1  The Role of Statistics and the Data Analysis Process
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Figure  1.9
Shapes for Activity 1.2.
AC TIVIT Y 1.3 
A Meaningful Paragraph
Write a meaningful paragraph that includes the following 
six terms: sample, population, descriptive statistics, bar 
chart, numerical variable, and dotplot.
A “meaningful paragraph” is a coherent piece of writing in 
an appropriate context that uses all of the listed words. The 
paragraph should show that you understand the meanings of 
the terms and their relationships to one ­another. A sequence 
of sentences that just defines the terms is not a meaningful 
paragraph. When choosing a context, think carefully about 
the terms you need to use. Choosing a good context will 
make writing a meaningful paragraph easier.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Term or Formula
Comment
Population
The entire collection of individuals or 
measurements about which information 
is desired.
Sample
A part of the population selected for study.
Descriptive statistics
Numerical, graphical, and tabular methods 
for organizing and summarizing data.
Inferential statistics
Methods for generalizing from a sample to 
a population.
Categorical data
Individual observations are categorical 
responses (nonnumerical).
Numerical data
Individual observations are numerical 
(quantitative) in nature.
Discrete numerical 
data
Possible values are isolated points along 
the number line.
Continuous numerical 
data
Possible values form an entire interval 
along then umber line.
Term or Formula
Comment
Univariate, bivariate, 
and multivariate data
Each observation consists of one 
(univariate), two (bivariate), or two or more 
(multivariate) responses or values.
Frequency distribution 
for categorical data
A table that displays frequencies, and 
sometimes relative frequencies, for each 
of the possible values of a categorical 
variable.
Bar chart
A graph of a frequency distribution for 
a categorical data set. Each category is 
represented by a bar, and the area of the 
bar is proportional to the corresponding 
frequency or relative frequency.
Dotplot
A graph of numerical data in which each 
observation is represented by a dot on or 
above a horizontal measurement scale.
CHAPTER REVIEW 
Exercises 1.32 - 1.37
1.32	
 The report “Testing the Waters 2009” (www.nrdc.org) 
included information on the water quality at the 
82 most popular swimming beaches in California. 
Thirty-eight of these beaches are in Los Angeles 
County. For each beach, water quality was tested 
weekly and the data below are the percent of the tests 
in 2008 that failed to meet water quality standards.
Los Angeles County
32
  4
  6
  4
  4
  7
  4
27
19
23
19
13
11
19
  9
11
16
23
19
16
33
12
29
  3
11
  6
22
18
31
43
17
26
17
20
10
  6
14
11
Other Counties
0
0
0
2
3
7
5
11
5
7
15
8
1
5
0
5
4
1
0
1
1
0
2
7
0
2
2
3
5
3
0
8
8
8
0
0
17
4
3
7
10
40
3
a.	 Construct a dotplot of the percent of tests 
failing to meet water quality standards for 
the Los Angeles County beaches. Write a few 
sentences describing any interesting features of 
the dotplot.
b.	Construct a dotplot of the percent of tests failing 
to meet water quality standards for the beaches in 
other counties. Write a few sentences describing 
any interesting features of the dotplot.
c.	 Based on the two dotplots from Parts (a) and 
(b), describe how the percent of tests that fail 
to meet water quality standards for beaches in 
Los Angeles County differs from those of other 
counties.
1.33	 The U.S. Department of Education reported that 
14% of adults were classiﬁed as being below a basic 
literacy level, 29% were classiﬁed as being at a basic 
literacy level, 44% were classiﬁed as being at an 
intermediate literacy level, and 13% were classiﬁed as 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Chapter Review Exercises 
●  25
SUMMARY 
Key Concepts and Formulas
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

26 
●  Chapter 1  The Role of Statistics and the Data Analysis Process
being at a proﬁcient level (2003 National Assessment of 
Adult Literacy).
a.	 Is the variable literacy level categorical or 
numerical?
b.	Construct a bar chart to display the given data on 
literacy level.
c.	 Would it be appropriate to display the given infor-
mation using a dotplot? Explain why or why not.
1.34	
 ▼ The Computer Assisted Assessment Center at 
the University of Luton published a report titled 
“Technical Review of Plagiarism Detection Software.” 
The authors of this report asked faculty at academic 
institutions about the extent to which they agreed 
with the statement “Plagiarism is a sig­niﬁ­cant prob-
lem in academic institutions.” The responses are 
summarized in the accompanying table. Construct a 
bar chart for these data.
Response
Frequency
Strongly disagree
    5
Disagree
  48
Not sure
  90
Agree
140
Strongly agree
  39
1.35	
 The article “Just How Safe Is That Jet?” (USA Today, 
March 13, 2000) gave the following relative frequency 
distribution that summarized data on the type of 
violation for ﬁnes imposed on airlines by the Federal 
Aviation Administration:
Type of Violation 
Relative Frequency
Security 
0.43
Maintenance 
0.39
Flight operations 
0.06
Hazardous materials 
0.03
Other 
0.09
a.	 Use this information to construct a bar chart for 
type of violation.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
b.	Write a sentence or two commenting on 
the relative occurrence of the various types 
of violation.
1.36	
 Each year, U.S. News and World Report publishes a 
ranking of U.S. business schools. The following data 
give the acceptance rates (percentage of applicants 
admitted) for the best 25 programs in a recent 
survey: 
16.3  12.0  25.1  20.3  31.9  20.7  30.1  19.5  36.2
46.9  25.8  36.7  33.8  24.2  21.5  35.1  37.6  23.9
17.0  38.4  31.2  43.8  28.9  31.4  48.9
a.	 Construct a dotplot.
b.	Comment on the interesting features of the plot.
1.37	
 Many adolescent boys aspire to be professional 
athletes. The paper “Why Adolescent Boys Dream of 
Becoming Professional Athletes” (Psychological Reports 
[1999]:1075–1085) examined some of the reasons. 
Each boy in a sample of teenage boys was asked the 
following question: “Previous studies have shown 
that more teenage boys say that they are considering 
becoming professional athletes than any other occu-
pation. In your opinion, why do these boys want to 
become professional athletes?” The resulting data are 
shown in the following table:
Response 
Frequency
Fame and celebrity 
94
Money 
56
Attract women 
29
Like sports 
27
Easy life 
24
Don’t need an education 
19
Other 
19
	
	 Construct a bar chart to display these data.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

JMP
1.  Enter the raw data into a column (Note: To open a new 
data table, click File then select New then Data Table)
2.  Click Graph and select Chart
3.  Click and drag the column name containing your stored 
data from the box under Select Columns to the box 
next to Categories, X, Levels
4.  Click OK
MINITAB
1.  Enter the raw data into C1
2.  Select Graph and choose Bar Chart…
3.  Highlight Simple
4.  Click OK
5.  Double click C1 to add it to the Categorical Variables 
box
6.  Click OK
Note: You may add or format titles, axis titles, legends, etc., 
by clicking on the Labels… button prior to performing step 
6 above.
SPSS
1.  Enter the raw data into a column
2.  Select Graph and choose Chart Builder…
3.  Under Choose from highlight Bar
4.  Click and drag the first bar chart in the right box (Sim-
ple Bar) to the Chart preview area
5.  Click and drag the variable from the Variables box to 
the X-Axis? box in the chart preview area
6.  Click OK
Note: By default, SPSS displays the count of each category 
in a bar chart. To display the percentage for each category, 
follow the above instructions to Step 5. Then, in the Element 
Properties dialog box, select Percentage from the drop-down 
box under Statistic. Click Apply then click OK on the Chart 
Builder dialog box.
Excel 2007
1.  Enter the category names into column A (you may input 
the title for the variable in cell A1)
2.  Enter the count or percent for each category into col-
umn B (you may put the title “Count” or “Percentage” 
in cell B1)
3.  Select all data (including column titles if used)
4.  Click on the Insert Ribbon
5.  Choose Column and select the first chart under 2-D 
Column (Clustered Column)
6.  The chart will appear on the same worksheet as your data
Note: You may add or format titles, axis titles, legends, and 
so on, by right-clicking on the appropriate piece of the chart.
Note: Using the Bar Option on the Insert Ribbon will pro-
duce a horizontal bar chart.
TI-83/84 
The TI-83/84 does not have the functionality to produce bar 
charts.
TI-Nspire
1.  Enter the category names into a list (to access data lists 
select the spreadsheet option and press enter)
Technology Notes 
●  27
Technology Notes
Bar Charts
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Note: In order to correctly enter category names, you will 
input them as text. Begin by pressing ?!> and then select 
“ and press enter. Now type the category name and press 
enter. 
Note: Be sure to title the list by selecting the top row of the 
column and typing a title.
2.  Enter the counts for each category into a second list (be 
sure to title this list as well!)
3.  Press the menu key and navigate to 3:Data and then 
5:Frequency Plot and select this option
4.  For Data List select the list containing your category 
names from the drop-down menu
5.  For Frequency List select the list containing the counts 
for each category from the drop-down menu
6.  Press OK
Dotplots
JMP
1.  Input the raw data into a column
2.  Click Graph and select Chart
3.  Click and drag the column name containing the data 
from the box under Select columns to the box next to 
Categories, X, Levels
4.  Select Point Chart from the second drop-down box in 
the Options section
5.  Click OK
MINITAB
1.  Input the raw data into C1
2.  Select Graph and choose Dotplot
3.  Highlight Simple under One Y
4.  Click OK
5.  Double click C1 to add it to the Graph Variables box
6.  Click OK
Note: You may add or format titles, axis titles, legends, and 
so on, by clicking on the Labels… button prior to perform-
ing Step 6 above.
SPSS
1.  Input the raw data into a column
2.  Select Graph and choose Chart Builder… 
3.  Under Choose from highlight Scatter/Dot 
4.  Click and drag the second option in the second row 
(Simple Dot Plot) to the Chart preview area
5.  Click and drag the variable name from the Variables 
box into the X-Axis? box
6.  Click OK
Excel 2007
Excel 2007 does not have the functionality to create dotplots.
TI-83/84
The TI-83/84 does not have the functionality to create dotplots.
TI-Nspire
1.  Enter the data into a data list (to access data lists select 
the spreadsheet option and press enter)
Note: Be sure to title the list by selecting the top row of the 
column and typing a title.
2.  Press the menu key then select 3:Data then select 
6:QuickGraph and press enter (a dotplot will appear)
28 
●  Chapter 1  The Role of Statistics and the Data Analysis Process
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

29
Data and conclusions from data are everywhere—
in newspapers, magazines, online resources, and 
professional publications. But should you believe 
what you read? For example, should you drink 
hot chocolate to improve your memory? Will eat-
ing beef make you happier? Will thinking positive 
thoughts add 7 years to your life? These are just 
three of many claims made in one issue of Woman’s 
World (December 23, 2013), a magazine with over 
1.5  million readers. The magazine suggests that 
these claims are based on research studies, but 
how reliable are these studies? Are the conclusions 
drawn reasonable, and do they apply to you? These 
are important questions.
A primary goal of statistical studies is to collect 
data that can then be used to make informed deci-
sions. It should come as no surprise that the ability 
to make good decisions depends on the quality of 
the information available.
Both the type of analysis that is appropriate and the conclusions that can be drawn 
depend on how the data are collected. In this chapter, we ﬁrst consider two types of sta-
tistical studies and then focus on two widely used methods of data collection: sampling 
and experimentation.
Collecting Data Sensibly
Chapter 2: Learning Objectives
Students will understand:
●
●that the types of conclusions that can be drawn from data depend on the way 
data were collected.
●
●that bias may be present when data are collected from a sample.
●
●why random selection is an important component of a sampling plan.
●
●why random assignment is important when collecting data in an experiment.
●
●the purposes of a control group and blinding in an experiment.
Students will be able to:
●
●distinguish between an observational study and an experiment.
●
●distinguish between selection bias, measurement or response bias, and 
nonresponse bias.
●
●select a simple random sample from a given population.
Kwame Zikomo/Purestock/SuperStock 
CHAPTER 2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

30 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
●
●distinguish between simple random sampling, stratified random sampling, 
cluster sampling, systematic sampling, and convenience sampling.
●
●describe a procedure for randomly assigning subjects to treatments in an 
experiment.
●
●design a completely randomized experiment.
●
●design a randomized block experiment.
On September 25, 2009, results from a study of the relationship between spanking and IQ 
were reported by a number of different news media. Some of the headlines that appeared 
that day were:
“Spanking lowers a child’s IQ” (Los Angeles Times)
“Do you spank? Studies indicate it could lower your kid’s IQ” (SciGuy, Houston Chronicle)
“Spanking can lower IQ” (NBC4i, Columbus, Ohio)
“Smacking hits kids’ IQ” (newscientist.com)
In the study that these headlines refer to, the investigators followed 806 kids age 2 to 4 and 
704 kids age 5 to 9 for 4 years. IQ was measured at the beginning of the study and again 
4 years later. The researchers found that at the end of the study, the average IQ of kids in 
the younger group who were not spanked was 5 points higher than that of kids who were 
spanked. For the older group, the average IQ of kids who were not spanked was 2.8 points 
higher.
These headlines all imply that spanking was the cause of the observed difference in IQ. 
Is this conclusion reasonable? The answer depends in a critical way on the study design. 
After considering some important aspects of study design, we’ll return to these headlines 
and decide if they are appropriate.
Observation and Experimentation
Data collection is an important step in the data analysis process. When we set out to 
collect information, it is important to keep in mind the questions we hope to answer 
on the basis of the resulting data. Sometimes we are interested in answering questions 
about characteristics of a single existing population or in comparing two or more well-
de­ﬁned populations. To accomplish this, we select a sample from each population under 
consideration and use the sample information to gain insight into characteristics of those 
populations.
For example, an ecologist might be interested in estimating the average shell thickness 
of bald eagle eggs. A social scientist studying a rural community may want to determine 
whether gender and attitude toward abortion are related. These are examples of studies 
that are observational in nature. In these studies, we want to observe characteristics of 
members of an existing population or of several populations, and then use the resulting in-
formation to draw conclusions. In observational studies, it is important to obtain samples 
that are representative of the corresponding populations.
Sometimes the questions we are trying to answer deal with the effect of certain explana-
tory variables on some response and cannot be answered using data from an observational 
study. Such questions are often of the form, “What happens when . . . ?” or, “What is the 
effect of . . . ?” For example, an educator may wonder what would happen to test scores if 
the required lab time for a chemistry course were increased from 3 hours to 6 hours per 
 2.1  
Statistical Studies: Observation and Experimentation
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 2.1   Statistical Studies: Observation and Experimentation 
●  31
week. To answer such questions, the researcher conducts an experiment to collect relevant 
data. The value of some response variable (test score in the chemistry example) is recorded 
under different experimental conditions (3-hour lab and 6-hour lab). In an experiment, 
the researcher manipulates one or more explanatory variables, also sometimes called fac-
tors, to create the experimental conditions.
Observational study: A study in which the investigator observes characteristics 
of a sample selected from one or more existing populations. The goal of an 
observational study is usually to draw conclusions about the corresponding 
population or about differences between two or more populations. In a well-
designed observational study, the sample is selected in a way that is designed 
to produce a sample that is respresentative of the population.
Experiment: A study in which the investigator observes how a response vari-
able behaves when one or more explanatory variables, also called factors, are 
manipulated. The usual goal of an experiment is to determine the effect of 
the manipulated explanatory variables (factors) on the response variable.  
In a well-designed experiment, the composition of the groups that will be 
exposed to different experimental conditions is determined by random 
assignment.
DEFINITION
The type of conclusion that can be drawn from a statistical study depends on how the 
study was conducted. Both observational studies and experiments can be used to compare 
groups, but in an experiment the researcher controls who is in which group, whereas this 
is not the case in an observational study. This seemingly small difference is critical when it 
comes to drawing conclusions based on data from the study.
A well-designed experiment can result in data that provide evidence for a cause-and-
effect relationship. This is an important difference between an observational study and 
an experiment. In an observational study, it is impossible to draw clear cause-and-effect 
conclusions because we cannot rule out the possibility that the observed effect is due to 
some variable other than the explanatory variable being studied. Such variables are called 
confounding variables.
Confounding variable: A variable that is related to both how the experimental 
groups were formed and the response variable of interest.
DEFINITION
Consider the role of confounding variables in the following three studies:
●
●The article “Panel Can’t Determine the Value of Daily Vitamins” (San Luis Obispo Tribune, 
July 1, 2003) summarized conclusions from a government advisory panel that inves-
tigated the bene­ﬁts of vitamin use. The panel looked at a large number of studies on 
vitamin use and concluded that the results were “inadequate or con­ﬂict­ing.” A major 
concern was that many of the studies were observational in nature and the panel wor-
ried that people who take vitamins might be healthier just because they tend to take 
better care of themselves in general. This potential confounding variable prevented 
the panel from concluding that taking vitamins is the cause of observed better health 
among those who take vitamins.
●
●Studies have shown that people over age 65 who get a ﬂu shot are less likely to 
die from a flu-related illness during the following year than those who do not get 
a ﬂu shot. However, recent research has shown that people over age 65 who get 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

32 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
a ﬂu shot are also less likely to die from any cause during the following year than 
those who don’t get a flu shot (International Journal of Epidemiology, De­cem­ber 21, 
2005). This has led to the speculation that those over age 65 who get ﬂu shots are 
healthier as a group than those who do not get ﬂu shots. If this is the case, observa-
tional studies that compare two groups—those who get ﬂu shots and those who do 
not—may overestimate the effectiveness of the ﬂu vaccine because general health 
differs in the two groups. General health is a possible confounding variable in such 
studies.
●
●The article “Heartfelt Thanks to Fido” (San Luis Obispo Tribune, July 5, 2003) summa-
rized a study that appeared in the American Journal of Cardiology (March 15, 2003). 
In this study researchers measured heart rate variability (a measure of the heart’s 
ability to handle stress) in patients who had recovered from a heart attack. They 
found that heart rate variability was higher (which is good and means the heart 
can handle stress better) for those who owned a dog than for those who did not. 
Should someone who suffers a heart attack immediately go out and get a dog? Well, 
maybe not yet. The American Heart Association recommends additional studies to 
determine if the improved heart rate variability is attributable to dog ownership or 
due to the fact that dog owners get more exercise. If in fact dog owners do tend to 
get more exercise than nonowners, level of exercise is a confounding variable that 
would prevent us from concluding that owning a dog is the cause of improved heart 
rate variability.
Each of the three studies described above illustrates why potential confounding variables 
make it unreasonable to draw a cause-and-effect conclusion from an observational study.
Let’s return to the study on spanking and IQ described at the beginning of this section. Is 
this study an observational study or an experiment? Two groups were compared (children 
who were spanked and children who were not spanked), but the researchers did not ran-
domly assign children to the spanking or no-spanking groups. The study is observational, 
and so cause-and-effect conclusions such as “spanking lowers IQ” are not justified based 
on the observed data. What we can say is that there is evidence that, as a group, children 
who are spanked tend to have a lower IQ than children who are not spanked. What we 
cannot say is that spanking is the cause of the lower IQ. It is possible that other variables—
such as home or school environment, socio-economic status, or parents’ education—are 
related to both IQ and whether or not a child was spanked. These are examples of possible 
confounding variables.
Fortunately, not everyone made the same mistake as the writers of the headlines given 
earlier in this section. Some examples of headlines that got it right are:
“Lower IQ’s measured in spanked children” (world-science.net)
“Children who get spanked have lower IQs” (livescience.com)
“Research suggests an association between spanking and lower IQ in children”  
(CBSnews.com)
Drawing Conclusions from Statistical Studies
In this section, two different types of conclusions have been described. One type involves 
generalizing from what we have seen in a sample to some larger population, and the other 
involves reaching a cause-and-effect conclusion about the effect of an explanatory variable 
on a response. When is it reasonable to draw such conclusions? The answer depends on the 
way that the data were collected. Table 2.1 summarizes the types of conclusions that can be 
made with different study designs.
As you can see from Table 2.1, it is important to think carefully about the objectives of 
a statistical study before planning how the data will be collected. Both observational stud-
ies and experiments must be carefully designed if the resulting data are to be useful. The 
common sampling procedures used in observational studies are considered in Section 2.2. 
In Sections 2.3 and 2.4, we consider experimentation and explore what constitutes good 
practice in the design of simple experiments.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 2.1   Statistical Studies: Observation and Experimentation 
●  33
Table 2.1  Drawing Conclusions from Statistical Studies
Study Description
Reasonable to Generalize 
Conclusions about Group 
Characteristics to the 
Population?
Reasonable to Draw 
Cause-and-Effect Conclusion?
Observational study with sample 
selected at random from population 
of interest
Yes
No
Observational study based on conve-
nience or voluntary response sample 
(poorly designed sampling plan)
No
No
Experiment with groups formed by 
random assignment of individuals or 
objects to experimental conditions
   •  Individuals or objects used in study 
are volunteers or not randomly 
selected from some population of 
interest
No
Yes
   •  Individuals or objects used in study 
are randomly selected from some 
population of interest
Yes
Yes
Experiment with groups not formed by 
random assignment to experimental 
conditions (poorly designed experiment)
No
No
EXERCISES 2.1 - 2.12
2.1	 The article “How Dangerous Is a Day in the Hospital?” 
(Medical Care [2011]: 1068–1075) describes a study to 
determine if the risk of an infection is related to the 
length of a hospital stay. The researchers looked at a 
large number of hospitalized patients and compared 
the proportion who got an infection for two groups 
of patients—those who were hospitalized overnight 
and those who were hospitalized for more than one 
night. Indicate whether the study is an observational 
study or an experiment. Give a brief explanation for 
your choice.
2.2	 The authors of the paper “Fudging the Numbers: 
Distributing Chocolate Influences Student Evaluations 
of an Undergraduate Course” (Teaching in Psychology 
[2007]: 245–247) carried out a study to see if events 
unrelated to an undergraduate course could affect 
student evaluations. Students enrolled in statistics 
courses taught by the same instructor participated 
in the study. All students attended the same lectures 
and one of six discussion sections that met once a 
week. At the end of the course, the researchers chose 
three of the discussion sections to be the “chocolate 
group.” Students in these three sections were offered 
chocolate prior to having them fill out course evalu-
ations. Students in the other three sections were not 
offered chocolate. 
The researchers concluded that “Overall, students 
offered chocolate gave more positive evaluations than 
students not offered chocolate.” Indicate whether the 
study is an observational study or an experiment. 
Give a brief explanation for your choice.
2.3	 The article “Why We Fall for This” (AARP Magazine, 
May/June 2011) described a study in which a busi-
ness professor divided his class into two groups. He 
showed students a mug and then asked students in 
one of the groups how much they would pay for the 
mug. Students in the other group were asked how 
much they would sell the mug for if it belonged to 
them. Surprisingly, the average value assigned to the 
mug was quite different for the two groups! Indicate 
whether the study is an observational study or an 
experiment. Give a brief explanation for your choice.
2.4	 ▼ The article “Television’s Value to Kids: It’s All in  
How They Use It” (Seattle Times, July 6, 2005)  
described a study in which researchers analyzed 
standardized test results and television viewing  
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

34 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
habits of 1700 children. They found that children 
who averaged more than 2 hours of television view-
ing per day when they were younger than 3 tended 
to score lower on measures of reading ability and 
short-term memory.
a.	 Is the study described an observational study or 
an experiment? 
b.	Is it reasonable to conclude that watching 2  
or more hours of television is the cause of  
lower reading scores? Explain. (Hint: Look at 
Table 2.1.) 
2.5	 The article “Acupuncture for Bad Backs: Even Sham 
Therapy Works” (Time, May 12, 2009) summarized a 
study conducted by researchers at the Group Health 
Center for Health Studies in Seattle. In this study, 
638 adults with back pain were randomly assigned 
to one of four groups. People in group 1 received the 
usual care for back pain. People in group 2 received 
acupuncture at a set of points tailored specifically for 
each individual. People in group 3 received acupunc-
ture at a standard set of points typically used in the 
treatment of back pain. Those in group 4 received 
fake acupuncture—they were poked with a toothpick 
at the same set of points chosen for the people in 
group 3!
Two notable conclusions from the study were: 
(1) patients receiving real or fake acupuncture 
experienced a greater reduction in pain than those 
receiving usual care; and (2) there was no significant 
difference in pain reduction for those who received 
acupuncture (at individualized or the standard set 
of points) and those who received fake acupuncture 
toothpick pokes.
a.	 Is this study an observational study or an experi-
ment? Explain.
b.	Is it reasonable to conclude that receiving ei-
ther real or fake acupuncture was the cause of 
the observed reduction in pain in those groups 
compared to the usual care group? What aspect of 
this study supports your answer? (Hint: Look at 
Table 2.1.)
2.6	 The article “Display of Health Risk Behaviors on 
MySpace by Adolescents” (Archives of Pediatrics and 
Adolescent Medicine [2009]: 27–34) described a study 
in which researchers looked at a random sample of 
500 publicly accessible MySpace web profiles posted 
by 18-year-olds. The content of each profile was 
analyzed. One of the conclusions reported was that 
displaying sport or hobby involvement was associ-
ated with decreased references to risky behavior 
(sexual references or references to substance abuse or 
violence).
a.	 Is the study described an observational study or 
an experiment?
b.	Is it reasonable to generalize the stated conclu-
sion to all 18-year-olds with a publicly accessible 
MySpace web profile? What aspect of the study 
supports your answer?
c.	 Not all MySpace users have a publicly accessible 
profile. Is it reasonable to generalize the stated 
conclusion to all 18-year-old MySpace users? 
Explain.
d.	Is it reasonable to generalize the stated conclusion 
to all MySpace users with a publicly accessible 
profile? Explain.
2.7	 Can choosing the right music make wine taste better? 
This question was investigated by a researcher at a 
university in Edinburgh (www.decanter.com/news). 
Each of 250 volunteers was assigned at random to 
one of five rooms where they were asked to taste and 
rate a glass of wine. In one of the rooms, no music 
was playing and a different style of music was playing 
in each of the other four rooms. The researchers con-
cluded that cabernet sauvignon is perceived as being 
richer and more robust when bold music is played 
than when no music is heard.
a.	 Is the study described an observational study or 
an experiment?
b.	Can a case be made for the researcher’s conclusion 
that the music played was the cause for the higher 
rating? Explain.
2.8	 “Fruit Juice May Be Fueling Pudgy Preschoolers, Study 
Says” is the title of an article that appeared in the  
San Luis Obispo Tribune (Feb­ru­ary 27, 2005). This article 
describes a study that found that for 3- and 4-year-
olds, drinking something sweet once or twice a day 
doubled the risk of being seriously overweight one 
year later. The authors of the study state
Total energy may be a confounder if consumption 
of sweet drinks is a marker for other dietary factors 
associated with overweight (Pediatrics, November 
2005).
Give an example of a dietary factor that might be one 
of the potentially confounding variables the study au-
thors are worried about. 
2.9	 The article “Americans are ‘Getting the Wrong Idea’ on 
Alcohol and Health” (Associated Press, April 19, 2005) re-
ported that observational studies in recent years that 
have concluded that moderate drinking is associated 
with a reduction in the risk of heart disease may be 
misleading. The article refers to a study conducted by 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that 
showed that moderate drinkers, as a group, tended to 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 2.2   Sampling 
●  35
be better educated, wealthier, and more active than 
nondrinkers.
Explain why the existence of these potentially 
confounding variables prevents drawing the conclu-
sion that moderate drinking is the cause of reduced 
risk of heart disease.
2.10	 Based on a survey conducted on the eDiets.com 
web site, investigators concluded that women who 
regularly watched Oprah were only one-seventh as 
likely to crave fattening foods as those who watched 
other daytime talk shows (San Luis Obispo Tribune, 
Oc­to­ber 14, 2000).
a.	 Is it reasonable to conclude that watching Oprah 
causes a decrease in cravings for fattening foods? 
Explain.
b.	Is it reasonable to generalize the results of this 
survey to all women in the United States? To all 
women who watch daytime talk shows? Explain 
why or why not.
2.11	 ▼ A survey of af­ﬂu­ent Americans (those with 
incomes of $75,000 or more) indicated that 57% 
would rather have more time than more money  
(USA Today, Janu­ary 29, 2003).
a.	What condition on how the data were collected 
would make the generalization from the 
sample to the population of af­ﬂu­ent Americans 
reasonable?
b.	Would it be reasonable to generalize from the 
sample and say that 57% of all Americans would 
rather have more time than more money?  
Explain. 
2.12	 Does living in the South cause high blood pres-
sure? Data from a group of 6278 whites and blacks 
questioned in the Third National Health and Nutri-
tional Examination Survey between 1988 and 1994 
indicates that a greater percentage of Southerners 
have high blood pressure than do people in any 
other region of the United States (see CNN.com web 
site article of Janu­ary 6, 2000, titled “High Blood 
Pressure Greater Risk in U.S. South, Study Says”). This 
difference in rate of high blood pressure was found 
in every ethnic group, gender, and age category 
studied.
List at least two possible reasons why we cannot 
conclude that living in the South causes high blood 
pressure.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
 2.2  
Sampling
Many studies are conducted in order to generalize the results of the study to the correspond-
ing population. In this case, it is important that the sample be representative of the popula-
tion. To be reasonably sure of this, we must carefully consider the way in which the sample 
is selected.
It is sometimes tempting to take the easy way out and gather data in a haphazard way. 
But if a sample is chosen on the basis of convenience alone, it is not possible to interpret 
the resulting data with conﬁdence. For example, it might be easy to use the students in your 
statistics class as a sample of students at your university. However, not all majors include a 
statistics course in their curriculum, and most students take statistics in their sophomore or 
junior year. When we attempt to generalize from this convenience sample, the difﬁculty 
is that it is not clear how these factors (and others that we might not be aware of) affect any 
conclusions based on information from such a sample.
There is no way to tell just by looking at a sample whether it is representative of 
the population from which it was drawn. Our only assurance comes from the 
method used to select the sample.
There are many reasons for selecting a sample rather than obtaining information from 
an entire population (a census). Sometimes the process of measuring the characteris-
tics of interest is destructive, as with measuring the lifetime of ﬂash­light batteries or the 
sugar content of oranges. It would be foolish to study the entire population in situa-
tions like these. But the most common reason for selecting a sample is limited resources. 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

36 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
Restrictions on available time or money usually make it impossible to collect data from an 
entire population.
Bias in Sampling
Bias in sampling is the tendency for samples to differ from the corresponding population 
in some systematic way. Bias can result from the way in which the sample is selected or 
from the way in which information is obtained once the sample has been chosen. The most 
common types of bias encountered in sampling situations are selection bias, measurement 
or response bias, and nonresponse bias.
Selection bias (sometimes also called undercoverage) is introduced when the way the 
sample is selected systematically excludes some part of the population of interest. For 
example, a researcher may wish to generalize from the results of a study to the popu­lation 
consisting of all residents of a particular city, but the method of selecting individuals may 
tend to exclude the homeless or those without telephones.
If those who are excluded from the sampling process differ in some systematic way from 
those who are included, the sample is virtually guaranteed to be unrepresentative of the 
population. If this difference between the included and the excluded occurs on a variable 
that is impor­tant to the study, conclusions based on the sample data may not be valid for 
the population of interest.
Selection bias also occurs if only volunteers or self-selected individuals are used in a 
study, because those who choose to partici­pate (for example, in a call-in telephone poll) 
may differ from those who choose not to participate.
Measurement or response bias occurs when the method of observation tends to pro-
duce values that systematically differ from the true value in some way. This might happen if 
an improperly calibrated scale is used to weigh items or if questions on a survey are worded 
in a way that tends to in­ﬂu­ence the response.
For example, a Gallup survey sponsored by the American Paper Institute (Wall Street 
Journal, May 17, 1994) included the following question:
“It is estimated that disposable diapers account for less than 2 percent of the trash in today’s 
landﬁlls. In contrast, beverage containers, third-class mail and yard waste are estimated to 
account for about 21 percent of trash in landﬁlls. Given this, in your opinion, would it be 
fair to tax or ban disposable diapers?”
It is likely that the wording of this question prompted people to respond in a particular way.
Other things that might contribute to response bias are the appearance or behavior of the 
person asking the question, the group or organization conducting the study, and the tendency 
for people not to be completely honest when asked about illegal behavior or unpopular beliefs.
Although the terms measurement bias and response bias are often used interchangeably, the 
term measurement bias is usually used to describe systematic deviation from the true value 
as a result of a faulty measurement instrument (as with the improperly calibrated scale). 
Response bias is typically used to describe systematic deviations from the true value when 
people provide answers to survey questions.
Nonresponse bias occurs when responses are not obtained from all individuals selected 
for inclusion in the sample. As with selection bias, nonresponse bias can distort results if 
those who respond differ in important ways from those who do not respond. Although 
some level of nonresponse is unavoidable in most surveys, the biasing effect on the result-
ing sample is lowest when the response rate is high. To minimize nonresponse bias, it is 
critical that a serious effort be made to follow up with individuals who do not respond to 
an initial request for information.
The nonresponse rate for surveys or opinion polls varies dramatically, depending on 
how the data are collected. Surveys are commonly conducted by mail, by phone, and by 
personal interview. Mail surveys are inexpensive but often have high nonresponse rates. 
Telephone surveys can also be inexpensive and can be implemented quickly, but they 
work well only for short surveys and they can also have high nonresponse rates. Personal 
interviews are generally expensive but tend to have better response rates. Some of the many 
challenges of conducting surveys are discussed in Section 2.6 (available online).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 2.2   Sampling 
●  37
Selection Bias
Tendency for samples to differ from the corresponding population as a result 
of systematic exclusion of some part of the population.
Measurement or Response Bias
Tendency for samples to differ from the corresponding population because the 
method of observation tends to produce values that differ from the true value.
Nonresponse Bias
Tendency for samples to differ from the corresponding population because 
data are not obtained from all individuals selected for inclusion in the sample.
Types of Bias
It is important to note that bias is introduced by the way in which a sample is 
selected or by the way in which the data are collected from the sample. Increas-
ing the size of the sample, although possibly desirable for other reasons, does 
nothing to reduce bias if the method of selecting the sample is ﬂawed or if the 
nonresponse rate remains high.
Potential sources of bias are illustrated in the following examples.
Example 2.1 
Are Cell Phone Users Different?
Many surveys are conducted by telephone and participants are often selected from phone 
books that include only landline telephones. For many years, it was thought that this was 
not a serious problem because most cell phone users also had a landline phone and so 
they still had a chance of being included in the survey. But the number of people with cell 
phones only is growing, and this trend is a concern for survey organizations.
The article “Omitting Cell Phone Users May Affect Polls” (Associated Press, September 25, 
2008) described a study that examined whether people who only have a cell phone are 
different from those who have landline phones. One finding from the study was that for 
people under the age of 30 with only a cell phone, 28% were Republicans compared to 
36% of landline users. This suggests that researchers who use telephone surveys need to 
worry about how selection bias might influence the ability to generalize the results of a 
survey if only landlines are used.
■
Example 2.2 
Think Before You Order That Burger!
The article “What People Buy from Fast-Food Restaurants: Caloric Content and Menu Item 
Selection” (Obesity [2009]: 1369–1374) reported that the average number of calories con-
sumed at lunch in New York City fast-food restaurants was 827. The researchers selected 
267 fast-food locations at random. The paper states that at each of these locations “adult 
customers were approached as they entered the restaurant and asked to provide their food 
receipt when exiting and to complete a brief survey.”
Approaching customers as they entered the restaurant and before they ordered may have 
influenced what they purchased. This introduces the potential for response bias. In addi-
tion, some people chose not to participate when approached. If those who chose not to 
participate differed from those who did participate, the researchers also need to be con-
cerned about nonresponse bias. Both of these potential sources of bias limit the researchers’ 
ability to generalize conclusions based on data from this study.
■
Understand the context ❭
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

38 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
Random Sampling
Most of the methods introduced in this text are based on the idea of random selection. The 
most straightforward sampling method is called simple random sampling. A simple ran-
dom sample is a sample chosen using a method that ensures that each different possible 
sample of the desired size has an equal chance of being the one chosen.
For example, suppose that we want a simple random sample of 10 employees chosen from 
all those who work at a large design ﬁrm. For the sample to be a simple random sample, 
the method used to select the sample must ensure that each of the many different subsets 
of 10 employees must be equally likely to be selected. A sample taken from only full-time 
employees would not be a simple random sample of all employees, because someone who 
works part-time has no chance of being selected. Although a simple random sample may, by 
chance, include only full-time employees, it must be selected in such a way that each pos-
sible sample, and therefore every employee, has the same chance of inclusion in the sample.
It is the selection process, not the ﬁ­nal sample, which determines whether the 
sample is a simple random sample.
The letter n is used to denote sample size. It is the number of individuals or objects in 
the sample. For the design ﬁrm scenario just described, n 5 10 becasue 10 employees were 
to be selected.
Simple random sample of size n: A sample that is selected from a population 
in a way that ensures that every different possible sample of size n has the same 
chance of being selected.
DEFINITION
The deﬁ­ni­tion of a simple random sample implies that every individual member of the pop-
ulation has an equal chance of being selected. However, the fact that every individual has an equal 
chance of selection, by itself, is not enough to guarantee that the sample is a simple random sample.
For example, suppose that a class is made up of 100 students, 60 of whom are female. A 
researcher decides to select 6 of the female students by writing all 60 names on slips of paper, 
mixing the slips, and then picking 6. She then selects 4 male students from the class using a 
similar procedure. Even though every student in the class has an equal chance of being in-
cluded in the sample (6 of 60 females are selected and 4 of 40 males are chosen), the resulting 
sample is not a simple random sample because not all different possible samples of 10 students 
from the class have the same chance of selection. Many possible samples of 10 students—for 
example, a sample of 7 females and 3 males or a sample of all females—have no chance of 
being selected. The sample selection method described here is not necessarily a bad choice 
(in fact, it is an example of stratiﬁed sampling, to be discussed in more detail shortly). But it 
does not produce a simple random sample. When this is the case, it is sometimes necessary to 
use different methods when generalizing results from the sample to the population. For this 
reason, the choice of sampling method is an important consideration that must be considered 
when a method is chosen for analyzing data resulting from such a sampling method.
Selecting a Simple Random Sample
A number of different methods can be used to select a simple random sample. One way 
is to put the name or number of each member of the population on different but identical 
slips of paper. The process of thoroughly mixing the slips and then selecting n slips one by 
one yields a random sample of size n. This method is easy to understand, but it has obvious 
drawbacks. The mixing must be adequate, and producing the necessary slips of paper can 
be extremely tedious, even for relatively small populations.
A commonly used method for selecting a random sample is to ﬁrst create a list, called 
a sampling frame, of the objects or individuals in the population. Each item on the list 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 2.2   Sampling 
●  39
can then be iden­ti­ﬁed by a number. A table of random digits or a random number gen-
erator can then be used to select the sample. A random number generator is a procedure 
that produces a sequence of numbers that satisﬁes properties associated with the notion 
of randomness. Most statistics software packages include a random number generator, as 
do many calculators. A small table of random digits can be found in Appendix A, Table 1.
For example, suppose a list containing the names of the 427 customers who purchased 
a new car during 2014 at a large dealership is available. The owner of the dealership wants 
to interview a sample of these customers to learn about customer satisfaction. She plans 
to select a simple random sample of 20 customers. Because it would be tedious to write 
all 427 names on slips of paper, random numbers can be used to select the sample. To do 
this, we can use three-digit numbers, starting with 001 and ending with 427, to represent 
the individuals on the list.
The random digits from rows 6 and 7 of Appendix A, Table 1 are shown here:
0 9 3 8 7 6 7 9 9 5 6 2 5 6 5 8 4 2 6 4
4 1 0 1 0 2 2 0 4 7 5 1 1 9 4 7 9 7 5 1
We can use blocks of three digits from this list (underlined in the lists above) to identify 
the individuals who should be included in the sample. The first block of three digits is 
093, so the 93rd person on the list will be included in the sample. The next five blocks of 
three digits (876, 799, 562, 565, and 842) do not correspond to anyone on the list, so we 
ignore them. The next block that corresponds to a person on the list is 410, so that person 
is included in the sample. This process would continue until 20 people have been selected 
for the sample. We would ignore any three-digit repeats since any particular person should 
only be selected once for the sample.
Another way to select the sample would be to use computer software or a graphing 
calculator to generate 20 random numbers. For example, Minitab produced the following 
numbers when 20 random numbers between 1 and 427 were requested.
289    67    29    26  205  214  422    31  233    98
  10  203  346  186  232  410    43  293    25  371
These numbers could be used to determine which 20 customers to include in the sample.
When selecting a random sample, researchers can choose to do the sampling with or 
without replacement. Sampling with replacement means that after each successive item is 
selected for the sample, the item is “replaced” back into the population and may therefore be 
selected again at a later stage. In practice, sampling with replacement is rarely used. Instead, 
the more common method is to not allow the same item to be included in the sample more 
than once. After being included in the sample, an individual or object would not be consid-
ered for further selection. Sampling in this manner is called sampling without replacement.
Sampling without replacement: Once an individual from the population is 
selected for inclusion in the sample, it may not be selected again in the 
­sampling process. A sample selected without replacement includes n distinct 
­individuals from the population.
Sampling with replacement: After an individual from the population is 
selected for inclusion in the sample and the corresponding data are recorded, 
the individual is placed back in the population and can be selected again in the 
sampling process. A sample selected with replacement might include any 
particular individual from the population more than once. 
Although these two forms of sampling are different, when the sample 
size n is small relative to the population size, as is often the case, there is 
little practical difference between them. In practice, the two methods can 
be viewed as equivalent if the sample size is less than 10% of the 
population size.
DEFINITION

40 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
Example 2.3 
Selecting a Random Sample of Glass  
Soda Bottles
Breaking strength is an important characteristic of glass soda bottles. Suppose that we 
want to measure the breaking strength of each bottle in a random sample of size n 5 3 
selected from four crates containing a total of 100 bottles (the population). Each crate 
contains ﬁve rows of ﬁve bottles each. We can identify each bottle with a number from 
1 to 100 by numbering across the rows in each crate, starting with the top row of crate 1, 
as pictured:
1
Crate 1
2
6
...
3
4
5
26
Crate 2
27 28 ...
76
Crate 4
77
100
...
...
Using a random number generator from a calculator or statistical software package, we 
could generate three random numbers between 1 and 100 to determine which bottles 
would be included in the sample. This might result in bottles 15 (row 3 column 5 of 
crate 1), 89 (row 3 column 4 of crate 4), and 60 (row 2 column 5 of crate 3) being 
selected.
■
The goal of random sampling is to produce a sample that is likely to be represen-
tative of the population. Although random sampling does not guarantee that the 
sample will be representative, it does allow us to assess the risk of an unrepresen-
tative sample. It is the ability to quantify this risk that will enable us to generalize 
with con­ﬁdence from a random sample to the corresponding population.
An Important Note Concerning Sample Size
It is a common misconception that if the size of a sample is relatively small compared 
to the population size, the sample cannot possibly accurately re­ﬂect the population. 
Critics of polls often make statements such as, “There are 14.6 million registered voters 
in California. How can a sample of 1000 registered voters possibly re­ﬂect public opinion 
when only about 1 in every 14,000 people is included in the sample?” These critics do not 
understand the power of random selection!
Consider a population consisting of 5000 applicants to a state university, and suppose 
that we are interested in math SAT scores for this population. A dotplot of the values in 
this population is shown in Figure 2.1(a). Figure 2.1(b) shows dotplots of the math SAT 
scores for individuals in ﬁve different random samples from the population, ranging in 
sample size from n 5 50 to n 5 1000.
Notice that each of the samples tend to re­ﬂect the distribution of scores in the popula-
tion. If we were interested in using the sample to estimate the population average or to 
say something about the variability in math SAT scores, even the smallest of the samples 
(n 5 50) pictured would provide reliable information.
Although it is possible to obtain a simple random sample that does not do a reasonable 
job of representing the population, this is likely only when the sample size is very small, 
and unless the population itself is small, this risk does not depend on what fraction of 
the population is sampled. The random selection process allows us to be con­ﬁdent that 
the resulting sample adequately re­ﬂects the population, even when the sample consists 
of only a small fraction of the population.
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
BananaStock/Alamy Limited 
Step-by-step technology 
instructions available online

 2.2   Sampling 
●  41
Other Sampling Methods
Simple random sampling provides researchers with a sampling method that is objective 
and free of selection bias. In some settings, however, alternative sampling methods may be 
less costly, easier to implement, and sometimes even more accurate.
Stratiﬁed Random Sampling
When the entire population can be divided into a set of nonoverlapping subgroups, a 
method known as stratiﬁed sampling often proves easier to implement and more cost-
effective than simple random sampling. In stratiﬁed random sampling, separate simple 
random samples are independently selected from each subgroup.
For example, to estimate the average cost of malpractice insurance, a researcher might 
ﬁnd it convenient to view the population of all doctors practicing in a particular city as 
being made up of four subpopulations: (1) surgeons, (2) internists and family practitioners, 
(3) obstetricians, and (4) a group that includes all other areas of specialization. Rather 
than taking a random simple sample from the population of all doctors, the researcher 
could take four separate simple random samples—one from the group of surgeons, another 
from the internists and family practitioners, and so on. These four samples would provide 
information about the four subgroups as well as information about the overall population 
of doctors.
When the population is divided in this way, the subgroups are called strata and each 
individual subgroup is called a stratum (the singular of strata). Stratiﬁed sampling entails se-
lecting a separate simple random sample from each stratum. Stratiﬁed sampling can be used 
instead of simple random sampling if it is important to obtain information about character-
istics of the individual strata as well as of the entire population, although a stratiﬁed sample 
300
400
500
600
700
800
Each dot represents up to 3 observations.
Each dot represents up to 3 observations.
300
400
500
600
700
800
n = 50
n = 100
n = 250
n = 500
n = 1000
Figure  2.1
(a) Dotplot of math SAT scores for the 
entire population.  
(b) Dotplots of math SAT scores for 
random samples of sizes 50, 100, 250, 
500, and 1000.

42 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
is not required to do this—subgroup estimates can also be obtained by using an appropriate 
subset of data from a simple random sample.
The real advantage of stratiﬁed sampling is that it often allows us to make more accurate 
inferences about a population than does simple random sampling. In general, it is much 
easier to produce relatively accurate estimates of characteristics of a homogeneous group 
than of a heterogeneous group.
For example, even with a small sample, it is possible to obtain an accurate estimate of 
the average grade point average (GPA) of students graduating with high honors from a 
university. The individual GPAs of these students are all quite similar (a homogeneous 
group), and even a sample of three or four individuals from this subpopulation should be 
representative. On the other hand, producing a reasonably accurate estimate of the average 
GPA of all seniors at the university, a much more diverse group of GPAs, is a more dif­ﬁ­cult 
task. This means that if a varied population can be divided into strata, with each stratum 
being much more homogeneous than the population with respect to the characteristic of 
interest, then a stratiﬁed random sample can produce more accurate estimates of popula-
tion characteristics than a simple random sample of the same size.
Cluster Sampling
Sometimes it is easier to select groups of individuals from a population than it is to select 
individuals themselves. Cluster sampling involves dividing the population of interest into 
nonoverlapping subgroups, called clusters. Clusters are then selected at random, and then 
all individuals in the selected clusters are included in the sample.
For example, suppose that a large urban high school has 600 senior students, all of 
whom are enrolled in a ﬁrst period homeroom. There are 24 senior homerooms, each with 
approximately 25 students. If school administrators wanted to select a sample of about 75 
seniors to participate in an evaluation of the college and career placement advising avail-
able to students, they might ﬁnd it much easier to select three of the senior homerooms at 
random and then include all the students in the selected homerooms in the sample. Then 
a survey could be administered to all students in the selected homerooms at the same 
time—certainly easier logistically than randomly selecting 75 individual seniors and then 
administering the survey to these students.
Because whole clusters are selected, the ideal situation for cluster sampling is when each 
cluster mirrors the characteristics of the population. When this is the case, a small number 
of clusters results in a sample that is representative of the population. If it is not reasonable 
to think that the variability present in the population is re­ﬂected in each cluster, as is often 
the case when the cluster sizes are small, then it becomes important to ensure that a large 
number of clusters are included in the sample.
Be careful not to confuse clustering and stratiﬁcation. Even though both of these 
sampling strategies involve dividing the population into subgroups, both the way 
in which the subgroups are sampled and the optimal strategy for creating the 
subgroups are different.
In stratiﬁed sampling, we sample from every subgroup, whereas in cluster 
sampling, we include only selected whole clusters in the sample. Because of this 
difference, to increase the chance of obtaining a sample that is representative of 
the population, we want to create homogeneous groups for strata and 
heterogeneous (re­ﬂect­ing the variability in the population) groups for clusters.
Systematic Sampling
Systematic sampling is a procedure that can be used when it is possible to view the popu-
lation of interest as consisting of a list or some other sequential arrangement. A value k is 
speci­ﬁed (for example, k 5 50 or k 5 200). Then one of the ﬁrst k individuals is selected 
at random, after which every kth individual in the sequence is included in the sample. A 
sample selected in this way is called a 1 in k systematic sample.

 2.2   Sampling 
●  43
For example, a sample of faculty members at a university might be selected from the 
faculty phone directory. One of the ﬁrst k 5 20 faculty members listed could be selected at 
random, and then every 20th faculty member after that on the list would also be included 
in the sample. This would result in a 1 in 20 systematic sample.
The value of k for a 1 in k systematic sample is generally chosen to achieve a desired 
sample size. For example, in the faculty directory scenario just described, if there were 900 
faculty members at the university, the 1 in 20 systematic sample described would result in 
a sample size of 45. If a sample size of 100 was desired, a 1 in 9 systematic sample could 
be used (because 900/100 5 9).
As long as there are no repeating patterns in the population sequence, systematic sam-
pling works reasonably well. However, if there are such patterns, systematic sampling can 
result in an unrepresentative sample. For example, suppose that workers at the entry sta-
tion of a state park have recorded the number of visitors to the park each day for the past 
10 years. In a 1 in 70 systematic sample of days from this list, we would pick one of the 
first 70 days at random and then every 70th day after that. But if the first day selected hap-
pened to be a Wednesday, every day selected in the entire sample would also be a Wednes-
day (because there are 7 days a week and 70 is a multiple of 7). It is unlikely that such a 
sample would be representative of the entire collection of days. The number of visitors is 
likely to be higher on weekend days, and no Saturdays or Sundays would be included in 
the sample.
Convenience Sampling: Don’t Go There!
It is often tempting to resort to convenience sampling—that is, using an easily available or 
convenient group to form a sample. This is a recipe for disaster! Results from such samples 
are rarely informative, and it is a mistake to try to generalize from a convenience sample to 
any larger population.
One common form of convenience sampling is sometimes called voluntary response 
sampling. Such samples rely entirely on individuals who volunteer to be a part of the 
sample, often by responding to an advertisement, calling a publicized telephone number 
to register an opinion, or logging on to an Internet site to complete a survey. It is extremely 
unlikely that individuals participating in such voluntary response surveys are representa-
tive of any larger population of interest.
EXERCISES 2.13 - 2.32
2.13	 A New York psychologist recommends that if you 
feel the need to check your e-mail in the middle of 
a movie or if you sleep with your cell phone next 
to your bed, it might be time to “power off” (AARP 
Bulletin, September 2010). Suppose that you want to 
learn about the proportion of students at your college 
who would feel the need to check e-mail during the 
middle of a movie and that you have access to a list 
of all students enrolled at your college. Describe how 
you would use this list to select a simple random 
sample of 100 students.
2.14	 As part of a curriculum review, the psychology 
department would like to select a simple random 
sample of 20 of last year’s 140 graduates to obtain 
information on how graduates perceived the value of 
the curriculum. Describe two different methods that 
might be used to select the sample.
2.15	 A petition with 500 signatures is submitted to a 
university’s student council. The council president 
would like to determine the proportion of those who 
signed the petition who are actually registered stu-
dents at the university. There is not enough time to 
check all 500 names with the registrar, so the council 
president decides to select a simple random sample 
of 30 signatures. Describe how this might be done.
2.16	 The article “Bicyclists and Other Cyclists” (Annals 
of Emergency Medicine [2010]: 426) reported that in 
2008, there were 716 bicyclists killed on public 
roadways in the United States, and that the average 
age of the cyclists killed was 41 years. These figures 
were based on an analysis of the records of all traffic-
related deaths of bicyclists on U.S. public roadways 
(this information is kept by the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration).
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available

44 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
a. Does the group of 716 bicycle fatalities represent a 
census or a sample of the 2008 bicycle fatalities?
b. If the population of interest is 2008 bicycle traffic 
fatalities, is the given average age of 41 years a 
number that describes a sample or a number that 
describes the population?
2.17	 The article “Teenage Physical Activity Reduces Risk of 
Cognitive Impairment in Later Life” (Journal of the Amer-
ican Geriatrics Society [2010]) describes a study of more 
than 9000 women from Maryland, Minnesota, Ore-
gon, and Pennsylvania. The women were asked about 
their physical activity as teenagers and at ages 30 and 
50. A press release about this study (www.wiley.com) 
generalized the results of this study to all American 
women. In the press release, the researcher who 
conducted the study is quoted as saying
Our study shows that women who are regularly physi-
cally active at any age have lower risk of cognitive im-
pairment than those who are inactive but that being 
physically active at teenage is most important in prevent-
ing cognitive impairment.
Answer the following four questions for this observa-
tional study. (Hint: Reviewing Examples 2.1 and 2.2 
might be helpful.)
a. What is the population of interest?
b. Was the sample selected in a reasonable way?
c. Is the sample likely to be representative of the 
population of interest?
d. Are there any obvious sources of bias?
2.18	 ▼ For each of the situations described, state whether 
the sampling procedure is simple random sampling, 
strat­i­ﬁed random sampling, cluster sampling, system-
atic sampling, or convenience sampling.
a.	 All first-year students at a university are enrolled 
in one of 30 sections of a seminar course. To select 
a sample of freshmen at this university, a research-
er selects four sections of the seminar course at 
random from the 30 sections and all students 
in the four selected sections are included in the 
sample. 
b.	To obtain a sample of students, faculty, and staff 
at a university, a researcher randomly selects 
50 faculty members from a list of faculty, 100 stu-
dents from a list of students, and 30 staff members 
from a list of staff. 
c.	 A university researcher obtains a sample of students 
at his university by using the 85 students enrolled 
in his Psychology 101 class. 
d.	To obtain a sample of the seniors at a particular 
high school, a researcher writes the name of each 
senior on a slip of paper, places the slips in a box 
and mixes them, and then selects 10 slips. The 
students whose names are on the selected slips of 
paper are included in the sample.
e.	 To obtain a sample of those attending a basketball 
game, a researcher selects the 24th person through 
the door. Then, every 50th person after that is also 
included in the sample. 
2.19	 Of the 6500 students enrolled at a community col-
lege, 3000 are part time and the other 3500 are full 
time. The college can provide a list of students that 
is sorted so that all full-time students are listed ﬁrst, 
followed by the part-time students.
a.	 Describe a procedure for selecting a stratiﬁed 
random sample that uses full-time and part-
time students as the two strata and that includes 
10 students from each stratum.
b.	Does every student at this community college 
have the same chance of being selected for inclu-
sion in the sample? Explain.
2.20	 Brieﬂy explain why it is advisable to avoid the use of 
convenience samples.
2.21	 A sample of pages from this book is to be obtained, 
and the number of words on each selected page will 
be determined. For the purposes of this exercise, 
equations are not counted as words and a number is 
counted as a word only if it is spelled out—that is, 
ten is counted as a word, but 10 is not.
a.	 Describe a sampling procedure that would result in 
a simple random sample of pages from this book.
b.	Describe a sampling procedure that would result in 
a stratiﬁed random sample. Explain why you chose 
the spe­ciﬁc strata used in your sampling plan.
c.	 Describe a sampling procedure that would result 
in a systematic sample.
d.	Describe a sampling procedure that would result 
in a cluster sample.
e.	 Using the process you gave in Part (a), select a sim-
ple random sample of at least 20 pages, and record 
the number of words on each of the selected pages. 
Construct a dotplot of the resulting sample values, 
and write a sentence or two commenting on what it 
reveals about the number of words on a page.
f.	 Using the process you gave in Part (b), select a 
stratiﬁed random sample that includes a total of at 
least 20 selected pages, and record the number of 
words on each of the selected pages. Construct a 
dotplot of the resulting sample values, and write 
a sentence or two commenting on what it reveals 
about the number of words on a page.
2.22	 In 2000, the chairman of a California ballot initia-
tive campaign to add “none of the above” to the list 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available

 2.2   Sampling 
●  45
of ballot options in all candidate races was quite 
critical of a Field poll that showed his measure 
trailing by 10 percentage points. The poll was based 
on a random sample of 1000 registered voters in 
California. He is quoted by the Associated Press 
(Janu­ary 30, 2000) as saying, “Field’s sample in that 
poll equates to one out of 17,505 voters,” and he 
added that this was so dishonest that Field should 
get out of the polling business! If you worked on the 
Field poll, how would you respond to this criticism? 
(Hint: See discussion of sample size on page 40.)
2.23	 The authors of the paper “Digital Inequality: Differ-
ences in Young Adults’ Use of the Internet” (Commu-
nication Research [2008]: 602–621) were interested in 
determining if people with higher levels of educa-
tion use the Internet in different ways than those 
who do not have as much formal education. To 
answer this question, they used data from a national 
telephone survey. Approximately 1300 households 
were selected for the survey, and 270 of them 
completed the interview. What type of bias should 
the researchers be concerned about and why? (Hint: 
See the box on page 37 that contains the definitions 
of different types of bias.)
2.24	 The authors of the paper “Illicit Use of Psychostimu-
lants among College Students” (Psychology, Health & 
Medicine [2002]: 283–287) surveyed college students 
about their use of legal and illegal stimulants. The 
sample of students surveyed consisted of students 
enrolled in a psychology class at a small, competitive 
college in the United States.
a.	 Was this sample a simple random sample, a strati-
fied sample, a systematic sample, or a convenience 
sample? Explain.
b.	Give two reasons why the estimate of the propor-
tion of students who reported using illegal stimu-
lants based on data from this survey should not be 
generalized to all U.S. college students.
2.25	 The paper “Deception and Design: The Impact of Com-
munication Technology on Lying Behavior” (Computer-
Human Interaction [2009]: 130–136) describes an 
investigation into whether lying is less common in 
face-to-face communication than in other forms 
of communication such as phone conversations or 
e-mail. Participants in this study were 30 students in 
an upper-division communications course at Cornell 
University who received course credit for participa-
tion. Participants were asked to record all of their 
social interactions for a week, making note of any 
lies told.
Based on data from these records, the authors 
of the paper concluded that students lie more 
often in phone conversations than in face-to-face 
conversations and more often in face-to-face conver-
sations than in e-mail.
Discuss the limitations of this study, commenting on 
the way the sample was selected and potential sources 
of bias.
2.26	 The authors of the paper “Popular Video Games: 
Quantifying the Presentation of Violence and its 
Context” (Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 
[2003]: 58–76) investigated the relationship between 
video game rating—suitable for everyone (E), suit-
able for 13 years of age and older (T), and suitable 
for 17 years of age and older (M)—and the number 
of violent interactions per minute of play. The sample 
of games examined consisted of 60 video games—the 
20 most popular (by sales) for each of three game 
systems.
The researchers concluded that video games rated 
for older children had significantly more violent in-
teractions per minute than did those games rated for 
more general audiences.
a.	 Do you think that the sample of 60 games was 
selected in a way that makes it reasonable to think 
it is representative of the population of all video 
games?
b.	Is it reasonable to generalize the researchers’ 
conclusion to all video games? Explain why or 
why not.
2.27	 Participants in a study of honesty in online dating 
profiles were recruited through print and online 
advertisements in the Village Voice, one of New York 
City’s most prominent weekly newspapers, and on 
Craigslist New York City (“The Truth About Lying in 
Online Dating Profiles,” Computer-Human Interaction 
[2007]: 1–4). The actual height, weight, and age of the 
participants were compared to what appeared in their 
online dating profiles. The resulting data was then 
used to draw conclusions about how common decep-
tion was in online dating profiles.
What concerns do you have about generalizing con-
clusions based on data from this study to the popula-
tion of all people who have an online dating profile? 
Be sure to address at least two concerns and give the 
reason for your concern.
2.28	 The report “Undergraduate Students and Credit Cards 
in 2004: An Analysis of Usage Rates and Trends” (Nellie 
Mae, May 2005) estimated that 21% of undergradu-
ates with credit cards pay them off each month and 
that the average outstanding balance on undergradu-
ates’ credit cards is $2169. These estimates were 
based on an online survey that was sent to 1260 
students. Responses were received from 132 of these 
students. Is it reasonable to generalize the reported 
estimates to the population of all undergraduate 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available

46 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
students? Address at least two possible sources of 
bias in your answer.
2.29	 The ﬁ­nan­cial aid advisor of a university plans to use a 
stratified random sample to estimate the average amount of 
money that students spend on textbooks each term. For 
each of the following proposed stratiﬁcation schemes, dis-
cuss whether it would be worthwhile to stratify the uni-
versity students in this manner. (Hint: Remember that it 
is desirable to create strata that are homogeneous.)
a.	 Strata corresponding to class standing (freshman, 
sophomore, junior, senior, graduate student)
b.	Strata corresponding to ﬁeld of study, using the 
following categories: engineering, architecture, 
business, other
c.	 Strata corresponding to the ﬁrst letter of the last 
name: A–E, F–K, etc.
2.30	 Suppose that you were asked to help design a survey 
of adult city residents in order to estimate the pro-
portion who would support a sales tax increase. The 
plan is to use a stratiﬁed random sample, and three 
stratiﬁcation schemes have been proposed.
	
	 Scheme 1:  Stratify adult residents into four strata 
based on the ﬁrst letter of their last name 
(A–G, H–N, O–T, U–Z).
	
	 Scheme 2:  Stratify adult residents into three strata: 
college students, nonstudents who work 
full time, nonstudents who do not work 
full time.
	
	 Scheme 3:  Stratify adult residents into ﬁve strata by 
randomly assigning residents into one of 
the ﬁve strata.
Which of the three stratiﬁcation schemes would be 
best in this situation? Explain.
2.31	 The article “High Levels of Mercury Are Found in 
Californians” (Los Angeles Times, Feb­ru­ary 9, 2006) 
describes a study in which hair samples were tested 
for mercury. The hair samples were obtained from 
more than 6000 people who voluntarily sent hair 
samples to researchers at Greenpeace and The Sierra 
Club. The researchers found that nearly one-third 
of those tested had mercury levels that exceeded the 
concentration thought to be safe. Is it reasonable to 
generalize this result to the larger population of U.S. 
adults? Explain why or why not.
2.32	 ▼ Whether or not to continue a Mardi Gras Parade 
through downtown San Luis Obispo, CA, is a hotly 
debated topic. The parade is popular with students 
and many residents, but some celebrations have 
led to complaints and a call to eliminate the pa-
rade. The local newspaper conducted online and 
telephone surveys of its readers and was surprised 
by the results. The survey web site received more 
than 400 responses, with more than 60% favoring 
continuing the parade, while the telephone response 
line received more than 120 calls, with more than 
90% favoring banning the parade (San Luis Obispo 
Tribune, March 3, 2004). What factors may have 
contributed to these very different results?
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
 2.3  
Simple Comparative Experiments
Sometimes the questions we are trying to answer deal with the effect of certain explana-
tory variables on some response. Such questions are often of the form, “What happens 
when . . . ?” or “What is the effect of . . . ?” For example, an industrial engineer may be 
considering two different workstation designs and might want to know whether the choice 
of design affects work performance. A medical researcher may want to determine how a 
proposed treatment for a disease compares to a standard treatment. Experiments provide a 
way to collect data to answer these types of questions.
Experiment: A study in which one or more explanatory variables are 
manipulated in order to observe the effect on a response variable.
Explanatory variables: Those variables that have values that are controlled by 
the experimenter. Explanatory variables are also called factors.
Response variable: A variable that is thought to be related to the explanatory 
variable in an experiment. It is measured as part of the experiment, but it is not 
controlled by the experimenter.
Experimental condition: Any particular combination of values for the 
explanatory variables. Experimental conditions are also called treatments.
DEFINITION

 2.3   Simple Comparative Experiments 
●  47
Suppose we are interested in determining the effect of room temperature on performance 
on a first-year calculus exam. In this case, the explanatory variable is room temperature (it 
can be manipulated by the experimenter). The response variable is exam performance (the 
variable that is not controlled by the experimenter and that will be measured).
In general, we can identify the explanatory variables and the response variable easily if 
we can describe the purpose of the experiment in the following terms:
The purpose is to assess the effect of                on               .
	
explanatory	
response
	
variable	
variable
Let’s return to the example of an experiment to assess the effect of room temperature on 
exam performance. We might decide to use two room temperature settings, 65° and 75°. 
This would result in an experiment with two experimental conditions (or equivalently, two 
treatments) corresponding to the two temperature settings.
Suppose that there are 10 sections of first-semester calculus that have agreed to partici-
pate in our study. We might design an experiment in this way: Set the room temperature 
(in degrees Fahrenheit) to 65° in five of the rooms and to 75° in the other five rooms on 
test day, and then compare the exam scores for the 65° group and the 75° group. Suppose 
that the average exam score for the students in the 65° group was noticeably higher than 
the average for the 75° group. Could we conclude that the increased temperature resulted 
in a lower average score? 
Based on the information given, the answer is no because many other factors might be 
related to exam score. Were the sections at different times of the day? Did they have the 
same instructor? Different textbooks? Did the sections differ with respect to the abilities 
of the students? Any of these other factors could provide a plausible explanation (having 
nothing to do with room temperature) for why the average test score was different for the 
two groups. It is not possible to separate the effect of temperature from the effects of these 
other factors. As a consequence, simply setting the room temperatures as described makes 
for a poorly designed experiment. 
A well-designed experiment requires more than just manipulating the explana-
tory variables. The design must also eliminate other possible explanations for 
any observed differences in the response variable.
The goal is to design an experiment that will allow us to determine the effects of the ex-
planatory variables on the chosen response variable. To do this, we must take into consid-
eration any extraneous variables that, although not of interest in the current study, might 
also affect the response variable.
Extraneous variable: A variable that is not one of the explanatory variables in 
the study but is thought to affect the response variable.
DEFINITION
A well-designed experiment copes with the potential effects of extraneous variables by 
using random assignment to experimental conditions and sometimes also by incorporating 
direct control and/or blocking into the design of the experiment. Each of these strategies—
random assignment, direct control, and blocking—is described in the paragraphs that follow.
A researcher can directly control some extraneous variables. In the calculus test example, 
the textbook used is an extraneous variable because part of the differences in test results 
might be attributed to this variable. We could control this variable directly, by requir-
ing that all sections use the same textbook. Then any observed differences in test scores 
between temperature groups could not be explained by the use of different textbooks. The 

48 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
extraneous variable time of day might also be directly controlled in this way by having all 
sections meet at the same time.
The effects of some extraneous variables can be ﬁl­tered out by a process known as block-
ing. Extraneous variables that are addressed through blocking are called blocking variables. 
An investigator using blocking creates groups (called blocks) that are similar with respect 
to blocking variables. Then all treatments are tried in each block. In our example, we 
might use instructor as a blocking variable. If five instructors are each teaching two sections 
of calculus, we would make sure that for each instructor, one section was part of the 65° 
group and the other section was part of the 75° group. With this design, if we see a differ-
ence in exam scores for the two temperature groups, the extraneous variable instructor can 
be ruled out as a possible explanation, because all five instructors’ students were present 
in each temperature group. (Had we controlled the instructor variable by choosing to have 
only one instructor, that would be an example of direct control. Of course we can’t directly 
control both time of day and instructor.) 
If one instructor taught all the 65° sections and another taught all the 75° sections, we 
would be unable to distinguish the effect of temperature from the effect of the instructor. 
In this situation, the two variables (temperature and instructor) are said to be confounded.
Two variables are confounded if their effects on the response variable cannot 
be distinguished from one another.
If an extraneous variable is confounded with the explanatory variables (which define the 
treatments), it is not possible to draw an unambiguous conclusion about the effect of the 
treatment on the response. Both direct control and blocking are effective in ensuring that 
the controlled variables and blocking variables are not confounded with the variables that 
de­ﬁne the treatments.
We can directly control some extraneous variables by holding them constant, and we 
can use blocking to create groups that are similar to essentially ﬁl­ter out the effect of other 
extraneous variables. But what about variables, such as student ability in our calculus test 
example, which cannot be controlled by the experimenter and which would be dif­ﬁ­cult to 
use as blocking variables? These extraneous variables are handled by the use of random 
assignment to experimental groups. 
Random assignment ensures that our experiment does not systematically favor one 
experimental condition over any other and attempts to create experimental groups that 
are as much alike as possible. For example, if the students requesting calculus could 
be assigned to one of the ten available sections using a random mechanism, we would 
expect the resulting groups to be similar with respect to student ability as well as with 
respect to other extraneous variables that are not directly controlled or used as a basis 
for blocking. 
Notice that random assignment in an experiment is different from random selection of 
subjects. The ideal situation would be to have both random selection of subjects and random 
assignment of subjects to experimental conditions, as this would allow conclusions from the 
experiment to be generalized to a larger population. 
For many experiments the random selection of subjects is not possible. As long 
as subjects are assigned at random to experimental conditions, it is still possible 
to assess treatment effects.
To get a sense of how random assignment tends to create similar groups, suppose that 
50 college freshmen are available to participate as subjects in an experiment to investigate 
whether completing an online review of course material before an exam improves exam 
performance. The 50 subjects vary quite a bit with respect to achievement, which is re­
ﬂected in their math and verbal SAT scores, as shown in Figure 2.2.

 2.3   Simple Comparative Experiments 
●  49
If these 50 students are to be assigned to the two experimental groups (one that will com-
plete the online review and one that will not), we want to make sure that the assignment of 
students to groups does not favor one group over the other by tending to assign the higher 
achieving students to one group and the lower achieving students to the other.
Creating groups of students with similar achievement levels in a way that considers both 
verbal and math SAT scores simultaneously would be dif­ﬁ­cult, so we rely on random as-
signment. Figure 2.3(a) shows the math SAT scores of the students assigned to each of the 
two experimental groups (one shown in orange and one shown in blue) for each of three 
different random assignments of students to groups. Figure 2.3(b) shows the verbal SAT 
scores for the two experimental groups for each of the same three random assignments. 
Notice that each of the three random assignments produced groups that are similar with 
respect to both verbal and math SAT scores. So, if any of these three assignments were used 
and the two groups differed on exam performance, we could rule out differences in math 
or verbal SAT scores as possible competing explanations for the difference.
Figure  2.2
Dotplots of math and verbal SAT 
scores for 50 freshmen.
500
600
700
800
Verbal
Math
Figure  2.3
Dotplots for three different random 
assignments to two groups, one 
shown in orange and one shown in 
blue:  
(a) math SAT score;  
(b) verbal SAT score.
500
600
700
800
(a)
500
600
700
800
(b)
Not only will random assignment tend to create groups that are similar with respect 
to verbal and math SAT scores, but it will also tend to even out the groups with respect to 
other extraneous variables. 
As long as the number of subjects is not too small, we can rely on the random 
assignment to produce comparable experimental groups. This is the reason that 
random assignment is a part of all well-designed experiments.
Not all experiments require the use of human subjects. For example, a researcher in-
terested in comparing the effect of three different gasoline additives on gas mileage might 
conduct an experiment using a single car with an empty tank. One gallon of gas with one 
of the additives will be put in the tank, and the car will be driven along a standard route 
at a constant speed until it runs out of gas. The total distance traveled on the gallon of gas 
could then be recorded. This could be repeated a number of times—10, for example—with 
each additive.
The experiment just described can be viewed as consisting of a sequence of trials. 
Because a number of extraneous variables (such as variations in environmental conditions 
like wind speed or humidity and small variations in the condition of the car) might have 
an effect on gas mileage, it would not be a good idea to use additive 1 for the ﬁrst 10 tri-
als, additive 2 for the next 10 trials, and so on. A better approach would be to randomly 
assign additive 1 to 10 of the 30 planned trials, and then randomly assign additive 2 to 10 

50 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
of the remaining 20 trials. The resulting plan for carrying out the experiment might look 
as follows:
Trial
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
. . .
30
Additive
2
2
3
3
2
1
2
. . .
  1
When an experiment can be viewed as a sequence of trials, random assignment involves 
the random assignment of treatments to trials. Remember that random assignment—either 
of subjects to treatments or of treatments to trials—is a critical component of a good experiment.
Random assignment can be effective only if the number of subjects or observations in each 
experimental condition (treatment) is large enough for each experimental group to reliably 
re­ﬂect variability in the population. For example, if there were only 20 students requesting 
calculus, it is unlikely that we would get equivalent groups for comparison, even with ran-
dom assignment to the ten sections. Replication is the design strategy of making multiple 
observations for each experimental condition. Together, replication and random assignment 
allow the researcher to be reasonably con­ﬁdent of comparable experimental groups.
To illustrate the design of a simple experiment, consider the dilemma of Anna, a waitress 
in a local restaurant. She would like to increase the amount of her tips, and her strategy is 
simple: She will write “Thank you” on the back of some of the checks before giving them 
to the patrons and on others she will write nothing. She plans to calculate the percentage 
of the tip as her measure of success (for example, a 15% tip is common). She will compare 
the average percentage of the tips calculated from checks with and without the handwritten 
“Thank you.” If writing “Thank you” does not produce higher tips, she may try a different 
strategy.
Anna wonders whether writing “Thank you” on the customers’ bills will have an effect on 
the amount of her tip. In the language of experimentation, we would refer to the writing of 
“Thank you” and the not writing of “Thank you” as treatments (the two experimental con-
ditions to be compared in the experiment). The two treatments together are the possible 
values of the explanatory variable. The tipping percentage is the response variable. The 
idea behind this terminology is that the tipping percentage is a response to the treatments 
writing “Thank you” or not writing “Thank you.” 
Anna’s experiment may be thought of as an attempt to explain the variability in the response 
variable in terms of its presumed cause, the variability in the explanatory variable. That is, as 
she manipulates the explanatory variable, she expects the response by her customers to vary. 
Anna has a good start, but now she must consider the four fundamental design principles.
Replication. Anna cannot run a successful experiment by gathering tipping information 
on only one person for each treatment. There is no reason to believe that any single tipping 
Random Assignment
Random assignment (of subjects to treatments or of treatments to trials) to 
ensure that the experiment does not systematically favor one experimental 
condition (treatment) over another.
Blocking
Using extraneous variables to create groups (blocks) that are similar. All experi-
mental conditions (treatments) are then tried in each block.
Direct Control
Holding extraneous variables constant so that their effects are not confounded 
with those of the experimental conditions (treatments).
Replication
Ensuring that there is an adequate number of observations for each experimen-
tal condition.
Principles of Experimental Design
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 2.3   Simple Comparative Experiments 
●  51
incident is representative of what would happen in other incidents, and therefore it would 
be impossible to evaluate the two treatments with only two subjects. To interpret the effects 
of a particular treatment, she must replicate each treatment in the experiment.
Blocking. Suppose that Anna works on both Thursdays and Fridays. Because day of the 
week might affect tipping behavior, Anna should block on day of the week and make 
sure that observations for both treatments are made on each of the two days.
Direct Control and Random Assignment. There are a number of extraneous variables 
that might have an effect on the size of tip. Some restaurant patrons will be seated near 
the window with a nice view. Some will have to wait for a table, whereas others may 
be seated immediately. Some may be on a ﬁxed income and cannot afford a large tip. 
Some of these variables can be directly controlled. For example, Anna may choose to 
use only window tables in her experiment, thus eliminating table location as a potential 
confounding variable. Other variables, such as length of wait and customer income, can-
not be easily controlled. As a result, it is important that Anna use random assignment to 
decide which of the window tables will be in the “Thank you” group and which will be in 
the “No thank you” group. She might do this by ﬂipping a coin as she prepares the check 
for each window table. If the coin lands with the head side up, she could write “Thank 
you” on the bill, omitting the “Thank you” when a tail is observed.
The accompanying box summarizes how experimental designs deal with extraneous 
variables.
Extraneous variables are variables other than the explanatory variables in an 
experiment that may also have an effect on the response variable. There are sev-
eral strategies for dealing with extraneous variables in order to avoid confounding.
Extraneous variables that we know about and choose to incorporate into 
the experimental design:
Strategies
Direct control—holds extraneous variables fixed so that they can’t affect 
the response variable
Blocking—allows for valid comparisons because each treatment is tried in 
each block
Sometimes extraneous variables are unknown to the experimenter, or might be 
impossible or very expensive to control. 
Extraneous variables that are not incorporated into the experimental design 
through direct control or blocking:
Strategy
Random assignment
Extraneous variables that are not incorporated into the design of the 
experiment are sometimes called lurking variables.*
*For more on lurking variables, see “Lurking Variables: Some Examples” (The American 
Statistician [1981]: 227–233).
Taking Extraneous Variables into Account
A Note on Random Assignment
There are several strategies that can be used to perform random assignment of subjects to 
treatments or treatments to trials. Two common strategies are:
●
●Write the name of each subject or a unique number that corresponds to a subject on 
a slip of paper. Place all of the slips in a container and mix well. Then draw out the 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

52 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
desired number of slips to determine those that will be assigned to the first treatment 
group. This process of drawing slips of paper then continues until all treatment groups 
have been determined.
●
●Assign each subject a unique number from 1 to n, where n represents the total number 
of subjects. Use a random number generator or table of random numbers to obtain 
numbers that will identify which subjects will be assigned to the first treatment group. 
This process would be repeated, ignoring any random numbers generated that cor-
respond to subjects that have already been assigned to a treatment group, until all 
treatment groups have been formed.
The two strategies above work well and can be used for experiments in which the desired 
number of subjects in each treatment group has been predetermined.
Another strategy that is sometimes employed is to use a random mechanism (such as 
tossing a coin or rolling a die) to determine which treatment will be assigned to a particu-
lar subject. For example, in an experiment with two treatments, you might toss a coin to 
determine if the first subject is assigned to treatment 1 or treatment 2. This could continue 
for each subject—if the coin lands H, the subject is assigned to treatment 1, and if the coin 
lands T, the subject is assigned to treatment 2. This strategy is fine, but may result in treat-
ment groups of unequal size. For example, in an experiment with 100 subjects, 53 might 
be assigned to treatment 1 and 47 to treatment 2. If this is acceptable, the coin flip strategy 
is a reasonable way to assign subjects to treatments.
But suppose you want to ensure that there is an equal number of subjects in each 
treatment group. Is it acceptable to use the coin flip strategy until one treatment group 
is complete and then just assign all of the remaining subjects to groups that are not yet 
full? The answer to this question is that it is probably not acceptable. For example, sup-
pose a list of 20 subjects is in order by age from youngest to oldest and that we want 
to form two treatment groups each consisting of 10 subjects. Tossing a coin to make 
the assignments might result in the following (based on using the first row of random 
digits in Appendix A, Table 1, with an even number representing H and an odd number 
representing T):
Subject
Random Number
Coin Toss Equivalent
Treatment Group
  1
4
H
1
  2
5
T
2
  3
1
T
2
  4
8
H
1
  5
5
T
2
  6
0
H
1
  7
3
T
2
  8
3
T
2
  9
7
T
2
10
1
T
2
11
2
H
1
12
8
H
1
13
4
H
1
14
5
T
2
15
1
T
2
16
Treatment group 2 filled. Assign all others  
to treatment group 1.
1
17
1
18
1
19
1
20
1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 2.3   Simple Comparative Experiments 
●  53
If the list of subjects was ordered by age, treatment group 1 would end up with a dispro-
portionate number of older people. This strategy usually results in one treatment group draw-
ing disproportionately from the end of the list. This means that the only time the strategy 
of assigning at random until groups fill up and then assigning the remaining subjects to the 
group that is not full is reasonable is if you can be sure that the list is in random order with 
respect to all variables that might be related to the response variable. Because of this, it is best 
to avoid this strategy. Activity 2.5 investigates potential difficulties with this type of strategy.
On the other hand, if the number of subjects is large, it may not be important that every 
treatment group has exactly the same number of subjects. If this is the case, it is reasonable 
to use a coin flip strategy (or other strategies of this type) that does not involve stopping 
assignment of subjects to a group that becomes full.
Evaluating an Experimental Design
The experimental design principles (see page 50) provide a framework for thinking about 
an experimental design, as illustrated in the following examples.
Example 2.4 
Revenge Is Sweet
The article “The Neural Basis of Altruistic Punishment” (Science, Au­gust 27, 2004) described a 
study that examined motivation for revenge. Subjects in the study were all healthy, right-
handed men. Subjects played a game with another player in which they could both earn 
money by trusting each other or one player could double-cross the other player and keep 
all of the money. In some cases the double cross was required by the rules of the game in 
certain circumstances, while in other cases the double cross was the result of a deliberate 
choice. The victim of a double cross was then given the opportunity to retaliate by imposing 
a ﬁne, but sometimes the victim had to spend some of his own money in order to impose 
the ﬁne. This study was an experiment with four experimental conditions or treatments:
1.	 double cross not deliberate (double cross dictated by the rules of the game)  
and no cost to the victim to retaliate
2.	 double cross deliberate and no cost to the victim to retaliate
3.	 double cross not deliberate and a cost to the victim to retaliate
4.	 double cross deliberate and a cost to the victim to retaliate
All subjects chose revenge (imposed a ﬁne on the double-crosser) when the double cross 
was deliberate and retaliation was free, and 86% of the subjects chose revenge when the 
double cross was deliberate, even if it cost them money. Only 21% imposed a ﬁne if the 
double cross was dictated by the rules of the game and was not deliberate.
Assuming that the researchers randomly assigned the subjects to the four experimental 
conditions, this study is an experiment that incorporated random assignment, direct con-
trol (controlled sex, health, and handedness by using only healthy, right-handed males as 
subjects), and replication (many subjects assigned to each experimental condition).
■
Example 2.5 
Subliminal Messages
The article “The Most Powerful Manipulative Messages Are Hiding in Plain Sight” (Chronicle 
of Higher Education, Janu­ary 29, 1999) reported the results of an interesting experiment on 
priming—the effect of subliminal messages on how we behave. In the experiment, subjects 
completed a language test in which they were asked to construct a sentence using each 
word in a list of words. One group of subjects received a list of words related to politeness, 
and a second group was given a list of words related to rudeness. Subjects were told to 
complete the language test and then come into the hall and ﬁnd the researcher so that he 
could explain the next part of the test. 
When each subject came into the hall, he or she found the researcher engaged in conver-
sation. The researcher wanted to see whether the subject would interrupt the conversation. 
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

54 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
The researcher found that 63% of those primed with words related to rudeness interrupted 
the conversation, whereas only 17% of those primed with words related to politeness 
interrupted.
If we assume that the researcher randomly assigned the subjects to the two groups, then 
this study is an experiment that compares two treatments (primed with words related to 
rudeness and primed with words related to politeness). The response variable, politeness, 
has the values interrupted conversation and did not interrupt conversation. The experiment 
uses replication (many subjects in each treatment group) and random assignment to con-
trol for extraneous variables that might affect the response.	
■
Many experiments compare a group that receives a particular treatment to a control 
group that receives no treatment.
Example 2.6 
Chilling Newborns? Then You Need  
a Control Group . . .
Researchers for the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development studied 
208 infants whose brains were temporarily deprived of oxygen as a result of complications 
at birth (The New England Journal of Medicine, Oc­to­ber 13, 2005). These babies were subjects 
in an experiment to determine if reducing body temperature for three days after birth 
improved their chances of surviving without brain damage. The experiment was summa-
rized in a paper that stated “infants were randomly assigned to usual care (control group) 
or whole-body cooling.” Including a control group in the experiment provided a basis for 
comparison of death and disability rates for the proposed cooling treatment and those for 
usual care. 
Some extraneous variables that might also affect death and disability rates, such as the 
duration of oxygen deprivation, could not be directly controlled, so to ensure that the ex-
periment did not unintentionally favor one experimental condition over the other, random 
assignment of the infants to the two groups was critical. Because this was a well-designed 
experiment, the researchers were able to use the resulting data and statistical methods that 
you will see in Chapter 11 to conclude that cooling did reduce the risk of death and dis-
ability for infants deprived of oxygen at birth.	
■
Visualizing the Underlying Structure of Some Common  
Experimental Designs
Simple diagrams are sometimes used to highlight important features of some common ex-
perimental designs. The structure of an experiment that is based on random assignment of 
experimental units (the units to which treatments are assigned, usually subjects or trials) to 
one of two treatments is displayed in Figure 2.4. The diagram can be easily adapted for an 
Consider the data ❭
Understand the context ❭
Treatment A
Measure
response for
Treatment A
Treatment B
Measure
response for
Treatment B
Experimental
units/
subjects
Random
assignment
Random
assignment
Compare treatments
Figure  2.4
Diagram of an experiment 
with random assignment of 
experimental units to two 
treatments.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 2.3   Simple Comparative Experiments 
●  55
experiment with more than two treatments. In any particular setting, we would also want 
to customize the diagram by indicating what the treatments are and what response will be 
measured. This is illustrated in Example 2.7.
Example 2.7 
A Helping Hand
Can moving their hands help children learn math? This is the question investi-
gated by the authors of the paper “Gesturing Gives Children New Ideas about Math”  
(Psychological Science [2009]: 267–272). An experiment was conducted to compare 
two different methods for teaching children how to solve math problems of the form 
3 1 2 1 8 5 ____ 1 8. One method involved having students point to the 3 1 2 on the 
left side of the equal sign with one hand and then point to the blank on the right side of the 
equal sign before filling in the blank to complete the equation. The other method did not 
involve using these hand gestures. 
The paper states that the study used children ages 9 and 10 who were given a pretest 
containing six problems of the type described above. Only children who answered all six 
questions incorrectly became subjects in the experiment. There were a total of 128 subjects.
To compare the two methods, the 128 children were assigned at random to the two 
experimental conditions. Children assigned to one experimental condition were taught a 
method that used hand gestures and children assigned to the other experimental condition 
were taught a similar strategy that did not involve using hand gestures. Each child then 
took a test with six problems and the number correct was determined for each child. 
The researchers used the resulting data to reach the conclusion that the average number 
correct for children who used the method that incorporated hand gestures was significantly 
higher than the average number correct for children who were taught the method that did 
not use hand gestures.
Understand the context ❭
Method with
hand gestures
Measure number
correct on test
Method without
hand gestures
Measure number
correct on test
128 children
Random
assignment
Random
assignment
Compare number correct for
those who used hand gestures
and those who did not
Figure  2.5
Diagram for the 
experiment of 
Example 2.7.
The basic structure of this experiment can be diagramed as shown in Figure 2.5. This 
type of diagram provides a nice summary of the experiment, but notice that several impor-
tant characteristics of the experiment are not captured in the diagram. For example, the 
diagram does not show that some extraneous variables were considered by the researchers 
and directly controlled. In this example, both age and prior math knowledge were directly 
controlled by using only children who were 9 and 10 years old and who were not able 
to solve any of the questions on the pretest correctly. So, be aware that while a diagram of 
an experiment may be a useful tool, it usually cannot stand alone in describing an experimental 
design.	
■
Some experiments consist of a sequence of trials, and treatments are assigned at random 
to the trials. The diagram in Figure 2.6 illustrates the underlying structure of such an ex-
periment. Example 2.8 shows how this diagram can be customized to describe a particular 
experiment.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

56 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
Example 2.8 
Distracted? Watch Out for Those Cars!
The paper “Effect of Cell Phone Distraction on Pediatric Pedestrian Injury Risk” (Pediatrics 
[2009]: e179–e185) describes an experiment to investigate whether pedestrians who are 
talking on a cell phone are at greater risk of an accident when crossing the street than when 
not talking on a cell phone. No children were harmed in this experiment—a virtual inter-
active pedestrian environment was used! One possible way of conducting such an experi-
ment would be to have a person cross 20 streets in this virtual environment. The person 
would talk on a cell phone for some crossings and would not use the cell phone for others. 
It would be important to randomly assign the two treatments (talking on the phone, not 
talking on the phone) to the 20 trials (the 20 simulated street crossings). This would result 
in a design that did not favor one treatment over the other because the pedestrian became 
more careful with experience or more tired and, therefore, more easily distracted over time. 
The basic structure of this experiment is diagramed in Figure 2.7.
Understand the context ❭
Trials for
Treatment A
Measure
response for
Treatment A
Trials for
Treatment B
Measure
response for
Treatment B
Experimental
trials
Random
assignment
Random
assignment
Compare treatments
Figure  2.6
Diagram of an experiment 
with random assignment of 
treatments to trials.
Crossings with
cell phone
Accident or
close call:
YES or NO
Crossings
without cell
phone
Accident or
close call:
YES or NO
20 street
crossings
Random
assignment
Random
assignment
Compare accident risk
for cell phone vs.
no cell phone
Figure  2.7
Diagram for the 
experiment of Example 2.8 
with random assignment 
to trials.
The actual experiment conducted by the authors of the paper was a bit more sophisti-
cated than the one just described. In this experiment, 77 children age 10 and 11 each per-
formed simulated crossings with and without a cell phone. Random assignment was used 
to decide which children would cross first with the cell phone followed by no cell phone 
and which children could cross first with no cell phone. The structure of this experiment 
is diagramed in Figure 2.8.
As was the case in Example 2.7, notice that while the diagram is informative, by itself, 
it does not capture all of the important aspects of the design. In particular, it does not 
capture the direct control of age (only children age 10 and 11 were used as subjects in the 
experiment).	
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 2.3   Simple Comparative Experiments 
●  57
Experimental designs in which experimental units are assigned at random to treatments 
or in which treatments are assigned at random to trials (like those of the experiments in 
Examples 2.7 and 2.8) are called completely randomized designs.
Diagrams are also useful for highlighting the structure of experiments that use blocking. 
This is illustrated in Example 2.9.
Example 2.9 
A Helping Hand Revisited
Let’s return to the experiment described in Example 2.7. Take a minute to go back and 
re-read that example. The experiment described in Example 2.7, a completely random-
ized design with 128 subjects, was used to compare two different methods for teaching 
kids how to solve a particular type of math problem. Age and prior math knowledge 
were extraneous variables that the researchers thought might be related to performance 
on the math test given at the end of the lesson, so the researchers chose to directly 
control these variables. The 128 children were assigned at random to the two experi-
mental conditions (treatments). The researchers relied on random assignment to create 
treatment groups that would be roughly equivalent with respect to other extraneous 
variables.
But suppose that we were worried that gender might also be related to performance on 
the math test. One possibility would be to use direct control of gender—that is, we might 
use only boys or only girls as subjects in the experiment. Then if we saw a difference in test 
performance for the two teaching methods, it could not be due to one experimental group 
containing more boys and fewer girls than the other group. The downside to this strategy 
is that if we use only boys in the experiment, there is no basis for also generalizing any 
conclusions from the experiment to girls.
Another strategy for dealing with extraneous variables is to incorporate blocking into the 
design. In the case of gender, we could create two blocks, one consisting of girls and one 
consisting of boys. Then, once the blocks are formed, we would randomly assign the girls 
to the two treatments and randomly assign the boys to the two treatments. In the actual 
study, the group of 128 children included 81 girls and 47 boys. A diagram that shows the 
structure of an experiment that includes blocking using gender is shown in Figure 2.9.
When blocking is used, the design is called a randomized block design. Notice that one 
difference between the diagram that describes the experiment in which blocking is used 
(Figure 2.9) and the diagram of the original experiment (Figure 2.5) is the point where 
the random assignment occurs. When blocking is incorporated in an experiment, the random 
assignment to treatments occurs after the blocks have been formed and is done separately for 
each block.
Understand the context ❭
Cell phone ﬁrst,
then no cell
phone
Accident or close call
with cell phone?
Accident or close call
without cell phone?
No cell phone
ﬁrst, then cell
phone
Accident or close call
without cell phone?
Accident or close call
with cell phone?
Compare accident risk
for cell phone vs. no cell
phone for those in the
cell phone ﬁrst group
Compare accident risk
for cell phone vs. no cell
phone for those in the
no cell phone ﬁrst group
77 children
Random
assignment
Random
assignment
Compare accident
risk for cell phone vs.
no cell phone
Figure  2.8
Diagram for the experiment of 
Example 2.8 with 77 children.

■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

58 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
Before proceeding with an experiment, you should be able to give a satisfactory answer to 
each of the following 10 questions.
1.	 What is the research question that data from the experiment will be used to answer?
2.	 What is the response variable?
3.	 How will the values of the response variable be determined?
4.	 What are the explanatory variables for the experiment?
5.	 For each explanatory variable, how many different values are there, and what are 
these values?
6.	 What are the treatments for the experiment?
7.	 What extraneous variables might in­ﬂu­ence the response?
8.	 How does the design incorporate random assignment of subjects to treatments 
(or treatments to subjects) or random assignment of treatments to trials?
9.	 For each extraneous variable listed in Question 7, does the design protect against 
its potential in­ﬂu­ence on the response through blocking, direct control, or ran-
dom assignment?
10.	 Will you be able to answer the research question using the data collected in this 
experiment?
Compare number
correct for girls
who used hand
gestures and girls
who did not
47 boys
Method with
hand gestures
Method without
hand gestures
Measure number
correct on test
Measure number
correct on test
Random assignment
Method with
hand gestures
Method without
hand gestures
Measure number
correct on test
Measure number
correct on test
81 girls
Random assignment
128
children
Create blocks
Create blocks
Compare number
correct for those
who used hand
gestures and those
who did not
Compare number
correct for boys
who used hand
gestures and boys
who did not
Figure  2.9
Diagram for the experiment of Example 
2.9 using gender to form blocks.
2.33	 The head of the quality control department at a print-
ing company would like to carry out an experiment 
to determine which of three different glues results in 
the greatest binding strength. Although they are not 
of interest in the current investigation, other factors 
thought to affect binding strength are the number 
of pages in the book and whether the book is being 
bound as a paperback or a hardback. (Hint: See box 
on page 46.)
a.	 What is the response variable in this experiment?
exercises 2.33 - 2.47
b.	What explanatory variable will determine the 
experimental conditions? 
c.	 What two extraneous variables are mentioned in 
the prob­lem description? Are there other extrane-
ous variables that should be considered?
2.34	 A study of college students showed a temporary 
gain of up to 9 IQ points after listening to a Mozart 
piano sonata. This conclusion, dubbed the Mozart 
effect, has since been criticized by a number of 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available

■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 2.3   Simple Comparative Experiments 
●  59
researchers who have been unable to con­ﬁrm the 
result in similar studies. Suppose that you wanted to 
see whether there is a Mozart effect for students at 
your school. (Hint: See Examples 2.4 and 2.5.)
a.	 Describe how you might design an experiment for 
this purpose.
b.	Does your experimental design include direct 
control of any extraneous variables? Explain.
c.	 Does your experimental design use blocking? 
Explain why you did or did not include blocking in 
your design.
d.	What role does random assignment play in your 
design?
2.35	 According to the article “Rubbing Hands Together 
Under Warm Air Dryers Can Counteract Bacteria 
Reduction” (Infectious Disease News, September 22, 
2010) washing your hands isn’t enough—good “hand 
hygiene” also includes drying hands thoroughly. The 
article described an experiment to compare bacteria 
reduction for three different hand-drying methods. In 
this experiment, subjects handled uncooked chicken 
for 45 seconds, then washed their hands with a sin-
gle squirt of soap for 60 seconds, and then used one 
of the three hand-drying methods. After completely 
drying their hands, the bacteria count on their hands 
was measured. 
Suppose you want to carry out a similar 
experiment and that you have 30 subjects who 
are willing to participate. Describe a method for 
randomly assigning each of the 30 subjects to one 
of the hand-drying methods. (Hint: See A Note on 
Random Assignment on page 51.)
2.36	 The following is from an article titled “After the 
Workout, Got Chocolate Milk?” that appeared in the 
Chicago Tribune (Janu­ary 18, 2005):
Researchers at Indiana University at Bloomington have 
found that chocolate milk effectively helps athletes 
recover from an intense workout. They had nine cyclists 
bike, rest four hours, then bike again, three separate 
times. After each workout, the cyclists downed chocolate 
milk or energy drinks Gatorade or Endurox (two to three 
glasses per hour); then, in the second workout of each 
set, they cycled to exhaustion. When they drank choco-
late milk, the amount of time they could cycle until they 
were exhausted was similar to when they drank Gatorade 
and longer than when they drank Endurox.
The article is not explicit about this, but in order 
for this to have been a well-designed experiment, it 
must have incorporated random assignment. Brieﬂy 
explain where the researcher would have needed to 
use random assign in order for the stated conclusion 
to be valid.
2.37	 The report “Comparative Study of Two Computer 
Mouse Designs” (Cornell Human Factors Laboratory 
Technical Report RP7992) included the following 
description of the subjects used in an experiment:
Twenty-four Cornell University students and  
staff (12 males and 12 females) volunteered to participate 
in the study. Three groups of 4 men and 4 women were 
selected by their stature to represent the 5th percentile 
(female 152.1 6 0.3 cm, male 164.1 6 0.4 cm), 
50th percentile (female 162.4 6 0.1 cm, male 
174.1 6 0.7 cm), and 95th percentile (female 
171.9 6 0.2 cm, male 185.7 6 0.6 cm) ranges . . . All 
subjects reported using their right hand to operate a com-
puter mouse.
This experimental design incorporated direct control 
and blocking.
a.	 Are the potential effects of the extraneous variable 
stature (height) addressed by blocking or direct 
control? 
b.	Whether the right or left hand is used to operate the 
mouse was considered to be an extraneous variable. 
Are the potential effects of this variable addressed 
by blocking or direct control? 
2.38	 The Institute of Psychiatry at Kings College London 
found that dealing with “infomania” has a temporary, 
but sig­niﬁ­cant derogatory effect on IQ (Discover, 
No­vem­ber 2005). Researchers divided volunteers into 
two groups. Each subject took an IQ test. One group 
had to check e-mail and respond to instant messages 
while taking the test, and the second group took the 
test without any distraction. The distracted group 
had an average score that was 10 points lower than 
the average for the control group. 
Explain why it is important that the researchers 
created the two experimental groups in this study by 
using random assignment.
2.39	 In an experiment to compare two different surgi-
cal procedures for hernia repair (“A Single-Blinded, 
Randomized Comparison of Laparoscopic Versus Open 
Hernia Repair in Children,” Pediatrics [2009]: 332–336), 
89 children were assigned at random to one of the 
two surgical methods. The researchers relied on 
the random assignment of subjects to treatments to 
create comparable groups with respect to extraneous 
variables that they did not control. One such 
extraneous variable was age. 
After random assignment to treatments, the 
researchers looked at the age distribution of the 
children in each of the two experimental groups 
(laparoscopic repair (LR) and open repair (OR)). The 
accompanying figure is from the paper.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

60 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
LR
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
OR
Age, y
Based on this figure, has the random assignment of 
subjects to experimental groups been successful in 
creating groups that are similar with respect to the 
ages of the children in the groups? Explain.
2.40	 In many digital environments, users are allowed to 
choose how they are represented visually online. 
Does how people are represented online affect online 
behavior? This question was examined by the authors 
of the paper “The Proteus Effect: The Effect of Trans-
formed Self-Representation on Behavior” (Human 
Communication Research [2007]: 271–290). Participants 
were randomly assigned either an attractive avatar (a 
graphical image that represents a person) to represent 
them or an unattractive avatar.
a.	 The researchers concluded that when interacting 
with a person of the opposite gender in an online 
virtual environment, those assigned an attrac-
tive avatar moved significantly closer to the other 
person than those who had been assigned an 
unattractive avatar. This difference was attributed 
to the attractiveness of the avatar. Explain why 
the researchers would not have been able to reach 
this conclusion if participants had been allowed to 
choose one of the two avatars (attractive, unat-
tractive) to represent them online.
b.	Construct a diagram to represent the underlying 
structure of this experiment.
2.41	 Does playing action video games provide more than 
just entertainment? The authors of the paper “Action-
Video-Game Experience Alters the Spatial Resolution of 
Vision” (Psychological Science [2007]: 88–94) concluded 
that spatial resolution, an important aspect of vision, 
is improved by playing action video games. They 
based this conclusion on data from an experiment 
in which 32 volunteers who had not played action 
video games were “equally and randomly divided 
between the experimental and control groups.” Sub-
jects in each group played a video game for 30 hours 
over a period of 6 weeks. Those in the experimental 
group played Unreal Tournament 2004, an action 
video game. Those in the control group played the 
game Tetris, a game that does not require the user to 
process multiple objects at once. 
Explain why the random assignment to the two 
groups is an important aspect of this experiment.
2.42	 Construct a diagram to represent the subliminal 
messages experiment of Example 2.5.
2.43	 Construct a diagram to represent the gasoline 
additive experiment described on pages 49–50.
2.44	 An advertisement for a sweatshirt that appeared in 
SkyMall Magazine (a catalog distributed by some 
airlines) stated the following: “This is not your 
ordinary hoody! Why? Fact: Research shows that 
written words on containers of water can influence 
the water’s structure for better or worse depending on 
the nature and intent of the word. Fact: The human 
body is 70% water. What if positive words were 
printed on the inside of your clothing?” 
For only $79, you could purchase a hooded sweat-
shirt that had over 200 positive words (such as hope, 
gratitude, courage, and love) in 15 different lan-
guages printed on the inside of the sweatshirt so that 
you could benefit from being surrounded by these 
positive words. The reference to the “fact” that writ-
ten words on containers of water can influence the 
water’s structure appears to be based on the work of 
Dr. Masaru Emoto who typed words on paper, pasted 
the words on bottles of water, and observed how 
the water reacted to the words by seeing what kind 
of crystals were formed in the water. He describes 
several of his experiments in his self-published book, 
The Message from Water. 
If you were going to interview Dr. Emoto, what 
questions would you want to ask him about his 
experiment?
2.45	 The paper “Turning to Learn: Screen Orientation and 
Reasoning from Small Devices” (Computers in Human 
Behavior [2011]: 793–797) describes a study that 
investigated whether cell phones with small screens 
are useful for gathering information. The researchers 
wondered if the ability to reason using information 
read on a small screen was affected by the screen ori-
entation. The researchers assigned 33 undergraduate 
students who were enrolled in a psychology course 
at a large public university to one of two groups at 
random. 
One group read material that was displayed on a 
small screen in portrait orientation, and the other 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 2.4   More on Experimental Design 
●  61
group read material on the same size screen but 
turned to display the information in landscape orien-
tation (see figure below).
Portrait
Landscape
The researchers found that performance on a 
reasoning test that was based on the displayed 
material was better for the group that read material in 
the landscape orientation.
a.	 Is the described study an observational study or 
an experiment?
b.	Did the study use random selection from some 
population?
c.	 Did the study use random assignment to experi-
mental groups?
d.	Is the conclusion—that reasoning using informa-
tion displayed on a small screen is improved by 
turning the screen to landscape orientation—
appropriate, given the study design? Explain.
e. Is it reasonable to generalize the conclusions from 
this study to some larger population? If so, what 
population?
2.46	 The Pew Research Center conducted a study of 
gender bias. The report “Men or Women: Who is 
the Better Leader? A Paradox in Public Attitudes” 
(www.pewsocialtrends.org, August 28, 2008) describes 
how the study was conducted:
In the experiment, two separate random samples of more 
than 1000 registered voters were asked to read a profile 
sent to them online of a hypothetical candidate for U.S. 
Congress in their district. One random sample of 1161 
respondents read a profile of Ann Clark, described as a 
lawyer, a churchgoer, a member of the local Chamber of 
Commerce, an environmentalist and a member of the 
same party as the survey respondent. They were then 
asked what they liked and didn’t like about her, whether 
they considered her qualified and whether they were in-
clined to vote for her. There was no indication that this 
was a survey about gender or gender bias. A second ran-
dom sample of 1139 registered voters was asked to read 
a profile of Andrew Clark, who—except for his gender—
was identical in every way to Ann Clark. These respon-
dents were then asked the same questions.
a.	 What are the two treatments in this experiment?
b.	What are the response variables in this experiment?
c.	 Explain why “taking two separate random sam-
ples” has the same benefits as random assignment 
to the two treatments in this experiment.
2.47	 Red wine contains flavonol, an antioxidant thought 
to have beneficial health effects. But to have an 
effect, the antioxidant must be absorbed into the 
blood. The article “Red Wine is a Poor Source of 
Bioavailable Flavonols in Men” (The Journal of Nutrition 
[2001]: 745–748) describes a study to investigate 
three sources of dietary flavonol—red wine, yellow 
onions, and black tea—to determine the effect 
of source on absorption. The article included the 
following statement:
We recruited subjects via posters and local newspa-
pers. To ensure that subjects could tolerate the alcohol 
in the wine, we only allowed men with a consumption 
of at least seven drinks per week to participate . . . 
Throughout the study, the subjects consumed a diet 
that was low in flavonols.
a.	 What are the three treatments in this experiment?
b.	What is the response variable?
c.	 What are three extraneous variables that the 
researchers chose to control in the experiment?
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
 2.4  
More on Experimental Design
The previous section covered basic principles for designing simple comparative  
experiments—control, blocking, random assignment, and replication. The goal of an ex-
perimental design is to provide a method of data collection that 
1.	 minimizes the effect of extraneous sources of variability in the response so that 
any differences in response for various experimental conditions can be more easily 
assessed and 
2.	 creates experimental groups that are similar with respect to extraneous variables 
that cannot be controlled either directly or through blocking.
In this section, we look at some additional considerations that you may need to think 
about when planning an experiment.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

62 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
Use of a Control Group
If the purpose of an experiment is to determine whether some treatment has an effect, it 
is important to include an experimental group that does not receive the treatment. Such 
a group is called a control group. The use of a control group allows the experimenter to 
assess how the response variable behaves when the treatment is not used. This provides a 
baseline against which the treatment groups can be compared to determine whether the 
treatment had an effect.
Example 2.10 
Comparing Gasoline 
Additives
Suppose that an engineer wants to know whether a gasoline 
additive increases fuel ef­ﬁ­ciency (miles per gallon). Such an 
experiment might use a single car (to eliminate car-to-car 
variability) and a sequence of trials in which 1 gallon of gas 
is put in an empty tank, the car is driven around a racetrack 
at a constant speed, and the distance traveled on the gallon 
of gas is recorded.
To determine whether the additive increases gas mileage, it would be necessary to in-
clude a control group of trials in which distance traveled was measured when gasoline 
without the additive was used. The trials would be assigned at random to one of the two 
experimental conditions (additive or no additive).
Even though this experiment consists of a sequence of trials all with the same car, ran-
dom assignment of trials to experimental conditions is still important because there will 
always be uncontrolled variability. For example, temperature or other environmental con-
ditions might change over the sequence of trials, the physical condition of the car might 
change slightly from one trial to another, and so on. Random assignment of experimental 
conditions to trials will tend to even out the effects of these uncontrollable factors.
■ 
Although we usually think of a control group as one that receives no treatment, in ex-
periments designed to compare a new treatment to an existing standard treatment, the 
term control group is sometimes also used to describe the group that receives the current 
standard treatment.
Not all experiments require the use of a control group. For example, many experiments 
are designed to compare two or more conditions—an experiment to compare density for 
three different formulations of bar soap or an experiment to determine how oven tem-
perature affects the cooking time of a particular type of cake. However, sometimes a con-
trol group is included even when the ultimate goal is to compare two or more different 
treatments. 
An experiment with two treatments and no control group might allow us to determine 
whether there is a difference between the two treatments and even to assess the magnitude 
of the difference if one exists, but it would not allow us to assess the individual effect of 
either treatment. For example, without a control group, we might be able to say that there 
is no difference in the increase in mileage for two different gasoline additives, but we would 
not be able to tell if this was because both additives increased gas mileage by a similar 
amount or because neither additive had any effect on gas mileage.
Use of a Placebo
In experiments that use human subjects, use of a control group may not be enough to de-
termine whether a treatment really does have an effect. People sometimes respond merely 
to the power of suggestion! For example, suppose a study designed to determine whether 
a particular herbal supplement is effective in promoting weight loss uses an experimen-
tal group that takes the herbal supplement and a control group that takes nothing. It is 
Stockbyte/Getty Images
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 2.4   More on Experimental Design 
●  63
possible that those who take the herbal supplement and believe that they are taking some-
thing that will help them to lose weight may be more motivated and may unconsciously 
change their eating behavior or activity level, resulting in weight loss.
Although there is debate about the degree to which people respond, many studies have 
shown that people sometimes respond to treatments with no active ingredients and that 
they often report that such “treatments” relieve pain or reduce symptoms. So, if an experi-
ment is to enable researchers to determine whether a treatment really has an effect, com-
paring a treatment group to a control group may not be enough. To address the problem, 
many experiments use what is called a placebo.
Placebo: Something that is identical (in appearance, taste, feel, etc.) to the treat-
ment received by the treatment group, except that it contains no active 
ingredients.
DEFINITION
For example, in the herbal supplement experiment, rather than using a control group 
that received no treatment, the researchers might want to include a placebo group. Indi-
viduals in the placebo group would take a pill that looked just like the herbal supplement 
but did not contain the herb or any other active ingredient. As long as the subjects did not 
know whether they were taking the herb or the placebo, the placebo group would provide 
a better basis for comparison and would allow the researchers to determine whether the 
herbal supplement had any real effect over and above the “placebo effect.”
Single-Blind and Double-Blind Experiments
Because people often have their own personal beliefs about the effectiveness of various 
treatments, it is desirable to conduct experiments in such a way that subjects do not know 
what treatment they are receiving. For example, in an experiment comparing four different 
doses of a medication for relief of headache pain, someone who knows that he is receiving 
the medication at its highest dose may be subconsciously in­ﬂu­enced to report a greater 
degree of headache pain reduction. By ensuring that subjects are not aware of which treat-
ment they receive, we can prevent the subjects’ personal perceptions from inﬂuencing the 
response.
An experiment in which subjects do not know what treatment they have received is 
described as single-blind. Of course, not all experiments can be made single-blind. For 
example, in an experiment to compare the effect of two different types of exercise on blood 
pressure, it is not possible for participants to be unaware of whether they are in the swim-
ming group or the jogging group! However, when it is possible, “blinding” the subjects in 
an experiment is generally a good strategy.
In some experiments, someone other than the subject is responsible for measuring the 
response. To ensure that the person measuring the response does not let personal beliefs 
in­ﬂu­ence the way in which the response is recorded, the researchers should make sure that 
the measurer does not know which treatment was given to any particular individual. For 
example, in a medical experiment to determine whether a new vaccine reduces the risk of 
getting the ﬂu, doctors must decide whether a particular individual who is not feeling well 
actually has the ﬂu or some other unrelated illness. If the doctor knew that a participant 
with ﬂu-like symptoms had received the new ﬂu vaccine, she might be less likely to deter-
mine that the participant had the ﬂu and more likely to interpret the symptoms as being 
the result of some other illness.
We have now considered two ways in which blinding might occur in an experiment. 
One involves blinding the subjects, and the other involves blinding the individuals who 
measure the response. If subjects do not know which treatment was received and those 
measuring the response do not know which treatment was given to which subject, the ex-
periment is described as double-blind. If only one of the two types of blinding is present, 
the experiment is single-blind.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

64 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
Experimental Units and Replication
An experimental unit is the smallest unit to which a treatment is applied. In the language 
of experimental design, treatments are assigned at random to experimental units, and rep-
lication means that each treatment is applied to more than one experimental unit.
Replication is necessary for random assignment to be an effective way to create similar 
experimental groups and to get a sense of the variability in the values of the response for in-
dividuals who receive the same treatment. As we will see in Chapters 9–15, this enables us 
to use statistical methods to decide whether differences in the responses in different treat-
ment groups can be attributed to the treatment received or whether they can be explained 
by chance variation (the natural variability seen in the responses to a single treatment).
Be careful when designing an experiment to ensure that there is replication. For ex-
ample, suppose that children in two third-grade classes are available to participate in an 
experiment to compare two different methods for teaching arithmetic. It might at ﬁrst 
seem reasonable to select one class at random to use one method and then assign the other 
method to the remaining class. But what are the experimental units here? If treatments are 
randomly assigned to classes, classes are the experimental units. Because only one class is 
assigned to each treatment, this is an experiment with no replication, even though there are 
many children in each class. We would not be able to determine whether there was a dif-
ference between the two methods based on data from this experiment, because we would 
have only one observation per treatment.
One last note on replication: Do not confuse replication in an experimental design with 
replicating an experiment. Replicating an experiment means conducting a new experiment 
using the same experimental design as a previous experiment. This is a way of con­ﬁrm­ing 
conclusions based on a previous experiment, but it does not eliminate the need for replica-
tion in each of the individual experiments themselves.
Using Volunteers as Subjects in an Experiment
Although the use of volunteers in a study that involves collecting data through sampling is 
never a good idea, it is a common practice to use volunteers as subjects in an experiment. 
Even though the use of volunteers limits the researcher’s ability to generalize to a larger 
population, random assignment of the volunteers to treatments should result in compa-
rable groups, and so treatment effects can still be assessed.
Double-blind experiment: An experiment in which neither the subjects nor 
the individuals who measure the response know which treatment was received.
Single-blind experiment: An experiment in which the subjects do not know 
which treatment was received but the individuals measuring the response do 
know which treatment was received, or one in which the subjects do know 
which treatment was received but the individuals measuring the response do 
not know which treatment was received.
DEFINITION
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
exercises 2.48 - 2.59
2.48	 Explain why some studies include both a control 
group and a placebo treatment. What additional 
comparisons are possible if both a control group and 
a placebo group are included?
2.49	 Explain why blinding is a reasonable strategy in 
many experiments.
2.50	 Give an example of an experiment for each of the 
following:
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 2.4   More on Experimental Design 
●  65
a.	 Single-blind experiment with the subjects blinded
b.	Single-blind experiment with the individuals mea-
suring the response blinded
c.	 Double-blind experiment
d.	An experiment for which it is not possible to blind 
the subjects
2.51	 ▼ Swedish researchers concluded that viewing and 
discussing art soothes the soul and helps relieve 
medical conditions such as high blood pressure 
and constipation (AFP International News Agency, 
October 14, 2005). This conclusion was based on a 
study in which 20 elderly women gathered once a 
week to discuss different works of art. The study also 
included a control group of 20 elderly women who 
met once a week to discuss their hobbies and inter-
ests. At the end of 4 months, the art discussion group 
was found to have a more positive attitude, to have 
lower blood pressure, and to use fewer laxatives than 
the control group.
a.	 Why would it be important to determine if the 
researchers randomly assigned the women partici-
pating in the study to one of the two groups?
b.	Explain why you think that the researchers 
included a control group in this study.
2.52	 In an experiment to compare two different surgi-
cal procedures for hernia repair (“A Single-Blinded, 
Randomized Comparison of Laparoscopic Versus Open 
Hernia Repair in Children,” Pediatrics [2009]: 332–336), 
89 children were assigned at random to one of the 
two surgical methods. The methods studied were 
laparoscopic repair and open repair. In laparoscopic 
repair, three small incisions are made and the surgeon 
works through these incisions with the aid of a small 
camera that is inserted through one of the incisions. 
In the open repair, a larger incision is used to open 
the abdomen. One of the response variables in this 
study was the amount of medication that was given 
after the surgery for the control of pain and nausea. 
The paper states “For postoperative pain, rescue 
fentanyl (1 mg/kg) and for nausea, ondansetron 
(0.1 mg/kg) were given as judged necessary by the 
attending nurse blinded to the operative approach.”
a.	 Why do you think it was important that the nurse 
who administered the medications did not know 
which type of surgery was performed?
b.	Explain why it was not possible for this 
experiment to be double-blind.
2.53	 The article “Placebos Are Getting More Effective. Drug 
Makers Are Desperate to Know Why.” (Wired Magazine, 
August 8, 2009) states that “according to research, 
the color of a tablet can boost the effectiveness even 
of genuine meds—or help convince a patient that a 
placebo is a potent remedy.” Describe how you would 
design an experiment to investigate if adding color 
to Tylenol tablets would result in greater perceived 
pain relief. Be sure to address how you would select 
subjects, how you would measure pain relief, what 
colors you would use, and whether or not you would 
include a control group in your experiment.
2.54	 The article “Yes That Miley Cyrus Biography Helps 
Learning” (The Globe and Mail, August 5, 2010) de-
scribes an experiment investigating whether provid-
ing summer reading books to low-income children 
would affect school performance. Subjects in the 
experiment were 1330 children randomly selected 
from first and second graders at low-income schools 
in Florida. A group of 852 of these children were se-
lected at random from the group of 1330 participants 
to be in the “book” group. The other 478 children 
were assigned to the control group. 
Children in the book group were invited to a book 
fair in the spring to choose any 12 reading books 
which they could then take home. Children in the 
control group were not given any reading books but 
were given some activity and puzzle books. This 
process was repeated each year for 3 years until 
the children reached third and fourth grade. The 
researchers then compared reading test scores of the 
two groups.
a.	 Explain why randomly selecting 852 of the 
1330 children to be in the book group is 
equivalent to random assignment of the children 
to the two experimental groups.
b.	Explain the purpose of including a control group 
in this experiment.
2.55	 Suppose that the researchers who carried out the ex-
periment described in the previous exercise thought 
that gender might be a potentially confounding vari-
able. If 700 of the children participating in the ex-
periment were girls and 630 were boys, describe how 
blocking could be incorporated into the experiment. 
Be specific about how you would assign the children 
to treatment groups.
2.56	 ▼ The article “Doctor Dogs Diagnose Cancer by 
Snifﬁng It Out” (Knight Ridder Newspapers, Janu­ary 9, 
2006) reports the results of an experiment described 
in the journal Integrative Cancer Therapies. In this 
experiment, dogs were trained to distinguish between 
people with breast and lung cancer and people 
without cancer by snifﬁng exhaled breath. Dogs 
were trained to lie down if they detected cancer in a 
breath sample. After training, dogs’ ability to detect 
cancer was tested using breath samples from people 
whose breath had not been used in training the dogs. 
The paper states “The researchers blinded both the 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

66 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
dog handlers and the experimental observers to the 
identity of the breath samples.” Explain why this 
blinding is an important aspect of the design of this 
experiment.
2.57	 Pismo Beach, California, has an annual clam festi-
val that includes a clam chowder contest. Judges 
rate clam chowders from local restaurants, and the 
judging is done in such a way that the judges are not 
aware of which chowder is from which restaurant. 
One year, much to the dismay of the seafood restau-
rants on the waterfront, Denny’s chowder was de-
clared the winner! (When asked what the ingredients 
were, the cook at Denny’s said he wasn’t sure—he 
just had to add the right amount of nondairy creamer 
to the soup stock that he got from Denny’s distribu-
tion center!)
a.	 Do you think that Denny’s chowder would have 
won the contest if the judging had not been 
“blind?” Explain.
b.	Although this was not an experiment, your answer 
to Part (a) helps to explain why those measuring 
the response in an experiment are often blinded. 
Using your answer in Part (a), explain why experi-
ments are often blinded in this way. 
2.58	 The San Luis Obispo Tribune (May 7, 2002) reported that 
“a new analysis has found that in the majority of tri-
als conducted by drug companies in recent decades, 
sugar pills have done as well as—or better than—
antidepressants.” What effect is being described here? 
What does this imply about the design of experi-
ments with a goal of evaluating the effectiveness of a 
new medication?
2.59	 The article “A Debate in the Dentist’s Chair” (San 
Luis Obispo Tribune, Janu­ary 28, 2000) described an 
ongoing debate over whether newer resin ﬁll­ings 
are a better alternative to the more traditional silver 
amalgam ﬁll­ings. Because amalgam ﬁll­ings con-
tain mercury, there is concern that they could be 
mildly toxic and prove to be a health risk to those 
with some types of immune and kidney disorders. 
One experiment described in the article used sheep 
as subjects and reported that sheep treated with 
amalgam ﬁll­ings had impaired kidney function.
a.	 In the experiment, a control group of sheep that 
received no ﬁll­ings was used but there was no 
placebo group. Explain why it is not necessary to 
have a placebo group in this experiment.
b.	The experiment compared only an amalgam ﬁll­ing 
treatment group to a control group. What would 
be the bene­ﬁt of also including a resin ﬁll­ing treat-
ment group in the experiment?
c.	 Why do you think the experimenters used sheep 
rather than human subjects?
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
 2.5  
Interpreting and Communicating the Results of ­Statistical Analyses
Statistical studies are conducted to allow investigators to answer questions about character-
istics of some population of interest or about the effect of some treatment. Such questions 
are answered on the basis of data, and how the data are obtained determines the quality 
of information available and the type of conclusions that can be drawn. As a consequence, 
when describing a study you have conducted (or when evaluating a published study), you 
must consider how the data were collected.
The description of the data collection process should make it clear whether the study is 
an observational study or an experiment. For observational studies, some of the issues that 
should be addressed are:
1.	 What is the population of interest? What is the sampled population? Are these two 
populations the same? If the sampled population is only a subset of the population 
of interest, undercoverage limits our ability to generalize to the population of 
interest. For example, if the population of interest is all students at a particular 
university, but the sample is selected from only those students who choose to list 
their phone number in the campus directory, undercoverage may be a problem. 
We would need to think carefully about whether it is reasonable to consider the 
sample as representative of the population of all students at the university. 
Overcoverage results when the sampled population is actually larger than the 
population of interest. This would be the case if we were interested in the popula-
tion of all high schools that offer Advanced Placement (AP) Statistics but sampled 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 2.5   Interpreting and Communicating the Results of ­Statistical Analyses 
●  67
from a list of all schools that offered an AP class in any subject. Both undercover-
age and overcoverage can be problematic.
2.	 How were the individuals or objects in the sample actually selected? A description 
of the sampling method helps the reader to make judgments about whether the 
sample can reasonably be viewed as representative of the population of interest.
3.	 What are potential sources of bias, and is it likely that any of these will have a 
substantial effect on the observed results? When describing an observational 
study, you should acknowledge that you are aware of potential sources of bias 
and explain any steps that were taken to minimize their effect. For example, in a 
mail survey, nonresponse can be a problem, but the sampling plan may seek to 
minimize its effect by offering incentives for participation and by following up one 
or more times with those who do not respond to the ﬁrst request. 
A common misperception is that increasing the sample size is a way to reduce 
bias in observational studies, but this is not the case. For example, if measurement 
bias is present, as in the case of a scale that is not correctly calibrated and tends to 
weigh too high, taking 1000 measurements rather than 100 measurements cannot 
correct for the fact that the measured weights will be too large. Similarly, a larger 
sample size cannot compensate for response bias introduced by a poorly worded 
question.
For experiments, some of the issues that should be addressed are:
1.	 What is the role of random assignment? All good experiments use random 
assignment as a means of coping with the effects of potentially confounding 
variables that cannot easily be directly controlled. When describing an experi-
mental design, you should be clear about how random assignment (subjects to 
treatments, treatments to subjects, or treatments to trials) was incorporated into 
the design.
2.	 Were any extraneous variables directly controlled by holding them at ﬁxed values 
throughout the experiment? If so, which ones and at which values?
3.	 Was blocking used? If so, how were the blocks created? If an experiment uses 
blocking to create groups of homogeneous experimental units, you should 
describe the criteria used to create the blocks and their rationale. For example, 
you might say something like “Subjects were divided into two blocks—those 
who exercise regularly and those who do not exercise regularly—because it was 
believed that exercise status might affect the responses to the diets.”
Because each treatment appears at least once in each block, the block size must be at 
least as large as the number of treatments. Ideally, the block sizes should be equal to the 
number of treatments, because this presumably would allow the experimenter to create 
small groups of extremely homogeneous experimental units. For example, in an experi-
ment to compare two methods for teaching calculus to ﬁrst-year college students, we may 
want to block on previous mathematics knowledge by using math SAT scores. If 100 stu-
dents are available as subjects for this experiment, rather than creating two large groups 
(above-average math SAT score and below-average math SAT score), we might want to 
create 50 blocks of two students each, the ﬁrst consisting of the two students with the 
highest math SAT scores, the second containing the two students with the next highest 
scores, and so on. We would then select one student in each block at random and assign 
that student to teaching method 1. The other student in the block would be assigned to 
teaching method 2.
A Word to the Wise: Cautions and Limitations
It is a big mistake to begin collecting data before thinking carefully about research objec-
tives and developing a plan. A poorly designed plan for data collection may result in data 
that do not enable the researcher to answer key questions of interest or to generalize con-
clusions based on the data to the desired populations of interest.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

68 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
Clearly de­ﬁn­ing the objectives at the outset enables the investigator to determine wheth-
er an experiment or an observational study is the best way to proceed. Watch out for the 
following inappropriate actions:
1.	 Drawing a cause-and-effect conclusion from an observational study. Don’t do this, 
and don’t believe it when others do it!
2.	 Generalizing results of an experiment that uses volunteers as subjects to a larger popula-
tion. This is not sensible without a convincing argument that the group of volunteers 
can reasonably be considered to be a representative sample from the population.
3.	 Generalizing conclusions based on data from a sample to some population of inter-
est. This is sometimes a sensible thing to do, but on other occasions it is not rea-
sonable. Generalizing from a sample to a population is jus­ti­ﬁed only when there is 
reason to believe that the sample is likely to be representative of the population. This 
would be the case if the sample was a random sample from the population and there 
were no major potential sources of bias. If the sample was not selected at random 
or if potential sources of bias were present, these issues would have to be addressed 
before a judgment could be made regarding the appropriateness of generalizing the 
study results.
For example, the Associated Press (Janu­ary 25, 2003) reported on the high cost 
of housing in California. The median home price was given for each of the 10 coun-
ties in California with the highest home prices. Although these 10 counties are a 
sample of the counties in California, they were not randomly selected and (because 
they are the 10 counties with the highest home prices) it would not be reasonable to 
generalize to all California counties based on data from this sample.
4.	 Generalizing conclusions based on an observational study that used voluntary response or 
convenience sampling to a larger population. This is almost never reasonable.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
exercises 2.60 - 2.63
2.60	 The following paragraph appeared in USA Today 
(August 6, 2009):
Cement doesn’t hold up to scrutiny
A common treatment that uses medical cement to fix 
cracks in the spinal bones of elderly people worked no 
better than a sham treatment, the first rigorous studies 
of a popular procedure reveal. Pain and disability were 
virtually the same up to six months later, whether pa-
tients had a real treatment or a fake one, shows the re-
search in today’s New England Journal of Medicine. Tens 
of thousands of Americans each year are treated with 
bone cement, especially older women with osteoporo-
sis. The researchers said it is yet another example of a 
procedure coming into wide use before proven safe 
and effective. Medicare pays $1,500 to $2,100 for the 
outpatient procedure.
The paper referenced in this paragraph is “A Random-
ized Trial of Vertebroplasty for Painful Osteoporotic 
Vertebral Fractures” (New England Journal of Medicine 
[2009]: 557–568). Obtain a copy of this paper through 
your university library or your instructor. Read 
the following sections of the paper: the abstract on 
page 557; the study design section on page 558; the 
participants section on pages 558–559; the outcome 
assessment section on pages 559–560; and the 
discussion section that begins on page 564.
The summary of this study that appeared in USA 
Today consisted of just one paragraph. If the news-
paper had allowed four paragraphs, other important 
aspects of the study could have been included. Write 
a four-paragraph summary that the paper could have 
used. Remember—you are writing for the USA Today 
audience, not for the readers of the New England 
Journal of Medicine! 
2.61	 The article “Effects of Too Much TV Can Be Undone” 
(USA Today, October 1, 2007) included the following 
paragraph:
Researchers at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of 
Public Health report that it’s not only how many hours 
children spend in front of the TV, but at what age they 
watch that matters. They analyzed data from a national 
survey in which parents of 2707 children were 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Activities 
●  69
interviewed first when the children were 30–33 months 
old and again when they were 5 1
2, about their TV view-
ing and their behavior.
a.	 Is the study described an observational study or 
an experiment?
b.	The article says that data from a sample of 2707 
parents were used in the study. What other infor-
mation about the sample would you want in order 
to evaluate the study?
c.	 The actual paper referred to in the USA Today 
article was “Children’s Television Exposure and 
Behavioral and Social Outcomes at 5.5 years: Does 
Timing of Exposure Matter?” (Pediatrics [2007]: 
762–769). The paper describes the sample as 
follows:
The study sample included 2707 children whose 
mothers completed telephone interviews at both 30 
to 33 months and 5.5 years and reported television 
exposure at both time points. Of those completing 
both interviewers, 41 children (1%) were excluded 
because of missing data on television exposure at 
one or both time points. Compared with those en-
rolled in the HS clinical trial, parents in the study 
sample were disproportionately older, white, more 
educated, and married.
The “HS clinical trial” referred to in the excerpt 
from the paper was a nationally representative sam-
ple used in the Healthy Steps for Young Children 
national evaluation. Based on the above description 
of the study sample, do you think that it is rea-
sonable to regard the sample as representative of 
parents of all children at age 5.5 years? Explain.
d.	The USA Today article also includes the following 
summary paragraph:
The study did not examine what the children 
watched and can’t show TV was the cause of later 
problems, but it does “tell parents that even if kids 
are watching TV early in life, and they stop, it could 
reduce the risk for behavioral and social problems 
later,” Mistry says.
What potentially confounding variable is identified 
in this passage?
e.	 The passage in Part (d) says that the study cannot 
show that TV was the cause of later problems. Is 
the quote from Kamila Mistry (one of the study 
authors) in the passage consistent with the state-
ment about cause? Explain.
2.62	 The short article “Developing Science-Based Food 
and Nutrition Information” (Journal of the American 
Dietetic Association [2001]: 1144–1145) includes some 
guidelines for evaluating a research paper. Obtain a 
copy of this paper through your university library 
or your instructor. Read this article and make a list 
of questions that can be used to evaluate a research 
study. 
2.63	 An article titled “I Said, Not While You Study: Science 
Suggests Kids Can’t Study and Groove at the Same 
Time” appeared in the Washington Post (September 5, 
2006). This provides an example of a reporter sum-
marizing the result of a scientific study in a way that 
is designed to make it accessible to the newspaper’s 
readers. You can find the newspaper article online by 
searching on the title or by going to http://www 
.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006 
/09/03/AR2006090300592.html. The study refer-
enced in the newspaper article was published in the 
Proceedings of the National Academies of Science and 
can be found at http://www.pnas.org/content/103 
/31/11778.full.
Read the newspaper article and then take a look 
at the published paper. Comment on whether you 
think that the author was successful in commu-
nicating the findings of the study to the intended 
audience. 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
AC TIVIT Y 2.1 
Facebook Friending
Background: The article “Professors Prefer Face Time to 
Facebook” appeared in the student newspaper at Cal Poly, 
San Luis Obispo (Mustang Daily, August 27, 2009). The arti-
cle examines how professors and students felt about using 
Facebook as a means of faculty-student communication. The 
student who wrote this article got mixed opinions when she 
interviewed students to ask whether they wanted to become 
Facebook friends with their professors. Two student com-
ments included in the article were
“I think the younger the professor is, the more you can 
relate to them and the less awkward it would be if you 
were to become friends on Facebook. The older the 
professor, you just would have to wonder, ‘Why are they 
friending me?’ ”
and
“I think becoming friends with professors on Facebook is really 
awkward. I don’t want them being able to see into my personal 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

70 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
life, and frankly, I am not really interested in what my profes-
sors do in their free time.”
Even if the students interviewed had expressed a consistent 
opinion, it would still be unreasonable to think this repre-
sented general student opinion on this issue because only 
four students were interviewed and it is not clear from the 
article how these students were selected.
In this activity, you will work with a partner to develop a 
plan to assess student opinion about being Facebook friends 
with professors at your school.
1.	 Suppose you will select a sample of 50 students at 
your school to participate in a survey. Write one or 
more questions that you would ask each student in 
the sample.
2.	 Discuss with your partner whether you think it 
would be easy or dif­ﬁ­cult to obtain a simple random 
sample of 50 students at your school and to obtain 
the desired information from all the students selected 
for the sample. Write a summary of your discussion.
3.	 With your partner, decide how you might go about 
selecting a sample of 50 students from your school 
that reasonably could be considered representative 
of the population of interest even if it may not be 
a simple random sample. Write a brief description 
of your sampling plan, and point out the aspects of 
your plan that you think make it reasonable to argue 
that it will be representative.
4.	 Explain your plan to another pair of students. Ask 
them to critique your plan. Write a brief summary of 
the comments you received. Now reverse roles, and 
provide a critique of the plan devised by the other pair.
5.	 Based on the feedback you received in Step 4, would 
you modify your original sampling plan? If not, 
explain why this is not necessary. If so, describe how 
the plan would be modi­ﬁed.
AC TIVIT Y 2.2 
An Experiment to Test for the Stroop Effect
Background: In 1935, John Stroop published the results of 
his research into how people respond when presented with 
con­ﬂict­ing signals. Stroop noted that most people are able to 
read words quickly and that they cannot easily ignore them 
and focus on other attributes of a printed word, such as text 
color. For example, consider the following list of words:
green    blue    red    blue    yellow    red
It is easy to quickly read this list of words. It is also easy 
to read the words even if the words are printed in color, and 
even if the text color is different from the color of the word. 
For example, people can read the words in the list
green    blue    red    blue    yellow    red
as quickly as they can read the list that isn’t printed in color.
However, Stroop found that if people are asked to name 
the text colors of the words in the list (red, yellow, blue, green, 
red, green), it takes them longer. Psychologists believe that 
this is because the reader has to inhibit a natural response 
(reading the word) and produce a different response (naming 
the color of the text).
If Stroop is correct, people should be able to name col-
ors more quickly if they do not have to inhibit the word 
response, as would be the case if they were shown the 
following:
1.	 Design an experiment to compare times to identify 
colors when they appear as text to times to identify 
colors when there is no need to inhibit a word re-
sponse. Indicate how random assignment is incorpo-
rated into your design. What is your response vari-
able? How will you measure it? How many subjects 
will you use in your experiment, and how will they 
be chosen?
2.	 When you are sat­is­ﬁed with your experimental 
design, carry out the experiment. You will need to 
construct your list of colored words and a correspond-
ing list of colored bars to use in the experiment. You 
will also need to think about how you will implement 
the random assignment scheme.
3.	 Summarize the resulting data in a brief report that 
explains whether your ﬁnd­ings are consistent with 
the Stroop effect.
AC TIVIT Y 2.3 
McDonald’s and the Next 100 Billion Burgers
Background: The article “Potential Effects of the Next 
100 Billion Hamburgers Sold by McDonald’s” (American Journal 
of Preventative Medicine [2005]: 379–381) estimated that 
992.25 million pounds of saturated fat would be consumed 
as McDonald’s sells its next 100 billion hamburgers. This 
estimate was based on the assumption that the average 
weight of a burger sold would be 2.4 oz. This is the average 
of the weight of a regular hamburger (1.6 oz.) and a Big Mac 
(3.2 oz.). The authors took this approach because
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Activities 
●  71
McDonald’s does not publish sales and proﬁts of individual 
items. Thus, it is not possible to estimate how many of 
McDonald’s ﬁrst 100 billion beef burgers sold were 1.6 oz 
hamburgers, 3.2 oz. Big Macs (introduced in 1968), 4.0 oz. 
Quarter Pounders (introduced in 1973), or other 
sandwiches.
This activity can be completed as an individual or as a team. 
Your instructor will specify which approach (individual or 
team) you should use.
1.	 The authors of the article believe that the use 
of 2.4 oz. as the average size of a burger sold at 
McDonald’s is “conservative,” which would result in 
the estimate of 992.25 million pounds of saturated 
fat being lower than the actual amount that would 
be consumed. Explain why the authors’ belief might 
be jus­ti­ﬁed.
2.	 Do you think it would be possible to collect data 
that could lead to an estimate of the average 
burger size that would be better than 2.4 oz.? If 
so, explain how you would recommend collecting 
such data. If not, explain why you think it is not 
possible.
AC TIVIT Y 2.4 
Video Games and Pain Management
Background: Video games have been used for pain man-
agement by doctors and therapists who believe that the at-
tention required to play a video game can distract the player 
and thereby decrease the sensation of pain. The paper “Video 
Games and Health” (British Medical Journal [2005]: 122–123) 
states
However, there has been no long term follow-up and no robust 
randomized controlled trials of such interventions. Whether 
patients eventually tire of such games is also unclear. Further-
more, it is not known whether any distracting effect depends 
simply on concentrating on an interactive task or whether the 
content of games is also an important factor as there have been 
no controlled trials comparing video games with other distract-
ers. Further research should examine factors within games such 
as novelty, users’ preferences, and relative levels of challenge 
and should compare video games with other potentially dis-
tracting activities.
1.	 Working with a partner, select one of the areas of 
potential research suggested in the passage from the 
paper and formulate a spe­ciﬁc question that could be 
addressed by performing an experiment.
2.	 Propose an experiment that would provide data to 
address the question from Step 1. Be spe­ciﬁc about 
how subjects might be selected, what the experi-
mental conditions (treatments) would be, and what 
response would be measured.
3.	 At the end of Section 2.3 there are 10 questions that 
can be used to evaluate an experimental design. 
Answer these 10 questions for the design proposed 
in Step 2.
4.	 After evaluating your proposed design, are there any 
changes you would like to make to your design? 
Explain.
AC TIVIT Y 2.5 
Be Careful with Random Assignment!
When individuals climb to high altitudes, a condition 
known as acute mountain sickness (AMS) may occur. AMS is 
brought about by a combination of reduced air pressure and 
lower oxygen concentration that occurs at high altitudes. Two 
standard treatments for AMS are a medication, acetazolamide 
(which stimulates breathing and reduces mild symptoms) 
and the use of portable hyperbaric chambers.
With increasing numbers of younger inexperienced 
mountaineers, it is important to re-evaluate these treatments 
for the 12- to 14-year age group. An experimental plan under 
consideration is to study the first 18 youngsters diagnosed 
with AMS at a high altitude park ranger station whose par-
ents consent to participation in the experiment. Equal num-
bers of each treatment are desired and the researchers are 
considering the following strategy for random assignment of 
treatments: Assign the treatments using a coin flip until one 
treatment has been assigned nine times; then assign the other 
treatment to the remaining subjects.
The table below presents data on the first 18 young climbers 
whose parents consented to participation in the experiment.
Order
Gender
Age (yr)
  1
male
12.90
  2
female
13.34
  3
male
12.39
  4
male
13.95
  5
male
13.63
  6
male
13.62
  7
female
12.55
continued
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

72 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
Order
Gender
Age (yr)
  8
female
13.54
  9
male
12.34
10
female
13.74
11
female
13.78
12
male
14.05
13
female
14.22
14
female
13.91
15
male
14.39
16
female
13.54
17
female
13.85
18
male
14.11
1.	 Describe how you would implement a strategy 
equivalent to the one proposed by the researchers. 
Your plan should assign the treatments M (medicine) 
and H (hyperbaric chamber) to these climbers as they 
appear at the ranger station.
2.	 Implement your strategy in Step (1), assigning treat-
ments to climbers 1–18.
3.	 Looking at which climbers were assigned to each of 
the two groups, do you feel that this method worked 
well? Why or why not?
4.	 Compute the proportion of females in the medicine 
group. How does this proportion compare to the pro-
portion of females in the entire group of 18 subjects?
5.	 Construct two dotplots—one of the ages of those 
assigned to the medicine treatment and one of the 
ages of those assigned to the hyperbaric chamber 
treatment. Are the age distributions for the two 
groups similar?
6.	 Compute the average age of those assigned to the 
medicine group. How does it compare to the average 
age for the other treatment group?
7.	 Record the proportion of females in the medicine 
group, the average age of those assigned to the medi-
cine group, and the average age of those assigned 
to the hyperbaric chamber group obtained by each 
student on your class.
8.	 Using the values from Step (7), construct a dotplot 
of each of the following: the proportion of females in 
the medicine group, the average age of those assigned 
to the medicine group, and the average age of those 
assigned to the hyperbaric chamber group.
9.	 Using the results of the previous steps, evaluate the 
success of this random assignment strategy. Write 
a short paragraph explaining to the researchers 
whether or not they should use the proposed strategy 
for random assignment and why.
SUMMARY 
Key Concepts and Formulas
Term or Formula
Comment
Observational 
study
A study that observes characteristics of an 
existing population.
Simple random 
sample
A sample selected in a way that gives every 
different sample of size n an equal chance 
of being selected.
Stratiﬁed 
sampling
Dividing a population into subgroups 
(strata) and then taking a separate random 
sample from each stratum.
Cluster sampling
Dividing a population into subgroups 
(clusters) and forming a sample by 
randomly selecting clusters and including 
all individuals or objects in the selected 
clusters in the sample.
1 in k systematic 
sampling
Forming a sample from an ordered 
arrangement of a population by choosing 
a starting point at random from the ﬁrst k 
individuals on the list and then selecting 
every kth individual thereafter.
Term or Formula
Comment
Confounding 
variable
A variable that is related both to group 
membership and to the response variable.
Measurement or 
response bias
The tendency for samples to differ from 
the population because the method of 
observation tends to produce values that 
differ from the true value.
Selection bias
The tendency for samples to differ from 
the population because of systematic 
exclusion of some part of the population.
Nonresponse bias
The tendency for samples to differ from the 
population because measurements are not 
obtained from all individuals selected for 
inclusion in the sample.
Experiment
A procedure for investigating the effect of 
experimental conditions (treatments) on a 
response variable.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter Review Exercises 
●  73
Term or Formula
Comment
Treatments
The experimental conditions imposed by 
the experimenter.
Extraneous 
variable
A variable that is not an explanatory vari-
able in the study but is thought to affect 
the response variable.
Direct control
Holding extraneous variables constant so 
that their effects are not confounded with 
those of the experimental conditions.
Blocking
Using extraneous variables to create 
groups that are similar with respect 
to those variables and then assigning 
treatments at random within each block, 
thereby ﬁl­ter­ing out the effect of the 
blocking variables.
Random 
assignment
Assigning experimental units to treatments 
or treatments to trials at random.
Replication
A strategy for ensuring that there is an 
adequate number of observations for each 
experimental treatment.
Term or Formula
Comment
Placebo treatment
A treatment that resembles the other treat-
ments in an experiment in all apparent 
ways but that has no active ingredients.
Control group
A group that receives no treatment.
Single-blind 
experiment
An experiment in which the subjects do 
not know which treatment they received 
but the individuals measuring the response 
do know which treatment was received, 
or an experiment in which the subjects do 
know which treatment they received but 
the individuals measuring the response do 
not know which treatment was received.
Double-blind 
experiment
An experiment in which neither the sub-
jects nor the individuals who measure 
the response know which treatment was 
received.
CHAPTER REVIEW 
Exercises 2.64 - 2.79
2.64	 The article “Rethinking Calcium Supplements” (U.S. 
Airways Magazine, October 2010) describes a study 
investigating whether taking calcium supplements 
increases the risk of heart attack. Consider the 
following four study descriptions. For each study, 
answer the following five questions:
	
Question 1:  Is the described study an observational 
study or an experiment?
	
Question 2:  Did the study use random selection 
from some population? 
	
Question 3:  Did the study use random assignment 
to experimental groups?
	
Question 4:  Based on the study description, is it 
reasonable to conclude that taking 
calcium supplements is the cause of 
the increased risk of heart attack?
	
Question 5:  Is it reasonable to generalize conclu-
sions from this study to some larger 
population? If so, what population?
Study 1: Every heart attack patient and every 
patient admitted for an illness other than a heart 
attack during the month of December at a large 
urban hospital was asked if he or she took calcium 
supplements. The researchers found that the pro-
portion of heart attack patients who took calcium 
supplements was significantly higher than the 
proportion of patients admitted for other illnesses 
who took calcium supplements.
Study 2: Two hundred people were randomly 
selected from a list of all people living in Minneapo-
lis who receive Social Security. Each person in the 
sample was asked whether or not they took calcium 
supplements. These people were followed for 5 years, 
and whether or not they had a heart attack during 
the 5-year period was noted. The researchers found 
that the proportion of heart attack victims in the 
group taking calcium supplements was significantly 
higher than the proportion of heart attack victims in 
the group not taking calcium supplements.
Study 3: Two hundred people were randomly 
selected from a list of all people living in Minneapolis 
who receive Social Security. Each person was asked 
to participate in a statistical study, and all agreed 
to participate. Those who had no previous history 
of heart problems were instructed to take calcium 
supplements. Those with a previous history of 
heart problems were instructed not to take calcium 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

74 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
supplements. The participants were followed for 
5 years, and whether or not they had a heart attack 
during the 5-year period was noted. The research-
ers found that the proportion of heart attack victims 
in the calcium supplement group was significantly 
higher than the proportion of heart attack victims in 
the no supplement group.
Study 4: Four hundred people volunteered to 
participate in a 10-year study. Each volunteer was as-
signed at random to either group 1 or group 2. Those 
in group 1 took a daily calcium supplement. Those 
in group 2 did not take a calcium supplement. The 
proportion who suffered a heart attack during the 
10-year study period was noted for each group. The 
researchers found that the proportion of heart attack 
victims in group 1 was significantly higher than the 
proportion of heart attack victims in group 2.
2.65	 A pollster for the Public Policy Institute of California 
explains how the Institute selects a sample of 
California adults (“It’s About Quality, Not Quantity,” 
San Luis Obispo Tribune, Janu­ary 21, 2000):
That is done by using computer-generated random 
residential telephone numbers with all California preﬁxes, 
and when there are no answers, calling back repeatedly 
to the original numbers selected to avoid a bias against 
hard-to-reach people. Once a call is completed, a second 
random selection is made by asking for the adult in 
the household who had the most recent birthday. It is 
as important to randomize who you speak to in the 
household as it is to ran­dom­ize the household you select. 
If you didn’t, you’d primarily get women and older people.
Comment on this approach to selecting a sample. 
How does the sampling procedure attempt to mini-
mize certain types of bias? Are there sources of bias 
that may still be a concern?
2.66	 The article “I’d Like to Buy a Vowel, Drivers Say” (USA 
Today, Au­gust 7, 2001) speculates that young people 
prefer automobile names that consist of just numbers 
and/or letters that do not form a word (such as 
Hyundai’s XG300, Mazda’s 626, and BMW’s 325i). 
The article goes on to state that Hyundai had planned 
to identify the car that was eventually marketed as 
the XG300 with the name Concerto, until they deter-
mined that consumers hated it and that they thought 
XG300 sounded more “technical” and deserving of 
a higher price. Do the students at your school feel 
the same way? Describe how you would go about 
selecting a sample to answer this question. 
2.67	 A study in Florida is examining whether health lit-
eracy classes and using simple medical instructions 
that include pictures and avoid big words and 
technical terms can keep Medicaid patients healthier 
(San Luis Obispo Tribune, Oc­to­ber 16, 2002). Twenty-
seven community health centers are participating 
in the study. For 2 years, half of the centers will 
administer standard care. The other centers will 
have patients attend classes and will provide special 
health materials that are easy to understand.
Explain why it is important for the researchers to 
assign the 27 centers to the two groups (standard care 
and classes with simple health literature) at random.
2.68	 Is status related to a student’s understanding of sci-
ence? The article “From Here to Equity: The Inﬂuence 
of Status on Student Access to and Understanding 
of Science” (Culture and Comparative Studies [1999]: 
577– 602) described a study on the effect of group dis-
cussions on learning biology concepts. An analysis of 
the relationship between status and “rate of talk” (the 
number of on-task speech acts per minute) during 
group work included gender as a blocking variable.
Do you think that gender is a useful blocking 
variable? Explain.
2.69	 The article “Tots’ TV-Watching May Spur Attention 
Problems” (San Luis Obispo Tribune, April 5, 2004) 
describes a study that appeared in the journal 
Pediatrics. In this study, researchers looked at records 
of 2500 children who were participating in a long-
term health study. They found that 10% of these 
children had attention disorders at age 7 and that 
hours of television watched at age 1 and age 3 was 
associated with an increased risk of having an atten-
tion disorder at age 7.
a.	 Is the study described an observational study or 
an experiment?
b.	Give an example of a potentially confounding 
variable that would make it unwise to draw the 
conclusion that hours of television watched at 
a young age is the cause of the increased risk of 
attention disorder.
2.70	 A study of more than 50,000 U.S. nurses found that 
those who drank just one soda or fruit punch a day 
tended to gain much more weight and had an 80% in-
creased risk of developing diabetes compared to those 
who drank less than one a month. (The Washington 
Post, Au­gust 25, 2004). “The message is clear. . . . 
Anyone who cares about their health or the health of 
their family would not consume these beverages,” said 
Walter Willett of the Harvard School of Public Health, 
who helped conduct the study. The sugar and bever-
age industries said that the study was fundamentally 
ﬂawed. “These allegations are inﬂammatory. Women 
who drink a lot of soda may simply have generally 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter Review Exercises 
●  75
unhealthy lifestyles,” said Richard Adamson of the 
American Beverage Association.
a.	 Do you think that the study described was an 
observational study or an experiment?
b.	Is it reasonable to conclude that drinking soda or 
fruit punch causes the observed increased risk of 
diabetes? Why or why not?
2.71	 “Crime Finds the Never Married” is the conclusion 
drawn in an article from USA Today (June 29, 2001). 
This conclusion is based on data from the Justice 
Department’s National Crime Victimization Survey, 
which estimated the number of violent crimes per 
1000 people, 12 years of age or older, to be 51 for 
the never married, 42 for the divorced or separated, 
13 for married individuals, and 8 for the widowed. 
Does being single cause an increased risk of violent 
crime? Describe a potential confounding variable 
that illustrates why it is unreasonable to conclude 
that a change in marital status causes a change in 
crime risk.
2.72	 The article “Workers Grow More Dissat­is­ﬁed” in the San 
Luis Obispo Tribune (Au­gust 22, 2002) states that “a sur-
vey of 5000 people found that while most Americans 
continue to ﬁnd their jobs interesting, and are even 
sat­is­ﬁed with their commutes, a bare majority like 
their jobs.” This statement was based on the fact that 
only 51 percent of those responding to a mail survey 
indicated that they were sat­is­ﬁed with their jobs.
Describe any potential sources of bias that might 
limit the researcher’s ability to draw conclusions 
about working Americans based on the data collected 
in this survey.
2.73	 According to the article “Effect of Preparation 
Methods on Total Fat Content, Moisture Content, and 
Sensory Characteristics of Breaded Chicken Nuggets 
and Beef Steak Fingers” (Family and Consumer Sciences 
Research Journal [1999]: 18–27), sensory tests were 
conducted using 40 college student volunteers at 
Texas Women’s University. Give three reasons, apart 
from the relatively small sample size, why this sample 
may not be ideal as the basis for generalizing to the 
population of all college students.
2.74	 Do ethnic group and gender in­ﬂu­ence the type of 
care that a heart patient receives? The following pas-
sage is from the article “Heart Care Reﬂects Race and 
Sex, Not Symptoms” (USA Today, Feb­ru­ary 25, 1999, 
reprinted with permission):
Previous research suggested blacks and women were 
less likely than whites and men to get cardiac catheter-
ization or coronary bypass surgery for chest pain or 
a heart attack. Scientists blamed differences in illness 
severity, insurance coverage, patient preference, and 
health care access. The researchers eliminated those 
differences by videotaping actors—two black men, 
two black women, two white men, and two white 
women—describing chest pain from identical scripts. 
They wore identical gowns, used identical gestures, and 
were taped from the same position. Researchers asked 
720 primary care doctors at meetings of the American 
College of Physicians or the American Academy of 
Family Physicians to watch a tape and recommend 
care. The doctors thought the study focused on clinical 
decision making.
a.	 Evaluate this experimental design. Do you think 
this is a good design or a poor design, and why?
b.	If you were de­signing such a study, what, if any-
thing, would you propose to do differently?
2.75	 An article in the San Luis Obispo Tribune (Sep­tem­ber 7, 
1999) described an experiment designed to investigate 
the effect of creatine supplements on the development 
of muscle ﬁ­bers. The article states that the research-
ers “looked at 19 men, all about 25 years of age and 
similar in weight, lean body mass, and capacity to lift 
weights. Ten were given creatine—25 grams a day for 
the ﬁrst week, followed by 5 grams a day for the rest 
of the study. The rest were given a fake preparation. 
No one was told what he was getting. All the men 
worked out under the guidance of the same trainer. 
The response variable mea­sured was gain in fat-free 
mass (in percent).”
a.	 What extraneous variables are iden­ti­ﬁed in 
the given statement, and what strategy did the 
researchers use to deal with them?
b.	Do you think it was important that the men partici-
pating in the experiment were not told whether they 
were receiving creatine or the placebo? Explain.
c.	 This experiment was not conducted in a double-
blind manner. Do you think it would have been a 
good idea to make this a double-blind experiment? 
Explain.
2.76	 Researchers at the University of Houston decided to 
test the hypothesis that restaurant servers who squat 
to the level of their customers would receive a larger 
tip (“Effect of Server Posture on Restaurant Tipping,” 
Journal of Applied Social Psychology [1993]: 678–685). 
In the experiment, the waiter would ﬂip a coin to 
determine whether he would stand or squat next 
to the table. The waiter would record the amount 
of the bill and of the tip and whether he stood or 
squatted.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

76 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
a.	 Describe the treatments and the response variable.
b.	Discuss possible extraneous variables and how 
they could be controlled.
c.	 Discuss whether blocking would be necessary.
d.	Identify possible confounding variables.
e.	 Discuss the role of random assignment in this 
experiment.
2.77	 You have been asked to determine on what types of 
grasslands two species of birds, northern harriers and 
short-eared owls, build nests. The types of grasslands 
to be used include undisturbed native grasses, man-
aged native grasses, undisturbed nonnative grasses, 
and managed nonnative grasses. (Based on the article 
“Response of Northern Harriers and Short-Eared Owls 
to Grassland Management in Illinois,” Journal of Wildlife 
Management [1999]: 517–523.)
a.	 You are allowed a plot of land 500 meters square 
to study. Explain how you would determine where 
to plant the four types of grasses. What role would 
random assignment play in this determination?
b.	Identify any confounding variables.
c.	 Would this study be considered an observational 
study or an experiment? 
2.78	 A manufacturer of clay rooﬁng tiles would like to 
investigate the effect of clay type on the proportion 
of tiles that crack in the kiln during ﬁr­ing. Two 
different types of clay are to be considered. One 
hundred tiles can be placed in the kiln at any one 
time. Firing temperature varies slightly at different 
locations in the kiln, and ﬁr­ing temperature may also 
affect cracking.
a.	 Discuss the design of an experiment to collect 
information that could be used to decide between 
the two clay types. 
b.	How does your proposed design deal with the ex-
traneous variable temperature? 
2.79	 A mortgage lender routinely places advertisements 
in a local newspaper. The advertisements are of 
three different types: one focusing on low interest 
rates, one featuring low fees for ﬁrst-time buyers, 
and one appealing to people who may want to 
reﬁ­nance their homes. The lender would like to 
determine which advertisement format is most 
successful in attracting customers to call for more 
information.
a.	 Describe an experiment that would provide the 
information needed to make this determination. 
Be sure to consider extraneous variables, such 
as the day of the week that the advertisement 
appears in the paper, the section of the paper in 
which the advertisement appears, or daily ﬂuc­tua­
tions in the interest rate.
b.	What role does random assignment play in your 
design?
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Technology Notes
JMP
1.  Once JMP is initialized, select File > New > DataTable 
to create a new data table. A table will appear with 
“Column 1” in the top row. If you wish, double-click on 
“Column 1” and change this to “RandSample”.
2.  Click on Rows > AddRows. The following panel will appear:
3.  Decide how many random integers you wish, and type 
that number in the box. Then press OK. Note that JMP 
Generating random integers
will not protect you against repeats, so you might wish 
to generate more numbers than you actually need. JMP 
will then present the column with the desired number 
of rows.
4.  Right-click on RandSample and select Formula.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.  Using the slider, find RANDOM in the Functions 
(grouped) panel. 
6.  Click on RANDOM, then Integer. The “Formula” box 
will update to “RandomInteger(n1)”.
7.  Replace n1 with “1<N”, where N is the maximum num-
ber desired. (If you want just 1 to 50, you can just sub-
stitute 50 for n1.) The random integers will appear in the 
RandSample column.
Minitab
1.  In the main Minitab Data Editor, at the top of the C1 
variable column, enter “randnum” as the variable name.
2.  In succession, click on Calc, RandomData, and finally 
Integer. The Integer Distribution panel will appear.
3.  Click on the Store in column(s) panel, and then double-
click on C1 randnum.
4.  Enter the number of random integers desired and the 
minimum and maximum values.
Technology Notes 
●  77
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.  Press OK. The random integers will appear in the rand-
num column.
SPSS
1.  In the SPSS Data Editor, click on the Variable View tab 
at the bottom of the screen. Then enter randnum in the 
name column and hit return.
2.  Click on the Data View tab at the bottom of the screen. 
Then enter any number in the cell corresponding to how 
many random numbers you want to generate. For exam-
ple, to generate 10 random numbers, type any number 
in cell 10 of the randnum column.
3.  Choose Compute from the Transform menu.
4.  Type randnum in the Target Variable box. Type 
RND(Uniform(N))+1 in the Numeric Expression box. N 
is a number that represents the largest integer you want 
to include. For example, to generate random integers be-
tween 1 and 100, you would type 100 for N.
5.  Click on OK and then click on OK in the box that asks if 
you want to change the existing variable. The requested 
random numbers will now appear in the randnum col-
umn of the Data Editor.
Excel 2007
1.  Choose a cell in Excel and enter “=RANDBETWEEN 
(Lo, Hi)” where Lo and Hi are the lower and upper ends 
of the range of values of random integers that you want. 
Press ENTER.
78 
●  Chapter 2  Collecting Data Sensibly
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2.  Click on the small square in the lower right of the cell. 
Drag the square downward the number of rows equal to 
the number of random integers that you wish to have.
3.  Check for any repetitions. If found, use the lower-right-
corner technique to add more.
TI-83/84
Note: The TI calculator has a built-in sequence of pseudo-
random numbers that has been determined by “seeding” the 
starting random number. Unless this number is changed, 
everyone in a group with a new calculator will get the same 
sequence of random numbers. Because of this, Step 0 is the 
“reseeding” step. Normally, this would only be done one time. 
0.  At the home screen, enter an 8-digit integer. Press STO 
> MATH > PROB.
Choose “rand” and press ENTER.
To generate n random numbers, with no repeats, between 1 
and N:
1a.  Select MATH > PROB > randIntNoRep(
2a.  Supply the relevant information about the desired ran-
dom integers. For example,
	
lower: 1
	
upper: 20
	
n: 7
	
Paste
Press ENTER after each of these lines.
3a.  randIntNoRep(1, 50, 7) will appear. Press ENTER 
and the random integers will be displayed.
If your calculator does not have the most recent oper-
ating system, you must supply the numbers indicated. 
The randInt function will not necessarily give nonre-
peating integers.
1b.  Select MATH > PROB > randInt(
2b.  Enter 1, 50, 7, “)” and ENTER.
3b.  randInt(1, 50, 7) should appear on the screen. Press 
ENTER and your numbers will be displayed.
To store the random integers in a TI List, do not press 
ENTER after randIntNoRep(1, 50, 7) or randInt(1, 
50, 7) in Step 3. Instead of Enter, continue with press-
ing STO> 2nd > L1. The random integers will be stored 
in List1. 
Technology Notes 
●  79
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

80
Most college students (and their parents) are 
concerned about the cost of a college education. 
The National Center for Education Statistics (www.nces 
.ed.gov) reported the average in state tuition and 
fees for 4-year public institutions in each of the 50 
U.S. states for the 2011–2012 academic year. Aver-
age tuition and fees (in dollars) are given below for 
each state.
Several questions could be posed about these 
data. What is a typical value of average in-state tu-
ition and fees for the 50 states? Are observations 
concentrated near the typical value, or do average 
tuition and fees differ quite a bit from state to state? 
Are there any states whose average tuition and fees 
are somehow unusual compared to the rest? What 
proportion of the states have average tuition and 
fees less than $7500? More than $10,000?
Questions such as these are most easily an-
swered if the data can be organized in a sensible 
manner. In this chapter, we introduce some tech-
niques for organizing and describing data using 
tables and graphs.
Graphical Methods  
for Describing Data
7502
5957
9021
6367
8907
7167
9069
10,524
4032
6015
7422
5674
11,252
7940
7563
6689
7943
5198
9278
7831
10,104
10,527
9862
5674
7588
6007
6752
4509
13,347
11,596
5293
6192
5701
6414
8800
5538
7975
11,818
9926
10,372
6939
7013
7116
5163
13,078
9373
7701
5241
7851
3501
©iStockphoto.com/florintt 
Chapter 3: Learning Objectives
Students will understand:
●
●that selecting an appropriate graphical display depends on the data type 
(categorical or numerical) and whether or not the purpose of the display is to 
compare groups.
continued
CHAPTER 3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.1   Displaying Categorical Data: Comparative Bar Charts and Pie Charts 
●  81
●
●how a graphical display of numerical data is described in terms of center, 
shape, and spread.
●
●how a scatterplot is used to investigate the relationship between two 
numerical variables.
●
●how time series plots are used to investigate trend over time.
Students will be able to:
●
●construct and interpret graphical displays of categorical data: pie charts and 
segmented bar charts.
●
●construct and interpret graphical displays of numerical data: stem-and-leaf 
displays, histograms, and relative frequency graphs.
●
●construct and interpret graphical displays designed to compare groups: 
comparative bar charts and comparative stem-and-leaf displays.
●
●construct and interpret a scatterplot of bivariate numerical data.
●
●construct and interpret a time series plot.
 3.1  
Displaying Categorical Data: Comparative Bar Charts and Pie Charts
Comparative Bar Charts
In Chapter 1 we saw that categorical data could be summarized in a frequency distribu-
tion and displayed graphically using a bar chart. Bar charts can also be used to give a 
visual comparison of two or more groups. This is accomplished by constructing two or 
more bar charts that use the same set of horizontal and vertical axes, as illustrated in 
Example 3.1.
Example 3.1 
How Far Is Far Enough?
Each year The Princeton Review conducts a survey of high school students who are applying 
to college and parents of college applicants. The report “2009 College Hopes & Worries Survey 
Findings” (www.princetonreview.com/archival/ir/REVU_News_2009_3_25_General.pdf) includ-
ed a summary of how 12,715 high school students responded to the question “Ideally how 
far from home would you like the college you attend to be?” Also included was a summary 
of how 3007 parents of students applying to college responded to the question “How far 
from home would you like the college your child attends to be?” The accompanying rela-
tive frequency table summarizes the student and parent responses.
Ideal Distance
Frequency
Relative Frequency
Students
Parents
Students
Parents
Less than 250 miles
4450
1594
.35
.53
250 to 500 miles
3942
  902
.31
.30
500 to 1000 miles
2416
  331
.19
.11
More than 1000 miles
1907
  180
.15
.06
The comparative bar chart based on the relative frequencies for these data is shown 
in Figure 3.1. It is easy to see the differences between students and parents. A higher 
proportion of parents prefer a college close to home, and a higher proportion of stu-
dents than parents believe that the ideal distance from home would be more than 
500 miles.
Step-by-step technology  
instructions available online
Understanding the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

82 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
To see why we use relative frequencies rather than frequencies to compare groups of dif-
ferent sizes, consider the incorrect bar chart constructed using the frequencies rather than 
the relative frequencies (Figure 3.2). The incorrect bar chart conveys a very different and 
misleading impression of the differences between students and parents.
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
0
Frequency
<250 miles
250–500 miles
500–1000 miles
>1000 miles
Ideal distance
Students
Parents

■
When constructing a comparative bar chart, use relative frequency rather than 
frequency to construct the scale on the vertical axis so that meaningful 
­comparisons can be made even if the sample sizes are not the same. 
Pie Charts
A categorical data set can also be summarized using a pie chart. In a pie chart, a circle 
is used to represent the whole data set, with “slices” of the pie representing the possible 
categories. The size of the slice for a particular category is proportional to the correspond-
ing frequency or relative frequency. Pie charts are most effective for summarizing data sets 
when there are not too many different categories.
Figure  3.1
Comparative bar chart of ideal 
distance from home.
Figure  3.2
An incorrect comparative bar chart 
for the data of Example 3.1.
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0
Relative frequency
<250 miles
250–500 miles
500–1000 miles
>1000 miles
Ideal distance
Students
Parents
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.1   Displaying Categorical Data: Comparative Bar Charts and Pie Charts 
●  83
Example 3.2 
Life Insurance for Cartoon Characters??
The article “Fred Flintstone, Check Your Policy” (The Washington Post, Oc­to­ber 2, 2005) sum-
marized the results of a survey of 1014 adults conducted by the Life and Health Insurance 
Foundation for Education. Each person surveyed was asked to select which of ﬁve ﬁc­tional 
characters, Spider-Man, Batman, Fred Flintstone, Harry Potter, and Marge Simpson, he or 
she thought had the greatest need for life insurance. The resulting data are summarized in 
the pie chart of Figure 3.3.
Spider-Man
28.0%
Batman
18.0%
Fred Flintstone
16.0%
Harry Potter
15.0%
Marge Simpson
11.0%
Don’t know
12.0%
The survey results were quite different from an insurance expert’s assessment. 
His opinion was that Fred Flintstone, a married father with a young child, was by  
far the one with the greatest need for life insurance. Spider-Man, unmarried with an elderly 
aunt, would need life insurance only if his aunt relied on him to supplement her income. 
Batman, a wealthy bachelor with no dependents, doesn’t need life insurance in spite of his 
dangerous job!	
■
When to Use  Categorical data with a relatively small number of possible 
categories. Pie charts are most useful for illustrating proportions of the whole 
data set for various categories.
How to Construct
1.	 Draw a circle to represent the entire data set.
2.	 For each category, calculate the “slice” size. Because there are 360 degrees 
in a circle
slice size 5 360 ? (category relative frequency)
3.	 Draw a slice of appropriate size for each category. This can be tricky, so 
most pie charts are generated using a graphing calculator or a statistical 
software package.
What to Look For
●
●Categories that form large and small proportions of the data set.
Pie Chart for Categorical Data
Understanding the context ❭
Figure  3.3
Pie chart of data on which ﬁc­tional 
character most needs life insurance.
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

84 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
Example 3.3 
Watch Those Typos
Typos on a résumé do not make a very good impression when applying for a job. Senior 
executives were asked how many typos in a résumé would make them not consider a job 
candidate (“Job Seekers Need a Keen Eye,” USA Today, August 3, 2009). The resulting data are 
summarized in the accompanying relative frequency distribution.
Number of Typos
Frequency
Relative Frequency
1
60
.40
2
54
.36
3
21
.14
4 or more
10
.07
Don’t know
  5
.03
To draw a pie chart by hand, we would ﬁrst compute the slice size for each category. For 
the one typo category, the slice size would be
slice size 5 (.40)(360) 5 144 degrees
We would then draw a circle and use a protractor to mark off a slice corresponding to about 
144°, as illustrated here in the ﬁgure shown in the margin. Continuing to add slices in this 
way leads to a completed pie chart.
It is much easier to use a statistical software package to create pie charts than to construct 
them by hand. A pie chart for the typo data, created with the statistical software package 
Minitab, is shown in Figure 3.4.
1
40.0%
2
36.0%
3
14.0%
4 or more
7.0%
Don’t know
3.0%
From the completed pie chart, it is easy to see that even one or two typos would result in 
many employers not considering a candidate for a job.
■
Pie charts can be used effectively to summarize a single categorical data set if there 
are not too many different categories. However, pie charts are not usually the best tool if 
the goal is to compare groups on the basis of a categorical variable. This is illustrated in 
Example 3.4.
Example 3.4 
Scientists and Nonscientists Do Not See  
Eye-to-Eye
Scientists and nonscientists were asked to indicate if they agreed or disagreed with the 
following statement: “When something is run by the government, it is usually inefficient 
Step-by-step technology  
instructions available online
Understanding the context ❭
Do the work ❭
144 degrees, to represent
ﬁrst attempt category
Figure  3.4
Pie chart for the typo data of 
Example 3.3.
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.1   Displaying Categorical Data: Comparative Bar Charts and Pie Charts 
●  85
and wasteful.” The resulting data (from “Scientists, Public Differ in Outlooks,” USA Today, 
July 10, 2009) were used to create the two pie charts in Figure 3.5.
Agree
Disgree
Don’t know
Scientists
(a)
Although differences between scientists and nonscientists can be seen by comparing 
the pie charts of Figure 3.5, it can be difficult to compare category proportions using pie 
charts. A comparative bar chart (Figure 3.6) makes this type of comparison easier.
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0
Relative frequency
Agree
Disagree
Don’t know
Scientists
Nonscientists
 
From the comparative bar chart, it is easy to see that the scientists were much less likely to 
agree with the statement than people who were not scientists.
■
A Different Type of “Pie” Chart: Segmented Bar Charts
A pie chart can be dif­ﬁ­cult to construct by hand, and the circular shape sometimes makes it 
dif­ﬁ­cult to compare areas for different categories, particularly when the relative frequencies 
for categories are similar. The segmented bar chart (also sometimes called a stacked bar 
chart) avoids these dif­ﬁ­cul­ties by using a rectangular bar rather than a circle to represent 
the entire data set. The bar is divided into segments, with different segments representing 
different categories. As with pie charts, the area of the segment for a particular category 
is proportional to the relative frequency for that category. Example 3.5 illustrates the con-
struction of a segmented bar chart.
Figure  3.5
Pie charts for Example 3.4:  
(a) scientist data;  
(b) nonscientist data.
Agree
Disgree
Don’t know
Nonscientists
(b)
Figure  3.6
Comparative bar chart for the 
scientist and nonscientist data.
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

86 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
Example 3.5 
How College Seniors Spend Their Time
Each year, the Higher Education Research Institute conducts a survey of college seniors. 
In 2008, approximately 23,000 seniors participated in the survey (“Findings from the 2008 
Administration of the College Senior Survey,” Higher Education Research Institute, June 2009). 
The accompanying relative frequency table summarizes student response to the question: 
“During the past year, how much time did you spend studying and doing homework in a 
typical week?”
Studying/Homework
Amount of Time
Relative Frequency
2 hours or less
.074
3 to 5 hours
.227
6 to 10 hours
.285
11 to 15 hours
.181
16 to 20 hours
.122
Over 20 hours
.111
To construct a segmented bar chart for these data, ﬁrst draw a bar of any ﬁxed width and 
length, and then add a scale that ranges from 0 to 1, as shown.
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
1.00
0.00
Then divide the bar into six segments, corresponding to the six possible time categories 
in this example. The first segment, corresponding to the 2 hours or less category, ranges 
from 0 to .074. The second segment, corresponding to 3 to 5 hours, ranges from .074 to 
.301 (for a length of .227, the relative frequency for this category), and so on. The seg-
mented bar chart is shown in Figure 3.7.
Over 20 hours
16 to 20 hours
11 to 15 hours
6 to 10 hours
3 to 5 hours
2 hours or less
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
1.00
0.00
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Do the work ❭
Figure  3.7
Segmented bar chart for the study 
time data of Example 3.5.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.1   Displaying Categorical Data: Comparative Bar Charts and Pie Charts 
●  87
The same report also gave data on amount of time spent on exercise or sports in a typical 
week. Figure 3.8 shows horizontal segmented bar charts (segmented bar charts can be 
displayed either vertically or horizontally) for both time spent studying and time spent 
exercising. Viewing these graphs side by side makes it easy to see how students differ with 
respect to time spent on these two types of activities.
>20 hours
16–20 hours
11–15 hours
6–10 hours
3–5 hours
2 hours or less
Amount of Time
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
Data
Studying/homework
Exercise/sport
The proportion of students who reported spending 5 hours or less per week exercising 
was much larger than the proportion who reported spending 5 hours or less per week 
studying. The proportion of students in each of the categories corresponding to 6 or more 
hours per week was noticeably higher for studying than for exercising.
■
Other Uses of Bar Charts and Pie Charts
As we have seen in previous examples, bar charts and pie charts can be used to summarize 
categorical data sets. However, they are sometimes also used for other purposes, as illus-
trated in Examples 3.6 and 3.7.
Example 3.6 
Grape Production
  The 2012 Grape Crush Report for California gave the 
following information on grape production for each 
of four different types of grapes (California Department 
of Food and Agriculture, March 8, 
2013):
Type of Grape
Tons Produced
Red Wine Grapes
  2,292,200
White Wine Grapes
  1,725,689
Raisin Grapes
   270,085
Table Grapes
    99,111
Total
4,387,085
Although this table is not a frequency distribution, it is common 
to represent information of this type graphically using a pie chart, as 
shown in Figure 3.9. The pie represents the total grape production, 
and the slices show the proportion of the total production for each of the four types of 
grapes.

■
Figure  3.8
Segmented bar charts for time spent 
studying and time spent exercising.
Interpret the results ❭
PhotoLink/Photodisc/Getty Images 
Red wine
White wine
Raisin Table
Figure  3.9
Pie chart for grape production data.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

88 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
Example 3.7 
Back-to-College Spending
The National Retail Federation’s 2013 Back to College Survey (www.nrf.com) asked each person 
in a sample of college students how much they planned to spend in various categories during 
the upcoming academic year. The average amounts of money (in dollars) that men and wom-
en planned to spend for five different types of purchases are shown in the accompanying table.
Type of Purchase
Average for Men
Average for Women
Clothing and Accessories
$176.67
$160.68
Shoes
$106.66
  $87.70
School Supplies
  $87.95
  $67.66
Electronics and Computers
$385.11
$401.22
Dorm or Apartment Furnishings
$287.04
$203.66
 Data set available online
Even though this table is not a frequency distribution, this type of information is often rep-
resented graphically in the form of a bar chart, as illustrated in Figure 3.10. From the bar 
chart, we can see that the average amount of money that men and women plan to spend 
is similar for all of the types of purchases except for dorm and apartment furnishings, in 
which the average for men is noticeably higher than the average for women.
100
200
300
400
0
Average amount
Clothing
Shoes
School
supplies
Electronics
and
computers
Dorm or
apartment
furnishings
Men
Women

■
Figure  3.10
Comparative bar chart for the 
back-to-college spending data of 
men and women.
EXERCISES 3.1 - 3.14
3.1	 Each person in a nationally representative sample 
of 1252 young adults age 23 to 28 years old was 
asked how they viewed their “financial physique” 
(“2009 Young Adults & Money Survey Findings,” Charles 
Schwab, 2009). “Toned and fit” was chosen by 18% 
of the respondents, while 55% responded “a little bit 
flabby,” and 27% responded “seriously out of shape.” 
Summarize this information in a pie chart. (Hint: See 
Examples 3.2 and 3.3.)
3.2	 The accompanying graphical display is similar to 
one that appeared in USA Today (October 22, 2009). 
It summarizes survey responses to a question about 
whether visiting social networking sites is allowed at 
work. Which of the graph types introduced in this 
section is used to display the responses? (USA Today 
frequently adds artwork and text to their graphs to 
try to make them look more interesting.) 
Source: Robert Half 
Technology survey of 1,400 
chief information ofﬁcers. 
Weighted to represent 
actual population.
No Facebooking for me
Does your company
policy prohibit
employees from visiting 
social-networking sites 
while at work?
Yes, 
completely 
54%
Don’t 
know 
1%
No, but
some limits 
apply 35%
No 
10%
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Source: USA TODAY. October 22, 2009.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.1   Displaying Categorical Data: Comparative Bar Charts and Pie Charts 
●  89
3.3	 The survey referenced in the previous exercise was 
conducted by Robert Half Technology. This company 
issued a press release (“Whistle—But Don’t Tweet—
While You Work,” www.roberthalftechnology.com,  
October 6, 2009) that provided more detail than in 
the USA Today snapshot graph. The actual question 
asked was “Which of the following most closely 
describes your company’s policy on visiting social 
networking sites, such as Facebook, MySpace and 
Twitter, while at work?” The responses are summa-
rized in the following table:
Response Category
Relative Frequency 
(expressed as percent)
Prohibited completely
54%
Permitted for business purposes only
19%
Permitted for limited personal use
16%
Permitted for any type of personal use
10%
Don’t know/no answer
  1%
a.	 Explain how the survey response categories and 
corresponding relative frequencies were used or 
modified to produce the graphical display in the 
previous exercise.
b.	Using the original data in the table, construct a 
segmented bar graph. (Hint: See Example 3.5.)
c.	 What are two other types of graphical displays that 
would be appropriate for summarizing these data?
3.4	 The National Confectioners Association asked 1006 
adults the following question: “Do you set aside 
a personal stash of Halloween candy?” Fifty-five 
percent of those surveyed responded no, 41% 
responded yes, and 4% either did not answer the 
question or said they did not know (USA Today, 
October 22, 2009). Use the given information to 
construct a pie chart.
3.5	 College student attitudes about e-books were inves-
tigated in a survey of 1625 students. Students were 
asked to indicate their level of agreement with the 
following statement:
“I would like to be able to get all my textbooks in 
digital form.”
The responses are summarized in the accompanying 
table. (The Chronicle of Higher Education, August 23, 2013)
Response
Percentage in This Category
Strongly disagree
21.3
Disagree
29.2
Agree
25.0
Strongly agree
13.2
Don’t know
11.3
a.	 Construct an appropriate graphical display to 
summarize the information given in the table.
b.	Write a headline that would be appropriate for a 
newspaper article that summarized the results of 
this survey.
3.6	 The Center for Science in the Public Interest evalu-
ated school cafeterias in 20 school districts across the 
United States. Each district was assigned a numerical 
score on the basis of rigor of food codes, frequency of 
food safety inspections, access to inspection informa-
tion, and the results of cafeteria inspections. Based 
on the score assigned, each district was also assigned 
one of four grades. 
The scores and grades are summarized in the 
accompanying table, which appears in the report 
“Making the Grade: An Analysis of Food Safety in School 
Cafeterias” (cspi.us/new/pdf/makingthegrade.pdf, 2007).
  Top of the Class   
  Passing   
  Barely Passing   
  Failing
Jurisdiction
Overall Score 
(out of 100)
City of Fort Worth, TX
80
King County, WA
79
City of Houston, TX
78
Maricopa County, AZ
77
City and County of Denver, CO
75
Dekalb County, GA
73
Farmington Valley Health District, CT
72
State of Virginia
72
Fulton County, GA
68
City of Dallas, TX
67
City of Philadelphia, PA
67
City of Chicago, IL
65
City and County of San Francisco, CA
64
Montgomery County, MD
63
Hillsborough County, FL
60
City of Minneapolis, MN
60
Dade County, FL
59
State of Rhode Island
54
District of Columbia
46
City of Hartford, CT
37
a.	 Two variables are summarized in the figure, grade 
and overall score. Is overall score a numerical or 
categorical variable? Is grade (indicated by the dif-
ferent colors in the figure) a numerical or categori-
cal variable?
b.	Explain how the figure is equivalent to a 
segmented bar graph of the grade data.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

90 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
c.	 Construct a dotplot of the overall score data. 
Based on the dotplot, suggest an alternate 
assignment of grades (top of class, passing, etc.) to 
the 20 school districts. Explain the reasoning you 
used to make your assignment. (Hint: Dotplots 
were covered in Section 1.4.)
3.7	 The article “Housework around the World” (USA Today, 
September 15, 2009) included the percentage of wom-
en who say their spouses never help with household 
chores for five different countries.
Country
Percentage
Japan
74
France
44
United Kingdom
40
United States
34
Canada
31
a.	 Display the information in the accompanying 
table in a bar chart.
b.	The article did not state how the author arrived at the 
given percentages. What are two questions that you 
would want to ask the author about how the data 
used to compute the percentages were collected?
c.	 Assuming that the data that were used to compute 
these percentages were collected in a reasonable 
way, write a few sentences describing how the five 
countries differ in terms of spouses helping their 
wives with housework.
3.8	 The report “Findings from the 2009 Administration of 
the College Senior Survey” (Higher Education Research 
Institute, 2010) asked a large number of college 
seniors how they would rate themselves compared 
to the average person of their age with respect to 
physical health. The accompanying relative frequency 
table summarizes the responses for men and women.
Rating of Physical Health
Relative Frequency
Men
Women
Highest 10%
.359
.227
Above average
.471
.536
Average
.160
.226
Below average
.009
.007
Lowest 10%
.001
.004
a.	 Construct a comparative bar graph of the responses 
that allows you to compare the responses of men 
and women.
b.	There were 8110 men and 15,260 women 
who responded to the survey. Explain why it 
is important that the comparative bar graph 
be constructed using the relative frequencies 
rather than the actual numbers of people (the 
frequencies) responding in each category.
c.	 Write a few sentences commenting on how 
college seniors perceive themselves with respect to 
physical health and how men and women differ in 
their perceptions.
3.9	 The article “Rinse Out Your Mouth” (Associated Press, 
March 29, 2006) summarized results from a survey 
of 1001 adults on the use of profanity. When asked 
“How many times do you use swear words in con-
versations?” 46% responded a few or more times per 
week, 32% responded a few times a month or less, 
and 21% responded never. Use the given information 
to construct a segmented bar chart.
3.10	 The survey on student attitude toward e-books 
described in Exercise 3.5 was conducted in 2011. 
A similar survey was also conducted in 2012 (The 
Chronicle of Higher Education, August 23, 2013). Data 
from 1588 students who participated in the 2012 
survey are summarized in the accompanying table.
Response
Percentage in This Category
Strongly disagree
19.1
Disagree
27.5
Agree
26.3
Strongly agree
16.0
Don’t know
11.1
a.	 Use these data and the data from Exercise 3.5 to 
construct a comparative bar chart that shows the 
distribution of responses for the two years. (Hint: 
See Example 3.1.)
b.	Based on your graph from part (a), do you think 
there was much of a change in attitude toward 
e-books from 2011 to 2012? 
3.11	 ▼ Poor ﬁt­ness in adolescents and adults increases 
the risk of cardiovascular disease. In a study of 3110 
adolescents and 2205 adults (Journal of the American 
Medical Association, De­cem­ber 21, 2005), researchers 
found 33.6% of adolescents and 13.9% of adults 
were unﬁt; the percentage was similar in adolescent 
males (32.9%) and females (34.4%), but was 
higher in adult females (16.2%) than in adult males 
(11.8%).
a.	 Summarize this information using a comparative 
bar graph that shows differences between males 
and females within the two different age groups.
b.	Comment on the interesting features of your 
graphical display.
3.12	 A survey of 1001 adults taken by Associated Press–
Ipsos asked “How accurate are the weather forecasts 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.2   Displaying Numerical Data: Stem-and-Leaf Displays 
●  91
in your area?” (San Luis Obispo Tribune, June 15, 2005). 
The responses are summarized in the table below.
Extremely
  4%
Very
27%
Somewhat
53%
Not too
11%
Not at all
  4%
Not sure
  1%
a.	 Construct a pie chart to summarize these data.
b.	Construct a bar chart to summarize these data.
c.	 Which of these charts—a pie chart or a bar chart—
best summarizes the important information? Explain.
3.13	 An article about college loans (“New Rules Would Pro-
tect Students,” USA Today, June 16, 2010) reported the 
percentage of students who had defaulted on a student 
loan within 3 years of when they were scheduled to
Relative Frequency
Loan Status
Public Colleges
Private Non-
profit Colleges
For-Profit 
Colleges
Good Standing
.928
.953
.833
In Default
.072
.047
.167
begin repayment. Information was given for public col-
leges, private non-profit colleges, and for-profit colleges.
a.	 Construct a comparative bar chart that would allow you 
to compare loan status for the three types of colleges.
b.	The article states “those who attended for-profit 
schools were more likely to default than those 
who attended public or private non-profit 
schools.” What aspect of the comparative bar 
chart supports this statement?
3.14	 The article “Fraud, Identity Theft Afflict Consumers” (San 
Luis Obispo Tribune, February 2, 2005) included the ac-
companying breakdown of identity theft complaints 
by type.
Type of Complaint
Percent of All Complaints
Credit card fraud
28
Phone or utilities fraud
19
Bank fraud
18
Employment fraud
13
Other
22
Construct a bar chart for these data and write a sen-
tence or two commenting on the most common types 
of identity theft complaints.
 3.2  
Displaying Numerical Data: Stem-and-Leaf Displays
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
A stem-and-leaf display is an effective and compact way to summarize numerical data. 
Each number in the data set is broken into two pieces, referred to as a stem and a leaf. 
The stem is the ﬁrst part of the number and consists of the beginning digit(s). The leaf is 
the last part of the number and consists of the ﬁ­nal digit(s). For example, the number 213 
might be split into a stem of 2 and a leaf of 13 or a stem of 21 and a leaf of 3. The resulting 
stems and leaves are then used to construct the display.
Example 3.8 
Going Wireless
● The article “Going Wireless” (AARP Bulletin, June 2009) reported the estimated percentage of 
U.S. households with only wireless phone service (no land line) for the 50 states and the 
District of Columbia. Data for the 19 Eastern states are given here.
Step-by-step technology  
instructions available online
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
 Data set available online
State
Wireless %
State
Wireless %
State
Wireless %
CN
  5.6
MA
  9.3
RI
  7.8
DE
  5.7
NH
11.6
SC
20.6
DC
20.0
NJ
  8.0
VA
10.8
FL
16.8
NY
11.4
VT
  5.1
GA
16.5
NC
16.3
WV
11.6
ME
13.4
OH
14.0
MD
10.8
PA
10.8
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

92 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
Figure 3.11 shows a stem-and-leaf display for the wireless percentage data.
The numbers in the vertical column on the left of the display are the stems. Each num-
ber to the right of the vertical line is a leaf corresponding to one of the ­observations in the 
data set. The legend
Stem:	 Tens
Leaf:	 Ones
tells us that the observation that had a stem of 0 and a leaf of 5.6 corresponds to a wireless 
percentage of 05.6 or 5.6 (as opposed to 56 or 0.56). Similarly, the observation with the 
stem of 1 and leaf of 6.8 corresponds to a wireless percentage of 16.8.
This display shows that for many Eastern states, the percentage of households with 
only wireless phone service was in the 10 to 20% range. Two states had percentages of at 
least 20%.	
■
The leaves on each line of the display in Figure 3.11 have not been arranged in order 
from smallest to largest. Most statistical software packages order the leaves this way, but it is 
not necessary to do so to get an informative display that still shows many of the important 
characteristics of the data set, such as shape and spread.
Stem-and-leaf displays can be useful to get a sense of a typical value for the data set, as 
well as a sense of how spread out the values in the data set are. It is also easy to spot data 
values that are unusually far from the rest of the values in the data set. Such values are 
called outliers. The stem-and-leaf display of the wireless percentage data (Figure 3.11) does 
not show any outliers.
Outlier: An unusually small or large data value. A precise rule for deciding when 
an observation is an outlier is given in Chapter 4.
DEFINITION
Interpret the results ❭
When to Use  Numerical data sets with a small to moderate number of 
observations (does not work well for very large data sets)
How to Construct
1.	 Select one or more leading digits for the stem values. The trailing digits (or 
sometimes just the first one of the trailing digits) become the leaves.
2.	 List possible stem values in a vertical column.
3.	 Record the leaf for every observation beside the corresponding stem value.
4.	 Indicate the units for stems and leaves someplace in the display.
What to Look For  The display conveys information about
●
●a representative or typical value in the data set
●
●the extent of spread about a typical value
●
●the presence of gaps and outliers in the data
●
●the extent of symmetry in the distribution of values
●
●the number and location of peaks
Stem-and-Leaf Displays
Stem:  Tens
Leaf:    Ones
5.6, 5.7, 9.3, 8.0, 7.8, 5.1
6.8, 6.5, 3.4, 0.8, 1.6, 1.4, 6.3, 4.0, 0.8, 0.8, 1.6
0.0, 0.6
0
1
2
Figure  3.11
Stem-and-leaf display of wireless 
percentage for Eastern states.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.2   Displaying Numerical Data: Stem-and-Leaf Displays 
●  93
Example 3.9 
Tuition at Public Universities
● The introduction to this chapter gave data on average in-state tuition and fees at public 
­institutions in the year 2012 for the 50 U.S. states. The observations ranged from a low 
value of $3501 to a high value of $13,347. The data are reproduced here:
7502
5957
9021
6367
8907
7167
9069 10,524
4032
6015
7422
5674 11,252
7940
7563
6689
7943
5198
9278
7831
10,104 10,527
9862
5674
7588
6007
6752
4509 13,347 11,596
5293
6192
5701
6414
8800
5538
7975 11,818
9926 10,372
6939
7013
7116
5163 13,078
9373
7701
5241
7851
3501
Notice that some of the data values are only four digits (such as 7502) and others are five 
digits (such as 10,104). It is easiest to proceed if we first make all of the data values five-
digit numbers by adding leading zeros as shown:
07,502 05,957 09,021 06,367 08,907 07,167 09,069 10,524 04,032 06,015
07,422 05,674 11,252 07,940 07,563 06,689 07,943 05,198 09,278 07,831
10,104 10,527 09,862 05,674 07,588 06,007 06,752 04,509 13,347 11,596
05,293 06,192 05,701 06,414 08,800 05,538 07,975 11,818 09,926 10,372
06,939 07,013 07,116 05,163 13,078 09,373 07,701 05,241 07,851 03,501
A natural choice for the stem is the leading two digits. This would result in a display with 
11 stems (03, 04, 05, 06, 07, 08, 09, 10, 11, 12, and 13). Using the first three digits of a 
number of the stem would result in 99 stems (035 to 133). A stem-and-leaf display with 
99 stems would not be an effective summary of the data. In general, stem-and-leaf displays 
that use between 5 and 30 stems tend to work well.
If we choose the first two digits as the stem, the remaining three digits (the hundreds, 
tens, and ones) would form the leaf. For example, for the first few values in the data set, 
we would have
	
07,502 → stem 5 07, leaf 5 502
	
05,957 → stem 5 05, leaf 5 957
	
09,021 → stem 5 09, leaf 5 021
The leaves have been entered in the display of Figure 3.12 in the order they are encoun-
tered in the data set. Commas are used to separate the leaves only when each leaf has two or 
more digits. Figure 3.12 shows that most states had average in-state tuition and fees in the 
$5000 to $8000 range and that the typical average tuition and fees is around $7500. Two 
states have average in-state tuition and fees at public four-year institutions that are quite a 
bit higher than most other states (the two states with the highest values were Vermont and 
New Hampshire).
Stem:  Thousands
Leaf:    Ones
501
032, 509
957, 674, 198, 674, 293, 701, 538, 163, 241
367, 015, 689, 007, 752, 192, 414, 939
502, 167, 422, 940, 563, 943, 831, 588, 975, 013, 116, 701, 851
907, 800
021, 069, 278, 862, 926, 373
524, 104, 527, 372
252, 596, 818
347, 078
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Figure  3.12
Stem-and-leaf display of average 
tuition and fees.
 Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

94 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
An alternative display (Figure 3.13) results from dropping all but the ﬁrst digit of the 
leaf. This is what most statistical computer packages do when generating a display. Little 
information about typical value, spread, or shape is lost in this truncation and the display 
is simpler and more compact.
Stem:  Thousands
Leaf:    Hundreds
5
05
961627512
30607149
5149598590178
98
002893
5153
258
30
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13

■
Repeated Stems to Stretch a Display
Sometimes a natural choice of stems gives a display in which too many observations are 
concentrated on just a few stems. A more informative picture can be obtained by dividing 
the leaves at any given stem into two groups: those that begin with 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 (the “low” 
leaves) and those that begin with 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9 (the “high” leaves). Then each stem value is 
listed twice when constructing the display, once for the low leaves and once again for the high 
leaves. It is also possible to repeat a stem more than twice. For example, each stem might be 
repeated ﬁve times, once for each of the leaf groupings {0, 1}, {2, 3}, {4, 5}, {6, 7}, and {8, 9}.
Example 3.10 
Median Ages in 2030
● The accompanying data on the Census Bureau’s projected median age in 2030 for the 50 
U.S. states and Washington, D.C. appeared in the article “2030 Forecast: Mostly Gray” (USA 
Today, April 21, 2005). The median age for a state is the age that divides the state’s residents 
so that half are younger than the median age and half are older than the median age.
Projected Median Age
41.0
32.9
39.3
29.3
37.4
35.6
41.1
43.6
33.7
45.4
35.6
38.7
39.2
37.8
37.7
42.0
39.1
40.0
38.8
46.9
37.5
40.2
40.2
39.0
41.1
39.6
46.0
38.4
39.4
42.1
40.8
44.8
39.9
36.8
43.2
40.2
37.9
39.1
42.1
40.7
41.3
41.5
38.3
34.6
30.4
43.9
37.8
38.5
46.7
41.6
46.4
The ages in the data set range from 29.3 to 46.9. Using the ﬁrst two digits of each data value 
for the stem results in a large number of stems, while using only the ﬁrst digit results in a 
stem-and-leaf display with only three stems.
The stem-and-leaf display using single digit stems and leaves truncated to a single digit is 
shown in Figure 3.14. A stem-and-leaf display that uses repeated stems is shown in Figure 3.15. 
Here each stem is listed twice, once for the low leaves (those beginning with 0, 1, 2, 3, 4) and 
once for the high leaves (those beginning with 5, 6, 7, 8, 9). This display is more informative 
than the one in Figure 3.14, but is much more compact than a display based on two-digit stems.
2
3
4
9
02345567777778888899999999
000000111111222333456666
Stem:  Tens
Leaf:    Ones
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Do the work ❭
Figure  3.14
Stem-and-leaf display for the 
projected median age data.
Figure  3.13
Stem-and-leaf display of average 
in-state tuition and fees using 
truncated leaves.
● Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.2   Displaying Numerical Data: Stem-and-Leaf Displays 
●  95
2H
3L
3H
4L
4H
9
0234 
5567777778888899999999
0000001111112223334 
56666
Stem:  Tens
Leaf:    Ones

■
Comparative Stem-and-Leaf Displays
Frequently an analyst wishes to see whether two groups of data differ in some fundamental 
way. A comparative stem-and-leaf display, in which the leaves for one group are listed to 
the right of the stem values and the leaves for the second group are listed to the left, can 
provide preliminary visual impressions and insights.
Example 3.11 
Progress for Children
● The report “Progress for Children” (UNICEF, April 2005) included the accompanying data on 
the percentage of primary-school-age children who were enrolled in school for 19 coun-
tries in Northern Africa and for 23 countries in Central Africa.
Northern Africa
54.6
34.3
48.9
77.8
59.6
88.5
97.4
92.5
83.9
96.9
88.9
98.8
91.6
97.8
96.1
92.2
94.9
98.6
86.6
Central Africa
58.3
34.6
35.5
45.4
38.6
63.8
53.9
61.9
69.9
43.0
85.0
63.4
58.4
61.9
40.9
73.9
34.8
74.4
97.4
61.0
66.7
79.6
98.9
We will construct a comparative stem-and-leaf display using the ﬁrst digit of each observa-
tion as the stem and the remaining two digits as the leaf. To keep the display simple the leaves 
will be truncated to one digit. For example, the observation 54.6 would be processed as
54.6 → stem 5 5, leaf 5 4 (truncated from 4.6)
and the observation 34.3 would be processed as
34.3 → stem 5 3, leaf 5 4 (truncated from 4.3)
The resulting comparative stem-and-leaf display is shown in Figure 3.16.
4854
035
838
6113913
943
5
87
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
4
8
49
76
8386
7268176248
Northern Africa
Central Africa
Stem:  Tens
Leaf:    Ones
From the comparative stem-and-leaf display we can see that there is quite a bit of vari-
ability in the percentage enrolled in school for both Northern and Central Afri­can coun-
tries and that the shapes of the two data distributions are quite different. The percentage 
enrolled in school tends to be higher in Northern African countries than in Central African 
countries, although the smallest value in each of the two data sets is about the same. For 
Northern African countries the distribution of values has a single peak in the 90s with the 
number of observations declining as we move toward the stems corresponding to lower 
percentages enrolled in school. For Central African countries the distribution is more sym-
metric, with a typical value in the mid 60s.
■
Figure  3.15
Stem-and-leaf display for the 
projected median age data using 
repeated stems.
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Figure  3.16
Comparative stem-and-leaf display 
for percentage of children enrolled in 
primary school.
Interpret the results ❭
● Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

96 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
3.15	 ● The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
provided the data in the accompanying table in the 
report “Births: Preliminary Data for 2007” (National Vital 
Statistics Reports, March 18, 2009). Entries in the table 
are the birth rates (births per 1,000 of population) 
for the year 2007.
State
*Births
Alabama
14.0
Alaska
16.2
Arizona
16.2
Arkansas
14.6
California
15.5
Colorado
14.6
Connecticut
11.9
Delaware
14.1
District of 
Columbia
15.1
Florida
13.1
Georgia
15.9
Hawaii
14.9
Idaho
16.7
Illinois
14.1
Indiana
14.2
Iowa
13.7
Kansas
15.1
Kentucky
14.0
Louisiana
15.4
Maine
10.7
Maryland
13.9
Massachusetts
12.1
Michigan
12.4
Minnesota
14.2
Mississippi
15.9
State
*Births
Missouri
13.9
Montana
13.0
Nebraska
15.2
Nevada
16.1
New Hampshire
10.8
New Jersey
13.4
New Mexico
15.5
New York
13.1
North Carolina
14.5
North Dakota
13.8
Ohio
13.2
Oklahoma
15.2
Oregon
13.2
Pennsylvania
12.1
Rhode Island
11.7
South Carolina
14.3
South Dakota
15.4
Tennessee
14.1
Texas
17.1
Utah
20.8
Vermont
10.5
Virginia
14.1
Washington
13.8
West Virginia
12.1
Wisconsin
13.0
Wyoming
15.1
*Births per 1000 of population
Construct a stem-and-leaf display using stems 10, 
11 . . . 20. Comment on the interesting features of 
the display. (Hint: See Example 3.9.)
3.16	 ● ▼ The National Survey on Drug Use and Health, con-
ducted in 2006 and 2007 by the Ofﬁce of Applied 
Studies, led to the following state estimates of the 
total number of people ages 12 and older who had 
used a tobacco product within the last month.
State
Number of 
People (in 
thousands)
Alabama
1,307
Alaska
   161
Arizona
1,452
Arkansas
   819
California
6,751
Colorado
1,171
Connecticut
   766
Delaware
   200
District of 
Columbia
   141
Florida
4,392
Georgia
2,341
Hawaii
   239
Idaho
   305
Illinois
3,149
Indiana
1,740
Iowa
   755
Kansas
   726
Kentucky
1,294
Louisiana
1,138
Maine
   347
Maryland
1,206
Massachusetts
1,427
Michigan
2,561
Minnesota
1,324
Mississippi
   763
Missouri
1,627
State
Number of 
People (in 
thousands)
Montana
   246
Nebraska
   429
Nevada
   612
New 
Hampshire
   301
New Jersey
1,870
New Mexico
   452
New York
4,107
North Carolina
2,263
North Dakota
   162
Ohio
3,256
Oklahoma
1,057
Oregon
   857
Pennsylvania
3,170
Rhode Island
   268
South Carolina
1,201
South Dakota
   202
Tennessee
1,795
Texas
5,533
Utah
   402
Vermont
   158
Virginia
1,771
Washington
1,436
West Virginia
   582
Wisconsin
1,504
Wyoming
   157
a.	 Construct a stem-and-leaf display using thousands 
(of thousands) as the stems and truncating the 
leaves to the tens (of thousands) digit.
b.	Write a few sentences describing the shape of the 
distribution and any unusual observations.
c.	 The four largest values were for California, Texas, 
Florida, and New York. Does this indicate that 
tobacco use is more of a problem in these states 
than elsewhere? Explain.
d.	If you wanted to compare states on the basis of 
the extent of tobacco use, would you use the data 
in the given table? If yes, explain why this would 
be reasonable. If no, what would you use instead 
as the basis for the comparison?
EXERCISES 3.15 - 3.21
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.2   Displaying Numerical Data: Stem-and-Leaf Displays 
●  97
3.17	 ● The article “Going Wireless” (AARP Bulletin, June 2009) 
reported the estimated percentage of households with 
only wireless phone service (no land line) for the 50 
U.S. states and the District of Columbia. In the ac-
companying data table, each state was also classified 
into one of three geographical regions—West (W), 
Middle states (M), and East (E).
Wireless 
%
Region
State
Wireless 
%
Region
State
13.9
M
AL
  9.2
W
MT
11.7
W
AK
23.2
M
NE
18.9
W
AZ
10.8
W
NV
22.6
M
AR
16.9
M
ND
  9.0
W
CA
11.6
E
NH
16.7
W
CO
  8.0
E
NJ
  5.6
E
CN
21.1
W
NM
  5.7
E
DE
11.4
E
NY
20.0
E
DC
16.3
E
NC
16.8
E
FL
14.0
E
OH
16.5
E
GA
23.2
M
OK
  8.0
W
HI
17.7
W
OR
22.1
W
ID
10.8
E
PA
16.5
M
IL
  7.9
E
RI
13.8
M
IN
20.6
E
SC
22.2
M
IA
  6.4
M
SD
16.8
M
KA
20.3
M
TN
21.4
M
KY
20.9
M
TX
15.0
M
LA
25.5
W
UT
13.4
E
ME
10.8
E
VA
10.8
E
MD
  5.1
E
VT
  9.3
E
MA
16.3
W
WA
16.3
M
MI
11.6
E
WV
17.4
M
MN
15.2
M
WI
19.1
M
MS
11.4
W
WY
9.9
M
MO
a.	 Construct a stem-and-leaf display for the wireless 
percentage using the data from all 50 states and 
the District of Columbia. What is a typical value 
for this data set?
b.	Construct a back-to-back stem-and-leaf dis-
play for the wireless percentage of the states in 
the West and the states in the East. How do the 
distributions of wireless percentages compare for 
states in the East and states in the West? (Hint: See 
Example 3.11.)
3.18	 The article “Economy Low, Generosity High” (USA Today, 
July 28, 2009) noted that despite a weak economy in 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
continued
2008, more Americans volunteered in their com-
munities than in previous years. Based on census 
data (www.volunteeringinamerica.gov), the top 
and bottom five states in terms of percentage of the 
population who volunteered in 2008 were identi-
fied. The top five states were Utah (43.5%), Nebraska 
(38.9%), Minnesota (38.4%), Alaska (38.0%), and 
Iowa (37.1%). The bottom five states were New 
York (18.5%), Nevada (18.8%), Florida (19.6%), 
Louisiana (20.1%), and Mississippi (20.9%).
a.	 For the data set that includes the percentage who 
volunteered in 2008 for each of the 50 states, 
what is the largest value? What is the smallest 
value?
b.	If you were going to construct a stem-and-leaf dis-
play for the data set consisting of the percentage 
who volunteered in 2008 for the 50 states, what 
stems would you use to construct the display? 
Explain your choice.
3.19	 The U.S. gasoline tax per gallon data for each of the 
50 states and the District of Columbia were listed 
in the article “Paying at the Pump” (AARP Bulletin, 
June 2010).
State
Gasoline 
tax* 
Alabama
20.9
Alaska
8.0
Arizona
19.0
Arkansas
21.8
California
48.6
Colorado
22.0
Connecticut
42.6
Delaware
23.0
District of 
Columbia
23.5
Florida
34.4
Georgia
20.9
Hawaii
45.1
Idaho
25.0
Illinois
40.4
Indiana
34.8
Iowa
22.0
Kansas
25.0
Kentucky
22.5
Louisiana
20.0
Maine
31.0
Maryland
23.5
Massachusetts
23.5
State
Gasoline 
tax* 
Michigan
35.8
Minnesota
27.2
Mississippi
18.8
Missouri
17.3
Montana
27.8
Nebraska
27.7
Nevada
33.1
New 
Hampshire
19.6
New Jersey
14.5
New Mexico
18.8
New York
44.9
North Carolina
30.2
North Dakota
23.0
Ohio
28.0
Oklahoma
17.0
Oregon
25.0
Pennsylvania
32.3
Rhode Island
33.0
South Carolina
16.8
South Dakota
24.0
Tennessee
21.4
Texas
20.0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

98 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
a.	 Construct a stem-and-leaf display of these data.
b.	Based on the stem-and-leaf display, what do you 
notice about the center and spread of the data 
distribution?
c.	 Do any values in the data set stand out as 
unusual? If so, which states correspond to the 
unusual observations, and how do these values 
differ from the rest?
3.20	 ● ▼ A report from Texas Transportation Institute (Texas 
A&M University System, 2005) titled “Congestion Reduc-
tion Strategies” included the accompanying data on 
extra travel time for peak travel time in hours per 
year per traveler for different-sized urban areas.
Very Large Urban Areas
Extra Hours per Year 
per Traveler
Los Angeles, CA
93
San Francisco, CA
72
Washington DC, VA, MD
69
Atlanta, GA
67
Houston, TX
63
Dallas, Fort Worth, TX
60
Chicago, IL-IN
58
Detroit, MI
57
Miami, FL
51
Boston, MA, NH, RI
51
New York, NY-NJ-CT
49
Phoenix, AZ
49
Philadelphia, PA-NJ-DE-MD
38
Large Urban Areas
Extra Hours per Year  
per Traveler
Riverside, CA
55
Orlando, FL
55
San Jose, CA
53
San Diego, CA
52
Denver, CO
51
Baltimore, MD
50
Seattle, WA
46
Tampa, FL
46
Minneapolis, St Paul, MN
43
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
continued
continued
State
Gasoline 
tax* 
Utah
24.5
Vermont
24.7
Virginia
19.6
Washington
37.5
State
Gasoline 
tax* 
West Virginia
32.2
Wisconsin
32.9
Wyoming
14.0
*Cents per gallon
Large Urban Areas
Extra Hours per Year  
per Traveler
Sacramento, CA
40
Portland, OR, WA
39
Indianapolis, IN
38
St Louis, MO-IL
35
San Antonio, TX
33
Providence, RI, MA
33
Las Vegas, NV
30
Cincinnati, OH-KY-IN
30
Columbus, OH
29
Virginia Beach, VA
26
Milwaukee, WI
23
New Orleans, LA
18
Kansas City, MO-KS
17
Pittsburgh, PA
14
Buffalo, NY
13
Oklahoma City, OK
12
Cleveland, OH
10
a.	 Construct a comparative stem-and-leaf plot for 
extra travel time per traveler for each of the two 
different sizes of ­urban areas.
b.	Is the following statement consistent with the 
display constructed in Part (a)? Explain.
	
The larger the urban area, the greater the extra 
travel time during peak period travel.
3.21	 ● The percentage of teens not in school or working 
in 2010 for the 50 states were given in the 2012 Kids 
Count Data Book (www.aecf.org) and are shown in the 
following table:
State
Rate
Alabama
11%
Alaska
11%
Arizona
12%
Arkansas
12%
California
  8%
Colorado
  7%
Connecticut
  5%
Delaware
  9%
Florida
10%
Georgia
12%
Hawaii
12%
Idaho
11%
Illinois
  8%
Indiana
  8%
Iowa
  6%
State
Rate
Kansas
  6%
Kentucky
11%
Louisiana
14%
Maine
  7%
Maryland
  8%
Massachusetts
  5%
Michigan
  9%
Minnesota
  5%
Mississippi
13%
Missouri
  9%
Montana
  9%
Nebraska
  4%
Nevada
15%
New Hampshire
  6%
New Jersey
  8%
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.3   Displaying Numerical Data: Frequency Distributions and Histograms  
●  99
Note that the percentages range from a low of 4% 
to a high of 15%. In constructing a stem-and-leaf 
display for these data, if we regard each percentage 
A stem-and-leaf display is not always an effective way to summarize data, because it can be 
unwieldy when the data set contains a large number of observations. Frequency distribu-
tions and histograms are displays that work well for large data sets.
Frequency Distributions and Histograms for Discrete Numerical Data
Discrete numerical data almost always result from counting. In such cases, each observa-
tion is a whole number. As in the case of categorical data, a frequency distribution for 
discrete numerical data lists each possible value (either individually or grouped into in-
tervals), the associated frequency, and sometimes the corresponding relative frequency. 
Recall that relative frequency is calculated by dividing the frequency by the total number 
of observations in the data set.
Example 3.12 
Promiscuous Queen Bees
● Queen honey bees mate shortly after they become adults. During a mating flight, the 
queen usually takes multiple partners, collecting sperm that she will store and use through-
out the rest of her life. The authors of the paper “The Curious Promiscuity of Queen Honey 
Bees” (Annals of Zoology [2001]: 255–265) studied the behavior of 30 queen honey bees to 
learn about the length of mating flights and the number of partners a queen takes during 
a mating flight. 
The accompanying data on number of partners were generated to be consistent with 
summary values and graphs given in the paper.
Number of Partners
12
2
4
6
6
  7
8
7
8
11
  8
3
5
6
7
10
1
9
7
  6
  9
7
5
4
7
  4
6
7
8
10
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
 3.3  
Displaying Numerical Data: Frequency Distributions  
and Histograms
as a two-digit number and use the ﬁrst digit for the 
stem, then there are only two possible stems, 0 and 
1. One solution is to use repeated stems. Consider a 
scheme that divides the leaf range into ﬁve parts: 0 
and 1, 2 and 3, 4 and 5, 6 and 7, and 8 and 9. Then, 
for example, stem 0 could be repeated as
0	
with leaves 0 and 1
0t	
with leaves 2 and 3
0f	
with leaves 4 and 5
0s	
with leaves 6 and 7
0*	
with leaves 8 and 9
Construct a stem-and-leaf display for this data set 
that uses stems 0t, 0f, 0s, 0*, and 1, 1t, and 1f. 
Comment on the important features of the display. 
(Hint: See Example 3.10.)
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
State
Rate
New Mexico
12%
New York
  8%
North Carolina
10%
North Dakota
  5%
Ohio
  8%
Oklahoma
  9%
Oregon
10%
Pennsylvania
  7%
Rhode Island
  5%
South Carolina
  9%
State
Rate
South Dakota
  8%
Tennessee
10%
Texas
  9%
Utah
  9%
Vermont
  4%
Virginia
  7%
Washington
  8%
West Virginia
14%
Wisconsin
  7%
Wyoming
  9%
● Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

100 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
The corresponding relative frequency distribution is given in Table 3.1. The smallest 
value in the data set is 1 and the largest is 12, so the possible values from 1 to 12 are listed 
in the table, along with the corresponding frequency and relative frequency.
Table 3.1  Relative Frequency Distribution for Number of Partners
Number of Partners
Frequency 
Relative Frequency
  1
1
.033
  2
1
.033
  3
1
.033
  4
3
.100
  5
2
.067
  6
5
.167
  7
7
.233
  8
4
.133
  9
2
.067
10
2
.067
11
1
.033
12
1
.033
Total
30
.999
Differs from 1 due 
to rounding
From the relative frequency distribution, we can see that five of the queen bees had 
six partners during their mating flight. The corresponding relative frequency, 5
30 5 .167, 
tells us that the proportion of queens with six partners is .167, or equivalently 16.7% of 
the queens had six partners. Adding the relative frequencies for the values 10, 11, and 
12 gives
.067 1 .033 1 .033 5 .133
indicating that 13.3% of the queens had 10 or more partners.
It is possible to create a more compact frequency distribution by grouping some of the 
possible values into intervals. For example, we might group together 1, 2, and 3 partners to 
form an interval of 1–3, with a corresponding frequency of 3. The grouping of other values 
in a similar way results in the relative frequency distribution shown in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2  Relative Frequency Distribution of Number of Partners  
Using Intervals
Number of Partners
Frequency 
Relative Frequency
1–3 
  3
.100
4–6 
10
.333 
7–9 
13
.433
10–12
  4
.133

■
A histogram for discrete numerical data is a graph of the frequency or relative frequency 
distribution, and it is similar to the bar chart for categorical data. Each frequency or relative 
frequency is represented by a rectangle centered over the corresponding value (or range 
of values) and the area of the rectangle is proportional to the corresponding frequency or 
relative frequency.
Interpret the results ❭
1
30 5 .033
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.3   Displaying Numerical Data: Frequency Distributions and Histograms  
●  101
When to Use  Discrete numerical data. Works well, even for large data sets.
How to Construct
1.	 Draw a horizontal scale, and mark the possible values of the variable.
2.	 Draw a vertical scale, and mark it with either frequency or relative 
frequency.
3.	 Above each possible value, draw a rectangle centered at that value (so that 
the rectangle for 1 is centered at 1, the rectangle for 5 is centered at 5, 
and so on). The height of each rectangle is determined by the correspond-
ing frequency or relative frequency. Often possible values are consecutive 
whole numbers, in which case the base width for each rectangle is 1.
What to Look For
●
●Center or typical value
●
●Extent of spread or variability
●
●General shape
●
●Location and number of peaks
●
●Presence of gaps and outliers
Histogram for Discrete Numerical Data
Example 3.13 
Revisiting Promiscuous Queen Bees
The queen bee data of Example 3.12 were summarized in a frequency distribution. The 
corresponding histogram is shown in Figure 3.17. Note that each rectangle in the histo-
gram is centered over the corresponding value. When relative frequency instead of fre-
quency is used for the vertical scale, the scale on the vertical axis is different but all essential 
characteristics of the graph (shape, center, spread) are unchanged.
6
5
2
4
3
1
7
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Number of partners
Frequency
9
10
11
12
.20
.15
.10
.05
.25
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Number of partners
Relative frequency
9
10
11
12
Figure  3.17
Histogram and relative frequency 
histogram of queen bee data.
A histogram based on the grouped frequency distribution of Table 3.2 can be constructed 
in a similar fashion, and is shown in Figure 3.18. A rectangle represents the frequency or 
relative frequency for each interval. For the interval 1–3, the rectangle extends from .5 to 
3.5 so that there are no gaps between the rectangles of the histogram.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

102 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Number of partners
Frequency
9
10
11
12
Figure  3.18
Histogram of queen bee data 
using intervals.

■
Sometimes a discrete numerical data set contains a large number of possible values and 
perhaps also has a few large or small values that are far away from most of the data. In this 
case, rather than forming a frequency distribution with a very long list of possible values, 
it is common to group the observed values into intervals or ranges. This is illustrated in 
Example 3.14.
Example 3.14  Math SAT Score Distribution
Each of the 1,664,479 students who took the math portion of the SAT exam in 2012 
received a score between 200 and 800. The score distribution was summarized in a 
frequency distribution table that appeared in the College Board report titled “2012 College 
Bound Seniors.” A relative frequency distribution is given in Table 3.3 and the correspond-
ing relative frequency histogram is shown in Figure 3.19. Notice that rather than list each 
possible individual score value between 200 and 800, the scores are grouped into intervals 
(200 to 299, 300 to 399, etc.). This results in a much more compact table that still com-
municates the important features of the data set. Also, notice that because the data set is so 
large, the frequencies are also large numbers. Because of these large frequencies, it is easier 
to focus on the relative frequencies in our interpretation. 
Table 3.3  Relative Frequency Distribution of Math SAT Score
Math SAT Score
Frequency 
Relative Frequency
200–299
  40,664
0.024
300–399
217,896
0.131
400–499
490,043
0.294
500–599
490,118
0.294
600–699
307,076
0.184
700–800
118,682
0.071
Consider the data ❭
From the relative frequency distribution and histogram, we can see that while there is a 
lot of variability in individual math SAT scores, the majority were in the 400 to 600 range 
and a typical value for math SAT looks to be something in the high 400s.
Before leaving this example, take a second look at the relative frequency histogram of 
Figure 3.19. Notice that there is one rectangle for each score interval in the relative fre-
quency distribution. For simplicity we have chosen to treat the very last interval, 700 to 
800, as if it were 700 to 799 so that all of the score ranges in the frequency distribution 
Understand the context ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.3   Displaying Numerical Data: Frequency Distributions and Histograms  
●  103
are the same width. Also note that the rectangle representing the score range 400 to 499 
actually extends from 399.5 to 499.5 on the score scale. This is similar to what happens 
in histograms for discrete numerical data where there is no grouping. For example, in 
Figure 3.17 the rectangle representing 2 is centered at 2 but extends from 1.5 to 2.5 on the 
number of partners scale.
■
Frequency Distributions and Histograms for Continuous Numerical Data
The dif­ﬁ­culty in constructing tabular or graphical displays with continuous data, such as 
observations on reaction time (in seconds) or weight of airline passenger carry-on luggage 
(in pounds), is that there are no natural categories. The way out of this dilemma is to de­
ﬁne our own categories. For carry-on luggage weight, we might expect weights up to about 
30 pounds. One way to group the weights into 5-pound intervals is shown in Figure 3.20. 
Then each observed data value could be classified into one of these intervals. The intervals 
used are sometimes called class intervals. The class intervals play the same role that the 
categories or individual values played in frequency distributions for categorical or discrete 
numerical data.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
There is one further dif­ﬁ­culty we need to address. Where should we place an observation 
such as 20, which falls on a boundary between classes? Our convention is to de­ﬁne inter-
vals so that such an observation is placed in the upper rather than the lower class interval. 
Thus, in a frequency distribution, one class might be 15 to ,20, where the symbol , is a 
substitute for the phrase less than. This class interval will contain all observations that are 
greater than or equal to 15 and less than 20. The observation 20 would then fall in the class 
interval 20 to ,25. 
Example 3.15 
Going Away to College
● States differ widely in the percentage of college students who attend college in their home 
state. The percentages of freshmen who attended college in their home state for each of the 
50 states are shown here (The Chronicle of Higher Education, August 23, 2013). The data have 
been ordered from largest to smallest.
Figure  3.20
Suitable class intervals for carry-on 
luggage weight data.
Understand the context ❭
.05
.10
.20
.25
.15
.30
0
199.5
299.5
Math SAT score
Relative frequency
399.5
499.5
599.5
699.5
799.5
Figure  3.19
Relative frequency histogram for the 
math SAT data.
● Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

104 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
Percentage of College Students Attending College in Home State
93
92
91
91
90
90
90
90
89
89
89
89
89
89
89
88
87
87
85
85
85
85
84
84
83
81
81
81
80
78
77
77
76
76
76
76
72
72
70
68
67
65
65
64
62
60
58
57
57
50
The smallest observation is 50% (Vermont) and the largest is 93% (Mississippi). It is 
reasonable to start the ﬁrst class interval at 40 and let each interval have a width of 10. This 
gives class intervals of 50 to ,60, 60 to ,70, 70 to ,80, 80 to ,90, and 90 to ,100.
Table 3.4 displays the resulting frequency distribution, along with the relative frequencies.
Table 3.4  Frequency Distribution for Percentage of College Students 
Attending College in Home State
Class Interval
Frequency 
Relative Frequency
50 to ,60
  4
.08
60 to ,70
  7
.14
70 to ,80
10
0.2
80 to ,90
21
.42
90 to ,100
  8
.16
50
1.00
Various relative frequencies can be combined to yield other interesting information. For 
example,
 1
proportion of states with
percent attending college
in home state less than 702
51
proportion in 50
to 60 class
2 11
proportion in 60
to 70 class
2
5 .08 1 .14 5 .22 s22%d
and
 1
proportion of states
with percent attending
college in home state
between 60 and 90 2
51
proportion
in 60 to
,70 class2
11
proportion
in 70 to
,80 class2
11
proportion
in 80 to
, 90 class2
5 .14 1 .20 1 .42 5 .76 s76%d

■
There are no set rules for selecting either the number of class intervals or the length of the 
intervals. Using a few relatively wide intervals will bunch the data, whereas using a great 
many relatively narrow intervals may spread the data over too many intervals, so that no in-
terval contains more than a few observations. Neither type of distribution will give an infor-
mative picture of how values are distributed over the range of measurement, and interesting 
features of the data set may be missed. In general, with a small amount of data, relatively 
few intervals, perhaps between 5 and 10, should be used. With a large amount of data, a 
distribution based on 15 to 20 (or even more) intervals is often recommended. The quantity
Ïnumber of observations
is often used as an estimate of an appropriate number of intervals: 5 intervals for 25 obser-
vations, 10 intervals when the number of observations is 100, and so on.
Consider the data ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.3   Displaying Numerical Data: Frequency Distributions and Histograms  
●  105
Two people making reasonable and similar choices for the number of intervals, their 
width, and the starting point of the ﬁrst interval will usually obtain histo­grams that are 
similar in terms of shape, center, and spread.
Example 3.16 
TV Viewing Habits of Children
The article “Early Television Exposure and Subsequent Attention Problems in Children” (Pediat-
rics, April 2004) investigated the television viewing habits of children in the United States. 
Table 3.5 gives approximate relative frequencies (read from graphs that appeared in the 
article) for the number of hours spent watching TV per day for a sample of children at age 
1 year and a sample of children at age 3 years. The data summarized in the article were 
obtained as part of a large-scale national survey.
Table 3.5  Relative Frequency Distribution for Number of Hours  
Spent Watching TV per Day
TV Hours
per Day
Age 1 Year  
Relative Frequency 
Age 3 Years  
Relative Frequency
  0 to ,2
.270
.630
  2 to ,4
.390
.195
  4 to ,6
.190
.100
  6 to ,8
.085
.025
  8 to ,10
.030
.020
10 to ,12
.020
.015
12 to ,14
.010
.010
14 to ,16
.005
.005
Figure 3.21(a) is the relative frequency histogram for the 1-year-old children and 
Figure  3.21(b) is the relative frequency histogram for 3-year-old children. Because we 
would like to compare the distributions of TV hours for 1-year-old and 3-year-old children, 
it is important to use the same scales for the two histograms. Notice that both histograms 
have a single peak with the majority of children in both age groups concentrated in the 
Step-by-step technology  
instructions available online
Understand the data ❭
Consider the data ❭
When to Use  Continuous numerical data. Works well, even for large data sets.
How to Construct
1.	 Mark the boundaries of the class intervals on a horizontal axis.
2.	 Use either frequency or relative frequency on the vertical axis.
3.	 Draw a rectangle for each interval directly above the corresponding interval (so that the edges are at the class 
interval boundaries). The height of each rectangle is the corresponding frequency or relative frequency.
What to Look For
●
●Center or typical value
●
●Extent of spread, variability
●
●General shape
●
●Location and number of peaks
●
●Presence of gaps and outliers
Histogram for Continuous Numerical Data When the Class Interval Widths Are Equal
Histograms for Continuous Numerical Data
When the class intervals in a frequency distribution are all of equal width, it is easy to con-
struct a histogram using the information in a frequency distribution.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

106 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
smaller TV hours intervals. Both histograms are quite stretched out at the upper end, indi-
cating some young children watch a lot of TV. 
The big difference between the two histograms is at the low end, with a much greater 
proportion of 3-year-old children falling in the 0 to 2 TV hours interval than is the case for 
1-year-old children. A typical number of TV hours per day for 1-year-old children would 
be somewhere between 2 and 4 hours, whereas a typical number of TV hours for 3-year-old 
children is in the 0 to 2 hours interval. 
■
Class Intervals of Unequal Widths
Figure 3.22 shows a data set in which a great many observations are concentrated at the 
center of the data set, with only a few unusual values below and above the main body of 
data. If a frequency distribution is based on short intervals of equal width, a great many 
intervals will be required to capture all observations, and many of them will contain no 
observations, as shown in Figure 3.22(a). On the other hand, only a few wide intervals will 
capture all values, but then most of the observations will be grouped into a few intervals, 
as shown in Figure 3.22(b). In such situations, it is best to use a combination of wide class 
intervals where there are few data points and shorter intervals where there are many data 
points, as shown in Figure 3.22(c).
(a)
(b)
(c)
Interpret the results ❭
Figure  3.22
Three choices of class intervals for a 
data set with outliers:  
(a) many short intervals of equal 
width;  
(b) a few wide intervals of equal 
width;  
(c) intervals of unequal width.
When class intervals are not of equal width, frequencies or relative frequencies 
should not be used on the vertical axis. Instead, the height of each rectangle, 
called the density for the class interval, is given by 
density 5 rectangle height 5 relative frequency of class interval
class interval width
The vertical axis is called the density scale.
Constructing a Histogram for Continuous Data 
When Class Interval Widths Are Unequal
Figure  3.21
Histogram of TV hours per day:  
(a) 1-year-old children;  
(b) 3-year-old children.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0
.7
.6
.5
.4
.3
.2
.1
Hours of TV per day
(a)
Relative frequency
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0
.7
.6
.5
.4
.3
.2
.1
Hours of TV per day
(b)
Relative frequency
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.3   Displaying Numerical Data: Frequency Distributions and Histograms  
●  107
The use of the density scale to construct the histogram ensures that the area of each 
rectangle in the histogram will be proportional to the corresponding relative frequency. 
The formula for density can also be used when class widths are equal. However, when 
the intervals are of equal width, the extra arithmetic required to obtain the densities is 
unnecessary.
Example 3.17 
Misreporting Grade Point Average
When people are asked for the values of characteristics such as age or weight, they 
sometimes shade the truth in their responses. The article “Self-Reports of Academic Per-
formance” (Social Methods and Research [No­vem­ber 1981]: 165–185) focused on such charac-
teristics as SAT scores and grade point average (GPA). For each student in a sample, the 
difference in GPA (reported – actual) was determined. Positive differences resulted from 
individuals reporting GPAs larger than the correct values. Most differences were close 
to 0, but there were some rather large errors. Because of this, the frequency distribu-
tion based on unequal class widths shown in Table 3.6 gives an informative yet concise 
summary.
Table 3.6  Frequency Distribution for Errors in Reported GPA
Class Interval
Relative Frequency
Width
Density
22.0 to ,20.4
.023
1.6
0.014
20.4 to ,20.2
.055
  .2
0.275
20.2 to ,20.1
.097
  .1
0.970
20.1 to ,0
.210
  .1
2.100
0 to ,0.1
.189
  .1
1.890
0.1 to ,0.2
.139
  .1
1.390
0.2 to ,0.4
.116
  .2
0.580
0.4 to ,2.0
.171
1.6
0.107
Consider the data ❭
Figure 3.23 displays two histograms based on this frequency distribution. The histogram 
in Figure 3.23(a) is correctly drawn, with density used to determine the height of each bar. 
The histogram in Figure 3.23(b) has height equal to relative frequency and is therefore 
not correct. In particular, this second histogram considerably exaggerates the incidence of 
grossly overreported and underreported values—the ­areas of the two most extreme rect-
angles are much too large. The eye is naturally drawn to large areas, so it is important that 
the areas correctly represent the relative frequencies.
2.0
1.0
0.4
0
–0.4
–2.0
(a)
2.0
0.5
1.5
Density
correct graph
Understand the context ❭
Figure  3.23
Histograms for errors in reporting 
GPA:  
(a) a correct histogram  
(height 5 density); 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

108 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
.10
.20
.05
.15
Relative frequency
incorrect graph
2.0
0.4
0
–0.4
–2.0
(b)

■
Histogram Shapes
General shape is an important characteristic of a histogram. In describing various shapes it 
is convenient to approximate the histogram with a smooth curve (called a smoothed histo-
gram). This is illustrated in Figure 3.24.
One description of general shape relates to the number of peaks, or modes.
Unimodal: A histogram is unimodal if it has a single peak. 
Bimodal: A histogram is bimodal if it has two peaks.
Multimodal: A histogram is multimodal if it has more than two peaks.
DEFINITION
These shapes are illustrated in Figure 3.25.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Bimodal histograms sometimes occur when the data set consists of observations on two 
quite different kinds of individuals or objects. For example, consider a large data set con-
sisting of driving times for automobiles traveling between San Luis Obispo, California, 
and Monterey, California. This histogram would show two peaks, one for those cars that 
took the inland route (roughly 2.5 hours) and another for those cars traveling up the coast 
highway (3.5–4 hours). 
However, bimodality does not automatically follow in such situations. Bimodality will 
occur in the histogram of the combined groups only if the centers of the two separate histo-
grams are far apart relative to the variability in the two data sets. For example, a large data 
Figure  3.23
Histograms for errors in reporting 
GPA:  
(b) an incorrect histogram  
(height 5 relative frequency).
Figure  3.24
Approximating a histogram with a 
smooth curve.
Figure  3.25
Smoothed histograms with various 
numbers of modes:  
(a) unimodal;  
(b) bimodal;  
(c) multimodal.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.3   Displaying Numerical Data: Frequency Distributions and Histograms  
●  109
set consisting of heights of college students would probably not produce a bimodal histo-
gram because the typical height for males (about 69 in.) and the typical height for females 
(about 66 in.) are not very far apart relative to the variability in the height distributions. 
Unimodal histograms come in a variety of shapes. A unimodal histogram is symmetric if 
there is a vertical line of symmetry such that the part of the histogram to the left of the line is 
a mirror image of the part to the right. (Bimodal and multimodal histograms can also be sym-
metric in this way.) Several different symmetric smoothed histograms are shown in Figure 3.26.
Proceeding to the right from the peak of a unimodal histogram, we move into what is 
called the upper tail of the histogram. Going in the opposite direction moves us into the 
lower tail.
Skewed: A unimodal histogram that is not symmetric is described as skewed.
Positively skewed or right skewed: A skewed histogram in which the upper 
tail of the histogram stretches out much farther than the lower tail is described 
as positively skewed or right skewed. 
Negatively skewed or left skewed: A skewed histogram in which the lower tail 
of the histogram stretches out much farther than the upper tail is described as 
negatively skewed or left skewed.
DEFINITION
These two types of skewness are illustrated in Figure 3.27. Positive skewness is much 
more frequently encountered than is negative skewness. An example of positive skewness 
occurs in the distribution of single-family home prices in Los Angeles County; most homes 
are moderately priced (at least for California), whereas the relatively few homes in Beverly 
Hills and Malibu have much higher price tags.
(a)
(b)
One spe­ciﬁc shape, a normal curve, arises more frequently than any other in statistical 
applications. Many histograms can be well approximated by a normal curve (for example, 
characteristics such as arm span and the weight of an apple). Here we brieﬂy mention 
several of the most important characteristics of normal curves, postponing a more detailed 
discussion until Chapter 7. A normal curve is both symmetric and bell-shaped; it looks like 
the curve in Figure 3.28(a). However, not all bell-shaped curves are normal. In a normal 
Figure  3.26
Several symmetric unimodal 
smoothed histograms.
Figure  3.27
Two examples of skewed smoothed 
histograms:  
(a) positive skew;  
(b) negative skew.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure  3.28
Three ­examples of bell-shaped histo­
grams:  
(a) normal;  
(b) heavy-tailed;  
(c) light-tailed.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

110 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
curve, starting from the top of the bell the height of the curve decreases at a well-de­ﬁned 
rate when moving toward either tail. (This rate of decrease is speci­ﬁed by a certain math-
ematical function.)
A curve with tails that do not decline as rapidly as the tails of a normal curve is called 
heavy-tailed (compared to the normal curve). Similarly, a curve with tails that decrease 
more rapidly than the normal tails is called light-tailed. Figure 3.28(b) and (c) illustrate 
these possibilities. The reason that we are concerned about the tails in a distribution is that 
many inferential procedures that work well (i.e., they result in a high proportion of correct 
conclusions) when the population distribution is approximately normal perform poorly 
when the population distribution is heavy-tailed.
Do Sample Histograms Resemble Population Histograms?
Sample data are usually collected to make inferences about a population. The resulting 
conclusions may be in error if the sample is unrepresentative of the population. So how 
similar might a histogram of sample data be to the histogram of all population values? Will 
the two histograms be centered at roughly the same place and spread out to about the same 
extent? Will they have the same number of peaks, and will the peaks occur at approxi-
mately the same places?
A related issue concerns the extent to which histograms based on different samples from 
the same population resemble one another. If two different sample histograms can be ex-
pected to differ from one another in obvious ways, then at least one of them might differ 
substantially from the population histogram. If the sample differs substantially from the 
population, conclusions about the population based on the sample are likely to be incor-
rect. Sampling variability—the extent to which samples from the same population differ 
from one another and from the population—is a central idea in statistics. Example 3.18 
illustrates sampling variability in histogram shapes.
Example 3.18 
What You Should Know About Bus Drivers . . .
● A sample of 708 bus drivers employed by public corporations was selected, and the 
number of traf­ﬁc accidents in which each bus driver was involved during a 4-year period 
was determined (“Application of Discrete Distribution Theory to the Study of Noncommunicable 
Events in Medical Epidemiology,” in Random Counts in Biomedi­cal and Social Sciences, G. P. Patil, 
ed. [University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1970]). A listing of the 708 sample 
observations might look like this:
3 0 6 0 0 2 1 4 1 . . . 6 0 2
The frequency distribution (Table 3.7) shows that 117 of the 708 drivers had no accidents, 
a relative frequency of 117/708 5 .165 (or 16.5%). Similarly, the proportion of sampled 
drivers who had 1 accident is .222 (or 22.2%). The largest sample observation was 11.
Understand the context ❭
Table 3.7  Frequency Distribution for Number of Accidents by Bus Drivers
Number of Accidents
Frequency
Relative Frequency
  0
117
.165
  1
157
.222
  2
158
.223
  3
115
.162
  4
  78
.110
  5
  44
.062
  6
  21
.030
  7
    7
.010
  8
    6
.008
continued
● Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.3   Displaying Numerical Data: Frequency Distributions and Histograms  
●  111
Although the 708 observations actually constituted a sample from the population of 
all bus drivers, we will regard the 708 observations as constituting the entire population. 
The ﬁrst histogram in Figure 3.29, then, represents the population histogram. The other 
four histograms in Figure 3.29 are based on four different samples of 50 observations each 
Figure  3.29
Comparison of population and 
sample histograms for number of 
accidents.
1
2
3
4
5
6
9
.05
.10
.15
.20
.25
0
Population histogram
7
8
10
11
1 2
3
4
5
6
9
.05
.10
.15
.20
.25
0
Sample histogram 1
7
8
10 11
1 2
3
4
5
6
9
0
Sample histogram 2
7
8
10 11
1 2
3
4
5
6
9
0
Sample histogram 3
7
8
10 11
1 2
3
4
5
6
9
0
Sample histogram 4
7
8
10 11
.05
.10
.15
.20
.25
.30
.35
Relative
frequency
Relative
frequency
Relative
frequency
Number of accidents
Relative
frequency
Relative
frequency
Number of Accidents
Frequency
Relative Frequency
  9
    1
.001
10
    3
.004
11
    1
.001
708
.998
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

112 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
selected at random from this population. The ﬁve histograms certainly resemble one an-
other in a general way, but some dissimilarities are also obvious. The population histogram 
rises to a peak and then declines smoothly, whereas the sample histograms tend to have 
more peaks, valleys, and gaps. Although the population data set contained an observation 
of 11, none of the four samples did. In fact, in the ﬁrst two samples, the largest observa-
tions were 7 and 8, respectively. In Chapters 8–15 we will see how sampling variability can 
be described and taken into account when we use sample data to draw conclusions about 
a population.
■
Cumulative Relative Frequencies and Cumulative Relative  
Frequency Plots
Rather than wanting to know what proportion of the data fall in a particular class, we often 
wish to determine the proportion falling below a speci­ﬁed value. This is easily done when 
the value is a class boundary. 
Consider the following intervals and relative frequencies for carry-on luggage weight (in 
lbs) for passengers on flights between Phoenix and New York City during October 2009:
Weight
0 to 5
5 to ,10
10 to ,15
15 to ,20 . . .
Relative frequency
.05
.10
.18
.25
. . .
Then
proportion of passengers with carry-on luggage weight less than 15 lbs. 
	
5 proportion in one of the ﬁrst three intervals 
5 .05 1 .10 1 .18
5 .33
Similarly,
proportion of passengers with carry-on luggage weight less than 20 lbs. 
	
5 .05 1 .10 1 .18 1 .25 5 .33 1 .25 5 .58
Each such sum of relative frequencies is called a cumulative relative frequency. Notice 
that the cumulative relative frequency .58 is the sum of the previous cumulative relative 
frequency .33 and the “current” relative frequency .25. The use of cumulative relative fre-
quencies is illustrated in Example 3.19.
Example 3.19 
Albuquerque Rainfall
The National Climatic Data Center has been collecting weather data for many years. Annual 
rainfall totals for Albuquerque, New Mexico, from 1950 to 2008 (www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa 
/climate/research/cag3/city.html) were used to construct the relative frequency distri-
bution shown in Table 3.8. The table also contains a column of cumulative relative 
frequencies.
The proportion of years with annual rainfall less than 10 inches is .585, the cumula-
tive relative frequency for the 9 to ,10 interval. What about the proportion of years with 
annual rainfall less than 8.5 inches? Because 8.5 is not the endpoint of one of the inter-
vals in the frequency distribution, we can only estimate this from the information given. 
The value 8.5 is halfway between the endpoints of the 8 to 9 interval, so it is reasonable 
to estimate that half of the relative frequency of .172 for this interval belongs in the 8 to 
8.5 range. Then
1
estimate of proportion of 
years with rainfall less 
than 8.5 inches 2
5 .052 1 .103 1 .086 1 .103 1 1
2
 s.172d 5 .430
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.3   Displaying Numerical Data: Frequency Distributions and Histograms  
●  113
Annual Rainfall  
(inches)
Frequency
Relative  
Frequency
Cumulative Relative 
Frequency
  4 to ,5
  3
0.052
0.052
  5 to ,6
  6
0.103
0.155 5 .052 1 .103
  6 to ,7
  5
0.086
0.241 5 .052 1 .103 1 .086
or .155 1 .086
  7 to ,8
  6
0.103
0.344
  8 to ,9
10
0.172
0.516
  9 to ,10
  4
0.069
0.585
10 to ,11
12
0.207
0.792
11 to ,12
  6
0.103
0.895
12 to ,13
  3
0.052
0.947
13 to ,14
  3
0.052
0.999
This proportion could also have been computed using the cumulative relative 
frequencies as
1
estimate of proportion of 
years with rainfall less 
than 8.5 inches 2
5 .344 1 1
2
 s.172d 5 .430
Similarly, since 11.25 is one-fourth of the way between 11 and 12,
1
estimate of proportion of 
years with rainfall less 
than 11.25 inches 2
5 .792 1 1
4
 s.103d 5 .818

■
A cumulative relative frequency plot is just a graph of the cumulative relative frequen-
cies against the upper endpoint of the corresponding interval. The pairs
(upper endpoint of interval, cumulative relative frequency)
are plotted as points on a rectangular coordinate system, and successive points in the plot 
are connected by a line segment. For the rainfall data of Example 3.19, the plotted points 
would be
(5, .052)
(6, .155)
(7, .241)
(8, .344)
(9, .516)
(10, .585)
(11, .792) 
(12, .895) 
(13, .947) 
(14, .999)
One additional point, the pair (lower endpoint of ﬁrst interval, 0), is also included in the 
plot (for the rainfall data, this would be the point (4, 0)), and then points are connected 
by line segments. Figure 3.30 shows the cumulative relative frequency plot for the rainfall 
data. The cumulative relative frequency plot can be used to obtain approximate answers to 
questions such as
What proportion of the observations is smaller than a particular value?
and
What value separates the smallest p percent from the larger values?
Table 3.8  Relative Frequency Distribution for Albuquerque Rainfall Data with 
Cumulative Relative Frequencies
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

114 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
0.2
0.0
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative relative frequency
4
5
3
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14
Rainfall
For example, to determine the approximate proportion of years with annual rainfall 
less than 9.5 inches, we would follow a vertical line up from 9.5 on the x-axis and then 
read across to the y-axis to obtain the corresponding relative frequency, as illustrated in 
Figure 3.31(a). Approximately .55, or 55%, of the years had annual rainfall less than 
9.5 inches.
Figure  3.30
Cumulative relative frequency plot 
for the rainfall data of Example 3.19.
0.2
0.0
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative relative frequency
0.3
0.1
0.5
0.7
0.9
4
3
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14
Rainfall
(a)
0.2
0.0
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative relative frequency
0.3
0.1
0.5
0.7
0.9
4
3
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Rainfall
(b)
Figure  3.31
Using the cumulative relative frequency plot.
(a) Determining the approximate proportion of years with annual rainfall less than 9.5 inches.
(b) Finding the amount of rainfall that separates the 30% of years with the lowest rainfall from the 70% with 
higher rainfall.
Similarly, to find the amount of rainfall that separates the 30% of years with the small-
est annual rainfall from years with higher rainfall, start at .30 on the cumulative relative 
frequency axis and move across and then down to find the corresponding rainfall amount, 
as shown in Figure 3.31(b). Approximately 30% of the years had annual rainfall of less 
than 7.6 inches.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.3   Displaying Numerical Data: Frequency Distributions and Histograms  
●  115
3.22	 The data in the accompanying table are from The 
Chronicle of Higher Education (August 23, 2013). Entries 
in the table are the number of people enrolled in col-
lege in 2011 per 100,000 people for 39 countries. For 
example, in the United States, there were 6585 col-
lege students for every 100,000 people in the country.
Country
*College 
Enrollment
Country
*College 
Enrollment
Argentina
6098
Ireland
4203
Australia
5933
Israel
4900
Austria
4409
Italy
3409
Bangladesh
1284
Japan
3025
Bhutan
 969
Mexico
2622
Brazil
3405
New Zealand
6261
Britain
3976
Norway
4805
Cambodia
1511
Pakistan
 839
Chile
6285
Panama
4079
China
2342
Poland
5586
Denmark
4361
Singapore
4997
Egypt
2737
Slovenia
5356
Finland
5863
Spain
4172
France
3459
Sweden
5100
Ghana
1153
Switzerland
3373
Greece
5971
Thailand
3743
Hungary
3828
Turkey
4536
Iceland
5843
Uganda
 837
India
1768
United States
6585
Iran
5286
*Per 100,000 people
a. Construct a histogram of these data using the class 
intervals 0 to , 1000, 1000 to , 2000, …, 6000 
to , 7000. (Hint: See Example 3.16.)
b. Write a few sentences describing the shape, center, 
and spread of the distribution.
3.23	 ● The accompanying data on annual maximum 
wind speed (in meters per second) in Hong Kong 
for each year in a 45-year period were given in an 
article that appeared in the journal Renewable Energy 
(March, 2007).
30.3 39.0 33.9 38.6 44.6 31.4 26.7 51.9 31.9
27.2 52.9 45.8 63.3 36.0 64.0 31.4 42.2 41.1
37.0 34.4 35.5 62.2 30.3 40.0 36.0 39.4 34.4
28.3 39.1 55.0 35.0 28.8 25.7 62.7 32.4 31.9
37.5 31.5 32.0 35.5 37.5 41.0 37.5 48.6 28.1
EXERCISES 3.22 - 3.37
a. Use the annual maximum wind speed data to 
construct a histogram.
b. Is the histogram approximately symmetric, posi-
tively skewed, or negatively skewed? 
c. Would you describe the histogram as unimodal, 
bimodal, or multimodal?
3.24	 ● The accompanying relative frequency table is based 
on data from the 2012 College Bound Seniors Report for 
California.
Score on SAT Critical 
Reading Exam
Relative 
Frequency  
for Males
Relative 
Frequency  
for Females
200 to < 300
.037
.031
300 to < 400
.151
.161
400 to < 500
.307
.329
500 to < 600
.298
.295
600 to < 700
.156
.140
700 to < 800
.050
.043
a.	 Construct a relative frequency histogram for SAT 
critical reading score for males.
b.	Construct a relative frequency histogram for SAT 
critical reading score for females.
c.	 Based on the histograms from Parts (a) and (b), 
write a few sentences commenting on the simi-
larities and differences in the distribution of SAT 
critical reading scores for males and females.
3.25	 ● The data in the accompanying table represents the 
percentage of workers who are members of a union 
for each U.S. state and the District of Columbia (AARP 
Bulletin, September 2009).
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
continued
State
% of Workers 
who Belong 
to a Union
Alabama
  9.8
Alaska
23.5
Arizona
  8.8
Arkansas
  5.9
California
18.4
Colorado
  8.0
Connecticut
16.9
Delaware
12.2
District of 
Columbia
13.4
Florida
  6.4
Georgia
  3.7
State
% of Workers 
who Belong 
to a Union
Hawaii
24.3
Idaho
  7.1
Illinois
16.6
Indiana
12.4
Iowa
10.6
Kansas
  7.0
Kentucky
  8.6
Louisiana
  4.6
Maine
12.3
Maryland
15.7
Massachusetts
12.6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

116 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
a.	 Construct a histogram of these data using class 
intervals of 0 to ,5, 5 to ,10, 10 to ,15, 15 
to ,20, and 20 to ,25.
b.	Construct a dotplot of these data. Comment on 
the interesting features of the plot. (Hint: Dotplots 
were covered in Section 1.4.)
c.	 For this data set, which is a more informative 
graphical display—the dotplot from Part (b) or 
the histogram constructed in Part (a)? Explain.
d.	Construct a histogram using about twice as many 
class intervals as the histogram in Part (a). Use 
2.5 to ,5 as the first class interval. Write a few 
sentences that explain why this histogram does a 
better job of displaying this data set than does the 
histogram in Part (a).
3.26	 ● Medicare’s new medical plans offer a wide range 
of variations and choices for seniors when picking 
a drug plan (San Luis Obispo Tribune, No­vem­ber 25, 
2005). The monthly cost for a stand-alone drug plan 
varies from plan to plan and from state to state. The 
accompanying table gives the premium for the plan 
with the lowest cost for each state.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
continued
State
% of Workers 
who Belong 
to a Union
Michigan
18.8
Minnesota
16.1
Mississippi
  5.3
Missouri
11.2
Montana
12.2
Nebraska
  8.3
Nevada
16.7
New 
Hampshire
  3.5
New Jersey
  6.1
New Mexico
10.6
New York
18.3
North Carolina
  7.2
North Dakota
24.9
Ohio
14.2
State
% of Workers 
who Belong 
to a Union
Oklahoma
  6.6
Oregon
16.6
Pennsylvania
15.4
Rhode Island
16.5
South Carolina
  3.9
South Dakota
  5.0
Tennessee
  5.5
Texas
  4.5
Utah
  5.8
Vermont
  4.1
Virginia
10.4
Washington
19.8
West Virginia
13.8
Wisconsin
15.0
Wyoming
  7.7
a.	 Use class intervals of $0 to ,$3, $3 to ,$6, $6 to 
,$9, etc., to create a relative frequency distribu-
tion for these data.
b.	Construct a histogram and comment on its shape.
c.	 Using the relative frequency distribution or the 
histo­gram, estimate the proportion of the states 
that have a minimum monthly plan of less than 
$13.00 a month.
3.27	 The following two relative frequency distributions are 
based on data that appeared in The Chronicle of Higher 
Education (August 23, 2013). The data are from a survey 
of students at four-year colleges that was conducted 
in 2012. One relative frequency distribution is for 
the number of hours spent online at social network 
sites in a typical week. The second relative frequency 
distribution is for the number of hours spent playing 
video and computer games in a typical week.
Number of Hours on  
Social Networks
Relative Frequency
0 to , 1
.234
1 to , 6
.512
6 to , 21
.211
21 or more
.044
State
Cost per 
Month 
(dollars)
Alabama
14.08
Alaska
20.05
Arizona
  6.14
Arkansas
10.31
California
  5.41
State
Cost per 
Month 
(dollars)
Colorado
  8.62
Connecticut
  7.32
Delaware
  6.44
District of 
Columbia
  6.44
State
Cost per 
Month 
(dollars)
Florida
10.35
Georgia
17.91
Hawaii
17.18
Idaho
  6.33
Illinois
13.32
Indiana
12.30
Iowa
  1.87
Kansas
  9.48
Kentucky
12.30
Louisiana
17.06
Maine
19.60
Maryland
  6.44
Massachusetts
  7.32
Michigan
13.75
Minnesota
  1.87
Mississippi
11.60
Missouri
10.29
Montana
  1.87
Nebraska
  1.87
Nevada
  6.42
New 
Hampshire
19.60
State
Cost per 
Month 
(dollars)
New Jersey
  4.43
New Mexico
10.65
New York
  4.10
North Carolina
13.27
North Dakota
  1.87
Ohio
14.43
Oklahoma
10.07
Oregon
  6.93
Pennsylvania
10.14
Rhode Island
  7.32
South Carolina
16.57
South Dakota
  1.87
Tennessee
14.08
Texas
10.31
Utah
  6.33
Vermont
  7.32
Virginia
  8.81
Washington
  6.93
West Virginia
10.14
Wisconsin
11.42
Wyoming
  1.87
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.3   Displaying Numerical Data: Frequency Distributions and Histograms  
●  117
Number of Hours Playing Video 
and Computer Games
Relative Frequency
0 to, 1
.621
1 to , 6
.252
6 to , 21
.108
21 or more
.020
a.	 Construct a histogram for the social media data. 
For purposes of constructing the histogram, 
assume that none of the students in the sample 
spent more than 40 hours on social media in 
a typical week and that the last interval can be 
regarded as 21 to ,40. Be sure to use the density 
scale when constructing the histogram. (Hint: See 
Example 3.17.)
b.	Construct a histogram for the video and computer 
game data. Use the same scale that you used for 
the histo­gram in Part (a) so that it will be easy to 
compare the two ­histograms.
c.	 Comment on the similarities and differences in the 
histograms from Parts (a) and (b).
3.28	 ● U.S. Census data for San Luis Obispo County, 
California, were used to construct the following 
frequency distribution for commute time (in min-
utes) of working adults (the given frequencies were 
read from a graph that appeared in the San Luis 
Obispo Tribune [Sep­tem­ber 1, 2002] and so are only 
approximate):
Commute Time
Frequency
0 to ,5
  5,200
  5 to ,10
18,200
10 to ,15
19,600
15 to ,20
15,400
20 to ,25
13,800
25 to ,30
  5,700
30 to ,35
10,200
35 to ,40
  2,000
40 to ,45
  2,000
45 to ,60
  4,000
60 to ,90
  2,100
90 to ,120
  2,200
a.	 Notice that not all intervals in the frequency 
distribution are equal in width. Why do you think 
that unequal width intervals were used?
b.	Construct a table that adds a relative frequency 
and a density column to the given frequency 
distribution (Hint: See Example 3.17).
c.	 Use the densities computed in Part (b) to con-
struct a histogram for this data set. (Note: The 
newspaper displayed an incorrectly drawn histo-
gram based on frequencies rather than densities!) 
Write a few sentences commenting on the impor-
tant features of the histogram.
d.	Compute the cumulative relative frequencies, and 
construct a cumulative relative frequency plot.
e.	 Use the cumulative relative frequency plot 
constructed in Part (d) to answer the following 
questions.
i.	 Approximately what proportion of commute 
times were less than 50 minutes? 
ii.	Approximately what proportion of commute 
times were greater than 22 minutes? 
iii.	What is the approximate commute time value 
that separates the shortest 50% of commute 
times from the longest 50%? 
3.29	 The report “Trends in College Pricing 2012” (www 
.collegeboard.com) included the information in the 
accompanying relative frequency distributions for 
public and for private not-for-profit four-year college 
students.
Public Four-Year 
College Students
Private Not- 
for-Profit Four-Year 
College Students
Tuition and Fees
Proportion of 
Students (Relative 
Frequency)
Proportion of 
Students (Relative 
Frequency)
    0 to , 3,000
.009
.000
3,000 to , 6,000
.107
.066
6,000 to , 9,000
.436
.011
9,000 to, 12,000
.199
.027
12,000 to , 15,000
.124
.032
15,000 to , 18,000
.033
.030
18,000 to , 21,000
.027
.052
21,000 to , 24,000
.019
.074
24,000 to , 27,000
.015
.103
27,000 to , 30,000
.020
.094
30,000 to , 33,000
.005
.103
33,000 to , 36,000
.003
.103
36,000 to , 39,000
.002
.066
39,000 to , 42,000
.002
.080
42,000 to , 45,000
.000
.136
45,000 to , 48,000
.000
.022
a. Construct a relative frequency histogram for 
tuition and fees for students at public four-year 
colleges. Write a few sentences describing the 
distribution of tuition and fees, commenting on 
center, spread, and shape.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

118 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
b. Construct a relative frequency histogram for tuition 
and fees for students at private not-for-profit four-
year colleges. Be sure to use the same scale for the 
vertical and horizontal axes as you used for the his-
togram in Part (a). Write a few sentences describ-
ing the distribution of tuition and fees for students 
at private not-for-profit four-year colleges.
c. Write a few sentences describing the differences in 
the distributions.
3.30	 An exam is given to students in an introductory 
­statistics course. What is likely to be true of the shape 
of the histogram of scores if:
a.	 the exam is quite easy? 
b.	the exam is quite dif­ﬁ­cult? 
c.	 half the students in the class have had calculus, 
the other half have had no prior college math 
courses, and the exam emphasizes mathematical 
manipulation? 
Explain your reasoning in each case.
3.31	 The accompanying frequency distribution summarizes 
data on the number of times smokers who had suc-
cessfully quit smoking attempted to quit before their 
final successful attempt (“Demographic Variables, Smok-
ing Variables, and Outcome Across Five Studies,” Health 
Psychology [2007]: 278–287). 
Number of Attempts
Frequency
0
778
1
306
2
274
3–4
221
5 or more
238
Assume that no one had made more than 10 
unsuccessful attempts, so that the last entry in 
the frequency distribution can be regarded as 
5–10 attempts. Summarize this data set using a 
histogram. Be careful—the class intervals are not all 
the same width, so you will need to use a density 
scale for the histogram. Also remember that for a 
discrete variable, the bar for 1 will extend from 0.5 
to 1.5. Think about what this will mean for the bars 
for the 3–4 group and the 5–10 group.
3.32	 ● Example 3.19 used annual rainfall data for Albuquerque, 
New Mexico, to construct a relative frequency distribution 
and cumulative relative frequency plot. The National 
Climate Data Center also gave the accompanying annual 
rainfall (in inches) for Medford, Oregon, from 1950  
to 2008.
28.84 20.15 18.88 25.72 16.42 20.18 28.96 20.72 23.58 10.62
20.85 19.86 23.34 19.08 29.23 18.32 21.27 18.93 15.47 20.68
23.43 19.55 20.82 19.04 18.77 19.63 12.39 22.39 15.95 20.46
16.05 22.08 19.44 30.38 18.79 10.89 17.25 14.95 13.86 15.30
13.71 14.68 15.16 16.77 12.33 21.93 31.57 18.13 28.87 16.69
18.81 15.15 18.16 19.99 19.00 23.97 21.99 17.25 14.07
a.	 Construct a relative frequency distribution for the 
Medford rainfall data.
b.	Use the relative frequency distribution of Part (a) 
to construct a histogram. Describe the shape of the 
histogram.
3.33	 Use the relative frequency distribution constructed in 
Exercise 3.32 to answer the following questions.
a.	 Construct a cumulative relative frequency plot for 
the Medford rainfall data.
b.	Use the cumulative relative frequency plot of 
Part (a) to answer the following questions:
i.	 Approximately what proportion of years had 
annual rainfall less than 15.5 inches? 
ii.	Approximately what proportion of years had 
annual rainfall less than 25 inches? 
iii.	Approximately what proportion of years 
had annual rainfall between 17.5 and 
25 inches? 
3.34	 The authors of the paper “Myeloma in Patients Younger 
than Age 50 Years Presents with More Favorable Features 
and Shows Better Survival” (Blood [2008]: 4039–4047) 
studied patients who had been diagnosed with stage 
2 multiple myeloma prior to the age of 50. For each 
patient who received high dose chemotherapy, the 
number of years that the patient lived after the therapy 
(survival time) was recorded. The cumulative relative 
frequencies in the accompanying table were approxi-
mated from survival graphs that appeared in the paper.
Years Survived
Cumulative Relative 
Frequency
0 to ,2
  .10
2 to ,4
  .52
4 to ,6
  .54
6 to ,8
  .64
  8 to ,10
  .68
10 to ,12
  .70
12 to ,14
  .72
14 to ,16
1.00
a.	 Use the given information to construct a cumula-
tive relative frequency plot.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.4   Displaying Bivariate Numerical Data 
●  119
b.	Use the cumulative relative frequency plot from 
Part (a) to answer the following questions:
i.	 What is the approximate proportion of patients 
who lived fewer than 5 years after treatment?
ii.	What is the approximate proportion of patients 
who lived fewer than 7.5 years after treatment?
iii.	What is the approximate proportion of patients 
who lived more than 10 years after treatment?
3.35	 a.	 Use the cumulative relative frequencies given 
in the previous exercise to compute the relative 
frequencies for each class interval and construct a 
relative frequency distribution.
b.	Summarize the survival time data with a histogram.
c.	 Based on the histogram, write a few sentences 
describing survival time of the stage 2 myeloma 
patients in this study.
d.	What additional information would you need in 
order to decide if it is reasonable to generalize 
conclusions about survival time from the group of 
patients in the study to all patients younger than 
50 years old who are diagnosed with multiple my-
eloma and who receive high dose chemotherapy?
3.36	 Construct a histogram corresponding to each of the 
ﬁve frequency distributions, I–V, given in the fol-
lowing table, and state whether each histogram is 
symmetric, bimodal, positively skewed, or negatively 
skewed: 
Frequency
Class Interval
I
II
III
IV
V
  0 to ,10
  5
40
30
15
  6
10 to ,20
10
25
10
25
  5
20 to ,30
20
10
  8
  8
  6
30 to ,40
30
  8
  7
  7
  9
40 to ,50
20
  7
  7
20
  9
50 to ,60
10
  5
  8
25
23
60 to ,70
  5
  5
30
10
42
3.37	 Using the ﬁve class intervals 100 to 120, 120 to 
140, . . . , 180 to 200, devise a frequency distribution 
based on 70 observations whose histogram could be 
described as follows:
a.	 symmetric	
c.	 positively skewed
b.	bimodal	
d.	negatively skewed
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
 3.4  
Displaying Bivariate Numerical Data
A bivariate data set consists of measurements or observations on two variables, x and y. 
For example, x might be the distance from a highway and y the lead content of soil at that 
distance. When both x and y are numerical variables, each observation consists of a pair 
of numbers, such as (14, 5.2) or (27.63, 18.9). The ﬁrst number in a pair is the value of x, 
and the second number is the value of y.
An unorganized list of bivariate data provides little information about the distribution of 
either the x values or the y values separately and even less information about how the two 
variables are related to one another. Just as graphical displays can be used to summarize 
univariate data, they can also help with bivariate data. The most important graph based on 
bivariate numerical data is a scatterplot.
In a scatterplot each observation (pair of numbers) is represented by a point on a rectan-
gular coordinate system, as shown in Figure 3.32(a). The horizontal axis is iden­ti­ﬁed with 
values of x and is scaled so that any x value can be easily located. Similarly, the vertical or 
y-axis is marked for easy location of y values. The point corresponding to any particular (x, 
y) pair is placed where a vertical line from the value on the x-axis meets a horizontal line 
from the value on the y-axis. Figure 3.32(b) shows the point representing the observation 
(4.5, 15); it is above 4.5 on the horizontal axis and to the right of 15 on the vertical axis.
x
10
1
2
3
4
5
(a)
y
20
30
40
x
10
1
2
3
4
5
(b)
Point
corresponding
to (4.5, 15)
y
20
30
40
x 5 4.5
y 515
Figure  3.32
Constructing a scatterplot:  
(a) rectangular coordinate system;  
(b) point corresponding to (4.5, 15).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

120 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
Example 3.20 
Olympic Figure Skating
● Do tall skaters have an advantage when it comes to earning high artistic scores in ﬁg­ure 
skating competitions? Data on x 5 height (in cm) and y 5 artistic score in the free skate 
for both male and female singles skaters at the 2006 Winter Olympics are shown in the 
accompanying table. (Data set courtesy of John Walker.)
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Name
Gender
Height
Artistic
Name
Gender
Height
Artistic
PLUSHENKO Yevgeny
M
178
41.2100
ARAKAWA Shizuka
F
166
39.3750
BUTTLE Jeffrey
M
173
39.2500
COHEN Sasha
F
157
39.0063
LYSACEK Evan
M
177
37.1700
SLUTSKAYA Irina
F
160
38.6688
LAMBIEL Stephane
M
176
38.1400
SUGURI Fumie
F
157
37.0313
SAVOIE Matt
M
175
35.8600
ROCHETTE Joannie
F
157
35.0813
WEIR Johnny
M
172
37.6800
MEISSNER Kimmie
F
160
33.4625
JOUBERT Brian
M
179
36.7900
HUGHES Emily
F
165
31.8563
VAN DER PERREN Kevin
M
177
33.0100
MEIER Sarah
F
164
32.0313
TAKAHASHI Daisuke
M
165
36.6500
KOSTNER Carolina
F
168
34.9313
KLIMKIN Ilia
M
170
32.6100
SOKOLOVA Yelena
F
162
31.4250
ZHANG Min
M
176
31.8600
YAN Liu
F
164
28.1625
SAWYER Shawn
M
163
34.2500
LEUNG Mira
F
168
26.7000
LI Chengjiang
M
170
28.4700
GEDEVANISHVILI Elene
F
159
31.2250
SANDHU Emanuel
M
183
35.1100
KORPI Kiira
F
166
27.2000
VERNER Tomas
M
180
28.6100
POYKIO Susanna
F
159
31.2125
DAVYDOV Sergei
M
159
30.4700
ANDO Miki
F
162
31.5688
CHIPER Gheorghe
M
176
32.1500
EFREMENKO Galina
F
163
26.5125
DINEV Ivan
M
174
29.2500
LIASHENKO Elena
F
160
28.5750
DAMBIER Frederic
M
163
31.2500
HEGEL Idora
F
166
25.5375
LINDEMANN Stefan
M
163
31.0000
SEBESTYEN Julia
F
164
28.6375
KOVALEVSKI Anton
M
171
28.7500
KARADEMIR Tugba
F
165
23.0000
BERNTSSON Kristoffer
M
175
28.0400
FONTANA Silvia
F
158
26.3938
PFEIFER Viktor
M
180
28.7200
PAVUK Viktoria
F
168
23.6688
TOTH Zoltan
M
185
25.1000
MAXWELL Fleur
F
160
24.5438
Figure 3.33(a) gives a scatterplot of the data. Looking at the data and the scatterplot, we 
can see that
1.	 Several observations have identical x values but different y values (for example, 
x 5 176 cm for both Stephane Lambiel and Min Zhang, but Lambiel’s artistic 
score was 38.1400 and Zhang’s artistic score was 31.8600). Thus, the value of y is 
not determined solely by the value of x but by various other factors as well.
2.	 At any given height there is quite a bit of variability in artistic score. For example, 
for those skaters with height 160 cm, artistic scores ranged from a low of about 
24.5 to a high of about 39.
3.	 There is no noticeable tendency for artistic score to increase as height increases. 
There does not appear to be a strong relationship between height and artistic score.
The data set used to construct the scatterplot included data for both male and female 
skaters. Figure 3.33(b) shows a scatterplot of the (height, artistic score) pairs with 
 Data set available online
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.4   Displaying Bivariate Numerical Data 
●  121
observations for male skaters shown in blue and observations for female skaters shown in 
orange. Not surprisingly, the female skaters tend to be shorter than the male skaters (the 
observations for females tend to be concentrated toward the left side of the scatterplot). 
Careful examination of this plot shows that while there was no apparent pattern in the 
combined (male and female) data set, there may be a relationship between height and 
artistic score for female skaters.
Figure 3.33(c) and (d) show separate scatterplots for the male and female skaters, 
respectively. It is interesting to note that it appears that for female skaters, higher  
artistic scores seem to be associated with smaller height values, but for men there does 
not appear to be a relationship between height and artistic score. The relationship 
between height and artistic score for women is not evident in the scatterplot of the 
combined data.	
■
The horizontal and vertical axes in the scatterplots of Figure 3.33 do not intersect at the 
point (0, 0). In many data sets, the values of x or of y or of both variables differ considerably 
from 0 relative to the ranges of the values in the data set. For example, a study of how air 
conditioner ef­ﬁ­ciency is related to maximum daily outdoor temperature might involve ob-
servations at temperatures of 808, 828, . . . , 988, 1008. In such cases, the plot will be more 
informative if the axes intersect at some point other than (0, 0) and are marked accordingly. 
This is illustrated in Example 3.21.
160
25
30
35
40
165
170
175
180
185
Height
(a)
Artistic
160
25
30
35
40
165
170
175
180
185
Gender
F
M
Height
(b)
Artistic
160
25
30
35
40
165
170
175
180
185
Height
(c)
Artistic
25
30
35
40
160
165
170
175
Height
(d)
Artistic
Figure  3.33
Scatterplots for the data of Example 3.20:  
(a) scatterplot of data;  
(b) scatterplot of data with observations for males and females distinguished by color;  
(c) scatterplot for male skaters;  
(d) scatterplot for female skaters.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

122 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
Example 3.21 
Taking Those “Hard” Classes Pays Off
● The report titled “2007 College Bound Seniors” (College Board, 2007) included the accom-
panying table showing the average score on the writing and math sections of the SAT 
for groups of high school seniors completing different numbers of years of study in six 
core academic subjects (arts and music, English, foreign languages, mathematics, natural 
sciences, and social sciences and history). Figure 3.34(a) and (b) show two scatterplots of 
x 5 total number of years of study and y 5 average writing SAT score. 
The scatterplots were produced by the statistical computer package Minitab. In 
Figure 3.34(a), we let Minitab select the scale for both axes. Figure 3.34(b) was obtained by 
specifying that the axes would intersect at the point (0, 0). The second plot does not make 
effective use of space. The data points are more crowded together than in the ﬁrst plot, and 
such crowding can make it more dif­ﬁ­cult to see the general nature of any relationship. For 
example, it can be more dif­ﬁ­cult to spot curvature in a crowded plot.
Years of Study
Average Writing Score
Average Math Score
15
442
461
16
447
466
17
454
473
18
469
490
19
486
507
20
534
551
Step-by-step technology  
instructions available online
Understand the context ❭
● Data set available online
450
500
475
525
550
15
16
17
18
19
20
Years of study
(a)
Average SAT writing score
600
400
300
200
100
0
500
5
0
10
15
20
Years of study
(b)
Average SAT writing score
Figure  3.34
Minitab scatterplots of data in 
Example 3.21:  
(a) scale for both axes selected by 
Minitab;  
(b) axes intersect at the point (0, 0); 
(c) math and writing on same plot.
450
500
475
525
550
15
16
17
18
19
20
Years of study
Average SAT score
(c)
Average SAT—writing
Average SAT—math
Variable
Consider the data ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.4   Displaying Bivariate Numerical Data 
●  123
The scatterplot for average writing SAT score exhibits a fairly strong curved pattern, 
indicating that there is a strong relationship between average writing SAT score and the 
total number of years of study in the six core academic subjects. Although the pattern in 
the plot is curved rather than linear, it is still easy to see that the average writing SAT score 
increases as the number of years of study increases. Figure 3.34(c) shows a scatterplot 
with the average writing SAT scores represented by blue squares and the average math SAT 
scores represented by orange dots. From this plot we can see that while the average math 
SAT scores tend to be higher than the average writing scores at all of the values of total 
number of years of study, the general curved form of the relationship is similar.	
■
In Chapter 5, methods for summarizing bivariate data when the scatterplot reveals a 
pattern are introduced. Linear patterns are relatively easy to work with. A curved pattern, 
such as the one in Example 3.21, is a bit more complicated to analyze, and methods for 
summarizing such nonlinear relationships are developed in Section 5.4.
Time Series Plots
Data sets often consist of measurements collected over time at regular intervals so that we 
can learn about change over time. For example, stock prices, sales ﬁg­ures, and other socio-
economic indicators might be recorded on a weekly or monthly basis. A time series plot 
(sometimes also called a time plot) is a simple graph of data collected over time that can be 
invaluable in identifying trends or patterns that might be of ­interest.
A time series plot can be constructed by thinking of the data set as a bivariate data set, 
where y is the variable observed and x is the time at which the observation was made. These 
(x, y) pairs are plotted as in a scatterplot. Consecutive observations are then connected by 
a line segment. This helps us to see trends over time.
Example 3.22 
The Cost of Christmas
The Christmas Price Index is computed each year by PNC Advisors, and it ­is a humorous 
look at the cost of giving all of the gifts described in the popular Christmas song “The 
Twelve Days of Christmas.” The year 2013 was the most costly year since the index began, 
with the “cost of Christmas” at $27,393.17. Historical data from the PNC web site (www 
.pncchristmaspriceindex.com) were used to construct the time series plot of Figure 3.35. 
Interpret the results ❭
Figure  3.35
Time series plot for the Christmas 
Price Index data of Example 3.22.
Price of Christmas
12000
14000
16000
18000
20000
22000
26000
24000
28000
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
Year
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

124 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
3.38	 The accompanying table gives data from a survey 
of new car owners conducted by J.D. Power and 
Associates (USA Today, June 16 and July 17, 2010). For 
each brand of car sold in the United States, data 
on a quality rating (defects per 100 cars, so lower 
numbers indicate higher quality) and a customer 
satisfaction rating (called the APEAL rating) are 
given in the accompanying table. The APEAL rating 
is a score between 0 and 1000, with higher values 
indicating greater satisfaction.
EXERCISES 3.38 - 3.45
The plot shows an upward trend in the index from 1984 until 1993. A dramatic drop in the 
cost occurred between 1993 and 1995, but there has been a clear upward trend in the index 
since then. You can visit the web site to see individual time series plots for each of the twelve 
gifts that are used to determine the Christmas Price Index (a partridge in a pear tree, two turtle 
doves, etc.). See if you can ﬁg­ure out what caused the dramatic decline from 1993 to 1995.	■
Example 3.23 
Education Level and Income—Stay in School!
The time series plot shown in Figure 3.36 appears on the U.S. Census Bureau web site. It 
shows the average earnings of workers by educational level as a proportion of the average 
earnings of a high school graduate over time. For example, we can see from this plot that 
in 1993 the average earnings for people with bachelor’s degrees was about 1.5 times the 
average for high school graduates. In that same year, the average earnings for those who 
were not high school graduates was only about 75% (a proportion of .75) of the average 
for high school graduates. The time series plot also shows that the gap between the aver-
age earnings for high school graduates and those with a bachelor’s degree or an advanced 
degree widened during the 1990s.
Average earnings as a proportion of high school graduates’ earnings
1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987
Year
1989 1991 1993 1995 1997
Advanced degree
Bachelor’s degree
Some college or associate’s degree
High school graduate
Not high school graduate
1999
0.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.0
1.5

■
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Figure  3.36
Time series plot for average earnings 
as a proportion of the average 
earnings of high school graduates.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
continued
Brand
Quality Rating
APEAL Rating
Acura
  86
822
Audi
111
832
BMW
113
845
Buick
114
802
Cadillac
111
818
Chevrolet
111
789
Chrysler
122
748
Dodge
130
751
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.4   Displaying Bivariate Numerical Data 
●  125
Brand
Quality Rating
APEAL Rating
Ford
  93
794
GMC
126
792
Honda
  95
766
Hyundai
102
760
Infiniti
107
805
Jaguar
130
854
Jeep
129
727
Kia
126
761
Land Rover
170
836
Lexus
  88
822
Lincoln
106
820
Mazda
114
774
Mercedes-Benz
  87
842
Mercury
113
769
Mini Cooper
133
815
Mitsubishi
146
767
Nissan
111
763
Porsche
  83
877
Ram
110
780
Scion
114
764
Subaru
121
755
Suzuki
122
750
Toyota
117
745
Volkswagen
135
797
Volvo
109
795
a. Construct a scatterplot of x 5 quality rating and 
y 5 APEAL rating. (Hint: See Example 3.21.)
b. Does customer satisfaction (as measured by the 
APEAL rating) appear to be related to car quality? 
Explain.
3.39	 ● Consumer Reports Health (www.consumerreports.org) 
gave the accompanying data on saturated fat (in grams), 
sodium (in mg), and calories for 36 fast-food items.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
continued
a.	 Construct a scatterplot using y 5 calories and 
x 5 fat. Does it look like there is a relationship 
between fat and calories? Is the relationship what 
you expected? Explain.
b.	Construct a scatterplot using y 5 calories and 
x 5 sodium. Write a few sentences comment-
ing on the difference between the relationship of 
calories to fat and calories to sodium.
c.	 Construct a scatterplot using y 5 sodium and 
x 5 fat. Does there appear to be a relationship 
between fat and sodium?
d.	Add a vertical line at x 5 3 and a horizontal line at 
y 5 900 to the scatterplot in Part (c). This divides 
the scatterplot into four regions, with some of the 
points in the scatterplot falling into each of the four 
regions. Which of the four regions corresponds to 
healthier fast-food choices? Explain.
3.40	 The report “Wireless Substitution: Early Release of Esti-
mates from the National Health Interview Survey” (Cen-
ter for Disease Control, 2009) gave the following esti-
mates of the percentage of homes in the United States 
that had only wireless phone service at 6-month 
intervals from June 2005 to December 2008.
Date
Percent with Only  
Wireless Phone Service
June 2005
  7.3
December 2005
  8.4
June 2006
10.5
December 2006
12.8
June 2007
13.6
December 2007
15.8
June 2008
17.5
December 2008
20.2
a.	 Construct a time series plot for these data and describe 
the trend in the percent of homes with only wireless 
phone service over time. (Hint: See Example 3.22.) 
b.	Has the percent increased at a fairly steady rate?
3.41	 ● The accompanying table gives the cost and an 
overall quality rating for 15 different brands of bike 
helmets (www.consumerreports.org). 
Fat
Sodium
Calories
2
1042
268
5
  921
303
3
  250
260
2
  770
660
1
  635
180
6
  440
290
  4.5
  490
290
5
1160
360
  3.5
  970
300
1
1120
315
2
  350
160
Fat
Sodium
Calories
3
  450
200
6
  800
320
3
1190
420
2
1090
120
5
  570
290
  3.5
1215
285
  2.5
1160
390
0
  520
140
  2.5
1120
330
1
  240
120
3
  650
180
Fat
Sodium
Calories
1
1620
340
4
  660
380
3
  840
300
  1.5
1050
490
3
1440
380
9
  750
560
1
  500
230
Fat
Sodium
Calories
  1.5
1200
370
  2.5
1200
330
3
1250
330
0
1040
220
0
  760
260
  2.5
  780
220
3
  500
230
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

126 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
Cost
Rating
35
65
20
61
30
60
40
55
50
54
23
47
30
47
18
43
40
42
28
41
20
40
25
32
30
63
30
63
40
53
a.	 Construct a scatterplot using y 5 quality rating 
and x 5 cost.
b.	Based on the scatterplot from Part (a), does there 
appear to be a relationship between cost and qual-
ity rating? Does the scatterplot support the state-
ment that the more expensive bike helmets tended 
to receive higher quality ratings?
3.42	 ● The accompanying table gives the cost and an 
overall quality rating for 10 different brands of men’s 
athletic shoes and nine different brands of women’s 
athletic shoes (www.consumerreports.org). 
Cost
Rating
Type
  65
71
Men’s
  45
70
Men’s
  45
62
Men’s
  80
59
Men’s
110
58
Men’s
110
57
Men’s
  30
56
Men’s
  80
52
Men’s
110
51
Men’s
  70
51
Men’s
  65
71
Women’s
  70
70
Women’s
  85
66
Women’s
  80
66
Women’s
  45
65
Women’s
  70
62
Women’s
  55
61
Women’s
110
60
Women’s
  70
59
Women’s
a.	 Using the data for all 19 shoes, construct a scatter-
plot using y 5 quality rating and x 5 cost. Write a 
sentence describing the relationship between qual-
ity rating and cost.
b.	Construct a scatterplot of the 19 data points 
that uses different colors or different symbols to 
distinguish the points that correspond to men’s 
shoes from those that correspond to women’s 
shoes. How do men’s and women’s athletic shoes 
differ with respect to cost and quality rating? 
c.	 Are the relationships between cost and quality 
rating the same for men and women? If not, how 
do the relationships differ?
3.43	 ● The article “Cities Trying to Rejuvenate Recycling 
Efforts” (USA Today, October 27, 2006) states that the 
amount of waste collected for recycling has grown 
slowly in recent years. This statement was supported 
by the data in the accompanying table. Use these data 
to construct a time series plot. Explain how the plot 
is or is not consistent with the given statement.
Year
Recycled Waste (in millions of tons)
1990
29.7
1991
32.9
1992
36.0
1993
37.9
1994
43.5
1995
46.1
1996
46.4
1997
47.3
1998
48.0
1999
50.1
2000
52.7
2001
52.8
2002
53.7
2003
55.8
2004
57.2
2005
58.4
3.44	 The report “Trends in Higher Education’ (www.collegeboard 
.com) gave the accompanying data on smoking rates 
for people age 25 and older by education level.
Percent Who Smoke
Year
Not a High 
School 
Graduate
High School 
Graduate but 
No College
Some 
College
Bachelor's 
Degree or 
Higher
1960
44
46
48
44
1965
44
45
47
41
1970
42
44
45
37
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
continued
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.5   Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses  
●  127
Percent Who Smoke
Year
Not a High 
School 
Graduate
High School 
Graduate but 
No College
Some 
College
Bachelor's 
Degree or 
Higher
1975
41
42
43
33
1980
38
40
39
28
1985
36
37
36
23
1990
34
34
32
19
1995
32
31
29
16
2000
30
28
26
14
2005
29
27
21
10
a.	 Construct a time series plot for people who did 
not graduate from high school and comment on 
any trend over time.
b.	Construct a time series plot that shows trend over 
time for each of the four education levels. Graph 
each of the four time series on the same set of 
axes, using different colors to distinguish the dif-
ferent education levels. Either label the time series 
in the plot or include a legend to indicate which 
time series corresponds to which education level.
c.	 Write a paragraph about your plot from Part (b). 
Discuss the similarities and differences for the four 
different education levels.
3.45	 The accompanying time series plot of movie box 
ofﬁce totals (in millions of dollars) over 18 weeks of 
summer for both 2001 and 2002 is similar to one 
that appeared in USA Today (Sep­tem­ber 3, 2002):
$300
$250
$200
$150
$100
$50
0
Giving at the box ofﬁce
Box ofﬁce comparisons for the
summer of 2002 vs. 2001:
Week 1
1 – projected
Source: Nielsen
Week 18
2001
2002
Week 181
$109.0
Week 18
$136.6
Week 1
$215.1
Week 1
$139.6
(in millions)
Patterns that tend to repeat on a regular basis over 
time are called seasonal patterns. Describe any 
seasonal patterns that you see in the summer box 
of­ﬁce data. (Hint: Look for patterns that seem to be 
consistent from year to year.)
 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
 3.5  
Interpreting and Communicating the Results  
of Statistical Analyses
A graphical display, when used appropriately, can be a powerful tool for organizing and 
summarizing data. By sacriﬁcing some of the detail of a complete listing of a data set, 
important features of the data distribution are more easily seen and more easily communi-
cated to others.
Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses
When reporting the results of a data analysis, a good place to start is with a graphical dis-
play of the data. A well-constructed graphical display is often the best way to highlight the 
essential characteristics of the data distribution, such as shape and spread for numerical 
data sets or the nature of the relationship between the two variables in a bivariate numeri-
cal data set.
For effective communication with graphical displays, some things to remember are
●
●Be sure to select a display that is appropriate for the given type of data.
●
●Be sure to include scales and labels on the axes of graphical displays.
●
●In comparative plots, be sure to include labels or a legend so that it is clear which 
parts of the display correspond to which samples or groups in the data set.
●
●Although it is sometimes a good idea to have axes that do not cross at (0, 0) in a 
scatterplot, the vertical axis in a bar chart or a histogram should always start at 0 
(see the cautions and limitations later in this section for more about this).
Source: USA TODAY. September 03, 2002.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

128 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
●
●Keep your graphs simple. A simple graphical display is much more effective than one 
that has a lot of extra “junk.” Most people will not spend a great deal of time studying 
a graphical display, so its message should be clear and straightforward.
●
●Keep your graphical displays honest. People tend to look quickly at graphical displays, 
so it is important that a graph’s ﬁrst impression is an accurate and honest portrayal of 
the data distribution. In addition to the graphical display itself, data analysis reports 
usually include a brief discussion of the features of the data distribution based on the 
graphical display.
●
●For categorical data, the discussion of the graphical display might be a few sentences 
on the relative proportion for each category, possibly pointing out categories that were 
either common or rare compared to other categories.
●
●For numerical data sets, the discussion of the graphical display usually summarizes the 
information that the display provides on three characteristics of the data distribution: 
center or location, spread, and shape.
●
●For bivariate numerical data, the discussion of the scatterplot would typically focus on 
the nature of the relationship between the two variables used to construct the plot.
●
●For data collected over time, any trends or patterns in the time series plot would be described.
Interpreting the Results of Statistical Analyses
When someone uses a web search engine, do they rely on the ranking of the search results 
returned or do they first scan the results looking for the most relevant? The authors of the 
paper “Learning User Interaction Models for Predicting Web Search Result Preferences” (Proceed-
ings of the 29th Annual ACM Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 2006) 
attempted to answer this question by observing user behavior when they varied the position 
of the most relevant result in the list of resources returned in response to a web search. 
They concluded that people clicked more often on results near the top of the list, even 
when they were not relevant. They supported this conclusion with the comparative bar 
graph in Figure 3.37.
PTR = 1
PTR = 2
PTR = 3
PTR = 5
PTR = 10
Background
Relative click frequency
Result position
1
2
3
5
10
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Figure  3.37
Comparative bar graph 
for click frequency data.
Although this comparative bar chart is a bit complicated, we can learn a great deal 
from this graphical display. Let’s start by looking at the first group of bars. The different 
bars correspond to where in the list of search results the result that was considered 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.5   Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses  
●  129
to be most relevant was located. For example, in the legend PTR 5 1 means that 
the most relevant result was in position 1 in the list returned. PTR 5 2 means that 
the most relevant result was in the second position in the list returned, and so on. 
PTR 5 Background means that the most relevant result was not in the first 10 results 
returned. 
The first group of bars shows the proportion of times users clicked on the first result 
returned. Notice that all users clicked on the first result when it was the most relevant, but 
nearly half clicked on the first result when the most relevant result was in the second posi-
tion and more than half clicked on the first result when the most relevant result was even 
farther down the list.
The second group of bars represents the proportion of users who clicked on the sec-
ond result. Notice that the proportion who clicked on the second result was highest 
when the most relevant result was in that position. Stepping back to look at the entire 
graphical display, we see that users tended to click on the most relevant result if it was 
in one of the first three positions, but if it appeared after that, very few selected it. Also, 
if the most relevant result was in the third or a later position, users were more likely to 
click on the first result returned, and the likelihood of a click on the most relevant result 
decreased the farther down the list it appeared. To fully understand why the research-
ers’ conclusions are justified, we need to be able to extract this kind of information from 
graphical displays.
The use of graphical data displays is quite common in newspapers, magazines, and 
journals, so it is important to be able to extract information from such displays. For 
example, data on test scores for a standardized math test given to eighth graders in 
37 states, 2 territories (Guam and the Virgin Islands), and the District of Columbia were 
used to construct the stem-and-leaf display and histogram shown in Figure 3.38. Careful 
examination of these displays reveals the following:
1.	 Most of the participating states had average eighth-grade math scores between 
240 and 280. We would describe the shape of this display as negatively skewed, 
because of the longer tail on the low end of the distribution.
2.	 Three of the average scores differed substantially from the others. These turn out 
to be 218 (Virgin Islands), 229 (District of Columbia), and 230 (Guam). These 
three scores could be described as outliers. It is interesting to note that the three 
unusual values are from the areas that are not states.
6
4
2
8
0
220
230
240
250
260
270
280
Average test score
Frequency
21H
22L
22H
23L
23H
24L
24H
25L
25H
26L
26H
27L
27H
28L
8
9
0
79
014
6667779999
0003344
55778
12233
667
01
Stem:  Tens
Leaf:    Ones
Figure  3.38
Stem-and-leaf display and 
histogram for math test 
scores.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

130 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
3.	 There do not appear to be any outliers on the high side.
4.	 A “typical” average math score for the 37 states would be somewhere around 260.
5.	 There is quite a bit of variability in average score from state to state.
How would the displays have been different if the two territories and the District of 
Columbia had not participated in the testing? The resulting histogram is shown in 
Figure 3.39. Note that the display is now more symmetric, with no noticeable outliers. 
The display still reveals quite a bit of state-to-state variability in average score, and 260 still 
looks reasonable as a “typical” average score. 
Now suppose that the two highest values among the 37 states (Montana and North 
Dakota) had been even higher. The stem-and-leaf display might then look like the 
one given in Figure 3.40. In this stem-and-leaf display, two values stand out from the 
main part of the display. This would catch our attention and might cause us to look 
carefully at these two states to determine what factors may be related to high math 
scores.
Figure  3.39
Histogram for the modi­ﬁed math 
score data.
6
4
2
8
0
245
255
265
275
Average test score
Frequency
Figure  3.40
Stem-and-leaf display for modi­ﬁed 
math score data.
24H
25L
25H
26L
26H
27L
27H
28L
28H
29L
29H
79
014
6667779999
0003344
55778
12233
667
68
Stem:  Tens
Leaf:    Ones
What to Look for in Published Data
Here are some questions you might ask yourself when attempting to extract information 
from a graphical data display:
●
●Is the chosen display appropriate for the type of data collected?
●
●For graphical displays of univariate numerical data, how would you describe the shape 
of the distribution, and what does this say about the variable being ­summarized?
●
●Are there any outliers (noticeably unusual values) in the data set? Is there any 
plausible explanation for why these values differ from the rest of the data? (The 
presence of outliers often leads to further avenues of investigation.)
●
●Where do most of the data values fall? What is a typical value for the data set? What 
does this say about the variable being summarized?
●
●Is there much variability in the data values? What does this say about the variable 
being summarized?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.5   Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses  
●  131
Of course, you should always think carefully about how the data were collected. If the 
data were not gathered in a reasonable manner (based on sound sampling methods or 
experimental design principles), you should be cautious in formulating any conclusions 
based on the data.
Consider the histogram in Figure 3.41, which is based on data published by the National 
Center for Health Statistics. The data set summarized by this histogram consisted of infant 
mortality rates (deaths per 1000 live births) for the 50 states in the United States. A his-
togram is an appropriate way of summarizing these data (although with only 50 observa-
tions, a stem-and-leaf display would also have been reasonable). 
6
4
2
8
10
0
7.0
8.0
9.0
10.0
11.0
12.0
13.0
Mortality rate
Frequency
The histogram itself is slightly positively skewed, with most mortality rates between 
7.5 and 12. There is quite a bit of variability in infant mortality rate from state to state—
perhaps more than we might have expected. This variability might be explained by differ-
ences in economic conditions or in access to health care. We may want to look further into 
these issues. 
Although there are no obvious outliers, the upper tail is a little longer than the lower 
tail. The three largest values in the data set are 12.1 (Alabama), 12.3 (Georgia), and 12.8 
(South Carolina)—all Southern states. Again, this may suggest some interesting questions 
that deserve further investigation. 
A typical infant mortality rate would be about 9.5 deaths per 1000 live births. This rep-
resents an improvement, because researchers at the National Center for Health Statistics 
stated that the overall rate for 1988 was 10 deaths per 1000 live births. However, they also 
point out that the United States still ranked 22 out of 24 industrialized nations surveyed, 
with only New Zealand and Israel having higher infant mortality rates.
A Word to the Wise: Cautions and Limitations
When constructing and interpreting graphical displays, you need to keep in mind these 
things:
1.	 Areas should be proportional to frequency, relative frequency, or magnitude 
of the number being represented. The eye is naturally drawn to large areas in 
graphical displays, and it is natural for the observer to make informal compari-
sons based on area. Correctly constructed graphical displays, such as pie charts, 
bar charts, and histograms, are designed so that the areas of the pie slices or the 
Figure  3.41
Histogram of infant mortality rates.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

132 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
bars are proportional to frequency or relative frequency. Sometimes, in an effort 
to make graphical displays more interesting, designers lose sight of this important 
principle, and the resulting graphs are misleading. For example, consider the 
following graph (USA Today, Oc­to­ber 3, 2002):
USA TODAY. October 03, 2002. Reprinted with permission.
In trying to make the graph more visually interesting by replacing the bars of a bar chart 
with milk buckets, areas are distorted. For example, the two buckets for 1980 represent 
32 cows, whereas the one bucket for 1970 represents 19 cows. This is misleading because 
32 is not twice as big as 19. Other areas are distorted as well.
Another common distortion occurs when a third dimension is added to bar charts or 
pie charts. For example, the pie chart at the bottom left of the page is similar to one that 
appeared in USA Today (September 17, 2009).
Adding the third dimension distorts the areas and makes it much more difficult to inter-
pret correctly. A correctly drawn pie chart is shown below.
How many times a week do
you choose fast food as a
dining option for your family?
1-3 times
a week
3-5 times
a week
Never
33.8%
Source: Market Day survey of 600 mothers of school-age children
63.2%
3.0%
3–5 times a week
Never
1–3 times a week
Category
Never
3–5 times a week
1–3 times a week
Source: USA TODAY. September 17, 2009.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.5   Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses  
●  133
2.	 Be cautious of graphs with broken axes. Although it is common to see scat-
terplots with broken axes, be extremely cautious of time series plots, bar charts, 
or histograms with broken axes. The use of broken axes in a scatterplot does not 
distort information about the nature of the relationship in the bivariate data set 
used to construct the display. On the other hand, in time series plots, broken axes 
can sometimes exaggerate the magnitude of change over time. Although it is not 
always inadvisable to break the vertical axis in a time series plot, it is something 
you should watch for, and if you see a time series plot with a broken axis, as in the 
accompany­ing time series plot of mortgage rates (similar to a graph appearing in 
USA Today, Oc­to­ber 25, 2002), you should pay particular attention to the scale on 
the vertical axis and take extra care in interpreting the graph.
In bar charts and histograms, the vertical axis (which represents frequency, relative 
frequency, or density) should never be broken. If the vertical axis is broken in this 
type of graph, the resulting display will violate the “proportional area” principle and 
the display will be misleading. For example, the accompanying bar chart is similar to 
one appearing in an advertisement for a software product designed to help teachers 
raise student test scores. By starting the vertical axis at 50, the gain for students using 
the software is exaggerated. Areas of the bars are not proportional to the magnitude 
of the numbers represented—the area for the rectangle representing 68 is more than 
three times the area of the rectangle representing 55!
Traditional instruction
Using software
Group
Percentile score
70
65
60
55
50
Pretest
Post-test 
3.	 Watch out for unequal time spacing in time series plots. If observations 
over time are not made at regular time intervals, special care must be taken in 
constructing the time series plot. Consider the accompanying time series plot, 
which is similar to one appearing in the San Luis Obispo Tribune (Sep­tem­ber 22, 
2002) in an article on online banking:
Jan
94
May
95
May
96
Dec.
97
Dec.
98
Feb.
00
Sept.
01
Number using online banking (in millions)
20
10
0
Notice that the intervals between observations are irregular, yet the points in 
the plot are equally spaced along the time axis. This makes it dif­ﬁ­cult to make a 
Source: USA TODAY. October 22, 2002. 
7%
6.5%
6%
5.5%
0 July 4
Source: Freddie Mac
6.57%
6.31%
Oct. 24
Mortgage rates creep up
30-year mortgage rates:
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

134 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
coherent assessment of the rate of change over time. This could have been rem-
edied by spacing the observations differently along the time axis, as shown in the 
following plot:
Jan
94
May
95
May
96
Dec.
97
Dec.
98
Feb.
00
Sept.
01
Number using online banking (in millions)
20
10
0
Time
4.	 Be careful how you interpret patterns in scatterplots. A strong pattern in 
a scatterplot means that the two variables tend to vary together in a predict-
able way, but it does not mean that there is a cause-and-effect relationship 
between the two variables. We will consider this point further in Chapter 5, 
but in the meantime, when describing patterns in scatterplots, be careful not 
to use wording that implies that changes in one variable cause changes in 
the other.
5.	 Make sure that a graphical display creates the right ﬁrst impression. 
For example, consider the graph below from USA Today (June 25, 2002). 
Although this graph does not vio­late the proportional area principle, the 
way the “bar” for the “none” category is displayed makes this graph dif­ﬁ­
cult to read, and a quick glance at this graph would leave the reader with 
an incorrect impression.
USA TODAY. June 25, 2002. Used with permission.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 3.5   Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses  
●  135
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
EXERCISES 3.46 - 3.51
3.46	 The accompanying comparative bar chart is from 
the report “More and More Teens on Cell Phones” 
(Pew Research Center, www.pewresearch.org, August 19, 
2009).
Pew Internet & American Life Project
Suppose that you plan to include this graph in 
an article that you are writing for your school 
newspaper. Write a few paragraphs that could 
accompany the graph. Be sure to address what the 
graph reveals about how teen cell phone ownership 
is related to age and how it has changed over time.
3.47	 Figure EX-3.47 is from the Fall 2008 Census Enroll-
ment Report at Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo. It uses 
both a pie chart and a segmented bar graph to sum-
marize data on ethnicity for students enrolled at the 
university in Fall 2008.
a.	 Use the information in the graphical display to 
construct a single segmented bar graph for the 
ethnicity data.
b.	Do you think that the original graphical display 
or the one you created in Part (a) is more 
informative? Explain your choice.
c.	 Why do you think that the original graphical 
display format (combination of pie chart and 
segmented bar graph) was chosen over a single 
pie chart with 7 slices?
3.48	 The accompanying graph is similar to one that 
appeared in USA Today (August 5, 2008). This graph is 
a modified comparative bar graph. Most likely, the 
modifications (incorporating hands and the earth) 
were made to try to make a display that readers 
would find more interesting.
a.	 Use the information in the USA Today graph to 
construct a traditional comparative bar graph.
b.	Explain why the modifications made in the USA 
Today graph may make interpretation more 
difficult than with the traditional comparative 
bar graph.
Source: USA TODAY. August 5, 2008. 
When asked where they’d most like to make a
difference in the world, more women than me
focus closest to home:
Source: American Express survey of 1,000 adults
conducted online by ICR and Authentic Response
42%
32%
Dreams for changing the world
Men
Women
Nation
36%
32%
World
22%
36%
Local
community
Nonwhite
24.2%
Hispanic/
Latino
11.3%
Asian
American
11.0%
Native
American
0.8%
African
American
1.1%
White
65.0%
Unknown/other 9.6%
Nonresident alien 1.2%
Fall 2008
total enrollment
Figure  EX-3.47
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

136 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
3.49	 The two graphical displays below are similar to ones 
that appeared in USA Today (June 8, 2009 and July 28, 
2009). One is an appropriate representation and the 
other is not. For each of the two, explain why it is or 
is not drawn appropriately.
Source: StrategyOne survey for
Tempur-Pedic of 1,004 adults in April 
Note: Exceeds 100% 
because of rounding
Hours of sleep adults get
(Average: 6.8 hours
per night)
Five 
or less
Six
Seven
Eight 
or more
37%
24%
29%
12%
Source: USA TODAY. June 8, 2009. 
Source: USA TODAY. July 28, 2009.
Source: Texas Transportation Institute
Cities with least road
congestion in peak hours
Among 90 metro areas, those with the
lowest percentage of rush-hour travelers
stuck in trafﬁc jams:
Wichita,
Kan.
8%
14%
15%
17%
19%
Beaumont,
Texas
Corpus 
Christi,
Texas
Spokane,
Wash.
Rochester, 
N.Y.
3.50	 The following graphical display is meant to be a 
comparative bar graph (USA Today, August 3, 2009). 
Do you think that this graphical display is an effec-
tive summary of the data? If so, explain why. If not, 
explain why not and construct a display that makes 
it easier to compare the ice cream preferences of men 
and women.
USA TODAY Snapshots®
41%
24%
34%
17% 18%
50%
Sundae
Sandwich
Other
Cup
Cone
Source: Harris Interactive survey of 2,177 adults
conducted online June 8-15
Note: Exceeds 100%
because of rounding.
By Anne R. Carey and Karl Gelles, USA TODAY
Favorite way for men and 
women to eat ice cream
Men
Women
2%
2%
8% 5%
USA TODAY. August 3, 2009. Reprinted with permission.
3.51	 Explain why the following graphical display (similar 
to one appearing in USA Today, September 17, 2009) is 
misleading.
U.S. currency tainted by cocaine
Among 234 U.S. bills from 17 large U.S. cities,
percentage with cocaine traces:
Source: American Chemical Society
N
E
W
Y
O
Y
R
K
2007
2009
67%
90%
Source: USA TODAY. September 17, 2009. 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

AC TIVIT Y 3.1 
Locating States
Background: A newspaper article bemoaning the state of 
students’ knowledge of geography claimed that more stu-
dents could identify the island where the 2002 season of the 
TV show Survivor was ﬁlmed than could locate Vermont on 
a map of the United States. In this activity, you will collect 
data that will allow you to estimate the proportion of students 
who can correctly locate the states of Vermont and Nebraska.
1.	 Working as a class, decide how you will select a 
sample that you think will be representative of the 
students from your school.
2.	 Use the sampling method from Step 1 to obtain the 
subjects for this study. Subjects should be shown the 
accompanying map of the United States and asked 
to point out the state of Vermont. After the subject 
has given his or her answer, ask the subject to point 
out the state of Nebraska. For each subject, record 
whether or not Vermont was correctly iden­ti­ﬁed and 
whether or not Nebraska was correctly iden­ti­ﬁed.
© Cengage Learning® 
3.	 When the data collection process is complete, sum-
marize the resulting data in a table like the one 
shown here:
Response
Frequency
Correctly identified both states
Correctly identified Vermont but not Nebraska
Correctly identified Nebraska but not Vermont
Did not correctly identify either state
4.	 Construct a pie chart that summarizes the data in the 
table from Step 3.
5.	 What proportion of sampled students were able to 
correctly identify Vermont on the map?
6.	 What proportion of sampled students were able to 
correctly identify Nebraska on the map?
7.	 Construct a comparative bar chart that shows the 
proportion correct and the proportion incorrect for 
each of the two states considered.
8.	 Which state, Vermont or Nebraska, is closer to the 
state in which your school is located? Based on the 
pie chart, do you think that the students at your 
school were better able to identify the state that was 
closer than the one that was farther away? Justify 
your answer.
9.	 Write a paragraph commenting on the level of 
knowledge of U.S. geography demonstrated by the 
students ­participating in this study.
10.	 Would you be comfortable generalizing your con­
clusions in Step 8 to the population of students at 
your school? Explain why or why not.
AC TIVIT Y 3.2 
Bean Counters!
Materials needed: A large bowl of dried beans (or mar-
bles, plastic beads, or any other small, fairly regular objects) 
and a coin.
In this activity, you will investigate whether people can 
hold more in the right hand or in the left hand.
1.	 Flip a coin to determine which hand you will mea-
sure ﬁrst. If the coin lands heads side up, start with 
the right hand. If the coin lands tails side up, start 
with the left hand. With the designated hand, reach 
into the bowl and grab as many beans as possible. 
Raise the hand over the bowl and count to 4. If no 
beans drop during the count to 4, drop the beans 
onto a piece of paper and record the number of 
beans grabbed. If any beans drop during the count, 
restart the count. That is, you must hold the beans 
for a count of 4 without any beans falling before 
you can determine the number grabbed. Repeat 
the process with the other hand, and then record 
the following information: (1) right-hand number, 
(2) left-hand number, and (3) dominant hand (left or 
right, depending on whether you are left- or right-
handed).
2.	 Create a class data set by recording the values of the 
three variables listed in Step 1 for each student in 
your class.
3.	 Using the class data set, construct a comparative 
stem-and-leaf display with the right-hand counts 
displayed on the right and the left-hand counts 
displayed on the left of the stem-and-leaf display. 
Comment on the interesting features of the display 
and include a comparison of the right-hand count 
and left-hand count distributions.
Activities 
●  137
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

138 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
4.	 Now construct a comparative stem-and-leaf display 
that allows you to compare dominant-hand count to 
nondominant-hand count. Does the display support 
the theory that dominant-hand count tends to be 
higher than non­dominant-hand count?
5.	 For each observation in the data set, compute the 
­difference
dominant-hand count 2 nondominant-hand count
Construct a stem-and-leaf display of the differences.
Comment on the interesting features of this display.
6.	 Explain why looking at the distribution of the differ-
ences (Step 5) provides more information than the 
comparative stem-and-leaf display (Step 4). What 
information is lost in the comparative display that is 
retained in the display of the differences?
SUMMARY 
Key Concepts and Formulas
Term or Formula
Comment
Frequency distribution
A table that displays frequencies, and 
sometimes relative and cumulative 
relative frequencies, for categories 
(categorical data), possible values 
(discrete numerical data), or class intervals 
(continuous data).
Comparative bar chart
Two or more bar charts that use the same 
set of horizontal and vertical axes.
Pie chart
A graph of a frequency distribution for a 
categorical data set. Each category is rep-
resented by a slice of the pie, and the area 
of the slice is proportional to the corre-
sponding frequency or relative frequency.
Segmented bar graph
A graph of a frequency distribution for 
a categorical data set. Each category is 
represented by a segment of the bar, and 
the area of the segment is proportional to 
the corresponding frequency or relative 
frequency.
Stem-and-leaf display
A method of organizing numerical data in 
which the stem values (leading digit(s) of 
the observations) are listed in a column, 
and the leaf (trailing digit(s)) for each 
observation is then listed beside the 
corresponding stem. Sometimes stems 
are repeated to stretch the display.
Term or Formula
Comment
Histogram
A graph of the information in a frequency 
distribution for a numerical data set. A 
rectangle is drawn above each possible 
value (discrete data) or class interval. 
The rectangle’s area is proportional to 
the corresponding frequency or relative 
frequency.
Histogram shapes
A (smoothed) histogram may be unimodal 
(a single peak), bimodal (two peaks), or 
multimodal. A unimodal histogram may 
be symmetric, positively skewed (a long 
right or upper tail), or negatively skewed. 
A frequently occurring shape is one that is 
approximately normal.
Cumulative relative 
frequency plot
A graph of a cumulative relative frequency 
distribution.
Scatterplot
A graph of bivariate numerical data 
in which each observation (x, y) is 
represented as a point with respect to a 
horizontal x-axis and a vertical y-axis.
Time series plot
A graphical display of numerical data 
collected over time.
CHAPTER REVIEW 
Exercises 3.52 - 3.71
3.52	 The article “Most Smokers Wish They Could Quit” 
(Gallup Poll Analyses, November 21, 2002) noted that 
smokers and nonsmokers perceive the risks of smok-
ing differently. The accompanying relative frequency 
table summarizes responses regarding the perceived 
harm of smoking for each of three groups: a sample 
of 241 smokers, a sample of 261 former smokers, 
and a sample of 502 nonsmokers. 
a. Construct a comparative bar chart for these data. 
Do not forget to use relative frequencies in con-
structing the bar chart because the three sample 
sizes are different. 
b. Comment on how smokers, former smokers, and 
nonsmokers differ with respect to perceived risk 
of smoking.
Perceived Risk  
of Smoking
Frequency
Smokers
Former 
Smokers
Nonsmokers
Very harmful
145
204
432
Somewhat harmful
  72
  42
  50
Not too harmful
  17
  10
  15
Not at all harmful
    7
    5
    5
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
3.53	 Each year the College Board publishes a pro­ﬁle 
of students taking the SAT. In the report “2005 
College Bound Seniors: Total Group Proﬁle Report,” the 
average SAT scores were reported for three groups 
de­ﬁned by ﬁrst language learned. Use the data in the 
accompanying table to construct a bar chart of the 
average verbal SAT score for the three groups.
First Language Learned
Average Verbal SAT
English
519
English and another language
486
A language other than English
462
3.54	 The report referenced in Exercise 3.53 also gave 
average math SAT scores for the three language 
groups, as shown in the following table.
First Language Learned
Average Math SAT
English
521
English and another language
513
A language other than English
521
a. Construct a comparative bar chart for the aver-
age verbal and math scores for the three language 
groups. 
b. Write a few sentences describing the differences 
and similarities between the three language groups 
as shown in the bar chart.
3.55	 ● The Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station 
conducted a study of the calorie content of different 
types of beer. The calorie content (calories per 100 ml) 
for 26 brands of light beer are (from the web site 
brewery.org):
29  28  33  31  30  33  30  28  27  41  39  31  29
23  32  31  32  19  40  22  34  31  42  35  29  43
a. Construct a stem-and-leaf display using stems 1, 
2, 3, and 4. 
b. Write a sentence or two describing the calorie 
content of light beers.
3.56	 The stem-and-leaf display of Exercise 3.55 uses only 
four stems. Construct a stem-and-leaf display for 
these data using repeated stems 1H, 2L, 2H, . . . , 4L. 
For example, the ﬁrst observation, 29, would have 
a stem of 2 and a leaf of 9. It would be entered into 
the display for the stem 2H, because it is a “high” 
2—that is, it has a leaf that is on the high end (5, 6, 
7, 8, 9).
3.57	 ● The article “A Nation Ablaze with Change” (USA 
Today, July 3, 2001) gave the accompanying data on 
percentage increase in population between 1990 and 
2000 for the 50 U.S. states. Also provided in the table 
is a column that indicates for each state whether the 
state is in the eastern or western part of the United 
States (the states are listed in order of population size):
State
Percentage 
Change
East/West
California
13.8
W
Texas
22.8
W
New York
  5.5
E
Florida
23.5
E
Illinois
  8.6
E
Pennsylvania
  3.4
E
Ohio
  4.7
E
Michigan
  6.9
E
New Jersey
  8.9
E
Georgia
26.4
E
North Carolina
21.4
E
Virginia
14.4
E
Massachusetts
  5.5
E
Indiana
  9.7
E
Washington
21.1
W
Tennessee
16.7
E
Missouri
  9.3
E
Wisconsin
  9.6
E
Maryland
10.8
E
Arizona
40.0
W
Minnesota
12.4
E
Louisiana
  5.9
E
Alabama
10.1
E
Colorado
30.6
W
Kentucky
  9.7
E
South Carolina
15.1
E
Oklahoma
  9.7
W
Oregon
20.4
W
Connecticut
  3.6
E
Iowa
  5.4
E
Mississippi
10.5
E
Kansas
  8.5
W
Arkansas
13.7
E
Utah
29.6
W
Nevada
66.3
W
New Mexico
20.1
W
West Virginia
  0.8
E
Nebraska
  8.4
W
Idaho
28.5
W
Chapter Review Exercises 
●  139
continued
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

140 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
State
Percentage 
Change
East/West
Maine
  3.9
E
New Hampshire
11.4
E
Hawaii
  9.3
W
Rhode Island
  4.5
E
Montana
12.9
W
Delaware
17.6
E
South Dakota
  8.5
W
North Dakota
  0.5
W
Alaska
14.0
W
Vermont
  8.2
E
Wyoming
  8.9
W
a.	Construct a stem-and-leaf display for percent-
age growth for the data set consisting of all 50 
states. Hints: Regard the observations as having 
two digits to the left of the decimal place. That 
is, think of an observation such as 8.5 as 08.5. 
It will also be easier to truncate leaves to a 
single digit; for example, a leaf of 8.5 could be 
truncated to 8 for purposes of constructing the 
display.
b.	Comment on any interesting features of the data 
set. Do any of the observations appear to be 
outliers?
c.	Now construct a comparative stem-and-leaf 
display for the eastern and western states. 
Write a few sentences comparing the per-
centage growth distributions for eastern and 
western states.
3.58	 ● People suffering from Alzheimer’s disease often 
have dif­ﬁ­culty performing basic activities of daily 
living (ADLs). In one study (“Functional Status and 
Clinical Findings in Patients with Alzheimer’s Disease,” 
Journal of Gerontology [1992]: 177–182), investigators 
focused on six such activities: dressing, bathing, 
transferring, toileting, walking, and eating. Here are 
data on the number of ADL impairments for each of 
240 patients:
Number of
  impairments
    0
  1
  2
  3
  4
5
  6
Frequency
100
43
36 
17
24
9
11
a.	 Determine the relative frequencies that correspond 
to the given frequencies.
b.	What proportion of these patients had at most two 
­impairments? 
c.	 Use the result of Part (b) to determine what 
proportion of patients had more than two impair-
ments.
d.	What proportion of the patients had at least four 
­impairments? 
3.59	 Does the size of a transplanted organ matter? A study 
that attempted to answer this question (“Minimum 
Graft Size for Successful Living Donor Liver Transplanta-
tion,” Transplantation [1999]:1112–1116) presented a 
scatterplot much like the following (“graft weight 
ratio” is the weight of the transplanted liver relative 
to the ideal size liver for the recipient):
a.	 Discuss interesting features of this scatterplot.
b.	Why do you think the overall relationship is 
negative?
x
200
100
100
0
50
Recipient body weight (kg)
Graft weight ratio (%)
0
3.60	 ● The National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration published a report titled “Falling 
Through the Net: Toward Digital Inclusion” (U.S. Depart-
ment of Commerce, Oc­to­ber 2000) that included the 
following information on access to computers in the 
home:
Year
Percentage of Households
with a Computer
1985
  8.2
1990
15.0
1994
22.8
1995
24.1
1998
36.6
1999
42.1
2000
51.0
a.	 Construct a time series plot for these data. Be 
careful—the observations are not equally spaced 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
in time. The points in the plot should not be 
equally spaced along the x-axis.
b.	Comment on any trend over time.
3.61	 According to the National Association of Home 
Builders, the average size of a home in 1950 was  
983 ft2. The average size increased to 1500 ft2 
in 1970, 2080 ft2 in 1990; and 2330 ft2 in 2003 
(San Luis Obispo Tribune, Oc­to­ber 16, 2005).
a.	 Construct a time series plot that shows how the 
average size of a home has changed over time.
b.	If the trend of the time series plot continued, what 
would you predict the average home size to have 
been in 2010?  
3.62	 The paper “Community Colleges Start to Ask, Where Are 
the Men?” (Chronicle of Higher Education, June 28, 2002) 
gave data on gender for community college students. 
It was reported that 42% of students enrolled at 
community colleges nationwide were male and 58% 
were female. Construct a segmented bar graph for 
these data.
3.63	 ● The article “Tobacco and Alcohol Use in G-Rated  
Children’s Animated Films” (Journal of the American 
Medical Association [1999]: 1131–1136) reported 
exposure to tobacco and alcohol use in all G-rated 
animated ﬁlms released between 1937 and 1997 by 
ﬁve major ﬁlm studios. The researchers found that 
tobacco use was shown in 56% of the reviewed ﬁlms. 
Data on the total tobacco exposure time (in seconds) 
for ﬁlms with tobacco use produced by Walt Disney, 
Inc., were as follows:
223
176
548
37
158 51
299
37
11
165
  74
  92
    6
23
206   9
Data for 11 G-rated animated ﬁlms showing tobacco 
use that were produced by MGM/United Artists, 
Warner Brothers, Universal, and Twentieth Century 
Fox were also given. The tobacco exposure times (in 
seconds) for these ﬁlms was as follows:
205  162  6  1  117  5  91  155  24  55  17
a. Construct a comparative stem-and-leaf display for 
these data. 
b. Comment on the interesting features of this display.
3.64	 ● The accompanying data on household expen-
ditures on transportation for the United King-
dom appeared in “Transport Statistics for Great 
Britain: 2002 Edition” (in Family Spending: A Report 
on the Family Expenditure Survey [The Stationary 
Ofﬁce, 2002]). Expenditures (in pounds per week) 
included costs of purchasing and maintaining any 
vehicles owned by members of the household and 
any costs associated with public transportation and 
leisure travel.
Year
Average 
Transportation
Percentage  of 
Household Expenditures 
for Transportation
1990
247.20
16.2
1991
259.00
15.3
1992
271.80
15.8
1993
276.70
15.6
1994
283.60
15.1
1995
289.90
14.9
1996
309.10
15.7
1997
328.80
16.7
1998
352.20
17.0
1999
359.40
17.2
2000
385.70
16.7
a.	 Construct time series plots of the transporta-
tion expense data and the percent of household 
expense data.
b.	Do the time series plots of Part (a) support the 
statement that follows? Explain why or why not. 
Statement: Although actual expenditures have 
been increasing, the percentage of the total house-
hold expenditures that go toward transportation 
has remained relatively stable.
3.65	 The article “The Healthy Kids Survey: A Look at the Find-
ings” (San Luis Obispo Tribune, Oc­to­ber 25, 2002) gave 
the accompanying information for a sample of ﬁfth 
graders in San Luis Obispo County. Responses are to 
the question:
“After school, are you home alone without adult 
­supervision?”
Response
Percentage
Never
  8
Some of the time
15
Most of the time
16
All of the time
61
a.	 Summarize these data using a pie chart.
b.	Construct a segmented bar graph for these data.
c.	 Which graphing method—the pie chart or the 
segmented bar graph—do you think does a better 
job of conveying information about response? 
Explain.
Chapter Review Exercises 
●  141
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

142 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
3.66	 “If you were taking a new job and had your choice 
of a boss, would you prefer to work for a man or a 
woman?” That was the question posed to individuals 
in a sample of 576 employed adults (Gallup at a 
Glance, Oc­to­ber 16, 2002). Responses are summarized 
in the following table:
Response
Frequency
Prefer to work for a man
190
Prefer to work for a woman
  92
No difference
282
No opinion
  12
a.	 Construct a pie chart to summarize this data set, 
and write a sentence or two summarizing how 
people responded to this question.
b.	Summarize the given data using a segmented bar 
graph.
3.67	 ● 2005 was a record year for hurricane devastation 
in the United States (San Luis Obispo Tribune, No­vem­
ber 30, 2005). Of the 26 tropical storms and hurri-
canes in the season, four hurricanes hit the mainland: 
­Dennis, Katrina, Rita, and Wilma. The United States’ 
insured catastrophic losses since 1989 (approximate 
values read from a graph that ­appeared in the San Luis 
Obispo Tribune, No­vem­ber 30, 2005) are as follows:
Year
Cost (in billions of dollars)
1989
  7.5
1990
  2.5
1991
  4.0
1992
22.5
1993
  5.0
1994
18.0
1995
  9.0
1996
  8.0
1997
  2.6
1998
10.0
1999
  9.0
2000
  3.0
2001
27.0
2002
  5.0
2003
12.0
2004
28.5
2005
56.8
a. Construct a time series plot that shows the insured 
catastrophic loss over time. 
b. What do you think causes the peaks in the graph?
3.68	 An article in the San Luis Obispo Tribune (No­vem­ber 20, 
2002) stated that 39% of those with critical housing 
needs (those who pay more than half their income 
for housing) lived in urban areas, 42% lived in 
suburban areas, and the rest lived in rural areas. Con-
struct a pie chart that shows the distribution of type 
of residential area (urban, suburban, or rural) for 
those with critical housing needs.
3.69	 ● Living-donor kidney transplants are becoming 
more common. Often a living donor has chosen to 
donate a kidney to a relative with kidney disease. 
The following data appeared in a USA Today article on 
organ transplants (“Kindness Motivates Newest Kidney 
Donors,” June 19, 2002):
Year
Number of Kidney Transplants
Living-Donor to 
Relative
Living-Donor  
to Unrelated Person
1994
2390
  202
1995
2906
  400
1996
2916
  526
1997
3144
  607
1998
3324
  814
1999
3359
  930
2000
3679
1325
2001
3879
1399
a.	 Construct a time series plot for the number of 
living-donor kidney transplants where the donor 
is a relative of the recipient. 
b. Describe the trend in this plot.
c. Use the data from 1994 and 2001 to construct a 
comparative bar chart for the type of donation 
(relative or ­unrelated). 
d. Write a few sentences commenting on your 
display.
3.70	 ● Many nutritional experts have expressed con-
cern about the high levels of sodium in prepared 
foods. The following data on sodium content (in 
milligrams) per frozen meal appeared in the article 
“Comparison of ‘Light’ Frozen Meals” (Boston Globe, 
April 24, 1991):
720   530   800   690   880   1050   340   810   760
300   400   680   780   390     950   520   500   630
480   940   450   990   910     420   850   390   600
Two histograms for these data are shown on the next 
page.
a.	 Do the two histograms give different impressions 
about the distribution of values?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

b.	Use each histogram to determine approximately 
the proportion of observations that are less than 
800, and compare to the actual proportion.
1050
800
550
300
10
5
0
Frequency
Sodium
1125
675
825
975
525
375
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Frequency
Sodium
3.71	 ● Americium 241 (241Am) is a radioactive material 
used in the manufacture of smoke detectors. The article 
“Retention and Dosimetry of Injected 241Am in Beagles” 
(Radiation Research [1984]: 564–575) described a study 
in which 55 beagles were injected with a dose of 
241Am (proportional to each animal’s weight). Skeletal 
retention of 241Am (in microcuries per kilogram) was 
recorded for each beagle, resulting in the following data:
0.196
0.451
0.498
0.411
0.324
0.190
0.489
0.300
0.346
0.448
0.188
0.399
0.305
0.304
0.287
0.243
0.334
0.299
0.292
0.419
0.236
0.315
0.447
0.585
0.291
0.186
0.393
0.419
0.335
0.332
0.292
0.375
0.349
0.324
0.301
0.333
0.408
0.399
0.303
0.318
0.468
0.441
0.306
0.367
0.345
0.428
0.345
0.412
0.337
0.353
0.357
0.320
0.354
0.361
0.329
a.	 Construct a frequency distribution for these data, 
and draw the corresponding histogram.
b.	Write a short description of the important features 
of the shape of the histogram. 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
TECHNOLOGY NOTES
JMP
1.    Enter the raw data into one column
2.    In a separate column enter the group information
3.    Click Graph then select Chart
4.    Click and drag the column containing the raw data 
from the box under Select Columns to the box next to 
Categories, X, Levels
5.    Click and drag the column containing the group infor-
mation from the box under Select Columns to the box 
next to Categories, X, Labels
6.    Click OK
MINITAB
1.    Input the group information into C1
2.    Input the raw data into C2 (be sure to match the response 
from the first column with the appropriate group)
Comparative Bar Charts
Technology Notes 
●  143
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

144 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
3.    Select Graph then choose Bar Chart…
4.    Highlight Cluster
5.    Click OK
6.    Double click C1 to add it to the Categorical Variables box
7.    Then double click C2 to add it to the Categorical Vari-
ables box
8.    Click OK
Note: Be sure to list the grouping variable first in the 
Categorical Variables box.
Note: You may add or format titles, axis titles, legends, and 
so on, by clicking on the Labels… button prior to perform-
ing Step 8 above.
SPSS
1.    Enter the raw data into one column
2.    Enter the group information into a second column (be 
sure to match the response from the first column with 
the appropriate group)
3.    Select Graph and choose Chart Builder…
4.    Under Choose from highlight Bar
5.    Click and drag the second bar chart in the first column 
(Clustered Bar) to the Chart preview area
6.    Click and drag the group variable (second column) into 
the Cluster on X box in the upper right corner of the 
chart preview area
7.    Click and drag the data variable (first column) into the 
X-Axis? box in the chart preview area
8.    Click Ok
Excel 2007
1.    Enter the category names into column A (you may input 
the title for the variable in cell A1)
2.    Enter the count or percent for different groups into a 
new column, starting with column B
3.    Select all data (including column titles if used)
4.    Click on the Insert Ribbon
5.    Choose Column and select the first chart under 2-D 
Column (Clustered Column)
6.    The chart will appear on the same worksheet as your data
144 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Note: You may add or format titles, axis titles, legends, and 
so on, by right-clicking on the appropriate piece of the chart.
Note: Using the Bar Option on the Insert Ribbon will pro-
duce a horizontal bar chart.
TI-83/84
The TI-83/84 does not have the functionality to produce 
comparative bar charts.
TI-Nspire
The TI-Nspire does not have the functionality to produce 
comparative bar charts.
Stem-and-leaf plots
JMP
1.    Enter the raw data into a column
2.    Click Analyze then select Distribution
3.    Click and drag the column name containing the data 
from the box under Select Columns to the box next to 
Y, Columns
4.    Click OK
5.    Click the red arrow next to the column name
6.    Select Stem and Leaf
MINITAB
1.    Input the raw data into C1
2.    Select Graph and choose Stem-and-leaf…
3.    Double click C1 to add it to the Graph Variables box
4.    Click OK
Note: You may add or format titles, axis titles, legends, and 
so on, by clicking on the Labels… button prior to perform-
ing Step 4 above.
SPSS
1.    Input the raw data into a column
2.    Select Analyze and choose Descriptive Statistics then 
Explore
3.    Highlight the variable name from the box on the left
4.    Click the arrow to the right of the Dependent List box to 
add the variable to this box
5.    Click OK
6.    Note: The stem-and-leaf plot is one of the plots produced 
along with several other descriptive statistics and plots.
Excel 2007
Excel 2007 does not have the functionality to create stem-
and-leaf plots automatically.
TI-83/84
The Ti-83/84 does not have the functionality to create stem-
and-leaf plots.
TI-Nspire
The TI-Nspire does not have the functionality to create stem-
and-leaf plots.
Histograms
JMP
1.    Enter the raw data into a column
2.    Click Analyze then select Distribution
3.    Click and drag the column name containing the data 
from the box under Select Columns to the box next 
to Y, Columns
4.    Click OK
5.    Click the red arrow next to the column name
6.    Select Histogram Options and click Vertical
MINITAB
1.    Input the raw data into C1
2.    Select Graph and choose Histogram…
3.    Highlight Simple
4.    Click OK
5.    Double click C1 to add it to the Graph Variables box
6.    Click OK 
Technology Notes 
●  145
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Note: You may add or format titles, axis titles, legends, and 
so on, by clicking on the Labels… button prior to perform-
ing Step 5 above.
SPSS
1.    Input the raw data into a column
2.    Select Graph and choose Chart Builder… 
3.    Under Choose from highlight Histogram
4.    Click and drag the first option (Simple Histogram) to the 
Chart preview area
5.    Click and drag the variable name from the Variables 
box into the X-Axis? box
6.    Click OK
Excel 2007
Note: In order to produce histograms in Excel 2007, we will 
use the Data Analysis Add-On. For instructions on installing 
this add-on, please see the note at the end of this chapter’s 
Technology Notes.
1.    Input the raw data in column A (you may use a column 
heading in cell A1)
2.    Click on the Data ribbon
3.    Choose the Data Analysis option from the Analysis 
group
4.    Select Histogram from the Data Analysis dialog box and 
click OK
5.    Click in the Input Range: box and then click and drag to 
select your data (including the column heading)
a.  If you used a column heading, click the checkbox 
next to Labels
6.    Click the checkbox next to Chart Output
7.    Click OK
Note: If you have specified bins manually in another col-
umn, click in the box next to Bin Range: and select your bin 
assignments.
TI-83/84
1.    Enter the data into L1 (In order to access lists press the 
STAT key, highlight the option called Edit… then press 
ENTER)
2.    Press the 2nd key then the Y 5 key
3.    Highlight the option for Plot1 and press ENTER
4.    Highlight On and press ENTER
5.    For Type, select the histogram shape and press ENTER
6.    Press GRAPH
Note: If the graph window does not display appropriately, 
press the WINDOW button and reset the scales appropriately. 
TI-Nspire
1.    Enter the data into a data list (In order to access data lists 
select the spreadsheet option and press enter)
Note: Be sure to title the list by selecting the top row of the 
column and typing a title.
2.    Press the menu key then select 3:Data then select 
6:QuickGraph and press enter (a dotplot will appear)
3.    Press the menu key and select 1:Plot Type
4.    Select 3:Histogram and press enter
Scatterplots
JMP
1.    Input the data for the independent variable into the first 
column
2.    Input the data for the dependent variable into the sec-
ond column
3.    Click Analyze then select Fit Y by X
4.    Click and drag the column name for the independent 
data from the box under Select Columns to the box 
next to Y, Response
5.    Click and drag the column name for the dependent data 
from the box under Select Columns to the box next to 
X, Factor
6.    Click OK
MINITAB
1.    Input the raw data for the independent variable into C1
2.    Input the raw data for the dependent variable into C2
3.    Select Graph and choose Scatterplot
4.    Highlight Simple
5.    Click OK
6.    Double click on C2 to add it to the Y Variables column 
of the spreadsheet
7.    Double click on C1 to add it to the X Variables column 
of the spreadsheet
8.    Click OK
Note: You may add or format titles, axis titles, legends, and 
so on, by clicking on the Labels… button prior to perform-
ing Step 7 above.
SPSS
1.    Input the raw data into two columns
2.    Select Graph and choose Chart Builder… 
3.    Under Choose from highlight Scatter/Dot 
4.    Click and drag the first option (Simple Scatter) to the 
Chart preview area
5.    Click and drag the variable name representing the inde-
pendent variable to the X-Axis? box
146 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.    Click and drag the variable name representing the 
dependent variable to the Y-Axis? box
7.    Click OK
Excel 2007
1.    Input the raw data into two columns (you may enter 
column headings)
2.    Select both columns of data
3.    Click on the Insert ribbon
4.    Click Scatter and select the first option (Scatter with 
Markers Only)
Note: You may add or format titles, axis titles, legends, and 
so on, by right-clicking on the appropriate piece of the chart.
TI-83/84
1.    Input the data for the dependent variable into L2 (In 
order to access lists press the STAT key, highlight the 
option called Edit… then press ENTER)
2.    Input the data for the dependent variable into L1
3.    Press the 2nd key then press the Y 5 key
4.    Select the Plot1 option and press ENTER
5.    Select On and press ENTER
6.    Select the scatterplot option and press ENTER
7.    Press the GRAPH key
Note: If the graph window does not display appropriately, 
press the WINDOW button and reset the scales appropri-
ately. 
TI-Nspire
1.    Enter the data for the independent variable into a data 
list (In order to access data lists select the spreadsheet 
option and press enter)
Note: Be sure to title the list by selecting the top row of the 
column and typing a title.
2.    Enter the data for the dependent variable into a separate 
data list
3.    Highlight both columns of data (by scrolling to the top 
of the screen to highlight one list then press shift and use 
the arrow key to highlight the second list)
4.    Press the menu key and select 3:Data then select 
6:QuickGraph and press enter
Time series plots
JMP
1.    Input the raw data into one column
2.    Input the time increment data into a second column
3.    Click Graph then select Control Chart then select Run 
Chart
4.    Click and drag the name of the column containing the 
raw data from the box under Select Columns to the box 
next to Process
5.    Click and drag the name of the column containing 
the time increment data from the box under Select 
Columns to the box next to Sample Label
6.    Click OK
MINITAB
1.    Input the raw data into C1
2.    Select Graph and choose Time Series Plot…
3.    Highlight Simple
4.    Click OK
5.    Double click C1 to add it to the Series box
6.    Click the Time/Scale button
7.    Choose the appropriate time scale under Time Scale 
(Choose Calendar if you want to use Days, Years, 
Months, Quarters, etc.)
8.    Click to select one set for each variable
9.    In the spreadsheet, fill in the start value for the time scale
10.  Input the increment value into the box next to Incre-
ment (i.e., 1 to move by one year or one month, etc.)
11.  Click OK
12.  Click OK
Note: You may add or format titles, axis titles, legends, and 
so on, by clicking on the Labels… button prior to perform-
ing Step 12 above.
SPSS
1.  Input the raw data into two columns: one representing 
the data and one representing the time increments
2.  Select Analyze then choose Forecasting then Sequence 
Charts…
3.  Highlight the column name containing the raw data and 
add it to the Variables box
4.  Highlight the column name containing the time data 
and add it to the Time Axis Labels box
5.  Click OK 
Technology Notes 
●  147
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Excel 2007
1.    Input the data into two columns: one representing the 
data and one representing the time increments
2.    Select an empty cell
3.    Click on the Insert ribbon
4.    Click Line and select the first option under 2-D Line 
(Line)
5.    Right-click on the empty chart area that appears and 
select Select Data…
6.    Under Legend Entries (Series) click Add
7.    In the Series name: box select the column title for the 
data
8.    In the Series values: box select the data values
9.    Click OK
10.  Under Horizontal (Category) Axis Labels click Edit
11.  In the Axis label range: select the time increment data 
(do NOT select the column title).
12.  Click OK
13.  Click OK
TI-83/84
1.    Input the time increment data into L1
2.    Input the data values for each time into L2
3.    Press the 2nd key then the Y 5 key
4.    Select 1:Plot1 and press ENTER
5.    Highlight On and press ENTER
6.    Highlight the second option in the first row and press 
ENTER
7.    Press GRAPH
Note: If the graph window does not display appropri-
ately, press the WINDOW button and reset the scales 
appropriately. 
TI-Nspire
1.    Enter the data for the time increments into a data list (In 
order to access data lists select the spreadsheet option 
and press enter)
Note: Be sure to title the list by selecting the top row of the 
column and typing a title.
2.    Enter the data for each time increment into a separate 
data list
3.    Highlight both columns of data (by scrolling to the top 
of the screen to highlight one list then press shift and use 
the arrow key to highlight the second list)
4.    Press the menu key and select 3:Data then select 
6:QuickGraph and press enter
5.    Press the menu key and select 1:Plot Type then select 
6:XY Line Plot and press enter
Installing Excel 2007’s Data Analysis Add-On
1.    Click the Microsoft Office Button and then Click Excel 
Options
2.    Click Add-Ins, then in the Manage box, select Excel 
Add-ins.
3.    Click Go
4.    In the Add-Ins available box, select the Analysis Tool-
Pak checkbox, and then click OK
Note: If this option is not listed, click Browse to locate it.
Note: If you get prompted that the Analysis ToolPak is not 
currently installed on your computer, click Yes to install it.
5.  After you load the Analysis ToolPak, the Data Analy-
sis command is available in the Analysis group on the 
Data ribbon.
CR3.1  Does eating broccoli reduce the risk of pros-
tate cancer? According to an observational study from 
the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center (see the  
CNN.com web site article titled “Broccoli, Not Pizza Sauce, 
Cuts Cancer Risk, Study Finds,” January 5, 2000), men who ate 
more cruciferous vegetables (broccoli, cauliﬂower, brussels 
sprouts, and cabbage) had a lower risk of prostate cancer. 
This study made separate comparisons for men who ate dif-
ferent levels of vegetables. According to one of the investiga-
tors, “at any given level of total vegetable consumption, as 
the percent of cruciferous vegetables increased, the prostate 
cancer risk decreased.” Based on this study, is it reasonable 
to conclude that eating cruciferous vegetables causes a re-
duction in prostate cancer risk? Explain.
CR3.2  An article that appeared in USA Today (August 11, 
1998) described a study on prayer and blood pressure. In 
this study, 2391 people 65 years or older, were followed for 
6 years. The article stated that people who attended a reli-
gious service once a week and prayed or studied the Bible at 
least once a day were less likely to have high blood pressure. 
The researcher then concluded that “attending religious ser-
vices lowers blood pressure.” The headline for this article 
was “Prayer Can Lower Blood Pressure.” Write a few sen-
tences commenting on the appropriateness of the research-
er’s conclusion and on the article headline.
CR3.3  Sometimes samples are composed entirely of vol-
unteer responders. Give a brief description of the dangers of 
using voluntary response samples.
CR3.4  A newspaper headline stated that at a recent bud-
get workshop, nearly three dozen people supported a sales tax 
increase to help deal with the city’s ﬁnancial deﬁcit (San Luis 
Obispo Tribune, January 22, 2005). This conclusion was based 
CUMULATIVE REVIEW Exercises 
CR3.1 - CR3.16
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
148 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Cumulative Review Exercises 
●  149
on data from a survey acknowledged to be unscientiﬁc, in 
which 34 out of the 43 people who chose to attend the budget 
workshop recommended raising the sales tax. Brieﬂy discuss 
why the survey was described as “unscientiﬁc” and how this 
might limit the conclusions that can be drawn from the survey 
data.
CR3.5  “More than half of California’s doctors say they are 
so frustrated with managed care they will quit, retire early, or 
leave the state within three years.” This conclusion from an 
article titled “Doctors Feeling Pessimistic, Study Finds” (San Luis 
Obispo Tribune, July 15, 2001) was based on a mail survey con-
ducted by the California Medical Association. Surveys were 
mailed to 19,000 California doctors, and 2000 completed 
surveys were returned. Describe any concerns you have re-
garding the conclusion drawn.
CR3.6  Based on observing more than 400 drivers in the 
Atlanta area, two investigators at Georgia State University 
concluded that people exiting parking spaces did so more 
slowly when a driver in another car was waiting for the space 
than when no one was waiting (“Territorial Defense in Parking 
Lots: Retaliation Against Waiting Drivers,” Journal of Applied 
Social Psychology [1997]: 821-834).
a.  Describe how you might design an experiment to de-
termine whether this phenomenon is true for your city.
b.  What is the response variable?
c.  What are some extraneous variables and how does your 
design control for them?
CR3.7  An article from the Associated Press (May 14, 
2002) led with the headline “Academic Success Lowers Preg-
nancy Risk.” The article described an evaluation of a pro-
gram that involved about 350 students at 18 Seattle schools 
in high crime areas. Some students took part in a program 
beginning in elementary school in which teachers showed 
children how to control their impulses, recognize the feel-
ings of others, and get what they want without aggressive 
behavior. Others did not participate in the program. The 
study concluded that the program was effective because by 
the time young women in the program reached age 21, the 
pregnancy rate among them was 38%, compared to 56% for 
the women in the experiment who did not take part in the 
program. Explain why this conclusion is valid only if the 
women in the experiment were randomly assigned to one of 
the two experimental groups.
CR3.8  Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania sug-
gest that a nasal spray derived from pheromones (chemicals 
emitted by animals when they are trying to attract a mate) 
may be beneficial in relieving symptoms of premenstrual 
syndrome (PMS) (Los Angeles Times, January 17, 2003).
a.  Describe how you might design an experiment using 
100 female volunteers who suffer from PMS to deter-
mine whether the nasal spray reduces PMS symptoms.
b.  Does your design from Part (a) include a placebo treat-
ment? Why or why not?
c.  Does your design from Part (a) involve blinding? Is it 
single-blind or double-blind? Explain.
CR3.9  Students in California are required to pass an exit 
exam in order to graduate from high school. The pass rate 
for San Luis Obispo High School has been rising, as have the 
rates for San Luis Obispo County and the state of Cali­fornia 
(San Luis Obispo Tribune, Au­gust 17, 2004). The percentage of 
students who passed the test was as follows:
Year
District
Pass Rate
2002
San Luis Obispo High School
66%
2003
72%
2004
93%
2002
San Luis Obispo County
62%
2003
57%
2004
85%
2002
State of California
32%
2003
43%
2004
74%
a.  Construct a comparative bar chart that allows the change 
in the pass rate for each group to be compared.
b.  Is the change the same for each group? Comment on 
any difference observed.
CR3.10  A poll conducted by the Associated Press–Ipsos 
on public attitudes found that most Americans are con-
vinced that political corruption is a major problem (San Luis 
Obispo Tribune, De­cem­ber 9, 2005). In the poll, 1002 adults 
were surveyed. Two of the questions and the summarized 
responses to these questions follow:
How widespread do you think corruption is in public ser-
vice in America?
Hardly anyone
  1%
A small number
20%
A moderate number
39%
A lot of people
28%
Almost everyone
10%
Not sure
  2%
In general, which elected of­ﬁ­cials would you say are more 
ethical?
Democrats
36%
Republicans
33%
Both equally
10%
Neither
15%
Not sure
  6%
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

a.  For each question, construct a pie chart summarizing 
the data.
b.  For each question, construct a segmented bar chart dis-
playing the data.
c.  Which type of graph (pie chart or segmented bar graph) 
does a better job of presenting the data? Explain.
CR3.11 
 The article “Determination of Most Representa-
tive Subdivision” (Journal of Energy Engineering [1993]: 43–55) 
gave data on various characteristics of subdivisions that 
could be used in deciding whether to provide electrical 
power using overhead lines or underground lines. Data on 
the variable x 5 total length of streets within a subdivision 
are as follows:
1280
5320
4390
2100
1240
3060
4770
1050
360
3330
3380
340
1000
960
1320
530
3350
540
3870
1250
2400
960
1120
2120
450
2250
2320
2400
3150
5700
5220
500
1850
2460
5850
2700
2730
1670
100
5770
3150
1890
510
240
396
1419
2109
a.  Construct a stem-and-leaf display for these data using 
the thousands digit as the stem. Comment on the vari-
ous features of the display.
b.  Construct a histogram using class boundaries of 0 to 
,1000, 1000 to ,2000, and so on. How would you 
describe the shape of the histogram?
c.  What proportion of subdivisions has total length less 
than 2000? between 2000 and 4000? 
CR3.12 
 The paper “Lessons from Pacemaker Implanta-
tions” (Journal of the American Medical Association [1965]: 231–
232) gave the results of a study that followed 89 heart pa-
tients who had received electronic pacemakers. The time (in 
months) to the ﬁrst electrical malfunction of the pacemaker 
was recorded:
24 20 16 32 14 22   2 12 24   6 10 20 
  8 16 12 24 14 20 18 14 16 18 20 22 
24 26 28 18 14 10 12 24   6 12 18 16 
34 18 20 22 24 26 18   2 18 12 12   8 
24 10 14 16 22 24 22 20 24 28 20 22 
26 20   6 14 16 18 24 18 16   6 16 10 
14    18     24    22     28   24  30  34  26  24    22  28
30    22   24    22  32
a.  Summarize these data in the form of a frequency dis­
tribution, using class intervals of 0 to ,6, 6 to ,12, 
and so on.
b.  Compute the relative frequencies and cumulative rela-
tive frequencies for each class interval of the frequency 
distribution of Part (a).
c.  Show how the relative frequency for the class interval 12 
to ,18 could be obtained from the cumulative relative 
frequencies.
d.  Use the cumulative relative frequencies to give approxi-
mate answers to the following:
	 i.   What proportion of those who participated in the 
study had pacemakers that did not malfunction 
within the ﬁrst year? 
	 ii.  If the pacemaker must be replaced as soon as the 
ﬁrst electrical malfunction occurs, approximately 
what proportion required replacement between 1 
and 2 years after implantation? 
e.  Construct a cumulative relative frequency plot, and use 
it to answer the following questions.
  i.   What is the approximate time at which about 50% 
of the pacemakers had failed? 
  ii.  What is the approximate time at which only about 
10% of the pacemakers initially implanted were 
still functioning? 
CR3.13  How does the speed of a runner vary over the 
course of a marathon (a distance of 42.195 km)? Consider 
determining both the time (in seconds) to run the ﬁrst 5 km 
and the time (in seconds) to run between the 35 km and 
40 km points, and then subtracting the 5-km time from 
the 35–40-km time. A positive value of this difference cor-
responds to a runner slowing down toward the end of the 
race. The histogram below is based on times of runners who 
participated in several different Japanese marathons (“Factors 
Affecting Runners’ Marathon Per­formance,” Chance [Fall 1993]: 
24–30).
a.  What are some interesting features of this histo­gram?
b.  What is a typical difference value?
c.  Roughly what proportion of the runners ran the late dis-
tance more quickly than the early ­distance?
0
100
200
400
50
100
150
200
2100
Time
difference
300
500
600 700
800
Frequency
CR3.14  Data on x 5 poverty rate (%) and y 5 high school 
dropout rate (%) for the 50 U.S. states and the District of 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
150 
●  Chapter 3  Graphical Methods for Describing Data
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Columbia were used to construct the following scatterplot 
(Chronicle of Higher Education, Au­gust 31, 2001):
15
20
10
5
15
Poverty rate
Dropout rate
10
a.  Write a few sentences commenting on this scatterplot.
b.  Would you describe the relationship between poverty 
rate and dropout rate as positive (y tends to increase as x 
increases), negative (y tends to decrease as x increases), 
or as having no discernible relationship between x and y?
CR3.15 
▼ One factor in the development of tennis el-
bow, a malady that strikes fear into the hearts of all serious 
players of that sport, is the impact­-induced vibration of the 
racket-and-arm system at ball contact. It is well known that 
the likelihood of getting tennis elbow depends on various 
properties of the racket used. Consider the accompanying 
scatterplot of x 5 racket resonance frequency (in hertz) and 
y 5 sum of peak-to-peak accelerations (a characteristic of 
arm vibration, in meters per second per second) for n 5 23 
different rackets (“Transfer of Tennis Racket Vibrations into the 
Human Forearm,” Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise 
[1992]: 1134–1140). Discuss interesting features of the data 
and of the scatterplot.
x
100
y 
38
36
34
32
30
28
26
22
24
120
110
130
140
160
150
170
190
180
CR3.16  An article that appeared in USA Today (Sep­tem­ber 3, 
2003) included a graph similar to the one shown here sum-
marizing responses from polls conducted in 1978, 1991, 
and 2003 in which a sample of American adults were asked 
whether or not it was a good time or a bad time to buy a 
house.
a.  Construct a time series plot that shows how the percent-
age that thought it was a good time to buy a house has 
changed over time.
b.  Add a new line to the plot from Part (a) showing the 
percentage that thought it was a bad time to buy a house 
over time. Be sure to label the lines clearly.
c.  Which graph, the given bar chart or the time series plot, 
best shows the trend over time?
Good time
Bad time
53%
67%
78% 78%
29%
25%
19% 20%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
Mar-78
Mar-91
Jun-03
Sep-03
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Cumulative Review Exercises 
●  151
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

152
Numerical Methods  
for Describing Data
Preview Example: 
Just Thinking 
About Exercise??
Studies have shown that in some cases people overestimate 
the extent to which physical exercise can compensate for 
food consumption. When this happens, people increase 
food intake more than what is justified based on the exercise 
performed. The authors of the paper “Just Thinking About 
Exercise Makes Me Serve More Food: Physical Activity and 
Calorie Compensation” (Appetite [2011]: 332–335) wondered if 
even thinking about exercise would lead to increased food 
consumption. 
They carried out an experiment in which people were 
offered snacks as a reward for participating in the experi-
ment. People read a short essay and then answered a few 
questions about the essay. Some participants read an essay 
that was unrelated to exercise (the control group), some read 
an essay that described listening to music while taking a 
Chapter 4: Learning Objectives
Students will understand:
●
●how the variance and standard deviation describe variability in a data set.
●
●the impact that outliers can have on measures of center and spread.
●
●the difference between a sample statistic and a population characteristic.
Students will be able to:
●
●compute and interpret the values of the sample mean and the sample median.
●
●compute and interpret the values of the sample standard deviation and the 
interquartile range.
●
●construct and interpret a boxplot.
●
●identify outliers in numerical data.
●
●use Chebyshev’s Rule and the Empirical Rule to make statements about a data 
distribution. 
●
●use percentiles and z scores to describe relative standing.
©Estudi M6/Shutterstock.com 
CHAPTER 4
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.1  Describing the Center of a Data Set 
●  153
30-minute walk (the fun group), and some read an essay that described strenuous exercise 
(the ­exercise group). 
Participants were then provided with two plastic bags and invited to help themselves 
to two types of snacks—Chex Mix and M&Ms. After the participants served themselves, 
the bags were weighed so that the researchers could determine the number of calories in 
snacks taken.
Data on number of calories consistent with summary values in the paper were used to 
construct the comparative dotplot shown in Figure 4.1. From the dotplots, it is clear that 
the number of calories consumed differs from person to person and also tends to be quite 
a bit higher for those who read about exercise than for those in the control group! If we 
want to compare the distributions with more precision, the first step is to describe them 
numerically.
How might we summarize this variability numerically? In this chapter, we show how to 
calculate numerical summary measures that describe both the center and the extent of 
spread in a data set. In Section 4.1, we introduce the mean and the median, the two most 
widely used measures of the center of a distribution. The variance and the standard devia-
tion are presented in Section 4.2 as measures of variability. In later sections, we will see 
some additional ways that measures of center and spread can be used to describe data 
distributions.
Calories
Calories control
Calories fun
Calories exercise
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Figure  4.1
Comparative dotplot of calories.
4.1 
Describing the Center of a Data Set
When describing numerical data, it is common to report a value that is representative of the 
observations. Such a number describes roughly where the data are located or “centered” 
along the number line, and is called a measure of center. The two most widely used 
measures of center are the mean and the median.
The Mean
The mean of a numerical data set is just the familiar arithmetic average: the sum of the 
observations divided by the number of observations. It is helpful to have concise notation 
for the variable on which observations are made, for the number of observations in the data 
set, and for the individual observations:
   x 5 the variable for which we have sample data
   n 5 the number of observations in the data set (the sample size)
x1 5 the ﬁrst observation in the data set
x2 5 the second observation in the data set
 
…
xn 5 the nth (last) observation in the data set
For example, we might have a sample consisting of n 5 4 observations on x 5 time it takes 
to complete an online hotel reservation (in minutes):
x1 5 5.9        x2 5 7.3        x3 5 6.6        x4 5 5.7
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

154 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
Notice that the value of the subscript on x has no relationship to the magnitude of the 
observation. In this example, x1 is just the ﬁrst observation in the data set and not necessarily 
the smallest observation, and xn is the last observation but not necessarily the largest.
The sum of x1, x2, . . . , xn can be denoted by x1 1 x2 1  Á 1 xn, but this is cumbersome. 
The Greek letter o is traditionally used in mathematics to denote sum­mation. In particular, 
ox denotes the sum of all the x values in the data set under ­consideration.*
Definition
Sample mean: The sample mean of a sample consisting of numerical observa-
tions x1, x2, . . . , xn, denoted by x, is
x 5 sum of all observations in the sample
number of observations in the sample 5 x1 1  x2 1 Á 1 xn
n
5 ox
n
Example 4.1 
Thinking About Exercise Again
The example in the chapter introduction described a study that investigated how thinking 
about exercise might affect food intake. Data on calories in snacks taken for people in each 
of three groups (control, read about fun walk, and read about strenuous exercise) are given 
in Table 4.1. Dotplots of these three data sets were given in the chapter introduction and 
are reproduced here as Figure 4.2.
Understand the context ❭
300
400
500
600
Calories
700
800
900
Calories control
Calories fun
Calories exercise
Figure  4.2
Dotplot of calories.
Table 4.1  Calorie Data
Control Group
Fun Group
Exercise Group
340
668
626
300
585
802
329
637
768
381
588
738
331
529
751
445
597
715
320
719
670
256
612
630
252
622
862
342
553
761
332
600
648
296
658
956
357
542
671
505
711
854
242
641
703
Consider the data ❭
*It is also common to see ox written as oxi or even as o
n
i51xi, but for simplicity we will usually omit the 
summation indices.
 Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.1  Describing the Center of a Data Set 
●  155
For the control group, the sum of the sample data values is
ox 5 340 1 300 1 Á 1 242 5 5028 
and the sample mean number of calories is
x 5 ox
n 5 5028
15
5 335.20
The value of the sample mean describes where the number of calories for the control 
group is centered along the number line. It can be interpreted as a typical number of 
calories for people in the control group. For the fun group, the sample mean number of 
calories is
x 5 ox
n 5 9262
15
5 617.47
and for the exercise group the sample mean number of calories is
x 5 ox
n 5 11,155
15
5 743.67
Notice that the sample mean number of calories for the control group was much smaller 
than the means for the other two groups. 
■
The data values in Example 4.1 were all integers, yet the means were given as 335.20, 617.47 
and 743.67. It is common to use more digits of decimal accuracy for the mean. This allows the 
value of the mean to fall between possible observable values (for example, the average number 
of children per family could be 1.8, whereas no single family will have 1.8 children).
The sample mean x is computed from sample observations, so it is a characteristic of 
the particular sample in hand. It is customary to use Roman letters to denote sample 
characteristics, as we have done with x. Characteristics of the population are usually 
denoted by Greek letters. One of the most important of such characteristics is the popu-
lation mean.
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Definition
Population mean: The population mean, denoted by m, is the average of all 
x values in the entire population.
For example, the average fuel ef­ﬁ­ciency for all 600,000 cars of a certain type under 
speci­ﬁed conditions might be m 5 27.5 mpg. A sample of n 5 5 cars might yield efﬁciencies 
of 27.3, 26.2, 28.4, 27.9, 26.5, from which we obtain x 5 27.26 for this particular sample 
(somewhat smaller than m). However, a second sample might give x 5 28.52, a third 
x 5 26.85, and so on. The value of x varies from sample to sample, whereas there is just one 
value for m.
In later chapters, we will see how the value of x from a particular sample can be used to 
draw various conclusions about the value of m. Example 4.2 illustrates how the value of x 
from a particular sample can differ from the value of m and how the value of x differs from 
sample to sample.
Example 4.2 
County Population Sizes
The 50 states plus the District of Columbia contain 3137 counties. Let x denote the num-
ber of residents of a county. Then there are 3137 values of the variable x in the population. 
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

156 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
The sum of these 3137 values is 293,655,404 (2004 Census Bureau estimate), so the popu-
lation average value of x is
m 5 293,655,404
3137
5 93,610.27 residents per county
We used the Census Bureau web site to select three different random samples from this 
population of counties, with each sample consisting of ﬁve counties. The results appear 
in Table 4.2, along with the sample mean for each sample. The three x values are different 
from one another because they are based on three different samples and the value of x de-
pends on the x values in the sample. Also notice that none of the three values comes close to 
the value of the population mean, m. If we did not know the value of m, we might use one 
of these x values as an ­estimate of m, but in each case the estimate would be far off the mark.
Alternatively, we could combine the three samples into a single sample with n 5 15 
observations: 
   x1 5 22,513, . . . , x5 5 31,624, . . . , x15 5 18,519
ox 5 1,340,259
     x 5 1,340,259
15
5 89,350.6
This value is closer to the value of m but is still somewhat unsatisfactory as an estimate. 
The problem here is that the population of x values exhibits a lot of variability (the largest 
value is x 5 9,937,739 for Los Angeles County, California, and the smallest value is x 5 52 
for Loving County, Texas, which evidently few people love). Therefore, it is dif­ﬁ­cult 
for a sample of 15 observations, let alone just 5, to be reasonably representative of the 
population. In Chapter 9, you will see how to take variability into account when deciding 
on the sample size required to accurately estimate a population mean.
■
One potential drawback to the mean as a measure of center for a data set is that its value 
can be greatly affected by the presence of even a single outlier (an unusually large or small 
observation) in the data set.
Example 4.3 
Number of Visits to a Class Web Site
 Forty students were enrolled in a section of a general education course in statistical rea-
soning during one fall quarter at Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo. The instructor made course 
materials, grades, and lecture notes available to students on a class web site, and course 
management software kept track of how often each student accessed any of the web pages 
on the class site. 
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
County
x Value
County
x Value
County
x Value
Fayette, TX
  22,513
Stoddard, MO
  29,773
Chattahoochee, GA
13,506
Monroe, IN
121,013
Johnston, OK
  10,440
Petroleum, MT
     492
Greene, NC
  20,219
Sumter, AL
  14,141
Armstrong, PA
71,395
Shoshone, ID
  12,827
Milwaukee, WI
928,018
Smith, MI
14,306
Jasper, IN
  31,624
Albany, WY
  31,473
Benton, MO
18,519
ox 5 208,196
x 5 41,639.2
ox 5 1,013,845
x 5 202,769.0
ox 5 118,218
x 5 23,643.6
Table 4.2  Three Samples from the Population of All U.S. Counties (x 5 number of residents)
Understand the context ❭
Step-by-step technology  
instructions available online
 Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.1  Describing the Center of a Data Set 
●  157
One month after the course began, the instructor ­requested a report that indicated how 
many times each student had accessed a web page on the class site. The 40 observations were:
20
37
  4
20
  0
84
14
36
  5
331
19
  0
  0
22
  3
13
14
36
  4
  0
18
    8
  0
26
  4
  0
  5
23
19
  7
12
  8
13
  16
21
  7
13
12
  8
42
The sample mean for this data set is x 5 23.10. Figure 4.3 is a Minitab dotplot of the data. 
Many would argue that 23.10 is not a very representative value for this sample, because 
23.10 is larger than most of the observations in the data set. Notice that only 7 of 40 obser-
vations, or 17.5%, are larger than 23.10. The two outlying values of 84 and 331 (no, that 
was not a typo!) have a substantial impact on the value of x.
	
■
We now turn our attention to a measure of center that is not as sensitive to outliers—the 
median.
The Median
The median strip of a highway divides the highway in half, and the median of a numerical 
data set does the same thing for a data set. Once the data values have been listed in order 
from smallest to largest, the median is the middle value in the list, and it divides the list 
into two equal parts. 
Depending on whether the sample size n is even or odd, the process of determining the 
median is slightly different. When n is an odd number (say, 5), the sample median is the 
single middle value. But when n is even (say, 6), there are two middle values in the ordered 
list, and we average these two middle values to obtain the sample median.
Consider the data ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Definition
Sample median: The sample median is obtained by ﬁrst ordering the n obser-
vations from smallest to largest (with any repeated values included, so that 
every sample observation appears in the ordered list). Then
sample median 55
the single middle value if n is odd
the average of the middle two values if n is even
Figure  4.3
A Minitab dotplot of the data in  
Example 4.3.
0
100
200
300
Number of accesses
Example 4.4 
Web Site Data Revised
The sample size for the web site access data of Example 4.3 was n 5 40, an even number. 
The median is the average of the 20th and 21st values (the middle two) in the ordered list 
of the data. Arranging the data in order from smallest to largest produces the following 
ordered list (with the two middle values highlighted):
  0
  0
  0
    0
  0
  0
  3
  4
  4
  4
  5
  5
  7
  7
  8
    8
  8
12
12
13
13
13
14
14
16
18
19
  19
20
20
21
22
23
26
36
36
37
42
84
331
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

158 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
The median can now be determined by averaging the two middle values:
median 5 13 1 13
2
5 13
Looking at the dotplot (Figure 4.3), we see that this value appears to be a more typical 
value for the data set than the sample mean of 23.10.
■
The sample mean can be sensitive to even a single value that lies far above or below the 
rest of the data. The value of the mean is pulled out toward such an outlying value or val-
ues. The median, on the other hand, is quite insensitive to outliers. For example, the largest 
sample observation (331) in Example 4.4 can be increased by any amount without changing 
the value of the median. Similarly, an increase in the second or third largest observations 
does not affect the median, nor would a decrease in several of the smallest observations.
This stability of the median is what sometimes justiﬁes its use as a measure of center in 
some situations. For example, the article “Educating Undergraduates on Using Credit Cards” 
(Nellie Mae, 2005) reported that the mean credit card debt for undergraduate students in 
2001 was $2327, whereas the median credit card debt was only $1770. In this case, the 
small percentage of students with unusually high credit card debt results in a mean that 
may not be representative of a typical student’s credit card debt.
Comparing the Mean and the Median
Figure 4.4 shows several smoothed histograms that might represent either a distribution 
of sample values or a population distribution. Pictorially, the median is the value on the 
measurement axis that separates the smoothed histogram into two parts, with half (50%) of 
the area under each part of the curve. The mean is a bit harder to visualize. If the histogram 
were balanced on a triangle (a fulcrum), it would tilt unless the triangle was positioned at 
the mean. The mean is the balance point for the distribution.
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Figure  4.4
The mean and the median.
Median
Equal
areas
Mean
Mean
Fulcrum
When the histogram is symmetric, the point of symmetry is both the dividing point for 
equal areas and the balance point, and the mean and the median are equal. However, when 
the histogram is unimodal (single-peaked) with a longer upper tail (positively skewed), the 
outlying values in the upper tail pull the mean up, so it generally lies above the median. 
For example, an unusually high exam score raises the mean but does not affect the median. 
Similarly, when a unimodal histogram is negatively skewed, the mean is generally smaller 
than the median (see Figure 4.5).
Figure  4.5
Relationship between the mean and 
the median.
Mean = Median
Median
Mean
Mean
Median
Example 4.5 
NBA Salaries
 The web site HoopsHype (hoopshype.com/salaries) publishes salaries of NBA players. Sala-
ries for the players of the Chicago Bulls in 2009 were
Understand the context ❭
 Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.1  Describing the Center of a Data Set 
●  159
A Minitab dotplot of these data is shown in Figure 4.6(a). Because the data distribution is 
positively skewed and there are outliers, we would expect the mean to be greater than the 
median.
For this data set, the mean is 
x 5 12,250,000 1 Á 1 1,000,497
14
5 4,977,687
The median is the average of the middle two observations in the ordered list of salaries:
median 5 5,184,480 1 4,743,598
2
5 4,964,039
Notice that the median is smaller than the mean, and it is probably a better description of 
a typical salary for this group. 
For the L.A., Lakers (see Figure 4.6(b)), the difference between the mean and median is 
even greater because in 2009, one player on the Lakers earned over $23 million and two 
players earned well over $10 million (see Figure 4.6(b)).
Do the work  ❭
0
5,000,000
10,000,000
15,000,000
20,000,000
25,000,000
2009 Salary (Bulls)
(a)
0
5,000,000
10,000,000
15,000,000
20,000,000
25,000,000
2009 Salary (Lakers)
(b)
Figure  4.6
Minitab dotplots for NBA salary data 
(a) Bulls (b) Lakers.
Player
2009 Salary
Brad Miller
$12,250,000
Luol Deng
$10,370,425
Kirk Hinrich
$9,500,000
Jerome James
$6,600,000
Tim Thomas
$6,466,600
John Salmons
$5,456,000
Derrick Rose
$5,184,480
Tyrus Thomas
$4,743,598
Joakim Noah
$2,455,680
Jannero Pargo
$2,000,000
James Johnson
$1,594,080
Lindsey Hunter
$1,306,455
Taj Gibson
$1,039,800
Aaron Gray
$1,000,497
Consider the data ❭

■
Categorical Data
The natural numerical summary quantities for a categorical data set are the relative 
frequencies for the various categories. Each relative frequency is the proportion (fraction) 
of responses in the corresponding category. Often there are only two possible responses 
(a dichotomy)—for example, male or female, does or does not have a driver’s license, 
did or did not vote in the last election. It is convenient in such situations to label one of 
the two possible responses S (for success) and the other F (for failure). As long as further 
analysis is consistent with the labeling, it does not matter which category is assigned the 
S label. When the data set is a sample, the fraction of S’s in the sample is called the sample 
proportion of successes.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

160 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
Example 4.6 
Can You Hear Me Now?
It is not uncommon for a cell phone user to complain about 
the quality of his or her service provider. Suppose that each 
person in a sample of n 5 15 cell phone users is asked if he 
or she is sat­is­ﬁed with the cell phone service. Each response 
is classiﬁed as S (sat­is­ﬁed) or F (not sat­is­ﬁed). The resulting 
data are
S
F
S
S
S
F
F
S
S
F
S
S
S
F
F
This sample contains nine S’s, so
p^ 5 9
15 5 .60
This means that 60% of the sample responses are S’s. Of those surveyed, 60% are sat­is­ﬁed 
with their cell phone service.
■
The letter p is used to denote the population proportion of S’s.* We will see later how the 
value of p^ from a particular sample can be used to draw conclusions about the population 
proportion p.
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Sample proportion of successes: The sample proportion of successes, 
denoted by p^, is 
p^ 5 sample proportion of successes 5 number of S's in the sample
n
where S is the label used for the response designated as success.
DEFINITION
Getty Images
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
exercises 4.1 - 4.16
*Note that this is one situation in which we will not use a Greek letter to denote a population characteristic. 
Some statistics books use the symbol p for the population proportion and p for the sample proportion. We will 
not use p in this context so that there is no confusion with the mathematical constant p 5 3.14. . . .
4.1	
 The Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (www.iihs 
.org, June 11, 2009) published data on repair costs 
for cars involved in different types of accidents. In 
one study, seven different 2009 models of mini- and 
micro-cars were driven at 6 mph straight into a fixed 
barrier. The following table gives the cost of repairing 
damage to the bumper for each of the seven models.
Model
Repair Cost
Smart Fortwo
$1,480
Chevrolet Aveo
$1,071
Mini Cooper
$2,291
Toyota Yaris
$1,688
Honda Fit
$1,124
Hyundai Accent
$3,476
Kia Rio
$3,701
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.1  Describing the Center of a Data Set 
●  161
a.	 Compute the values of the mean and median.
b.	Why are these values so different?
c.	 Which of the two—mean or median—appears to 
be better as a description of a typical value for this 
data set? (Hint: See Example 4.5.)
4.2	
 The article “Caffeinated Energy Drinks—A Growing 
Problem” (Drug and Alcohol Dependence [2009]: 1–10) 
gave the following data on caffeine concentration 
(mg/ounce) for eight top-selling energy drinks:
Energy Drink
Caffeine Concentration  
(mg/oz)
Red Bull
  9.6
Monster
10.0
Rockstar
10.0
Full Throttle
  9.0
No Fear
10.9
Amp
  8.9
SoBe Adrenaline Rush
  9.5
Tab Energy
  9.1
a.	 What is the value of the mean caffeine  
concentration for this set of top-selling  
energy drinks? 
b.	Coca-Cola has 2.9 mg/ounce of caffeine and 
Pepsi Cola has 3.2 mg/ounce of caffeine. 
Write a sentence explaining how the caffeine 
concentration of top-selling energy drinks 
compares to that of these colas.
4.3	 ● Consumer Reports Health (www.consumerreports.org 
/health) reported the accompanying caffeine concen-
tration (mg/cup) for 12 brands of coffee:
Coffee Brand
Caffeine Concentration  
(mg/cup)
Eight O’Clock
140
Caribou
195
Kickapoo
155
Starbucks
115
Bucks Country Coffee Co.
195
Archer Farms
180
Gloria Jean’s Coffees
110
Chock Full o’Nuts
110
Peet’s Coffee
130
Maxwell House
  55
Folgers
  60
Millstone
  60
Use at least one measure of center to compare 
caffeine concentration for coffee with that of the 
energy drinks of the previous exercise. (Note: 
1 cup 5 8 ounces)
4.4	
 Consumer Reports Health (www.consumerreports.org 
/health) reported the sodium content (mg) per 2 
tablespoon serving for each of 11 different peanut 
butters:
120
50
140
120
150
150
150
65
170
250
110
a.	 Display these data using a dotplot. Comment on 
any unusual features of the plot.
b.	Compute the mean and median sodium content 
for the peanut butters in this sample.
c.	 The values of the mean and the median for this 
data set are similar. What aspect of the distri-
bution of sodium content—as pictured in the 
dotplot from Part (a)—provides an explanation 
for why the values of the mean and median are 
similar? (Hint: See the discussion of Figure 4.4.)
4.5	 In August 2009, Harris Interactive released the results 
of the “Great Schools” survey. In this survey, 1086 
parents of children attending a public or private 
school were asked approximately how much time 
they spent volunteering at school per month over the 
last school year. 
For this sample, the mean number of hours per 
month was 5.6 hours and the median number of 
hours was 1.0. What does the large difference between 
the mean and median tell you about this data set?
4.6	
 The accompanying data on number of minutes 
used for cell phone calls in one month was generated 
to be consistent with summary statistics published in 
a report of a marketing study of San Diego residents 
(TeleTruth, March 2009):
189
0 189 177 106 201
0 212
0 306
0
0
59 224
0 189 142
83 71 165
236
0 142 236 130
Would you recommend the mean or the median as 
a measure of center for this data set? Give a brief 
explanation of your choice. (Hint: It may help to 
look at a graphical display of the data.)
4.7	
 USA Today (May 9, 2006) published the accompany-
ing average weekday circulation for the 6-month 
period ending March 31, 2006, for the top 20 news-
papers in the country:
2,272,815 2,049,786 1,142,464 851,832 724,242
708,477
673,379
579,079 513,387 438,722
427,771
398,329
398,246 397,288 365,011
362,964
350,457
345,861 343,163 323,031
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

162 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
a.	 Do you think the mean or the median will be 
larger for this data set? Explain.
b.	Compute the values of the mean and the median of 
this data set. 
c.	 Of the mean and median, which does the best job 
of describing a typical value for this data set?
d.	Explain why it would not be reasonable to 
generalize from this sample of 20 newspapers 
to the population of all daily newspapers in the 
United States.
4.8	 Each student in a sample of 20 seniors at a particular 
university was asked if he or she was registered to 
vote. With R denoting registered and N denoting not 
registered, the sample data are:
R
R
N
N
N
R
N
R
N
R
N
R
N
R
R
R
N
R
R
R
a.	 If being registered to vote is considered a 
“success,” what is the value of the proportion of 
successes for this sample?
b.	When would it be reasonable to generalize from 
this sample to the population of all seniors at this 
university?
4.9	
 The U.S. Department of Transportation reported 
the number of speeding-related crash fatalities for the 
20 days of the year that had the highest number of 
these fatalities between 1994 and 2003 (Trafﬁc Safety 
Facts, July 2005).
Date
Speeding-Related
Fatalities
Date
Speeding-Related
Fatalities
Jan 1
521
Aug 17
446
Jul 4
519
Dec 24
436
Aug 12
466
Aug 25
433
Nov 23
461
Sep 2
433
Jul 3
458
Aug 6
431
Dec 26
455
Aug 10
426
Aug 4
455
Sept 21
424
Aug 31
446
Jul 27
422
May 25
446
Sep 14
422
Dec 23
446
May 27
420
a.	 Compute the mean number of speeding-related 
fatalities for these 20 days. 
b.	Compute the median number of speeding-related 
fatalities for these 20 days. 
c.	 Explain why it is not reasonable to generalize 
from this sample of 20 days to the other 345 days 
of the year.
4.10	 The ministry of Health and Long-Term Care in   
Ontario, Canada, publishes information on its web  
site (www.health.gov.on.ca) on the time that patients 
must wait for various medical procedures. For two 
cardiac procedures completed in fall of 2005, the  
following information was provided:
Number of 
Completed 
Procedures
Median 
Wait Time 
(days)
Mean 
Wait 
Time 
(days)
90% 
Completed 
Within 
(days)
Angioplasty
847
14
18
39
Bypass  
surgery
539
13
19
42
The median wait time for angioplasty is greater than 
the median wait time for bypass surgery but the 
mean wait time is shorter for angioplasty than for 
bypass surgery. What does this suggest about the 
distribution of wait times for these two procedures?
4.11	 Houses in California are expensive, especially on 
the Central Coast where the air is clear, the ocean 
is blue, and the scenery is stunning. The median 
home price in San Luis Obispo County reached a 
new high in July 2004, soaring to $452,272 from 
$387,120 in March 2004. (San Luis Obispo Tribune, 
April 28, 2004). 
The article included two quotes from people 
attempting to explain why the median price had 
increased. Richard Watkins, chairman of the Central 
Coast Regional Multiple Listing Services was quoted 
as saying, “There have been some fairly expensive 
houses selling, which pulls the median up.” 
Robert Kleinhenz, deputy chief economist for the 
California Association of Realtors explained the vola-
tility of house prices by stating: “Fewer sales means 
a relatively small number of very high or very low 
home prices can more easily skew medians.” 
Are either of these statements correct? For each 
statement that is incorrect, explain why it is incorrect 
and propose a new wording that would correct any 
errors in the statement.
4.12	 Consider the following statement: More than 65% 
of the residents of Los Angeles earn less than the 
average wage for that city. Could this statement be 
correct? If so, how? If not, why not?
4.13	 ▼ A sample consisting of four pieces of luggage was 
selected from among those checked at an airline 
counter, yielding the following data on x 5 weight 
(in pounds):
x1 5 33.5, x2 5 27.3, x3 5 36.7, x4 5 30.5
Suppose that one more piece is selected and denote its 
weight by x5. Find a value of x5 such that x 5 sample 
median. 
4.14	 Suppose that 10 patients with meningitis received 
treatment with large doses of penicillin. Three days 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 4.2   Describing Variability in a Data Set 
●  163
later, temperatures were recorded, and the treatment 
was considered successful if there had been a 
reduction in a patient’s temperature. Denoting 
success by S and failure by F, the 10 observations are
S      S      F      S      S      S      F      F      S      S
a.	 What is the value of the sample proportion of  
successes? 
b.	Replace each S with a 1 and each F with a 0. Then 
­calculate x for this numerically coded sample. 
How does x compare to p^? 
c.	 Suppose that it is decided to include 15 more 
patients in the study. How many of these would 
have to be S’s to give p^ 5 .80 for the entire sample 
of 25 patients?
4.15	 A study of the lifetime (in hours) for a certain brand 
of light bulb involved putting 10 light bulbs into 
operation and observing them for 1000 hours. Eight 
of the light bulbs failed during that period, and those 
lifetimes were recorded. The lifetimes of the two 
light bulbs still functioning after 1000 hours were 
recorded as 10001. The resulting sample observa-
tions were
480 790 10001
350 920 860 570 10001
170 290
Which of the measures of center discussed in this sec-
tion can be calculated, and what are the values of those 
measures? 
4.16	 An instructor has graded 19 exam papers submitted 
by students in a class of 20 students, and the average 
so far is 70. (The maximum possible score is 100.) 
How high would the score on the last paper have to 
be to raise the class average by 1 point? By 2 points?
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
 4.2  
Describing Variability in a Data Set
Reporting a measure of center gives only partial information about a data set. It is also im-
portant to describe how much the observations differ from one another. The three different 
samples displayed in Figure 4.7 all have mean 5 median 5 45. There is a lot of variability 
in the ﬁrst sample compared to the third sample. The second sample shows less variabil-
ity than the ﬁrst and more variability than the third; most of the variability in the second 
sample is due to the two extreme values being so far from the center. 
Figure  4.7
Three samples with the same center 
and different amounts of variability.
Sample
1.
20, 40, 50, 30, 60, 70
2.
47, 43, 44, 46, 20, 70
3.
44, 43, 40, 50, 47, 46
Mean = Median
20
30
40
50
60
70
The simplest numerical measure of variability is the range.
DEFINITION
In general, more variability will result in a larger range. However, variability is a charac-
teristic of the entire data set, and each observation contributes to variability. The ﬁrst two 
samples plotted in Figure 4.7 both have a range of 70 2 20 5 50, but there is less variability 
in the second sample. Because of this, the range is not usually the best measure of variability.
Range: The range of a data set is deﬁned as
range 5 largest observation 2 smallest observation
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

164 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
Deviations from the Mean
The most widely used measures of variability describe the extent to which the sample 
observations deviate from the sample mean x. Subtracting x from each observation gives a 
set of deviations from the mean.
Country
Big Mac Price in U.S. Dollars
Argentina
3.88
Brazil
5.28
Chile
3.94
Colombia
4.48
Costa Rica
4.31
Peru
3.59
Uruguay
4.98
Table 4.3  Big Mac Prices for 7 Countries
Consider the data ❭
Notice that there is quite a bit of variability in the Big Mac prices.
For this data set, ox 5 30.46 and x 5 $4.35. Table 4.4 displays the data along with the 
corresponding deviations, formed by subtracting x 5 4.35 from each observation. Three of 
the deviations are positive because three of the observations are larger than x. The negative 
deviations correspond to observations that are smaller than x. Some of the deviations are 
quite large in magnitude (0.93 and 20.76, for example), indicating observations that are 
far from the sample mean.
Country
Big Mac Price in U.S. Dollars
Deviations from Mean
Argentina
3.88
20.47
Brazil
5.28
0.93
Chile
3.94
20.41
Colombia
4.48
0.13
Costa Rica
4.31
20.04
Peru
3.59
20.76
Uruguay
4.98
0.63
Table 4.4  Deviations from the Mean for the Big Mac Data

■
Deviation from the mean: The n deviations from the sample mean are the 
differences
sx1 2 x d, sx2 2 x d, Á , sxn 2 x d
DEFINITION
Notice that a deviation will be positive if the corresponding x value is greater than x and 
negative if the x value is less than x.
Example 4.7 
The Big Mac Index
 McDonald’s fast-food restaurants are now found in many countries around the world. But 
the cost of a Big Mac varies from country to country. Table 4.3 shows data on the cost of a 
Big Mac (converted to U.S. dollars based on the July 2013 exchange rates) taken from the 
article “The Big Mac Index” (The Economist, July 11, 2013).
Understand the context ❭
 Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 4.2   Describing Variability in a Data Set 
●  165
In general, the greater the amount of variability in the sample data, the larger the magni-
tudes (ignoring the signs) of the deviations. We now consider how to combine the devia-
tions into a single numerical measure of variability. A ﬁrst thought might be to calculate the 
average deviation, by adding the deviations together (this sum can be denoted compactly 
by osx 2 xd) and then dividing by n. This does not work, though, because negative and 
positive deviations counteract one another in the summation.
As a result of rounding, the value of the sum of the seven deviations in Example 4.7 is 
osx 2 xd 5 0.01. If we used even more decimal accuracy in computing x the sum would 
be even closer to zero.
Except for the effects of rounding in computing the deviations, it is always 
true that 
osx 2 xd 5 0
Since this sum is zero, the average deviation is always zero and so it cannot be 
used as a measure of variability.
The Variance and Standard Deviation
One way to prevent negative and positive deviations from counteracting one another is 
to square them before combining. Then deviations with opposite signs but with the same 
magnitude, such as 12 and 22, make identical contributions to variability. The squared 
deviations are sx1 2 xd2, sx2 2 xd2, . . . , sxn 2 xd2 and their sum is
sx1 2 xd2 1 sx2 2 xd2 1 Á 1 sxn 2 xd2 5 osx 2 xd2
Dividing this sum by the sample size n gives the average squared deviation. Although this 
seems to be a reasonable measure of variability, we use a divisor slightly smaller than n. 
(The reason for this will be explained later in this section and in Chapter 9.)
Sample variance: The sample variance, denoted by s2, is the sum of squared 
deviations from the mean divided by n 2 1. That is, 
s2 5 osx 2 x d2
n 2 1
Sample standard deviation: The sample standard deviation is the positive 
square root of the sample variance and is denoted by s.
DEFINITION
A large amount of variability in the sample is indicated by a relatively large value of s2 
or s, whereas a value of s2 or s close to zero indicates a small amount of variability. Notice 
that the units for the squared deviations and therefore s2 are the square of whatever unit is 
used for x. Taking the square root gives a measure expressed in the same units as x. This 
means that for a sample of heights, the standard deviation might be s 5 3.2 inches, and for 
a sample of textbook prices, it might be s 5 $12.43.
Example 4.8 
Big Mac Revisited
Let’s continue using the Big Mac data and the computed deviations from the mean given in 
Example 4.7 to calculate the sample variance and standard deviation. Table 4.5 shows the 
Step-by-step technology  
instructions available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

166 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
observations, deviations from the mean, and squared deviations. Combining the squared 
deviations to compute the values of s2 and s gives
osx 2 x d2 5 2.2469
and
 s 2 5 osx 2 xd2
n 2 1
5 2.2469
7 2 1 5 2.2469
6
5 0.3745
s 5 Ï0.3745 5 0.612
Big Mac Price in U.S. Dollars
Deviations from Mean
Squared Deviations
3.88
20.47
0.2209
5.28
0.93
0.8649
3.94
20.41
0.1681
4.48
0.13
0.0169
4.31
20.04
0.0016
3.59
20.76
0.5776
4.98
0.63
0.3969
osx 2 x d2 5 2.2469
Table 4.5  Deviations and Squared Deviations for the Big Mac Data

■
The computation of s2 can be a bit tedious, especially if the sample size is large. 
Fortunately, many calculators and computer software packages compute the variance 
and standard deviation upon request. One commonly used statistical computer package 
is Minitab. The output resulting from using the Minitab Describe command with the Big 
Mac data follows. Minitab gives a variety of numerical descriptive measures, including the 
mean, the median, and the standard deviation.
Descriptive Statistics: Big Mac Price in U.S. Dollars
Variable
N
Mean
SE Mean
StDev
Minimum
Q1
Median
Big Mac Price
7
4.351
0.231
0.612
3.590
3.880
4.310
Variable
Q3
Maximum
Big Mac Price
4.980
5.280
The standard deviation can be informally interpreted as the size of a “typical” or “rep-
resentative” deviation from the mean. In Example 4.8, a typical deviation from x is about 
0.612; some observations are closer to x than 0.612 and others are farther away. 
We computed s 5 0.612 in Example 4.8 without saying whether this value indicated 
a large or a small amount of variability. At this point, it is better to use s for comparative 
purposes than for an absolute assessment of variability. If Big Mac prices for a differ-
ent group of countries resulted in a standard deviation of s 5 1.27 (this is the standard 
deviation for all 57 countries for which Big Mac data was available) then we would con-
clude that our original sample has much less variability than the data set consisting of all 
57 countries.
There are measures of variability for the entire population that are analogous to s2 and 
s for a sample. These measures are called the population variance and the population 
standard deviation and are denoted by s2 and s, respectively. (We again use a lowercase 
Greek letter for a population characteristic.)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 4.2   Describing Variability in a Data Set 
●  167
In many statistical procedures, we would like to use the value of s, but unfortunately it is 
not usually known. Therefore, we must estimate s using a value computed from the sample. 
The divisor (n 2 1) is used in calculating s2 rather than n because, on average, the resulting 
value tends to be a bit closer to the value of s2. We will say more about this in Chapter 9.
An alternative rationale for using (n 2 1) is based on the property osx 2 xd 5 0. Suppose 
that (n 5 5) and that four of the deviations are
x1 2 x 5 24 x2 2 x 5 6 x3 2 x 5 1    x5 2 x 5 28
Then, because the sum of these four deviations is 25, the remaining deviation must be 
x4 2 x 5 5 (so that the sum of all ﬁve is zero). More generally, once any (n 2 1) of the 
deviations are known, the value of the remaining deviation is determined. The n deviations 
actually contain only (n 2 1) independent pieces of information about variability. Statisti-
cians express this by saying that s2 and s are based on (n 2 1) degrees of freedom (df).
The Interquartile Range
As with x, the value of s can be greatly affected by the presence of even a single unusually 
small or large observation. The interquartile range is a measure of variability that is 
resistant to the effects of outliers. It is 
based on quantities called quartiles. 
The lower quartile separates the bot-
tom 25% of the data set from the up-
per 75%, and the upper quartile sep-
arates the top 25% from the bottom 
75%. The middle quartile is the me-
dian, and it separates the bottom 50% 
from the top 50%. Figure 4.8 illus-
trates the lo­cations of these quartiles 
for a smoothed histogram.
The quartiles for sample data are ob-
tained by dividing the n ordered observations into a lower half and an upper half. If n is 
odd, the median is excluded from both halves. The upper and lower quartiles are then the 
medians of the two halves. (Note: The median is only temporarily excluded for the purpose 
of computing quartiles. It is not excluded from the data set.)
Figure  4.8
The quartiles for a smoothed 
histogram.
25%
25%
25%
25%
Lower
quartile
Upper
quartile
Median
Notation
s2    sample variance
s2  population variance
s     sample standard deviation
s    population standard deviation
Lower quartile: Median of the lower half of the sample
Upper quartile: Median of the upper half of the sample
(If n is odd, the median of the entire sample is excluded from both halves when 
computing quartiles.)
Interquartile range (iqr): A measure of variability that is not as sensitive to the 
presence of outliers as the standard deviation. The iqr is calculated as
    iqr 5 upper quartile 2 lower quartile
*There are several other sensible ways to deﬁne quartiles. Some calculators and software packages use 
an alternative ­deﬁnition.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

168 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
The resistant nature of the interquartile range follows from the fact that up to 25% of 
the smallest sample observations and up to 25% of the largest sample observations can be 
made more extreme without affecting the value of the interquartile range.
Example 4.9 
Beating That High Score
The authors of the paper “Striatal Volume Predicts Level of Video Game Skill Acquisition” 
(Cerebral Cortex [2010]: 2522–2530) studied a number of factors that affect performance on 
a complex video game. One of the factors investigated was practice strategy. Forty college 
students who all reported that they played video games less than three hours per week over 
the two years prior to the study and who had never played the game Space Fortress were 
assigned at random to one of two practice strategies. In the Space Fortress game, points are 
awarded for control, velocity, and speed. 
Each person completed 20 two-hour practice sessions. Those in one group, the fixed 
priority group, were told to work on improving their total score at each practice session. 
Those in the other group, the variable priority group, were told to focus on a particular 
aspect of the game, such as improving speed score in each practice session, and the 
focus changed from one practice session to another. The investigators were interested 
in whether practice strategy makes a difference. They measured the improvement in 
total score from the first day of the study to the day when the last practice session was 
completed.
Improvement scores (approximate values read from a graph that appears in the paper) 
for the 20 people in the variable priority practice strategy group are given here.
1200
1300
2300
3200
3300
3800
4000
4100
4300
4800  
5500
5700
5700
5800
6000
6300
6800
6800
6900
7700  
The median is the average of the middle two observations, so
median 5  4800 1 5500
2
5 5150
The lower half of the data set is
1200  1300  2300  3200  3300  3800  4000  4100  4300  4800 
so the lower quartile is
lower quartile 5  3300 1 3800
2
5 3550
The upper half of the data set is
5500  5700  5700  5800  6000  6300  6800  6800  6900  7700  
so the upper quartile is 
upper quartile 5  6000 1 6300
2
5 6150
lower quartile 5 3550
upper quartile 5 6150
iqr 5 6150 2 3550 5 2660
The sample mean and standard deviation for this data set are 4775 and 1867, respectively. 
If we were to change the two largest values from 6900 and 7700 to 10,900 and 11,700 (so 
that they still remain the two largest values), the median and interquartile range would not 
be affected, whereas the mean and the standard deviation would change to 7500 and 2390, 
respectively. The value of the interquartile range is not affected by a few extreme values in 
the data set.
■
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
 Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 4.2   Describing Variability in a Data Set 
●  169
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
4.17	
 The following data are costs (in cents) per ounce 
for nine different brands of sliced Swiss cheese (www 
.consumerreports.org):
29
62
37
41
70
82
47
52
49
a.	 Compute the variance and standard deviation  
for this data set. (Hint: See Example 4.8.) 
b.	If a very expensive cheese with a cost per slice of  
150 cents was added to the data set, how would 
the values of the mean and standard deviation 
change?
4.18	
 Cost per serving (in cents) for six high-fiber 
cereals rated very good and for nine high-fiber 
cereals rated good by Consumer Reports are shown 
below. Write a few sentences describing how these 
two data sets differ with respect to center and 
variability. Use summary statistics to support your 
statements.
	
Cereals Rated Very Good
46
49
62
41
19
77
	
Cereals Rated Good
71
30
53
53
67
43
48
28
54
4.19	
 Combining the cost-per-serving data for high-fiber 
cereals rated very good and those rated good from 
the previous exercise gives the following data set:
46
49
62
41
19
77
71
30
53
53
67
43
48
28
54
a.	 Compute the quartiles and the interquartile range 
for this combined data set. (Hint: See Example 4.9.)
b.	Compute the interquartile range for just the 
cereals rated good. Is this value greater than, less 
than, or about equal to the interquartile range 
computed in Part (a)?
4.20	
 The paper “Caffeinated Energy Drinks—A Growing 
Problem” (Drug and Alcohol Dependence [2009]: 1–10) 
gave the accompanying data on caffeine per ounce 
for eight top-selling energy drinks and for 11 high-
caffeine energy drinks:
Top-Selling Energy Drinks
9.6
10.0
10.0
9.0
10.9
8.9
9.5
9.1
High-Caffeine Energy Drinks
21.0
25.0
15.0
21.5
35.7
15.0
33.3
11.9
16.3
31.3
30.0
The mean caffeine per ounce is clearly higher for the 
high-caffeine energy drinks, but which of the two 
groups of energy drinks (top-selling or high-caffeine) 
is the most variable with respect to caffeine per 
ounce? Justify your choice.
4.21	 The accompanying data are consistent with sum-
mary statistics that appeared in the paper “Shape 
of Glass and Amount of Alcohol Poured: Comparative 
Study of Effect of Practice and Concentration” (British 
Medical Journal [2005]: 1512–1514). Data represent 
the actual amount poured (in ml) into a tall, slender 
glass for bartenders who were asked to pour 44.3 ml 
(1.5 ounces). Compute and interpret the values of 
the mean and standard deviation.
44.0 49.6 62.3 28.4 39.1 39.8 60.5 73.0 57.5 56.5 65.0
56.2 57.7 73.5 66.4 32.7 40.4 21.4
4.22	 The paper referenced in the previous exercise also 
gave data on the actual amount poured (in ml) into 
a short, wide glass for bartenders who were asked to 
pour 44.3 ml (1.5 ounces). 
89.2 68.6 32.7 37.4 39.6 46.8 66.1 79.2 66.3 52.1 47.3
64.4 53.7 63.2 46.4 63.0 92.4 57.8
a.	 Compute and interpret the values of the mean and 
standard deviation.
b.	What do the values of the mean amount poured 
in the short, wide glass and the mean computed 
in the previous exercise suggest about the shape of 
glasses used?
4.23	
 The Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (www.iihs 
.org, June 11, 2009) published data on repair costs 
for cars involved in different types of accidents. 
In one study, seven different models of mini- and 
micro-cars were driven at 6 mph straight into a fixed 
barrier. The following table gives the cost of repairing 
damage to the bumper for each of the seven models:
Model
Repair Cost
Smart Fortwo
$1,480
Chevrolet Aveo
 $1,071
Mini Cooper
 $2,291
Toyota Yaris
$1,688
Honda Fit
$1,124
Hyundai Accent
$3,476
Kia Rio
 $3,701
a.	 Compute the values of the variance and standard 
deviation. 
b.	The standard deviation is fairly large. What does 
this tell you about the repair costs?
exercises 4.17 - 4.31 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

170 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
4.24	 The Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (refer-
enced in the previous exercise) also gave bumper 
repair costs in a study of six models of minivans 
(December 30, 2007). Write a few sentences describing 
how mini- and micro-cars and minivans differ with 
respect to typical bumper repair cost and bumper 
repair cost variability.
Model
Repair Cost
Honda Odyssey
$1,538
Dodge Grand Caravan
$1,347
Toyota Sienna
  $840
Chevrolet Uplander
$1,631
Kia Sedona
$1,176
Nissan Quest
$1,603
4.25	
 The accompanying data on number of minutes 
used for cell phone calls in 1 month was generated 
to be consistent with summary statistics published in 
a report of a marketing study of San Diego residents 
(TeleTruth, March 2009):
189
0
189
177
106
201
    0
212
  0
306
    0
0
  59
224
    0
189
142
  83
71
165
236
0
142
236
130
a.	 Compute the values of the quartiles and the inter-
quartile range for this data set.
b.	Explain why the lower quartile is equal to the 
minimum value for this data set. Will this be the 
case for every data set? Explain.
4.26	 Give two sets of ﬁve numbers that have the same 
mean but different standard deviations, and give two 
sets of ﬁve numbers that have the same standard 
deviation but different means. 
4.27	 The article “Rethink Diversiﬁcation to Raise Returns, 
Cut Risk” (San Luis Obispo Tribune, Janu­ary 21, 2006) 
included the following paragraph:
In their research, Mulvey and Reilly compared the 
results of two hypothetical portfolios and used actual 
data from 1994 to 2004 to see what returns they 
would achieve. The ﬁrst portfolio invested in Treasury 
bonds, domestic stocks, international stocks, and 
cash. Its 10-year average annual return was 9.85% 
and its volatility—measured as the standard deviation 
of annual returns—was 9.26%. When Mulvey and 
Reilly shifted some assets in the portfolio to include 
funds that invest in real estate, commodities, and 
options, the 10-year return rose to 10.55% while the 
standard deviation fell to 7.97%. In short, the more 
diversiﬁed portfolio had a slightly better return and 
much less risk.
Explain why the standard deviation is a reasonable 
measure of volatility and why it is reasonable to 
interpret a smaller standard deviation as meaning 
less risk.
4.28	
 The U.S. Department of Transportation reported 
the accompanying data (see below) on the number 
of speeding-related crash fatalities during holiday 
periods for the years from 1994 to 2003 (Trafﬁc Safety 
Facts, July 20, 2005).
a.	 Compute the standard deviation for the New 
Year’s Day data. 
b.	Without computing the standard deviation of the 
Memorial Day data, explain whether the standard 
deviation for the Memorial Day data would be 
larger or smaller than the standard deviation of 
the New Year’s Day data. 
c.	 Memorial Day and Labor Day are holidays that 
always occur on Monday and Thanksgiving always 
occurs on a Thursday, whereas New Year’s Day, 
July 4th, and Christmas do not always fall on the 
same day of the week every year. Based on the 
given data, is there more or less variability in the 
speeding-related crash fatality numbers from year 
to year for same day of the week holiday periods 
than for holidays that can occur on different 
days of the week? Support your answer with 
appropriate measures of variability.
Data for Exercise 4.28
Speeding-Related Fatalities
Holiday Period
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
New Year’s Day
141
142
178
  72
219
138
171
134
210
  70
Memorial Day
193
178
185
197
138
183
156
190
188
181
July 4th
178
219
202
179
169
176
219
  64
234
184
Labor Day
183
188
166
179
162
171
180
138
202
189
Thanksgiving
212
198
218
210
205
168
187
217
210
202
Christmas
152
129
  66
183
134
193
155
210
  60
198
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.3  Summarizing a Data Set: Boxplots  
●  171
4.29	 The Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care in Ontario, 
Canada, publishes information on the time that 
patients must wait for various medical procedures on 
its web site (www.health.gov.on.ca). For two cardiac 
procedures completed in fall of 2005, the following 
information was provided:
Procedure
Number of 
Completed 
Procedures
Median 
Wait 
Time 
(days)
Mean 
Wait 
Time 
(days)
90%  
Completed 
Within 
(days)
Angioplasty
847
14
18
39
Bypass surgery
539
13
19
42
a.	 Which of the following must be true for the lower 
quartile of the data set consisting of the 847 wait 
times for angioplasty? 
	
i.	 The lower quartile is less than 14.
	
ii.	 The lower quartile is between 14 and 18.
	
iii.	 The lower quartile is between 14 and 39.
	
iv.	 The lower quartile is greater than 39.
b.	Which of the following must be true for the upper 
quartile of the data set consisting of the 539 wait 
times for bypass surgery? 
	
i.	 The upper quartile is less than 13.
	
ii.	 The upper quartile is between 13 and 19.
	
iii.	 The upper quartile is between 13 and 42.
	
iv.	 The upper quartile is greater than 42.
c.	 Which of the following must be true for the 
number of days for which only 5% of the bypass 
surgery wait times would be longer? 
	
i.	 It is less than 13.
	
ii.	 It is between 13 and 19.
	
iii.	 It is between 13 and 42.
	
iv.	 It is greater than 42. 
4.30	
 In 1997, a woman sued a computer keyboard 
manufacturer, charging that her repetitive stress 
injuries were caused by the keyboard (Genessey v. 
Digital Equipment Corporation). The jury awarded 
about $3.5 million for pain and suffering, but the 
court then set aside that award as being unreasonable 
compensation. In making this de­termination, the 
court iden­ti­ﬁed a “normative” group of 27 similar 
cases and speci­ﬁed a reasonable award as one within 
2 standard deviations of the mean of the awards in 
the 27 cases.
The 27 award amounts were (in thousands of dollars)
    37
    60
    75
  115
  135
  140
  149
  150
  238
  290
  340
  410
  600
  750
  750
  750
1050
1100
1139
1150
1200
1200
1250
1576
1700
1825
2000
What is the maximum possible amount that could 
be awarded under the “2-standard deviations 
rule?” 
4.31	
 The standard deviation alone does not measure 
relative variation. For example, a standard deviation 
of $1 would be considered large if it is describing the 
variability from store to store in the price of an ice 
cube tray. On the other hand, a standard deviation of 
$1 would be considered small if it is describing store-
to-store variability in the price of a particular brand 
of freezer. 
A quantity designed to give a relative measure of 
variability is the co­efﬁ­cient of variation. Denoted by 
CV, the coef­ﬁ­cient of variation expresses the standard 
deviation as a percentage of the mean. It is de­ﬁned 
by the formula CV 5 1001
s
x2.
Consider two samples. Sample 1 gives the actual 
weight (in ounces) of the contents of cans of pet food 
labeled as having a net weight of 8 ounces. Sample 2 
gives the actual weight (in pounds) of the contents of 
bags of dry pet food labeled as having a net weight of 
50 pounds. The weights for the two samples are
Sample 1
  8.3
  7.1
  7.6
  8.1
  7.6
  8.3
  8.2
  7.7
  7.7
  7.5
Sample 2
52.3
50.6
52.1
48.4
48.8
47.0
50.4
50.3
48.7
48.2
a.	 For each of the given samples, calculate the mean 
and the standard deviation.
b.	Compute the coef­ﬁ­cient of variation for each sample. 
Do the results surprise you? Why or why not?
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
4.3 
Summarizing a Data Set: Boxplots 
In Sections 4.1 and 4.2, we looked at ways of describing the center and variability of a data set 
using numerical measures. It would be nice to have a method of summarizing data that pro-
vides more information than just reporting a measure of center and spread and yet less detail 
than a stem-and-leaf display or histogram. A boxplot is one way to do this. A boxplot is com-
pact, yet it provides information about the center, spread, and symmetry or skewness of the 
data. We will consider two types of boxplots: the skeletal boxplot and the modi­ﬁed boxplot.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

172 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
Example 4.10 
Revisiting Improvement Score Data
Let’s reconsider the data from Example 4.9 on improvement score for people in the variable 
priority practice group. The ordered observations are
Ordered Data
Lower Half:
1200
1300
2300
3200
3300
3800
4000
4100
4300
4800
Median 5 5150
Upper Half:
5500
5700
5700
5800
6000
6300
6800
6800
6900
7700
To construct a boxplot of these data, we need the following information: the smallest 
observation, the lower quartile, the median, the upper quartile, and the largest observation. 
This collection of summary measures is often referred to as a five-number summary. For 
this data set we have
smallest observation 5 1200
lower quartile 5 median of the lower half 5 3550
median 5 average of the 10th and 11th observations in the ordered list 5 5150
upper quartile 5 median of the upper half 5 6150
largest observation 5 7700
Figure 4.9 shows the corresponding boxplot. The median line is somewhat closer to the 
upper edge of the box than to the lower edge, suggesting a concentration of values in 
the upper part of the middle half. The lower whisker is longer than the upper whisker, 
suggesting that the distribution of improvement scores for the variable practice strategy 
group is not symmetric.
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Improvement Score
8000
Figure  4.9
Skeletal boxplot for the improvement 
score data of Example 4.10.
1.	 Draw a horizontal (or vertical) measurement scale.
2.	 Construct a rectangular box with a left (or lower) edge at the lower 
quartile and a right (or upper) edge at the upper quartile. The box 
width is then equal to the iqr.
3.	 Draw a vertical (or horizontal) line segment inside the box at the 
location of the median.
4.	 Extend horizontal (or vertical) line segments, called whiskers, from each 
end of the box to the smallest and largest observations in the data set. 
Construction of a Skeletal Boxplot

■
Boxplots are often used to compare groups. For example, we could compare video game 
improvement scores for the two different practice strategies described in Example 4.9 using 
a comparative boxplot.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.3  Summarizing a Data Set: Boxplots  
●  173
The video game improvement scores for the two different strategy groups were used to 
construct the comparative boxplot shown in Figure 4.10.
1000
Fixed priority-
Variable priority-
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Improvement Score
8000
Figure  4.10
Comparative boxplots for improve-
ment scores of fixed priority practice 
group and variable priority practice 
group.
From the comparative boxplot, we can see that both data distributions are approxi-
mately symmetric. The improvement scores tend to be higher for the variable priority 
practice group than for the fixed priority practice group. However, there is more consis-
tency in the improvement scores for the fixed priority practice group. Improvement scores 
in the variable priority practice group are more spread out, indicating more variability in 
improvement scores for this group.
The sequence of steps used to construct a skeletal boxplot is easily modi­ﬁed to give 
information about outliers.
Outlier: An observation that is more than 1.5(iqr) away from the nearest quartile 
(the nearest end of the box).
An outlier is an extreme outlier if it is more than 3(iqr) from the nearest quartile 
and it is a mild outlier otherwise. 
DEFINITION
A modi­ﬁed boxplot represents mild outliers by solid circles and extreme outliers by 
open circles, and the whiskers extend on each end to the most extreme observations that 
are not outliers.
1.	 Draw a horizontal (or vertical) measurement scale.
2.	 Construct a rectangular box with a left (or lower) edge at the lower 
quartile and right (or upper) edge at the upper quartile. The box width is 
then equal to the iqr.
3.	 Draw a vertical (or horizontal) line segment inside the box at the location 
of the median.
4.	 Determine if there are any mild or extreme outliers in the data set.
5.	 Draw whiskers that extend from each end of the box to the most extreme 
observation that is not an outlier.
6.	 Draw a solid circle to mark the location of any mild outliers in the data set.
7.	 Draw an open circle to mark the location of any extreme outliers in the data set.
Construction of a Modified Boxplot
Comparative boxplot: Two or more boxplots drawn using the same numerical 
scale.
DEFINITION
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

174 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
Example 4.11 
Golden Rectangles
 The accompanying data came from an anthropological study of rectangular shapes 
(Lowie’s Selected Papers in Anthropology, Cora Dubios, ed. [Berkeley, CA: University of Cali-
fornia Press, 1960]: 137–142). Observations were made on the variable x 5 width/length 
for a sample of n 5 20 beaded rectangles used in Sho­shoni Indian leather handicrafts:
0.553    0.570    0.576    0.601    0.606    0.606    0.609    0.611    0.615    0.628  
0.654      0.662     0.668          0.670        0.672       0.690       0.693     0.749      0.844      0.933
The quantities needed for constructing the modi­ﬁed boxplot follow:
median 5 0.641	
iqr 5 0.681 2 0.606 5 0.075
lower quartile 5 0.606	
1.5(iqr) 5 0.1125
upper quartile 5 0.681	
3(iqr) 5 0.225
Then,
(upper quartile) 1 1.5(iqr) 5 0.681 1 0.1125 5 0.7935
(lower quartile)  2 1.5(iqr) 5 0.606 2 0.1125 5 0.4935
So 0.844 and 0.933 are both outliers on the upper end (because they are larger than 
0.7935), and there are no outliers on the lower end (because no observations are smaller 
than 0.4935). Because
(upper quartile) 1 3(iqr) 5 0.681 1 0.225 5 0.906
0.933 is an extreme outlier and 0.844 is only a mild outlier. The upper whisker extends 
to the largest observation that is not an outlier, 0.749, and the lower whisker extends to 
0.553. The boxplot is shown in Figure 4.11. The median line is not at the center of the 
box, so there is a slight asymmetry in the middle half of the data. However, the most strik-
ing feature is the presence of the two outliers. These two x values considerably exceed the 
“golden ratio” of 0.618, used since antiquity as an aesthetic standard for rectangles.
Understand the context ❭
Step-by-step technology  
instructions available online
Consider the data ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Figure  4.11
Boxplot for the rectangle data in  
Example 4.11.
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Median
Mild
outlier
Extreme
outlier
Largest observation
that isn’t an outlier
Mild outlier cutoffs
Extreme outlier cutoffs
	
■
Example 4.12 
Another Look at Big Mac Prices
Big Mac prices in U.S. dollars for 57 different countries were given in the article “The Big 
Mac Index” first introduced in Example 4.7. The 57 Big Mac prices were:
3.88  4.62  5.28  4.02  5.26  3.94  2.61  4.48  4.31  3.49    4.91
2.39  4.66  2.19  3.76  1.50  2.80  4.80  3.20  3.09  3.20   2.30
2.86  4.30  7.51  3.00  3.59  2.65  2.73  2.64  2.67  3.69   1.82
3.43  2.83  6.16  6.72  2.63  2.85  4.34  3.27  2.33  4.56   4.98
7.15  4.36  4.76  3.54  5.27  5.01  4.68  3.34  4.45  4.82   4.44
3.79  4.50
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
 Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.3  Summarizing a Data Set: Boxplots  
●  175
Figure 4.12 shows a Minitab boxplot for the Big Mac price data. Note that the upper 
whisker is longer than the lower whisker and that there is one outlier on the high end 
(Norway with a Big Mac price of $7.51).
Figure  4.12
Minitab boxplot of the Big Mac price 
data of Example 4.12.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Price of Big Mac in U.S. dollars
8
Note that Minitab does not distinguish between mild outliers and extreme outliers in the 
boxplot. For the Big Mac price data,
lower quartile 5 2.84
upper quartile 5 4.67
iqr 5 4.67 2 2.84 5 1.83
Then
1.5(iqr) 5 2.745
   3(iqr) 5 5.490
We can compute outlier boundaries as follows:
upper quartile 1 1.5(iqr) 5 4.67 1 2.745 5 7.415
upper quartile 1 3(iqr) 5 4.67 1 5.49 5 10.16
The observation for Norway (7.51) is a mild outlier because it is greater than 7.415 (the 
upper quartile 1 1.5(iqr)) but less than 10.16 (the upper quartile 1 3(iqr)). There are no 
extreme outliers in this data set.
■
Example 4.13 
NBA Salaries Revisited
The 2009–2010 salaries of NBA players published on the web site hoopshype.com were used 
to construct the comparative boxplot of the salary data for ﬁve teams shown in Figure 4.13.
Do the work ❭
Understand the context ❭
Figure  4.13	
Comparative boxplot for salaries for 
five NBA teams.
0
5,000,000
Grizzlies
Nuggets
Lakers
Knicks
Bulls
10,000,000
15,000,000
20,000,000
25,000,000
Salary
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

176 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
The comparative boxplot reveals some interesting similarities and differences in the 
salary distributions of the ﬁve teams. The minimum salary is lower for the Grizzlies, but is 
about the same for the other four teams. The median salary was lowest for the Nuggets—in 
fact the median for the Nuggets is about the same as the lower quartile for the Knicks and 
the Lakers, indicating that half of the players on the Nuggets have salaries less than about 
$2.5 million, whereas only about 25% of the Knicks and the Lakers have salaries less than 
about $2.5 million. The Lakers had the player with by far the highest salary. The Grizzlies 
and the Lakers were the only teams that had any salary outliers. With the exception of one 
highly paid player, salaries for players on the Grizzlies team were noticeably lower than for 
the other four teams. 	
■
Interpret the results ❭
4.32	 Based on a large national sample of working 
adults, the U.S. Census Bureau reports the following 
information on travel time to work for those who do 
not work at home:
lower quartile 5 7 minutes
median 5 18 minutes
upper quartile 5 31 minutes
Also given was the mean travel time, which was 
reported as 22.4 minutes.
a.	 Is the travel time distribution more likely to be 
ap­proxi­mately symmetric, positively skewed, or 
negatively skewed? Explain your reasoning based 
on the given summary quantities.
b.	Suppose that the minimum travel time was 1 min-
ute and that the maximum travel time in the sample 
was 205 minutes. Construct a skeletal boxplot for 
the travel time data. (Hint: See Example 4.10.)
c.	 Were there any mild or extreme outliers in the data 
set? How can you tell? (Hint: See Example 4.11.)
4.33	
 The report “Who Moves? Who Stays Put? Where’s 
Home?” (Pew Social and Demographic Trends, December 17, 
2008) gave the accompanying data for the 50 U.S. states 
on the percentage of the population that was born in the 
state and is still living there. The data values have been 
arranged in order from largest to smallest.
75.8 71.4 69.6 69.0 68.6 67.5 66.7 66.3 66.1 66.0 66.0
65.1 64.4 64.3 63.8 63.7 62.8 62.6 61.9 61.9 61.5 61.1
59.2 59.0 58.7 57.3 57.1 55.6 55.6 55.5 55.3 54.9 54.7
54.5 54.0 54.0 53.9 53.5 52.8 52.5 50.2 50.2 48.9 48.7
48.6 47.1 43.4 40.4 35.7 28.2
a.	 Find the values of the median, the lower quartile, 
and the upper quartile.
b.	The two smallest values in the data set are 28.2 
(Alaska) and 35.7 (Wyoming). Are these two 
states outliers? (Hint: See Example 4.11.)
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
State
Gasoline Tax 
per Gallon
Alabama
20.9
Alaska
  8.0
Arizona
19.0
Arkansas
21.8
California
48.6
Colorado
22.0
Connecticut
42.6
Delaware
23.0
District of 
Columbia
23.5
Florida
34.4
Georgia
20.9
Hawaii
45.1
Idaho
25.0
Illinois
40.4
Indiana
34.8
Iowa
22.0
Kansas
25.0
Kentucky
22.5
Louisiana
20.0
Maine
31.0
Maryland
23.5
Massachusetts
23.5
Michigan
35.8
Minnesota
27.2
Mississippi
18.8
State
Gasoline Tax 
per Gallon
Missouri
17.3
Montana
27.8
Nebraska
27.7
Nevada
33.1
New Hampshire
19.6
New Jersey
14.5
New Mexico
18.8
New York
44.9
North Carolina
30.2
North Dakota
23.0
Ohio
28.0
Oklahoma
17.0
Oregon
25.0
Pennsylvania
32.3
Rhode Island
33.0
South Carolina
16.8
South Dakota
24.0
Tennessee
21.4
Texas
20.0
Utah
24.5
Vermont
24.7
Virginia
19.6
Washington
37.5
West Virginia
32.2
Wisconsin
32.9
Wyoming
14.0
EXERCISES 4.32 - 4.37
c.	 Construct a boxplot for this data set and comment 
on the interesting features of the plot.
4.34	 Data on the gasoline tax per gallon (in cents) as of 
April 2010 for the 50 U.S. states and the District of 
Columbia are shown below (AARP Bulletin, June 2010).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.3  Summarizing a Data Set: Boxplots  
●  177
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
a.	 The smallest value in the data set is 8.0 (Alaska) 
and the largest value is 48.6 (California). Are these 
values outliers? Explain. (Hint: See Example 4.11.)
b.	Construct a boxplot of the data set and comment 
on the interesting features of the plot.
4.35	 The article “Going Wireless” (AARP Bulletin, June 2009) 
reported the estimated percentage of U.S. households 
with only wireless phone service (no landline) for the 
50 states and the District of Columbia. In the accom-
panying data table, each state was also classified into 
one of three geographical regions—West (W), Middle 
states (M), and East (E).
4.36	
 Fiber content (in grams per serving) and sugar 
content (in grams per serving) for 18 high fiber cere-
als (www.consumerreports.com) are shown below.
Fiber Content
  7
10
10
  7
8
  7
12
12
8
13
10
  8
12
7
14
  7
  8
8
Sugar Content
11
  6
14
13
  0
18
9
10
19
  6
10
17
10
10
  0
9
  5
11
a.	 Find the median, quartiles, and interquartile range 
for the fiber content data set.
b.	Find the median, quartiles, and interquartile range 
for the sugar content data set.
c.	 Are there any outliers in the sugar content 
data set?
d.	Explain why the minimum value for the fiber 
content data set and the lower quartile for the 
fiber content data set are equal.
e.	 Construct a comparative boxplot and use it to 
comment on the differences and similarities in the 
fiber and sugar distributions.
4.37	
 Shown here are the number of auto accidents per 
year for every 1000 people in each of 40 occupations 
(Knight Ridder Tribune, June 19, 2004):
Occupation
Accidents 
per 1000
Occupation
Accidents 
per 1000
Student
152
Banking, ﬁ­nance
89
Physician
109
Customer service
88
Lawyer
106
Manager
88
Architect
105
Medical support
87
Real estate broker
102
Computer-related
87
Enlisted military
  99
Dentist
86
Social worker
  98
Pharmacist
85
Manual laborer
  96
Proprietor
84
Analyst
  95
Teacher, professor
84
Engineer
  94
Accountant
84
Consultant
  94
Law enforcement
79
Sales
  93
Physical therapist
78
Military of­ﬁ­cer
  91
Veterinarian
78
Nurse
  90
Clerical, secretary
77
School administrator
  90
Clergy
76
Skilled laborer
  90
Homemaker
76
Librarian
  90
Politician
76
Creative arts
  90
Pilot
75
Executive
  89
Fireﬁghter
67
Insurance agent
  89
Farmer
43
Wireless %
Region 
State
13.9
M
AL
11.7 
W 
AK
18.9 
W 
AZ
22.6 
M 
AR
  9.0 
W 
CA
16.7
W 
CO
  5.6 
E 
CT
  5.7 
E 
DE
20.0
E 
DC
16.8 
E 
FL
16.5 
E 
GA
  8.0 
W 
HI
22.1
W 
ID
16.5
M 
IL
13.8
M 
IN
22.2
M 
IA
16.8
M 
KA
21.4
M 
KY
15.0
M 
LA
13.4
E 
ME
10.8
E 
MD
  9.3 
E 
MA
16.3 
M 
MI
17.4 
M 
MN
19.1 
M 
MS
  9.9 
M 
MO
Wireless %
Region 
State
  9.2 
W 
MT
23.2 
M 
NE
10.8 
W 
NV
16.9 
M 
ND
11.6 
E 
NH
  8.0 
E 
NJ
21.1 
W 
NM
11.4 
E 
NY
16.3 
E 
NC
14.0 
E 
OH
23.2 
M 
OK
17.7 
W 
OR
10.8 
E 
PA
  7.9 
E 
RI
20.6 
E 
SC
  6.4 
M 
SD
20.3 
M 
TN
20.9 
M 
TX
25.5 
W 
UT
10.8 
E 
VA
  5.1 
E 
VT
16.3 
W 
WA
11.6 
E 
WV
15.2 
M 
WI
11.4 
W 
WY
a.	 Display the data in a comparative boxplot that 
makes it possible to compare wireless percent for 
the three geographical regions.
b.	Does the graphical display in Part (a) reveal any 
striking differences in wireless percent for the three 
geographical regions, or are the distributions  
of wireless percent observations similar for the 
three regions?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

178 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
a.	 Would you recommend using the standard 
deviation or the iqr as a measure of variability for 
this data set? 
b.	Are there outliers in this data set? If so, which observa­
tions are mild outliers? Which are extreme outliers?
c.	 Draw a modi­ﬁed boxplot for this data set.
d.	If you were asked by an insurance company to 
decide which, if any, occupations should be offered 
a professional discount on auto insurance, which 
occupations would you recommend? Explain.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
 4.4  
Interpreting Center and Variability: Chebyshev’s Rule,  
the Empirical Rule, and z Scores 
The mean and standard deviation can be combined to make informative statements about 
how the values in a data set are distributed and about the relative position of a particular 
value in a data set. To do this, it is useful to be able to describe how far away a particular 
observation is from the mean in terms of the standard deviation. For example, we might 
say that an observation is 2 standard deviations above the mean or that an observation is 
1.3 standard deviations below the mean.
Example 4.14 
Standardized Test Scores
Consider a data set of scores on a standardized test with a mean and standard deviation of 
100 and 15, respectively. We can make the following statements:
1.	 Because 100 2 15 5 85, we say that a score of 85 is “1 standard deviation below 
the mean.” Similarly, 100 1 15 5 115 is “1 standard deviation above the mean” 
(see Figure 4.14).
Mean
70
85
1 sd
1 sd
100
115
130
Figure  4.14
Values within 1 standard deviation of 
the mean (Example 4.14).
3.	 Because 100 1 (3)(15) 5145, scores above 145 are greater than the mean by 
more than 3 standard deviations.
■
Sometimes in published articles, the mean and standard deviation are reported, but a 
graphical display of the data is not given. However, using a result called Chebyshev’s Rule, 
it is possible to get a sense of the distribution of data values based on our knowledge of 
only the mean and standard deviation.
Mean
Within 2 sd’s of the mean
70
85
2 sd’s
2 sd’s
 100
115
130
Figure  4.15
Values within 2 standard deviations 
of the mean (Example 4.14).
2.	 Because 2 times the standard deviation is 2(15) 5 30, and 100 1 30 5 130 and 
100 2 30 5 70, scores between 70 and 130 are those within 2 standard deviations 
of the mean (see Figure 4.15).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 4.4   Interpreting Center and Variability: Chebyshev’s Rule, the Empirical Rule, and z Scores   
●  179
Consider any number k, where k $ 1. Then the percentage of observations that 
are within k standard deviations of the mean is at least 10011 2 1
k22%.  
Substituting selected values of k gives the following results.
Number of Standard 
Deviations, k
1 2 1
k 2
Percentage Within k Standard 
Deviations of the Mean
  2 
1 2 1
4 5 .75
at least 75%
  3 
1 2 1
9 5 .89
at least 89%
  4 
1 2 1
16 5 .94
at least 94%
  4.472 
1 2 1
20 5 .95
at least 95%
  5 
1 2 1
25 5 .96
at least 96%
10 
1 2
1
100 5 .99
at least 99%
Chebyshev’s Rule
Example 4.15 
Child Care for Preschool Kids
The article “Piecing Together Child Care with 
Multiple Arrangements: Crazy Quilt or Preferred 
Pattern for Employed Parents of Preschool Chil-
dren?” (Journal of Marriage and the Family 
[1994]: 669–680) examined various modes of 
care for preschool children. For a sample of 
families with one preschool child, it was re-
ported that the mean and standard deviation 
of child care time per week were approxi-
mately 36 hours and 12 hours, respectively. 
Figure 4.16 displays values that are 1, 2, 
and 3 standard deviations from the mean.
Understand the context ❭
Ariel Skelley/Blend Images/Jupiter Images
0
12
24
36
48
60
72
x – 3s
x – 2s
 x – s
x + s
x + 2s
x + 3s
x–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Figure  4.16
Measurement scale for child care time 
(Example 4.15).
Chebyshev’s Rule allows us to assert the following:
1.	 At least 75% of the sample observations must be between 12 and 60 hours 
(within 2 standard deviations of the mean).
2.	 Because at least 89% of the observations must be between 0 and 72, at most 11% 
are outside this interval. Time cannot be negative, so we conclude that at most 
11% of the observations exceed 72.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

180 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
3.	 The values 18 and 54 are 1.5 standard deviations to either side of x, so using  
k 5 1.5 in Chebyshev’s Rule implies that at least 55.6% of the observations must 
be between these two values. This means that at most 44.4% of the observations 
are less than 18—not at most 22.2%, because the distribution of values may not 
be symmetric.
■
Because Chebyshev’s Rule is applicable to any data set (distribution), whether symmetric 
or skewed, we must be careful when making statements about the proportion above a 
particular value, below a particular value, or inside or outside an interval that is not centered 
at the mean. The rule must be used in a conservative fashion. There is another aspect of this 
conservatism. The rule states that at least 75% of the observations are within 2 standard 
deviations of the mean, but for many data sets substantially more than 75% of the values 
satisfy this condition. The same sort of understatement is frequently encountered for other 
values of k (numbers of standard deviations).
Example 4.16 
IQ Scores
Figure 4.17 gives a stem-and-leaf display of IQ scores of 112 children in one of the early 
studies that used the Stanford revision of the Binet–Simon intelligence scale (The Intelli-
gence of School Children, L. M. Terman [Boston: Houghton-Mifﬂin, 1919]).
Summary quantities include
x 5 104.5  s 5 16.3  2s 5 32.6  3s 5 48.9
Understand the context ❭
Figure  4.17
Stem-and-leaf display of IQ scores 
used in Example 4.16.
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
1
25679
0000124555668
0000112333446666778889
0001122222333566677778899999
00001122333344444477899
01111123445669
006
26
2
Stem:  Tens
Leaf:    Ones
In Figure 4.17, all observations that are within two standard deviations of the mean 
are shown in blue. Table 4.6 shows how Chebyshev’s Rule can sometimes considerably 
understate actual percentages.
	
■
Empirical Rule
The fact that statements based on Chebyshev’s Rule are frequently conservative suggests 
that we should look for rules that are less conservative and more precise. One useful rule 
is the Empirical Rule, which can be applied whenever the distribution of data values can 
be reasonably well described by a normal curve (distributions that are “mound” shaped).
k 5 Number of sd’s
x 6ks
Chebyshev
Actual
2.0
71.9 to 137.1
at least 75%
  96% (108)
2.5
63.7 to 145.3
at least 84%
  97% (109)
3.0
55.6 to 153.4
at least 89%
100% (112)
Table 4.6  Summarizing the Distribution of IQ Scores
 the blue 
leaves in  
Figure 4.17
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 4.4   Interpreting Center and Variability: Chebyshev’s Rule, the Empirical Rule, and z Scores   
●  181
The Empirical Rule makes “approximately” instead of “at least” statements, and the per-
centages for k 5 1, 2, and 3 standard deviations are much higher than those of Chebyshev’s 
Rule. Figure 4.18 illustrates the percentages given by the Empirical Rule. In contrast to 
Chebyshev’s Rule, dividing the percentages in half is permissible, because a normal curve 
is symmetric.
2.35%
2.35%
34%
34%
Mean
1 sd
1 sd
13.5%
13.5%
Figure  4.18
Approximate percentages implied by 
the Empirical Rule.
If the histogram of values in a data set can be reasonably well approximated by 
a normal curve, then 
Approximately 68% of the observations are within 1 standard deviation of the 
mean.
Approximately 95% of the observations are within 2 standard deviations of the 
mean.
Approximately 99.7% of the observations are within 3 standard deviations of 
the mean.
The Empirical Rule
Example 4.17 
Heights of Mothers 
and the Empirical Rule
One of the earliest articles to argue for the wide applicabil-
ity of the normal distribution was “On the Laws of Inheri-
tance in Man. I. Inheritance of Physical Characters” (Biometrika 
[1903]: 375–462). Among the data sets discussed in the arti-
cle was one consisting of 1052 measurements of the heights 
of mothers. The mean and standard deviation were
x 5 62.484 in.  s 5 2.390 in.
The data distribution was described as approximately normal. Table 4.7 contrasts actual 
percentages with those obtained from Chebyshev’s Rule and the Empirical Rule.
Understand the context ❭
Paul Thomas/The Image Bank/Getty Images
Number
of sd’s
Interval
Actual
Empirical
Rule
Chebyshev
Rule
1
60.094 to 64.874
72.1%
Approximately 68%
At least 0%0
2
57.704 to 67.264
96.2%
Approximately 95%
At least 75%
3
55.314 to 69.654
99.2%
Approximately 99.7%
At least 89%
Table 4.7  Summarizing the Distribution of Mothers’ Heights
Clearly, the Empirical Rule is much more successful and informative in this case than 
Chebyshev’s Rule.
■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

182 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
Our detailed study of the normal distribution and areas under normal curves in 
Chapter 7 will enable us to make statements analogous to those of the Empirical Rule for 
values other than k 5 1, 2, or 3 standard deviations. For now, note that it is unusual to 
see an observation from a normally distributed population that is farther than 2 standard 
deviations from the mean (only 5%), and it is very surprising to see one that is more than 
3 standard deviations away. If you encountered a mother whose height was 72 inches, you 
might reasonably conclude that she was not part of the population described by the data 
set in Example 4.17.
Measures of Relative Standing
When you obtain your score after taking a test, you probably want to know how it compares 
to the scores of others who have taken the test. Is your score above or below the mean, and 
by how much? Does your score place you among the top 5% of those who took the test or 
only among the top 25%? Questions of this sort are answered by ﬁnd­ing ways to measure 
the position of a particular value in a data set relative to all values in the set. One measure 
of relative standing is a z score.
DEFINITION
The process of subtracting the mean and then dividing by the standard deviation is 
sometimes referred to as standardizing, and a z score is one example of what is called a 
standardized score.
Example 4.18 
Relatively Speaking, Which Is the Better Offer?
Suppose that two graduating seniors, one a marketing major and one an accounting major, 
are comparing job offers. The accounting major has an offer for $45,000 per year, and the 
marketing student has an offer for $43,000 per year. Summary information about the dis-
tribution of offers follows:
Accounting:	
mean 5 46,000        standard deviation 5 1500
Marketing:	
mean 5 42,500        standard deviation 5 1000
Then,
accounting z score 5 45,000 2 46,000
1500
5 2.67
(so $45,000 is .67 standard deviation below the mean), whereas
marketing z score 5 43,000 2 42,500
1000
5 .5
Relative to the appropriate data sets, the marketing offer is actually more attractive 
than the accounting offer (although this may not offer much solace to the marketing 
major).	
■
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
z score: The z score corresponding to a particular value is 
z score 5
value 2 mean
standard deviation
The z score tells us how many standard deviations the value is from the mean. It 
is positive or negative depending on whether the value is greater than or less 
than the mean.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The z score is particularly useful when the distribution of observations is approxi­mately 
normal. In this case, from the Empirical Rule, a z score outside the interval from 22 to 
12 occurs in about 5% of all cases, whereas a z score outside the interval from 23 to 13 
occurs only about 0.3% of the time.
Percentiles
A particular observation can be located even more precisely by giving the percentage of 
the data that fall at or below that observation. If, for example, 95% of all test scores are at 
or below 650, whereas only 5% are above 650, then 650 is called the 95th percentile of the 
data set (or of the distribution of scores). Similarly, if 10% of all scores are at or below 400 
and 90% are above 400, then the value 400 is the 10th percentile.
Percentile: For any particular number r between 0 and 100, the r th percentile 
is a value such that r percent of the observations in the data set fall at or below 
that value.
DEFINITION
Example 4.19 
Head Circumference at Birth
In addition to weight and length, head circumference is another measure of health in 
newborn babies. The National Center for Health Statistics reports the following summary 
values for head circumference (in cm) at birth for boys (approximate values read from 
graphs on the Center for Disease Control web site):
Understand the context ❭
Figure  4.19
Ninetieth percentile for a smoothed 
histogram.
90th percentile
Shaded area 5 90% of total area
Figure 4.19 illustrates the 90th percentile. We have already met several percentiles in 
disguise. The median is the 50th percentile, and the lower and upper quartiles are the 25th 
and 75th percentiles, respectively.
Percentile
  5
10
25
50
75
90
95
Head Circumference (cm)
32.2
33.2
34.5
35.8
37.0
38.2
38.6
Consider the data ❭
Interpreting these percentiles, we know that half of newborn boys have head 
circumferences of less than 35.8 cm, because 35.8 is the 50th percentile (the medi-
an). The middle 50% of newborn boys have head circumferences between 34.5 cm and 
37.0 cm, with about 25% of the head circumferences less than 34.5 cm and about 25% 
greater than 37.0 cm. 
We can tell that the head circumference distribution for newborn boys is not symmetric, 
because the 5th percentile is 3.6 cm below the median, whereas the 95th percentile is only 
2.8 cm above the median. This suggests that the bottom part of the distribution stretches 
out more than the top part of the distribution. This would be consistent with a distribution 
that is negatively skewed, as shown in Figure 4.20.
Interpret the results ❭
 4.4   Interpreting Center and Variability: Chebyshev’s Rule, the Empirical Rule, and z Scores   
●  183
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

184 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available

■
4.38	 The average playing time of compact discs in a large 
collection is 35 minutes, and the standard deviation 
is 5 minutes.
a.	 What value is 1 standard deviation above the 
mean? 1 standard deviation below the mean? 
What values are 2 standard deviations away from 
the mean? (Hint: See Example 4.14.)
b.	Without assuming anything about the distribu-
tion of times, at least what percentage of the 
times is between 25 and 45 minutes? (Hint: See 
Example 4.15.) 
c.	 Without assuming anything about the distribution 
of times, what can be said about the percentage 
of times that are either less than 20 minutes or 
greater than 50 minutes? 
d.	Assuming that the distribution of times is 
approximately normal, about what percentage of 
times are between 25 and 45 minutes? less than 
20 minutes or greater than 50 minutes? less than 
20 minutes?
4.39	 ▼ In a study investigating the effect of car speed on 
accident severity, 5000 reports of fatal automobile 
accidents were examined, and the vehicle speed 
at impact was re­corded for each one. For these 
5000 accidents, the average speed was 42 mph and 
the standard deviation was 15 mph. A histogram 
revealed that the vehicle speed at impact distribution 
was approximately normal.
a.	 Roughly what proportion of vehicle speeds 
were between 27 and 57 mph? (Hint: See 
Example 4.17.) 
b.	Roughly what proportion of vehicle speeds 
exceeded 57 mph? 
exercises 4.38 - 4.52
4.40	 The U.S. Census Bureau (2000 census) reported the follow-
ing relative frequency distribution for travel time to work 
for a large sample of adults who did not work at home:
Travel Time 
(minutes)
Relative Frequency
0 to ,5
.04
  5 to ,10
.13
10 to ,15
.16
15 to ,20
.17
20 to ,25
.14
25 to ,30
.05
30 to ,35
.12
35 to ,40
.03
40 to ,45
.03
45 to ,60
.06
60 to ,90
.05
90 or more
.02
a.	 Draw the histogram for the travel time distribu-
tion. In constructing the histogram, assume that 
the last interval in the relative frequency distribu-
tion (90 or more) ends at 200; so the last interval 
is 90 to ,200. Be sure to use the density scale to 
determine the heights of the bars in the histogram 
because not all the intervals have the same width. 
(Hint: Histograms were covered in Chapter 3.)
b.	Describe the interesting features of the histogram 
from Part (a), including center, shape, and spread.
c.	 Based on the histogram from Part (a), would it 
be appropriate to use the Empirical Rule to make 
statements about the travel time distribution? 
Explain why or why not.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Figure  4.20
Negatively skewed distribution.
95th 
percentile
5th 
percentile
Median
Shaded area 5 .05
Shaded area 5 .05
32.2
35.8
38.6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 4.4   Interpreting Center and Variability: Chebyshev’s Rule, the Empirical Rule, and z Scores   
●  185
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
d.	The approximate mean and standard deviation for the 
travel time distribution are 27 minutes and 24 min-
utes, respectively. Based on this mean and standard 
deviation and the fact that travel time cannot be nega-
tive, explain why the travel time distribution could 
not be well approximated by a normal curve.
e.	 Use the mean and standard deviation given in Part (d) 
and Chebyshev’s Rule to make a statement about
i.	 the percentage of travel times that were 
between 0 and 75 minutes 
ii.	the percentage of travel times that were 
between 0 and 47 minutes 
f.	 How well do the statements in Part (e) based on 
Chebyshev’s Rule agree with the actual percent-
ages for the travel time distribution? (Hint: You 
can estimate the actual percentages from the given 
relative frequency distribution.)
4.41	 Mobile homes are tightly constructed for energy 
conservation. This can lead to a buildup of indoor 
pollutants. The paper “A Survey of Nitrogen Dioxide 
Levels Inside Mobile Homes” (Journal of the Air Pollution 
Control Association [1988]: 647–651) discussed various 
aspects of NO2 concentration in these structures.
a.	 In one sample of mobile homes in the Los Angeles 
area, the mean NO2 concentration in kitchens 
during the summer was 36.92 ppb, and the stan-
dard deviation was 11.34. Making no assumptions 
about the shape of the NO2 distribution, what 
can be said about the percentage of observations 
between 14.24 and 59.60? 
b.	Inside what interval is it guaranteed that at 
least 89% of the concentration observations 
will lie? 
c.	 In a sample of non–Los Angeles mobile homes, 
the ­average kitchen NO2 concentration during the 
winter was 24.76 ppb, and the standard deviation 
was 17.20. Do these values suggest that the 
histogram of sample observations did not closely 
resemble a normal curve? (Hint: What is x 2 2s?)
4.42	 The article “Taxable Wealth and Alcoholic Beverage 
Consumption in the United States” (Psychological 
Reports [1994]: 813–814) reported that the mean 
annual adult consumption of wine was 3.15 gallons 
and that the standard deviation was 6.09 gallons. 
Would you use the Empirical Rule to approximate 
the proportion of adults who consume more than 
9.24 gallons (i.e., the proportion of adults whose 
consumption value exceeds the mean by more than 
1 standard deviation)? Explain your reasoning.
4.43	 A student took two national aptitude tests. The 
national average and standard deviation were 475 
and 100, respectively, for the ﬁrst test and 30 and 8, 
respectively, for the second test. The student scored 
625 on the ﬁrst test and 45 on the second test. Use z 
scores to determine on which exam the student per-
formed better relative to the other test takers. (Hint: 
See Example 4.18.) 
4.44	 Suppose that your younger sister is applying for 
entrance to college and has taken the SAT. She scored 
at the 83rd percentile on the verbal section of the test 
and at the 94th percentile on the math section of the 
test. Because you have been studying statistics, she 
asks you for an interpretation of these values. What 
would you tell her? (Hint: See Example 4.19.)
4.45	 The report “Who Borrows Most? Bachelor’s Degree 
Recipients with High Levels of Student Debt” (www 
.collgeboard.com/trends) reported the following per-
centiles for amount of student debt for those graduat-
ing with a bachelor’s degree in 2010:
10th percentile 5 $0	
25th percentile 5 $0
50th percentile 5 $11,000   75th percentile 5 $24,600
90th percentile 5 $39,300
For each of these percentiles, write a sentence 
interpreting the value of the percentile.
4.46	 The paper “Modeling and Measurements of Bus 
Service Reliability” (Transportation Research [1978]: 
253–256) studied various aspects of bus service and 
presented data on travel times (in minutes) from 
several different routes. The accompanying frequency 
distribution is for bus travel times from origin to 
destination on one particular route in Chicago during 
peak morning traf­ﬁc periods:
Travel Time
Frequency
Relative Frequency
15 to ,16
  4
.02
16 to ,17
  0
.00
17 to ,18
26
.13
18 to ,19
99
.49
19 to ,20
36
.18
20 to ,21
  8
.04
21 to ,22
12
.06
22 to ,23
  0
.00
23 to ,24
  0
.00
24 to ,25
  0
.00
25 to ,26
16
.08
a.	 Construct the corresponding histogram.
b.	Approximate the following percentiles:
i.	 86th	
iv.	95th
ii.	15th	
v.	 10th
iii.	90th
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

186 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
4.47	 An advertisement for the “30-inch Wonder” that 
appeared in the Sep­tem­ber 1983 issue of the journal 
Packaging claimed that the 30-inch Wonder weighs 
cases and bags up to 110 pounds and provides 
accuracy to within 0.25 ounce. Suppose that a 
50-ounce weight was repeatedly weighed on this 
scale and the weight readings recorded. The mean 
value was 49.5 ounces, and the standard deviation 
was 0.1. What can be said about the percentage of 
the time that the scale actually showed a weight 
that was within 0.25 ounce of the true value of 50 
ounces? (Hint: Use Chebyshev’s Rule.) 
4.48	 Suppose that your statistics professor returned your 
ﬁrst midterm exam with only a z score written on it. 
She also told you that a histogram of the scores was 
approximately normal. How would you interpret 
each of the following z scores?
a.	 2.2	
d.	1.0
b.	0.4	
e.	 0
c.	 1.8
4.49	 The paper “Answer Changing on Multiple-Choice 
Tests” (Journal of Experimental Education [1980]: 18–21) 
reported that for a group of 162 college students, 
the average number of responses changed from 
the correct answer to an incorrect answer on a test 
containing 80 multiple-choice items was 1.4. The 
corresponding standard deviation was reported to 
be 1.5. Based on this mean and standard deviation, 
what can you tell about the shape of the distribution 
of the variable number of answers changed from right to 
wrong? What can you say about the number of stu-
dents who changed at least six answers from correct 
to incorrect?
4.50	 The average reading speed of students completing 
a speed-reading course is 450 words per minute 
(wpm). If the standard deviation is 70 wpm, ﬁnd the 
z score associated with each of the following reading 
speeds.
a.	 320 wpm 
	
c.  420 wpm 
b.	475 wpm 
	
d.  610 wpm 
4.51	 ● The following data values are 2009 per capita 
expenditures on public libraries for each of the 
50 U.S. states and the District of Columbia (from 
www.statemaster.com):
16.84
16.17
11.74
11.11
8.65
7.69
7.48
  7.03
  6.20
  6.20
  5.95
5.72
5.61
5.47
  5.43
  5.33
  4.84
  4.63
4.59
4.58
3.92
  3.81
  3.75
  3.74
  3.67
3.40
3.35
3.29
  3.18
  3.16
  2.91
  2.78
2.61
2.58
2.45
  2.30
  2.19
  2.06
  1.78
1.54
1.31
1.26
  1.20
  1.19
  1.09
  0.70
0.66
0.54
0.49
  0.30
  0.01
a.	 Summarize this data set with a frequency 
distribution. Construct the corresponding 
histogram.
b.	Use the histogram in Part (a) to ﬁnd approximate 
values of the following percentiles:
i.	 50th 
	
iv.	90th 
ii.	70th 
	
v.	 40th 
iii.	10th 
4.52	 The accompanying table gives the mean and standard 
deviation of reaction times (in seconds) for each of 
two different stimuli:
Stimulus
1
Stimulus
2
Mean
6.0
3.6
Standard deviation
1.2
0.8
If your reaction time is 4.2 seconds for the ﬁrst 
stimulus and 1.8 seconds for the second stimulus, 
to which stimulus are you reacting (compared to 
other individuals) relatively more quickly? (Hint: See 
Example 4.18.) 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
4.5  
Interpreting and Communicating the Results  
of Statistical Analyses
As was the case with the graphical displays of Chapter 3, the primary function of the 
descriptive tools introduced in this chapter is to help us better understand the variables 
under study. If we have collected data on the amount of money students spend on textbooks 
at a particular university, most likely we did so because we wanted to learn about the 
distribution of this variable (amount spent on textbooks) for the population of interest 
(in this case, students at the university). Numerical measures of center and spread and 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.5   Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses  
●  187
boxplots help to inform us, and they also allow us to communicate to others what we have 
learned from the data.
Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses
When reporting the results of a data analysis, it is common to start with descriptive 
information about the variables of interest. It is always a good idea to start with a graphi­cal 
display of the data, and, as we saw in Chapter 3, graphical displays of numerical data are 
usually described in terms of center, variability, and shape. The numerical measures of this 
chapter can help you to be more spe­ciﬁc in describing the center and spread of a data set.
When describing center and spread, you must ﬁrst decide which measures to use. 
Common choices are to use either the sample mean and standard deviation or the sample 
median and interquartile range (and maybe even a boxplot) to describe center and spread. 
Because the mean and standard deviation can be sensitive to extreme values in the data set, 
they are best used when the distribution shape is approximately symmetric and when there 
are few outliers. If the data set is noticeably skewed or if there are outliers, the median and 
iqr are generally used to describe center and spread.
Interpreting the Results of Statistical Analyses
It is relatively rare to ﬁnd raw data in published sources. Typically, only a few numerical 
summary quantities are reported. We must be able to interpret these values and understand 
what they tell us about the underlying data set.
For example, a university conducted an investigation of the amount of time required 
to enter the information contained in an application for admission into the university 
computer system. One of the individuals who performs this task was asked to note starting 
time and completion time for 50 randomly selected application forms. The resulting entry 
times (in minutes) were summarized using the mean, median, and standard deviation:
x 5 7.854
median 5 7.423
s 5 2.129
What do these summary values tell us about entry times? The average time required to 
enter admissions data was 7.854 minutes, but the relatively large standard deviation sug-
gests that many observations differ substantially from this mean. The median tells us that 
half of the applications required less than 7.423 minutes to enter. The fact that the mean 
exceeds the median suggests that some unusually large values in the data set affected the 
value of the mean. This last conjecture is con­ﬁrmed by the stem-and-leaf display of the data 
given in Figure 4.21.
Stem:  Ones
Leaf:    Tenths
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
8
02345679
00001234566779
223556688
23334
002
011168
134
2
3
Figure  4.21
Stem-and-leaf ­display of data entry 
times.
The administrators conducting the data-entry study looked at the outlier 14.3 minutes 
and at the other relatively large values in the data set. They found that the ﬁve largest values 
came from applications that were entered before lunch. After talking with the individual who 
entered the data, the administrators speculated that morning entry times might differ from 
afternoon entry times because there tended to be more distractions and interruptions (phone 
calls, etc.) during the morning hours, when the admissions of­ﬁce generally was busier. 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

188 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
When morning and afternoon entry times were separated, the following summary 
statistics resulted:
Morning (based on n 5 20 applications):        x 5 9.093        median 5 8.743        s 5 2.329
Afternoon (based on n 5 30 applications):        x 5 7.027        median 5 6.737        s 5 1.529
Clearly, the average entry time is higher for applications entered in the morning. The indi-
vidual entry times also differ more from one another in the mornings than in the afternoons 
(because the standard deviation for morning entry times, 2.329, is about 1.5 times as large 
as 1.529, the standard deviation for afternoon entry times).
What to Look for in Published Data
Here are a few questions to ask yourself when you interpret numerical summary ­measures.
●
●Is the chosen summary measure appropriate for the type of data collected? In particu-
lar, watch for inappropriate use of the mean and standard deviation with categorical 
data that has simply been coded numerically.
●
●If both the mean and the median are reported, how do the two values compare? What 
does this suggest about the distribution of values in the data set? If only the mean or 
the median was used, was the appropriate measure selected?
●
●Is the standard deviation large or small? Is the value consistent with your expectations 
regarding variability? What does the value of the standard deviation tell you about the 
variable being summarized?
●
●Can anything of interest be said about the values in the data set by applying 
Chebyshev’s Rule or the Empirical Rule?
For example, consider a study that investigated whether people tend to spend more 
money when they are paying with a credit card than when they are paying with cash. The 
authors of the paper “Monopoly Money: The Effect of Payment Coupling and Form on Spending 
Behavior” (Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied [2008]: 213–225) randomly assigned 
each of 114 volunteers to one of two experimental groups. Participants were given a menu 
for a new restaurant that showed nine menu items. They were then asked to estimate the 
amount they would be willing to pay for each item. A price index was computed for each 
participant by averaging the nine prices assigned. 
The difference between the two experimental groups was that the menu viewed by one 
group showed a credit card logo at the bottom of the menu while there was no credit card 
logo on the menu that those in the other group viewed. The following passage appeared in 
the results section of the paper:
On average, participants were willing to pay more when the credit card logo was present 
(M 5 $4.53, SD 5 1.15) than when it was absent (M 5 $4.11, SD 5 1.06). Thus, even though 
consumers were not explicitly informed which payment mode they would be using, the mere 
presence of a credit card logo increased the price that they were willing to pay.
The price index data was also described as mound shaped with no outliers for each of the 
two groups. Because price index (the average of the prices that a participant assigned to the 
nine menu items) is a numerical variable, the mean and standard deviation are reasonable 
measures for summarizing center and spread in the data set. 
Although the mean for the credit-card-logo group is higher than the mean for the no-logo 
group, the two standard deviations are similar, indicating similar variability in price index 
from person to person for the two groups.
Because the distribution of price index values was mound shaped for each of the two 
groups, we can use the Empirical Rule to tell us a bit more about the distribution. For 
example, for those in the group who viewed the menu with a credit card logo, approximately 
95% of the price index values would have been between
4.53 2 2(1.15) 5 4.53 2 2.3 5 2.23
and
4.53 1 2(1.15) 5 4.53 1 2.30 5 6.83.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.5   Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses  
●  189
A Word to the Wise: Cautions and Limitations
When computing or interpreting numerical descriptive measures, you need to keep in 
mind the following:
1.	 Measures of center don’t tell all. Although measures of center, such as the mean 
and the median, do give us a sense of what might be considered a typical value 
for a variable, this is only one characteristic of a data set. Without additional 
information about variability and distribution shape, we don’t really know much 
about the behavior of the variable.
2.	 Data distributions with different shapes can have the same mean and standard 
deviation. For example, consider the following two histograms:
5.5
6.5
7.5
8.5
9.5 10.5 11.5 12.5 13.5 14.5
Frequency
10
5
0
5.5
6.5
7.5
8.5
9.5 10.5 11.5 12.5 13.5 14.5
Frequency
20
10
0
Both histograms summarize data sets that have a mean of 10 and a standard deviation 
of 2, yet they have different shapes.
3.	 Both the mean and the standard deviation are sensitive to extreme values in a 
data set, especially if the sample size is small. If a data distribution is skewed or if 
the data set has outliers, the median and the interquartile range may be a better 
choice for describing center and spread.
4.	 Measures of center and variability describe the values of the variable studied, 
not the frequencies in a frequency distribution or the heights of the bars in a 
histogram. For example, consider the following two frequency distributions and 
histograms:
Frequency Distribution A
Frequency Distribution B
Value
Frequency
Value
Frequency
1
10
1
  5
2
10
2
10
3
10
3
20
4
10
4
10
5
10
5
  5
  
1
2
3
4
5
20
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
Frequency
10
5
0
Histogram A
Histogram B
Frequency
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

190 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
There is more variability in the data summarized by Frequency Distribution 
and Histogram A than in the data summarized by Frequency Distribution and 
Histogram B. This is because the values of the variable described by Histogram and 
Frequency Distribution B are more concentrated near the mean than are the values for 
the variable described by Histogram and Frequency Distribution A. Don’t be misled 
by the fact that there is no variability in the frequencies in Frequency Distribution A or 
the heights of the bars in Histogram A.
5.	 Be careful with boxplots based on small sample sizes. Boxplots convey information 
about center, variability, and shape, but when the sample size is small, you should 
be hesitant to overinterpret shape information. It is really not possible to decide 
whether a data distribution is symmetric or skewed if only a small sample of 
observations from the distribution is available.
6.	 Not all distributions are normal (or even approximately normal). Be cautious in 
applying the Empirical Rule in situations in which you are not convinced that the 
data distribution is at least approximately normal. Using the Empirical Rule in 
such situations can lead to incorrect statements.
7.	 Watch out for outliers! Unusual observations in a data set often provide important 
information about the variable under study, so it is important to consider outliers 
in addition to describing what is typical. Outliers can also be problematic—both 
because the values of some descriptive measures are in­ﬂu­enced by outliers and 
because some of the methods for drawing conclusions from data may not be 
appropriate if the data set has outliers.
4.53	 The authors of the paper “Delayed Time to Defibril-
lation after In-Hospital Cardiac Arrest” (New England 
Journal of Medicine [2008]: 9–16) described a study of 
how survival is related to the length of time it takes 
from the time of a heart attack to the administration 
of defibrillation therapy. The following is a statement 
from the paper:
We identified 6789 patients from 369 hospitals who 
had in-hospital cardiac arrest due to ventricular fibril-
lation (69.7%) or pulseless ventricular trachycardia 
(30.3%). Overall, the median time to defibrillation was 
1 minute (interquartile range [was] 3 minutes).
Data from the paper on time to defibrillation (in 
minutes) for these 6789 patients was used to produce 
the following Minitab output and boxplot.
a.	 Why is there no lower whisker in the given boxplot?
b.	How is it possible for the median, the lower 
quartile, and the minimum value in the data set to 
all be equal? (Note—this is why you do not see a 
median line in the box part of the boxplot.)
c.	 The authors of the paper considered a time 
to defibrillation of greater than 2 minutes as 
unacceptable. Based on the given boxplot 
and summary statistics, is it possible that the 
percentage of patients having an unacceptable 
time to defibrillation is greater than 50%? Greater 
than 25%? Less than 25%? Explain.
d.	Is the outlier shown at 7 a mild outlier or an 
extreme outlier? 
EXERCISES 4.53 - 4.54
Descriptive Statistics: Time to Defibrillation
Variable
N
Mean
 StDev
Minimum
   Q1
Median
  Q3
Maximum
Time
6789
 2.3737
2.0713
    1.0000
1.0000
 1.0000
3.0000
    7.0000
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Time to deﬁbrillation (minutes)
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.54	 The paper “Portable Social Groups: Willingness to Com-
municate, Interpersonal Communication Gratifications, and 
Cell Phone Use among Young Adults” (International Journal 
of Mobile Communications [2007]: 139–156) describes a 
study of young adult cell phone use patterns.
a.	 Comment on the following quote from the paper. 
Do you agree with the authors?
Seven sections of an Introduction to Mass 
Communication course at a large southern 
university were surveyed in the spring and fall of 
2003. The sample was chosen because it offered 
an excellent representation of the population 
under study—young adults.
b.	Below is another quote from the paper. In this 
quote, the author reports the mean number of 
minutes of cell phone use per week for those 
who participated in the survey. What additional 
information would have been provided about 
cell phone use behavior if the author had also 
reported the standard deviation?
Based on respondent estimates, users spent an 
average of 629 minutes (about 10.5 hours) per 
week using their cell phone on or off line for any 
reason.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
In this activity, you will work in groups to collect data that 
will provide information about how many hours per week, 
on average, students at your school spend engaged in a 
particular activity. You will use the sampling plan designed in 
Activity 2.1 to collect the data.
1.	 With your group, pick one of the following activities 
to be the focus of your study:
i.	
Surﬁng the web
ii.	 Studying or doing homework
iii.	 Watching TV
iv.	 Exercising
v.	 Sleeping
or you may choose a different activity, subject to the 
approval of your instructor.
2.	 Use the plan developed in Activity 2.1 to collect data 
on the variable you have chosen for your study.
3.	 Summarize the resulting data using both numerical 
and graphical summaries. Be sure to address both 
center and variability.
4.	 Write a short article for your school paper 
summarizing your ﬁnd­ings regarding student 
behavior. Your article should include both numerical 
and graphical summaries.
AC TIVIT Y 4.1 
Collecting and Summarizing Numerical Data
The article “Airlines Should Weigh Passengers, Bags, NTSB 
Says” (USA Today, Feb­ru­ary 27, 2004) states that the National 
Transportation Safety Board recommended that airlines weigh 
passengers and their bags to prevent overloaded planes from 
attempting to take off. This recommendation was the result of 
an investigation into the crash of a small commuter plane in 
2003, which determined that too much weight contributed 
to the crash.
Rather than weighing passengers, airlines currently use 
estimates of average passenger and luggage weights. After the 
2003 accident, this estimate was increased by 10 pounds for 
passengers and 5 pounds for luggage. Although an airplane 
can ﬂy if it is somewhat overweight if all systems are working 
properly, if one of the plane’s engines fails an overweight 
plane becomes dif­ﬁ­cult for the pilot to control.
Assuming that the new estimate of the average passenger 
weight is accurate, discuss the following questions with 
a partner and then write a paragraph that answers these 
questions.
1.	 What role does variability in passenger weights play 
in creating a potentially dangerous situation for an 
airline?
2.	 Would an airline have a lower risk of a potentially 
dangerous situation if the variability in passenger 
weight is large or if it is small?
AC TIVIT Y 4.2 
Airline Passenger Weights
Activities 
●  191
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

192 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
In this activity, you will investigate the relationship between 
boxplot shapes and the corresponding ﬁve-number summary. 
The accompanying ﬁg­ure shows four boxplots, labeled A–D. 
Also given are 4 ﬁve-number summaries, labeled I–IV. Match 
each ﬁve-number summary to the ­appropriate boxplot. Note 
that scales are not included on the boxplots, so you will have 
to think about what the ﬁve-number summary implies about 
characteristics of the ­boxplot.
Five-Number Summaries
I
II
III
IV
Minimum
  40
  4
0.0
  10
Lower quartile
  45
  8
0.1
  34
Median
  71
16
0.9
  44
Upper quartile
  88
25
2.2
  82
Maximum
106
30
5.1
132
AC TIVIT Y 4.3 
Boxplot Shapes
A
C
B
D
Term or Formula
Comment
x1, x2, … , xn
Notation for sample data consisting 
of observations on a variable x, 
where n is the sample size.
Sample mean, x
The most frequently used measure 
of center of a sample. It can be very 
sensitive to the presence of even 
a single outlier (unusually large or 
small observation).
Population mean, m
The average x value in the entire 
population.
Sample median
The middle value in the ordered list 
of sample observations. (For n even, 
the median is the average of the two 
middle values.) It is very insensitive 
to outliers.
Deviations from the mean:  
x1 2 x, x2 2 x, Á , xn 2 x
Quantities used to assess variability 
in a sample. Except for rounding 
effects, osx 2 x d 5 0.
The sample variance 
s2 5 osx 2 xd2
n 2 1
 and  
standard deviation s 5 Ïs2
The most frequently used measures 
of variability for sample data.
The population variance s2 and 
standard deviation s
Measures of variability for the entire 
population.
Term or Formula
Comment
Quartiles and the interquartile 
range
The lower quartile separates the 
smallest 25% of the data from the 
remaining 75%, and the upper 
quartile separates the largest 25% 
from the smallest 75%. The inter­
quartile range (iqr), a measure of 
variability less sensitive to outliers 
than s, is the difference between the 
upper and lower quartiles.
Chebyshev’s Rule
This rule states that for any number 
k $ 1, at least  10011 2 1
k22% of 
the observations in any data set are 
within k standard deviations of the 
mean. It is typically conservative in 
that the actual percentages are often 
considerably greater than the stated 
lower bound.
Empirical Rule
This rule gives the approximate 
percentage of observations 
within 1 standard deviation (68%), 
2 standard deviations (95%), and 
3 standard deviations (99.7%) of the 
mean when the histogram is well 
approximated by a normal curve.
z score
This quantity gives the distance 
between an observation and the 
mean expressed as a certain number 
of standard deviations. It is posi-
tive (negative) if the observation is 
greater than (less than) the mean.
SUMMARY 
Key Concepts and Formulas
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Term or Formula
Comment
r th percentile
The value such that r % of the 
observations in the data set fall at or 
below that value.
Five-number summary
A summary of a data set that 
includes the minimum, lower 
quartile, median, upper quartile, 
and maximum.
Term or Formula
Comment
Boxplot
A picture that conveys information 
about the most important features 
of a numerical data set: center, 
spread, extent of skewness, and 
presence of outliers.
4.55	 Research by the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) shows that acrylamide (a possible cancer-
causing substance) forms in high-carbohydrate foods 
cooked at high temperatures and that acrylamide 
levels can vary widely even within the same brand 
of food (Associated Press, December 6, 2002). FDA 
scientists analyzed McDonald’s French fries pur-
chased at seven different locations and found the 
following acrylamide levels:
497
193
328
155
326
245
270
a.	 Compute the mean acrylamide level and the seven 
deviations from the mean.
b.	Verify that, except for the effect of rounding, the 
sum of the deviations from the mean is equal to 0 
for this data set. (If you rounded the sample mean 
or the deviations, your sum may not be exactly 
zero, but it should be close to zero if you have 
computed the deviations correctly.) 
c.	 Calculate the variance and standard deviation for 
this data set. 
4.56	 ● The technical report “Ozone Season Emissions by 
State” (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2002) gave 
the following nitrous oxide emissions (in thousands 
of tons) for the 48 states in the continental U.S. states:
76   22
40
  7
30
  5     6 136
72
33     0
89 136
39
92
40
13   27     1
63
33   60
27   16
63
32
20
  2   15   36
19
39 130
40     4
85
38
  7
68 151   32
34
  0     6
43    89
34
  0
a.	 Use these data to construct a boxplot that shows 
outliers. 
b.	Write a few sentences describing the important 
characteristics of the boxplot.
4.57	 The San Luis Obispo Telegram-Tribune (Oc­to­ber 1, 
1994) reported the following monthly salaries for 
super­visors from six different counties: $5354 
(Kern), $5166 (Monterey), $4443 (Santa Cruz), 
$4129 (Santa Barbara), $2500 (Placer), and $2220 
(Merced). San Luis Obispo County supervisors are 
supposed to be paid the average of the two counties 
among these six in the middle of the sal­ary range. 
a.	 Which measure of center determines this salary, 
and what is its value? 
b.	Why is the other measure of center featured in 
this section not as favorable to these super­visors 
(although it might appeal to taxpayers)?
4.58	 ● A sample of 26 offshore oil workers took part in a 
simulated escape exercise, resulting in the accompany-
ing data on time (in seconds) to complete the escape 
(“Oxygen Consumption and Ventilation During Escape 
from an Offshore Platform,” Ergonomics [1997]: 281–292):
389
356
359
363
375
424
325
394
402
373
373
370
364
366
364
325
339
393
392
369
374
359
356
403
334
397
a.	 Construct a stem-and-leaf display of the data. Will 
the sample mean or the sample median be larger 
for this data set?
b.	Calculate the values of the sample mean and 
median. 
c.	 By how much could the largest time be increased 
without affecting the value of the sample median? 
By how much could this value be decreased 
without affecting the sample median?
4.59	 Because some homes have selling prices that are 
much higher than most, the median price is usu-
ally used to describe a “typical” home price for a 
given location. The three accompanying quotes are 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
CHAPTER REVIEW 
Exercises 4.55 - 4.73
Chapter Review Exercises 
●  193
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

194 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
all from the San Luis Obispo Tribune, but each gives a 
different interpretation of the median price of a home 
in San Luis Obispo County. Comment on each of 
these statements. (Look carefully. At least one of the 
statements is incorrect.)
a.	 “So we have gone from 23% to 27% of county 
residents who can afford the median priced home 
at $278,380 in SLO County. That means that 
half of the homes in this county cost less than 
$278,380 and half cost more.” (Oc­to­ber 11, 2001)
b.	“The county’s median price rose to $285,170 in 
the fourth quarter, a 9.6% increase from the same 
period a year ago, the report said. (The median rep-
resents the midpoint of a range.)” (Feb­ru­ary 13, 2002)
c.	 “‘Your median is going to creep up above 
$300,000 if there is nothing available below 
$300,000,’ Walker said.” (Feb­ru­ary 26, 2002)
4.60	 ● Although bats are not known for their eyesight, 
they are able to locate prey (mainly insects) by 
emitting high-pitched sounds and listening for 
echoes. A paper appearing in Animal Behaviour (“The 
Echolocation of Flying Insects by Bats” [1960]: 141–154) 
gave the following distances (in centimeters) at which 
a bat ﬁrst detected a nearby insect:
62
23
27
56
52
34
42
40
68
45
83
a.	 Compute the sample mean distance at which the 
bat ﬁrst detects an insect. 
b.	Compute the sample variance and standard devia-
tion for this data set. Interpret these values. 
4.61	 For the data in Exercise 4.60, subtract 10 from each 
sample observation. For the new set of values, com-
pute the mean and the deviations from the mean. How 
do these deviations compare to the deviations from the 
mean for the original sample? How does s2 for the new 
values compare to s2 for the old values? In general, 
what effect does subtracting (or adding) the same 
number to each observation have on s2 and s? Explain.
4.62	 For the data of Exercise 4.60, multiply each data 
value by 10. How does s for the new values compare 
to s for the original values? More generally, what 
happens to s if each observation is multiplied by the 
same positive constant c?
4.63	 ● The percentage of juice lost after thawing for 
19 different strawberry varieties appeared in the 
article “Evaluation of Strawberry Cultivars with Differ-
ent Degrees of Resistance to Red Scale” (Fruit Varieties 
Journal [1991]: 12–17):
46
51
44
50
33
46
60
41
55
46
53
53
42
44
50
54
46
41
48
a.	 Are there any observations that are mild outliers? 
Extreme outliers? 
b.	Construct a boxplot, and comment on the 
important features of the plot.
4.64	 ● The risk of developing iron de­ﬁ­ciency is especially 
high during pregnancy. Detecting such a de­ﬁ­ciency 
is complicated by the fact that some methods for 
determining iron status can be affected by the 
state of pregnancy itself. Consider the following 
data on transferrin receptor concentration for a 
sample of women with laboratory evidence of overt 
iron-de­ﬁ­ciency anemia (“Serum Transferrin Receptor for 
the Detection of Iron Deﬁciency in Pregnancy,” American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition [1991]: 1077–1081):
15.2
9.3
  7.6
11.9
10.4
9.7
20.4
9.4
11.5
16.2
  9.4
8.3
a.	 Compute the values of the sample mean and 
median. Why are these values different here? 
b.	Which of the mean and the median do you regard 
as more representative of the sample, and why?
4.65	 ● The paper “The Pedaling Technique of Elite 
Endurance Cyclists” (International Journal of Sport Bio­
mechanics [1991]: 29–53) reported the following data 
on single-leg power at a high workload:
244
191
160
187
180
176
174
205
211
183
211
180
194
200
a.	 Calculate and interpret the sample mean and 
median. 
b.	Suppose that the ﬁrst observation had been 
204, not 244. How would the mean and median 
change?
4.66	 The paper cited in Exercise 4.65 also reported 
values of single-leg power for a low workload. The 
sample mean for n 5 13 observations was x 5 119.8 
(actually 119.7692), and the 14th observation, 
somewhat of an outlier, was 159. What is the value of 
x for the entire sample? 
4.67	 ● The amount of aluminum contamination (in parts 
per million) in plastic was determined for a sample of 
26 plastic specimens, resulting in the following data 
(“The Log Normal Distribution for Modeling Quality Data 
When the Mean Is Near Zero,” Journal of Quality Technol-
ogy [1990]: 105–110):
  30
  30
  60
  63
  70
  79
  87
  90
101
102
115
118
119
119
120
125
140
145
172
182
183
191
222
244
291
511
Construct a boxplot that shows outliers, and comment 
on the interesting features of this plot.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.68	 ● The article “Can We Really Walk Straight?” (American 
Journal of Physical Anthropology [1992]: 19–27) reported 
on an experiment in which each of 20 healthy men 
was asked to walk as straight as possible to a target 
60 m away at normal speed. Consider the following 
data on cadence (number of strides per second):
0.95
0.85
0.92
0.95
0.93
0.86
1.00
0.92
0.85
0.81
0.78
0.93
0.93
1.05
0.93
1.06
1.06
0.96
0.81
0.96
Use the methods developed in this chapter to sum-
marize the data; include an interpretation or discus-
sion whenever appropriate. (Note: The author of the 
paper used a rather sophisticated statistical analysis 
to conclude that people cannot walk in a straight line 
and suggested several explanations for this.)
4.69	 ● The article “Comparing the Costs of Major Hotel 
Franchises” (Real Estate Review [1992]: 46–51) gave the 
following data on franchise cost as a percentage of 
total room revenue for chains of three different types:
Budget
2.7
2.8
3.8
3.8
4.0
4.1
5.5
5.9
6.7
7.0
7.2
7.2
7.5
7.5
7.7
7.9
7.9
8.1
8.2
8.5
Midrange
1.5
4.0
6.6
6.7
7.0
7.2
7.2
7.4
7.8
8.0
8.1
8.3
8.6
9.0
First-class
1.8
5.8
6.0
6.6
6.6
6.6
7.1
7.2
7.5
7.6
7.6
7.8
7.8
8.2
9.6
Construct a boxplot for each type of hotel, and comment 
on interesting features, similarities, and differences.
4.70	 ● The accompanying data on milk volume (in grams 
per day) were taken from the paper “Smoking During 
Pregnancy and Lactation and Its Effects on Breast Milk 
Volume” (American Journal of Clinical Nutrition [1991]: 
1011–1016):
Smoking
621
793
  593
  545
753
655
mothers
895
767
  714
  598
693
Nonsmoking
947
945
1086
1202
973
981
mothers
930
745
  903
  899
961
Compare and contrast the two samples
4.71	 The Los Angeles Times (July 17, 1995) reported that in 
a sample of 364 lawsuits in which punitive damages 
were awarded, the sample median damage award was 
$50,000, and the sample mean was $775,000. What 
does this suggest about the distribution of values in 
the sample? 
4.72	
 Age at diagnosis for each of 20 patients under 
treatment for meningitis was given in the paper 
“Penicillin in the Treatment of Meningitis” (Journal of the 
American Medical Association [1984]: 1870–1874). The 
ages (in years) were as follows:
18
18
25
19
23
20
69
18
21
18
20
18
18
20
18
19
28
17
18
18
a.	 Calculate the values of the sample mean and the 
standard deviation.
b.	Compute the upper quartile, the lower quartile, 
and the interquartile range.
c.	 Are there any mild or extreme outliers present in 
this data set?
d.	Construct the boxplot for this data set.
4.73	 Suppose that the distribution of scores on an exam is 
closely described by a normal curve with mean 100. 
The 16th percentile of this distribution is 80.
a.	 What is the 84th percentile? 
b.	What is the approximate value of the standard 
deviation of exam scores? 
c.	 What z score is associated with an exam score 
of 90? 
d.	What percentile corresponds to an exam score 
of 140? 
e.	 Do you think there were many scores below 40? 
Explain.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Chapter Review Exercises 
●  195
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

TECHNOLOGY NOTES
Mean
JMP
1.  Input the raw data into a column
2.  Click Analyze and select Distribution
3.  Click and drag the column name containing the data 
from the box under Select Columns to the box next 
to Y, Columns
4.  Click OK
Note: These commands also produce the following statistics: 
standard deviation, minimum, quartile 1, median, quartile 3, 
and maximum.
Minitab
1.  Input the raw data into C1
2.  Select Stat and choose Basic Statistics then choose 
Display Descriptive Statistics...
3.  Double-click C1 to add it to the Variables list
4.  Click OK
Note: These commands also produce the following statistics: 
standard deviation, minimum, quartile 1, median, quartile 3, 
and maximum.
SPSS
1.  Input the raw data into the first column
2.  Select Analyze and choose Descriptive Statistics then 
choose Explore...
3.  Highlight the column name for the variable
4.  Click the arrow to move the variable to the Dependent 
List box
5.  Click OK
Note: These commands also produce the following statistics: 
median, variance, standard deviation, minimum, maximum, 
interquartile range, and several plots.
Excel 2007
1.  Input the raw data into the first column
2.  Click on the Data ribbon and select Data Analysis
Note: If you do not see Data Analysis listed on the 
Ribbon, see the Technology Notes for Chapter 3 for 
instructions on installing this add-on.
3.  Select Descriptive Statistics from the dialog box
4.  Click OK
5.  Click in the box next to Input Range: and select the 
data (if you used and selected column titles, check the 
box next to Labels in First Row)
6.  Check the box next to Summary Statistics
7.  Click OK
Note: These commands also produce the following statistics: 
standard error, median, mode, standard deviation, sample 
variance, range, minimum, and maximum.
Note: You can also find the mean using the Excel function 
average.
TI-83/84 
1.  Input the raw data into L1 (To access lists press the 
STAT key, highlight the option called Edit... then press 
ENTER)
2.  Press the STAT key
3.  Use the arrows to highlight CALC 
4.  Highlight 1-Var Stats and press ENTER
5.  Press the 2nd key and then the 1 key
6.  Press ENTER
Note: You may need to scroll to view all of the statistics. This 
procedure also produces the standard deviation, minimum, 
Q1, median, Q3, maximum.
TI-Nspire
1.  Enter the data into a data list (To access data lists select 
the spreadsheet option and press enter)
Note: Be sure to title the list by selecting the top row of 
the column and typing a title.
2.  Press the menu key and select 4:Statistics then select 
1:Stat Calculations then 1:One-Variable Statistics...
3.  Press OK
4.  For X1 List, select the title for the column containing 
your data from the drop-down menu
5.  Press OK
Note: You may need to scroll to view all of the statistics. This 
procedure also produces the standard deviation, minimum, 
Q1, median, Q3, maximum.
Median
JMP
1.  Input the raw data into a column
2.  Click Analyze and select Distribution
3.  Click and drag the column name containing the data 
from the box under Select Columns to the box next to 
Y, Columns
4.  Click OK
Note: These commands also produce the following statistics: 
mean, standard deviation, minimum, quartile 1, quartile 3, 
and maximum.
Minitab
1.  Input the raw data into C1
2.  Select Stat and choose Basic Statistics then choose 
Display Descriptive Statistics...
3.  Double-click C1 to add it to the Variables list
4.  Click OK
196 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.5   Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses  
●  197
Note: These commands also produce the following statistics: 
mean, standard deviation, minimum, quartile 1, quartile 3, 
maximum.
SPSS
1.  Input the raw data into the first column
2.  Select Analyze and choose Descriptive Statistics then 
choose Explore...
3.  Highlight the column name for the variable
4.  Click the arrow to move the variable to the Dependent 
List box
5.  Click OK
Note: These commands also produce the following statistics: 
mean, variance, standard deviation, minimum, maximum, 
interquartile range, and several plots.
Excel 2007
1.  Input the raw data into the first column
2.  Click on the Data ribbon and select Data Analysis
3.  Note: If you do not see Data Analysis listed on the 
Ribbon, see the Technology Notes for Chapter 3 for 
instructions on installing this add-on.
4.  Select Descriptive Statistics from the dialog box
5.  Click OK
6.  Click in the box next to Input Range: and select the 
data (if you used and selected column titles, check the 
box next to Labels in First Row)
7.  Check the box next to Summary Statistics
8.  Click OK
Note: These commands also produce the following statistics: 
mean, standard error, mode, standard deviation, sample 
variance, range, minimum, and maximum.
Note: You can also find the median using the Excel function 
median.
TI-83/84 
1.  Input the raw data into L1 (To access lists press the 
STAT key, highlight the option called Edit... then press 
ENTER)
2.  Press the STAT key
3.  Use the arrows to highlight CALC 
4.  Highlight 1-Var Stats and press ENTER
5.  Press the 2nd key and then the 1 key
6.  Press ENTER
Note: You may need to scroll to view all of the statistics. 
This procedure also produces the mean, standard deviation, 
minimum, Q1, Q3, maximum.
TI-Nspire
1.  Enter the data into a data list (To access data lists select 
the spreadsheet option and press enter)
Note: Be sure to title the list by selecting the top row of 
the column and typing a title.
2.  Press the menu key and select 4:Statistics then select 
1:Stat Calculations then 1:One-Variable Statistics...
3.  Press OK
4.  For X1 List, select the title for the column containing 
your data from the drop-down menu
5.  Press OK
Note: You may need to scroll to view all of the statistics. 
This procedure also produces the mean, standard deviation, 
minimum, Q1, Q3, maximum.
Variance
JMP
1.  Input the raw data into a column
2.  Click Analyze and select Distribution
3.  Click and drag the column name containing the data 
from the box under Select Columns to the box next to 
Y, Columns
4.  Click OK
5.  Click the red arrow next to the column name
6.  Click Display Options then select More Moments
Note: These commands also produce the following statistics: 
standard deviation, minimum, quartile 1, median, quartile 3, 
and maximum.
Minitab
1.  Input the raw data into C1
2.  Select Stat and choose Basic Statistics then choose 
Display Descriptive Statistics...
3.  Double-click C1 to add it to the Variables list
4.  Click the Statistics button
5.  Check the box next to Variance
6.  Click OK
7.  Click OK
SPSS
1.  Input the raw data into the first column
2.  Select Analyze and choose Descriptive Statistics then 
choose Explore...
3.  Highlight the column name for the variable
4.  Click the arrow to move the variable to the Dependent 
List box
5.  Click OK
Note: These commands also produce the following statistics: 
mean, median, standard deviation, minimum, maximum, 
interquartile range, and several plots.
Excel 2007
1.  Input the raw data into the first column
2.  Click on the Data ribbon and select Data Analysis
3.  Note: If you do not see Data Analysis listed on the 
Ribbon, see the Technology Notes for Chapter 3 for 
instructions on installing this add-on.
4.  Select Descriptive Statistics from the dialog box
5.  Click OK
6.  Click in the box next to Input Range: and select the 
data (if you used and selected column titles, check the 
box next to Labels in First Row)
Technology Notes 
●  197
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

198 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
7.  Check the box next to Summary Statistics
8.  Click OK
Note: These commands also produce the following statistics: 
mean, standard error, median, mode, standard deviation, 
range, minimum, and maximum.
Note: You can also find the variance using the Excel 
function var.
TI-83/84
The TI-83/84 does not automatically produce the variance; 
however, this can be determined by finding the standard 
deviation and squaring it.
TI-Nspire
The TI-Nspire does not automatically produce the variance; 
however, this can be determined by finding the standard 
deviation and squaring it.
Standard Deviation
JMP
1.  Input the raw data into a column
2.  Click Analyze and select Distribution
3.  Click and drag the column name containing the data 
from the box under Select Columns to the box next 
to Y, Columns
4.  Click OK
Note: These commands also produce the following statistics: 
mean, minimum, quartile 1, median, quartile 3, and maximum.
Minitab
1.  Input the raw data into C1
2.  Select Stat and choose Basic Statistics then choose 
Display Descriptive Statistics...
3.  Double-click C1 to add it to the Variables list
4.  Click OK
Note: These commands also produce the following statistics: 
standard deviation, minimum, quartile 1, median, quartile 3, 
maximum.
SPSS
1.  Input the raw data into the first column
2.  Select Analyze and choose Descriptive Statistics then 
choose Explore...
3.  Highlight the column name for the variable
4.  Click the arrow to move the variable to the Dependent 
List box
5.  Click OK
Note: These commands also produce the following statistics: 
mean, median, variance, minimum, maximum, interquartile 
range, and several plots.
Excel 2007
1.  Input the raw data into the first column
2.  Click on the Data ribbon and select Data Analysis
3.  Note: If you do not see Data Analysis listed on the 
Ribbon, see the Technology Notes for Chapter 3 for 
instructions on installing this add-on.
4.  Select Descriptive Statistics from the dialog box
5.  Click OK
6.  Click in the box next to Input Range: and select the 
data (if you used and selected column titles, check the 
box next to Labels in First Row)
7.  Check the box next to Summary Statistics
8.  Click OK
Note: These commands also produce the following statistics: 
mean, standard error, median, mode, sample variance, range, 
minimum, and maximum.
Note: You can also find the standar deviation using the Excel 
function sd.
TI-83/84
1.  Input the raw data into L1 (To access lists press the 
STAT key, highlight the option called Edit... then press 
ENTER)
2.  Press the STAT key
3.  Use the arrows to highlight CALC 
4.  Highlight 1-Var Stats and press ENTER
5.  Press the 2nd key and then the 1 key
6.  Press ENTER
Note: You may need to scroll to view all of the statistics. This 
procedure also produces the mean, minimum, Q1, median, 
Q3, maximum.
TI-Nspire
1.  Enter the data into a data list (To access data lists select 
the spreadsheet option and press enter)
Note: Be sure to title the list by selecting the top row of 
the column and typing a title.
2.  Press the menu key and select 4:Statistics then select 
1:Stat Calculations then 1:One-Variable Statistics...
3.  Press OK
4.  For X1 List, select the title for the column containing 
your data from the drop-down menu
5.  Press OK
Note: You may need to scroll to view all of the statistics. This 
procedure also produces the mean, minimum, Q1, median, 
Q3, maximum.
Quartiles
JMP
1.  Input the raw data into a column
2.  Click Analyze and select Distribution
3.  Click and drag the column name containing the data 
from the box under Select Columns to the box next to 
Y, Columns
4.  Click OK
198 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.5   Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses  
●  199
Note: These commands also produce the following 
statistics: mean, standard deviation, minimum, median, and 
maximum.
Minitab
1.  Input the raw data into C1
2.  Select Stat and choose Basic Statistics then choose 
Display Descriptive Statistics...
3.  Double-click C1 to add it to the Variables list
4.  Click OK
Note: These commands also produce the following statistics: 
standard deviation, minimum, quartile 1, median, quartile 3, 
maximum.
SPSS
1.  Input the raw data into the first column
2.  Select Analyze and choose Descriptive Statistics then 
choose Frequencies...
3.  Highlight the column name for the variable
4.  Click the arrow to move the variable to the Dependent 
List box
5.  Click the Statistics button
6.  Check the box next to Quartiles
7.  Click Continue
8.  Click OK
Excel 2007
1.  Input the raw data into the first column
2.  Select the cell where you would like to place the first 
quartile results
3.  Click the Formulas Ribbon
4.  Click Insert Function
5.  Select the category Statistical from the drop-down 
menu
6.  In the Select a function: box click Quartile
7.  Click OK
8.  Click in the box next to Array and select the data
9.  Click in the box next to Quart and type 1
10.  Click OK
Note: To find the third quartile, type 3 into the box next to 
Quart in Step 9.
TI-83/84 
1.  Input the raw data into L1 (To access lists press the 
STAT key, highlight the option called Edit... then press 
ENTER)
2.  Press the STAT key
3.  Use the arrows to highlight CALC 
4.  Highlight 1-Var Stats and press ENTER
5.  Press the 2nd key and then the 1 key
6.  Press ENTER
Note: You may need to scroll to view all of the statistics. 
This procedure also produces the mean, standard deviation, 
minimum, median, maximum.
TI-Nspire
1.  Enter the data into a data list (To access data lists select 
the spreadsheet option and press enter)
Note: Be sure to title the list by selecting the top row of 
the column and typing a title.
2.  Press the menu key and select 4:Statistics then select 
1:Stat Calculations then 1:One-Variable Statistics...
3.  Press OK
4.  For X1 List, select the title for the column containing 
your data from the drop-down menu
5.  Press OK
Note: You may need to scroll to view all of the statistics. 
This procedure also produces the mean, standard deviation, 
minimum, median, maximum.
IQR
JMP
JMP does not have the functionality to produce the IQR 
automatically.
Minitab
1.  Input the raw data into C1
2.  Select Stat and choose Basic Statistics then choose 
Display Descriptive Statistics...
3.  Double-click C1 to add it to the Variables list
4.  Click the Statistics button
5.  Check the box next to Interquartile range
6.  Click OK
7.  Click OK
SPSS
1.  Input the raw data into the first column
2.  Select Analyze and choose Descriptive Statistics then 
choose Explore...
3.  Highlight the column name for the variable
4.  Click the arrow to move the variable to the Dependent 
List box
5.  Click OK
Note: These commands also produce the following statistics: 
mean, median, variance, standard deviation, minimum, 
maximum, and several plots.
Excel 2007
1.  Use the steps under the Quartiles section to find both 
the first and third quartiles
2.  Click on an empty cell where you would like the result 
for IQR to appear
3.  Type 5 into the cell
4.  Click on the cell containing the third quartile
5.  Type 2
6.  Click on the cell containing the first quartile
7.  Press Enter
Technology Notes 
●  199
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

200 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
TI-83/84 
The TI-83/84 does not have the functionality to produce the 
IQR automatically.
TI-Nspire
The TI-Nspire does not have the functionality to produce the 
IQR automatically.
Boxplot
JMP
1.  Input the raw data into a column
2.  Click Analyze and select Distribution
3.  Click and drag the column name containing the data 
from the box under Select Columns to the box next  
to Y, Columns
4.  Click OK
Minitab
1.  Input the raw data into C1
2.  Select Graph then choose Boxplot...
3.  Highlight Simple under One Y
4.  Click OK
5.  Double-click C1 to add it to the Graph Variables box
6.  Click OK
Note: You may add or format titles, axis titles, legends, and 
so on by clicking on the Labels... button prior to performing 
Step 6 above.
SPSS
1.  Enter the raw data the first column
2.  Select Graph and choose Chart Builder...
3.  Under Choose from highlight Boxplot
4.  Click and drag the first boxplot (Simple Boxplot) to the 
Chart preview area
5.  Click and drag the data variable into the Y-Axis? box in 
the chart preview area
6.  Click OK
Note: Boxplots are also produced when summary statistics 
such as mean, median, standard deviation, and so on are 
produced.
Excel 2007
Excel 2007 does not have the functionality to create boxplots.
TI-83/84 
1.  Input the raw data into L1 (To access lists press the 
STAT key, highlight the option called Edit... then press 
ENTER)
2.  Press the 2nd key and then press the Y 5 key
3.  Select Plot1 and press ENTER
4.  Highlight On and press ENTER
5.  Highlight the graph option in the second row, second 
column, and press ENTER
6.  Press GRAPH
Note: If the graph window does not display appropriately, 
press the WINDOW button and reset the scales appropriately. 
TI-Nspire
1.  Enter the data into a data list (To access data list select 
the spreadsheet option and press enter)
Note: Be sure to title the list by selecting the top row of 
the column and typing a title.
2.  Press menu and select 3:Data then select 6:QuickGraph
3.  Press menu and select 1:Plot Type then select 2:Box 
Plot and press enter
Side-by-side Boxplots
JMP
1.  Enter the raw data for both groups into a column
2.  Enter the group information into a second column
3.  Click Analyze then select Fit Y by X
4.  Click and drag the column name containing the raw 
data from the box under Select Columns to the box 
next to Y, Response
5.  Click and drag the column name containing the group 
information from the box under Select Columns to the 
box next to X, Factor
6.  Click OK
7.  Click the red arrow next to Oneway Analysis of...
8.  Click Quantiles
Minitab
1.  Input the raw data for the first group into C1
2.  Input the raw data for the second group into C2
3.  Continue to input data for each group into a separate 
column
4.  Select Graph then choose Boxplot...
5.  Highlight Simple under Multiple Y’s
6.  Click OK
7.  Double-click the column names for each column to be 
graphed to add it to the Graph Variables box
8.  Click OK
SPSS
1.  Enter the raw data into the first column
2.  Enter the group data into the second column
200 
●  Chapter 4  Numerical Methods for Describing Data
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.5   Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses  
●  201
3.  Select Graph and choose Chart Builder...
4.  Under Choose from highlight Boxplot
5.  Click and drag the first boxplot (Simple Boxplot) to the 
Chart preview area
6.  Click and drag the data variable into the Y-Axis? box in 
the chart preview area
7.  Click and drag the group variable into the X-Axis? box 
in the chart preview area
8.  Click OK
Excel 2007
Excel 2007 does not have the functionality to create side-by-
side boxplots.
TI-83/84 
The TI-83/84 does not have the functionality to create side-
by-side boxplots.
TI-Nspire
The TI-Nspire does not have the functionality to create side-
by-side boxplots.
Technology Notes 
●  201
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

202
Forensic scientists must often estimate the age of an unidentified 
crime victim. Prior to 2010, this was usually done by analyzing teeth 
and bones, and the resulting estimates were not very reliable. 
A groundbreaking study described in the paper “Estimating 
Human Age from T-Cell DNA Rearrangements” (Current Biology [2010]) 
examined the relationship between age and a measure based on a 
blood test. Age and the blood test measure were recorded for 195 
people ranging in age from a few weeks to 80 years. By studying 
this relationship, the investigators hoped to be able to estimate 
the age of a crime victim from a blood sample.
In this chapter, we will consider methods for describing the re-
lationship between two numerical variables and for assessing the 
strength of a relationship.
Summarizing Bivariate Data
Spencer Platt/Getty Images Sport/Getty Images 
Chapter 5: Learning Objectives
Students will understand:
●
●that the relationship between two numerical variables can be described in 
terms of form, strength, and direction.
●
●the difference between a statistical relationship and a causal relationship (the 
difference between correlation and causation).
●
●how a line is used to describe the relationship between two numerical variables. 
●
●the meaning of least-squares in the context of fitting a regression line.
●
●why it is risky to use the least-squares line to make predictions outside the 
range of the data.
●
●why it is important to consider both the standard deviation about the 
regression line and the value of r2 when assessing the usefulness of the 
least-squares regression line.
●
●the role of a residual plot in assessing whether a line is an appropriate way to 
describe the relationship between two numerical variables.
Students will be able to:
●
●informally describe the form, direction, and strength of a linear relationship 
based on a scatterplot.
●
●compute and interpret the value of the correlation coefficient.
●
●find the equation of the least-squares regression line and interpret the slope 
and intercept in context.
●
●use the least-squares regression line to make predictions.
CHAPTER 5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.1   Correlation 
●  203
An investigator is often interested in how two or more variables are related to one another. 
For example, an environmental researcher might wish to know how the lead content of 
soil varies with distance from a major highway. Researchers in early childhood education 
might investigate how vocabulary size is related to age. College admissions of­ﬁ­cers, who 
must try to predict whether an applicant will succeed in college, might be interested in the 
relationship between college grade point average and high school grade point average or 
score on the ACT or SAT exam.
We can get a visual impression of how strongly two numerical variables are related by 
looking at a scatterplot. However, to make more precise statements we must go beyond 
pictures. A correlation coef­ﬁ­cient (from co- and relation) is a numerical assessment of the 
strength of relationship between the x and y values in a bivariate data set consisting of (x, y) 
pairs. In this section, we introduce the most commonly used correlation coef­ﬁ­cient.
Figure 5.1 displays several scatterplots that show different relationships between the 
x and y values. The plot in Figure 5.1(a) suggests a strong positive relationship ­between 
x and y. For every pair of points in the plot, the one with the larger x value also has the 
larger y value. That is, an increase in x is paired with an increase in y. 
●
●compute and interpret the value of the standard deviation about the 
regression line, se.
●
●compute and interpret the value of r 2, the coefficient of determination.
●
●construct a residual plot and use it to assess the appropriateness of using a 
line to describe the relationship between two numerical variables.
●
●identify outliers and potentially influential observations in a linear regression 
context.
 5.1  
Correlation
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
Figure  5.1
Scatterplots illustrating various types 
of relationships:  
(a) positive linear relationship;  
(b) another positive linear relationship;  
(c) negative linear relationship;  
(d) no relationship;  
(e) curved relationship.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

204 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
The plot in Figure 5.1(b) shows a strong tendency for y to increase as x does, but there 
are a few exceptions. For example, the x and y values of the two points with the largest 
x values (shown in a different color) go in opposite directions (for this pair of points, 
x increases but y decreases in value). Nevertheless, a plot like this still indicates a fairly 
strong ­positive relationship. 
Figure 5.1(c) suggests that x and y are negatively related. As x increases, y tends to 
decrease. The negative relationship in this plot is not as strong as the positive relationship 
in Figure 5.1(b), although both plots show a well-de­ﬁned linear pattern. 
The plot of Figure 5.1(d) indicates that there is not a strong relationship between 
x and y. There is no tendency for y either to increase or to decrease as x increases. Finally, 
as ­illustrated in Figure 5.1(e), a scatterplot can show evidence of a strong relationship that 
is curved rather than linear.
Pearson’s Sample Correlation Coefficient
Pearson’s sample correlation coefficient measures the strength of any linear relationship 
between two numerical variables. It does this by using z scores in a clever way. Consider 
replacing each x value by the corresponding z score, zx (by subtracting x and then dividing 
by sx) and similarly replacing each y value by its z score. Note that x values that are larger 
than x will have positive z scores and those smaller than x will have negative z scores. 
Also y values larger than y will have positive z scores and those smaller will have negative 
z scores. Pearson’s sample correlation coef­ﬁ­cient is based on the sum of the products of zx 
and zy for each observation in the bivariate data set. This can be written as ozxzy.
To see how this works, let’s look at some scatterplots. The scatterplot in Figure 5.2(a) 
indicates a strong positive relationship. A vertical line through x and a horizontal line 
through y divide the plot into four regions. In Region I, both x and y are greater than their 
mean values, so the z score for x and the z score for y are both positive numbers. It follows 
that zxzy is positive. The product of the z scores is also positive for any point in Region III, 
because both z scores are negative in Region III and multiplying two negative numbers 
gives a positive number. 
In each of the other two regions, one z score is positive and the other is negative, so 
zxzy is negative. But because the points generally fall in Regions I and III, the products of 
z scores tend to be positive. Thus, the sum of the products will be a relatively large positive 
number.
Similar reasoning for the data displayed in Figure 5.2(b), which exhibits a strong nega-
tive relationship, implies that ozxzy will be a relatively large (in magnitude) negative num-
ber. When there is no strong relationship, as in Figure 5.2(c), positive and negative prod-
ucts tend to counteract one another, producing a value of ozxzy that is close to zero. 
In summary, ozxzy seems to be a reasonable measure of the degree of association between 
x and y. It can be a large positive number, a large negative number, or a number close to 0, 
depending on whether there is a strong positive, a strong negative, or no linear relationship.
Pearson’s sample correlation coef­ﬁ­cient, denoted r, is obtained by dividing ozxzy by 
(n 2 1).
Pearson’s sample correlation coef­ﬁ­cient r: A measure of the strength and 
direction of a linear relationship between two numerical variables. Denoted by r, 
Pearson’s sample correlation coefficient is given by 
r 5
o zx zy
n 2 1
Although there are several different correlation coef­ﬁ­cients, Pearson’s ­correlation 
coef­ﬁ­cient is by far the most commonly used, and so the name “Pearson’s” is 
often omitted and it is referred to as simply the correlation coef­ﬁ­cient.
DEFINITION
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.1   Correlation 
●  205
Hand calculation of the correlation coef­ﬁ­cient is quite tedious. Fortunately, all statistical 
software packages and most graphing calculators can compute the value of r once the x and 
y values have been input.
Example 5.1 
A Face You Can Trust
The article “How to Tell If a Guy Is Trustworthy” (LiveScience, March 8, 2010) described an 
interesting research study published in the journal Psychological Science (“Valid Facial 
Cues to Cooperation and Trust: Male Facial Width and Trustworthiness,” Psychological Science 
[2010]: 349–354). This study investigated whether there is a relationship between facial 
characteristics and peoples’ assessment of trustworthiness. Sixty-two students were each 
told that they would play a series of two-person games in which they could earn real 
money. In each game, the student could choose between two options:
1.	 They could end the game immediately and a total of $10 would be paid out, with 
each player receiving $5.
	 or
2.	 They could “trust” the other player. In this case, $3 would be added to the money 
available, but the other player could decide to either split the money fairly with 
$6.50 to each player or could decide to keep $10 and only give $3 to the first player.
Understand the context ❭
x
y
y
x
y
y–
x –
y–
x –
II
III
I
IV
II
III
I
IV
II
III
I
IV
zx is negative
zy is positive
zxzy is negative
zx is negative
zy is negative
zxzy is positive
zx is positive
zy is positive
zxzy is positive
zx is positive
zy is negative
zxzy is negative
x –
y–
x
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure  5.2
Viewing a scatterplot according to 
the signs of zx and zy:  
(a) a positive relationship;  
(b) a negative relationship;  
(c) no strong relationship.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

206 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
Face Width-to-
Height Ratio
Percentage 
Choosing Trust 
Option
1.75
58
1.80
80
1.90
30
1.95
50
1.95
65
2.00
10
2.00
28
2.00
62
2.00
70
2.00
63
Face Width-to-
Height Ratio
Percentage 
Choosing Trust 
Option
2.05
  8
2.05
35
2.05
50
2.05
58
2.10
64
2.10
25
2.10
35
2.10
50
2.10
66
2.10
62
Face Width-to-
Height Ratio
Percentage 
Choosing Trust 
Option
2.15
42
2.15
31
2.15
15
2.15
65
2.20
42
2.20
22
2.20
14
2.25
  9
2.25
20
2.25
35
Face Width-to-
Height Ratio
Percentage 
Choosing Trust 
Option
2.30
43
2.30
  8
2.35
41
2.40
53
2.40
35
2.60
55
2.68
20
2.70
11
The first observation (1.75, 58) indicates that 58% of the students shown the picture of 
a person with a width-to-height ration of 1.75 chose the trust option.
A scatterplot of these data is shown in Figure 5.3. 
1.8
2.0
2.2
Face width-to-hight ratio
2.4
2.6
2.8
0
40
60
70
80
30
10
50
Percent trusting
Figure  5.3
Scatterplot for the data of  
­Example 5.1.
JMP was used to compute the value of the correlation coefficient, with the following result:
The value of the correlation coefficient (−0.39169) is found in the JMP output under the 
heading “Correlation.” 
To compute the value of the correlation coefficient by hand, use x to denote the face width-to- 
height ratio and y to denote the percentage choosing the trust option. It is easy to verify that
x 5 2.153 sx 5 0.210 y 5 40.26 sy 5 20.59
Each student was shown a picture of the person he or she would be playing with. The 
student then indicated whether they would end the game immediately and take $5 or 
trust the other player to do the right thing in hopes of increasing the payout to $6.50. This 
process was repeated for a series of games, each with a photo of a different second player. 
For each photo, the researchers recorded the width-to-height ratio of the face in the photo 
and the percentage of the students who chose the trust option when shown that photo. A 
representative subset of the data (from a graph that appeared in the paper) is given here:
Consider the data ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.1   Correlation 
●  207
Begin by computing z scores for each (x, y) pair in the data set. For example, the ﬁrst 
observation is (1.75, 58). The corresponding z scores are
zx 5 1.75 2 2.153
0.210
5 21.92       zy 5 58 2 40.26
20.59
5 0.86
The following table shows the z scores and the product zx zy for each observation:
Do the work ❭
x
y
zx
zy
zxzy
x
y
zx
zy
zxzy
x
y
zx
zy
zxzy
1.75
58
  21.92
    0.86
21.65
2.05
58
20.49
    0.86
20.42
2.20
14
0.22
21.28
20.28
1.80
80
  21.68
   1.93
23.24
2.10
64
20.25
    1.15
20.29
2.25
  9
0.46
21.52
20.7
1.90
30
21.2
20.5
  0.6
2.10
25
20.25
20.74
   0.19
2.25
20
0.46
20.98
20.45
1.95
50
  20.97
    0.47
20.46
2.10
35
20.25
20.26
   0.07
2.25
35
0.46
20.26
20.12
1.95
65
  20.97
    1.2
21.16
2.10
50
20.25
    0.47
20.12
2.30
43
0.7
    0.13
    0.09
2.00
10
  20.73
  21.47
    1.07
2.10
66
20.25
    1.25
20.31
2.30
  8
0.7
21.57
21.1
2.00
28
  20.73
20.6
    0.44
2.10
62
20.25
    1.06
20.27
2.35
41
0.94
    0.04
    0.04
2.00
62
  20.73
    1.06
20.77
2.15
42
20.01
    0.08
0
2.40
53
1.18
    0.62
    0.73
2.00
70
  20.73
    1.44
21.05
2.15
31
20.01
20.45
0
2.40
35
1.18
20.26
20.31
2.00
63
  20.73
    1.1
20.8
2.15
15
20.01
21.23
    0.01
2.60
55
2.13
    0.72
    1.53
2.05
  8
  20.49
  21.57
   0.77
2.15
65
20.01
  1.2
20.01
2.68
20
2.51
20.98
22.46
2.05
35
  20.49
  20.26
    0.13
2.20
42
    0.22
   0.08
0.02
2.70
11
2.6
21.42
23.69
2.05
50
  20.49
    0.47
20.23
2.20
22
    0.22
20.89
20.2
ozx zy 5 214.4 and n 5 38, so
r 5
o zx zy
n 2 1 5 214.4
37
5 20.3892
The difference between the correlation coefficient reported by JMP and what we obtained 
is the result of rounding in the z scores when carrying out the calculations by hand. 
Based on the scatterplot and the properties of the correlation coef­ﬁ­cient presented in 
the discussion that follows this example, we conclude that there is a weak negative linear 
relationship between face width-to-height ratio and the percentage of people who chose 
to trust the face when playing the game. The relationship is negative, indicating that those 
with larger face width-to-height ratios (wider faces) tended to be trusted less. Based on this 
observation, the researchers concluded “It is clear that male facial width ratio is a cue to 
male trustworthiness and that it predicts trust placed in male faces.”
An interesting side note: In another study where subjects were randomly assigned to 
the player 1 and player 2 roles, the researchers found that those with larger face width-to-
height ratios were less trustworthy! They found a positive correlation between player 2 face 
width-to-height ratio and the percentage of the time that player 2 decided to keep $10 and 
only give $3 to player 1.	
■
Properties of r
	 1.	 The value of r is between 21 and 11. A value near the upper limit, 11, indicates 
a strong positive linear relationship, whereas an r close to the lower limit, 21, 
suggests a strong negative linear relationship. Figure 5.4 shows a useful way to 
describe the strength of relationship based on r. It may seem surprising that a value 
of r as extreme as 2 0.5 or 0.5 should be in the weak category. An explanation for 
this is given later in the chapter. Even a weak correlation may indicate a meaningful 
­relationship.
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

208 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
	 2.	 A correlation coef­ﬁ­cient of r 5 1 occurs only when all the points in a scatterplot of the 
data lie exactly on a straight line that slopes upward. Similarly, r 5 21 only when all 
the points lie exactly on a downward-sloping line. r 5 1 or r 5 21 indicates a perfect 
linear relationship between x and y in the sample data.
	 3.	 The value of r is a measure of the extent to which x and y are linearly related. r measures 
the extent to which the points in the scatterplot fall close to a straight line. A value of 
r close to 0 does not necessarily mean that there is no relationship between x and y. 
It is possible that there could still be a strong relationship that is not linear.
	 4.	 The value of r does not depend on the unit of measurement for either variable. For 
example, if x is height, the corresponding z score is the same whether height is 
expressed in inches, meters, or miles, and the value of the correlation coef­ﬁ­cient 
is not affected. The correlation coef­ﬁ­cient measures the inherent strength of the 
linear relationship between two numerical variables.
	 5.	 The value of r does not depend on which of the two variables is considered x. This 
means that if we had let x 5 percentage choosing trust option and y 5 face 
width-to-height ratio in Example 5.1, the same value, r 5 20.3892, would have 
resulted.
Example 5.2 
Does It Pay to Pay More for a Bike Helmet?
● Are more expensive bike helmets safer than less expensive ones? The accompanying 
data on x 5 price and y 5 quality rating for 12 different brands of bike helmets appeared 
on the Consumer Reports web site (www.consumerreports.org/health). Quality rating was a 
number from 0 (the worst possible rating) to 100, and was determined based on factors 
that included how well the helmet absorbed the force of an impact, the strength of the 
helmet, ventilation, and ease of use. Figure 5.5 shows a scatterplot of the data.
Understand the context ❭
Price
Quality Rating
35
65
20
61
30
60
40
55
50
54
23
47
30
47
18
43
40
42
28
41
20
40
25
32
Quality rating
50
45
60
55
65
40
35
30
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Price
FIGURE  5.5
Minitab scatterplot for the bike 
helmet data of Example 5.2.
21
20.8
20.5
0
0.5
0.8
1
Weak
Moderate
Moderate
Strong
Strong
Figure  5.4
Describing the strength of a linear 
relationship.
From the scatterplot, it appears that there is only a weak positive relationship between 
price and quality rating. The correlation coefficient, obtained using Minitab, is
Correlations: Price, Quality Rating
Pearson correlation of Price and Quality Rating 5 0.303
 Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.1   Correlation 
●  209
A correlation coefficient of r 5 .303 confirms that there is a tendency for higher quality ratings 
to be associated with higher priced helmets, but that the relationship is not very strong. In fact, 
the highest quality rating was for a helmet priced near the middle of the price values.	
■
Example 5.3 
Age and Marathon Times
● The article “Master’s Performance in the New York City Marathon” (British Journal of Sports 
Medicine [2004]: 408–412) gave the following data on the average ﬁn­ishing time by age group 
for female participants in the New York City marathon.
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
Age Group
Representative Age
Average Finish Time
10–19
15
302.38
20–29
25
193.63
30–39
35
185.46
40–49
45
198.49
50–59
55
224.30
60–69
65
288.71
Consider the data ❭
The scatterplot of average ﬁn­ish time versus representative age is shown in Figure 5.6.
10
Average ﬁnish time
300
275
250
225
200
20
30
40
50
60
70
Age
Figure  5.6
Scatterplot of y 5 average ﬁn­ish time 
and x 5 age for the data of 
­Example 5.3.
Using Minitab to compute Pearson’s correlation coef­ﬁ­cient between age and average 
ﬁnish time results in the following:
Correlations: Age, Average Finish Time
Pearson correlation of Age and Average Finish Time 5 0.038
This example shows the importance of interpreting r as a measure of the strength of a 
linear relationship. Here, r is not large, but there is a strong nonlinear relationship between 
age and average ﬁn­ish time. This is an important point—we should not conclude that there 
is no relationship whatsoever simply because the value of r is small in absolute value. Be 
sure to look at the scatterplot of the data before concluding that there is no relationship 
between two variables based on a correlation coefficient with a value near 0.	
■
The Population Correlation Coefficient
The sample correlation coef­ﬁ­cient r measures how strongly the x and y values in a sample 
of pairs are linearly related to one another. There is an analogous measure of how strongly 
x and y are related in the entire population of pairs from which the sample was obtained. It 
Interpret the results ❭
 Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

210 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
is called the population correlation coef­ﬁ­cient and is denoted by r. (Notice again the use 
of a Greek letter for a population characteristic and a Roman letter for a sample characteris-
tic.) We will never have to calculate r from an entire population of pairs, but it is important 
to know that r satisﬁes properties paralleling those of r:
1.	 r is a number between 21 and 11 that does not depend on the unit of measurement 
for either x or y, or on which variable is labeled x and which is labeled y.
2.	 r 5 11 or 21 if and only if all (x, y) pairs in the population lie exactly on a 
straight line, so r measures the extent to which there is a linear relationship in the 
­population.
In Chapter 13, we will see how the sample correlation coef­ﬁ­cient r can be used to draw 
conclusions about the value of the population correlation coef­ﬁ­cient r.
Correlation and Causation
A value of r close to 1 indicates that the larger values of one variable tend to be associated 
with the larger values of the other variable. This is different from saying that a large value 
of one variable causes the value of the other variable to be large. Correlation measures the 
extent of association, but association does not imply causation. 
It frequently happens that two variables are highly correlated not because one is causally 
related to the other but because they are both strongly related to a third variable. Among 
all elementary school children, the relationship between the number of cavities in a child’s 
teeth and the size of his or her vocabulary is strong and positive. Yet no one advocates 
eating foods that result in more cavities to increase vocabulary size (or working to decrease 
vocabulary size to protect against cavities). Number of cavities and vocabulary size are both 
strongly related to age, so older children tend to have higher values of both variables than 
do younger ones. 
In the ABCNews.com series “Who’s Counting?” (Feb­ru­ary 1, 2001), John Paulos reminded 
readers that correlation does not imply causation and gave the following example: 
Consumption of hot chocolate is negatively correlated with crime rate (high values of hot 
chocolate consumption tend to be paired with lower crime rates), but both are responses 
to cold weather.
Scientiﬁc experiments can frequently make a strong case for causality by carefully 
controlling the values of all variables that might be related to the ones under study. Then, 
if y is observed to change in a “smooth” way as the experimenter changes the value of x, 
a plausible explanation would be that there is a causal relationship between x and y. In 
the absence of such control and the ability to manipulate values of one variable, we must 
admit the possibility that an un­iden­ti­ﬁed underlying third variable is inﬂuencing both 
variables under investigation. A high correlation in many ­un­controlled studies carried out 
in different settings can also marshal support for causality—as in the case of cigarette 
smoking and cancer—but proving causality is an elusive task.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
exercises 5.1 - 5.13
5.1	 For each of the scatterplots shown, answer the 
following questions:
a.	 Does there appear to be a relationship between 
x and y? 
b.	If so, does the relationship appear to be linear?
c.	 If so, would you describe the linear relationship as 
positive or negative?
	
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.1   Correlation 
●  211
Scatterplot 4:
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
y
x
110
5.2	 For each of the following pairs of variables, indicate 
whether you would expect a positive correlation, 
a negative correlation, or a correlation close to 0. 
Explain your choice.
a.	 Maximum daily temperature and cooling 
costs 
b.	Interest rate and number of loan applications
c.	 Incomes of husbands and wives when both have 
full-time jobs 
d.	Height and IQ 
e.	 Height and shoe size 
f.	 Score on the math section of the SAT exam and 
score on the verbal section of the same test 
g.	 Time spent on homework and time spent watch-
ing television during the same day by elementary 
school ­children 
h.	Amount of fertilizer used per acre and crop yield 
(Hint: As the amount of fertilizer is increased, 
yield tends to increase for a while but then tends 
to start decreasing.) 
5.3	 Is the following statement correct? Explain why or 
why not. (Hint: See Example 5.3.)
A correlation coef­ﬁ­cient of 0 implies that no relationship 
exists between the two variables under study.
5.4	 Draw two scatterplots, one for which r 5 1 and a 
­second for which r 5 21.
5.5	 Each year J.D. Power and Associates surveys new car 
owners 90 days after they purchase their cars. This 
data is used to rate auto brands (such as Toyota and 
Ford) on quality and customer satisfaction. USA Today 
(June 16, 2010 and July 17, 2010) reported a quality 
rating and a satisfaction score for all 33 brands sold 
in the United States. 
Scatterplot 1:
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
y
x
110
Scatterplot 2:
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
y
x
110
Scatterplot 3:
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
y
x
110
 	
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

212 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
Brand
Quality Rating
Satisfaction Rating
Acura
  86
822
Audi
111
832
BMW
113
845
Buick
114
802
Cadillac
111
818
Chevrolet
111
789
Chrysler
122
748
Dodge
130
751
Ford
  93
794
GMC
126
792
Honda
  95
766
Hyundai
102
760
Infiniti
107
805
Jaguar
130
854
Jeep
129
727
Kia
126
761
Land Rover
170
836
Lexus
  88
822
Lincoln
106
820
Mazda
114
774
Mercedes-Benz
  87
842
Mercury
113
769
Mini Cooper
133
815
Mitsubishi
146
767
Nissan
111
763
Porsche
  83
877
Ram
110
780
Scion
114
764
Subaru
121
755
Suzuki
122
750
Toyota
117
745
Volkswagen
135
797
Volvo
109
795
a.	 Construct a scatterplot of y 5 satisfaction rating 
versus x 5 quality rating. How would you 
describe the relationship between x and y?
b.	Compute and interpret the value of the correlation 
coefficient.
5.6	 ● The accompanying data are x 5 cost (cents per 
serving) and y 5 fiber content (grams per serving) 
for 18 high-fiber cereals rated by Consumer Reports 
(www.consumerreports.org/health). 
Cost per 
Serving
Fiber per 
Serving
33
  7
46
10
49
10
62
  7
41
  8
19
  7
77
12
71
12
30
  8
Cost per 
Serving
Fiber per 
Serving
53
13
53
10
67
  8
43
12
48
  7
28
14
54
  7
27
  8
58
  8
a.	 Compute and interpret the value of the correlation 
coefficient for this data set. (Hint: See Example 5.1.)
b.	The serving size differed for the different cereals, 
with serving sizes varying from 1⁄2 cup to 11⁄4 
cups. Converting price and fiber content to “per 
cup” rather than “per serving” results in the 
accompanying data. Is the correlation coefficient 
for the per cup data greater than or less than the 
correlation coefficient for the per serving data?
Cost per 
Cup
Fiber per 
Cup
Cost per 
Cup
Fiber per 
Cup
     9.3
44
13
53
10
46
10
53
10
49
  8
67
  7
62
12
43
     6.4
   32.8
  7
48
  7
19
28
56
12
77
  7
54
     9.6
   56.8
16
54
  8
30
10.7
   77.3
5.7	 The authors of the paper “Flat-footedness is Not a 
Disadvantage for Athletic Performance in Children Aged 
11 to 15 Years” (Pediatrics [2009]: e386–e392) studied the 
relationship between y 5 arch height and scores on a 
number of different motor ability tests for 218 children. 
They reported the following correlation coefficients:
Motor Ability Test
Correlation between Test 
Score and Arch Height
Height of counter  
movement jump
20.02
Hopping: average height
20.10
Hopping: average power
20.09
Balance, closed eyes, one leg
    0.04
Toe flexion
   0.05
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.1   Correlation 
●  213
a.	 Interpret the value of the correlation coefficient 
between average hopping height and arch height. 
What does the fact that the correlation coefficient 
is negative say about the relationship? Do higher 
arch heights tend to be paired with higher or 
lower average hopping heights?
b.	The title of the paper suggests that having a small 
value for arch height (flat-footedness) is not a 
disadvantage when it comes to motor skills. Do 
the given correlation coefficients support this 
conclusion? Explain.
5.8	 In a study of 200 Division I athletes, variables related 
to academic performance were examined. The paper 
“Noncognitive Predictors of Student Athletes’ Academic 
Performance” (Journal of College Reading and Learning 
[2000]: e167) reported that the correlation coefficient for 
college GPA and a measure of academic self-worth was 
r 5 0.48. Also reported were the correlation coefficient 
for college GPA and high school GPA (r 5 0.46) and 
the correlation coefficient for college GPA and a mea-
sure of tendency to procrastinate (r 5 20.36). Higher 
scores on the measure of self-worth indicate higher 
self-worth, and higher scores on the measure of pro-
crastination indicate a higher tendency to procrastinate. 
Write a few sentences summarizing what these 
correlation coefficients tell you about the academic 
performance of the 200 athletes in the sample.
5.9	 ● Data from the U.S. Federal Reserve Board (House-
hold Debt Service Burden, 2002) on the percentage 
of disposable personal income required to meet 
consumer loan payments and mortgage payments for 
selected years are shown in the following table:
Consumer 
Debt
Household 
Debt
Consumer 
Debt
Household 
Debt
7.88
6.22
6.24
5.73
7.91
6.14
6.09
5.95
7.65
5.95
6.32 
6.09
7.61
5.83
6.97
6.28
7.48
5.83
7.38
6.08
7.49
5.85
7.52
5.79
7.37
5.81
7.84
5.81
6.57
5.79
a.	 What is the value of the correlation coef­ﬁ­cient for 
this data set?   
b.	Is it reasonable to conclude in this case that there 
is no strong relationship between the variables 
(linear or otherwise)? Use a graphical display to 
support your answer.
5.10	 ● ▼ The accompanying data were read from graphs 
that appeared in the article “Bush Timber Proposal 
Runs Coun­ter to the Record” (San Luis Obispo Tribune, 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Sep­tem­ber 22, 2002). The variables shown are the 
number of acres burned in forest ﬁres in the western 
United States and timber sales.
Year
Number of Acres 
Burned (thousands)
Timber Sales 
(billions of 
board feet)
1945
200
  2.0
1950
250
  3.7
1955
260
  4.4
1960
380
  6.8
1965
  80
  9.7
1970
450
11.0
1975
180
11.0
1980
240
10.2
1985
440
10.0
1990
400
11.0
1995
180
  3.8
a.	 Is there a correlation between timber sales and 
acres burned in forest ﬁres? Compute and inter-
pret the value of the correlation coef­ﬁ­cient.
b.	The article concludes that “heavier logging led to 
large forest ﬁres.” Do you think this conclusion is 
jus­ti­ﬁed based on the given data? Explain.
5.11	 It may seem odd, but one of the ways biologists can tell 
how old a lobster is involves measuring the concentra-
tion of a pigment called neurolipofuscin in the eyestalk 
of a lobster. (We are not making this up!) The authors 
of the paper “Neurolipofuscin is a Measure of Age in Panu-
lirus argus, the Caribbean Spiny Lobster, in Florida” (Biologi-
cal Bulletin [2007]: 55–66) wondered if it was sufficient to 
measure the pigment in just one eye stalk, which would 
be the case if there is a strong relationship between the 
concentration in the right and left eyestalks. 
Pigment concentration (as a percentage of 
tissue sample) was measured in both eyestalks for 
39 lobsters, resulting in the following summary 
quantities (based on data read from a graph that 
appeared in the paper):
n 5 39
ox 5 88.8 
oy 5 86.1
oxy 5 281.1
ox2 5 288.0
oy2 5 286.6
An alternative formula for computing the correlation 
coef­ﬁ­cient that is based on raw data and is algebraically 
equivalent to the one given in the text is
r 5
oxy 2 soxdsoyd
n
Îox2 2 soxd2
n
 Îoy2 2 soyd2
n
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

214 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
Use this formula to compute the value of the correla-
tion coef­ﬁ­cient, and interpret this value.
5.12	 An auction house released a list of 25 recently sold 
paintings. Eight artists were represented in these 
sales. The sale price of each painting also appears 
on the list. Would the correlation coef­ﬁ­cient be 
an appropriate way to summarize the relationship 
between artist (x) and sale price (y)? Why or why 
not? 
The objective of regression analysis is to use information about one variable, x, to predict 
the value of a second variable, y. For example, we might want to predict y 5 product sales 
during a given period when the amount spent on advertising is x 5 $10,000. The two 
variables in a regression analysis play different roles: y is called the dependent or response 
variable, and x is referred to as the independent, predictor, or explanatory variable.
Dependent variable: In a bivariate data set, the variable whose value we would 
like to predict. The dependent variable is denoted by y. The dependent variable 
is also sometimes called the response variable.
Independent variable: In a bivariate data set, the variable that will be used to 
make a prediction of the dependent variable. The independent variable is 
denoted by x. The independent variable is also sometimes called the predictor 
variable or the explanatory variable.
DEFINITION
Scatterplots frequently exhibit a linear pattern. When this is the case, it makes sense to 
summarize the relationship between the variables by ﬁnd­ing a line that is as close as possible 
to the points in the plot. Before seeing how this is done, let’s review some elementary facts 
about lines and linear relationships.
The equation of a line is y 5 a 1 bx. A particular line is speci­ﬁed by choosing values of 
a and b. For example, one line is y 5 10 1 2x; another is y 5 100 2 5x. If we choose some 
x values and compute y 5 a 1 bx for each value, the points in the plot of the resulting (x, y) 
pairs will fall exactly on a straight line.
DEFINITION
The equation of a line is 
y 5 a 1 bx
Slope: The value of b, called the slope of the line, is the amount by which 
y increases when x increases by 1 unit. 
Intercept: The value of a, called the intercept (or sometimes the y-intercept or 
vertical intercept) of the line, is the height of the line above the value x 5 0.
Intercept
Slope
The line y 5 10 1 2x has slope b 5 2, so each 1-unit increase in x is paired with an increase 
of 2 in y. When x 5 0, y 5 10, so the height at which the line crosses the vertical axis (where 
x 5 0) is 10. This is illustrated in Figure 5.7(a). The slope of the line y 5 100 2 5x is 25, so 
y increases by 25 (or equivalently, decreases by 5) when x increases by 1. The height of the 
line above x 5 0 is a 5 100. The resulting line is pictured in Figure 5.7(b).
 5.2  
Linear Regression: Fitting a Line to Bivariate Data
5.13	 A sample of automobiles traversing a certain stretch 
of highway is selected. Each one travels at roughly 
a constant rate of speed, although speed does vary 
from auto to auto. Let x 5 speed and y 5 time 
needed to traverse this segment of highway. Would 
the sample correlation coef­ﬁ­cient be closest to .9, .3, 
2.3, or 2.9? Explain.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.2   Linear Regression: Fitting a Line to Bivariate Data 
●  215
0
5
10
15
20
5
15
25
30
10
20
x
y
y 5 10 1 2x
y increases by b 5 2
x increases by 1
a 5 10
x increases by 1
y changes by b 5 25
y 5 100 2 5x
a 5 100
0
5
10
15
75
25
50
100
x
y
(b)
(a)
Figure  5.7
Graphs of two lines:  
(a) slope b 5 2, intercept a 5 10;  
(b) slope b 5 25, intercept a 5 100.
It is easy to draw the line corresponding to any particular linear equation. Choose any 
two x values and substitute them into the equation to obtain the corresponding y values. 
Then plot the resulting two (x, y) pairs as two points. The desired line is the one passing 
through these points. For the equation y 5 10 1 2x, substituting x 5 5 yields y 5 20, 
whereas using x 5 10 gives y 5 30. The resulting two points are then (5, 20) and (10, 30). 
The line in Figure 5.7(a) passes through these points.
Fitting a Straight Line: The Principle of Least Squares
Figure 5.8 shows a scatterplot with two lines superimposed on the plot. Line II is a better ﬁt 
to the data than Line I is. In order to measure the extent to which a particular line provides 
a good ﬁt to data, we focus on the vertical deviations from the line. 
Line II in Figure 5.8 has equation y 5 10 1 2x. The third and fourth points from the left 
in the scatterplot are (15, 44) and (20, 45). For these two points, the vertical deviations 
from this line are
 3rd deviation 5 y3 2 height of the line above x3
 5 44 2 f10 1 2s15dg
 5 4
and
4th deviation 5 45 2 [10 1 2(20)] 5 25
A positive vertical deviation results from a point that lies above the line, and a negative 
deviation results from a point that lies below the line. A particular line is said to be a good 
ﬁt to the data if the deviations from the line are small in magnitude. Line I in Figure 5.8 ﬁts 
poorly, because all deviations from that line are larger in magnitude (some are much larger) 
than the corresponding deviations from Line II.
Figure  5.8
Line I gives a poor ﬁt and Line II gives 
a good ﬁt to the data.
Line II
Slope 5 2
Vertical intercept 5 10
Line I
30
25
20
15
10
5
10
40
60
70
30
20
50
x
y
(20, 45)
(15, 44)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

216 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
To assess the overall ﬁt of a line, we need a way to combine the n deviations into a single 
measure of ﬁt. The standard approach is to square the deviations (to obtain nonnegative 
numbers) and then to sum these squared deviations.
Sum of squared deviations: The most widely used measure of the goodness of 
ﬁt of a line y 5 a 1 bx to bivariate data (x1, y1),…, (xn, yn) is the sum of the 
squared deviations about the line 
ofy 2 (a 1 bx)g2 5 fy1 2 (a 1 bx1)g2 1 fy2 2 (a 1 bx2)g2 1 Á 1 fyn 2 (a 1 bxn)g2
Least-squares line: The line that minimizes the sum of squared deviations. The 
least-squares line is also called the sample regression line.
DEFINITION
Fortunately, the equation of the least-squares line can be obtained without having to 
calculate deviations from any particular line. The accompanying box gives relatively simple 
formulas for the slope and intercept of the least-squares line.
The slope of the least-squares line is 
b 5 o(x 2 x )(y 2 y )
o(x 2 x )2
and the y intercept is 
a 5 y 2 bx
We write the equation of the least-squares line as 
y⁄ 5 a 1 bx
where the ⁄ above y indicates that y⁄ (read as y-hat) is the prediction of y that 
results from substituting a particular x value into the equation.
Statistical software packages and many calculators can compute the slope and intercept 
of the least-squares line. If the slope and intercept are to be computed by hand, the follow-
ing computational formula can be used to reduce the amount of time required to perform 
the calculations.
b 5
oxy 2 (ox)(oy)
n
ox 2 2 (ox)2
n
Calculating Formula for the Slope of the Least-Squares Line
Example 5.4 
Pomegranate Juice and Tumor Growth
● Pomegranate, a fruit native to Persia, has been used in the folk medicines of many 
cultures to treat various ailments. Researchers are now studying pomegranate’s antioxidant 
properties to see if it might have any beneficial effects in the treatment of cancer. One 
such study, described in the paper “Pomegranate Fruit Juice for Chemoprevention and 
Chemotherapy of Prostate Cancer” (Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences [October 11, 
Understand the context ❭
 Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.2   Linear Regression: Fitting a Line to Bivariate Data 
●  217
2005]: 14813–14818), investigated whether pomegranate fruit extract (PFE) was effective in 
slowing the growth of prostate cancer tumors. 
In this study, 24 mice were injected with cancer cells. The mice were then randomly 
assigned to one of three treatment groups. One group of eight mice received normal drink-
ing water, the second group of eight mice received drinking water supplemented with 
0.1% PFE, and the third group received drinking water supplemented with 0.2% PFE. The 
average tumor volume for the mice in each group was recorded at several points in time. 
The accompanying data on y 5 average tumor volume (in mm3) and x 5 number of 
days after injection of cancer cells for the mice that received plain drinking water was 
approximated from a graph that appeared in the paper:
x
  11
  15
  19
  23
  27
y
150
270
450
580
740
A scatterplot of these data (Figure 5.9) shows that the relationship between number 
of days after injection of cancer cells and average tumor volume could reasonably be 
summarized by a straight line.
Consider the data ❭
Figure  5.9
Scatterplot for the plain drinking  
water data of Example 5.4.
10
12
14
16
18
Days after injection
20
22
24
26
28
100
400
600
700
800
300
200
500
Control average tumor size
Calculating the values of the slope and intercept of the least-squares line can be very 
tedious. This is where a statistics computer package or a graphing calculator can really be 
helpful. Minitab was used to find the equation of the least-squares line, and the resulting 
output is shown here:
Regression Analysis: y versus x 
The regression equation is
y 5 2270 1 37.3x
Predictor
Constant
x
Coef
2269.75
37.250
SE Coef
23.42
1.181
T
211.52
31.53
P
0.001
0.000
From the Minitab output, the equation of the least-squares line is
y⁄ 5 2270 1 37.3x
We could also use the values given in the Coef column for the slope and intercept. These 
values have more decimal accuracy than those in the given equation.
We could also calculate the values of the slope and intercept of the least-squares line by hand. 
The summary quantities necessary to compute the equation of the least-squares line are
ox 5 95           ox2 5 1965                oxy 5 47,570
oy 5 2190        oy2 5 1,181,900
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

218 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
From these quantities, we compute
x 5 19        y 5 438
b 5
oxy 2 soxdsoyd
n
ox2 2 soxd2
n
5
47,570 2 s95ds2190d
5
1965 2 s95d2
5
5 5960
160 5 37.25
and
a 5 y 2 bx 5 438 2 s37.25ds19d 5 2269.75
The least-squares line is then
y⁄ 5 2269.75 1 37.25x
This line is also shown on the scatterplot of Figure 5.9.
If we wanted to predict average tumor volume 20 days after injection of cancer cells, we 
could use the y value of the point on the least-squares line above x 5 20:
y⁄ 5 2269.75 1 37.25s20d 5 475.25
Predicted average tumor volume for other numbers of days after injection of cancer cells 
could be computed in a similar way.	
■
You need to be careful when making predictions. For example, in the context of 
Example 5.4, the least-squares line should not be used to predict average tumor volume for 
times much outside the range 11 to 27 days (the range of x values in the data set) because 
we do not know whether the linear pattern observed in the scatterplot continues outside 
this range. This is sometimes referred to as the danger of extrapolation.
We can see that using the least-squares line to predict average tumor volume for 
fewer than 10 days after injection of cancer cells can lead to nonsensical predictions. 
For example, if the number of days after injection is five, the predicted average tumor 
volume is negative:
y⁄ 5 2269.75 1 37.25s5d 5 283.5
Because it is impossible for average tumor volume to be negative, this is a clear indication 
that the pattern observed for x values in the 11 to 27 range does not continue outside this 
range. Nonetheless, the least-squares line can be a useful tool for making predictions for 
x values within the 11- to 27-day range.
USE CAUTION—The Danger of Extrapolation
The least-squares line should not be used to make predictions outside the 
range of the x values in the data set because we have no evidence that the 
linear relationship continues outside this range.
Example 5.5 
More on Pomegranate Juice and Tumor Growth
Figure 5.10 shows a scatterplot for average tumor volume versus number of days after 
injection of cancer cells for both the group of mice that drank only water and the group that 
drank water supplemented by 0.2% PFE. Notice that the tumor growth seems to be much 
slower for the mice that drank water supplemented with PFE. For the 0.2% PFE group, the 
relationship between average tumor volume and number of days after injection of cancer 
cells appears to be curved rather than linear. We will see in Section 5.4 how a curve (rather 
than a straight line) can be used to summarize this relationship.
Do the work ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.2   Linear Regression: Fitting a Line to Bivariate Data 
●  219
FIGURE  5.11
Scatterplot and least-squares line for 
the data of Example 5.6.
1.8
2.0
2.2
Face width-to-hight ratio
2.4
2.6
2.8
0
40
60
70
80
30
10
50
Percent choosing trust option
	
■
Example 5.6 
Revisiting a Face You Can Trust
Data on x 5 face-to-height ratio and y 5 percentage choosing the trust option in a game 
were given in Example 5.1. In that example, we saw that the correlation coefficient was 
20.392, indicating a weak negative linear relationship. This linear relationship can be 
summarized using the least-squares line, as shown in Figure 5.11.
Understand the context ❭
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
Days after injection
100
0
400
600
700
800
300
200
500
Average tumor size
Water average tumor size
0.2% PFE average tumor size
Variable
FIGURE  5.10
Scatterplot of average tumor volume 
versus number of days after injection 
of cancer cells for the water group 
and the 0.2% PFE group.
Minitab was used to ﬁt the least-squares line, and Figure 5.12 shows part of the resulting 
output. Instead of x and y, the variable labels Face-to-width ratio and Percentage choosing 
trust option are used. The equation at the top is that of the least-squares line. In the rect­
angular table just below the equation, the ﬁrst row gives information about the intercept, a, 
and the second row gives information concerning the slope, b. In particular, the coef­ﬁ­cient 
column labeled “Coef” contains the values of a and b using more ­digits than in the rounded 
values that appear in the equation.
Equation y = a + bx
ˆ
Value of b
Value of a
The regression equation is
Percentage choosing trust option = 123 – 38.5 Face width-to-height ratio
Predictor
Constant
Face width-to-height ratio
Coef
123.11
–38.47
SE Coef
32.58
15.06
T
3.78
–2.55
P
0.001
0.015
Figure  5.12
Partial Minitab output for 
­Example 5.6.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

220 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
The least-squares line should not be used to predict the percentage choosing the trust 
option for faces with width-to-height ratios such as  x 5 1.00 or x 5 4.00. These x values 
are well outside the range of the data, and we do not know if the linear relationship 
continues outside the observed range.	
■
Regression
The least-squares line is often called the sample regression line. This terminology comes 
from the relationship between the least-squares line and Pearson’s correlation coef­ﬁ­cient. 
To understand this relationship, we ﬁrst need alternative expressions for the slope b and the 
equation of the line itself. With sx and sy denoting the sample standard deviations of the x’s 
and y’s, respectively, a bit of algebraic manipulation gives
b 5 r 1
sy
sx2
y⁄ 5 y 1 r 1
sy
sx2sx 2 xd
You do not need to use these formulas in any computations, but several of their implica-
tions are important for appreciating what the least-squares line does.
1.	 When x 5 x is substituted in the equation of the line, y⁄ 5 y results. This means 
that the least-squares line passes through the point of averages sx, yd.
2.	 Suppose for the moment that r 5 1, so that all points lie exactly on the line whose 
equation is
y⁄ 5 y 1
sy
sx sx 2 xd
Now substitute x 5 x 1 sx, which is 1 standard deviation above x:
y⁄ 5 y 1
sy
sx sx 1 sx 2 xd 5 y 1 sy
We can see that with r 5 1, when x is 1 standard deviation above its mean, we predict 
that the associated y value will be 1 standard deviation above its mean. Similarly, if 
x 5 x 2 2sx (2 standard deviations below its mean), then
y⁄ 5 y 1
sy
sx sx 2 2sx 2 xd 5 y 2 2sy
which is also 2 standard deviations below the mean. 
If r 5 21, then x 5 x 1 sx results in y
⁄ 5 y 2 sy, so the predicted y is also 1 standard 
deviation from its mean but on the opposite side of y from where x is relative to x. In 
general, if x and y are ­perfectly correlated, the predicted y value associated with a given 
x value will be the same number of standard deviations (of y) from its mean y as x is 
from its mean x.
3.	 Now suppose that x and y are not perfectly correlated. For example, suppose 
r 5 .5, so the least-squares line has the equation
y⁄ 5 y 1 .51
sy
sx2sx 2 xd
Then substituting x 5 x 1 sx gives
y⁄ 5 y 1 .51
sy
sx2sx 1 sx 2 xd 5 y 1 .5sy
For r 5 .5, when x lies 1 standard deviation above its mean, we predict that y will 
be only 0.5 standard deviation above its mean. Similarly, we can predict y when r 
is negative. If r 5 2.5, then the predicted y value will be only half the number of 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.2   Linear Regression: Fitting a Line to Bivariate Data 
●  221
standard deviations from y that x is from x but x and the predicted y will now be on 
opposite sides of their respective means.
Consider using the least-squares line to predict the value of y associated with 
an x value some speciﬁed number of standard deviations away from x. Then 
the predicted y value will be only r times this number of standard deviations 
from y. In terms of standard deviations, except when r 5 1 or 21, the predicted y 
will always be closer to y than x is to x.
Using the least-squares line for prediction results in a predicted y that is pulled back in, 
or regressed, toward the mean of y compared to where x is relative to the mean of x. This 
regression effect was ﬁrst noticed by Sir Francis Galton (1822–1911), a famous biologist, 
when he was studying the relationship between the heights of fathers and their sons. He 
found that predicted heights of sons whose fathers were above average in height were also 
above average (because r is positive here) but not by as much as the father’s height. He 
found a similar relationship for fathers whose heights were below average. This regression 
effect has led to the term regression analysis for the collection of methods involving the 
ﬁt­ting of lines, curves, and more complicated functions to bivariate and multivariate data.
The alternative form of the regression (least-squares) line emphasizes that predict­ing 
y from knowledge of x is not the same problem as predicting x from knowledge of y. 
The slope of the least-squares line for predicting x is r(sx /sy) rather than r(sy /sx) and the 
intercepts of the lines are almost always different. For purposes of prediction, it makes a 
difference whether y is regressed on x, as we have done, or x is regressed on y.
The regression line of y on x should not be used to predict x, because it is not 
the line that minimizes the sum of squared deviations in the x direction.
5.14	 Two scatterplots are shown below. Explain why it makes 
sense to use the least-squares regression line to sum-
marize the relationship between x and y for one of these 
data sets but not the other. (Hint: See Example 5.5.)
Scatterplot 1:
	
 
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
y
x
110
Scatterplot 2:
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
y
x
110
5.15	 The authors of the paper  “Statistical Methods for 
Assessing Agreement Between Two Methods of Clinical 
Measurement” (International Journal of Nursing Studies 
[2010]: 931–936) compared two different instruments 
for measuring a person’s ability to breathe out air. 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
EXERCISES 5.14 - 5.28
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

222 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
of the released salamander larvae moving upstream 
and the relative frequency of released salamander 
larvae moving downstream. A positive value of 
net directionality means a higher proportion were 
moving upstream than downstream. A negative value 
of net directionality means a higher proportion were 
moving downstream than upstream.
Mean Temperature (x)
Net Directionality (y)
  6.17
20.08
  8.06
    0.25
  8.62
20.14
10.56
    0.00
12.45
    0.08
11.99
    0.03
12.50
20.07
17.98
    0.29
18.29
    0.23
19.89
    0.24
20.25
    0.19
19.07
    0.14
17.73
    0.05
19.62
    0.07
a.	 Construct a scatterplot of the data. How would 
you describe the relationship between x and y?
b.	Find the equation of the least-squares line 
describing the relationship between y 5 net 
directionality and x 5 mean water temperature.
c.	 What value of net directionality would you predict 
for a stream that had mean water temperature of 
15 8C? 
d.	The authors state that “when temperatures were 
warmer, more larvae were captured moving 
upstream, but when temperatures were cooler, 
more larvae were captured moving downstream.” 
Do the scatterplot and least-squares line support 
this statement? Explain. 
e.	 Approximately what mean temperature would result 
in a prediction of the same number of salamander 
larvae moving upstream and downstream? 
5.17	 A sample of 548 ethnically diverse students from 
Massachusetts were followed over a 19-month period 
from 1995 and 1997 in a study of the relationship 
be­tween TV viewing and eating habits (Pediatrics 
[2003]: 1321–1326). For each additional hour of 
television viewed per day, the number of fruit and 
vegetable servings per day was found to decrease on 
average by 0.14 serving.
a.	 For this study, what is the dependent variable? 
What is the independent variable? 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
(This measurement is helpful in diagnosing various 
lung disorders.) The two instruments considered 
were a Wright peak flow meter and a mini-Wright 
peak flow meter. Seventeen people participated in 
the study, and for each person air flow was measured 
once using the Wright meter and once using the 
mini-Wright meter.
Subject
Mini-
Wright 
Meter
Wright 
Meter
Subject
Mini-
Wright 
Meter
Wright 
Meter
1
512
494
10
445
433
2
430
395
11
432
417
3
520
516
12
626
656
4
428
434
13
260
267
5
500
476
14
477
478
6
600
557
15
259
178
7
364
413
16
350
423
8
380
442
17
451
427
9
658
650
a.	 Suppose that the Wright meter is considered 
to provide a better measure of air flow, but the 
mini-Wright meter is easier to transport and to 
use. If the two types of meters produce different 
readings but there is a strong relationship between 
the readings, it would be possible to use a reading 
from the mini-Wright meter to predict the reading 
that the larger Wright meter would have given. 
Use the given data to find an equation to predict 
Wright meter reading using a reading from the 
mini-Wright meter. (Hint: See Example 5.4.)
b.	What would you predict for the Wright meter 
reading of a person whose mini-Wright meter 
reading was 500?
c.	 What would you predict for the Wright meter 
reading of a person whose mini-Wright meter 
reading was 300? (Hint: See discussion of 
extrapolation that follows Example 5.4.)
5.16	 ● The authors of the paper “Evaluating Existing Move-
ment Hypotheses in Linear Systems Using Larval Stream 
Salamanders” (Canadian Journal of Zoology [2009]: 
292–298) investigated whether water temperature 
was related to how far a salamander would swim and 
whether it would swim upstream or downstream. 
Data for 14 streams with different mean water tem-
peratures where salamander larvae were released are 
given (approximated from a graph that appeared in 
the paper). 
The two variables of interest are x 5 mean water 
temperature (8C) and y 5 net directionality, which 
was defined as the difference in the relative frequency 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.2   Linear Regression: Fitting a Line to Bivariate Data 
●  223
b.	Would the least-squares line for predicting 
number of servings of fruits and vegetables using 
number of hours spent watching TV as a predictor 
have a positive or negative slope? Explain.
5.18	 The relationship between hospital patient-to-nurse 
ratio and various characteristics of job satisfaction and 
­patient care has been the focus of a number of research 
studies. Suppose x 5 patient-to-nurse ratio is the 
­independent variable. For each of the following poten-
tial dependent variables, indicate whether you expect 
the slope of the least-squares line to be positive or 
negative and give a brief explanation for your choice.
a.	 y 5 a measure of nurse’s job satisfaction (higher 
values indicate higher satisfaction)
b.	y 5 a measure of patient satisfaction with hospital 
care (higher values indicate higher satisfaction)
c.	 y 5 a measure of patient quality of care
5.19	 The article “No-Can-Do Attitudes Irk Fliers” (USA Today, 
September 15, 2010) included the accompanying 
data on airline quality score and a ranking based on 
the number of passenger complaints per 100,000 
passengers boarded. In the complaint ranking, a rank 
of 1 is best, corresponding to fewest complaints. 
Similarly, for the J.D. Powers quality score, lower 
scores correspond to higher quality.
Airline
Passenger 
Complaint Rank
J.D. Powers 
Quality Score
Airtran
  6
  3
Alaska
  2
  4
American
  8
  7
Continental
  7
  6
Delta
12
  8
Frontier
  5
  5
Hawaiian
  3
Not rated
JetBlue
  4
  1
Northwest
  9
Not rated
Southwest
  1
  2
United
11
  9
US Airways
10
10
Two of the airlines were not scored by J.D. Powers. 
Use the ranks for the other 10 airlines to fit a 
least-squares regression line.
5.20	 Use the least-squares line from Exercise 5.19 to 
predict the J.D. Powers Quality Score for Hawaiian 
Airlines and Northwest Airlines.
5.21	 Studies have shown that people who suffer sudden 
cardiac arrest have a better chance of survival if a 
defibrillator shock is administered very soon after 
cardiac arrest. How is survival rate related to the 
time between when cardiac arrest occurs and when 
the defibrillator shock is delivered? This question 
is addressed in the paper “Improving Survival from 
Sudden Cardiac Arrest: The Role of Home Defibrillators” 
(by J. K. Stross, University of Michigan, February 2002; 
available at www.heartstarthome.com). 
The accompanying data give y 5 survival rate 
(percent) and x 5 mean call-to-shock time (minutes) 
for a cardiac rehabilitation center (in which cardiac 
arrests occurred while victims were hospitalized and 
so the call-to-shock time tended to be short) and for 
four communities of different sizes:
Mean call-to-shock time, x 
  2   6
  7
9
12
Survival rate, y 
90
45
30
5
  2
a.	 Construct a scatterplot for these data. How would 
you describe the relationship between mean call-
to-shock time and survival rate?
b.	Find the equation of the least-squares line.
c.	 Use the least-squares line to predict survival rate 
for a community with a mean call-to-shock time 
of 10 minutes. 
5.22	 The data given in the previous exercise on x 5 call-
to-shock time (in minutes) and y 5 survival rate 
(percent) were used to compute the equation of the 
least-squares line, which was
	
y⁄ 5 101.33 2 9.30x
The newspaper article “FDA OKs Use of Home 
Deﬁbrillators” (San Luis Obispo Tribune, No­vem­ber 13, 
2002) reported that “every minute spent waiting 
for paramedics to arrive with a deﬁbrillator lowers 
the chance of survival by 10 percent.” Is this 
statement consistent with the given least-squares 
line? Explain.
5.23	 An article on the cost of housing in California that 
appeared in the San Luis Obispo Tribune (March 30, 
2001) included the following statement: “In Northern 
California, people from the San Francisco Bay area 
pushed into the Central Valley, bene­ﬁt­ing from home 
prices that dropped on average $4000 for every 
mile traveled east of the Bay area.” If this statement 
is correct, what is the slope of the least-squares 
regression line, y⁄ 5 a 1 bx, where y 5 house price 
(in dollars) and x 5 distance east of the Bay (in 
miles)? Explain. 
5.24	 ● The following data on sale price, size, and land-
to-building ratio for 10 large industrial properties 
appeared in the paper “Using Multiple Regression 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

224 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
Analysis in Real Estate Appraisal” (Appraisal Journal 
[2002]: 424–430):
Property
Sale Price 
(millions of 
dollars)
Size 
(thousands of 
sq. ft.)
Land-to-
Building 
Ratio
  1
10.6
2166
  2.0
  2
  2.6
  751
  3.5
  3
30.5
2422
  3.6
  4
  1.8
  224
  4.7
  5
20.0
3917
  1.7
  6
  8.0
2866
  2.3
  7
10.0
1698
  3.1
  8
  6.7
1046
  4.8
  9
  5.8
1108
  7.6
10
  4.5
  405
17.2
a.	 Calculate and interpret the value of the correlation 
coef­ﬁ­cient between sale price and size.
b.	Calculate and interpret the value of the correlation 
co­ef­ﬁ­cient between sale price and land-to-building 
ratio.
c.	 If you wanted to predict sale price and you could 
use either size or land-to-building ratio as the 
basis for making predictions, which would you 
use? Explain. 
d.	Based on your choice in Part (c), ﬁnd the equation 
of the least-squares regression line you would use 
for predicting y 5 sale price. 
5.25	 Explain why it can be dangerous to use the least-
squares line to obtain predictions for x values that are 
substantially larger or smaller than those contained in 
the sample.
5.26	 The sales manager of a large company selected a random 
sample of n 5 10 salespeople and determined for each 
one the values of x 5 years of sales experience and y 5 
annual sales (in thousands of dollars). A scatterplot of 
the resulting (x, y) pairs showed a linear pattern.
a.	 Suppose that the sample correlation coef­ﬁ­cient is  
r 5 .75 and that the average annual sales is 
y 5 100. If a particular salesperson is 2 standard 
deviations above the mean in terms of experience, 
what would you predict for that person’s annual 
sales?   
b.	If a particular person whose sales experience is  
1.5 standard deviations below the average experi-
ence is predicted to have an annual sales value 
that is 1 standard deviation below the average an-
nual sales, what is the value of r?   
5.27	 Explain why the slope b of the least-squares line 
always has the same sign (positive or negative) as the 
sample correlation coef­ﬁ­cient r.
5.28	 ● The accompanying data resulted from an 
experiment in which weld diameter x and shear 
strength y (in pounds) were determined for ﬁve 
different spot welds on steel. A scatterplot shows a 
strong linear pattern. With osx 2 xd2 5 1000 and 
osx 2 xds y 2 yd 5 8577, the least-squares line is 
y⁄ 5 2936.22 1 8.577x.
x
200.1
210.1
220.1
  230.1
  240.0
y
813.7
785.3
960.4
1118.0
1076.2
a.	 Because 1 lb 5 0.4536 kg, strength observa-
tions can be re-expressed in kilograms through 
multiplication by this conversion factor: new 
y 5 0.4536(old y). What is the equation of 
the least-squares line when y is expressed in 
­kilograms?  
b.	More generally, suppose that each y value in a data 
set consisting of n (x, y) pairs is multiplied by a 
conversion factor c (which changes the units of mea-
surement for y). What effect does this have on the 
slope b (i.e., how does the new value of b compare to 
the value before conversion), on the intercept a, and 
on the equation of the least-squares line? Verify your 
conjectures by using the given formulas for b and a. 
(Hint: Replace y with cy, and see what happens—
and remember, this conversion will affect y.)
 
 5.3  
Assessing the Fit of a Line
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Once we have found the equation of the least-squares regression line, the next step is to 
consider how effectively the line summarizes the relationship between x and y. Important 
questions to consider are
1.	 Is a line an appropriate way to summarize the relationship between the two ­variables?
2.	 Are there any unusual aspects of the data set that we need to consider before 
proceeding to use the regression line to make predictions?
3.	 If we decide that it is reasonable to use the regression line as a basis for prediction, 
how accurate can we expect predictions based on the regression line to be?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.3   Assessing the Fit of a Line 
●  225
In this section, we look at graphical and numerical methods that will allow us to ­answer 
these questions. 
Most of these methods are based on the vertical deviations of the data points from the 
regression line. These vertical deviations are called residuals, and each represents the difference 
between an actual y value and the corre­sponding predicted value, y⁄, that would result from 
using the regression line to make a ­prediction.
Predicted Values and Residuals
The predicted value corresponding to the first observation in a data set is obtained by 
substituting that value, x1, into the regression equation to obtain y⁄
1, where
y⁄
1 5 a 1 bx1
The difference between the actual y value for the first observation, y1, and the corre-
sponding predicted value is
y1 2 y⁄
1
This difference is the residual, which is the vertical deviation of a point in the scatterplot 
from the regression line.
An observation falling above the line results in a positive residual, whereas a point falling 
below the line results in a negative residual. This is shown in Figure 5.13.
x1
x
y
x2
(x2, y2)
(x2, y2)
y2 is less
than y2 so
y2 – y2 is
negative
y1 is greater
than y1 so
y1 – y1 is
positive
(x1, y1)
(x1, y1)
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
FIGURE  5.13
Positive and negative deviations from 
the least-squares line (residuals).
DEFINITION
Predicted values: The predicted values result from substituting each sample 
x value into the equation for the least-squares line. This gives 
y⁄
1 5 first predicted value 5 a 1 bx1
y⁄
2 5 second predicted value 5 a 1 bx2
. . . 
y⁄
n 5 nth predicted value 5 a 1 bxn
Residuals: The residuals from the least-squares line are the n quantities 
y1 2 y⁄
1 5 first residual
y2 2 y⁄
2 5 second residual

. . . 
yn 2 y⁄
n 5 nth residual
Each residual is the difference between an observed y value and the 
corresponding predicted y value.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

226 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
Example 5.7 
It May Be a Pile of Debris to You, but It Is  
Home to a Mouse
● The accompanying data is a subset of data read from a scatterplot that appeared in the 
paper “Small Mammal Responses to Fine Woody Debris and Forest Fuel Reduction in Southwest 
Oregon” (Journal of Wildlife Management [2005]: 625–632). The authors of the paper were 
interested in how the distance a deer mouse will travel for food is related to the distance 
from the food to the nearest pile of fine woody debris. Distances were measured in meters. 
The data are given in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1  Predicted Values and Residuals for the Data of Example 5.7
Consider the data ❭
Distance from Debris (x)
Distance Traveled (y)
Predicted Distance 
Traveled ( y⁄)
Residual ( y 2 y⁄)
6.94
  0.00
14.76
214.76
5.23
  6.13
  9.23
  23.10
5.21
11.29
  9.16
      2.13
7.10
14.35
15.28
  20.93
8.16
12.03
18.70
  26.67
5.50
22.72
10.10
    12.62
9.19
20.11
22.04
   21.93
9.05
26.16
21.58
    4.58
9.36
30.65
22.59
    8.06
Understand the context ❭
5
6
7
8
9
Distance to debris
0
15
25
30
10
5
20
Distance traveled
Figure  5.14
Scatterplot for the data of  
Example 5.7.
Minitab was used to fit the least-squares regression line. Partial computer output follows:
Regression Analysis: Distance Traveled versus Distance to Debris
The regression equation is
Distance Traveled 5 27.7 1 3.23 Distance to Debris
Predictor
Coef
SE Coef
T
P
Constant
27.69
13.33
20.58
0.582
Distance to Debris
3.234
1.782
   1.82
0.112
S 5 8.67071
R-Sq 5 32.0%
R-Sq(adj) 5 22.3%
The resulting least-squares line is y⁄ 5 27.69 1 3.234x.
A plot of the data that also includes the regression line is shown in Figure 5.14. The 
residuals for this data set are the signed vertical distances from the points to the line.
 Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.3   Assessing the Fit of a Line 
●  227
For the mouse with the smallest x value (the third observation with x3 5 5.21 and 
y3 5 11.29), the corresponding predicted value and residual are
predicted value 5 y⁄
3 5 27.69 1 3.234sx3d 5 27.69 1 3.234s5.21d 5 9.16
residual 5 y3 2 y⁄
3 5 11.29 2 9.16 5 2.13
The other predicted values and residuals are computed in a similar manner and are 
included in Table 5.1.
Computing the predicted values and residuals by hand can be tedious, but Minitab and other 
statistical software packages, as well as many graphing calculators, include them as part of the 
output, as shown in Figure 5.15. The predicted values and residuals can be found in the table 
at the bottom of the Minitab output in the columns labeled “Fit” and “Residual,” respectively.
Do the work ❭
Figure  5.15
Minitab output for the data of 
Example 5.7.
The regression equation is
Distance Traveled = – 7.7 + 3.23 Distance to Debris
Predictor
Coef
SE Coef
T
P
Constant
–7.69
13.33
–0.58
0.582
Distance to Debris
3.234
1.782
1.82
0.112
S = 8.67071
R-Sq = 32.0%
R-Sq(adj) = 22.3%
Analysis of Variance
Source
DF
SS
MS
F
P
Regression
1
7
8
247.68
526.27
773.95
247.68
75.18
3.29
0.112
Residual Error
Total
Obs
Distance
to Debris
Distance
Traveled
Fit
SE Fit
Residual
St Resid
1
6.94
5.23
5.21
7.10
8.16
5.50
9.19
9.05
9.36
0.00
6.13
11.29
14.35
12.03
22.72
20.11
26.16
30.65
14.76
9.23
9.16
15.28
18.70
10.10
22.04
21.58
22.59
2.96
4.69
4.72
2.91
3.27
4.32
4.43
4.25
4.67
–14.76
–3.10
2.13
–0.93
–6.67
12.62
–1.93
4.58
8.06
–1.81
–0.42
0.29
–0.11
–0.83
1.68
–0.26
0.61
1.10
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9	
■
Plotting the Residuals
A careful look at residuals can reveal many potential problems. A residual plot is a good 
place to start when assessing the appropriateness of the regression line.
Residual plot: A scatterplot of the (x, residual) pairs. 
Isolated points or a pattern of points in the residual plot indicate potential 
problems.
DEFINITION
A desirable residual plot is one that exhibits no particular pattern, such as curvature. 
Curvature in the residual plot is an indication that the relationship between x and y is not 
linear and that a curve would be a better choice than a line for describing the relationship 
between x and y. This is sometimes easier to see in a residual plot than in a scatterplot of y 
versus x, as illustrated in Example 5.8.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

228 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
	
■
Example 5.8 
Heights and Weights of American Women
● Consider the accompanying data on x 5 height (in inches) and y 5 average weight (in 
pounds) for American females, age 30–39 (from The World Almanac and Book of Facts). The 
scatterplot displayed in Figure 5.16(a) appears rather straight. However, when the residuals 
from the least-squares line sy⁄ 5 98.23 1 3.59xd are plotted (Figure 5.16(b)), substantial 
curvature is apparent (even though r < .99). It is not accurate to say that weight increases 
in direct proportion to height (linearly with height). Instead, average weight increases 
somewhat more rapidly for relatively large heights than it does for relatively small heights.
x
  58
  59
  60
  61
  62
  63
  64
  65
y
113
115
118
121
124
128
131
134
x
  66
  67
  68
  69
  70
  71
  72
y
137
141
145
150
153
159
164
Understand the context ❭
● Data set available online
There is another common type of residual plot—one that plots the residuals versus the 
corresponding y⁄ values rather than versus the x values. Because y⁄ 5 a 1 bx is simply a 
linear function of x, the only real difference between the two types of residual plots is 
the scale on the horizontal axis. The pattern of points in the residual plots will be the 
same, and it is this pattern of points that is important, not the scale. The two plots give 
equivalent information, as can be seen in Figure 5.17, which gives both plots for the data 
of Example 5.7.
It is also important to look for unusual values in the scatterplot or in the residual plot. 
A point falling far above or below the horizontal line at height 0 corresponds to a large 
residual, which may indicate some unusual circumstance such as a recording error, a non-
standard experimental condition, or an atypical experimental subject. 
A point whose x value differs greatly from others in the data set may have exerted 
excessive in­ﬂu­ence in determining the ﬁtted line. One method for assessing the impact of 
such an isolated point is to delete it from the data set, recompute the least-squares line, and 
evaluate the extent to which the equation of the line has changed.
Figure  5.16
Plots for the data of Example 5.8:  
(a) scatterplot;  
(b) residual plot.
58
62
66
70
74
120
130
140
150
160
170
(a)
(b)
x
y
3
2
1
0
21
22
23
58
62
66
70
Strong
curved
pattern
x
Residual
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.3   Assessing the Fit of a Line 
●  229
Example 5.9 
Older Than Your Average Bear
● The accompanying data on x 5 age (in years) and y 5 weight (in kg) for 12 black bears 
appeared in the paper “Habitat Selection by Black Bears in an Intensively Logged Boreal Forest” 
(Canadian Journal of Zoology [2008]: 1307–1316).
A scatterplot and residual plot are shown in Figures 5.18(a) and 5.18(b), respectively. 
One bear in the sample was much older than the other bears (bear 3 with an age of x 5 
28.5 years and a weight of y 5 62.00 kg). This results in a point in the scatterplot that is 
far to the right of the other points in the scatterplot. 
Because the least-squares line minimizes the sum of squared residuals, the line is pulled 
toward this observation. This single observation plays a big role in determining the slope 
of the least-squares line, and it is therefore called an influential observation. Notice that 
this influential observation is not necessarily one with a large residual, because the least-
squares line actually passes near this point. Figure 5.19 shows what happens when the 
influential observation is removed from the data set. Both the slope and intercept of the 
least-squares line are quite different from the slope and intercept of the line with this 
influential observation included.
Understand the context ❭
● Data set available online
Figure  5.17
Plots for the data of Example 5.7.  
(a) Plot of residuals versus x;  
(b) plot of residuals versus y⁄.
5
6
7
8
9
Distance to debris
–15
0
10
–5
–10
5
Residuals
(a)
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Predicted y
–15
0
10
–5
–10
5
Residuals
(b)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

230 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
Bear
Age
Weight
  1
10.5
54
  2
  6.5
40
  3
28.5
62
  4
10.5
51
  5
  6.5
55
  6
  7.5
56
  7
  6.5
62
  8
  5.5
42
  9
  7.5
40
10
11.5
59
11
  9.5
51
12
  5.5
50
Figure  5.18
Plots for the bear data of  
Example 5.9:  
(a) scatterplot;  
(b) residual plot.
5
10
15
20
25
30
Age
Inﬂuential observation
Observation with large residual
Fitted Line Plot
Weight = 45.90 + 0.6141 Age
40
55
65
50
45
60
Weight
(a)
5
10
15
20
25
30
Age
Inﬂuential observation
Observation with large residual
Residuals vs Age
–10
5
15
0
–5
10
Residuals
(b)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.3   Assessing the Fit of a Line 
●  231
	
■
Some points in a scatterplot may fall far from the least-squares line in the y direc-
tion, resulting in a large residual. These points are sometimes referred to as outliers. In 
Example 5.9, the observation with the largest residual is bear 7 with an age of x 5 6.5 years 
and a weight of y 5 62.00 kg. This observation is labeled in Figure 5.18. Even though this 
observation has a large residual, this observation is not very influential. The equation of the 
least-squares line for the data set consisting of all 12 observations is y⁄ 5 45.90 1 0.6141x, 
which is not much different from the equation that results from deleting bear 7 from the 
data set sy⁄ 5 43.81 1 0.7131xd.
DEFINITION
Unusual points in a bivariate data set are those that fall away from most of the 
other points in the scatterplot in either the x direction or the y direction.
Influential observation: An observation is potentially influential if it has an x 
value that is far away from the rest of the data (separated from the rest of the 
data in the x direction). To determine if the observation is in fact influential, we 
assess whether removal of this observation has a large impact on the value of 
the slope or intercept of the least-squares line.
Outlier: An observation that has a large residual. Outlier observations fall far 
away from the least-squares line in the y direction.
Careful examination of a scatterplot and a residual plot can help us determine the 
appropriateness of a line for summarizing a relationship. If we decide that a line is 
appropriate, the next step is to think about assessing the accuracy of predictions based on 
the least-squares line and whether these predictions (based on the value of x) are better 
in general than those made without knowledge of the value of x. Two numerical measures 
that are helpful in this assessment are the coef­ﬁ­cient of determination and the standard 
deviation about the regression line.
Coefficient of Determination, r2
Suppose that we would like to predict the price of homes in a particular city. A random 
sample of 20 homes that are for sale is selected, and y 5 price and x 5 size (in square 
feet) are recorded for each house in the sample. There will be variability in house price 
(the houses will differ with respect to price), and it is this variability that makes accurate 
Figure  5.19
Scatterplot and least-squares line 
with bear 3 removed from data set.
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Age
Fitted Line Plot—Omit Bear 3
Weight = 41.13 + 1.230 Age
40
55
65
50
45
60
Weight
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

232 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
prediction of price a challenge. How much of the variability in house price can be explained 
by the fact that price is related to house size and that houses differ in size? If differences 
in size account for a large proportion of the variability in price, a price prediction that 
takes house size into account will be a big improvement over a prediction that is not based 
on size.
The coef­ﬁ­cient of determination is a measure of the proportion of variability in the 
y variable that can be “explained” by a linear relationship between x and y.
Coef­ﬁ­cient of determination: The proportion of variation in y that can be 
attributed to an approximate linear relationship between x and y. The coefficient 
of determination is denoted by r2.
The value of r2 is often converted to a percentage (by multiplying by 100) and 
interpreted as the percentage of variation in y that can be explained by an 
approximate linear relationship between x and y.
DEFINITION
To understand how r2 is computed, we first consider variation in the y values. Variation in 
y can effectively be explained by an approximate straight-line relationship when the points 
in the scatterplot fall close to the least-squares line—that is, when the residuals are small 
in magnitude. A natural measure of variation about the least-squares line is the sum of the 
squared residuals. (Squaring before combining prevents negative and positive residuals 
from counteracting one another.) A second sum of squares assesses the total amount of 
variation in observed y values by considering how spread out the y values are from the 
mean y value.
DEFINITION
Total sum of squares: The total sum of squares, denoted by SSTo, is deﬁned as 
SSto 5 (y1 2 y )2 1 (y2 2 y )2 1 Á 1 (yn 2 y )2 5 o ( y 2 y )2
Residual sum of squares: The residual sum of squares (sometimes referred to 
as the error sum of squares), denoted by SSResid, is deﬁned as 
SSresid 5 ( y1 2 y⁄
1)2 1 ( y2 2 y⁄
2)2 1 Á 1 ( yn 2 y⁄
n)2 5 o( y 2 y⁄)2
These sums of squares can be found as part of the regression output from most 
standard statistical packages or can be obtained using the following 
computational formulas:
SSto 5 oy2 2 (oy)2
n
SSresid 5 oy2 2 aoy 2 boxy
Example 5.10 
Revisiting the Deer Mice Data
Figure 5.20 displays part of the Minitab output that results from fitting the least-squares 
line to the data on y 5 distance traveled for food and x 5 distance to nearest woody debris 
pile from Example 5.7. From the output,
SSTo 5 773.95 and SSResid 5 526.27
Notice that SSResid is fairly large relative to SSTo.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.3   Assessing the Fit of a Line 
●  233
	
■
The residual sum of squares is the sum of squared vertical deviations from the least-
squares line. As Figure 5.21 illustrates, SSTo is also a sum of squared vertical deviations 
from a line—the horizontal line at height y. The least-squares line is, by deﬁ­ni­tion, the one 
having the smallest sum of squared deviations. It follows that SSResid # SSTo. The two 
sums of squares are equal only when the least-squares line is the hori­zontal line.
Figure  5.20
Minitab output for the data of  
Example 5.10.
The regression equation is
Distance Traveled = – 7.7 + 3.23 Distance to Debris
Predictor
Coef
SE Coef
T
P
Constant
–7.69
13.33
–0.58
0.582
Distance to Debris
3.234
1.782
1.82
0.112
S = 8.67071
R-Sq = 32.0%
R-Sq(adj) = 22.3%
Analysis of Variance
Source
Regression Analysis: Distance Traveled versus Distance to Debris
DF
SS
MS
F
P
Regression
1
7
8
247.68
526.27
773.95
247.68
75.18
3.29
0.112
Residual Error
Total
SSResid
SSTo
Figure  5.21
Interpreting sums of squares:  
(a) SSResid 5 sum of squared vertical 
deviations from the least-squares line;  
(b) SSTo 5 sum of squared ­vertical 
deviations from the horizontal line  
at y.
Least-squares line
Horizontal
line at 
height y–
x
x
y
(a)
y
(b)
y–
SSResid is often referred to as a measure of unexplained variation—the amount of variation 
in y that cannot be attributed to the linear relationship between x and y. The more the 
points in the scatterplot deviate from the least-squares line, the larger the value of SSResid 
and the greater the amount of y variation that cannot be explained by the approximate 
linear relationship. Similarly, SSTo is interpreted as a measure of total variation. The larger 
the value of SSTo, the greater the amount of variability in y1, y2, . . . , yn. 
The ratio SSResid/SSTo is the fraction or proportion of total variation that is unexplained 
by a straight-line relation. Subtracting this ratio from 1 gives the proportion of total 
variation that is explained:
DEFINITION
Coefficient of determination, r2: The coefﬁcient of determination is defined as
r 2 5 1 2 SSresid
SSto
Multiplying r2 by 100 gives the percentage of y variation attributable to the 
approximate linear relationship. The closer this percentage is to 100%, the more 
successful the linear relationship is in explaining variation in y.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

234 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
Example 5.11 
r 2 for the Deer Mice Data
For the data on distance traveled for food and distance to nearest debris pile from 
Example 5.10, we found SSTo 5 773.95 and SSResid 5 526.27. It follows that
r 2 5 1 2 SSResid
SSTo
5 1 2 526.27
773.95 5 .32
This means that only 32% of the observed variability in distance traveled for food can 
be explained by an approximate linear relationship between distance traveled for food and 
distance to nearest debris pile. Note that the r2 value can be found in the Minitab output of 
­Figure 5.20, labeled “R-Sq.”
■
The symbol r was used in Section 5.1 to denote Pearson’s sample correlation coef­ﬁ­cient. 
It is not a coincidence that r2 is used to represent the coef­ﬁ­cient of determination. The 
notation suggests how these two quantities are related:
(correlation coef­ﬁ­cient)2 5 coef­ﬁ­cient of determination
This means that if r 5 .8 or r 5 2.8, then r2 5 .64, so 64% of the observed variation in 
the dependent variable can be explained by the linear relationship. Because the value of 
r does not depend on which variable is labeled x, the same is true of r2. The coef­ﬁ­cient of 
determination is one of the few quantities computed in a regression analysis whose value 
remains the same when the roles of the dependent and independent variables are inter-
changed. When r 5 .5, we get r2 5 .25, so only 25% of the observed variation is explained 
by a linear relationship. This is why a value of r between 2.5 and .5 is not considered 
evidence of a strong linear relationship.
Example 5.12 
Lead Exposure and Brain Volume
The authors of the paper “Decreased Brain Volume in Adults with Childhood Lead Exposure” 
(Public Library of Science Medicine [May 27, 2008]: e112) studied the relationship between 
childhood environmental lead exposure and a measure of brain volume change in a 
particular region of the brain. Data on x 5 mean childhood blood lead level (mg/dL) and 
y 5 brain volume change (percent) read from a graph that appeared in the paper was 
used to produce the scatterplot in Figure 5.22. The least-squares line is also shown on the 
scatterplot.
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
Figure  5.22
Scatterplot and least-squares line for 
the data of Example 5.12.
0
10
20
30
40
Mean blood lead
–0.10
–0.05
0.0
0.05
Brain volume change
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.3   Assessing the Fit of a Line 
●  235
Figure 5.23 displays part of the Minitab output that results from fitting the least-squares line 
to the data. Notice that although there is a slight tendency for smaller y values (corresponding 
to a brain volume decrease) to be paired with higher values of mean blood lead levels, the 
relationship is weak. The points in the plot are widely scattered around the least-squares line.
From the computer output, we see that 100r2 5 13.6%, so r2 5 .136. This means that 
differences in childhood mean blood lead level explain only 13.6% of the variability in 
adult brain volume change. Because the coefficient of determination is the square of the 
correlation coefficient, we can compute the value of the correlation coefficient by taking the 
square root of r2. In this case, we know that the correlation coefficient will be negative (be-
cause there is a negative relationship between x and y), so we want the negative square root:
r 5 2Ï.136 5 2.369
Based on the values of the correlation coefficient and the coefficient of determination, we 
would conclude that there is a weak negative linear relationship and that childhood mean 
blood lead level explains only about 13.6% of adult change in brain volume.
■
Standard Deviation About the Least-Squares Line, se
The coef­ﬁ­cient of determination measures the extent of variation about the least-squares line 
relative to overall variation in y. A large value of r2 does not by itself promise that the deviations 
from the line are small in an absolute sense. A typical observation could deviate from the line 
by quite a bit, but these deviations might still be small relative to overall y variation.
Recall that in Chapter 4 the sample standard deviation
s 5Î
o sx 2 xd2
n 2 1
was used as a measure of variability in a single sample. Roughly speaking, s is the typical 
amount by which a sample observation deviates from the sample mean. There is an 
analogous measure of variability when a least-squares line is ﬁt.
DEFINITION
Standard deviation about the least-squares line: The standard deviation 
about the least-squares line is defined as
se 5Î
SSresid
n 2 2
Roughly speaking, se is the typical amount by which an observation deviates 
from the least-squares line.
The standard deviation about the least-squares line is given as part of the usual regression 
output when statistical software or a graphing calculator is used. For the brain volume data 
Interpret the results ❭
The regression equation is
Brain Volume Change = 0.01559 – 0.001993 Mean Blood Lead
S = 0.0310931
R-Sq = 13.6%
R-Sq(adj) = 12.9%
Analysis of Variance
Source
Regression Analysis: Brain Volume Change versus Mean Blood Lead
DF
SS
MS
F
P
Regression
1
111
112
0.016941
0.107313
0.124254
0.0169410
0.0009668
17.52
0.000
Error
Total
Figure  5.23
Minitab output for the data of  
Example 5.12.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

236 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
of Example 5.12, the value of se can be found in the Minitab output of Figure 5.23 labeled 
as “S.” For the brain volume data, se < 0.031.
Example 5.13 
Predicting Graduation Rates
● Consider the accompanying data on six-year graduation rate (%), student-related 
expenditure per full-time student, and median SAT score for the 38 primarily undergraduate 
public universities and colleges in the United States with enrollments between 10,000 and 
20,000 (Source: College Results Online, The Education Trust).
Graduation Rate
Expenditure
Median SAT
Graduation Rate
Expenditure
Median SAT
81.2
7462
1160
46.5
6744
1010
66.8
7310
1115
45.3
8842
1223
66.4
6959
1070
45.2
7743
  990
66.1
8810
1205
43.7
5587
1010
64.9
7657
1135
43.5
7166
1010
63.7
8063
1060
42.9
5749
  950
62.6
8352
1130
42.1
6268
  955
62.5
7789
1200
42.0
8477
  985
61.2
8106
1015
38.9
7076
  990
59.8
7776
1100
38.8
8153
  990
56.6
8515
  990
38.3
7342
  910
54.8
7037
1085
35.9
8444
1075
52.7
8715
1040
32.8
7245
  885
52.4
7780
1040
32.6
6408
1060
52.4
7198
1105
32.3
4981
  990
50.5
7429
  975
31.8
7333
  970
49.9
7551
1030
31.3
7984
  905
48.9
8112
1030
31.0
5811
1010
48.1
8149
  950
26.0
7410
1005
Consider the data ❭
Understand the context ❭
Figure 5.24 displays scatterplots of graduation rate versus student-related expenditure 
and graduation rate versus median SAT score. The least-squares lines and the values of r2 
and se are also shown.
Notice that while there is a positive linear relationship between student-related 
expenditure and graduation rate, the relationship is weak. The value of r2 is only .119 
(11.9%), indicating that only about 11.9% of the variability in graduation rate from 
university to university can be explained by student-related expenditures. The standard 
deviation about the regression line is se 5 12.2846, which is larger than se for the predictor 
median SAT, a re­ﬂec­tion of the fact that the points in the scatterplot of graduation rate 
versus student-related expenditure tend to fall farther from the regression line than is the 
case for the line that describes graduation rate versus median SAT. 
The value of r2 for graduation rate versus median SAT is .421 (42.1%) and se 5 9.95214, 
indicating that the predictor median SAT does a better job of explaining variability in 
graduation rates. The corresponding least-squares line would be expected to produce 
more accurate estimates of graduation rates than would be the case for the predictor 
student-related expenditure.
Based on the values of r2 and se, median SAT would be a better choice for ­predicting 
graduation rates than student-related expenditures. It is also possible to develop a predic-
tion equation that would incorporate both potential predictors—techniques for doing this 
are introduced in Chapter 14.
Interpret the results ❭
 Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.3   Assessing the Fit of a Line 
●  237
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
Student-related expenditure
Graduation Rate 5 12.41 1 0.004834 Student-related Expenditure
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Graduation rate
(a)
S
R-Sq
R-Sq(adj)
12.2846
11.9%
9.4%
900
950
1000
1050
1100
1150
1200
1250
Median SAT
Graduation Rate 5 257.43 1 0.1023 Median SAT
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Graduation rate
(b)
S
R-Sq
R-Sq(adj)
9.95214
42.1%
40.5%
Figure  5.24
Scatterplots for the data 
of Example 5.13:  
(a) graduation rate versus student-
related expenditure;  
(b) graduation rate versus median SAT.
Given a bivariate numerical data set consisting of observations on a dependent 
variable y and an independent variable x:
Step 1.	 Summarize the data graphically by constructing a scatterplot.
Step 2.	 Based on the scatterplot, decide if it looks like the relationship 
between x and y is approximately linear. If so, proceed to the next step.
Step 3.	 Find the equation of the least-squares regression line.
Step 4.	 Construct a residual plot and look for any patterns or unusual features 
that may indicate that a line is not the best way to summarize the 
Steps in a Linear Regression Analysis

■
Now that we have considered all of the parts of a linear regression analysis, let’s put all the parts 
together. The steps in a linear regression analysis are summarized in the accompanying box.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

238 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
Let’s return to the example from the chapter introduction and look at how following 
these steps can help us learn about the age of an unidentified crime victim.
Example 5.14 
Revisiting Help for Crime Scene Investigators
One of the tasks that forensic scientists face is estimating the age of an unidentified crime 
victim. Prior to 2010, this was usually done by analyzing teeth and bones, and the resulting 
estimates were not very reliable. In a groundbreaking study described in the paper “Estimating 
Human Age from T-Cell DNA Rearrangements” (Current Biology [2010]), scientists examined the 
relationship between age and a blood test measure. They recorded age and the blood test 
measure for 195 people ranging in age from a few weeks to 80 years. 
Because the scientists were interested in predicting age using the blood test measure, 
the dependent variable is y 5 age and the independent variable is x 5 blood test measure.
Step 1:  The scientists first constructed a scatterplot of the data, which is shown in 
Figure 5.25.
Understand the context ❭
relationship between x and y. If none are found, proceed to the 
next step.
Step 5.	 Compute the values of se and r 2 and interpret them in context.
Step 6.	 Based on what you have learned from the residual plot and the values 
of se and r 2, decide whether the least-squares regression line is useful 
for making predictions. If so, proceed to the last step.
Step 7.	 Use the least-squares regression line to make predictions.
Step 2:  Based on the scatterplot, it does appear that there is a reasonably strong negative 
linear relationship between age and the blood test measure. The scientists also reported 
that the correlation coefficient for this data set was r 5 20.92, which is consistent with the 
strong negative linear pattern in the scatterplot.
Step 3:  The scientists calculated the equation of the least-squares regression line to be 
y⁄ 5 233.65 2 6.74x
Step 4:  A residual plot constructed from these data showed a few observations with 
large residuals, but these observations were not far removed from the rest of the data in 
the x direction. These observations were not judged to be influential. Also, there were no 
unusual patterns in the residual plot that would suggest a nonlinear relationship between 
age and the blood test measure.
Figure  5.25
Scatterplot of age versus blood test 
measure.
0
80
60
40
20
Age in years
Blood Test Measure
–17
–15
–13
–11
–9
–7
–5
–3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.3   Assessing the Fit of a Line 
●  239
Step 5:  The values of se and r2 were
	
se 5 8.9 and r2 5 0.835
This means that approximately 83.5% of the variability in age can be explained by the 
linear relationship between age and blood test measure. The value of se tells us that if the 
least-squares regression line is used to predict age from the blood test measure, a typical 
difference between the predicted age and the actual age would be about 9 years.
Step 6:  Based on the residual plot, the large value of r 2, and the relatively small value of se, 
the scientists proposed using the blood test measure and the least-squares regression line 
as a way to estimate ages of crime victims.
Step 7:  To illustrate predicting age, suppose that a blood sample is take from an 
unidentified crime victim and that the value of the blood test measure is determined to 
be 210. The predicted age of the victim would be
y⁄ 5 233.65 2 6.74s210d
	 5 233.65 2 s267.4d
	 5 33.75 years
This is just an estimate of the actual age, and a typical prediction error is about 9 years.
■
5.29	 Does it pay to stay in school? The report Trends in 
Higher Education (The College Board, 2010) looked at 
the median hourly wage gain per additional year of 
schooling in 2007. The report states that workers 
with a high school diploma had a median hourly 
wage that was 10% higher than those who had only 
completed 11 years of school. Workers who had 
completed 1 year of college (13 years of education) 
had a median hourly wage that was 11% higher than 
that of the workers who had completed only 12 years 
of school. The added gain in median hourly wage for 
each additional year of school is shown in the accom-
panying table. The entry for 15 years of schooling 
has been intentionally omitted from the table.
Years of Schooling
2007 Median Hourly Wage Gain  
for the Additional Year (percent)
12
10 
13
11
14
13
16
16
17
18
18
19
a.	 Use the given data to predict the median hourly 
wage gain for the 15th year of schooling.
b.	The actual wage gain for 15th year of schooling 
was 14%. How close was the actual value to the 
predicted wage gain percent from Part (a)?
5.30	 ● The data in the accompanying table is from 
the paper “Six-Minute Walk Test in Children and 
Adolescents” (The Journal of Pediatrics [2007]: 395–399). 
Two hundred and eighty boys completed a test that 
measures the distance that the subject can walk on 
a flat, hard surface in 6 minutes. For each age group  
shown in the table, the median distance walked by 
the boys in that age group is also given.
Age Group
Representative  
Age (Midpoint  
of Age Group)
Median Six-minute 
Walk Distance 
(meters)
3–5
  4
544.3
6–8
  7
584.0
  9–11
10
667.3
12–15
  13.5
701.1
16–18
17
727.6
a.	 With x 5 representative age and y 5 median 
distance walked in 6 minutes, construct a 
scatterplot. Does the pattern in the scatterplot 
look linear?
b.	Find the equation of the least-squares regression 
line that describes the relationship between 
median distance walked in 6 minutes and 
representative age.
c.	 Compute the five residuals and construct a 
residual plot. (Hint: See Examples 5.7 and 5.8)
d.	Are there any unusual features in the plot? 
EXERCISES 5.29 - 5.43
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

240 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
5.31	 ● The paper referenced in the previous exercise also 
gave the 6-minute walk distances for 248 girls age 
3 to 18 years. The median 6-minute walk times for 
girls for the five age groups were
492.4    578.3    655.8    657.6    660.9
a.	 With x 5 representative age and y 5 median 
distance walked in 6 minutes, construct a scatterplot. 
b.	How does the pattern in the scatterplot for girls 
differ from the pattern in the scatterplot for boys 
from Exercise 5.30?
c.	 Find the equation of the least-squares regression 
line that describes the relationship between 
median distance walked in 6 minutes and repre-
sentative age for girls. 
d.	Compute the five residuals and construct a 
residual plot.
e.	 The authors of the paper decided to use a curve 
rather than a straight line to describe the relationship 
between median distance walked in 6 minutes and 
age for girls. What aspect of the residual plot sup-
ports this decision? (Hint: See Example 5.8.)
5.32	 ● Northern flying squirrels eat lichen and fungi, 
which makes for a relatively low quality diet. The 
authors of the paper “Nutritional Value and Diet 
Preference of Arboreal Lichens and Hypogeous Fungi 
for Small Mammals in the Rocky Mountains” (Canadian 
Journal of Zoology [2008]: 851–862) measured nitrogen 
intake and nitrogen retention in six flying squirrels 
that were fed the fungus Rhizopogon. 
Data read from a graph that appeared in the paper 
are given in the table below. (The negative value for 
nitrogen retention for the first squirrel represents a net 
loss in nitrogen.)
Nitrogen Intake,  
x (grams)
Nitrogen Retention,  
y (grams)
0.03
20.04
0.10
0.00
0.07
0.01
0.06
0.01
0.07
0.04
0.25
0.11
a.	 Construct a scatterplot of these data.
b.	Find the equation of the least-squares regression 
line. 
c. Based on this line, what would you predict 
nitrogen retention to be for a flying squirrel whose 
nitrogen intake is 0.06 gram? 
d. What is the residual associated with the 
observation (0.06, 0.01)?
e.	 Look again at the scatterplot from Part (a). Which 
observation is potentially influential? Explain the 
reason for your choice. (Hint: See Example 5.9.)
f.	 When the potentially influential observation is 
deleted from the data set, the equation of the  
least-squares regression line fit to the remaining 
five observations is y⁄ 5 20.037 1 0.627x. Use 
this equation to predict nitrogen retention for a 
flying squirrel whose nitrogen intake is 0.06. Is this 
prediction much different from the prediction made 
in Part (c)? 
5.33	 Some types of algae have the potential to cause 
damage to river ecosystems. The accompanying data 
on algae colony density (y) and rock surface area (x) 
for nine rivers is a subset of data that appeared in a 
scatterplot in a paper in the journal Aquatic Ecology 
(2010: 33–40).
x
50
55
50
79
44
37
70
45
49
y
152
48
22
35
38
171
13
185
25
a.	 Compute the equation of the least-squares 
regression line.
b.	What is the value of r2 for this data set? Write a 
sentence interpreting this value in context. (Hint: 
See Example 5.12.)
c.	 What is the value of se for this data set? Write a 
sentence interpreting this value in context. (Hint: 
See Example 5.13.)
d.	Is the linear relationship between rock surface area 
and algae colony density positive or negative? Is it 
weak, moderate, or strong? Justify your answer.
5.34	 ● The relationship between x 5 total number of 
salmon in a creek and y 5 percentage of salmon 
killed by bears that were transported away from 
the stream prior to the bear eating the salmon was 
examined in the paper “Transportation of Pacific 
Salmon Carcasses from Streams to Riparian Forests by 
Bears” (Canadian Journal of Zoology [2009]: 195–203). 
Data for the 10 years from 1999 to 2008 is given in 
the accompanying table.
Total Number
Percentage Transported
19,504
77.8
  3,460
28.7
  1,976
28.9
  8,439
27.9
11,142
55.3
  3,467
20.4
  3,928
46.8
20,440
76.3
  7,850
40.3
  4,134
24.1
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.3   Assessing the Fit of a Line 
●  241
a.	 Construct a scatterplot of the data. 
b.	Does there appear to be a relationship between 
the total number of salmon in the stream and 
the percentage of salmon killed by bears that are 
transported away from the stream?
c.	 Find the equation of the least-squares regression 
line. Draw the regression line on the scatterplot 
from Part (a). 
d.	The residuals from the least-squares line are 
shown in the accompanying table. The observa-
tion (3928, 46.8) has a large residual. Is this data 
point also an influential observation? 
Total Number
Percent Transported
Residual
19,504
77.8
    3.43
  3,460
28.7
    0.30
  1,976
28.9
    4.76
  8,439
27.9
214.76
11,142
55.3
    4.89
  3,467
20.4
  28.02
  3,928
46.8
    17.06
20,440
76.3
  20.75
  7,850
40.3
  20.68
  4,134
24.1
  26.23
e.	 The two points with unusually large x values 
(19,504 and 20,440) were not thought to be 
influential observations even though they are far 
removed in the x direction from the rest of the 
points in the scatterplot. Explain why these two 
points are not influential.
f.	 Partial Minitab output resulting from fitting the 
least-squares line is shown here. What is the value 
of se? Write a sentence interpreting this value.
Regression Analysis: Percent Transported versus 
Total Number
The regression equation is
Percent Transported 5 18.5 1  0.00287 Total Number
Predictor
Coef
SE Coef
T
P
Constant
18.483
4.813
3.84
0.005
Total Number
0.0028655
0.0004557
6.29
0.000
S 5 9.16217
R-Sq 5 83.2% R-Sq(adj) 5 81.1%
g.	What is the value of r 2 for this data set (see 
Minitab output in Part (f ))? Is the value of r 2  large 
or small? Write a sentence interpreting the value 
of r 2.
5.35	 ● The paper “Effects of Age and Gender on Physical 
Performance” (Age [2007]: 77–85) describes a study of 
the relationship between age and 1-hour swimming 
performance. Data on age and swim distance for over 
10,000 men participating in a national long-distance 
1-hour swimming competition are summarized in 
the accompanying table.
Age Group
Representative Age 
(Midpoint of Age Group)
Average Swim 
Distance (meters)
20–29
25
3913.5
30–39
35
3728.8
40–49
45
3579.4
50–59
55
3361.9
60–69
65
3000.1
70–79
75
2649.0
80–89
85
2118.4
a.	 Find the equation of the least-squares line with 
x 5 representative age and y 5 average swim 
distance.
b.	Compute the seven residuals and use them to 
construct a residual plot. 
c.	 What does the residual plot suggest about the 
appropriateness of using a line to describe the 
relationship between representative age and swim 
distance?
d.	Would it be reasonable to use the least-squares 
line from Part (a) to predict the average swim 
distance for women age 40 to 49 by substituting 
the representative age of 45 into the equation of 
the least-squares line? Explain. 
5.36	 ● Cost-to-charge ratio (the percentage of the amount 
billed that represents the actual cost) for inpatient 
and outpatient services at 11 Oregon hospitals is 
shown in the following table (Oregon Department of 
Health Services, 2002). A scatterplot of the data is also 
shown.
Cost-to-Charge Ratio
Hospital
Outpatient Care
Inpatient Care
  1
62
  80
  2
66
  76
  3
63
  75
  4
51
  62
  5
75
100
  6
65
  88
  7
56
  64
  8
45
  50
  9
48
  54
10
71
  83
11
54
100
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

242 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
45
55
65
75
Inpatient
100
90
80
70
60
50
Outpatient
The least-squares regression line with y 5 inpatient 
cost-to-charge ratio and x 5 outpatient cost-to-charge 
ratio is y⁄ 5 21.1 1 1.29x.
a.	 Is the observation for Hospital 11 an inﬂuential 
observation? Justify your answer.
b.	Is the observation for Hospital 11 an outlier? 
Explain.
c.	 Is the observation for Hospital 5 an inﬂuential 
observation? Justify your answer.
d.	Is the observation for Hospital 5 an outlier? 
Explain. 
5.37	 The article “Examined Life: What Stanley H. Kaplan 
Taught Us About the SAT” (The New Yorker [De­cem­ber 17, 
2001]: 86–92) included a summary of ﬁnd­ings 
­regarding the use of SAT I scores, SAT II scores, and 
high school grade point average (GPA) to predict 
ﬁrst-year college GPA. The article states that “among 
these, SAT II scores are the best predictor, explaining 
16 percent of the variance in ﬁrst-year college grades. 
GPA was second at 15.4 percent, and SAT I was last 
at 13.3 percent.”
a.	 If the data from this study were used to ﬁt a 
least-squares line with y 5 ﬁrst-year college GPA 
and x 5 high school GPA, what would be the 
value of r2? 
b.	The article stated that SAT II was the best 
predictor of ﬁrst-year college grades. Do you think 
that predictions based on a least-squares line with 
y 5 ﬁrst-year college GPA and x 5 SAT II score 
would be very accurate? Explain why or why not.
5.38	 ● The paper “Accelerated Telomere Shortening in 
Response to Life Stress” (Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences [2004]: 17312–17315) described 
a study that examined whether stress accelerates 
aging at a cellular level. The accompanying data on a 
measure of perceived stress (x) and telomere length (y) 
were read from a scatterplot that appeared in the 
paper. Telomere length is a measure of cell longevity.
Perceived 
Stress
Telomere 
Length
  5
1.25
  6
1.32
  6
1.5
  7
1.35
10
1.3
11
1
12
1.18
13
1.1
14
1.08
14
1.3
15
0.92
15
1.22
15
1.24
17
1.12
17
1.32
17
1.4
18
1.12
18
1.46
19 
0.84
Perceived 
Stress
Telomere 
Length
20
1.22
20
1.30
20
1.32
21
1.24
21
1.26
21
1.30
22
1.18
22
1.22
22
1.24
23
1.18
24
1.12
24
1.50
25
0.94
26
0.84
27
1.02
27
1.12
28
1.22
29
1.30
33
0.94
a.	 Compute the equation of the least-squares line.
b.	What is the value of r2?   
c.	 Does the linear relationship between perceived 
stress and telomere length account for a large or 
small proportion of the variability in telomere 
length? Justify your answer. 
5.39	 ● The article “California State Parks Closure List Due 
Soon” (The Sacramento Bee, August 30, 2009) gave the 
following data on y 5 number of employees in fiscal 
year 2007–2008 and x 5 total size of parks (in acres) 
for the 20 state park districts in California:
Number of Employees, y
Total Park Size, x
  95
39,334
  95
      324
102
 17,315
  69
   8,244
  67
620,231
  77
  43,501
  81
  8,625
116
 31,572
  51
 14,276
  36
 21,094
  96
103,289
  71
130,023
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
continued
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.3   Assessing the Fit of a Line 
●  243
Number of Employees, y
Total Park Size, x
  76
16,068
112
  3,286
  43
24,089
  87
  6,309
131
14,502
138
62,595
  80
23,666
  52
35,833
a.	 Construct a scatterplot of the data.
b.	Find the equation of the least-squares line. 
c.	 Do you think the least-squares line gives accurate 
predictions? Explain.
d.	Delete the observation with the largest x value 
from the data set and recalculate the equation 
of the least-squares line. Does this observation 
greatly affect the equation of the line?
5.40	 ● The article referenced in the previous exercise also 
gave data on the percentage of operating costs covered 
by park revenues for the 2007–2008 fiscal year.
Number of Employees, x
Percent of Operating Cost  
Covered by Park Revenues, y
  95
  37
  95
  19 
102
  32
  69
  80
  67
  17
  77
  34
  81
  36
116
  32
  51
  38
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Number of Employees, x
Percent of Operating Cost  
Covered by Park Revenues, y
  36
  40
  96
  53
  71
  31
  76
  35
112
108
  43
  34
  87
  97
131
  62
138
  36
  80
  36
  52
  34
a.	 Find the equation of the least-squares line relating 
y 5 percent of operating costs covered by park 
revenues and x 5 number of employees.
b.	Based on the values of r2 and se, do you think that 
the least-squares regression line does a good job of 
describing the relationship between y 5 percent 
of operating costs covered by park revenues and 
x 5 number of employees? Explain.
c.	 The graph in Figure EX-5.40 is a scatterplot 
of y 5 percent of operating costs covered by 
park revenues and x 5 number of employees. 
The least-squares line is also shown. Which 
observations are outliers? Do the observations 
with the largest residuals correspond to the park 
districts with the largest number of employees?
5.41	 A study was carried out to investigate the relationship 
between the hardness of molded plastic (y, in 
Brinell units) and the amount of time elapsed since 
the plastic was molded (x, in hours). Summary 
quantities include n 5 15, SSResid 5 1235.470, 
Figure  EX-5.40
50
75
100
125
150
Number of employees
Fitted Line Plot
Percentage of operating costs = 27.71 + 0.2011 number of employees
20
30
40
50
60
70
110
80
90
100
Percentage of operating costs
S
R-Sq
R-Sq(adj)
24.1475
5.3%
0.1%
continued
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

244 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
and SSTo 5 25,321.368. Calculate and interpret the 
coef­ﬁ­cient of ­determination.
5.42	 Both r2 and se are used to assess the ﬁt of a line.
a.	 Is it possible that both r2 and se could be large for 
a ­bivariate data set? Explain. (A picture might be 
helpful.)
b.	Is it possible that a bivariate data set could yield 
values of r2 and se that are both small? Explain. 
(Again, a picture might be helpful.)
c.	 Explain why it is desirable to have r2 large and 
se small if the relationship between two variables 
x and y is to be described using a straight line.
5.43	 With a bit of algebra, we can show that
SSResid 5 s1 2 r2d osy 2 yd2
from which it follows that
se 5Î
n 2 1
n 2 2 Ï1 2 r2 sy
Unless n is quite small, (n 2 1)/(n 2 2) < 1, so
 se < Ï1 2 r2 sy
a.	 For what value of r is se as large as sy? What is the 
least-squares line in this case? 
b.	For what values of r will se be much smaller 
than sy?
c.	 A study by the Berkeley Institute of Human 
Development (see the book Statistics by Freedman 
et al., listed in the back of the book) reported the 
following summary data for a sample of n 5 66 
California boys:
r < .80 
At age 6, average height < 46 inches, standard 
deviation < 1.7 inches.
At age 18, average height < 70 inches, standard 
deviation < 2.5 inches.
What would se be for the least-squares line used to 
predict 18-year-old height from 6-year-old height?
d.	Referring to Part (c), suppose that you wanted to 
predict the past value of 6-year-old height from 
knowledge of 18-year-old height. Find the equa-
tion for the appropriate least-squares line. What is 
the corresponding value of se? 
 
 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
 5.4  
Nonlinear Relationships and Transformations
When the points in a scatterplot exhibit a linear pattern and the residual plot does not reveal 
any problems with the linear fit, the least-squares line is a sensible way to summarize the rela-
tionship between two numerical variables. But what should we do if a scatterplot or residual 
plot exhibits a curved pattern, indicating a more complicated relationship between x and y? 
When this happens, we consider using a nonlinear function to summarize the relationship 
between x and y. The process we will use is similar to what we have done for linear relation-
ships, but now we will use a curve instead of a line. After choosing an appropriate curve, we 
will evaluate the fit of the curve and use a residual plot to assess whether the curve is an ap-
propriate way to describe the relationship. If we decide the curve is a useful summary of the 
relationship between x and y, we can then use the curve to make predictions.
Choosing a Nonlinear Function to Describe a Relationship
Once we have decided to use a nonlinear function to describe the relationship between two 
variables x and y, we need to decide what type of function should be considered. Some 
common functions that are used to model relationships are shown in Figure 5.26.
Example 5.15 
Fishing Bears
The article “Quantifying Spatiotemporal Overlap of Alaskan Brown Bears and People” (Jour-
nal of Wildlife Management [2005]: 810–817) describes a study of the effect of human activity 
on bears. The researchers wondered if sport fishing and boating might be limiting bears’ 
access to salmon. They collected data on
	
x 5 number of days from the beginning of June 2003 (June 1st 5 1)
and
	
y 5 total fishing time (in bear-hours) for the day at a particular location in Alaska
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.4   Nonlinear Relationships and Transformations 
●  245
10.0
10.5
11.0
11.5
12.0
0
20
y
x
40
60
80
100
Function
Equation
Looks Like
(a)
Quadratic
y⁄ 5 a 1 b1x 1 x2
(b)
Square Root
y⁄ 5 a 1 bÏx
         
       
(c)
Reciprocal
y⁄ 5 a 1 b 1
1
x2
10
15
20
25
30
0
20
y
x
40
60
80
100
–10
–5
0
5
10
0
20
y
x
40
60
80
100
8.0
8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0
0
20
y
x
40
60
80
100
10
5
5
10
y
x
10
5
5
10
y
x
continued
Figure  5.26
Common nonlinear functions
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

246 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
  (d)
Log
y⁄ 5 a 1 b1nsxd
(e)
Exponential
y⁄ 5 ea1bx
(f)
Power
y⁄ 5 axb
0
2
4
8
6
10
0
20
y
x
40
60
80
100
10
11
12
13
14
16
15
18
17
19
0
20
y
x
40
60
80
100
5
5
10
10
x
y
2
4
6
8
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
x
y
5
4
3
2
1
5
4
3
2
1
x
y
Figure  5.26
Common nonlinear functions
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.4   Nonlinear Relationships and Transformations 
●  247
0
10
20
30
40
50
10
20
30
40
50
60
Fishing Time
Date
Figure  5.27
Scatterplot of fishing time
versus date
The pattern in the scatterplot is clearly nonlinear. Because the shape of the pattern looks 
like a quadratic curve (see Figure 5.26(a)), a quadratic function could be used to describe 
this relationship. The model to consider is 
    y⁄ 5 a 1 b1x 1 b2x2
■
Once we have decided on a potential nonlinear model, such as quadratic or exponential, 
the next step is to estimate the coefficients in the model. For example, for the quadratic 
model y⁄ 5 a 1 b1x 1 b2x2, we would need to use the sample data to determine appropri-
ate values for a, b1, and b2. The process used to estimate the coefficients in a nonlinear 
model is a bit different for quadratic models than for the other nonlinear models listed in  
Figure 5.26. Let’s begin by considering quadratic models.
Quadratic Regression Models
The general form of the quadratic regression model is y⁄ 5 a 1 b1x 1 b2x2. What are the 
best choices for the values of a, b1, and b2? In fitting a line to data, the principle of least-
squares was used to determine the values of the slope and intercept for the “best fit” line. 
Least-squares can also be used to fit a quadratic function. The deviations, y 2 y⁄​, are still 
represented by vertical distances in the scatterplot, but now they are vertical distances from 
the points to a parabola (the graph of a quadratic function) rather than to a line, as shown 
in Figure 5.28. Values for the coefficients in the quadratic function are then chosen to make 
the sum of the squared deviations as small as possible.
Formulate a plan ❭
Date (x) 
(June 1 5 1)
Fishing Time 
(bear-hours)
Date (x) 
(June 1 5 1)
Fishing Time 
(bear-hours)
Date (x) 
(June 1 5 1)
Fishing Time 
(bear-hours)
11
11.3
24
11.3
40
22.0
12
15.1
25
18.4
41
26.0
13
  6.6
27
16.2
44
10.5
14
12.9
28
19.5
45
18.6
15
12.1
31
35.8
46
21.1
17
18.1
32
37.1
49
11.9
18
20.9
33
45.7
50
13.7
19
17.6
36
34.8
51
13.7
20
11.0
37
25.6
54
  6.3
21
24.6
38
26.7
55
  1.8
Consider the data ❭
For example, the data pair (33, 45.7) corresponds to the day that is 32 days after June 1 
(which is July 2). On this day, the total fishing time for bears was 45.7 bear-hours. This is the 
sum of the number of hours spent fishing for all bears fishing at this location on July 2, 2003. 
Figure 5.27 is a scatterplot of these data.  
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

248 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
10.0995
S 
R-Sq
R-Sq(adj)
0.0%
0.0%
–10
–20
0
10
20
30
Date
10
20
30
40
50
60
Residual
Fishing Time = 18.97 – 0.0022 Date
0
10
20
30
40
50
10
20
30
40
50
60
Fishing Time
Date
(a)
(b)
Figure  5.29
Plots for the bear fishing data of
Examples 5.15 and 5.16:
(a) least-squares regression line;
(b) residual plot for linear model.
x
x1
y
Deviation
Figure  5.28
Deviation for a quadratic function
For a quadratic regression, the least-squares estimates of a, b1, and b2 are those 
values that minimize the sum of squared deviations, o(y 2 y⁄)2, where  
y⁄ 5 a 1 b1x 1 b2x2.
For quadratic regression, a measure that is useful for assessing fit is
R2 5 1 2 SSResid
SSTo
where SSResid 5 osy 2 y⁄d2. The measure R2 is defined in a way similar to r2 for the linear 
regression model and is interpreted in a similar fashion. The lowercase notation r2 is used 
only with linear regression to emphasize the relationship between r2 and the correlation 
coefficient, r, in the linear case. For nonlinear models, an uppercase R2 is used.
The general expressions for computing the least-squares quadratic regression estimates 
are somewhat complicated, so a statistical software package or a graphing calculator will be 
used to do the computations.
Example 5.16 
Fishing Bears Revisited—Fitting a  
Quadratic Model
For the bear fishing data of Example 5.15, the scatterplot showed a curved pattern. If a 
least-squares line is fit to these data, it is not surprising that the line does not do a good 
job of describing the relationship (r2 5 0.000, and se 5 10.1). Both the scatterplot and the 
residual plot show a distinct curved pattern (see Figure 5.29).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.4   Nonlinear Relationships and Transformations 
●  249
JMP output resulting from fitting the least-squares quadratic regression to these data is 
shown in Figure 5.30.
Do the work ❭
0
10
10
20
50
60
30
40
20
30
40
50
Fishing Time
Date
0
5
–5
10
–10
15
20
60
50
40
30
20
10
Date
Residual
(a)
(b)
Figure  5.31
Quadratic regression of
Example 5.16:
(a) scatterplot with curve;
(b) residual plot for quadratic model.
From the JMP output the least-squares quadratic is
y⁄ 5 220.967 1 2.996x 2 0.046x2
The curve and the corresponding residual plot for the quadratic regression are shown in 
Figure 5.31. Notice that there is no strong pattern in this residual plot, unlike the linear 
case. For the quadratic regression, R2 5 0.556 (as opposed to essentially zero for the linear 
model). This means that 55.6% of the variability in the bear fishing time can be explained 
by an approximate quadratic relationship between fishing time and date.
Interpret the results ❭
Figure  5.30
JMP output for the quadratic
regression of Example 5.16.
Polynomial Fit Degree=2
Usage = –20.96713 + 2.9957567* Date – 0.0463151* Date^2
Summary of Fit
RSquare
RSquare Adj
Root Mean Square Error
Mean of Response
Observations (or Sum Wgts)
0.555541
0.522618
6.856681
18.89667
30
Analysis of Variance
Parameter Estimates
Term
Intercept
Date
Date^2
Estimate
–20.96713
2.9957567
–0.046315
Std Error
7.567052
0.524223
0.007973
t Ratio
–2.77
5.71
–5.81
Prob>[t]
0.0100*
<.0001*
<.0001*
To use the quadratic regression model to make a prediction, we substitute a value of x 
into the regression equation. For example, the predicted fishing time for June 18 (x 5 18) is
y⁄ 5 220.967 1 2.996x 2 0.046x2
   5 220.967 1 2.996(18) 2 0.046(18)2
   5 220.967 1 53.928 2 14.904
   5 18.057 bear-hours
	
■
Other Nonlinear Regression Models: Using Transformations
Now that we have seen how to use a quadratic regression model to describe relationships 
that look like the curves in Figure 5.26(a), let’s consider some other nonlinear models. The 
square root function of Figure 5.26(b) is
y⁄ 5 a 1 bÏx
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

250 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
(a)
28
26
27
29
30
24
23
22
25
5
6
7
8
9 10
3
4
0
1
2
Distance
(b)
–1
0
1
5
6
7
8
9
10
3
4
0
1
2
Distance
Velocity
Residual
Figure  5.32
Plots for the data of
Example 5.17:
(a) scatterplot of the river data;
(b) residual plot for linear model.
Notice that if you define a new variable x9 where
x9 5 Ïx
the square root model ​y⁄ 5 a 1 bÏx can be written as ​y⁄ 5 a 1 bx9, so y is a linear function 
of x9. This suggests that if a scatterplot of (x, y) pairs looks like the curve in Figure 5.26(b), 
a scatterplot of (x9, y) pairs should look linear. You can then use a line to describe the 
relationship between y and x9—something you already know how to do. This is illustrated 
in the following example.
Example 5.17 
River Water Velocity and Distance from Shore
As fans of white-water rafting know, a river flows more slowly close to its banks (because 
of friction between the riverbank and the water). To study the nature of the relationship 
between water velocity and the distance from the shore, data were gathered on velocity (in 
centimeters per second) of a river at different distances (in meters) from the bank. Suppose 
that the resulting data were as follows:
Distance 
0.5
1.5
2.5
3.5
4.5
5.5
6.5
7.5
8.5
9.5
Velocity
22.00
23.18
25.48
25.25
27.15
27.83
28.49
28.18
28.50
28.63 
A scatterplot of the data exhibits a curved pattern, as seen in both the scatterplot 
(Figure 5.32(a)) and the residual plot from a linear fit (Figure 5.32(b)).
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Original Data
Transformed Data
Original Data
Transformed Data
x
y
x9
y
x
y
x9
y
0.5
22.00 
0.7071
22.00
5.5
27.83 
2.3452 
27.83 
1.5
23.18 
1.2247 
23.18 
6.5
28.49 
2.5495 
28.49 
2.5
25.48 
1.5811 
25.48 
7.5
28.18 
2.7386
28.18 
3.5
25.25 
1.8708 
25.25 
8.5
28.50 
2.9155 
28.50 
4.5
27.15 
2.1213 
27.15 
9.5
28.63 
3.0822 
28.63 
Table 5.2  Original and Transformed Data of Example 5.17
Do the work ❭
Because the scatterplot of the (x, y) pairs looks like the curve for the square root function 
in Figure 5.26(b), we begin by replacing each x value by its square root:
x9 5 Ïx
This is called transforming the x values. The original and transformed data are shown in 
Table 5.2.
Formulate a plan ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.4   Nonlinear Relationships and Transformations 
●  251
Figure 5.33(a) shows a scatterplot of y versus x9 (or equivalently y versus Ïx). The pat-
tern of points in this plot looks linear, and so you can fit the least-squares regression line 
using the transformed data. The Minitab output from this regression is as follows:
Regression Analysis
The regression equation is
velocity 5 20.1 1 3.01 sqrt distance
Predictor
Coef
SE Coef
T
P
Constant
20.1103
0.6097
32.99
0.000
sqrt distance
3.0085
0.2726
11.03
0.000
S 5 0.629242	
R-Sq 5 93.8%	
R-Sq(adj) 5 93.1%
(a)
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
1
2
3
Velocity
(b)
20.8
20.6
20.4
20.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
1
2
3
Residual
0.8
Distance
Distance
Figure  5.33
Plots for the transformed data of
Example 5.17:
(a) scatterplot of y versus x9;
(b) residual plot resulting from a
linear fit to the transformed data.
The resulting regression equation is
y⁄ 5 20.1 1 3.01x9
or, equivalently,
y⁄ 5 20.1 1 3.01Ïx
This model is evaluated using R2, se, and a residual plot. The residual plot (shown in 
Figure 5.33(b)) does not have any patterns or unusual features. The values of R2 and se (see 
the Minitab output) indicate that a line is a reasonable way to describe the relationship 
between y and x9.
To predict velocity of the river at a distance of 9 meters from shore, we first compute 
x9 5 Ïx 5 Ï9 5 3 and then use the least-squares regression line to obtain a predicted 
y value: 
​y⁄ 5 20.1 1 3.01x9 5 20.1 1 (3.01)(3) 5 29.13 cm per second
	
■
A general strategy for fitting a nonlinear model is to find a way to transform the x 
and/or y values so that a scatterplot of the transformed data has a linear appearance. A 
transformation (sometimes called a re-expression) involves using a simple function of a 
variable in place of the variable itself (like x9 5 Ïx in Example 5.17). Common transfor-
mations involve taking square roots, logarithms, or reciprocals.
The nonlinear models (other than the quadratic model) given in Figure 5.26 (square 
root, reciprocal, log, exponential, and power) can all be fit by transforming variables and 
then fitting a line to the transformed data. It is convenient to separate these models into 
two types:
1.	 Models that involve transforming only the x variable (square root, reciprocal, and log).
2.	 Models that involve transforming the y variable (exponential and power).
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

252 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
Models That Involve Transforming Only x
The square root, reciprocal, and log models all have the form
 ​y⁄ 5 a 1 b(some function of x)
where the function of x is square root, reciprocal, or log. Notice that these models all 
describe a linear relationship between y and a function of x. This suggests that if the pattern 
in the scatterplot of (x, y) pairs looks like one of the curves in Figure 5.26(b)–(d), an 
appropriate transformation of the x values should result in transformed data that shows a 
linear pattern.
Model
Transformation
Square root
x9 5 Ïx​
Reciprocal
x9 5 1
x
Log
x9 5 ln (x)
Example 5.18 
Electromagnetic Radiation
Is electromagnetic radiation from phone antennae associated with declining bird popula-
tions? This is one of the questions investigated by the authors of the paper “The Urban 
Decline of the House Sparrow (Passer domesticus): A Possible Link with Electromagnetic 
Radiation” (Electromagnetic Biology and Medicine [2007]: 141–151). The accompanying data 
on x 5 electromagnetic field strength (Volts per meter) and y 5 sparrow density (sparrows 
per hectare) were read from a graph in the paper. 
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Field Strength
Sparrow Density
Field Strength
Sparrow Density
0.11
41.71
0.90
16.29
0.20
33.60
1.20
16.97
0.29
24.74
1.30
12.83
0.40
19.50
1.41
13.17
0.50
19.42
1.50
  4.64
0.61
18.74
1.80
  2.11
1.01
24.23
1.90
  0.00
1.10
22.04
3.01
  0.00
0.70
16.29
3.10
14.69
0.80
14.69
3.41
  0.00
Sparrow density
Field strength
0
10
20
30
40
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Figure  5.34
Scatterplot of the sparrow data.
A scatterplot of these data is shown in Figure 5.34.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.4   Nonlinear Relationships and Transformations 
●  253
Regression Analysis: Sparrow Density Versus ln (Field Strength)
The regression equation is
Sparrow Density = 14.8 – 10.5 ln (Field Strength) 
S = 5.50641
R–Sq = 76.2%
R–Sq(adj) = 74.9%
Constant
14.805
1.238
11.96
0.000
ln (Field Strength)
–10.546
1.389
–7.59
0.000
Predictor
Coef
SE Coef
T
P
Figure  5.36
Minitab output for the log model
of Example 5.18.
Sparrow density
0
10
20
30
40
22.5
21.5
21.0
20.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
22.0
In(Field strength)
Figure  5.35
Scatterplot of the transformed
data of Example 5.18.
Notice that there is a curved pattern in the scatterplot that has a shape that is similar to 
the first graph in Figure 5.26(d). This suggests that a reasonable choice for describing the 
relationship between sparrow density and field strength is a log model
y⁄ 5 a 1 bln(x)
To fit this model, begin by transforming the x values using
x9 5 ln(x)
In this text, natural logs (denoted by ln or loge) are used, but in practice, either the 
natural log or log base 10 (denoted by log or log10) can be used. The transformed data is 
given here.
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
A scatterplot of the (x9, y) pairs is shown in Figure 5.35. The pattern in this plot looks lin-
ear, so you can find the least-squares regression line using the transformed data. From the 
resulting Minitab output (Figure 5.36), the equation of the least-squares regression line is
y⁄ 5 14.8 2 10.5x9
or, in terms of x
y⁄ 5 14.8 2 10.5 ln(x)
In(Field Strength)
Sparrow Density
In(Field Strength)
Sparrow Density
22.207
41.71
20.105
	
16.29
21.609
33.60
  0.182
	
16.97
21.238
24.74
  0.262
	
12.83
20.916
19.50
  0.344
	
13.17
20.693
19.42
  0.405
	
  4.64
20.494
18.74
  0.588
	
  2.11
	
0.001
24.23
  0.642
	
  0.00
	
0.095
22.04
  1.102
	
  0.00
20.357
16.29
  1.131
	
14.69
20.223
14.69
  1.227
	
  0.00
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

254 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
The value of R2 for this model is 0.762 and se 5 5.5. A residual plot from the least-squares 
regression line fit to the transformed data is shown in Figure 5.37. There are no apparent 
patterns or unusual features in the residual plot, so it appears that the log model is a rea-
sonable choice for describing the relationship between sparrow density and field strength.
Interpret the results ❭
–10
–5
0
5
10
0.0
0.5
Residual
Field strength
1.0
2.0
1.5
3.0
2.5
3.5
Figure  5.37
Residual plot for the log model fit to 
the sparrow data of Example 5.18.
This model can now be used to predict sparrow density from field strength. For example, 
if the field strength is 1.6 Volts per meter, we would predict that sparrow density would be
y⁄ 5 14.8 2 10.5x9
	
5 14.8 2 10.5 ln(x)
	
5 14.8 2 10.5 ln(1.6)
	
5 14.8 2 10.5 (0.470)
	 5 9.685 sparrows per hectare
■
Models That Involve Transforming y
There are two nonlinear models in Figure 5.26 that have not yet been considered—the 
exponential and power models. Let’s begin by considering the exponential model
y 5 ea1bx
Using properties of logarithms, it follows that 
ln(y) 5 ln ea1bx​
           5 a 1 bx
For the exponential model, ln(y) is a linear function of x. This means that if the pattern 
in a scatterplot of the (x, y) pairs looks like the exponential curves of Figure 5.26(e), a scat-
terplot of the (x, y9) pairs, where
y9 5 ln y
should look linear.
Now consider the power model of Figure 5.26(f ),
y 5 ax b
Again using properties of logarithms,
ln y 5 ln(axb)
	
5 ln a 1 ln xb
	
5 ln a 1 bln x
If a power model is an appropriate way to describe the relationship between x and y, a 
linear model would describe the relationship between x9 5 ln x and y9 5 ln y.
Model
Transformation
Exponential
y9 5 ln y
Power
x9 5 ln x
y9 5 ln y
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.4   Nonlinear Relationships and Transformations 
●  255
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
5
6
Blood mercury level (y)
In (y)
Lake pH (x)
7
8
9
10
–3.5
–3.0
–2.5
–2.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
5
6
Lake pH (x)
7
8
9
10
(a)
(b)
Figure  5.38
Scatterplots for the loon data of
Example 5.19:  
(a) scatterplot oforiginal data;  
(b) scatterplot of transformed data 
with y9 5 ln y.
Example 5.19 
Loons in Acidic Lakes
A study of factors that affect the survival of loon chicks is described in the paper “Does 
Prey Biomass or Mercury Exposure Affect Loon Chick Survival in Wisconsin?” (The Journal 
of Wildlife Management [2005]: 57–67). In this study, a relationship between the pH of lake 
water and blood mercury level in loon chicks was observed. 
The researchers thought that it is possible that the pH of the lake water could be related 
to the type of fish that the loons ate. The accompanying data (Table 5.3) on x 5 lake pH 
and y 5 blood mercury level (mg/g) for 37 loon chicks from different lakes in Wisconsin 
were read from a graph in the paper. A scatterplot is shown in Figure 5.38(a).
Understand the context ❭
The pattern in this scatterplot is typical of exponential decay and looks like the second 
curve in Figure 5.26(e). The change in y as x increases is much smaller for large x values 
than for small x values. We can see that a change of 1 in pH is associated with a much larger 
change in blood mercury level in the part of the plot where the x values are small than in 
the part of the plot where the x values are large.
Formulate a plan ❭
Lake pH (x)
Blood Mercury 
Level (y)
y9 5 ln(y)
Lake pH (x)
Blood Mercury 
Level (y)
y9 5 ln(y)
Lake pH (x)
Blood Mercury 
Level (y)
y9 5 ln(y)
5.28
1.10
  0.0953
6.17
0.55
20.5978
7.03
0.12
22.1203
5.69
0.76
20.2744
6.22
0.43
20.8440
7.20
0.15
21.8971
5.56
0.74
20.3011
6.15
0.40
20.9163
7.89
0.11
22.2073
5.51
0.60
20.5108
6.05
0.33
21.1087
7.93
0.11
22.2073
4.90
0.48
20.7340
6.04
0.26
21.3471
7.99
0.09
22.4079
5.02
0.43
20.8440
6.24
0.18
21.7148
7.99
0.06
22.8134
5.02
0.29
21.2379
6.30
0.16
21.8326
8.30
0.09
22.4079
5.04
0.09
22.4079
6.80
0.45
20.7985
8.42
0.09
22.4079
5.30
0.10
22.3026
6.58
0.30
21.2040
8.42
0.04
23.2189
5.33
0.20
21.6094
6.65
0.28
21.2730
8.95
0.12
22.1203
5.64
0.28
21.2730
7.06
0.22
21.5141
9.49
0.14
21.9661
5.83
0.17
21.7720
6.99
0.21
21.5606
5.83
0.18
21.7148
6.97
0.13
22.0402
Table 5.3  Data and Transformed Data from Example 5.19
Consider the data ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

256 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
To fit an exponential model, begin by transforming the y values using y9 5 ln y. In addi-
tion to the original data, Table 5.3 also displays the transformed data. A scatterplot of the 
(x, y9) pairs is shown in Figure 5.38(b). The pattern in the scatterplot of the transformed 
data looks linear, so it is reasonable to use the least-squares regression line to describe the 
relationship between y9 and x.
The following Minitab output shows the result of fitting the least-squares line to the 
transformed data:
The regression equation is
ln(y) 5 1.06 2 0.396 Lake pH (x)
Predictor
Coef
SE Coef
T
P
Constant
1.0550
0.5535
1.91
0.065
Lake pH (x)
20.39564
0.08264 
24.79
0.000
S 5 0.605645	
R-Sq 5 39.6%	
R-Sq(adj) 5 37.8%
The resulting least-squares regression line is
y⁄9 5 1.06 2 0.396x
or equivalently
ln y 5 1.06 2 0.396x
	
■
Notice that the linear model in Example 5.19 could be used to predict values of ln(y). To 
translate this linear model back to the form of the exponential model, you can take anti-
logarithms of each side of the equation. This is illustrated in Example 5.20.
Example 5.20 
Revisiting the Loon Data
For the loon data of Example 5.19, y9 5 ln y and the least-squares regression line describ-
ing the relationship between y9 and x was y⁄95 1.06 2 0.396x or ln y 5 1.06 2 0.396x. To 
“undo” the transformation, we can take the antilog of both sides of this equation:
eln y 5 ​e1.06 2 0.396x​
Using properties of logs and exponents, eln y 5 e1.06 2 0.396x5 (e1.06) (e20.396x). Then
y⁄ 5 e1.06 e20.396x 5 2.886e20.396x​
The equation ​y⁄ 5 2.886e20.396x can be used to predict the y value (blood mercury level) 
for a given x (lake pH). For example, the predicted blood mercury level when lake pH 
is 6 is
y⁄ 5 2.886e20.396x 5 2.886e 0.396(6) 5 2.886e22.376 5 2.886(0.093) 5 0.268
	
■
The process of transforming data, fitting a line to the transformed data, and then un-
doing the transformation to get an equation for a curved relationship between x and y 
usually results in a curve that provides a reasonable fit to the sample data. But when y 
is transformed, this process does not result in the least-squares curve for the data. For 
example, in Example 5.20, a transformation was used to fit the curve y⁄ 5 2.886e20.396x. 
However, there may be another equation of the form ​y⁄ 5 aebx that has a smaller sum 
of squared residuals for the original data than the one obtained using transformations. 
Finding the least-squares estimates for a and b for an exponential or power model is dif-
ficult. Fortunately, the curves found using transformations usually provide reasonable 
predictions of y.
Choosing Among Different Possible Nonlinear Models
Often there is more than one reasonable model that could be used to describe a nonlinear 
relationship between two variables. When this is the case, how do we choose a model? 
Do the work ❭
ˆ
ˆ
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.4   Nonlinear Relationships and Transformations 
●  257
20
0
3
6
9
12
40
60
80
100
120
140
Rock density
Salamander density
Figure  5.39
Scatterplot of salamander density
versus rock density.
The choice often involves considering how well the model fits the data and what scientific 
theory suggests the form of the relationship should be. In the absence of any scientific 
theory, we want to choose a model that has small residuals (small se) and accounts for a 
large proportion of the variability in y (large R2). On the other hand, if scientific theory 
suggests that the relationship should have a particular form, we would choose a model 
that is consistent with the suggested form. The following two examples illustrate these two 
different situations.
Example 5.21 
Look for Salamanders Under Those Rocks
The paper “The Relationship Between Rock Density and Salamander Density in a Mountain 
Stream” (Herpetologica [1987]: 357–361) describes a study of factors that influence popula-
tion density of salamanders. In this study, researchers created a range of salamander habi-
tats at different locations in a small stream in the Appalachian Mountains by using different 
sized rocks and pebbles. Three months later, they returned to measure salamander density. 
This resulted in data on 
x 5 rock density (rocks per 1.4 square meters)
and
y 5 salamander density (salamanders per 1.4 square meters)
A scatterplot of these data is shown in Figure 5.39.
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Looking at the curves in Figure 5.26, we might think about using a square root model or 
a reciprocal model. The researchers chose the reciprocal regression model, y 5 a 1 b 1
1
x2, 
for two reasons: (1) it provided a good fit to the data, and (2) the reciprocal model made 
sense scientifically. The investigators felt that there would be an upper limit to the popula-
tion density, since the streambed is a nonrenewable resource and the stream therefore had 
a limit in the number of salamanders that could be sustained. This limit is known as the 
“carrying capacity” of an environment and is estimated by the value of the intercept, a, in 
the reciprocal model.
Using the transformation x9 5 1
x, a least-squares regression line was fit using the trans-
formed data. The resulting model was
y 5 12.37 2 292.6x9 5 12.37 2 292.61
1
x2
The value of R2 for this model is R2 5 0.82. Figure 5.40(a) shows a scatterplot of the 
transformed data and the least-squares regression line. Figure 5.40(b) is a scatterplot of the 
original data that also shows the curve corresponding to the reciprocal model.
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

258 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
EXAMPLE 5.22 
How Old Is That Lobster?
Can you tell how old a lobster is by its size? This question was investigated by the authors of 
a paper that appeared in the Biological Bulletin (August, 2007). Researchers measured carapace 
(the exterior shell) length (in mm) of 27 laboratory-raised lobsters of known age. The data on 
x 5 carapace length and y 5 age (in years) in Table 5.4 were read from a graph in the paper.
Understand the context ❭
Table 5.4  Original and Transformed Data for Example 5.22
y
x
In(x)
ln( y)
y
x
In(x)
ln( y)
1.00
  63.32
4.148
0.000
2.33
138.47
4.931
0.846
1.00
  67.50
4.212
0.000
2.50
133.95
4.897
0.916
1.00
  69.58
4.242
0.000
2.51
125.25
4.830
0.920
1.00
  73.41
4.296
0.000
2.50
123.51
4.816
0.916
1.42
  79.32
4.373
0.351
2.93
146.82
4.989
1.075
1.42
  82.80
4.416
0.351
2.92
139.17
4.936
1.072
1.42
  85.59
4.450
0.351
2.92
136.73
4.918
1.072
1.82
105.07
4.655
0.599
2.92
122.81
4.811
1.072
1.82
107.16
4.674
0.599
3.17
142.30
4.958
1.154
1.82
117.25
4.764
0.599
3.41
152.73
5.029
1.227
2.18
109.24
4.694
0.779
3.42
145.78
4.982
1.230
2.18
110.64
4.706
0.779
3.75
148.21
4.999
1.322
2.17
118.99
4.779
0.775
4.08
152.04
5.024
1.406
2.17
122.81
4.811
0.775
Consider the data ❭
12
3
6
9
0.01
1/Rock density
Rock density
Salamander density
Salamander density
0.02
0.03
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
3
6
9
12
Figure  5.40
Scatterplots for the salamander
data of Example 5.21:
(a) transformed data;
(b) original data. 

■
The scatterplot of the data in Figure 5.41 shows a clear curved pattern. Considering the 
curves in Figure 5.26, there are several models that could be considered, including the 
exponential model and the power model.
In this situation, there is no scientific theory to suggest what the form of the rela-
tionship might be. A reasonable way to proceed is to fit both models and then choose 
the one that provides the best fit. Let’s start with the exponential model. Using the 
transformation 
y9 5 ln y
results in the transformed y values given in Table 5.4. A scatterplot of the (x, y9) pairs 
is shown in Figure 5.42(a). Notice that the relationship between y9 and x looks linear. 
Formulate a plan ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.4   Nonlinear Relationships and Transformations 
●  259
50
75
100
x
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
y
125
150
Figure  5.41
Scatterplot of age versus
carapace length.
x
50
75
100
ln(y)
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
125
150
5.0
4.9
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
ln(x)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
ln(y)
4.7
4.8
(a)
(b)
Figure  5.42
Scatterplot of the transformed
lobster data:  
(a) x 5 carapace length, y9 5 ln(age); 
(b) x9 5 ln(carapace length),  
y9 5 ln(age).
Minitab was used to fit the least-squares regression line to the (x, y9) data, resulting in the 
following output:
Regression Analysis: ln( y) versus x 
The regression equation is
ln(y) 5 20.927 1 0.0145 x
Predictor
Coef
SE Coef
T
P
Constant
20.92704
0.08692
210.67
0.000
x
0.0144903
0.0007311
19.82
0.000
S 5 0.105917	
R-Sq 5 94.0%	
R-Sq(adj) 5 93.8%
Do the work ❭
Figure 5.42(b) shows a scatterplot of the transformed data that would be used to fit a 
power model (x9 5 ln, y9 5 ln y). The pattern in this scatterplot also looks linear. Minitab 
output from fitting a least-squares regression line using the (x9, y9) data is shown here:
Regression Analysis: ln( y) versus ln(x) 
The regression equation is
ln(y) 5 26.32 1 1.50 ln(x)
Predictor
Coef
SE Coef
T
P
Constant
26.3205
0.3687
217.14
0.000
ln(x)
1.49866
0.07805
19.20
0.000
S 5 0.109120	
R-Sq 5 93.6%	
R-Sq(adj) 5 93.4%
Notice that both the exponential model and the power model have large R2 values. 
Comparing the fit of the two models results in
Model
R2
Se
Exponential
0.940
0.106
Power
0.936
0.109
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

260 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
Both models do a good job in describing the relationship between age and carapace 
length. In the absence of any scientific theory suggesting the form of the model, we would 
choose the exponential model because it provides a (slightly) better fit.
The exponential model is
y⁄9 5 20.927 1 0.0145x
or equivalently
ln y⁄ 5 20.927 1 0.0145x
or 
	
y⁄ 5 e20.927e0.0145x 5 0.396e0.0145x
	
■
Interpret the results ❭
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
EXERCISES 5.44 - 5.50
5.44	 The following data on x 5 frying time (in seconds) 
and y 5 moisture content (%) appeared in the paper 
“Thermal and Physical Properties of Tortilla Chips as 
a Function of Frying Time” (Journal of Food Processing 
and Preservation [1995]: 175 –189):
x    5   10     15    20    25    30    45    60
y  16.3  9.7   8.1   4.2   3.4   2.9   1.9   1.3
a.	 Construct a scatterplot of the data.
b.	Would a straight line provide an effective sum-
mary of the relationship? 
c.	 Here are the values of x9 5 log(x) and y9 5 log(y):
x9 0.70 1.00 1.18 1.30 1.40 1.48 1.65 1.78
y9 1.21 0.99 0.91 0.62 0.53 0.46 0.28 0.11
	
Construct a scatterplot of these transformed 
data, and comment on the pattern. 
d.	Based on the accompanying MINITAB output, 
does the least-squares line effectively summarize 
the relationship between y9 and x9? 
The regression equation is
log(moisture) 5 2.02 2 1.05 log(time)
Predictor
Coef
SE Coef
T
P
Constant
2.01780
0.09584
21.05
0.000
log(time)
21.05171
0.07091
214.83
0.000
S 5 0.0657067  R-Sq 5 97.3%  R-Sq(adj) 5 96.9%
Analysis of Variance
Source
DF
SS
MS
F
P
Regression
1
0.94978
0.94978
219.99
0.000
Residual Error
6
0.02590
0.00432
Total
7
0.97569
e.	 Use the MINITAB output to predict moisture 
content when frying time is 35 sec. 
5.45	 The paper “Aspects of Food Finding by Wintering 
Bald Eagles” (The Auk [1983]: 477– 484) examined 
the relationship between the time that eagles spend 
aloft searching for food (indicated by the percentage 
of eagles soaring) and relative food availability. The 
accompanying data were taken from a scatterplot 
that appeared in this paper. Salmon availability is 
denoted by x and the percentage of eagles in the air is 
denoted by y.
x
0
0
0.2
0.5
0.5
1.0 
y
28.2
69.0
27.0
38.5
48.4
31.1
x
1.2
1.9
2.6
3.3
4.7
6.5
y
26.9
8.2
4.6
7.4
7.0
6.8
a.	 Draw a scatterplot for this data set. Would you 
describe the plot as linear or curved? 
b.	One possible transformation that might lead to a 
linear pattern involves taking the square root of 
both the x and y values. Construct a scatterplot 
using the variables Ïx and Ïy. Is the pattern in 
this scatterplot more linear than the scatterplot in 
Part (a)?
c.	 After considering your scatterplot in Part (a), sug-
gest another transformation that might be used to 
straighten the original plot. Use your suggestion 
to construct a scatterplot for your x9 and/or y9. 
Which transformation (the one from this part or 
the square root transformation from Part (b)) do 
you prefer? Explain.
5.46	 Food intake of grazing animals is limited by the rate 
grass can be chewed and swallowed, as well as the 
rate at which food can be digested. The authors of 
the paper “What Constrains Daily Intake in Thom-
son’s Gazelles?” (Ecology [1999]: 2338–2347) observed 
the grazing activity of captive Thomson’s gazelles. 
They recorded grazing rate (amount of grass eaten, 
in grams per minute) and biomass of the grazing 
area (food density, in grams per square meter). 
Scatterplots of these data with four possible func-
tions that might be used to describe the relationship 
between grazing rate and biomass are shown in the 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 5.4   Nonlinear Relationships and Transformations 
●  261
­Figure EX-5.46 the bottom of the page. Which of these 
functions would you recommend? Explain your rea-
soning in a few sentences. (Hint: See Example 5.21.)
5.47	 A study, described in the paper “Prediction of 
Defibrillation Success from a Single Defibrilla-
tion Threshold Measurement” (Circulation [1988]: 
1144 –1149) investigated the relationship between 
defibrillation success and the energy of the 
defibrillation shock (expressed as a multiple of 
the defibrillation threshold). The accompanying 
data are from this study.
Energy of Shock
Success (%)
0.5
  33.3
1.0
  58.3
1.5
  81.8
2.0
  96.7
2.5
100.0
a.	 Construct a scatterplot of y 5 success and x 5 
energy of shock. Does the relationship appear to 
be linear or nonlinear? 
b.	Fit a least-squares line to the given data, and 
construct a residual plot. Does the residual plot 
support your conclusion in Part (a)? Explain.
c.	 Consider transforming the data by leaving y 
unchanged and using either x9 5 Ïx​ or x" 5 
ln(x). Which of these transformations would you 
recommend? Justify your choice by appealing to 
appropriate graphical displays. 
d.	Using the transformation you recommended in  
Part (c), find the equation of the least-squares line 
that describes the relationship between y and the 
transformed x. 
e.	 What would you predict success to be when the energy 
of shock is 1.75 times the threshold level? When it is 
0.8 times the threshold level? 
0
0
50
100
Biomass
Graze Rate
150
200
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
0
50
Biomass
Graze Rate
100
150
200
(c) y⁄ 5 a 1 b 1
1
x2
(d) y⁄ 5 a 1 b Ïx
50
Biomass
0
Graze Rate
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
100
150
200
Graze Rate
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
50
0
100
150
200
Biomass
(a) y⁄ 5 a 1 bln(x)
(b) y⁄ 5 a 1 b1x 1 b2x2
Figure  EX-5.46
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

262 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
5.48	 The article “Organ Transplant Demand Rises Five Times 
as Fast as Existing Supply” (San Luis Obispo Tribune, 
February 23, 2001) included a graph that showed 
the number of people waiting for organ transplants 
each year from 1990 to 1999. The following data are 
approximate values and were read from the graph in 
the article:
Year
Number Waiting for  Transplant 
(in thousands)
1 (1990)
22
2
25
3
29
4
33
5
38
6
44
7
50
8
57
9
64
10 (1999)
72
a.	 Construct a scatterplot of the data with y 5 
number waiting for transplant and x 5 year. 
Describe how the number of people waiting for 
transplants has changed over time from 1990 
to 1999.
b.	Find a transformation of x and/or y that straight-
ens the plot. Construct a scatterplot for your 
transformed variables. 
c.	 Using the transformed variables from Part (b), 
fit a least-squares line and use it to predict the 
number waiting for an organ transplant in 2000 
(Year 11).
d.	The prediction made in Part (c) involves predic-
tion for an x value that is outside the range of the 
x values in the sample. What assumption must 
you be willing to make for this to be reasonable? 
Do you think this assumption is reasonable in 
this case? Would your answer be the same if the 
prediction had been for the year 2010 rather than 
2000? Explain.
5.49	 The paper “Population Pressure and Agricul-
tural Intensity” (Annals of the Association of American 
Geographers [1977]: 384–396) reported a positive 
relationship between population density and agricul-
tural intensity. The following data consist of measures 
of population density (x) and agricultural intensity 
(y) for 18 different subtropical locations:
x
1.0
26.0
1.1
101.0
14.9
134.7 
y
9
  7
6
  50
  5
100
x
3.0
  5.7
  7.6
25.0
143.0
27.5
y
7
14
14
10
  50
14
x 103.0
180.0
49.6
140.6
140.0
233.0
y   50
150
10
  67
100
100
a.	 Construct a scatterplot of y versus x. Is the scat-
terplot compatible with the statement of positive 
relationship made in the paper? 
b.	Try a scatterplot that uses y and x2. Does this 
transformation straighten the plot? 
c.	 Draw a scatterplot that uses log(y) and x. The 
log(y) values, given in order corresponding to the 
y values, are 0.95, 0.85, 0.78, 1.70, 0.70, 2.00, 
0.85, 1.15, 1.15, 1.00, 1.70, 1.15, 1.70, 2.18, 
1.00, 1.83, 2.00, and 2.00. How does this scat-
terplot compare with that of Part (b)? 
d.	Now consider a scatterplot that uses transforma-
tions on both x and y: log(y) and x2. Is this effec-
tive in straightening the plot? Explain. 
5.50	 Determining the age of an animal can sometimes be 
a difficult task. One method of estimating the age of 
harp seals is based on the width of the pulp canal 
in the seal’s canine teeth. To investigate the relation-
ship between age and the width of the pulp canal, 
researchers recorded age and canal width in seals of 
known age. The following data on x 5 age (in years) 
and y 5 canal length (in millimeters) are a portion of 
a larger data set that appeared in the paper “Valida-
tion of Age Estimation in the Harp Seal Using Den-
tinal Annuli” (Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic 
Science [1983]: 1430–1441):
x
0.25 0.25 0.50 0.50
0.50
0.75
0.75 1.00 
y
700
675
525
500
400
350
300
300 
x 1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.25 1.25 1.50 1.50
y 250
230
150
100
200
100
100
125
x 2.00
2.00
2.50
2.75
3.00 4.00 4.00 5.00
y 60
140
60
50
10
10
10
10
x 5.00
5.00
5.00
6.00
6.00
y
15
10
10
15
10
Construct a scatterplot for this data set. Would you de-
scribe the relationship between age and canal length 
as linear? If not, suggest a transformation that might 
straighten the plot.  
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   5.5    Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses  
●  263
   5.5   
Interpreting and Communicating the Results  
of Statistical Analyses
Using either a least-squares line to summarize a linear relationship or a correlation 
coef­ﬁ­cient to describe the strength of a linear relationship is common in investigations 
that focus on more than a single variable. In fact, the methods described in this chapter 
are among the most widely used of all statistical tools. When numerical bivariate data are 
analyzed in journal articles and other published sources, it is common to ﬁnd a scatterplot 
of the data and a least-squares line or a correlation coef­ﬁ­cient.
Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses
When reporting the results of a data analysis involving bivariate numerical data, it is 
important to include graphical displays as well as numerical summaries. Including a 
scatterplot and providing a description of what the plot reveals about the form of the 
relationship between the two variables under study establish the context in which numerical 
summary measures, such as the correlation coef­ﬁ­cient or the equation of the least-squares 
line, can be interpreted.
In general, the goal of an analysis of bivariate data is to give a quantitative description 
of the relationship, if any, between the two variables. If there is a relationship, you can 
describe how strong or weak the relationship is or model the relationship in a way that 
allows various conclusions to be drawn. If the goal of the study is to describe the strength 
of the relationship and the scatterplot shows a linear pattern, you can report the value of 
the correlation coef­ﬁ­cient or the coef­ﬁ­cient of determination as a measure of the strength 
of the linear relationship. 
When you interpret the value of the correlation coef­ﬁ­cient, it is a good idea to relate the 
interpretation to the pattern observed in the scatterplot. This is especially important before 
making a statement of no relationship between two variables, because a correlation coef­ﬁ­cient 
near 0 does not necessarily imply that there is no relationship of any form. Similarly, a cor-
relation coef­ﬁ­cient near 1 or 21, by itself, does not guarantee that the relationship is linear.
If the goal of a study is prediction, then, when you report the results of the study, you 
should not only give a scatterplot and the equation of the least-squares line but also address 
how well the linear prediction model ﬁts the data. At a minimum, you should include both 
the values of se (the standard deviation about the regression line) and r2 (the coef­ﬁ­cient of 
determination). Including a residual plot can also provide support for the appropriateness 
of the linear model for describing the relationship between the two variables.
What to Look for in Published Data
Here are a few things to consider when you read an article that includes an analysis of 
bivariate data:
●
●What two variables are being studied? Are they both numerical? Is a distinction made 
between a dependent variable and an independent variable?
●
●Does the article include a scatterplot of the data? If so, does there appear to be a 
relationship between the two variables? Can the relationship be described as linear, or 
is some type of nonlinear relationship a more appropriate description?
●
●Does the relationship between the two variables appear to be weak or strong? Is the 
value of a correlation coef­ﬁ­cient reported?
●
●If the least-squares line is used to summarize the relationship between the dependent 
and independent variables, is any measure of goodness of ﬁt reported, such as r2 or se? 
How are these values interpreted, and what do they imply about the usefulness of the 
least-squares line?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

264 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
●
●If a correlation coef­ﬁ­cient is reported, is it interpreted properly? Be cautious of 
interpretations that claim a causal relationship.
The authors of the paper “Recycling and Ambivalence: Quantitative and Qualitative 
Analyses of Household Recycling Among Young Adults” (Environment and Behavior [2008]: 
777–797) describe a study of recycling among young adults in Sweden. They considered 
y 5 a numerical measure of recycling behavior that was based on how often six 
types of household waste (newspapers, glass, hard plastic, soft plastic, metal, and 
paper) were recycled and x 5 distance to the nearest recycling facility. They reported 
that “a check of a plot between the variables recycling behavior and distance to the 
nearest recycling facility showed an approximately linear association between the two 
variables.” Based on this observation, a least-squares regression line is an appropriate 
way to summarize the relationship between recycling behavior and distance to nearest 
recycling facility.
A related article, “Rubbish Regression and the Census Undercount” (Chance [1992]: 33), 
describes work done by the Garbage Project at the University of Arizona. Project researchers 
had analyzed different categories of garbage for a number of households. They were asked 
by the Census Bureau to see whether any of the garbage data variables were related to 
household size. They reported that “the weight data for different categories of garbage 
were plotted on graphs against data on household size, dwelling by dwelling, and the 
resulting scatterplots were analyzed to see in which categories the weight showed a steady, 
monotonic rise relative to household size.”
The researchers determined that the strongest linear relationship appeared to be that 
between the amount of plastic discarded and household size. The line used to summarize 
this relationship was stated to be y⁄ 5 0.2815x, where y 5 household size and x 5 weight 
(in pounds) of plastic during a 5-week collection. Note that this line has an intercept of 
0. Scientists at the Census Bureau believed that this relationship would extend to entire 
neighborhoods, and so the amount of plastic discarded by a neighborhood could be 
measured (rather than having to measure house by house) and then used to approximate the 
neighborhood size.
An example of the use of the correlation coefficient is found in a paper describing a 
study of nightingales (a species of bird known for its song). For male songbirds, both 
physical characteristics and the quality of the song play a role in a female’s choice of a 
mate. The authors of the article “Song Repertoire Is Correlated with Body Measures and Arrival 
Date in Common Nightingales” (Animal Behaviour [2005]: 211–217) used data from n 5 20 
nightingales to reach the conclusion that there was a positive correlation between the 
number of different songs in a nightingale’s repertoire and both body weight (r 5 .53) 
and wing length (r 5 .47), and a negative correlation between repertoire size and arrival 
date (r 5 2.47). This means that heavier birds tend to know more songs, as do birds with 
longer wings. The authors of the paper indicated that the observed correlation between 
repertoire size and body characteristics was unlikely to be due solely to the age of the bird, 
since all nightingales in the study were more than 3 years old and prior research indicates 
that repertoire size does not continue to increase with age ­after the third year. The negative 
correlation between repertoire size and arrival date was interpreted as meaning that male 
nightingales who knew more songs tended to arrive at their breed­ing habitats earlier than 
those who knew fewer songs.
A nonlinear regression was used by the authors of the paper “Maternal Blood Manganese 
Levels and Infant Birth Weight” (Epidemiology [2009]: 367–373) to describe the relationship 
between y 5 birth weight and x 5 maternal blood-manganese level at delivery for 470 
mother-infant pairs. The paper states:
In this cross-sectional study, there was an inverted U-shaped association between maternal 
blood-manganese levels at delivery and birth weight in full-term infants. This suggests that both 
lower and higher manganese exposures are associated with lower birth weight, although the 
association of higher manganese with lower weight was rather weak and imprecise. This is the 
first epidemiologic study to provide clear evidence of a nonlinear association between maternal 
manganese exposure and birth weight.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   5.5    Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses  
●  265
The paper goes on to suggest why the relationship may be best described by a quadratic 
rather than a linear equation:
One possible explanation for this effect would be oxidative stress caused by high manganese 
levels, leading to impairment of cellular function and growth. Manganese, like iron, is a transi-
tional metal and can catalyze oxidative cellular reactions. Exposure to high levels of iron, a metal 
with overlapping chemical properties to manganese, has been associated with low birth weight.
A Word to the Wise: Cautions and Limitations
There are a number of ways to get into trouble when analyzing bivariate numerical data! 
Here are some of the things you need to keep in mind when conducting your own analyses 
or when reading reports of such analyses:
1.	 Correlation does not imply causation. A common media blunder is to infer a cause-
and-effect relationship between two variables simply because there is a strong 
correlation between them. Don’t fall into this trap! A strong correlation implies 
only that the two variables tend to vary together in a predictable way, but there are 
many possible explanations for why this is occurring besides one variable causing 
changes in the other.
For example, the article “Ban Cell Phones? You May as Well Ban Talking Instead” 
(USA Today, April 27, 2000) gave data that showed a strong negative correlation 
between the number of cell phone subscribers and traf­ﬁc fatality rates. During the 
years from 1985 to 1998, the number of cell phone subscribers increased from 
200,000 to 60,800,000, and the number of traf­ﬁc deaths per 100 million miles 
traveled decreased from 2.5 to 1.6 over the same period. However, based on this 
correlation alone, the conclusion that cell phone use improves road safety is not 
reasonable!
Similarly, the Calgary Herald (April 16, 2002) reported that heavy and moderate 
drinkers earn more than light drinkers or those who do not drink. Based on the 
correlation between number of drinks consumed and income, the author of the 
study concluded that moderate drinking “causes” higher earnings. This is obviously 
a misleading statement, but at least the article goes on to state that “there are many 
possible reasons for the correlation. It could be because better-off men simply choose 
to buy more alcohol. Or it might have something to do with stress: Maybe those with 
stressful jobs tend to earn more after controlling for age, occupation, etc., and maybe 
they also drink more in order to deal with the stress.”
2.	 A correlation coef­ﬁ­cient near 0 does not necessarily imply that there is no relationship 
between two variables. Before such an interpretation can be given, it is important to 
examine a scatterplot of the data carefully. Although it may be true that the variables 
are unrelated, there may in fact be a strong but nonlinear relationship.
3.	 The least-squares line for predicting y from x is not the same line as the least-squares 
line for predicting x from y. The least-squares line is, by deﬁ­ni­tion, the line that has 
the smallest possible sum of squared deviations of points from the line in the y direction 
(it minimizes os y 2 y⁄d2). The line that minimizes the sum of squared deviations in 
the y direction is not generally the same as the line that minimizes the sum of the 
squared deviations in the x direction. So, for example, it is not appropriate to ﬁt a line 
to data using y 5 house price and x 5 house size and then use the resulting least-
squares line Price 5 a 1 b(Size) to predict the size of a house by substituting in a price 
and then solving for size. Make sure that the dependent and independent variables are 
clearly iden­ti­ﬁed and that the appropriate line is ﬁt.
4.	 Beware of extrapolation. It is dangerous to assume that a linear model ﬁt to data is 
valid over a wider range of x values. Using the least-squares line to make predictions 
outside the range of x values in the data set often leads to poor predictions.
5.	 Be careful in interpreting the value of the slope and intercept in the least-squares 
line. In particular, in many instances interpreting the intercept as the value of y that 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

266 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
would be predicted when x 5 0 is equivalent to extrapolating way beyond the range 
of the x values in the data set, and this should be avoided unless x 5 0 is within the 
range of the data.
6.	 Remember that the least-squares line may be the “best” line (in that it has 
a smaller sum of squared deviations than any other line), but that doesn’t 
necessarily mean that the line will produce good predictions. Be cautious of 
predictions based on a least-squares line without any information about the 
adequacy of the linear model, such as se and r2.
7.	 It is not enough to look at just r2 or just se when assessing a linear model. These 
two measures address different aspects of the ﬁt of the line. In general, we would 
like to have a small value for se (which indicates that deviations from the line tend 
to be small) and a large value for r2 (which indicates that the linear relationship 
explains a large proportion of the variability in the y values). It is possible to 
have a small se combined with a small r2 or a large r2 combined with a large se. 
Remember to consider both values.
8.	 The value of the correlation coef­ﬁ­cient as well as the values for the intercept and 
slope of the least-squares line can be sensitive to inﬂuential observations in the 
data set, particularly if the sample size is small. Because potentially inﬂuential 
observations are those whose x values are far away from most of the x values in 
the data set, it is important to look for such observations when examining the 
scatterplot. (Another good reason for always starting with a plot of the data!)
9.	 If the relationship between two variables is nonlinear, it is preferable to model the 
relationship using a nonlinear model rather than ﬁt­ting a line to the data. A plot 
of the residuals from a linear ﬁt is particularly useful in determining whether a 
nonlinear model would be a more appropriate choice.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
EXERCISES 5.51 - 5.54
5.51	 The “Admitted Students Highlights Report 2009” 
prepared by The College Board for Cal Poly San Luis 
Obispo summarizes responses to a survey completed 
by 2001 new students who enrolled at Cal Poly in 
fall 2008 and by 2000 students who were admitted 
to Cal Poly for the fall 2008 term but who enrolled at 
other universities. 
One question in the survey presented a list 
of “college images” (such as career-oriented and 
friendly) and asked students to indicate for each im-
age whether or not they associated that image with 
Cal Poly. The percentage that associated an image 
with Cal Poly was recorded for enrolling students 
and for non-enrolling students for each image. For 
example, 61% of enrolling students but only 46% of 
non-enrolling students associated the image “career-
oriented” with Cal Poly. 
The resulting data were used to construct a scatterplot 
that appeared in the report. The scatterplot is reproduced 
as Figure EX-5.51 at the bottom of the following page.
a.	 What do you think the two dashed lines in the 
scatterplot represent?
b.	Write a short article appropriate for a student 
newspaper commenting on what can be learned 
from this scatterplot. You can assume that the 
scatterplot will appear with the article.
5.52	 The following is an excerpt from a letter to the editor 
written by Roger Cleary that appeared in the San Luis 
Obispo Tribune (September 16, 2008):
The causes of poor fuel economy have nothing to do 
with higher highway speeds, notwithstanding all the 
press hoopla, including the July 19 Miami Herald claim 
that “There is no question that slower speeds will save 
gasoline,” and the July 3 statement by Drive Smarter 
Challenge vehicle director Deron Lovaas that, “I’m not 
sure whether most people make the connection between 
how fast they drive and how much fuel they use.”
I decided to gather the speed facts for myself using my 
Chevy, which comes equipped with a fuel usage driver 
information center, real-time read out. At a road speed 
of 17.5 mph, it averages 10 mpg; at 35 mph, it averages 
20 mpg; and at 65 mph, it averages 30 mpg, all testing 
done with engine speed standardized at 2000 rpm.
The higher the speed, the better the fuel economy. 
The faster you drive, the more fuel efficient you become 
and the more gasoline you save.
Notice that the only speeds that the letter writer pro-
vides data for are 17.5, 35, and 65 mpg. Studies of the 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   5.5    Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses  
●  267
relationship between y 5 gas mileage and x 5  speed 
have suggested that the relationship is not linear, and 
some have used a quadratic curve to describe the 
relationship between gas mileage and speed.
Write a response to Mr. Cleary that explains how 
his three observed data points could still be consis-
tent with the statement that higher highway speeds 
lead to reduced fuel efficiency. Include a graph to 
support your explanation.
5.53	 The paper “How Lead Exposure Relates to Temporal 
Changes in IQ, Violent Crime, and Unwed Pregnancy” (En-
vironmental Research [2000]: 1–22) investigated whether 
childhood lead exposure is related to criminal behav-
ior in young adults. Using historical data, the author 
paired y 5 assault rate (assaults per 100,000 people) 
for each year from 1964 to 1997 with a measure of 
lead exposure (tons of gasoline lead per 1000 people) 
23 years earlier. For example, the lead exposure from 
1974 was paired with the assault rate from 1997. 
The author chose to go back 23 years for lead 
exposure because the highest number of assaults are 
committed by people in their early twenties, and 
23 years earlier would represent a time when those in 
this age group were infants.
A least-squares regression line was used to describe 
the relationship between assault rate and lead exposure 
23 years prior. Summary statistics given in the paper are
intercept:	
224.08
slope	
327.41
r2	
0.89
Use the information provided to answer the following 
questions.
a.	 What is the value of the correlation coefficient for 
x 5 lead exposure 23 years prior and y 5 assault 
rate? Interpret this value. Is it reasonable to 
conclude that increased lead exposure is the cause 
of increased assault rates? Explain.
b.	What is the equation of the least-squares 
regression line? Use the line to predict assault rate 
in a year in which gasoline lead exposure 23 years 
prior was 0.5 tons per 1000 people. 
c.	 What proportion of year-to-year variability in 
assault rates can be explained by the relationship 
between assault rate and gasoline lead exposure 
23 years earlier? 
d.	The graph in Figure EX-5.53 on the next page 
appeared in the paper. Note that this is not a 
scatterplot of the (x, y) pairs—it is two separate 
time series plots. The  
time scale 1941, 1942,…, 1986 is the time scale 
used for the lead exposure data and the time scale 
1964, 1965,…, 2009 is used for the assault rate 
data. Also note that at the time the graph was 
constructed, assault rate data was only available 
through 1997. Spend a few minutes thinking about 
the information contained in this graph and then 
briefly explain what aspect of this graph accounts 
for the reported positive correlation between assault 
rate and lead exposure 23 years prior.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
0
20
40
60
80
100
100
20
Average
Personal
Exciting
Intellectual
Challenging
Highly respected
Friendly
Fun
Comfortable
Selective
Excitingly
different
Isolated
Back-up school
Career-oriented
Prestigious
40
60
80
Percentage of nonenrolling students marking image
Percentage of enrolling students marking image
Figure  EX-5.51
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

268 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
5.54	 The following quote is from the paper “Evaluation 
of the Accuracy of Different Methods Used to Estimate 
Weights in the Pediatric Population” (Pediatrics [2009]: 
e1045–e1051):
As expected, the model demonstrated that weight 
increased with age, but visual inspection of an age 
versus weight plot demonstrated a nonlinear 
relationship unless infants and children were analyzed 
separately. The linear coefficient for age as a predictor of 
weight was 6.93 in infants and 3.1 to 3.48 in children.
This quote suggests that when a scatterplot of 
weight versus age was constructed for all 1011 
children in the study described in the paper, the 
relationship between y 5 weight and x 5 age was 
not linear. When the 1011 children were separated 
into two groups—infants (age birth to 1 year) and 
children (age 1 to 10 years)—and separate scat-
terplots were constructed, the relationship between 
weight and age appeared linear in each scatterplot. 
The slopes reported in the given quote (referred to as 
“the linear coefficient”) are expressed in kg/year. 
Briefly explain why the relationship between 
weight and age in the scatterplot for the combined 
group would appear nonlinear.
1941:1964
1944:1967
1947:1970
1950:1973
1953:1976
1956:1979
1959:1982
1962:1985
1965:1988
1968:1991
1971:1994
1974:1997
1977:2000
1980:2003
1983:2006
1986:2009
1.5
500
450
400
300
350
200
250
100
150
Gasoline Lead
Aggravated Assault
0
50
0.3
0.6
0.9
1.2
Lead year: Assault year (23 year lag)
Tons of gasoline lead per 1000 population
Aggravated assaults per 100,000 inhabitants
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
AC TIVIT Y 5.1 
Exploring Correlation and Regression Technology Activity (Applets)
Open the applet (available in CengageNOW at www.cengage 
.com/login) called CorrelationPoints. You should see a screen 
like the one shown below.
1.	 Using the mouse, you can click to add points to form 
a scatterplot. The value of the correlation coef­ﬁ­cient 
for the data in the plot at any given time (once you 
have two or more points in the plot) will be dis-
played at the top of the screen. Try to add points to 
obtain a correlation coef­ﬁ­cient that is close to 20.8. 
Brieﬂy describe the factors that in­ﬂu­enced where you 
placed the points.
2.	 Reset the plot (by clicking on the Reset bar in the 
lower left corner of the screen) and add points trying 
to produce a data set with a correlation that is close 
to 10.4. Brieﬂy describe the factors that in­ﬂu­enced 
where you placed the points. 
Now open the applet called RegDecomp. You should see 
a screen that looks like the one shown at the top of the next 
page.
Figure  EX-5.53
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

AC TIVIT Y 5.2 
Age and Flexibility
SUMMARY 
Key Concepts and Formulas
Term or Formula
Comment
Scatterplot
A graph of bivariate numeri-
cal data in which each obser-
vation (x, y) is represented as 
a point located with ­respect 
to a horizontal x axis and a 
vertical y axis.
Pearson’s sample correlation 
coef­ﬁ­cient 
r 5 ozxzy
n 2 1
A measure of the extent to 
which sample x and y values 
are linearly related. Values 
close to 1 or 21 indicate a 
strong linear relationship.
Term or Formula
Comment
Principle of least squares
The method used to select 
a line that summarizes an 
­approximate linear relation-
ship between x and y. The 
least-squares line is the line 
that minimizes the sum of the 
squared errors (vertical devia-
tions) for the points in the 
scatterplot.
b 5
o(x 2 x )( y 2 y )
o(x 2 x)2
5
oxy 2
(ox)(oy)
n
ox2 2 (ox)2
n
The slope of the least-squares 
line.
The black points in the plot represent the data set, 
and the blue line represents a possible line that might be 
used to describe the relationship between the two variables 
shown. The pink lines in the graph represent the deviations 
of points from the line, and the pink bar on the left-hand 
side of the display depicts the sum of squared errors for the 
line shown.
3.	 Using your mouse, you can move the line and see 
how the deviations from the line and the sum of 
squared errors change as the line changes. Try to 
move the line into a ­position that you think is close 
to the least-squares regression line. When you think 
you are close to the line that minimizes the sum of 
squared errors, you can click on the bar that says 
“Find Best Model” to see how close you were to the 
actual least-squares line.
Summary 
●  269
Materials needed: Yardsticks.
In this activity, you will investigate the relationship between 
age and a measure of ﬂexi­bil­ity. Flexibility will be measured by 
asking a person to bend at the waist as far as possible, extending 
his or her arms toward the ﬂoor. Using a yardstick, measure the 
distance from the ﬂoor to the ﬁnger­tip closest to the ﬂoor.
1.	 Age and the measure of ﬂexi­bil­ity just described will 
be measured for a group of individuals. Our goal is to 
determine whether there is a relationship between age 
and this measure of ﬂexi­bil­ity. What are two reasons 
why it would not be a good idea to use just the 
students in your class as the subjects for your study?
2.	 Working as a class, decide on a reasonable way to 
collect data on the two variables of interest.
3.	 After your class has collected appropriate data, use 
them to construct a scatterplot. Comment on the 
interesting features of the plot. Does it look like there 
is a relationship between age and ﬂexi­bil­ity?
4.	 If there appears to be a relationship between age 
and ﬂexi­bil­ity, ﬁt a model that is appropriate for 
describing the relationship.
5.	 In the context of this activity, write a brief description 
of the danger of extrapolation.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

270 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
Term or Formula
Comment
a 5 y 2 bx
The intercept of the least-
squares line.
Predicted (ﬁtted) values y⁄
1, y⁄
2 , . . . , y⁄
n
Obtained by substituting the 
x value for each observation 
in the data set into the least-
squares line; y⁄
1 5 a 1 bx1, . . . , 
y⁄
n 5 a 1 bxn
Residuals
Obtained by subtracting each 
predicted value from the cor-
responding observed y value: 
y1 2 y⁄
1, . . . , yn 2 y⁄
n. These are 
the vertical deviations from 
the least-squares line.
Residual plot
Scatterplot of the (x, residual) 
pairs. Isolated points or a 
pattern of points in a residual 
plot are indicative of potential 
problems.
Residual (error) sum of squares 
SSResid 5 o( y 2 y⁄)2
The sum of the squared 
residuals is a measure of 
y variation that cannot be 
attributed to an approximate 
linear relationship (unex-
plained variation).
Term or Formula
Comment
Total sum of squares 
SSTo 5 o( y 2 y )2
The sum of squared devia-
tions from the sample mean 
is a measure of total variation 
in the observed y values.
Coef­ﬁ­cient of determination 
r2 5 1 2 SSResid
SSTo
The proportion of variation 
in observed y’s that can be 
explained by an approximate 
linear relationship.
Standard deviation about the least-
squares line 
se 5Î
SSResid
n 2 2
The size of a “typical” 
deviation from the 
least-squares line.
Transformation
A simple function of the x 
and/or y variable, which is 
then used in a regression.
CHAPTER REVIEW 
Exercises 5.55 - 5.67
5.55	 ● The accompanying data represent x 5 amount of 
catalyst added to accelerate a chemical reaction and 
y 5 resulting reaction time:
x
1
2
3
4
5
y
49
46
41
34
25
a.	 Calculate r. Does the value of r suggest a strong 
linear relationship? 
b.	Construct a scatterplot. From the plot, does 
the word linear provide the most effective 
description of the relationship between x and y? 
Explain.
5.56	 ● The paper “A Cross-National Relationship Between 
Sugar Consumption and Major Depression?” (Depression 
and Anxiety [2002]: 118–120) concluded that there was 
a correlation between re­ﬁned sugar consumption 
(calories per person per day) and annual rate of 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
major depression (cases per 100 people) based on 
data from six countries. The following data were read 
from a graph that appeared in the paper:
Country
Sugar Consumption
Depression Rate
Korea
150
2.3
United States
300
3.0
France
350
4.4
Germany
375
5.0
Canada
390
5.2
New Zealand
480
5.7
a.	 Compute and interpret the correlation coef­ﬁ­cient 
for this data set.
b.	Is it reasonable to conclude that increasing sugar 
­consumption leads to higher rates of depression? 
Explain.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

c.	 Do you have any concerns about this study that 
would make you hesitant to generalize these con-
clusions to other countries?
5.57	 ● The following data on x 5 score on a measure 
of test anxiety and y 5 exam score for a sample of 
n 5 9 students are consistent with summary quan-
tities given in the paper “Effects of Humor on Test 
Anxiety and Performance” (Psychological Reports [1999]: 
1203–1212):
x    23    14    14      0    17    20    20    15    21
y    43    59    48    77    50    52    46    51    51
Higher values for x indicate higher levels of anxiety.
a.	 Construct a scatterplot, and comment on the 
features of the plot.
b.	Does there appear to be a linear relationship 
between the two variables? How would you 
characterize the ­relationship?
c.	 Compute the value of the correlation coef­ﬁ­cient. 
Is the value of r consistent with your answer to 
Part (b)?
d.	Is it reasonable to conclude that test anxiety 
caused poor exam performance? Explain.
5.58	 ● Researchers asked each child in a sample of 411 
school-age children if they were more or less likely 
to ­purchase a lottery ticket at a store if lottery tickets 
were visible on the counter. The percentage that 
said that they were more likely to purchase a ticket 
by grade level are as follows (R&J Child Development 
Consultants, Quebec, 2001):
Grade
Percentage That Said They Were More 
Likely to Purchase
     6
32.7
     8
46.1
   10
75.0
   12
83.6
a.	 Construct a scatterplot of y 5 percentage who said 
they were more likely to purchase and x 5 grade. 
Does there appear to be a linear relationship between 
x and y?
b.	Find the equation of the least-squares line. 
5.59	 ● Percentages of public school students in 
fourth grade in 1996 and in eighth grade in 
2000 who were at or above the proﬁcient level 
in mathematics were given in the ar­ticle “Mixed 
Progress in Math” (USA Today, Au­gust 3, 2001) for 
eight western states:
State
4th grade (1996)
8th grade (2000)
Arizona
15
21
California
11
18
Hawaii
16
16
Montana
22
37
New Mexico
13
13
Oregon
21
32
Utah
23
26
Wyoming
19
25
a.	 Construct a scatterplot, and comment on any 
interesting features.
b.	Find the equation of the least-squares line 
that summarizes the relationship between x 5 
1996 fourth-grade math proﬁciency percentage 
and y 5 2000 eighth-grade math proﬁciency 
percentage. 
c.	 Nevada, a western state not included in the data 
set, had a 1996 fourth-grade math proﬁciency 
of 14%. What would you predict for Nevada’s 
2000 eighth-grade math proﬁciency percentage? 
How does your prediction compare to the actual 
eighth-grade value of 20 for Nevada? 
5.60	 ● The following table gives the number of organ 
transplants performed in the United States each 
year from 1990 to 1999 (The Organ Procurement and 
Transplantation Network, 2003):
Year
Number of Transplants  
(in thousands)
  1 (1990)
15.0
  2
15.7
  3
16.1
  4
17.6
  5
18.3
  6
19.4
  7
20.0
  8
20.3
  9
21.4
10 (1999)
21.8
a.	 Construct a scatterplot of these data, and then 
ﬁnd the equation of the least-squares regres-
sion line that describes the relationship between 
y 5 number of transplants performed and 
x 5 year. 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Chapter Review Exercises 
●  271
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

272 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
b. Describe how the number of transplants per-
formed has changed over time from 1990 to 1999.
c.	 Compute the 10 residuals, and construct a 
residual plot. 
d. Are there any features of the residual plot that 
­indicate that the relationship between year and 
number of transplants performed would be better 
described by a curve rather than a line? Explain.
5.61	 The paper “Effects of Canine Parvovirus (CPV) on Gray 
Wolves in Minnesota” (Journal of Wildlife Management 
[1995]: 565–570) summarized a regression of y 5 per-
centage of pups in a capture on x 5 percentage of 
CPV prevalence among adults and pups. The equa-
tion of the least-squares line, based on n 5 10 obser-
vations, was y⁄ 5 62.9476 2 0.54975x, with  
r2 5 .57.
a.	 One observation was (25, 70). What is the 
correspond­ing residual? 
b.	What is the value of the sample correlation 
coef­ﬁ­cient? 
c.	 Suppose that SSTo 5 2520.0 (this value was not 
given in the paper). What is the value of se? 
5.62	 ● The paper “Aspects of Food Finding by Wintering 
Bald Eagles” (The Auk [1983]: 477–484) examined 
the­ ­relationship between the time that eagles 
spend aerially searching for food (indicated by 
the percentage of eagles soaring) and relative food 
availability. The accompanying data were taken 
from a scatterplot that appeared in this paper. Use 
x to denote salmon availability and y to denote the 
percentage of eagles in the air.
x
0
0
  0.2
  0.5
  0.5
  1.0
y
28.2
69.0
27.0
38.5
48.4
31.1
x
  1.2
  1.9
  2.6
  3.3
  4.7
  6.5
y
26.9
  8.2
  4.6
  7.4
  7.0
  6.8
a.	 Draw a scatterplot for this data set. Would you 
describe the pattern in the plot as linear or 
curved?
b.	One possible transformation that might lead to a 
straighter plot involves taking the square root of 
both the x and y values. Explain why this might 
be a reasonable transformation.
c.	 Construct a scatterplot using the variables Ïx and 
Ïy. Is this scatterplot more nearly linear than the 
scatterplot in Part (a)?
d.	Suggest another transformation that might be used 
to straighten the original plot.
5.63	 Data on salmon availability (x) and the percentage of 
eagles in the air (y) were given in the previous exercise.
a.	 Calculate the correlation coef­ﬁ­cient for these data.
b.	Because the scatterplot of the original data 
appeared curved, transforming both the x and 
y values by taking square roots was suggested. 
Calculate the correlation co­ef­ﬁ­cient for the variables 
Ïx and Ïy. How does this value compare with 
that calculated in Part (a)? Does this indicate that 
the transformation was successful in straightening 
the plot?
5.64	 No tortilla chip lover likes soggy chips, so it is 
important to find characteristics of the production 
process that produce chips with an appealing texture. 
The accompanying data on x 5 frying time (in 
seconds) and y 5 moisture content (%) appeared in 
the paper, “Thermal and Physical Properties of Tortilla 
Chips as a Function of Frying Time” (Journal of Food 
Processing and Preservation [1995]: 175–189):
Frying time (x):   5
10 15 20 25 30 45 60
Moisture  
content (y):
16.3 9.7 8.1 4.2 3.4 2.9 1.9 1.3
a.	 Construct a scatterplot of these data. Does the 
relationship between moisture content and frying 
time appear to be linear?
b.	Transform the y values using y9 5 log(y) and 
construct a scatterplot of the (x, y9) pairs. Does 
this scatterplot look more nearly linear than the 
one in Part (a)?
c.	 Find the equation of the least-squares line that 
describes the relationship between y9 and x.
d.	Use the least-squares line from Part (c) to 
predict moisture content for a frying time of 
35 minutes. 
5.65	 ● The article “Reduction in Soluble Protein and 
Chlo­rophyll Contents in a Few Plants as Indicators of 
Automobile Exhaust Pollution” (International Journal of 
­Environmental Studies [1983]: 239–244) reported the 
following data on x 5 distance from a highway (in 
meters) and y 5 lead content of soil at that distance 
(in parts per million):
x
  0.3
  1
  5
10
15
20
y
62.75
37.51
29.70
20.71
17.65
15.41
x
25
30
40
50
75
100
y
14.15
13.50
12.11
11.40
10.85
10.85
a.	 Use a statistical computer package to construct 
scatterplots of y versus x, y versus log(x), log(y) 
versus log(x), and 1
y versus 1
x.
b.	Which transformation considered in Part (a) does 
the best job of producing an approximately linear 
relationship? Use the selected transformation to 
predict lead content when distance is 25 m.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Technology Notes
Correlation
Technology Notes 
●  273
5.66	 ● An accurate assessment of oxygen consumption 
provides important information for determining 
energy expenditure requirements for physically 
demanding tasks. The paper “Oxygen Consumption 
During Fire Suppression: Error of Heart Rate Estimation” 
(Ergonomics [1991]: 1469–1474) reported on a study 
in which x 5 oxygen consumption (in milliliters 
per kilogram per minute) during a treadmill test 
was determined for a sample of 10 ﬁre­ﬁghters. Then 
y 5 oxygen consumption at a comparable heart rate 
was measured for each of the 10 individuals while 
they performed a ﬁre-suppression simulation. This 
resulted in the following data and scatterplot:
Fireﬁghter
  1
  2
  3
  4
  5
x
51.3
34.1
41.1
36.3
36.5
y
49.3
29.5
30.6
28.2
28.0
Fireﬁghter
  6
  7
  8
  9
10
x
35.4
35.4
38.6
40.6
39.5
y
26.3
33.9
29.4
23.5
31.6
20
30
40
50
35
42
49
Treadmill
consumption
Fire-simulation
consumption
a.	 Does the scatterplot suggest an approximate linear  
relationship?
b.	The investigators ﬁt a least-squares line. The 
resulting Minitab output is given in the following:
The regression equation is
ﬁrecon 5 211.4 1 1.09 treadcon
Predictor
Coef
Stdev
t-ratio
p
Constant
211.37
12.46
–0.91
0.388
treadcon
1.0906
0.3181
3.43
0.009
s 5 4.70        R-sq 5 59.5%        R-sq(adj) 5 54.4%
Predict ﬁre-simulation consumption when 
treadmill consumption is 40.   
c.	 How effectively does a straight line summarize the 
­relationship?
d.	Delete the ﬁrst observation, (51.3, 49.3), and 
calculate the new equation of the least-squares line 
and the value of r2. What do you conclude? (Hint: 
For the original data, ox 5 388.8, oy 5 310.3,  
ox2 5 15,338.54, oxy 5 12,306.58, and 
oy2 5 10,072.41.)
5.67	 Consider the four (x, y) pairs (0, 0), (1, 1), 1, 21), 
and (2, 0).
a.	 What is the value of the sample correlation coef­ﬁ­
cient r?   
b.	If a ﬁfth observation is made at the value x 5 6, 
ﬁnd a value of y for which r . 0.5. 
c.	 If a ﬁfth observation is made at the value x 5 6, 
ﬁnd a value of y for which r , 0.5.   
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
TI-83/84
Note: Before beginning this chapter, press the 2nd key then the 
0 key and scroll down to the entry DiagnosticOn. Press ENTER 
twice. After doing this, the regression correlation coefficient r 
will appear as output with the linear regression line.
1.  Enter the data for the independent variable into L1 (to 
access lists press the STAT key, highlight the option 
called Edit… then press ENTER)
2.  Input the data for the dependent variable into L2
3.  Press the STAT key
4.  Highlight CALC then select LinReg(a1bx) and press 
ENTER
5.  Press the 2nd key then the 1 key
6.  Press ,
7.  Press the 2nd key then the 2 key
8.  Press ENTER
TI-Nspire
1.  Enter the data for the independent variable into a data 
list (to access data lists select the spreadsheet option and 
press enter)
Note: Be sure to title the list by selecting the top row of 
the column and typing a title.
2.  Enter the data for the dependent variable into a separate 
data list
3.  Press the menu key and select 4:Statistics then 1:Stat 
Calculations then 3:Linear Regression(mx1b)… and 
press enter
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.  For X List: select the column with the independent vari-
able data from the drop-down menu
5.  For Y List: select the column with the dependent variable 
data from the drop-down menu
6.  Press OK
Note: You may need to scroll to view the correlation 
coefficient in the list of output.
JMP
1.  Input the data for the dependent variable into one 
column
2.  Input the data for the independent variable into another 
column
3.  Click Analyze then select Multivariate Methods then 
select Multivariate
4.  Click and drag the column name containing the depen- 
dent variable from the box under Select Columns to the 
box next to Y, Columns
5.  Click and drag the column name containing the inde-
pendent variable from the box under Select Columns to 
the box next to Y, Columns
6.  Click OK
Note: This produces a table of correlations. The correla-
tion between the two variables can be found in the first row, 
second column.
MINITAB
1.  Input the data for the dependent variable into the first 
column
2.  Input the data for the independent variable into the 
second column
3.  Select Stat then Basic Statistics then Correlation…
4.  Double-click each column name in order to move it to 
the box under Variables:
5.  Click OK
SPSS
1.  Input the data for the dependent variable into the first 
column
2.  Input the data for the independent variable into the 
second column
3.  Select Analyze then choose Correlate then choose 
Bivariate…
4.  Highlight the name of both columns by holding the ctrl 
key and clicking on each name
5.  Click the arrow button to move both variables to the 
Variables box
6.  Click OK
Note: This produces a table of correlations. The correlation 
between the two variables can be found in the first row, 
second column.
Note: The correlation can also be produced by following the 
steps to produce the regression equation.
274 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
Excel 2007
1.  Input the data into two separate columns
2.  Click the Data ribbon and select Data Analysis
3.  Note: If you do not see Data Analysis listed on the Rib-
bon, see the Technology Notes for Chapter 2 for instruc-
tions on installing this add-on.
4.  Select Correlation from the dialog box and click OK
5.  Click in the box next to Input Range: and select 
BOTH columns of data (if you input and selected 
titles for the columns, click the box next to Labels in 
First Row)
6.  Click OK
Note: The correlation between the variables can be found in 
the first column, second row of the table that is output.
Regression
TI-83/84
1.  Enter the data for the independent variable into L1 (to 
access lists press the STAT key, highlight the option 
called Edit… then press ENTER)
2.  Input the data for the dependent variable into L2
3.  Press the STAT key
4.  Highlight CALC then select LinReg(a1bx) and press 
ENTER
5.  Press the 2nd key then the 1 key
6.  Press ,
7.  Press the 2nd key then the 2 key
8.  Press ENTER
TI-Nspire
1.  Enter the data for the independent variable into a data 
list (to access data lists select the spreadsheet option and 
press enter)
Note: Be sure to title the list by selecting the top row of 
the column and typing a title.
2.  Enter the data for the dependent variable into a separate 
data list
3.  Press the menu key and select 4:Statistics then 1:Stat 
Calculations then 3:Linear Regression(mx1b)… and 
press enter
4.  For X List: select the column with the independent vari-
able data from the drop-down menu
5.  For Y List: select the column with the dependent vari-
able data from the drop-down menu
6.  Press OK
JMP
1.  Enter the data for the dependent variable into the first 
column
2.  Input the data for the independent variable into the 
second column
3.  Click Analyze then select Fit Y by X
4.  Click and drag the column name containing the 
dependent data from the box under Select Columns to 
the box next to Y, Response
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Note: The regression coefficients can be found in the third 
table under the Coefficients column.
Residuals
TI 83/84
Note:  When the TI 83/84 performs a regression analysis, the 
residuals are automatically stored in a list called “RESID.” To 
prevent loss of the residuals, copy them into a named list.
1.  Press the 2nd key then the List key. Select RESID. (You 
may have to scroll down to find it.) Your screen should 
now show “lRESID.”
2.  Click on STO, then the 2nd key, and then L3.
3.  Click on Enter.
TI-Nspire
1.  Enter the data for the independent variable into a data 
list (to access data lists select the spreadsheet option and 
press enter)
Note: Be sure to title the list by selecting the top row of 
the column and typing a title.
2.  Enter the data for the dependent variable into a separate 
data list
3.  Press the menu key and select 4:Statistics then 1:Stat 
Calculations then 3:Linear Regression(mx1b)… and 
press enter
4.  For X List: select the column with the independent vari-
able data from the drop-down menu
5.  For Y List: select the column with the dependent variable 
data from the drop-down menu
6.  Press OK
JMP
1.  Enter the data for the dependent variable into the first 
column
2.  Input the data for the independent variable into the 
second column
3.  Click Analyze then select Fit Y by X
4.  Click and drag the column name containing the depen-
dent data from the box under Select Columns to the 
box next to Y, Response
5.  Click and drag the column name containing the inde-
pendent data from the box under Select Columns to the 
box next to X, Factor
6.  Click OK
7.  Click the red arrow next to Bivariate Fit…
8.  Click Fit Line
9.  Click the red arrow next to Linear Fit
10.  Click Save Residuals
5.  Click and drag the column name containing the 
independent data from the box under Select Columns 
to the box next to X, Factor
6.  Click OK
7.  Click the red arrow next to Bivariate Fit…
8.  Click Fit Line
MINITAB
1.  Input the data for the dependent variable into the first 
column
2.  Input the data for the independent variable into the 
second column
3.  Select Stat then Regression then Regression…
4.  Highlight the name of the column containing the depen-
dent variable and click Select
5.  Highlight the name of the column containing the inde-
pendent variable and click Select
6.  Click OK
Note: You may need to scroll up in the Session window to 
view the regression equation.
SPSS
1.  Input the data for the dependent variable into the first 
column
2.  Input the data for the independent variable into the sec-
ond column
3.  Select Analyze then choose Regression then choose 
Linear…
4.  Highlight the name of the column containing the depen-
dent variable
5.  Click the arrow button next to the Dependent box to 
move the variable to this box
6.  Highlight the name of the column containing the inde-
pendent variable
7.  Click the arrow button next to the Independent box to 
move the variable to this box
8.  Click OK
Note: The regression coefficients can be found in the 
Coefficients table. The intercept value can be found in the 
first column of the (Constant) row. The value of the slope 
can be found in the first column of the row labeled with the 
independent variable name.
Excel 2007
1.  Input the data into two separate columns
2.  Click the Data ribbon and select Data Analysis
3.  Note: If you do not see Data Analysis listed on the Rib-
bon, see the Technology Notes for Chapter 2 for instruc-
tions on installing this add-on.
4.  Select Regression from the dialog box and click OK
5.  Click in the box next to Y: and select the dependent vari-
able data
6.  Click in the box next to X: and select the independent 
variable data (if you input and selected titles for BOTH 
columns, check the box next to Labels)
7.  Click OK
Technology Notes 
●  275
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

© Cengage Learning® 
MINITAB
1.  Input the data for the dependent variable into the first 
column
2.  Input the data for the independent variable into the 
second column
3.  Select Stat then Regression then Regression…
4.  Highlight the name of the column containing the 
dependent variable and click Select
5.  Highlight the name of the column containing the 
independent variable and click Select
6.  Click Storage…
7.  Check the box next to Residuals
8.  Click OK
9.  Click OK
SPSS
1.  Input the data for the dependent variable into the first 
column
2.  Input the data for the independent variable into the 
second column
3.  Select Analyze then choose Regression then choose 
Linear…
4.  Highlight the name of the column containing the 
dependent variable
5.  Click the arrow button next to the Dependent box to 
move the variable to this box
6.  Highlight the name of the column containing the 
independent variable
7.  Click the arrow button next to the Independent box to 
move the variable to this box
8.  Click on the Save… button
9.  Click the check box next to Unstandardized under the 
Residuals section
10.  Click Continue
11.  Click OK
Note: The residuals will be saved in the SPSS worksheet in a 
new column.
Excel 2007
1.  Input the data into two separate columns
2.  Click the Data ribbon and select Data Analysis
Note: If you do not see Data Analysis listed on the 
Ribbon, see the Technology Notes for Chapter 2 for 
instructions on installing this add-on.
3.  Select Regression from the dialog box and click OK
4.  Click in the box next to Y: and select the dependent vari-
able data
5.  Click in the box next to X: and select the independent 
variable data (if you input and selected titles for BOTH 
columns, check the box next to Labels)
6.  Check the box next to Residuals under the Residuals 
section of the dialog box
7.  Click OK
Residual Plot
TI-83/84
The TI-83/84 does not have the functionality to produce a 
residual plot automatically. After using Linreg(a1bx), select 
2nd, Statplot. Set the first plot as a scatter with XList: L1 and 
YList: RESID. Select Zoom, Stats, and a residual plot is dis-
played.
TI-Nspire
The TI-Nspire does not have the functionality to produce a 
residual plot automatically. 
JMP
1.  Begin by saving the residuals as described in the previous 
section
2.  Form a scatterplot of the independent variable versus the 
residuals using the procedures described in Chapter 2 
for scatterplots
MINITAB
1.  Input the data for the dependent variable into the first  
column
2.  Input the data for the independent variable into the sec-
ond column
276 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.  Select Stat then Regression then Regression…
4.  Highlight the name of the column containing the depen-
dent variable and click Select
5.  Highlight the name of the column containing the inde-
pendent variable and click Select
6.  Click Graphs…
7.  Click the box under Residuals versus the variables:
8.  Double-click the name of the independent variable
9.  Click OK
10.  Click OK
SPSS
1.  Begin by saving the residuals as described in the previ-
ous section
2.  Form a scatterplot of the independent variable versus the 
residuals using the procedures described in Chapter 2 
for scatterplots
Excel 2007
1.  Input the data into two separate columns
2.  Click the Data ribbon and select Data Analysis
Note: If you do not see Data Analysis listed on the 
Ribbon, see the Technology Notes for Chapter 2 for 
instructions on installing this add-on.
3.  Select Regression from the dialog box and click OK
4.  Click in the box next to Y: and select the dependent vari-
able data
5.  Click in the box next to X: and select the independent 
variable data (if you input and selected titles for BOTH 
columns, check the box next to Labels)
6.  Check the box next to Residuals Plots under the 
Residuals section of the dialog box
7.  Click OK
Transforming Variables
TI 83/84
1.  Enter the data for the variable you wish to transform into 
L1 (to access lists press the STAT key, highlight the op-
tion called Edit…then press ENTER)
2.  Click on Stat and select Edit
3.  Using the arrow keys (directly above the VARS and 
CLEAR Keys) position the cursor at the top of List2. 
That is, the cursor should be covering the “L2.” In 
addition, “L25” should appear in the bottom line
Now choose the transformation you wish to make. For 
example, to set the values of L2 equal to the natural log of 
L1, do the following:
4.  Click the LN button; the formula at the bottom of the 
screen will change to “L2=ln(”
5.  Click on the 2nd key, then the STO key, and finally L1; 
the formula at the bottom of the screen will change to 
“L2=ln(L1”
6.  Click on the right parenthesis key; the formula at the 
bottom of the screen will change to “L2=ln(L1)”
7.  Click on Enter
JMP
1.  Enter the pre-transformed data into Column1
2.  Double-click at the top of Column2. A window with 
properties for Column2 will pop up
3.  In that window, click on Column Properties, select For-
mula, and click on Edit Formula
Now choose the transformation you wish to make. For 
example, to set the values of Column2 equal to the natural 
logarithm of Column1, do the following:
5.  Click on Transcendental, then click on Log; the formula 
box will be updated to “Log(    )”
6.  In the TableColumns panel, click on Column1; the 
formula box will be updated to “Log(Column1)”
7.  Click Ok and close the column properties window
8.  Respond with “Yes” to the “Apply changes” question
MINITAB
1.  Enter the pre-transformed data into column “C1”
2.  Click on Calc in the main menu, and then Calculator
3.  Type C2 in the “Store result in variable” box
Now choose the transformation you wish to make. For 
example, to set the values of C2 equal to the natural log 
of C1:
4.  Click on Natural log (log bas e) in the Functions drop-
down menu and click on Select. The “Expression:” 
window will be updated to “LN(number)”
5.  Double-click on C1 in the variables list panel; the 
“Expression:” window will be updated to “LN(C1)”
6.  Click OK
Automatic Nonlinear Regression
TI 83/84
1.  Enter the data for the independent variable into L1 (to 
access lists press the STAT key, highlight the option 
called Edit… then press ENTER)
2.  Input the data for the dependent variable into L2
3.  Press the STAT key
4.  Select CALC
Now choose the nonlinear option you wish; for example, to 
perform exponential regression, do the following:
5.  Select ExpReg and press ENTER
6.  Press the 2nd key then the 1 key
7.  Press,
8.  Press the 2nd key then the 2 key
9.  Press ENTER
Technology Notes 
●  277
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CUMULATIVE REVIEW Exercises 
CR5.1 - CR5.19
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
CR5.1  The article “Rocker Shoe Put to the Test: Can it Really 
Walk the Walk as a Way to Get in Shape?” (USA Today, October 12, 
2009) describes claims made by Skechers about Shape-Ups, 
a shoe line introduced in 2009. These curved-sole sneak-
ers are supposed to help you “get into shape without going 
to the gym” according to a Skechers advertisement. Briefly 
describe how you might design a study to investigate this 
claim. Include how you would select subjects and what vari-
ables you would measure. Is the study you designed an ob-
servational study or an experiment?
CR5.2  Data from a survey of 1046 adults age 50 and older 
were summarized in the AARP Bulletin (November 2009). The 
following table gives relative frequency distributions of the 
responses to the question, “How much do you plan to spend 
for holiday gifts this year?” for respondents age 50 to 64 and 
for respondents age 65 and older. 
Construct a histogram for each of the two age groups and 
comment on the differences between the two age groups. 
(Notice that the interval widths in the relative frequency 
distribution are not the same, so you shouldn’t use relative 
frequency on the y-axis for your histograms.)
Amount Plan  
to Spend
Relative Frequency  
for Age Group  
50 to 64
Relative Frequency  
for Age Group  
65 and Older
less than $100
.20
.36
$100 to ,$200
.13
.11
$200 to ,$300
.16
.16
$300 to ,$400
.12
.10
$400 to ,$500
.11
.05
$500 to ,$1000
.28
.22
CR5.3  The graph in Figure CR5.3 appeared in the 
report “Testing the Waters 2009” (Natural Resources Defense 
Council). Spend a few minutes looking at the graph and 
reading the caption that appears with the graph. Briefly 
explain how the graph supports the claim that discharges 
of polluted storm water may be responsible for increased 
illness levels.
CR5.4  The cost of Internet access was examined in the 
report “Home Broadband Adoption 2009” (pewinternet.org). In 
The graph shows the relationship between unusually heavy rainfall and the number of confirmed cases of E. coli infection that occurred 
during a massive disease outbreak in Ontario, Quebec, in May 2000. The incubation period for E.coli is usually 3 to 4 days, which is consistent 
with the lag between extreme precipitation events and surges in the number of cases.
Figure  CR5.3
Influence of heavy rainfall on occurrence of E. coli infections.
May 1
May 4
May 7
May 10
May 13
May 16
May 19
May 22
May 25
May 28
May 31
60
10
20
30
40
50
0
100
80
60
Number of cases
Rainfall
40
20
0
Number of cases
Rainfall (ml)
278 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
2009, the mean and median amount paid monthly for ser-
vice for broadband users was reported as $39.00 and $38.00, 
respectively. For dial-up users, the mean and median amount 
paid monthly were $26.60 and $20.00, respectively. What do 
the values of the mean and median tell you about the shape 
of the distribution of monthly amount paid for broadband 
users? For dial-up users?
CR5.5  ● Foal weight at birth is an indicator of health, so 
it is of interest to breeders of thoroughbred horses. Is foal 
weight related to the weight of the mare (mother)? The 
accompanying data are from the paper “Suckling Behaviour 
Does Not Measure Milk Intake in Horses” (Animal Behaviour 
[1999]: 673–678):
Observation
Mare Weight  
(x, in kg)
Foal weight  
(y, in kg)
  1
556
129
  2
638
119
  3
588
132
  4
550
   123.5
  5
580
112
  6
642
   113.5
  7
568
  95
  8
642
104
  9
556
104
10
616
     93.5
11
549
   108.5
12
504
  95
13
515
   117.5
14
551
128
15
594
   127.5
The correlation coefficient for these data is 0.001. Construct 
a scatterplot of these data and then write a few sentences 
describing the relationship between mare weight and foal 
weight that refer both to the value of the correlation coefficient 
and the scatterplot.
CR5.6  In August 2009, Harris Interactive released the 
results of the “Great Schools” survey. In this survey, 1086 
parents of children attending a public or private school 
were asked approximately how much they had spent on 
school supplies over the last school year. For this sam-
ple, the mean amount spent was $235.20 and the median 
amount spent was $150.00. What does the large differ-
ence between the mean and median tell you about this 
data set?
CR5.7  ● Bidri is a popular and traditional art form in 
India. Bidri articles (bowls, vessels, and so on) are made by 
casting from an alloy containing primarily zinc along with 
some copper. Consider the following observations on copper 
content (%) for a sample of Bidri artifacts in London’s Victoria 
and Albert Museum (“Enigmas of Bidri,” Surface Engineering 
[2005]: 333–339), listed in increasing order:
2.0
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.6
2.7
2.7
  2.8
3.0
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.3
3.4
3.4
3.6
  3.6
3.6
3.6
3.7
4.4
4.6
4.7
4.8
5.3
10.1
a.  Construct a dotplot for these data.
b.  Calculate the mean and median copper content.
CR5.8  ● ▼ Medicare’s medical plans offer a wide range 
of variations and choices for seniors when picking a drug 
plan (San Luis Obispo Tribune, No­vem­ber 25, 2005). The month-
ly cost for a stand-alone drug plan varied from a low of $1.87 
in Montana, Wyoming, North Dakota, South Dakota, Ne-
braska, Minnesota, and Iowa to a high of $104.89. Here are 
the lowest and highest monthly premiums for stand-alone 
Medicare drug plans for each state:
State
$ Low
$ High
Alabama
14.08
  69.98
Alaska
20.05
  61.93
Arizona
  6.14
  64.86
Arkansas
10.31
  67.98
California
   5.41
  66.08
Colorado
  8.62
  65.88
Connecticut
  7.32
  65.58
Delaware
  6.44
  68.91
District of 
Columbia
  6.44
  68.91
Florida
10.35
104.89
Georgia
17.91
73.17
Hawaii
17.18
64.43
Idaho
  6.33
68.88
Illinois
13.32
65.04
Indiana
12.30
70.72
Iowa
  1.87
99.90
Kansas
  9.48
67.88
Kentucky
12.30
70.72
Louisiana
17.06
70.59
Maine
19.60
65.39
State
$ Low
$ High
Maryland
  6.44
68.91
Massachusetts
  7.32
65.58
Michigan
13.75
65.69
Minnesota
  1.87
99.90
Mississippi
11.60
70.59
Missouri
10.29
68.26
Montana
  1.87
99.90
Nebraska
  1.87
99.90
Nevada
  6.42
64.63
New 
Hampshire
19.60
65.39
New Jersey
  4.43
66.53
New Mexico
10.65
62.38
New York
  4.10
85.02
North Carolina
13.27
65.03
North Dakota
  1.87
99.90
Ohio
14.43
68.05
Oklahoma
10.07
70.79
Oregon
  6.93
64.99
Pennsylvania
10.14
68.61
Rhode Island
  7.32
65.58
Cumulative Review Exercises 
●  279
continued
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Which of the following can be determined from the data? If it 
can be determined, calculate the requested value. If it cannot 
be determined, explain why not.
a.	 the median premium cost in Colorado
b.	 the number of plan choices in Virginia
c.	 the state(s) with the largest difference in cost between 
plans
d.	 the state(s) with the choice with the highest premium 
cost 
e.	 the state for which the minimum premium cost is 
greatest 
f.	
the mean of the minimum cost of all states beginning 
with the letter “M” 
CR5.9  Note: This exercise requires the use of a computer. Refer 
to the Medicare drug plan premium data of Exercise CR5.8.
a.  Construct a dotplot or a stem-and-leaf display of the 
lowest premium cost data.
b.  Based on the display in Part (a), which of the following 
would you expect to be the case for the lowest cost 
premium data? 
	 i.    the mean will be less than the median
	 ii.   the mean will be approximately equal to the  
median
	 iii.  the mean will be greater than the median
c.  Compute the mean and median for the lowest cost 
premium data.   
d.  Construct an appropriate graphical display for the 
highest cost premium data.
e.  Compute the mean and median for the highest cost 
premium data.   
CR5.10  ● ▼ The paper “Total Diet Study Statistics on Element 
Results” (Food and Drug Administration, April 25, 2000) gave 
information on sodium content for various types of foods. 
Twenty-six tomato catsups were analyzed. Data consistent 
with summary quantities given in the paper were
Sodium content (mg/kg)
12,148   10,426   10,912      9116   13,226   11,663   
11,781   10,680      8457   10,788   12,605   10,591   
11,040   10,815   12,962   11,644   10,047   10,478   
10,108   12,353   11,778   11,092   11,673      8758   
11,145   11,495
Compute the values of the quartiles and the interquartile 
range. 
CR5.11 
● The paper referenced in Exercise CR5.10 also 
gave data on sodium content (in milligrams per kilogram) of 
10 chocolate puddings made from instant mix:
3099   3112   2401   2824   2682   2510   2297
3959   3068   3700
a.  Compute the mean, the standard deviation, and the 
interquartile range for sodium content of these chocolate 
puddings. 
b.  Based on the interquartile range, is there more or less vari-
ability in sodium content for the chocolate pudding data 
than for the tomato catsup data of Exercise CR5.10? 
CR5.12  ● ▼ A report from Texas Transportation Institute 
(Texas A&M University System, 2005) on congestion reduction 
strategies looked into the extra travel time (due to traf­ﬁc 
congestion) for commute travel per traveler per year in hours 
for different urban areas. Below are the data for urban areas 
that had a population of over 3 million for the year 2002.
Urban Area
Extra Hours per Traveler  
per Year
Los Angeles
98
San Francisco
75
Washington DC
66
Atlanta
64
Houston
65
Dallas, Fort Worth
61
Chicago
55
Detroit
54
Miami
48
Boston
53
New York
50
Phoenix
49
Philadelphia
40
a.  Compute the mean and median values for extra travel 
hours. Based on the values of the mean and median, is the 
distribution of extra travel hours likely to be approximately 
symmetric, positively skewed, or negatively skewed?
b.  Construct a boxplot that shows outliers for these data 
and comment on any interesting features of the plot.
CR5.13  ● ▼ The paper “Relationship Between Blood Lead 
and Blood Pressure Among Whites and African Americans” (a 
technical report published by Tulane University School of Public 
Health and Tropical Medicine, 2000) gave summary quantities 
for blood lead level (in micrograms per deciliter) for a sample ­
State
$ Low
$ High
South Carolina
16.57
69.72
South Dakota
  1.87
99.90
Tennessee
14.08
69.98
Texas
10.31
68.41
Utah
  6.33
68.88
Vermont
  7.32
65.58
State
$ Low
$ High
Virginia
  8.81
68.61
Washington
  6.93
64.99
West Virginia
10.14
68.61
Wisconsin
11.42
63.23
Wyoming
  1.87
99.90
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
280 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

of whites and a sample of African Americans. Data consistent 
with the given summary quantities follow:
Whites
  8.3
0.9
2.9
  5.6
  5.8
5.4
1.2
  1.0
1.4
2.1
  1.3
  5.3
8.8
6.6
  5.2
3.0
2.9
  2.7
  6.7
3.2
African
  4.8
1.4
0.9
10.8
  2.4
0.4
5.0
Americans   5.4
6.1
2.9
  5.0
  2.1
7.5
3.4
13.8
1.4
3.5
  3.3
14.8
3.7
a.  Compute the values of the mean and the median for 
blood lead level for the sample of African Americans. 
b.  Which of the mean or the median is larger? What char-
acteristic of the data set explains the relative values of the 
mean and the median?
c.  Construct a comparative boxplot for blood lead level for 
the two samples. 
d.  Write a few sentences comparing the blood lead level dis-
tributions for the two samples.
CR5.14  ● Cost-to-charge ratios (the percentage of the 
amount billed that represents the actual cost) for 11 Oregon 
hospitals of similar size were reported separately for inpatient 
and outpatient services. The data are shown in the following 
table.
Cost-to-Charge Ratio
Hospital
Inpatient
Outpatient
Blue Mountain
  80
62
Curry General
  76
66
Good Shepherd
  75
63
Grande Ronde
  62
51
Harney District
100
54
Lake District
100
75
Pioneer
  88
65
St. Anthony
  64
56
St. Elizabeth
  50
45
Tillamook
  54
48
Wallowa Memorial
  83
71
a.  Does there appear to be a strong linear relationship 
­between the cost-to-charge ratio for inpatient and out­
patient services? Justify your answer based on the value 
of the correlation coef­ﬁ­cient and examination of a scat-
terplot of the data.
b.  Are any unusual features of the data evident in the 
scatterplot?
c.  Suppose that the observation for Harney District was 
removed from the data set. Would the correlation coef­ﬁ­
cient for the new data set be greater than or less than the 
one computed in Part (a)? Explain.
CR5.15  The accompanying scatterplot shows observations 
on hemoglobin level, determined both by the standard spec-
trophotometric method (y) and by a new, simpler method 
based on a color scale (x) (“A Simple and Reliable Method for 
Estimating Hemoglobin,” Bulletin of the World Health Organiza-
tion [1995]: 369–373):
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
2
4
New method (g/dl)
6
8
10
12
14
Reference method (g/dl)
a.  Does it appear that x and y are highly correlated? 
b.  The paper reported that r 5 .9366. How would you de-
scribe the relationship between the two variables?
c.  The line pictured in the scatterplot has a slope of 1 and 
passes through (0, 0). If x and y were always identical, 
all points would lie exactly on this line. The authors of 
the paper claimed that perfect correlation (r 5 1) would 
result in this line. Do you agree? Explain your reasoning.
CR5.16  In the article “Reproductive Biology of the Aquatic 
Salamander Amphiuma tridactylum in Louisiana” (Journal of Her-
petology [1999]: 100–105), 14 female salamanders were stud-
ied. Using regression, the researchers predicted y 5 clutch 
size (number of salamander eggs) from x 5 snout-vent length 
(in centimeters) as follows:
y⁄ 5 2147 1 6.175x
For the salamanders in the study, the range of snout-vent 
lengths was approximately 30 to 70 cm.
a.  What is the value of the y intercept of the least-squares 
line? 
b.  What is the value of the slope of the least-squares line? 
Interpret the slope in the context of this problem.
c.  Would you be reluctant to predict the clutch size when 
snout-vent length is 22 cm? Explain.   
CR5.17  Exercise CR5.16 gave the least-squares regression 
line for predicting y 5 clutch size from x 5 snout-vent length 
(“Reproductive Biology of the Aquatic Salamander Amphiuma 
tridactylum in Louisiana,” Journal of Herpetology [1999]: 100–
105). The paper also reported r2 5 .7664 and SSTo 5 43,951.  
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Cumulative Review Exercises 
●  281
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

a.  Interpret the value of r2.
b.  Find and interpret the value of se (the sample size was 
n 5 14).
CR5.18  ● A study, described in the paper “Prediction of 
De­ﬁbrillation Success from a Single Deﬁbrillation Threshold 
Measurement” (Circulation [1988]: 1144–1149) investigated the 
relationship between deﬁbrillation success and the energy 
of the deﬁbrillation shock (expressed as a multiple of the 
deﬁbrillation threshold) and presented the following data:
Energy of Shock
Success (%)
0.5
  33.3
1.0
  58.3
1.5
  81.8
2.0
  96.7
2.5
100.0
a.  Construct a scatterplot of y 5 success percentage and 
x 5 energy of shock. Does the relationship appear to be 
linear or nonlinear?
b.  Fit a least-squares line to the given data, and construct 
a residual plot. Does the residual plot support your 
conclusion in Part (a)? Explain.
c.  Consider transforming the data by leaving y unchanged 
and using either x9 5 Ïx or x 0 5 log(x). Which of these 
transformations would you recommend? Justify your 
choice by appealing to appropriate graphical displays.
d.  Using the transformation you recommended in Part (c), 
ﬁnd the equation of the least-squares line that describes 
the relationship between y and the transformed x.
e.  What would you predict success percentage to be when 
the energy of shock is 1.75 times the threshold level? 
When it is 0.8 times the threshold level? 
CR5.19  ● The paper “Population Pressure and Agricultural 
Intensity” (Annals of the Association of American Geographers 
[1977]: 384–396) reported a positive association ­between 
population density and agricultural intensity. The following 
data consist of measures of population density (x) and 
agricultural intensity (y) for 18 different subtropical locations:
x
    1.0
  26.0
  1.1
101.0
  14.9
134.7
y
    9
  7
  6
  50
    5
100
x
    3.0
  5.7
  7.6
  25.0
143.0
  27.5
y
    7
  14
14
  10
  50
  14
x
103.0
180.0
49.6
140.6
140.0
233.0
y
  50
150
10
  67
100
100
a.  Construct a scatterplot of y versus x. Is the scatterplot 
compatible with the statement of positive association 
made in the paper?
b.  Draw a scatterplot that uses y and x2. Does this 
transformation straighten the plot?
c.  Draw a scatterplot that uses log(y) and x. The log(y) 
values, given in order corresponding to the y values, 
are 0.95, 0.85, 0.78, 1.70, 0.70, 2.00, 0.85, 1.15, 1.15, 
1.00, 1.70, 1.15, 1.70, 2.18, 1.00, 1.83, 2.00, and 2.00. 
How does this scatterplot compare with that of Part (b)?
d.  Now consider a scatterplot that uses transformations 
on both x and y: log(y) and x2. Is this effective in 
straightening the plot? Explain.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
282 
●  Chapter 5  Summarizing Bivariate Data
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

283
We make decisions based on uncertainty every day. 
Should you buy an extended warranty for your new iPod? 
It depends on the likelihood that it will fail during the war-
ranty period. Should you allow 45 minutes to get to your  
8 a.m. class, or is 35 minutes enough? From experience, you 
may know that most mornings you can drive to school and 
park in 25 minutes or less. Most of the time, the walk from 
your parking space to class is 5 minutes or less. But how 
often will the drive to school or the walk to class take longer 
than you expect? When it takes longer than usual to drive 
to campus, is it more likely that it will also take longer to 
walk to class? less likely? Or are the driving and walking 
times unrelated? 
Some questions involving uncertainty are more serious: 
If an ar­ti­ﬁ­cial heart has four key parts, how likely is each 
one to fail? How likely is it that at least one will fail? We can 
answer questions like these using the ideas and methods of 
probability, the systematic study of uncertainty.
Probability
Chapter 6: Learning Objectives
Students will understand:
●
●basic properties of probabilities.
●
●what it means for two events to be mutually exclusive.
●
●what it means for two events to be independent.
●
●the difference between an unconditional and a conditional probability.
Students will be able to:
●
●interpret a probability in context as a long-run relative frequency of occurrence.
●
●identify the sample space for a given chance experiment.
●
●calculate the probability of events, including events that are the union of, the 
intersection of, or the complement of other events.
●
●calculate conditional probabilities.
●
●estimate probabilities empirically and using simulation.
Doug Menuez/Stockbyte/Getty Images 
CHAPTER 6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

284 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
The basic ideas and terminology of probability are most easily introduced in situations 
that are both familiar and reasonably simple. Because of this, some of our initial examples 
involve such elementary activities as tossing a coin, selecting cards from a deck, and rolling 
a die. However, after considering a few of these simplistic examples, we will move on to 
more interesting and realistic situations.
Chance Experiments
When a single coin is tossed, there are two possible outcomes. The coin can land with its 
heads side up or its tails side up. The selection of a single card from a well-mixed standard 
deck may result in the ace of spades, the ﬁve of diamonds, or any one of the other 50 
possibilities. Consider rolling both a red die and a green die. One possible outcome is the 
red die lands with four dots facing up and the green die shows one dot on its upturned 
face. Another outcome is the red die lands with three dots facing up and the green die also 
shows three dots on its upturned face. There are 36 possible outcomes in all, and we do 
not know in advance what the result of a particular roll will be. Situations such as these are 
referred to as chance experiments.
Chance experiment: Any activity or situation in which there is uncertainty 
about which of two or more possible outcomes will result.
DEFINITION
When the term chance experiment is used in a probability setting, we mean something 
different from what was meant by the term experiment in Chapter 2 (where experiments 
investigated the effect of two or more treatments on a response). For example, in an opin-
ion poll or survey, there is uncertainty about whether an individual selected at random 
from the population of interest supports a school bond, and when a die is rolled, there is 
uncertainty about which face will land upturned. Both of these situations ﬁt the deﬁ­ni­tion 
of a chance experiment.
Consider a chance experiment to investigate whether men or women are more likely to 
choose a hybrid car over a traditional internal combustion engine car when purchasing 
a Honda Civic at a particular car dealership. The Honda Civic is available with either a 
hybrid or a traditional engine. In this chance experiment, a customer will be selected at 
random from those who purchased a Honda Civic. The type of vehicle purchased (hybrid 
or traditional) will be determined and the customer’s gender will be recorded. Before the 
customer is selected the outcome of this chance experiment is unknown to us. We do 
know, however, what the possible outcomes are. This set of possible outcomes is called the 
sample space.
Sample space: The collection of all possible outcomes of a chance experiment.
DEFINITION
The sample space of a chance experiment can be represented in many ways. One repre-
sentation is a simple list of all the possible outcomes. For the car-purchase chance experi-
ment, the possible outcomes are:
1.	A male buying hybrid
2.	A female buying hybrid
3.	A male buying traditional
4.	A female buying traditional
 6.1  
Chance Experiments and Events
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.1   Chance Experiments and Events 
●  285
We can also use set notation and ordered pairs. A male purchasing a hybrid is repre-
sented as (male, hybrid). The sample space is then
sample space 55
smale, hybridd, sfemale, hybridd,
smale, traditionald, sfemale, traditionald6
Another useful representation of the sample space is a tree diagram. A tree diagram 
(shown in Figure 6.1) for the outcomes of the car-purchase chance experiment has two sets 
of branches corresponding to the two pieces of information that were gathered. To identify 
any particular outcome in the sample space, traverse the tree by ﬁrst selecting a branch 
corresponding to gender and then a branch iden­ti­ﬁed with a type of car.
Figure  6.1
Tree diagram for the car purchase 
example.
Male
Hybrid
Traditional
Hybrid
Traditional
Female
Outcome (male, hybrid)
In the tree diagram of Figure 6.1, there is no particular reason for having the gender 
as the ﬁrst generation branch and the type of car as the second generation branch. Some 
chance experiments involve making observations in a particular order, in which case the 
order of the branches in the tree does matter. In this example, however, it would be accept-
able to represent the sample space with the tree diagram shown in Figure 6.2.
Figure  6.2
Another tree diagram for the car  
purchase example.
Hybrid
Male
Female
Male
Female
Traditional
As we have seen, the sample space for a chance experiment can be represented in several 
ways, but the representations all have one thing in common: Every possible outcome of the 
chance experiment is included in the representation.
Events
In the car-purchase chance experiment, we might be interested in which particular out-
come will result. Or we might focus on a group of outcomes that involve the purchase 
of a hybrid—the group consisting of (male, hyrid) and (female, hybrid). When we form 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

286 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
a collection of one or more individual outcomes, we are creating what is known as an 
event.
Event: Any collection of outcomes from the sample space of a chance experiment.
Simple event: An event consisting of exactly one outcome.
DEFINITION
We usually represent an event by an uppercase letter, such as A, B, C, and so on. On some 
occasions, the same letter with different numerical subscripts, such as E1, E2, E3, … may 
also be used for this purpose.
Example 6.1 
Car Preferences
Reconsider the situation in which a person who purchased a Honda Civic was categorized 
by gender (M or F) and type of car purchased (H 5 hybrid, T 5 traditional). Using this 
notation, one possible representation of the sample space is
sample space 5 {MH, FH, MT, FT}
Because there are four outcomes, there are four simple events:
E1 5 MH    E2 5 FH    E3 5 MT    E4 5 FT
One event of interest might be the event consisting of all outcomes for which a hybrid 
was purchased. A symbolic description of the event hybrid is
hybrid 5 {MH, FH}
Another event is the event that the purchaser is male,
male 5 {MH, MT}	
■
Example 6.2 
Video Game
Suppose you believe that after losing to an opponent in a video game, a player is more 
likely to lose the next game. You conduct a chance experiment that consists of watching 
two consecutive games for a particular player and observing whether the player won, tied, 
or lost each of the two games. In this case (using W, T, and L to represent win, tie, and loss, 
respectively), the sample space can be represented as
sample space 5 {WW, WT, WL, TW, TT, TL, LW, LT, LL}
The event lose exactly one of the two games, denoted by L1, could then be defined as
L1 5 {WL, TL, LW, LT}	
■
Only one outcome (one simple event) occurs when a chance experiment is performed. 
We say that a given event occurs whenever one of the outcomes making up the event occurs. 
For example, if the outcome in the car purchase example is MH, then the simple event male 
purchasing a hybrid has occurred, and so has the nonsimple event hybrid purchased.
Forming New Events
Once some events have been specified, they can be manipulated in several useful ways to 
create new events. 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.1   Chance Experiments and Events 
●  287
Example 6.3 
Turning Directions
A traffic engineer has been asked to consider whether a stop sign at the bottom of a freeway 
off-ramp should be replaced by a traffic light. To help in this decision, she plans to observe 
traffic patterns for this off-ramp. Suppose she were to record the turning direction (L 5 
left or R 5 right) of each of three successive vehicles. This is a chance experiment and the 
sample space contains eight outcomes:
{LLL, RLL, LRL, LLR, RRL, RLR, LRR, RRR}
Each of these outcomes determines a simple event. Other events include
A  5 event that exactly one of the cars turns right 5 {RLL, LRL, LLR}
B  5 event that at most one of the cars turns right 5 {LLL, RLL, LRL, LLR}
C 5 event that all cars turn in the same direction 5 {LLL, RRR}
Some other events that can be formed from those just defined are
  not C 5 CC 5 event that not all cars turn in the same direction
	
    5 {RLL, LRL, LLR, RRL, RLR, LRR}
   A or C 5 A ø C 5 event that exactly one of the cars turns right or all cars turn in the 
same direction
	
    5 {RLL, LRL, LLR, LLL, RRR}
B and C 5 B > C 5 event that at most one car turns right and all cars turn in the same 
direction
        5 {LLL}
■
Example 6.4 
More on Video Games
In Example 6.2, in addition to the event that a video game player loses exactly one of the two 
games, L1 5 {WL, TL, LW, LT}, we could also define events corresponding to L0 5 neither 
game is lost and L2 5 both games are lost. Then L0 5 {WW, WT, TW, TT} and L2 5 {LL}.
Some other events that can be formed from those just defined include
       LC2 5 event that at most one game was lost
        5 {WW, WT, WL, TW, TT, TL, LW, LT}
L1 ø L2 5 event that at least one game was lost
	
    5 {WL, TL, LW, LT, LL}
L1 > L2 5 event that exactly one game was lost and two games were lost
        5 the empty set
■
Let A and B denote two events.
Not A: The event that consists of all experimental outcomes that are not in  
event A. Not A is sometimes called the complement of A and is usually denoted 
by AC, A9, or A.
A or B: The event that consists of all experimental outcomes that are in at least 
one of the two events, that is, in A or in B or in both of these. A or B is called the 
union of the two events and is denoted by A ø B.
A and B: The event that consists of all experimental outcomes that are in both of 
the events A and B. A and B is called the intersection of the two events and is 
denoted by A > B.
DEFINITION
Grant Faint/The Image Bank/Getty Images
all 3 cars turn left
the 1st car turns left and the next 2 turn right
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

288 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
It frequently happens that two events have no common outcomes, as was the case for events 
L1 and L2 in the video game example. Such situations are described using special ­terminology.
Mutually exclusive: Two events are mutually exclusive if they have no out-
comes in common. The term disjoint is also sometimes used to describe events 
that have no outcomes in common.
DEFINITION
Saying that two events are mutually exclusive means that they can’t both occur when the 
chance experiment is performed once.
It is sometimes useful to draw an informal picture of events to visualize relationships. In 
a Venn diagram, the collection of all possible outcomes is typically shown as the interior 
of a rectangle. Other events are then iden­tified by specified regions inside this rectangle. 
Figure 6.3 illustrates several Venn diagrams.
Figure  6.3
Venn ­diagrams.
A
A
B
A
A
B
B
Not A
A or B
A and B
Mutually exclusive events
The use of the or and and operations can be extended to form new events from more than 
two initially specified events (as illustrated in Figure 6.4).
Let A1, A2, … , Ak denote k events.
1.	 The event A1 or A2 or … or Ak consists of all outcomes in at least one of the 
individual events A1, A2, … , Ak.
2.	 The event A1 and A2 and … and Ak consists of all outcomes that are simultane-
ously in every one of the individual events A1, A2, … , Ak.
These k events are mutually exclusive if no two of them have any common outcomes.
Figure  6.4
Venn diagrams with three events.
A or B or C
A and B and C
Three mutually exclusive events
A1
A1
A1
A2
A2
A2
A3
A3
A3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.1   Chance Experiments and Events 
●  289
Example 6.5 
Asking Questions
The instructor in a seminar class consisting of four students has an unusual way of ask-
ing questions. Four slips of paper numbered 1, 2, 3, and 4 are placed in a box. The in-
structor determines the student to whom any particular question is to be ­addressed 
by selecting one of these four slips. Suppose that one question is to be posed dur-
ing each of the next two class meetings. One possible outcome could be represented as  
(3, 1)—the first question is addressed to Student 3 and the second question to Student 1. 
There are 15 other possibilities. Consider the following events:
A   5 {(1,1), (2,2), (3,3), (4,4)}
B 5 {(1,1), (1,2), (1,3), (1,4), (2,1), (3,1), (4,1)}
C  5 {(3,1), (2,2), (1,3)}
D 5 {(3,3), (3,4), (4,3)}
E 5 {(1,1), (1,3), (2,2), (3,1), (4,2), (3,3), (2,4), (4,4)}
F 5 {(1,1), (1,2), (2,1)}
Then
A or C or D 5 {(1,1), (2,2), (3,3), (4,4), (3,1), (1,3), (3,4), (4,3)}
The outcome (3,1) is contained in each of the events B, C, and E, as is the outcome (1,3). 
These are the only two common outcomes in all three events, so
B and C and E 5 {(3,1), (1,3)}
The events C, D, and F are mutually exclusive because no outcome in any one of these 
events is contained in either of the other two events.
■
the event that the same student is asked 
both questions
the event that Student 1 is asked at least 
one of the two questions
6.1	 Define the term chance experiment, and give an example 
of a chance experiment with four possible outcomes.
6.2	 Define the term sample space, and then give the sam-
ple space for the chance experiment you described in 
Exercise 6.1.  ​
6.3	 Consider the chance experiment in which the type 
of transmission—automatic (A) or manual (M)—is 
recorded for each of the next two cars purchased 
from a certain dealer.
a.	 What is the set of all possible outcomes (the 
sample space)? (Hint: See Example 6.2.) 
b.	Display the possible outcomes in a tree diagram.
c.	 List the outcomes in each of the following events. 
Which of these events are simple events? (Hint: 
See Example 6.3.)
i.	 B  ​the event that at least one car has an auto-
matic transmission 
ii.	C  ​the event that exactly one car has an auto-
matic transmission 
iii. D  ​the event that neither car has an automatic 
transmission 
d.	What outcomes are in the event B and C? In the 
event B or C? 
6.4	 A tennis shop sells five different brands of rackets, 
each of which comes in either a midsize version or 
an oversize version. Consider the chance experi-
ment in which brand and size are noted for the 
next racket purchased. One possible outcome 
is Head midsize, and another is Prince oversize. 
Possible outcomes correspond to cells in the 
following table:
Head
Prince
Slazenger
Wimbledon
Wilson
Midsize
Oversize
a.	 Let A denote the event that an oversize racket is 
purchased. List the outcomes in A.
exercises 6.1 - 6.12
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

290 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
b.	Let B denote the event that the name of the  
brand purchased begins with a W. List the 
outcomes in B.
c.	 List the outcomes in the event not B.
d.	Head, Prince, and Wilson are U.S. companies and 
the others are not. Let C denote the event that 
the racket purchased is made by a U.S. company. 
List the outcomes in the event B or C. (Hint: See 
Example 6.4.)
e.	 List outcomes in B and C.
f.	 Display the possible outcomes on a tree diagram, 
with a first-generation branch for each brand.
6.5	 A new model of laptop computer can be ordered 
with one of three screen sizes (10 inches, 12 inches, 
15 inches) and one of four hard drive sizes  
(50 GB, 100 GB, 150 GB, and 200 GB). Consider 
the chance experiment in which a laptop order is 
selected and the screen size and hard drive size are 
recorded.
a.	 Display possible outcomes using a tree diagram.
b.	Let A be the event that the order is for a laptop 
with a screen size of 12 inches or smaller. Let B be 
the event that the order is for a laptop with a hard 
drive size of at most 100 GB. What outcomes are in  
i. AC?  ii. A ø B?  iii. A > B?
c.	 Let C denote the event that the order is for a 
laptop with a 200 GB hard drive. Are A and C 
mutually exclusive events? Are B and C mutually 
exclusive?
6.6	 A college library has four copies of a certain book; 
the copies are numbered 1, 2, 3, and 4. Two of these 
are selected at random. The first selected book is 
placed on 2-hour reserve, and the second book can 
be checked out overnight.
a.	 Construct a tree diagram to display the 12 out-
comes in the sample space.
b.	Let A denote the event that at least one of the 
books ­selected is an even-numbered copy. What 
outcomes are in A?
c.	 Suppose that copies 1 and 2 are hardcover books, 
whereas copies 3 and 4 are softcover books. Let 
B denote the event that exactly one of the copies 
selected is a hardcover book. What outcomes are 
contained in B?
6.7	 A library has five copies of a certain textbook on 
reserve of which two copies (1 and 2) are hardcover 
books and the other three (3, 4, and 5) are softcover 
books. A student examines these books in random 
order, stopping only when a softcover book has been 
selected.
a.	 Display the possible outcomes in a tree diagram.
b.	What outcomes are contained in the event A, that 
exactly one book is examined before the chance 
experiment terminates? 
c.	 What outcomes are contained in the event C, that 
the chance experiment terminates with the exami-
nation of book 5? 
6.8	 Suppose that, starting at a certain time, batteries 
coming off an assembly line are examined one by one 
to see whether they are defective (let D 5 defective 
and N 5 not defective). The chance experiment 
terminates as soon as a nondefective battery is 
obtained.
a.	 Give five possible outcomes for this chance 
experiment.
b.	What can be said about the number of outcomes 
in the sample space? 
c.	 What outcomes are in the event E, that the num-
ber of batteries examined is an even number? 
6.9	 Refer to the previous exercise and now suppose that 
the chance experiment terminates only when two 
nondefective batteries have been obtained.
a.	 Let A denote the event that at most three batteries 
must be examined before the chance experiment 
terminates. What outcomes are contained in A? 
b.	Let B be the event that exactly four batteries must 
be examined before the chance experiment termi-
nates. What outcomes are in B? 
c.	 What can be said about the number of possible 
outcomes for this chance experiment? 
6.10	 A family consisting of three people—P1, P2, and 
P3—belongs to a medical clinic that always has a 
phy­sician at each of stations 1, 2, and 3. During a 
certain week, each member of the family visits the 
clinic exactly once and is randomly assigned to a 
station. One experimental outcome is (1, 2, 1), which 
means that P1 is assigned to station 1, P2 to station 2, 
and P3 to station 1.
a.	 List the 27 possible outcomes. (Hint: First list the 
nine outcomes in which P1 goes to station 1, then 
the nine in which P1 goes to station 2, and finally 
the nine in which P1 goes to station 3; a tree dia-
gram might help.)
b.	List all outcomes in the event A, that all three 
people go to the same station. 
c.	 List all outcomes in the event B, that all three 
people go to different stations.
d.	List all outcomes in the event C, that no one goes 
to station 2.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.2   Definition of Probability 
●  291
e.	 Identify outcomes in each of the following events: 
i. BC  ii. CC  iii. A ø B  iv. A > B  v. A > C
6.11	 An engineering construction firm is currently work-
ing on power plants at three different sites. Define 
events E1, E2, and E3 as follows:
E1 5 the plant at Site 1 is completed by the contract date
E2 5 the plant at Site 2 is completed by the contract date
E3 5 the plant at Site 3 is completed by the contract date
The following Venn diagram pictures the relationships 
among these events:
E1
E2
E3
Shade the region in the Venn diagram corresponding 
to each of the following events. Redraw the Venn 
diagram for each part of the problem. (Hint: See the 
discussion of Venn diagrams)
a.	 At least one plant is completed by the contract date.
b.	All plants are completed by the contract date.
c.	 None of the plants are completed by the contract date.
d.	Only the plant at Site 1 is completed by the 
contract date.
e.	 Exactly one of the three plants is completed by the 
contract date.
f.	 Either the plant at Site 1 or both of the other two 
plants are completed by the contract date.
6.12	 Consider a Venn diagram picturing two events A and 
B that are not mutually exclusive.
a.	 Shade the event sA ø BdC. On a separate Venn 
diagram shade the event AC > BC. How are these 
two events related?
b.	Shade the event sA > BdC. On a separate Venn 
diagram shade the event AC ø BC. How are these 
two events related? (Note: These two relationships 
together are called DeMorgan’s laws.)
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
 6.2  
Definition of Probability
Reasoning about games of chance and probabilistic thinking share a long history. Archeolo-
gists have found evidence that Egyptians used a small bone in mammals, the as­trag­a­lus, as 
a sort of four-sided die as early as 3500 b.c. Games of chance were common in Greek and 
Roman times and during the Renaissance of Western Europe. 
The formal study of probability began with the correspondence between Blaise Pascal 
(1623–62) and Pierre de Fermat (1601–65) in 1654. Their letters discussed some prob-
lems related to gambling that were posed by the French nobleman Chevalier de Mère. The 
methods and solutions that resulted from this exchange greatly enhanced the study of 
probability. 
From this early work, new interpretations of probability have evolved, including an em-
pirical approach preferred by many statisticians today. We begin our discussion of prob-
ability with a look at some of the different approaches to probability: the classical, relative 
frequency, and subjective approaches.
Classical Approach to Probability
Early mathematicians’ development of the theory of probability was primarily in the 
context of gambling and reflected the peculiarities of games of chance. A character-
istic common to most games of chance is a physical device used to generate differ-
ent outcomes. In children’s games, dice or a “spinner” might be used to create chance 
outcomes. 
Dice are constructed so that the physical characteristics of each face are alike (except, of 
course, for the number of dots), ensuring that the different outcomes for an individual die 
are very close to equally likely. Therefore, it seems quite natural to assume, for example, 
that the probability of getting a five when a single six-sided die is rolled is one-sixth  
(1 chance in 6). In general, if there are N equally likely outcomes in a game of chance, the 
probability of each of the outcomes is 1/N. 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

292 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
Chance experiments that involve tossing fair coins, rolling fair dice, or selecting cards 
from a well-mixed deck have equally likely outcomes. For example, if a fair die is rolled 
once, each outcome (simple event) has probability 1/6. With E denoting the event that the 
number rolled is even, P(E) 5 3/6. This is just the number of outcomes in E divided by the 
total number of possible outcomes.
Example 6.6 
Calling the Toss
On some football teams, the honor of calling the toss at the beginning of a football game is 
determined by random selection. Suppose that this week a member of the offensive team 
will call the toss. There are 5 interior linemen on the 11-player offensive team. If we define 
the event L as the event that an interior lineman is selected to call the toss, 5 of the 11 pos-
sible outcomes are included in L. The probability that an interior lineman will be selected 
is then
PsLd 5 5
11

■
Example 6.7 
Math Contest
Four students (Adam, Betina, Carlos, and Debra) submitted correct solutions to a math 
contest with two prizes. The contest rules specify that if more than two ­correct responses 
are submitted, the winners will be selected at random from those submitting correct re-
sponses. In this case, the set of possible outcomes for the chance experiment that consists 
of selecting the two winners from the four correct responses is
{(A, B), (A, C), (A, D), (B, C), (B, D), (C, D)}
Because the winners are selected at random, the six outcomes are equally likely and the 
probability of each individual outcome is 1/6.
Let E be the event that both selected winners are the same gender. Then
E 5 {(A, C), (B, D)}
Because E contains two outcomes, P(E) 5 2/6 5 .333. 
If F denotes the event that at least one of the selected winners is female, then F consists 
of all outcomes except (A, C) and P(F) 5 5/6 5 .833.
■
When the outcomes in the sample space of a chance experiment are equally 
likely, the probability of an event E, denoted by P(E ), is the ratio of the 
number of outcomes favorable to E to the total number of outcomes in the 
sample space:
PsEd 5
number of outcomes favorable to E
number of outcomes in the sample space
According to this definition, the calculation of a probability consists of count-
ing the number of outcomes that make up an event, counting the number of 
outcomes in the sample space, and then dividing.
Classical Approach to Probability for Equally Likely Outcomes
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.2   Definition of Probability 
●  293
​Limitations of the Classical Approach to Probability
The classical approach to probability works well with games of chance or other situations 
with a finite set of outcomes that can be regarded as equally likely. However, some situ-
ations that are clearly probabilistic in nature do not fit the classical model. Consider the 
accident rates of young adults driving cars. Information of this kind is used by insurance 
companies to set car insurance rates. Suppose that we have two individuals, one 18 years 
old and one 28 years old. A person purchasing a standard accident insurance policy at 
age 28 should have a lower annual premium than a person purchasing the same policy at 
age 18, because the 28-year-old has a much lower chance of an accident, based on prior 
experience. 
However, the classical probabilist, playing by the classical rules, would have to consider 
that there are two outcomes for a policy year—having one or more accidents or not having 
an accident—and would consider those outcomes equally likely for both the 28-year-old and the 
18-year-old. This certainly seems to defy reason and experience.
Another example of a situation that cannot be handled using the classical approach has 
a geometric flavor. Suppose that you have a square that is 8 inches on each side and that 
a circle with a diameter of 8 inches is drawn inside the square, touching the square on all 
four sides, as shown.
This drawing will be used as a target in a dart game. A dart will be thrown at the target 
and any dart that completely misses the square is a “do-over” and will be thrown again. It 
seems reasonable to think about the probability of a dart landing in the circle as a ratio of 
the area of the circle to the area of the square. That ratio is
area of circle
area of square 5 r2
s2 5 s4d2
82
5 
4 5 .785
A practiced dart player who is aiming for the center of the target might have an even 
greater probability of hitting the inside of the circle. In any case, it is not reasonable to think 
that the two outcomes inside the circle and not inside the circle are equally likely, so the clas-
sical approach to probability will not help here.
From the standpoint of statistics, a major limitation of the classical approach to pro­
bability is that there seems to be no way to allow past experience to inform our expectation 
of the future. To return to the car insurance example, suppose that in the experience of 
the insurance companies, 0.5% of 18-year-olds have accidents during their 19th year. It 
seems reasonable that, all things being equal, we could expect this percentage to be stable 
enough to set the prices for an insurance policy. Although the ­classical ­approach’s assump-
tion of equal probabilities is based on and consistent with the ­experience with dice, it can-
not accommodate using an observed proportion in real life to estimate a probability. For a 
statistician, this is a problem. Without an understanding of probability that allows such a 
generalization, statistical inference would be ­impossible.
Relative Frequency Approach to Probability
Early sci­en­tific investigators were aware that chance experiments do not always give the 
same results when repeated. However, even though it is not possible to predict the out-
come of a chance experiment in any particular instance, there is a dependable and stable 
regularity when a chance experiment is repeated many times. This became the basis for fair 
wagering in games of chance. 
For example, suppose that two friends, Chris and Jay, meet to play a game. A fair coin 
is flipped. If it lands heads up, Chris pays Jay $1; otherwise, Jay pays the same amount to 
Chris. After many repetitions, the proportion of the time that Chris wins will be close to 
one-half, and the two friends will have simply enjoyed the pleasure of each other’s com-
pany for a few hours. This happy circumstance occurs ­because in the long run (i.e., over 
many repetitions) the proportion of heads is .5. In the long run, half the time Chris wins, 
and half the time Jay wins.
When any given chance experiment is performed, some events are relatively likely to 
occur, whereas others are not as likely to occur. For a specified event E, we want to assign a 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

294 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
probability that gives a precise indication of how likely it is that E will occur. In the relative 
frequency approach to probability, the probability describes how ­frequently E occurs when 
the chance experiment is performed many times.
Example 6.8 
Tossing a Coin
Frequently, we hear a coin described as fair, or we are told that there is a 50% chance of a 
coin landing heads up. What is the meaning of the expression fair? It cannot refer to the 
result of a single toss, because a single toss cannot result in both a head and a tail. Might 
“fairness” and “50%” refer to 10 successive tosses yielding exactly five heads and five tails? 
Not really, because it is easy to imagine a fair coin landing heads up on only 3 or 4 of the 
10 tosses.
Consider the chance experiment of tossing a coin just once. Define the simple events
H 5 event that the coin lands with its heads side facing up
 T 5 event that the coin lands with its tails side facing up
Now suppose that we take a fair coin and begin to toss it over and over. After each toss, 
we compute the relative frequency of heads observed so far. This calculation gives the value 
of the ratio
number of times event H occurs
number of tosses
The results of the first 10 tosses might be as follows:
Toss
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Cumulative number of H’s
0
1
2
3
3
3 
4
5
5
5
Relative frequency of H’s
0
.5
.667 .75
.6
.5 .571 .625 .556
.5
Figure 6.5 illustrates how the relative frequency of heads fluc­tu­ates during a sample 
sequence of 50 tosses. As the number of tosses increases, the relative frequency of heads 
does not continue to fluc­tu­ate wildly but instead stabilizes and approaches some fixed num-
ber (the limiting value). This stabilization is illustrated for a sequence of 1000 tosses in 
Figure 6.6.
Figure  6.5
Relative frequency of heads in the 
first 50 of a long series of coin tosses.
.2
0
.4
.5
.6
.8
1.0
Relative frequency of heads
Relative
frequency =  9
15 = .60
Relative
frequency =  5
10 = .50
10
0
20
30
40
50
Number of tosses
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.2   Definition of Probability 
●  295
It may seem natural to you that the proportion of H’s would get closer and closer to the 
“real” probability of .5. That an empirically observed proportion could behave like this in 
real life also seemed reasonable to James Bernoulli in the early 18th century. He focused 
his considerable mathematical power on this topic and was able to prove mathematically 
what we now know as the law of large numbers.*
As the number of repetitions of a chance experiment increases, the chance that 
the relative frequency of occurrence for an event will differ from the true prob-
ability of the event by more than any small number approaches 0.
Law of Large Numbers
The law of large numbers tells us that, as the number of repetitions of a chance experi-
ment increases, the proportion of the time an event E occurs gets close and stays close to 
the real probability of E occurring in a single chance experiment even if the value of this prob-
ability is not known. This means that we can observe the outcomes of repetitions of a chance 
experiment and then use the observed outcomes to estimate probabilities.
The probability of an event E, denoted by P(E ), is defined to be the value 
approached by the relative frequency of occurrence of E when a chance experi-
ment is performed many times. If the number of times the chance experiment 
is performed is quite large, 
PsE d < 
number of times E occurs
number of times the experiment is performed
Relative Frequency Approach To Probability
Figure  6.6
Stabilization of the relative frequency 
of heads in coin tossing.

■
.4
.5
.6
Relative frequency of heads
100
0
600
700
800
Number of tosses
200
300
400
500
    
900
1000
*Technically, this should be referred to more spe­cific­ally as the weak law of large numbers for Bernoulli trials. 
After Bernoulli’s proof, mathematical statisticians proved more general laws of large numbers.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

296 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
The relative frequency defini­tion of probability depends on being able to repeat a chance 
experiment under identical conditions. Suppose that we perform a chance experiment 
that consists of flipping a cap from a 20-ounce bottle of soda and noting whether the cap 
lands with the open side up or down. The crucial difference from the previous coin-tossing 
chance experiment is that there is no particular reason to believe the cap is equally likely 
to land top up or top down. 
If we assume that the chance experiment can be repeated under similar conditions 
(which seems reasonable), then we can flip the cap many times and compute the relative 
frequency of the event top up (the proportion of the time the event has occurred so far):
number of times the event top up occurs
number of flips 
The results of the first 10 flips, with U indicating top up and D indicating top down, 
might be:
Flip
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Outcome
U
U
D
U
D
D
U
D
U
U
Cumulative
  number of ups
1
2
2
3
3
3
4
4
5
6
Relative frequency of ups
1.0
1.0
.67
.75
.6
.5
.57
.5
.56
.6
Figure 6.7 illustrates how the relative frequency of the event top up fluc­tu­ates ­during a 
sequence of 100 flips. Based on these results and faith in the law of large numbers, it is 
reasonable to think that the probability of the cap landing top up is about .7.
Figure  6.7
Stabilization of the relative frequency 
of a bottle cap landing top up.
Number of ﬂips
50
0
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8
.9
1.0
Relative frequency
100
The relative frequency approach to probability is based on observation. From repeated 
observation, we can obtain stable relative frequencies that will, in the long run, provide 
good estimates of the probabilities of different events. The relative frequency interpretation 
of probability is intuitive, widely used, and most relevant for the inferential procedures 
introduced in later chapters.
Subjective Approach to Probability
A third distinct approach to probability is based on subjective judgments. In this view, a 
probability is interpreted as a personal measure of the strength of belief that a particular 
outcome will occur. A probability of 1 represents a belief that the outcome will certainly 
occur. A probability of 0 represents a belief that the outcome will certainly not occur—that 
it is impossible. Other probabilities are placed somewhere between 0 and 1, based on the 
strength of one’s beliefs. 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.3   Basic Properties of Probability 
●  297
For example, an airline passenger might report her subjective assessment of the prob-
ability of being denied a seat as a result of overbooking on a particular flight as .01. Because 
this probability is close to 0, she believes it is very unlikely that she will be denied a seat.
The subjective interpretation of probability presents some diffi­cul­ties. For one thing, dif-
ferent people may assign different probabilities to the same outcome, because each could 
have a different subjective belief. Although subjective probabilities are useful in studying 
and analyzing decision making, they are of limited use because they are personal and not 
generally replicable by others.
How Are Probabilities Determined?
Probability statements are frequently encountered in newspapers and magazines (and, of 
course, in this textbook). What is the basis for these probability statements? In most cases, 
research allows reasonable estimates based on observation and analysis. In general, if a 
probability is stated, it is based on one of the following approaches:
1.	The classical approach: This approach is appropriate only for modeling chance 
experiments with equally likely outcomes.
2.	The subjective approach: In this case, the probability represents an individual’s judg-
ment based on facts combined with personal evaluation of other information.
3.	The relative frequency approach: An estimate is based on observing the outcomes of 
a chance experiment.
When you see probabilities in this book and in other published sources, you should con-
sider how the probabilities were produced. Be particularly cautious in the case of subjective 
probabilities.
 6.3  
Basic Properties of Probability
The view of a probability as a long-run relative frequency that can be approximated empiri-
cally has some limitations when it comes to calculating probabilities in real life. The most 
obvious problem is time. If computing probabilities even for simple chance experiments 
were to require hundreds or thousands of observations, even the most ardent statistics stu-
dents would avoid this task! An alternative approach that simplifies things in some situa-
tions is to study fundamental properties of probability that can be used to find probabilities 
of complex events. These fundamental properties are given in the accompanying box. A 
discussion of each property follows.
1.	 For any event E, 0 # P(E ) # 1.
2.	 If S is the sample space for an experiment, P(S) 5 1.
3.	 If two events E and F are mutually exclusive, then P(E or F ) 5 P(E ) 1 P(F ).
4.	 For any event E, P(E ) 1 P(not E ) 5 1. Therefore
P(not E ) 5 1 2 P(E )
and
P(E ) 5 1 2 P(not E ).
Fundamental Properties of Probability
​Property 1:  ​For any event E, 0 # P(E) # 1
To understand the first property of probability, recall the previous bottle cap chance experi-
ment. You may remember that we were keeping track of the number of flips landing with 
the top of the bottle cap facing up. Suppose that, after flipping the bottle cap N times, we 
have observed x occurrences of top up. What are the possible values of x? 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

298 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
The fewest that could have been counted is 0, and the most that could have been counted 
is N. Therefore, the relative frequency of top up falls between two numbers:
0
N # relative frequency # N
N
This means that the relative frequency must always be greater than or equal to 0 and less 
than or equal to 1. As N increases, the long-run value of the relative frequency, which 
defines the probability, must also lie between 0 and 1.
Property 2:  If S is the sample space for a chance experiment, P(S) 5 1
The probability of any event is the proportion of time an outcome in the event will occur 
in the long run. Because the sample space consists of all possible outcomes for a chance 
experiment, in the long run an outcome that is in S must occur 100% of the time. This 
mean that P(S) 5 1.
Property 3:  If two events E and F are mutually exclusive, then P(E or F) 5 P(E) 1 P(F)
This is one of the most important properties of probability because it provides a method 
for computing probabilities if the number of possible outcomes (simple events) in the 
sample space is finite. Any nonsimple event is just a collection of outcomes from the 
sample space—some outcomes are in the event and others are not. Because simple events 
are mutually exclusive, any event can be viewed as a union of mutually exclusive events. 
For example, suppose that a chance experiment has a sample space that consists of 
six outcomes, O1, O2, … , O6. Then P(O1) can be interpreted as the long run proportion 
of times that the outcome O1 will occur, and the probabilities of the other outcomes can 
be interpreted in a similar way. Suppose that an event E is made up of outcomes O1, O2, 
and O4. Then E will occur whenever O1, O2, or O4 occurs. Because O1, O2, and O4 are 
mutually exclusive, the long-run proportion of time that E will occur is just the sum of the 
proportion of time that each of the outcomes O1, O2, and O4 will occur. 
Because it is always possible to express any event as a collection of mutually exclusive 
simple events in this way, find­ing the probability of an event can be reduced to find­ing the 
probabilities of the simple events (outcomes) that make up the event and then adding. If 
the probabilities of all the simple events are known, it is then easy to compute the prob-
ability of more complex events.
Property 4:  For any event E, P(E) 1 P(not E) 5 1. Therefore P(not E) 5 1 2 P(E) 
and P(E) 5 1 2 P(not E)
Property 4 follows from Properties 2 and 3. Property 2 tells us that P(E) is the sum of the 
probabilities in E and that P(not E) is the sum of the probabilities for simple events corre-
sponding to outcomes in not E. Every outcome in the sample space is in either E or not E. 
We know from Property 3 that the sum of the probabilities of all the simple events is 1. It 
follows that P(E) 1 P(not E) must equal 1. 
The implication of Property 4, namely, that P(E) 5 1 2 P(not E) is surprisingly useful. 
There are many situations in which calculation of P(not E) is much easier than calculating 
P(E) directly.
Example 6.9 
Medical Errors
Diagnostic errors in medical settings are of concern because they often lead to serious 
consequences and sometimes even death. The paper “Diagnostic Error in Internal Medicine” 
(Archives of Internal Medicine [2005]: 1493–1499) describes possible outcomes when a doctor 
specializing in internal medicine reaches a diagnosis for a patient. The possible diagnostic 
outcomes are
O1  Correct diagnosis
O2  No-fault diagnostic error (a misdiagnosis due to unusual symptoms or due to an 
uncooperative or deceptive patient)
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.3   Basic Properties of Probability 
●  299
O3  System-related diagnostic error (a misdiagnosis due to equipment failure, faulty lab 
results, etc.)
O4  Cognitive diagnostic error (a misdiagnosis due to faulty or inadequate doctor 
knowledge or failure to synthesize available information correctly)
O5  Misdiagnosis resulting from a combination of system-related error and cognitive 
error
Based on a study of a large number of patients, the paper suggests that 
85%  of patients are correctly diagnosed
  1%  are misdiagnosed because of a no-fault error
  3%  are misdiagnosed because of a system-related error
  4%  are misdiagnosed because of a cognitive error
  7%  are misdiagnosed because of a combination of system and cognitive errors.
The following table displays the probabilities of the simple events for the chance experi-
ment in which the diagnostic outcome is observed for a randomly selected patient:
Simple Event (Outcome)
O1
O2
O3
O4
O5
Probability
.85
.01
.03
.04
.07
Let’s create event E, the event that a randomly selected patient is misdiagnosed. This event 
consists of the outcomes O2, O3, O4, and O5. It follows that
PsEd 5 PsO2 ø O3 ø O4 ø O5d
          5 PsO2d 1 PsO3d 1 PsO4d 1 PsO5d
          5 .01 1 .03 1 .04 1 .07
          5 .15
That is, in the long run, 15% of all patients seen by internal medicine specialists are misdi-
agnosed. Another way to compute this probability is to notice that the event not E consists 
only of the outcome O1. Another way to calculate P(E) is
PsEd 5 1 2 Psnot Ed 5 1 2 PsO1d 5 1 2 .85 5 .15
If we were interested in the probability of a misdiagnosis that involved a cognitive error 
in some way, we could define the event F, where F is the event that a randomly selected 
patient is misdiagnosed in a way that involved a cognitive error. Then
F 5 O4 ø O5
and
PsFd 5 PsO4 ø O5d 5 PsO4d 1 PsO5d 5 .04 1 .07 5 .11
This means that, in the long run, cognitive errors play a role in the misdiagnosis of about 
11% of patients.
■
Having established the fundamental properties of probability, we now present some 
practical probability rules that can be used to evaluate probabilities in some situations. An 
important aspect of each rule is the set of conditions necessary in order to use the rule. A 
common error for beginning statistics students is to believe that the rules can be used in 
any probability calculation. This is not the case. You must be careful to use the rules only 
after verifying that any necessary conditions are met.
Equally Likely Outcomes
The first probability rule that we consider applies only when events are equally likely. It 
is not always true for all events in all situations. Chance experiments involving tossing fair 
coins, rolling fair dice, or selecting cards from a well-mixed deck are examples of chance 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

300 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
experiments that have equally likely outcomes. If a fair die is rolled once, each possible 
outcome (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6) has probability 1/6. With E denoting the event that the out-
come is an even number,
PsEd 5 Ps2 or 4 or 6d 5 Ps2d 1 Ps4d 1 Ps6d 5 1
6 1 1
6 1 1
6 5 3
6
This is just the ratio of the number of outcomes in E to the total number of possible out-
comes. The following box presents the generalization of this result.
Consider an experiment that can result in any one of N possible outcomes. 
Denote the corresponding simple events by O1, O2, … , ON. If these simple 
events are equally likely to occur, then
1.	 PsO1d 5 1
N, PsO2d 5 1
N , … , PsONd 5 1
N
2.	 For any event E,
    PsEd 5 number of outcomes in E
N
Calculating Probabilities When Outcomes Are Equally Likely
Addition Rule for Mutually Exclusive Events
We have seen previously that the probability of an event can be calculated by adding to-
gether probabilities of the simple events that correspond to the outcomes making up the 
event. This addition process is also legitimate when calculating the probability of the union 
of two events that are mutually exclusive.
Let E and F be two mutually exclusive events. One of the basic properties 
(axioms) of probability is 
PsE or F d 5 PsE ø F d 5 PsE d 1 PsF d
This property of probability is known as the addition rule for mutually 
exclusive events. More generally, if events E1, E2, … , Ek are all mutually 
exclusive, then 
PsE1 or E2 or … or Ekd 5 PsE1 ø E2 ø Á ø Ekd 5 PsE1d 1 PsE2d 1 Á 1 PsEkd
In words, the probability that any of these k mutually exclusive events occurs is 
the sum of the probabilities of the individual events.
The Addition Rule for Mutually Exclusive Events
Consider the chance experiment that consists of rolling a pair of fair dice. There are 36 
possible outcomes for this chance experiment, such as (1, 1), (1, 2), and so on. Because 
these outcomes are equally likely, we can compute the probability of observing a total of 5 
on the two dice by counting the number of outcomes that result in a total of 5. There are 
four such outcomes—(1, 4), (2, 3), (3, 2), and (4, 1)—giving
Pstotal of 5d 5 4
36
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.3   Basic Properties of Probability 
●  301
The probabilities for the other totals can be computed in a similar fashion, and they are 
shown in the following table:
Total
Probability
Total
Probability
2
1/36
  ​8
5/36
3
2/36
  ​9
4/36
4
3/36
10
3/36
5
4/36
11
2/36
6
5/36
12
1/36
7
6/36
What is the probability of getting a total of 3 or 5? Consider the two events 
      E 5 total is 3 
and  F 5 total is 5
Clearly E and F are mutually exclusive because the sum cannot simultaneously be both 3 
and 5. Notice also that neither of these events is simple, because ­neither consists of only 
a single outcome from the sample space. We can apply the ­addition rule for mutually 
­exclusive events as follows:
PsE or Fd 5 PsE ø Fd 5 PsEd 1 PsFd 5 2
36 1 4
36 5 6
36
Example 6.10 
Car Choices
A large auto center sells cars made by a number of different manufacturers. Three of these 
manufacturers are Japanese: Honda, Nissan, and Toyota. Consider a chance experiment 
that consists of observing the make and model of the next car purchased at this auto center. 
The outcomes in the sample space would then be simple events such as Nissan Altima and 
Toyota Prius. Let’s define events E1, E2, and E3 by 
	   E1 5 Honda
	   E2 5 Nissan
and  E3 5 Toyota
Notice that E1 is not a simple event because there is more than one model Honda (for 
example, Civic, Accord, and Insight).
Based on several years of sales data, the probabilities of these three events have been 
estimated empirically as P(E1) 5 .25, P(E2) 5 .18, and P(E3) 5 .14. Because E1, E2, and E3 
are mutually exclusive, the addition rule gives
 PsHonda or Nissan or Toyotad 5 PsE1 ø E2 ø E3d
	
 5 PsE1d 1 PsE2d 1 PsE3d
	
 5 .25 1 .18 1 .14 5 .57
The probability that the next car purchased is not made by one of these three manufac-
turers is
PsnotsE1 or E2 or E3dd 5 PssE1 ø E2 ø E3dCd 5 1 2 .57 5 .43
■
In Section 6.6, we will show how PsE ø Fd can be calculated when the two events E and 
F are not mutually exclusive.
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

302 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
6.13	 A large department store offers online ordering. 
When a purchase is made online, the customer can 
select one of four different delivery options: expedited 
overnight delivery, expedited second-business-day 
delivery, standard delivery, or delivery to the nearest 
store for customer pick-up. Consider the chance ex-
periment that consists of observing the selected deliv-
ery option for a randomly selected online purchase.
a.	 What are the four simple events that make up the 
sample space for this experiment?
b.	Suppose that the probability of an overnight deliv-
ery selection is .1, the probability of a second-day 
delivery selection is .3, and the probability of a 
standard-delivery selection is .4. Find the follow-
ing probabilities. (Hint: See Example 6.9.)
i.  the probability that a randomly selected 
online purchase selects delivery to the nearest 
store for customer pick-up. 
ii.   the probability that the customer selects a 
form of expedited delivery. 
iii.  the probability that either standard delivery or 
delivery to the nearest store is selected. 
6.14	 The manager of a music store has kept records of 
the number of CDs bought in a single transaction 
by customers who make a purchase at the store. The 
accompanying table gives six possible outcomes and 
the estimated probability associated with each of 
these outcomes for the chance experiment that con-
sists of observing the number of CDs purchased by a 
randomly selected customer at the store.
Number of CDs  
  purchased
1
2
3
4
5 6 or more
Estimated  
  probability
.45 .25 .10 .10 .07
.03
a.	 What is the estimated probability that the next 
customer purchases three or fewer CDs? 
b.	What is the estimated probability that the next 
customer purchases at most three CDs? How  
does this compare to the probability computed in 
Part (a)? 
c.	 What is the estimated probability that the next 
customer purchases five or more CDs? 
d.	What is the estimated probability that the next 
customer purchases one or two CDs? 
e.	 What is the estimated probability that the next 
customer purchases more than two CDs? Show 
two different ways to compute this probability 
that use the probability rules of this section.
exercises 6.13 - 6.29
6.15	 A bookstore sells two types of books (fiction and 
nonfiction) in several formats (hardcover, paperback, 
digital, and audio). For the chance experiment that 
consists of observing the type and format of a single-
book purchase, two of the eight possible outcomes 
are a hardcover fiction book and an audio nonfiction 
book.
a.	 There are eight outcomes in the sample space for 
this experiment. List these possible outcomes.
b.	Do you think it is reasonable to think that the 
outcomes for this experiment would be equally 
likely? Explain.
c.	 For customers who purchase a single book, the 
estimated probabilities for the different possible 
outcomes are given in the cells of the accompany-
ing table. What is the probability that a randomly 
selected single-book purchase will be for a book 
in print format (hardcover or paperback)? 
Hardcover Paperback
Digital
Audio
Fiction
.15
.45
.10
.10
Nonfiction
.08
.04
.02
.06
d.	Show two different ways to compute the probabil-
ity that a randomly selected single-book purchase 
will be for a book that is not in a print format. 
(Hint: See Example 6.9.) 
e.	 Find the probability that a randomly selected single-
book purchase will be for a work of fiction. 
6.16	 ▼ Medical insurance status—covered (C) or not 
covered (N)—is determined for each individual 
arriving for treatment at a hospital’s emergency 
room. Consider the chance ex­periment in which this 
determination is made for two randomly selected 
patients. 
The simple events are O1 5 (C, C), meaning that 
the first patient selected was covered and the second 
patient selected was also covered, O2 5 (C, N), O3 5 
(N, C), and O4 5 (N, N). Suppose that probabilities 
are P(O1) 5 .81, P(O2) 5 .09, P(O3) 5 .09, and  
P(O4) 5 .01.
a.	 What outcomes are contained in A, the event that 
at most one patient is covered, and what is P(A)?
b.	What outcomes are contained in B, the event that 
the two patients have the same status with respect 
to coverage, and what is P(B)? 
6.17	 Roulette is a game of chance that involves spinning 
a wheel that is divided into 38 equal segments, as 
shown in the accompanying picture.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.3   Basic Properties of Probability 
●  303
A metal ball is tossed into the wheel as it is spin-
ning, and the ball eventually lands in one of the 38 
segments. Each segment has an associated color. Two 
segments are green. Half of the other 36 segments are 
red and the others are black. When a balanced rou-
lette wheel is spun, the ball is equally likely to land 
in any one of the 38 segments.
a.	 When a balanced roulette wheel is spun, what  
is the probability that the ball lands in a red 
segment? 
b.	In the roulette wheel shown, black and red seg-
ments alternate. Suppose instead that the red 
segments were side-by-side and that the black 
segments were together. Does this increase the 
probability that the ball will land in a red seg-
ment? Explain. 
c.	 Suppose that you watch 1000 spins of a roulette 
wheel and note the color that results from each 
spin. What would be an indication that the wheel 
was not balanced?
6.18	 Phoenix is a hub for a large airline. Suppose that on 
a particular day, 8000 passengers arrived in Phoenix 
on this airline. Phoenix was the final destination 
for 1800 of these passengers. The others were all 
connecting to flights to other cities. On this particu-
lar day, several inbound flights were late, and 480 
connecting passengers missed their connecting flight 
and were delayed in Phoenix. Of the 480 who were 
delayed, 75 were delayed overnight and had to spend 
the night in Phoenix. Consider the chance experiment 
of choosing a passenger at random from these 8000 
passengers. Compute the following probabilities:
a.	 the probability that the selected passenger had 
Phoenix as a final destination. 
b.	the probability that the selected passenger did not 
have Phoenix as a final destination. 
c.	 the probability that the selected passenger was 
connecting and missed the connecting flight. 
d.	the probability that the selected passenger was a 
connecting passenger and did not miss the con-
necting flight. 
e.	 the probability that the selected passenger either 
had Phoenix as a final destination or was delayed 
overnight in Phoenix. 
f.	 An independent customer satisfaction survey is 
planned. The company carrying out the survey 
plans to contact 50 passengers selected at random 
from the 8000 passengers who arrived in Phoenix 
on the day described above. The airline knows 
that the survey results will not be favorable if too 
many people who were delayed overnight are 
included in the survey. Should the airline be wor-
ried? Write a few sentences explaining whether or 
not you think the airline should be worried, using 
relevant probabilities to support your answer.
6.19	 A professor assigns five problems to be completed as 
homework. At the next class meeting, two of the five 
problems will be selected at random and collected for 
grading. You only completed the first three problems.
a.	 What is the probability that you will be able to 
turn in both of the problems selected? (Hint: You 
can think of the problems as being labeled A, B, 
C, D, and E. Then one possible selection of two 
problems is A and B. If these are the two problems 
selected and you did problems A, B, and C, you 
will be able to turn in both problems. There are 
nine other possible selections to consider.)
b.	Does the probability that you will be able to turn 
in both problems change if you had completed 
the last three problems instead of the first three 
problems? Explain.
c.	 What happens to the probability that you will be 
able to turn in both problems selected if you had 
completed four of the problems rather than just 
three?
6.20	 Refer to the following information on full-term births 
in the United States over a given period of time:
Type of Birth
Number of Births
Single birth
41,500,000
Twins
500,000
Triplets
5,000
Quadruplets
100
Use this information to estimate the probability that 
a randomly selected pregnant woman who reaches 
full term
a.	 Delivers twins 
b.	Delivers quadruplets 
c.	 Gives birth to more than a single child 
6.21	 Suppose you want to estimate the probability that 
a customer at a particular grocery store will pay by 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
©Anna Baburkina/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

304 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
credit card. Over the past three months, 80,500 pur-
chases were made, and 37,100 of them were paid for 
by credit card. What is the estimated probability that 
a customer will pay by credit card?
6.22	 A Nielsen survey of teens between the ages of 13 and 
17 found that 83% use text messaging and 56% use 
picture messaging (“How Teens Use Media,” Nielsen, 
June 2009). Use these percentages to explain why the 
two events
T 5 event that a randomly selected teen uses 
text messaging
and
P 5 event that a randomly selected teen uses 
picture messaging
cannot be mutually exclusive.
6.23	 According to The Chronicle for Higher Education 
(Aug. 26, 2011), there were 787,325 associate degrees 
awarded by U.S. community colleges in the  
2008–2009 academic year. A total of 488,142 of 
these degrees were awarded to women.
a.	 If a person who received a degree in 2008–2009 
was selected at random, what is the probability 
that the selected student will be female?
b.	What is the probability that the selected student 
will be male?
6.24	 The same issue of The Chronicle for Higher Education 
referenced in the previous exercise also reported 
the following information for degrees awarded by 
U.S. colleges to Hispanic students in the 2008–2009 
academic year:
●	 A total of 274,515 degrees were awarded to 
Hispanic students.
●	 97,921 of these degrees were associate degrees.
●	 129,526 of these degrees were bachelor’s degrees.
●	 The remaining degrees were either graduate or 
professional degrees.
What is the probability that a randomly selected His-
panic student who received a degree in 2008–2009
a.	 received an associate degree? 
b.	received a graduate or professional degree? 
c.	 did not receive a bachelor’s degree? 
6.25	 A deck of 52 cards is mixed well, and 5 cards are 
dealt.
a.	 It can be shown that (disregarding the order in 
which the cards are dealt) there are 2,598,960 
possible five-card hand­s, of which only 1287 are 
hands consisting entirely of spades. What is the 
probability that a hand will consist entirely of 
spades? What is the probability that a hand will 
consist entirely of a single suit? 
b.	It can be shown that exactly 63,206 hands contain 
only spades and clubs, with both suits represented. 
What is the probability that a hand consists 
entirely of spades and clubs with both suits 
represented? 
c.	 Using the result of Part (b), what is the probability 
that a hand contains cards from exactly two suits? 
6.26	 After all students have left the classroom, a statistics 
professor notices that four copies of the text were left 
under desks. At the beginning of the next lecture, 
the professor distributes the four books at random to 
the four students (1, 2, 3, and 4) who claim to have 
left books. One possible outcome is that 1 receives 2’s 
book, 2 receives 4’s book, 3 receives his or her own 
book, and 4 receives 1’s book. This outcome can be 
abbreviated (2, 4, 3, 1).
a.	 List the 23 other possible outcomes.
b.	Which outcomes are contained in the event that 
exactly two of the books are returned to their cor-
rect owners? ­As­suming equally likely outcomes, 
what is the probability of this event?
c.	 What is the probability that exactly one of the four 
­students receives his or her own book? 
d.	What is the probability that exactly three receive 
their own books? 
e.	 What is the probability that at least two of the four 
­students receive their own books? 
6.27	 The student council for a school of science and math 
has one representative from each of the five academic 
departments: biology (B), chemistry (C), mathemat-
ics (M), physics (P), and statistics (S). Two of these 
students are to be randomly selected for inclusion 
on a university-wide student committee (by placing 
five slips of paper in a bowl, mixing, and drawing out 
two of them).
a.	 What are the 10 possible outcomes (simple 
events)?
b.	From the description of the selection process, all 
outcomes are equally likely. What is the probabil-
ity of each simple event? 
c.	 What is the probability that one of the committee 
members is the statistics department representative?
d.	What is the probability that both committee mem-
bers come from laboratory science departments? 
6.28	 A student placement center has requests from five 
students for interviews regarding employment with a 
­particular consulting firm. Three of these students are 
math majors, and the other two students are statistics 
­majors. Unfortunately, the interviewer has time to 
talk to only two of the students. These two will be 
randomly selected from among the five.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.4   Conditional Probability 
●  305
a.	 What is the probability that both selected students 
are statistics majors? 
b.	What is the probability that both students are 
math ­majors? 
c.	 What is the probability that at least one of the 
students selected is a statistics major? 
d.	What is the probability that the selected students 
have different majors? 
6.29	 Suppose that a six-sided die is “loaded” so that any 
particular even-numbered face is twice as likely to 
land face up as any particular odd-numbered face. 
Consider the chance experiment that consists of roll-
ing this die.
a.	 What are the probabilities of the six simple 
events? (Hint: Denote these events by O1, … , O6. 
Then P(O1) 5 p, P(O2) 5 2p, P(O3) 5 p, … ,  
P(O6) 5 2p. Now use a condition on the sum of 
these probabilities to determine p.)
b.	What is the probability that the number showing 
is an odd number? at most three? 
c.	 Now suppose that the die is loaded so that the 
probability of any particular simple event is pro-
portional to the number showing on the corre-
sponding upturned face; that is, P(O1) 5 c, P(O2) 5 
2c, … , P(O6) 5 6c. What are the probabilities of 
the six simple events? Calculate the probabilities 
of Part (b) for this die. 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
 6.4  
Conditional Probability
Sometimes the knowledge that one event has occurred changes our assessment of the like-
lihood that another event occurs. For example, consider a population in which 0.1% of all 
individuals have a certain disease. The presence of the disease cannot be discerned from 
outward appearances, but there is a diagnostic test available. Unfortunately, the test is not 
always correct. Of those with positive test results, 80% actually have the disease; and the 
other 20% who show positive test results are false-positives. 
To put this in probability terms, consider the chance experiment in which an individual 
is randomly selected from the population. Define the following events:
E 5 event that the individual has the disease
F 5 event that the individual’s diagnostic test is positive
We will use PsEuFd to denote the probability of the event E given that the event F is known 
to have occurred. A new symbol has been used to indicate that a probability calculation 
has been made conditional on the occurrence of another event. The standard ­symbol for 
this is a vertical line, and it is read “given.” For example, we would say, “the probability 
that an individual has the disease given that the diagnostic test is positive,” and represent 
this symbolically as Pshas diseaseupositive testd or PsEuFd. This probability is called a con-
ditional probability.
The information provided then implies that
   PsEd 5 .001
PsEuFd 5 .8
This means that before we have diagnostic test information, the occurrence of E is un-
likely. However, once it is known that the test result is positive, the likelihood of the 
disease increases dramatically. (If this were not so, the diagnostic test would not be very 
­useful!)
Example 6.11 
College Housing Options
At a small liberal arts college, students have three housing options. They can live in on-
campus housing, off-campus housing, or at home with family. The following table gives the 
number of students in each housing option by year in school.
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

306 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
Freshman
Sophomore
Junior
Senior
Total
On-campus housing
150
160
140
150
  ​600
Off-campus housing
100
  ​90
120
125
  ​435
Home with family
125
140
150
150
  ​565
Total
375
390
410
425
1600
Consider each of the following statements, and make sure that you see how each follows 
from the information in the table:
1.	There are 160 sophomores who live in on-campus housing.
2.	The number of seniors who live in off-campus housing is 125.
3.	There are 435 students who live in off-campus housing.
4.	There are 410 juniors at the college.
5.	The total number of students at the college is 1600.
Each week, the college president selects a students at random and invites him or her to 
have lunch with her to discuss various issues that might be of concern to them. She feels 
that random selection will give her the greatest chance of hearing from a diverse group of 
students. What is the probability that a randomly selected student is a senior who lives on 
campus? Assuming that each student is equally likely to be selected, we can calculate this 
probability as follows:
Pssenior who lives on campusd 5
number of seniors who live on campus
total number of students
5 150
1600 5 .09375
Now suppose that the president’s assistant records not only the student’s name but also the 
student’s year in school. The assistant has indicated that the selected student is a senior. 
Does this information change our assessment of the likelihood that the ­se­lected student 
lives on campus? Because 150 of the 425 seniors live on campus, this suggests that
Pslive on campususeniord 5
number of seniors who live on campus
total number of seniors
5 150
425 5 .3529
The probability is calculated in this way because we know that the selected student is one 
of 425 seniors, each of whom is equally likely to have been the one selected. The inter-
pretation of this conditional probability is that if we were to repeat the chance experiment 
of selecting a student at random, about 35.29% of the selections that resulted in a senior 
being selected would also result in the selection of someone who lives on campus.	
■
Example 6.12 
GFI Switches
A GFI (ground fault interrupt) switch turns off power to a system in the event of  
an electrical malfunction. A spa manufacturer currently has 25 spas in stock, each equipped 
with a single GFI switch. Two different companies supply the switches, and some of the 
switches are defective, as summarized in the following table:
Nondefective
Defective
Total
Company 1
10
  ​5
15
Company 2
  ​8
  ​2
10
Total
18
  ​7
Consider the data ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.4   Conditional Probability 
●  307
A spa is randomly selected for testing. Let
E 5 event that GFI switch in selected spa is from Company 1
F 5 event that GFI switch in selected spa is defective
Using the information in the table, we can calculate the following probabilities:
PsEd 5 15
25 5 .60 PsFd 5 7
25 5 .28 PsE and Fd 5 PsE > Fd 5 5
25 5 .20
Now suppose that testing reveals a defective switch. (This means that the chosen spa is 
one of the seven in the “defective” column.) How likely is it that the switch came from the 
first company? Because five of the seven defective switches are from ­Company 1,
PsEuFd 5 Pscompany 1udefectived 5 5
7 5 .714
This is larger than the unconditional probability P(E). This is because Company 1 has a 
much higher defective rate than Company 2.
An alternative expression for the conditional probability is
PsEuFd 5 5
7 5 5y25
7y25 5 PsE and Fd
PsFd
5 PsE > Fd
PsFd
Notice that PsEuFd is a ratio of two previously specified probabilities. It is the probability 
that both events occur divided by the probability of the “conditioning event” F. Additional 
insight comes from the Venn diagram of Figure 6.8. Once it is known that the outcome lies 
in F, the chance that E also occurs is the “size” of (E and F) relative to the size of F.
Do the work ❭

■
Figure  6.8
Venn diagram for Example 6.12 (each 
dot represents one GFI switch).
E
F
The results of the previous example lead us to a general defini­tion of conditional 
probability.
Conditional probability: Suppose that E and F are two events with P(F) . 0. The 
conditional probability of the event E given that the event F has occurred, 
denoted by P(EuF), is
   P(EuF) 5 P(E > F)
P(F )
DEFINITION
Notice the requirement that P(F) . 0. In addition to the standard warning about division 
by 0, there is another reason for requiring P(F) to be positive. If the probability of F were 0, 
the event F would never occur. Therefore, it would not make sense to calculate the prob-
ability of another event conditional on F having occurred.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

308 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
Example 6.13 
Surviving a Heart Attack
Medical guidelines recommend that a hospitalized patient who suffers cardiac arrest should 
receive defibrillation (an electric shock to the heart) within 2 minutes. The paper “Delayed 
Time to Defibrillation After In-Hospital Cardiac Arrest” (The New England Journal of Medicine 
[2008]: 9–17) describes a study of the time to defibrillation for hospitalized patients in hos-
pitals of various sizes. 
The authors examined medical records of 6716 patients who suffered cardiac arrest while 
hospitalized, recording the size of the hospital and whether or not defibrillation occurred 
in 2 minutes or less. Data from this study are summarized in the accompanying table.
Time to Defibrillation
Hospital Size
2 minutes  
or less
More than  
2 minutes
Total
Small (Less than 250 beds)
1124
   576
1700
Medium (250–499 beds)
2178
   886
3064
Large (500 or more beds)
1387
   565
1952
Total
4689
2027
6716
We will assume that these data are representative of the larger group of all hospitalized 
patients who suffer a cardiac arrest. Suppose that a hospitalized patient who suffered a 
cardiac arrest is selected at random. The following events are of interest:
  S ​5 ​event that the selected patient is at a small hospital
 M ​5 ​event that the selected patient is at a medium-sized hospital
   L ​5 ​event that the selected patient is at a large hospital
   D ​5 ​event that the selected patient receives defibrillation in 2 minutes or less
We can use the information in the table to compute
PsDd 5 4689
6716 5 .698
This probability is interpreted as the proportion of hospitalized patients who suffer cardiac 
arrest that receive defibrillation in 2 minutes or less. That is, 69.8% of these patients receive 
timely defibrillation.
Now suppose it is known that the selected patient was at a small hospital. How likely 
is it that this patient received defibrillation in 2 minutes or less? To answer this question, 
we need to compute PsDuSd, the probability of defibrillation in 2 minutes or less given that 
the patient is at a small hospital. Using the formula for conditional probability, we know
PsDuSd 5 PsD > Sd
PsSd
From the information in the table, we can compute
PsD > Sd 5 1124
6716 5 .167
PsSd 5 1700
6716 5 .253
and so
PsDuSd 5 PsD > Sd
PsSd
5 .167
.253 5 .660
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Do the work ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.4   Conditional Probability 
●  309
Notice that this is smaller than the unconditional probability, PsDd 5 .698. This tells us 
that there is a smaller probability of timely defibrillation at a small hospital.
Two other conditional probabilities of interest are
PsDuMd 5 PsD > Md
PsMd
5 2178y6716
3064y6716 5 .711
and
PsDuLd 5 PsD > Ld
PsLd
5 1387y6716
1952y6716 5 .711
From this, we see that the probability of timely defibrillation is the same for patients at 
medium-sized and large hospitals, and that this probability is higher than that for patients 
at small hospitals.
It is also possible to compute PsLuDd, the probability that a patient is at a large hospital 
given that the patient received timely defibrillation:
PsLuDd 5 PsL > Dd
PsDd
5 1387y6716
4689y6716 5 .296
Let’s look carefully at the interpretation of some of these probabilities:
1.	PsDd 5 .698 is interpreted as the proportion of all hospitalized patients suffering 
cardiac arrest who would receive timely defibrillation. Approximately 69.8% of 
these patients would receive timely defibrillation.
2.	PsD > Ld 5 1387
6716 5 .207 gives the proportion of all hospitalized patients who suffer 
cardiac arrest who are at a large hospital and who would receive timely defibrillation.
3.	PsDuLd 5 .711 is the proportion of patients at large hospitals suffering cardiac arrest 
who would receive timely defibrillation.
4.	PsLuDd 5 .296 is the proportion of patients who receive timely defibrillation who were 
at large hospitals.
Notice the difference between the unconditional probabilities in Interpretations 1 and 
2 and the conditional probabilities in Interpretations 3 and 4. The reference point for the 
unconditional probabilities is the entire group of interest (all hospitalized patients suffering 
cardiac arrest), whereas the conditional probabilities are interpreted in a more restricted 
context defined by the “given” event.	
■
Example 6.14 demonstrates the calculation of conditional probabilities and also makes 
the point that we must be careful when translating real-world problems—especially prob-
ability problems—into mathematical form. Not only are probability problems sometimes 
diffi­cult to formulate precisely, but the answers are sometimes surprising.
Example 6.14 
Two-Kid Families
Consider the population of all families with two children. Representing the gender of each 
child using G for girl and B for boy results in four possibilities: BB, BG, GB, GG. The gen-
der information is sequential, with the first letter indicating the gender of the older sibling. 
Thus, a family having a girl first and then a boy is denoted GB. If we assume that a child is 
equally likely to be male or female, each of the four possibilities in the sample space for the 
chance experiment that selects at random from families with two children is equally likely. 
Consider the following two questions:
1.	What is the probability that the selected family has two girls, given that the family 
has at least one girl?
Understand the context ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

310 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
2.	What is the probability that the selected family has two girls, given that the older 
child is a girl?
To many people, these questions appear to be identical. However, by computing the 
appropriate probabilities, we can see that they are actually different.
For question 1 we obtain
Psfamily with two girls u family has at least one girld
     ​5 Psfamily with two girls and family with at least one girld
Psfamily with at least one girld
     ​5
PsGGd
PsGG or BG or GBd
  ​  
5 1y4
3y4 5 .25
.75 5 .3333
For question 2 we calculate
Psfamily with two girls u family with older child a girld
 
5 Psfamily with two girls and family with older child a girld
Psfamily with older child a girld
 
5
PsGGd
PsGB or GGd
 
5 1y4
1y2 5 .25
.50 5 .50
The moral of this story is: Correct solutions to probability problems, especially conditional 
probability problems, are much more the result of careful consideration of the sample 
spaces and the probabilities than they are a product of what your intuition tells you!	
■
As we mentioned in the opening paragraphs of this section, one of the most important 
practical uses of conditional probability is in making diagnoses. Your mechanic diagnoses 
your car by hooking it up to a machine and reading the pressures and speeds of the various 
components. A meteorologist diagnoses the weather by looking at temperatures, isobars, 
and wind speeds. 
Doctors observe characteristics of their patients in an attempt to determine whether 
or not their patients have a certain disease. Many diseases are not actually observable—
or at least not easily so—and often the doctor must make a probabilistic judgment. 
As we will see, conditional probability plays a large role in evaluating diagnostic 
techniques.
Example 6.15 
Diagnosing Tuberculosis
To illustrate the calculations involved in evaluating a diagnostic test, we consider the case 
of tuberculosis (TB), an infectious disease that typically attacks lung tissue. Before 1998, 
culturing was the standard method for diagnosing TB. This method always resulted in a 
correct diagnosis, but it took 10 to 15 days to produce a test result. In 1998, investigators 
evaluated a DNA technique that turned out to be much faster (“LCx: A Diagnostic Alterna-
tive for the Early Detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis Complex,” ­Diagnostic Microbiology 
and Infectious Diseases [1998]: 259–264). 
The DNA technique for detecting tuberculosis was evaluated by comparing results from 
the test to the existing gold standard, with the following results for 207 patients exhibiting 
symptoms:
Do the work ❭
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.4   Conditional Probability 
●  311
A quick look at the table indicates that the DNA technique seems to be working in a 
manner consistent with what we expect from a diagnostic test. Samples that tested positive 
with the technique agreed with the standard test in every case. Samples that tested nega-
tive were generally in agreement with the standard test, but the table also indicates some 
false-negative results. 
Now think about a randomly selected individual who is tested for TB. Define the follow-
ing events:
T  5 event that the individual has tuberculosis
N 5 event that the DNA test is negative
Then PsTuNd denotes the probability of the event T given that the event N has occurred. We 
calculate this probability as follows:
 PsTuNd 5 Pstuberculosisunegative DNA testd
	
 5 Pstuberculosis > negative DNA testd
Psnegative DNA testd
	
 5 .0580
.9324
	
5 .0622
Notice that .1256 is the proportion of those tested who had tuberculosis. The added in-
formation provided by the diagnostic test has altered the probability—and provided some 
measure of relief for the patients who test negative. Once it is known that the test result 
is negative, the estimated likelihood of the disease is cut in half. If the diagnostic test did 
not sig­nificantly alter the probability, the test would not be very useful to the doctor or 
patient.	
■
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Standard Test Shows Has 
Tuberculosis
Standard Test Shows Does 
Not Have Tuberculosis
DNA Positive Indication
14
    0
DNA Negative Indication
12
181
Has TB
Does Not Have TB
Total
DNA1
.0676
.0000
    ​.0676
DNA2
.0580
.8744
    ​.9324
Total
.1256
.8744
  ​1.0000
Converting these data to proportions and adding the column and row totals into the 
table, we get the following information:
Consider the data ❭
EXERCISES 6.30 - 6.42
6.30	 Two different airlines have a flight from Los Angeles 
to New York that departs each weekday morning at 
a certain time. Let E denote the event that the first 
airline’s flight is fully booked on a particular day, and 
let F denote the event that the second airline’s flight 
is fully booked on that same day. 
Suppose that PsEd 5 .7, PsFd 5 .6, and  
	  PsE > Fd 5 .54.
a.	 Calculate PsEuFd, the probability that the first airline’s 
flight is fully booked given that the second airline’s 
flight is fully booked. (Hint: See Example 6.12.)
b.	Calculate PsFuEd. 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

312 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
6.31	 The article “Chances Are You Know Someone with 
a Tattoo, and He’s Not a Sailor” (Associated Press, 
June 11, 2006) included results from a survey  
of adults aged 18 to 50. The accompanying data  
are consistent with summary values given in the 
article.
At Least One Tattoo
No Tattoo
Age 18–29
18
32
Age 30–50
  ​6
44
Assuming these data are representative of adult 
Americans and that an adult American is selected at 
random, use the given information to estimate the 
following probabilities. (Hint: See Example 6.13.)
a.	 P(tattoo) 
b.	P(tattoouage 18–29) 
c.	 P(tattoouage 30–50) 
d.	P(age 18–29utattoo) 
6.32	 The accompanying data are from the article “Char-
acteristics of Buyers of Hybrid Honda Civic IMA: 
Preferences, Decision Process, Vehicle Ownership, 
and Willingness-to-Pay” (Institute for Environmental 
Decisions, November 2006). Each of 311 people who 
purchased a Honda Civic was classified according to 
gender and whether the car purchased had a hybrid 
engine or not.
Hybrid
Not Hybrid
Male
77
117
Female
34
  83
Suppose one of these 311 individuals is to be 
selected at random.
a.	 Find the following probabilities:
i. 	Psmaled 
ii.	Pshybridd 
iii.	Pshybridumaled 
iv.	Pshybridu femaled 
v.	 Ps femaleuhybridd 
b.	For each of the probabilities calculated in Part (a), 
write a sentence interpreting the probability. 
(Hint: See Example 6.13.)
c.	 Are the probabilities Pshybridumaled and  
Psmaleuhybridd equal? If not, write a sentence or 
two explaining the difference between these two 
probabilities.
6.33	 The following graphical display is similar to one that 
appeared in USA Today (January 8, 2010).
Use the information in this display to answer the fol-
lowing questions. Assume that the percentages in the 
graph are representative of adult Americans.
a.	 What is the probability that a randomly selected 
adult American drinks coffee? 
b.	The display associates 45% with the category “two 
or more cups a day.” For the chance experiment 
that consists of selecting an adult American at 
random, is .45 the probability that the selected 
individual drinks two or more cups of coffee a 
day, or is it the conditional probability that the 
selected individual drinks two or more cups a day 
given that he or she drinks coffee? Explain.
6.34	 Delayed diagnosis of cancer is a problem because it 
can delay the start of treatment. The paper “Causes 
of Physician Delay in the Diagnosis of Breast Cancer” 
(Archives of Internal Medicine [2002]: 1343–1348) exam-
ined possible causes for delayed diagnosis for women 
with breast cancer. The accompanying table summa-
rizes data on the initial written mammogram report 
(benign or suspicious) and whether or not diagnosis 
was delayed for 433 women with breast cancer.
Diagnosis 
Delayed
Diagnosis 
Not 
Delayed
Mammogram Report Benign
32
  89
Mammogram Report  
Suspicious
  8
304
Consider the following events:
    B ​5 ​the event that the mammogram report 
says benign
        S ​5 ​event that the mammogram report says 
suspicious
        D ​5 ​event that diagnosis is delayed
How many 
cups-o-joe do 
you drink?
Ab
A out 722% 
% of Ame
merir cans 
drinink coffeee. Ho
H w muuch
ch
they drirink:
1 cup
a day 
27%
1 cup 
a week 
13%
2 or more 
cups a day 
45%
2 cups
a week 
15%
Source: Braun Research for International
Delight Coffee House Inspirations
Source: USA TODAY. January 8, 2010. 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.4   Conditional Probability 
●  313
a.	 Assume that these data are representative of the 
larger group of all women with breast cancer. Use 
the data in the table to estimate and interpret the 
following probabilities. (Hint: See Example 6.15.)
i.	 PsBd 
ii.	PsSd 
iii.	PsDuBd 
iv.	PsDuSd 
b.	Remember that all of the 433 women in this study 
actually had breast cancer, so benign mammogram 
reports were, by definition, in error. Write a few 
sentences explaining whether this type of error in 
the reading of mammograms is related to delayed 
diagnosis of breast cancer.
6.35	 The events E and Ti are defined as E ​5 ​the event that 
someone who is out of work and actively looking for 
work will find a job within the next month and Ti ​5 ​
the event that someone who is currently out of work 
has been out of work for i months. For example, T2 is 
the event that someone who is out of work has been 
out of work for 2 months. 
The following conditional probabilities are ap-
proximate and were read from a graph in the paper 
“The Probability of Finding a Job” (American Economic 
Review: Papers & Proceedings [2008]: 268–273):
PsEuT1d 5 .30	
PsEuT2d 5 .24
PsEuT3d 5 .22	
PsEuT4d 5 .21
PsEuT5d 5 .20	
PsEuT6d 5 .19
PsEuT7d 5 .19	
PsEuT8d 5 .18
PsEuT9d 5 .18	
PsEuT10d 5 .18
PsEuT11d 5 .18	
PsEuT12d 5 .18
a. 	Interpret the following two probabilities:
i.	 PsEuT1d 5 .30
ii.	PsEuT6d 5 .19
b.	Construct a graph of PsEuTid versus i. That is, plot 
PsEuTid on the y-axis and i ​5 ​1, 2, … , 12 on the 
x-axis.
c.	 Write a few sentences about how the probability 
of finding a job in the next month changes as a 
function of length of unemployment.
6.36	 The newspaper article “Folic Acid Might Reduce Risk 
of Down Syndrome” (USA Today, Sep­tem­ber 29, 1999) 
makes the following statement: “Older women are 
at a greater risk of giving birth to a baby with Down 
­Syn­drome than are younger women. But younger 
women are more fertile, so most children with Down 
Syndrome are born to mothers under 30.” 
Let D 5 event that a randomly selected baby is 
born with Down Syndrome and Y 5 event that a 
randomly selected baby is born to a young mother 
(under age 30). For each of the following prob-
ability statements, indicate whether the statement is 
consistent with the quote from the article, and if not, 
explain why not.
a.	 PsDuY d 5 .001, PsDuY C d 5 .004, PsY d 5 .7
b.	PsDuY d 5 .001, PsDuY C d 5 .001, PsY d 5 .7
c.	 PsDuY d 5 .004, PsDuY C d 5 .004, PsY d 5 .7
d.	PsDuY d 5 .001, PsDuY C d 5 .004, PsY d 5 .4
e.	 PsDuY d 5 .001, PsDuY C d 5 .001, PsY d 5 .4
f.	 PsDuY d 5 .004, PsDuY C d 5 .004, PsY d 5 .4
6.37	 Suppose that an individual is randomly selected from 
the population of all adult males living in the United 
States. Let A be the event that the selected individual 
is over 6 feet in height, and let B be the event that the 
selected individual is a professional basketball player. 
Which do you think is larger, PsAuBd or PsBuAd? Why?
6.38	 ▼ Is ultrasound a reliable method for determining 
the gender of an unborn baby? The accompanying 
data on 1000 births are consistent with summary val-
ues that appeared in the Journal of Statistics Education 
(“New Approaches to Learning Probability in the First 
Statistics Course,” 2001).
Ultrasound
Predicted
Female
Ultrasound
Predicted
Male
Actual Gender Is 
Female
432
  ​48
Actual Gender Is 
Male
130
390
a.	 Use the given information to estimate the prob-
ability that a newborn baby is female, given that 
the ultrasound predicted the baby would be 
female. 
b.	Use the given information to estimate the prob-
ability that a newborn baby is male, given that 
the ultrasound predicted the baby would be 
male. 
c.	 Based on your answers to Parts (a) and (b), do 
you think that a prediction that a baby is male 
and a prediction that a baby is female are equally 
reliable? Explain. 
6.39	 The table at the top of the next page summarizes data 
on smoking status and perceived risk of smoking and 
is consistent with summary quantities obtained in a 
Gallup Poll conducted in No­vem­ber 2002. Assume 
that it is reasonable to consider these data as repre-
sentative of the adult American population.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

314 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
a.	 What is the probability that a randomly selected 
adult American is a former smoker? 
b.	What is the probability that a randomly selected 
adult American views smoking as very harmful? 
c.	 What is the probability that a randomly selected 
adult American views smoking as very harmful 
given that the selected individual is a current 
smoker? 
d.	What is the probability that a randomly selected 
adult American views smoking as very harmful 
given that the selected individual is a former 
smoker? 
e.	 What is the probability that a randomly selected 
adult American views smoking as very harmful 
given that the selected individual never 
smoked? 
f.	 How do the probabilities computed in Parts (c), (d), 
and (e) compare? Does this surprise you? Explain.
6.40	 USA Today (June 6, 2000) gave information on seat belt 
usage by gender. The proportions in the following 
table are based on a survey of a large number of adult 
men and women in the United States.
Male
Female
Uses Seat Belts Regularly
.10
.175
Does Not Use Seat Belts Regularly
.40
.325
Assume that these proportions are representative 
of adult Americans and that an adult American is 
selected at random.
a.	 What is the probability that the selected adult 
regularly uses a seat belt? 
b.	What is the probability that the selected adult 
regularly uses a seat belt given that the individual 
selected is male? 
c.	 What is the probability that the selected adult 
does not use a seat belt regularly given that the 
selected individual is female? 
d.	What is the probability that the selected individual 
is female given that the selected individual does 
not use a seat belt regularly? 
e.	 Are the probabilities from Parts (c) and (d) equal? 
Write a couple of sentences explaining why this is so.
6.41	 The USA Today article referenced in the previous exer-
cise also gave information on seat belt usage by age, 
which is summarized in the following table:
Age
Does Not Use Seat 
Belt Regularly
Uses Seat Belt 
Regularly
18–24
59
41
25–34
73
27
35–44
74
26
45–54
70
30
55–64
70
30
65 and older
82
18
Consider the following events: S 5 event that a ran-
domly selected individual uses a seat belt regularly, 
A1 5 event that a randomly selected individual is in 
age group 18–24, and A6 5 event that a randomly 
selected individual is in age group 65 and older.
a.	 Convert the counts to proportions and then use 
them to compute the following probabilities:
i.	 PsA1d	
ii.  PsA1 > Sd	
iii.  PsA1uSd
iv.	Psnot A1d	
v.  ​PsSuA1d	
vi.  ​PsSuA6d
b.	Using the probabilities PsSuA1d and PsSuA6d com-
puted in Part (a), comment on how 18–24-year-
olds and seniors differ with respect to seat belt 
usage.
6.42	 The paper “Good for Women, Good for Men, Bad for 
People: Simpson’s Paradox and the Importance of 
­Sex-Specific Analysis in Observational Studies” (Journal 
of Women’s Health and Gender-Based Medicine [2001]:  
867–872) described the results of a medical study in 
which one treatment was shown to be better for men 
and better for women than a competing treatment. 
However, if the data for men and women are combined, 
it appears as though the competing treatment is better. 
To see how this can happen, consider the accom-
panying data tables constructed from information 
in the paper. Subjects in the study were given either 
Treatment A or Treatment B, and survival was noted. 
Let S be the event that a patient selected at random 
survives, A be the event that a patient selected at ran-
dom received Treatment A, and B be the event that a 
patient selected at random received Treatment B.
Perceived Risk
Smoking Status
Very  
Harmful
Somewhat 
Harmful
Not Too  
Harmful
Not at All 
Harmful
Current Smoker
60
30
5
1
Former Smoker
78
16
3
2
Never Smoked
86
10
2
1
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.5   Independence 
●  315
a.	 The following table summarizes data for men and 
women combined:
Survived
Died
Total
Treatment A
215
  ​85
300
Treatment B
241
  ​59
300
Total
456
144
i.	 Find P(S). 
ii.	Find PsSuAd. 
iii.	Find PsSuBd. 
iv.	Which treatment appears to be better? 
b.	Now consider the summary data for the men who 
participated in the study:
Survived
Died
Total
Treatment A
120
  ​80
200
Treatment B
  ​20
  ​20
  ​40
Total
140
100
i.	 ​Find P(S). 
ii.	Find PsSuAd. 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
iii.	Find PsSuBd. 
iv.	​Which treatment appears to be better? 
c.	 Now consider the summary data for the women 
who participated in the study:
Survived
Died
Total
Treatment A
  ​95
  5
100
Treatment B
221
  ​39
260
Total
316
144
i.	 ​Find P(S). 
ii.	Find PsSuAd. 
iii.	​Find PsSuBd. 
iv.	Which treatment appears to be better? 
d.	You should have noticed from Parts (b) and (c) 
that for both men and women, Treatment A ap-
pears to be better. But in Part (a), when the data 
for men and women are combined, it looks like 
Treatment B is better. This is an example of what 
is called Simpson’s paradox. Write a brief explana-
tion of why this apparent inconsistency occurs for 
this data set. (Hint: Do men and women respond 
similarly to the two treatments?)
 6.5  
Independence
In Section 6.4, we saw that knowledge of the occurrence of one event can alter our 
­assessment of the likelihood that some other event has occurred. For example, we saw how 
­information about conditional probabilities could be used in medical diagnosis to revise 
assessments of patients in light of the outcome of a diagnostic procedure. However, it is 
also possible that knowledge that one event has occurred will not change our assessment 
of the probability of occurrence of a second event.
Example 6.16  Mortgage Choices
A large lending institution issues both adjustable-rate and fixed-rate mortgage loans 
on residential property, which it classifies into three categories: single-family houses, 
condominiums, and multifamily dwellings. The following table, sometimes called a joint 
probability table, displays probabilities based on the bank’s long-run lending behavior:
Single-Family
Condo
Multifamily
Total
Adjustable
.40
.21
.09
.70
Fixed
.10
.09
.11
.30
Total
.50
.30
.20
From the table we see that 70% of all mortgages are adjustable rate, 50% of all mortgages 
are for single-family properties, 40% of all mortgages are adjustable rate for single-family 
properties (adjustable-rate and single-family), and so on.
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

316 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
Define the events E and F by
E 5 event that a mortgage is adjustable rate
F 5 event that a mortgage is for a single-family house
Then P(E) 5 .70 and
PsEuFd 5 PsE and Fd
PsFd
5 .40
.50 5 .80
That is, 80% of loans made for single-family houses are adjustable-rate loans. Notice that 
PsEuFd is larger than the original (unconditional) probability P(E) 5 .70. Also,
PsFuEd 5 PsE and Fd
PsEd
5 .40
.70 5 .571
which is larger than the unconditional probability PsFd 5 .5. Knowing that E has occurred 
has changed our assessment of how likely it is that F has also occurred.
Now consider another event C defined as
C 5 event that a mortgage is for a condominium
then
PsEuCd 5 PsE and Cd
PsCd
5 .21
.30 5 .70
Notice that PsEuCd 5 PsEd. In this case, knowing that a mortgage is for a condominium 
doesn’t change our assessment of the probability that the mortgage has an adjustable 
interest rate.	
■
When two events E and F are such that PsEuFd 5 PsEd, the probability that event E has 
occurred is the same after we learn that F has occurred as it was before we knew that F had 
occurred. In this case, we say that E and F are independent of one another.
Independent events: Two events E and F are said to be independent if
P(EuF) 5 P(E)
Dependent events: If two events E and F are not independent, they are said to 
be dependent events.
If P(EuF ) 5 P(E ), it is also true that P(FuE ) 5 P(F ), and vice versa.
DEFINITION
Independence of events E and F also implies the following additional three relationships:
 Psnot EuFd 5 Psnot Ed
 PsEunot Fd 5 PsEd
Psnot Eunot Fd 5 Psnot Ed
This means that if E and F are independent, nothing we learn about F will change the likeli-
hood of E or of not E.
Recall that the formula for conditional probability is
PsEuFd 5 PsE > Fd
PsFd
which can be rearranged to give
PsE > Fd 5 PsEuFdPsFd
Interpret the results ❭
Do the work ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.5   Independence 
●  317
When E and F are independent, PsEuFd 5 PsEd, so it follows that if E and F are independent,
PsE > Fd 5 PsEuFdPsFd 5 PsEdPsFd
This result is called the multiplication rule for two independent events.
The events E and F are independent if and only if 
PsE > Fd 5 PsEdPsFd
Multiplication Rule for Two Independent Events
Example 6.17 
Hitchhiker’s Thumb
In humans, there is a gene that controls a characteristic known as hitchhiker’s thumb. 
Hitchhiker’s thumb is the ability to bend the last joint of the thumb back at an angle of 60°  
or more. Whether a child has hitchhiker’s thumb is determined by two random events: 
which of two alleles is contributed by the father and which of two alleles is contributed by 
the mother. You can think of these alleles as a parental vote of yes or no on the hitchhiker’s 
thumb gene. If the votes by the two parents disagree, the dominant allele wins and the child  
does not have hitchhiker’s thumb. These two random events, the results of cell division in 
two dif­ferent biological parents, are independent of each other. 
Suppose that there is a .10 probability that a parent contributes a positive hitchhiker’s 
thumb allele. Because the events are independent, the probability that each parent contrib-
utes a positive hitchhiker’s thumb allele, H1, to the offspring is
Psmother contributes H1 > father contributes H1d
 
5 Psmother contributes H1dPsfather contributes H1d
 
5 s.10ds.10d
 
5 .01
This means that only about 1% of all children in the population would have hitchhiker’s 
thumb.
■
Example 6.18 
Curious Guppies
Let’s look at another example, this time from the field of animal behavior, to illustrate how 
an investigator could judge whether two events are independent. In a number of fish spe-
cies, including guppies, a phenomenon known as predator inspection has been reported. 
It is thought that predator inspection allows a guppy to assess the risk posed by a potential 
predator. In a typical inspection a guppy moves toward a predator, presumably to acquire 
information and then (hopefully) depart to inspect again another day.
Investigators have observed that guppies sometimes approach and inspect a predator in 
pairs. Suppose that it is not known whether these predator inspections are independent 
or whether the guppies are operating as a team. Denote the probability that an individual 
guppy will inspect a predator by p. Let event E1 be the event that guppy 1 will approach 
and inspect a predator and E2 be the event that guppy 2 will approach and inspect a 
predator. Then the probability of guppies 1 and 2, approaching the predator at the same 
time by chance if they are acting independently is
PsE1 > E2d 5 PsE1dPsE2d 5 p ? p 5 p2
Based on our analysis, if the inspections are in fact independent, we would expect the 
proportion of times that two guppies happen to simultaneously inspect a predator to be 
Understand the context ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Maximillian Weinzier/Alamy
Understand the context ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

318 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
equal to the square of the proportion of times that a single fish does so. For example, if 
the probability a single guppy inspects a predator is .3, we would expect the proportion 
of the time that two guppies would inspect a predator simultaneously to be (.3)2 5 .09. 
Based on observations of the inspection behavior of a large number of guppies, scientists 
found that inspections by two guppies occurred much more often than 9% of the time. 
As a result, they concluded that the inspection behavior of guppies does not appear to be 
independent.
■
The concept of independence extends to more than two events. Consider three events, 
E1, E2, and E3. Then independence means not only that
 PsE1uE2d 5 PsE1d
 PsE3uE2d 5 PsE3d
and so on but also that
 PsE1uE2 and E3d 5 PsE1d
 PsE1 and E3uE2d 5 PsE1 and E3d
and so on. There is also a multiplication rule for more than two independent events.
The independence of more than two events is an important concept in studying complex 
systems with many components. If these components are critical to the operation of a ma-
chine, an examination of the probability of the machine’s failure is undertaken by analyzing 
the failure probabilities of the components. 
Events E1, E2, … , Ek are independent if knowledge that any of the events have 
occurred does not change the probabilities that any particular one or more of 
the other events has occurred.
Independence implies that 
    PsE1 > E2 > Á > Ekd 5 PsE1dPsE2d Á  PsEkd
This means that when events are independent, the probability that all occur 
together is the product of the individual probabilities. This relationship also 
holds if one or more of the events is replaced by its complement. 
Multiplication Rule for k Independent Events
In Example 6.19 we take a rather sim­plified view of a desktop computer to illustrate the 
use of the multiplication rule.
Example 6.19 
Computer Configurations
Suppose that a desktop computer system consists of a monitor, a mouse, a keyboard, the 
computer processor itself, and storage devices such as a disk drive. Most computer system 
problems due to manufacturing defects occur soon in the system’s lifetime. Purchasers of 
new computer systems are advised to turn their computers on as soon as they are pur-
chased and then to let them run for a few hours to see if any problems crop up.
Let
E1 5 event that a newly purchased monitor is not defective
E2 5 event that a newly purchased mouse is not defective
E3 5 event that a newly purchased disk drive is not defective
E4 5 event that a newly purchased computer processor is not defective
Suppose these four events are independent, with
P(E1) 5 P(E2) 5 .98    P(E3) 5 .95    P(E4) 5 .99
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.5   Independence 
●  319
The probability that all these components are not defective and that the system will operate 
properly is then
PsE1 > E2 > E3 > E4d 5 PsE1dPsE2dPsE3dPsE4d
	
5 s.98ds.98ds.94ds.99d
	
5 .89
We interpret this probability as follows: In the long run, 89% of such systems will run 
properly when tested shortly after purchase. (In reality, the reliability of these components 
is much higher than the numbers used in this example!) The probability that all compo-
nents except the monitor will run properly is
PsE C1 > E2 > E3 >  E4d 5 PsE C1 dPsE2dPsE3dPsE4d
	
5 s1 2 PsE1ddPsE2dPsE3dPsE4d
	
5 s.02ds.98ds.94ds.99d
                      
5 .018	
■
Sampling With and Without Replacement
One area of statistics where the rules of probability are important is sampling. As we saw 
in Chapter 2, a well-designed sampling plan allows investigators to make inferences about 
a population based on information from a sample. Sampling methods can be classified into 
two categories: sampling with replacement and sampling without ­replacement. 
Most inferential methods presented in an introductory statistics course are based on the 
assumption of sampling with replacement, but when sampling from real populations, we 
almost always sample without replacement. This seemingly ­contradictory practice can be a 
source of confusion. Fortunately, under certain conditions, the distinction between sam-
pling with and without replacement is not important.
Sampling with replacement: Once selected, an individual or object is put back 
into the population before the next selection. 
Sampling without replacement: Once selected, an individual or object is not 
returned to the population prior to subsequent selections.
DEFINITION
Example 6.20 
Sampling With and Without Replacement
Consider the process of selecting three cards from a standard deck of cards. This selection 
can be made in two ways. One method is to shuffle the cards and then deal three cards off 
the top of the deck. This would be sampling without replacement. A second method, rarely 
seen in real games, is to select a card at random, note which card is observed, replace it in the 
deck, and shuffle before selecting the next card. This method is sampling with replacement. 
From the standpoint of probability, sampling with and without replacement are analyzed 
differently. To see this, consider these events:
H1 5 event that the first card is a heart
H2 5 event that the second card is a heart
H3 5 event that the third card is a heart
For sampling with replacement, the probability of H3 is .25, regardless of whether either H1 
or H2 occurs, because replacing selected cards gives the same deck for the third selection as 
for the first two selections. Whether either of the first two cards is a heart has no bearing on 
the third card selected, so the three events, H1, H2, and H3, are independent.
When sampling is without replacement, the chance of getting a heart on the third draw 
does depend on the results of the first two draws. If both H1 and H2 occur, only 11 of the 
Do the work ❭
Interpret the result ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

320 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
50 remaining cards are hearts. Because any one of these 50 has the same chance of being 
selected, the probability of H3 in this case is
PsH3uH1 and H2d 5 11
50 5 .22
Alternatively, if neither of the first 2 cards is a heart, then all 13 hearts remain in the deck 
for the third draw, so
PsH3u not H1 and not H2d 5 13
50 5 .26
Information about the occurrence of H1 and H2 affects the chance that H3 has occurred. For 
sampling without replacement, the three events described here are not independent.	
■
In opinion polls and other types of surveys, sampling is virtually always done without re-
placement. For this method of sampling, the results of successive selections are not indepen-
dent of one another. However, Example 6.21 suggests that, under certain circumstances, the fact 
that selections in sampling without replacement are not ­independent is not a cause for concern.
Example 6.21 
Independence and Sampling Without 
Replacement
A lot of 10,000 computer chips used in graphing calculators consists of 2500 manufac-
tured by one firm and 7500 manufactured by a second firm, all mixed together. Three of 
the chips will be selected at random without replacement. Let
E1 5 event that first chip selected was manufactured by Firm 1
E2 5 event that second chip selected was manufactured by Firm 1
E3 5 event that third chip selected was manufactured by Firm 1
Following the reasoning we used in Example 6.20, we get
PsE3uE1 and E2d 5 2498
9998 5 .24985
PsE3unot E1 and not E2d 5 2500
9998 5 .25005
Although these two probabilities differ slightly, when rounded to three decimal places they 
are both .250. We conclude that the occurrence or nonoccurrence of E1 or E2 has virtually 
no effect on the chance that E3 will occur. For practical purposes, the three events can be 
considered independent.	
■
The essential difference between the situations of Example 6.20 and Example 6.21 is the 
size of the sample relative to the size of the population. In Example 6.20 a relatively large 
proportion of the population was sampled (3 out of 52), whereas in ­Example 6.21 the pro-
portion of the population sampled was quite small (only 3 out of 10,000).
In most settings, the sample size is small compared to the size of the population. The 
theory of sampling with replacement required for many ­inferential methods can coexist 
with the practice of sampling without replacement ­because of the following principle:
If a random sample of size n is taken from a population of size N, the theoretical 
probabilities of successive selections calculated on the basis of sampling with 
replacement and on the basis of sampling without replacement differ by insig-
nificant amounts when n is small compared to N. 
In practice, independence can be assumed for the purpose of calculating 
probabilities as long as n is not larger than 5% of N.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.5   Independence 
●  321
This principle justifies the assumption of independence in many statistical problems. 
The phrase assumption of independence does not signify that the investigators are in some 
sense fooling themselves. They are recognizing that, for all practical purposes, the results 
will not differ from the “right” answers.
In some sampling situations, the sample size might be more than 5% of the population. 
For example, a newspaper editor at a small school might easily sample more than 5% of the 
students at the school to assess student opinion on a particular issue. In that instance, the 
editors would be wise to consult a statistician before proceeding. Does this mean that an 
investigator should never sample more than 5% of a population? Certainly not! It is almost 
always the case that a larger sample results in better inferences about the population. The 
only disadvantage of sampling more than 5% of the population (other than an increase in 
the time and resources required) is that the analysis of the resulting data is slightly more 
complicated.
exercises 6.43 - 6.58
6.43	 Many fire stations handle emergency calls for ­medi­cal 
assistance as well as calls requesting firefight­ing 
equipment. A particular station says that the prob-
ability that an incoming call is for medical assistance 
is .85. This can be expressed as P(call is for medical 
assistance) 5 .85.
a.	 Give a relative frequency interpretation of the 
given probability.
b.	What is the probability that a call is not for medi-
cal ­assistance? 
c.	 Assuming that successive calls are independent 
of one another, calculate the probability that two 
successive calls will both be for medical assis-
tance. (Hint: See Example 6.18.) 
d.	Still assuming independence, calculate the prob-
ability that for two successive calls, the first is for 
medical assistance and the second is not for medi-
cal assistance. 
e.	 Still assuming independence, calculate the prob-
ability that exactly one of the next two calls will 
be for medical assistance. (Hint: There are two 
different possibilities. The one call for medical 
assistance might be the first call, or it might be the 
second call.) 
f.	 Do you think that it is reasonable to assume that 
the ­requests made in successive calls are indepen-
dent? ­Explain.
6.44	 The paper “Predictors of Complementary Therapy 
Use Among Asthma Patients: Results of a Primary 
Care Survey” (Health and Social Care in the Community 
[2008]: 155–164) included the accompanying table. The 
table summarizes the responses given by 1077 asthma 
patients to two questions:
Question 1: Do conventional asthma medications 
usually help your asthma symptoms?
Question 2: Do you use complementary therapies 
(such as herbs, acupuncture, aroma therapy) in 
the treatment of your asthma?
Doesn’t Use 
Complementary 
Therapies
Does Use 
Complementary 
Therapies
Conventional 
Medications Usually 
Help
816
131
Conventional 
Medications Usually 
Do Not Help
103
27
Consider a chance experiment that consists of ran-
domly selecting one of the 1077 survey participants.
a.	 Construct a joint probability table by dividing the 
count in each cell of the table by the sample size  
n ​5 ​1077. (Hint: See Example 6.16.)
b.	The joint probability in the upper left cell of the 
table from Part (a) is 816
1077 5 .758. This repre-
sents the probability of conventional medications 
usually help and does not use complementary 
therapies. Interpret the other three probabilities in 
the joint probability table of Part (a).
c.	 Are the events
CH 5 event that the selected participant reports 
that conventional medications usually help
and
CT 5 event that the selected participant reports 
using complementary therapies
independent events?
Use a probability argument to justify your choice. 
(Hint: See Example 6.18.) 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

322 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
6.45	 The report “TV Drama/Comedy Viewers and Health 
Information” (www.cdc.gov/Healthmarketing) describes 
the results of a large survey involving approximately 
3500 people that was conducted for the Center for 
Disease Control. The sample was selected in a way that 
the Center for Disease Control believed would result 
in a sample that was representative of adult Americans. 
One question on the survey asked respondents if 
they had learned something new about a health issue 
or disease from a TV show in the previous 6 months. 
Data from the survey was used to estimate the follow-
ing probabilities, where
L 5 event that a randomly selected adult American 
reports learning something new about a health 
issue or disease from a TV show in the previ-
ous 6 months
and
F 5 event that a randomly selected adult American 
is female
PsLd 5 .58    PsL > Fd 5 .31
Assume that PsFd 5 .5. Are the events L and F 
independent events? Use probabilities to justify your 
answer. 
6.46	 The article “SUVs Score Low in New Federal Roll­over 
Ratings” (San Luis Obispo Tribune, Janu­ary 6, 2001) 
gave information on death rates for various kinds of 
accidents by vehicle type for accidents reported to the 
police. Suppose that we randomly select an accident 
reported to the police and consider the following events: 
 R 5 event that the selected accident is a single-
vehicle rollover
 F 5 event that the selected accident is a frontal 
collision
D 5 event that the selected accident results in 
a death
Information in the article indicates that the following 
probability estimates are reasonable: 
P(R) 5 .06, P(F) 5 .60, PsRuDd 5 .30, PsFuDd 5 .54.
a.	 Interpret the value of PsRuDd.
b.	Interpret the value of PsFuDd.
c.	 Are the events R and D independent? Justify your 
­answer. 
d.	Is PsF > Dd 5 PsFdPsDd? Explain why or why not.
e.	 Is F 5 RC? Explain how you can tell.
6.47	 A Gallup survey of 2002 adults found that 46% of 
women and 37% of men experience pain daily (San 
Luis Obispo Tribune, April 6, 2000). Suppose that this 
information is representative of adult Americans. 
If an adult American is selected at random, are the 
events selected adult is male and selected adult experi-
ences pain daily independent or dependent? Explain. 
6.48	 In a small city, approximately 15% of those eligible 
are called for jury duty in any one calendar year. 
People are selected for jury duty at random from 
those eligible, and the same individual cannot be 
called more than once in the same year. 
a. What is the probability that a particular eligible per-
son in this city is selected in both of the next 2 years? 
b. What is the probability that a particular eligible 
person in this city is selected in all three of the 
next 3 years?
6.49	 Jeanie is a bit forgetful, and if she doesn’t make a “to 
do” list, the probability that she forgets something she 
is supposed to do is .1. Tomorrow she intends to run 
three errands, and she fails to write them on her list.
a.	 What is the probability that Jeanie forgets all three 
­errands? What assumptions did you make to cal-
culate this probability? 
b.	What is the probability that Jeanie remembers at 
least one of the three errands? 
c.	 What is the probability that Jeanie remembers the 
first errand but not the second or third? 
6.50	 ▼ Approximately 30% of the calls to an airline reser­
vation phone line result in a reservation being made.
a.	 Suppose that an operator handles 10 calls. What 
is the probability that none of the 10 calls result in 
a ­reservation? 
b.	What assumption did you make to calculate the 
probability in Part (a)? 
c.	 What is the probability that at least one call results 
in a reservation being made? (Hint: Use your 
answer to Part (a).) 
6.51	 Consider a system consisting of four components, as 
pictured in the following diagram:
1
2
3
4
Components 1 and 2 form a series subsystem, as do 
Components 3 and 4. The two subsystems are con-
nected in parallel. Suppose that 
P(1 works) 5 .9
P(2 works) 5 .9
P(3 works) 5 .9
P(4 works) 5 .9 
and that the four components work independently of 
one another.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.5   Independence 
●  323
a.	 The 1–2 subsystem works only if both components 
work. What is the probability of this happening? 
b.	What is the probability that the 1–2 subsystem 
doesn’t work? that the 3–4 subsystem doesn’t work?
c.	 The system won’t work if the 1–2 subsystem 
doesn’t work and if the 3–4 subsystem also doesn’t 
work. What is the probability that the system 
won’t work? that it will work? 
d.	How would the probability of the system working 
change if a 5–6 subsystem were added in parallel 
with the other two subsystems? 
e.	 How would the probability that the system works 
change if there were three components in series in 
each of the two subsystems? 
6.52	 Information from a poll of registered voters in Cedar 
Rapids, Iowa, to assess voter support for a new 
school tax was the basis for the following statements 
(Cedar Rapids Gazette, Au­gust 28, 1999):
The poll showed 51% of the respondents in the Cedar 
Rapids school district are in favor of the tax. The ap-
proval rating rises to 56% for those with children in 
public schools. It falls to 45% for those with no chil-
dren in public schools. The older the respondent, the 
less favorable the view of the proposed tax: 36% of 
those over age 56 said they would vote for the tax 
compared with 72% of 18- to 25-year-olds.
Suppose that a registered voter from Cedar Rapids is 
­selected at random, and define the following events: 
F 5 event that the selected individual favors the 
school tax
C 5 event that the selected individual has 
children in the public schools
O 5 event that the selected individual is over 
56 years old
Y 5 event that the selected individual is 18–25 
years old
a.	 Use the given information to estimate the values of 
the following probabilities:
i.	 PsFd 
ii.	​PsFuCd 
iii.	​PsFuC C d 
iv.	​PsFuOd 
v.	 ​PsFuY d 
b.	Are F and C independent? Justify your answer.
c.	 Are F and O independent? Justify your answer.
6.53	 The following case study was reported in the article 
“Parking Tickets and Missing Women,” which appeared 
in an early edition of the book Statistics: A Guide to the 
Unknown. In a Swedish trial on a charge of overtime 
parking, a police offi­cer testified that he had noted the 
position of the two air valves on the tires of a parked 
car: To the closest hour, one was at the one o’clock 
position and the other was at the six o’clock position. 
After the allowable time for parking in that zone had 
passed, the policeman returned, noted that the valves 
were in the same position, and ticketed the car. The 
owner of the car claimed that he had left the parking 
place in time and had returned later. The valves just 
happened by chance to be in the same positions. 
An “expert” witness computed the probability of 
this occurring as (1/12)(1/12) 5 1/144.
a.	 What reasoning did the expert use to arrive at the 
probability of 1/144?
b.	Can you spot the error in the reasoning that leads 
to the stated probability of 1/144? 
c. What effect does this error have on the probability 
of occurrence? 
d. Do you think that 1/144 is larger or smaller than 
the correct probability of ­occurrence?
6.54	 Three friends (A, B, and C) will participate in a 
round-­robin tournament in which each one plays 
both of the others. Suppose that 
P(A beats B) 5 .7
P(A beats C) 5 .8
P(B beats C) 5 .6
and that the outcomes of the three matches are inde-
pendent of one another.
a.	 What is the probability that A wins both her 
matches and that B beats C? 
b.	What is the probability that A wins both her 
matches? 
c.	 What is the probability that A loses both her 
matches? 
d.	What is the probability that each person wins one 
match? (Hint: There are two different ways for this 
to ­happen.) 
6.55	 A shipment of 5000 printed circuit boards contains 40 
that are defective. Two boards will be chosen at ran-
dom, without replacement. Consider the two events 
E1 5 event that the first board selected is defective and 
E2 5 event that the second board selected is defective.
a.	 Are E1 and E2 dependent events? Explain in words.
b.	Let not E1 be the event that the first board selected 
is not defective sthe event E C1 d. What is Psnot E1d? 
c.	 How do the two probabilities PsE2uE1d and 
PsE2unot E1d compare?
d.	Based on your answer to Part (c), would it be 
reasonable to view E1 and E2 as approximately 
independent? 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

324 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
6.56	 A store sells two different brands of dishwasher soap, 
and each brand comes in three different sizes: small 
(S), medium (M), and large (L). The proportions of 
the two brands and of the three sizes purchased are 
displayed as marginal totals in the following table.
Size
S
M
L
B1
.40
Brand
B2
.60
.30
.50
.20
Suppose that any event involving brand is indepen-
dent of any event involving size. What is the proba-
bility of the event that a randomly selected purchaser 
buys the small size of Brand B1 (the event B1 > S)? 
What are the probabilities of the other brand–size 
combinations?
6.57	 The National Public Radio show Car Talk has a ­feature 
called “The Puzzler.” Listeners are asked to send in 
answers to some puzzling questions—usually about 
cars but sometimes about probability (which, of 
course, must account for the incredible popularity of 
the program!). 
Suppose that for a car question, 800 answers are 
submitted, of which 50 are correct.
a.	 Suppose that the hosts randomly select two 
answers from those submitted with replacement. 
Calculate the probability that both selected 
answers are correct. (For purposes of this prob-
lem, keep at least five digits to the right of the 
decimal.) 
b.	Suppose now that the hosts select the answers 
at random but without replacement. Use condi-
tional probability to evaluate the probability that 
both answers selected are correct. How does this 
probability compare to the one computed in  
Part (a)? 
6.58	 Refer to the previous exercise. Suppose now that for 
a probability question, 100 answers are submitted, 
of which 50 are correct. Calculate the probabilities 
in Parts (a) and (b) of the previous exercise for the 
probability question. 
 6.6  
Some General Probability Rules
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
In previous sections, we saw how the probability of PsE ø Fd could be easily computed 
when E and F are mutually exclusive and how PsE > Fd could be computed when E and F 
are independent. In this section, we develop more general rules: an addition rule that can 
be used even when events are not mutually exclusive and a multiplication rule that can be 
used even when events are not independent.
General Addition Rule
Calculating PsE ø Fd when the two events are not mutually exclusive is a bit more complicated 
than in the case of mutually exclusive events. Consider Figure 6.9, in which E and F overlap. 
The area of the colored region sE ø Fd is not the sum of the area of E and the area of F, because 
when the two individual areas are added, the area of the intersection sE > Fd is counted twice. 
Similarly, PsEd 1 PsFd includes PsE > Fd twice, so this intersection probability must then be 
subtracted from the sum to obtain PsE ø Fd. This reasoning leads to the general addition rule.
Figure  6.9
The colored region is PsE ø Fd, and 
PsE ø Fd ± PsEd 1 PsFd.
E
E and F
F
For any two events E and F,
   PsE ø F d 5 PsE d 1 PsF d 2 PsE > F d
General Addition Rule for Two Events
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.6   Some General Probability Rules 
●  325
When E and F are mutually exclusive, the general addition rule simplifies to the previous 
rule for mutually exclusive events. This is because when E and F are mutually exclusive, 
E > F contains no outcomes and PsE > Fd 5 0. The general addition rule can be used to 
determine any one of the four probabilities PsEd, PsFd, PsE > Fd, or PsE ø Fd provided 
that the other three probabilities are known.
Example 6.22 
Cable Services
Suppose that 60% of all customers of a large cable company subscribe to Internet service, 
40% subscribe to phone service, and 25% have both types of services. If a customer is se-
lected at random, what is the probability that he or she has at least one of these two types 
of service? We can define the following events:
E 5 event that a selected customer has Internet service
F 5 event that a selected customer has phone service
The given information implies that
PsEd 5 .60 PsFd 5 .40 PsE > Fd 5 .25
from which we obtain
Pscustomer has at least one of the two types of servicesd
 
5 PsE ø Fd
 
5 PsEd 1 PsFd 2 PsE > Fd
 
5 .60 1 .40 2 .25
 
5 .75
The event that the customer has neither type of service is sE ø FdC, so
Pscustomer has neither type of serviced 5 1 2 PsE ø Fd 5 .25
Now let’s determine the probability that the selected customer has exactly one type of service. 
Referring to the Venn diagram in Figure 6.10, we see that the event at least one can be thought 
of as consisting of two mutually exclusive parts: exactly one and both. This means that
 PsE ø Fd 5 Psat least oned
	
5 Psexactly one ø  bothd
	
5 Psexactly oned 1 Psbothd
	
5 Psexactly oned 1 PsE > Fd
It follows that
Psexactly oned 5 PsE ø Fd 2 PsE > Fd
	
5 .75 2 .25
	
5 .50
Understand the context ❭
Do the work ❭
	
■
Figure  6.10
Representing PsE ø Fd as the union of 
two mutually exclusive events.
5
The general addition rule for more than two events is rather complicated. For example, 
in the case of three events,
PsE ø F ø Gd 5 PsEd 1 PsFd 1 PsGd 2 PsE > Fd 2 PsE > Gd
	
	
 2 PsF > Gd 1 PsE > F > Gd
For more than three events, you should consult a book with more extensive coverage of 
probability.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

326 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
General Multiplication Rule
In Section 6.4, we used the formula
PsEuFd 5 PsE > Fd
PsFd
to compute conditional probabilities when PsE > Fd is known. Sometimes, however, con-
ditional probabilities are known or can be estimated. When this is the case, they can be 
used to calculate the probability of the intersection of two events. 
Multiplying both sides of the conditional probability formula by PsFd gives a useful 
expression for the probability that both events E and F will ­occur.
For any two events E and F,
   PsE > F d 5 PsEuF dPsF d
General Multiplication Rule for Two Events
Example 6.23 
Traffic School
Suppose that 20% of all teenage drivers in a certain county received a citation for a moving 
violation in 2014. Also suppose that 80% of those receiving such a citation attended traf-
fic school so that the citation would not appear on their driving record. If a teenage driver 
from this county is randomly selected, what is the probability that he or she received a 
citation and attended traffic school?
Let’s define two events E and F as follows:
E 5 selected driver attended traffic school
F 5 selected driver received such a citation
The question posed can then be answered by calculating PsE > Fd. The percentages given 
in the problem imply that 
	
   PsFd 5 .20 
and  PsEuFd 5 .80. 
Notice the difference between PsEd, which is the proportion in the entire population who 
attended traffic school (not given), and PsEuFd, which is the proportion of those receiving a 
citation that attended traffic school. Using the multiplication rule, we calculate
PsE and Fd 5 PsEuFdPsFd
	
5 s.80ds.20d
	
5 .16
This means that 16% of all teenage drivers in this county received a citation and attended 
traffic school.	
■
Example 6.24 
DVD Player Warranties
The following table gives information on DVD players sold by a large electronics store:
Percentage  
of Customers 
Purchasing
Of Those Who Purchase, 
Percentage Who Purchase 
Extended Warranty
Brand 1
70
20
Brand 2
30
40
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.6   Some General Probability Rules 
●  327
Suppose a purchaser is randomly selected from among all those who bought a DVD player 
from this store. What is the probability that the selected customer purchased a Brand 1 
model and an extended warranty?
To answer this question, we first define the following events:
B1 5 event that Brand 1 is purchased
B2 5 event that Brand 2 is purchased
   E 5 event that an extended warranty is purchased
The information in the table implies that
	
	
      PsBrand 1 purchasedd 5 PsB1d 5 .70
Psextended warrantyuBrand 1 purchasedd 5 PsEuB1d 5 .20
Notice that the 20% is iden­tified with a conditional probability. Among purchasers of Brand 1,  
this is the percentage opting for an extended warranty. Substituting these numbers into the 
general multiplication rule yields
 PsB1 and Ed 5 PsEuB1dPsB1d
	
   
5 s.20ds.70d
	
   
5 .14
The tree diagram of Figure 6.11 gives a nice visual display of how the general multi-
plication rule is used here. The two first-generation branches are labeled with events B1 
and B2 along with their probabilities. Two second-generation branches ­extend from each 
first-generation branch. These correspond to the two events E and not E. The conditional 
probabilities PsEuB1d, Psnot EuB1d, PsEuB2d, and Psnot EuB2d, ­appear on these branches. Ap-
plication of the multiplication rule then consists of multiplying probabilities along the 
branches of the tree diagram. For ­example,
 PsBrand 2 and warranty purchasedd 5 PsB2 and Ed
	
	
	
	
      5 PsB2 > Ed
	
	
	
	
      5 PsEuB2dPsB2d
	
	
	
	
      5 s.4ds.3d
	
	
	
	
      5 .12
and this probability is displayed to the right of the E branch that comes from the B2 branch.
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Figure  6.11
A tree diagram for the probability  
calculations of Example 6.24.
.7
.2
.8
.4
.6
.3
E
E
Not E
Not E
B1
B2
.7 3 .2 5 .14 5 P(B1 and E)
.3 3 .4 5 .12 5 P(B2 and E)
.3 3 .6 5 .18
.7 3 .8 5 .56
We can now easily calculate PsEd, the probability that an extended warranty is purchased. 
The event E can occur in two different ways: Buy Brand 1 and warranty, or buy Brand 2 and 
warranty. Symbolically, these events are B1 > E and B2 > E. Furthermore, if each customer 
purchased a single DVD player, he or she could not have simultaneously purchased both 
Brand 1 and Brand 2, so the two events B1 > E and B2 > E are mutually exclusive.
It follows that
PsEd 5 PsB1 > Ed 1 PsB2 > Ed
	
5 PsEuB1dPsB1d 1 PsEuB2dPsB2d
	
5 s.2ds.7d 1 s.4ds.3d
	
5 .14 1 .12
	
5 .26
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

328 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
This probability is the sum of two of the probabilities shown on the right-hand side of 
the tree diagram. This means that 26% of all DVD player purchasers selected an extended 
warranty.	
■
The general multiplication rule can be extended to give an expression for the probability 
that several events occur together. In the case of three events E, F, and G, we have
PsE > F > Gd 5 PsEuF > GdPsFuGdPsGd
When the events are all independent, PsEuF > Gd 5 PsEd and PsFuGd 5 PsFd so the right-
hand side of the equation for PsE > F > Gd simplifies to the product of the three uncon-
ditional probabilities.
Example 6.25 
Lost Luggage
Twenty percent of all passengers who fly from Los Angeles (LA) to New York (NY) do so on 
Airline G. This airline misplaces luggage for 10% of its passengers, and 90% of this lost lug-
gage is subsequently recovered. If a passenger who has flown from LA to NY is randomly 
selected, what is the probability that the selected individual flew on Airline G (event G), had 
luggage misplaced (event F), and subsequently recovered the misplaced luggage (event E)? 
The given information implies that
PsGd 5 .20 PsFuGd 5 .10 PsEuF > Gd 5 .90
Then
PsE > F > Gd 5 PsEuF > GdPsFuGdPsGd 5 s.90ds.10ds.20d 5 .018
This means that about 1.8% of passengers fly­ing from LA to NY fly on Airline G, have their 
luggage misplaced, and subsequently recover the lost luggage.	
■
Law of Total Probability
Let’s reconsider the information on DVD player sales from Example 6.24. In this ­example, 
the following events were defined:
B1 5 event that Brand 1 is purchased
B2 5 event that Brand 2 is purchased
 ​E 5 event that an extended warranty is purchased
Based on the information given in Example 6.24, the following probabilities are known:
PsB1d 5 .7 PsB2d 5 .3 PsEuB1d 5 .2 PsEuB2d 5 .4
Notice that the conditional probabilities PsEuB1d and PsEuB2d are known but that the uncon-
ditional probability PsEd is not known.
To find PsEd we noted that the event E can occur in two ways: 
(1) A customer purchases an extended warranty and buys Brand 1 sE > B1d; or 
(2) a customer purchases an extended warranty and buys Brand 2 sE > B2d. 
Because these are the only ways in which E can occur, we can write the event E as
E 5 sE > B1d ø sE > B2d
The two events sE > B1d and sE > B2d are mutually exclusive (since B1 and B2 are mutually 
exclusive), so using the addition rule for mutually exclusive events gives
PsEd 5 PssE > B1d ø sE > B2dd
     5 PsE > B1d 1 PsE > B2d
Finally, using the general multiplication rule to evaluate PsE > B1d and PsE > B2d ­results in
PsEd 5 PsE > B1d 1 PsE > B2d
      5 PsEuB1dPsB1d 1 PsEuB2dPsB2d
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.6   Some General Probability Rules 
●  329
Substituting in the known probabilities gave
 PsEd 5 PsEuB1dPsB1d 1 PsEuB2dPsB2d
        5 s.2ds.7d 1 s.4ds.3d
        5 .26
We concluded that 26% of the DVD player customers purchased an ­extended warranty.
As we have just illustrated, when conditional probabilities are known, they can some-
times be used to compute unconditional probabilities. The law of total probability 
formalizes this use of conditional probabilities.
If B1 and B2 are mutually exclusive events with PsB1d 1 PsB2d 5 1, then for 
any event E
    PsE d 5 PsE > B1d 1 PsE > B2d
         5 PsE uB1dPsB1d 1 PsE uB2dPsB2d 
More generally, if B1, B2, … , Bk are mutually exclusive events with  
PsB1d 1 PsB2d 1 Á 1  PsBkd 5 1, then for any event E
    PsE d 5 PsE > B1d 1 PsE > B2d 1 Á 1 PsE > Bkd
         5 PsE uB1dPsB1d 1 PsE uB2dPsB2d 1 Á 1 PsE uBkdPsBkd 
The Law of Total Probability
Example 6.26 
Which Way to Jump?
The paper “Action Bias among Elite Soccer Goalkeepers: The Case of Penalty Kicks” (Journal of 
Economic Psychology [2007]: 606–621) presents an interesting analysis of 286 penalty kicks 
in televised championship soccer games from around the world. In a penalty kick, the only 
players involved are the kicker and the goalkeeper from the opposing team. The kicker 
tries to kick a ball into the goal from a point located 11 meters away. The goalkeeper tries 
to block the ball from reaching the goal. 
For each penalty kick analyzed, the researchers recorded the direction that the goalkeeper 
moved (jumped to the left, stayed in the center, or jumped to the right) and whether or not 
the penalty kick was successfully blocked.
Consider the following events:
L ​5 ​the event that the goalkeeper jumps to the left
C ​5 ​the event that the goalkeeper stays in the center
R ​5 ​the event that the goalkeeper jumps to the right
B ​5 ​the event that the penalty kick is blocked
Based on an analysis of the penalty kicks, the authors of the paper gave the following prob-
ability estimates:
PsBuLd 5 .142	 	
PsBuCd 5 .333	
	
PsBuRd 5 .126
   PsLd 5 .493	 	
   PsCd 5 .063	
	
   PsRd 5 .444
What proportion of penalty kicks were blocked? We can use the law of total probability to 
answer this question. Here, the three events L, C, and R play the role of B1, B2, and B3 and 
B plays the role of E in the formula for the law of total probability.
Substituting into the formula, we get
 PsBd 5 PsB > Ld 1 PsB > Cd 1 PsB > Rd
       5 PsBuLdPsLd 1 PsBuCdPsCd 1 PsBuRdPsRd
       5 s.142ds.493d 1 s.333ds.063d 1 s.126ds.444d
       5 .070 1 .021 1 .056
       5 .147
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Do the work ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

330 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
This means that only 14.7% of penalty kicks were successfully blocked. Two other interest-
ing findings of this study were
1.	The direction that the goalkeeper moves appears to be independent of whether the 
kicker kicked the ball to the left, center, or right of the goal. This was attributed 
to the fact that goalkeepers have to choose their action before they can clearly 
observe the direction of the kick.
2.	Based on the three conditional probabilities—PsBuLd 5 .142, PsBuCd 5 .333, and 
PsBuRd 5 .126—the optimal strategy for a goalkeeper appears to be to stay in the 
center of the goal. However, staying in the center was only chosen 6.3% of the 
time—much less often that jumping left or right. The authors believe that this is 
because a goalkeeper does not feel as bad about not successfully blocking a kick if 
some action (jumping left or right) is taken compared to if no action (staying in the 
center) is taken. This is the “action bias” referred to in the title of the paper.	 
■
Bayes’ Rule
We conclude our discussion of probability rules by considering a formula discovered by the 
Reverend Thomas Bayes (1702–1761), an English Presbyterian minister. He discovered what is 
now known as Bayes’ rule (or Bayes’ theorem). Bayes’ rule is a solution to what Bayes called the 
converse problem. To see what he meant by this, we return to the field of medical diagnosis.
Example 6.27 
Lyme Disease
Lyme disease is the leading tick-borne disease in the United States and Europe. ­Diagnosis of 
the disease is diffi­cult and is aided by a test that detects particular antibodies in the blood. 
The article “Laboratory Considerations in the Diagnosis and Management of Lyme Borreliosis” 
(American Journal of Clinical Pathology [1993]: 168–174) used the following notation:
1  represents a positive result on the blood test
2  represents a negative result on the blood test
L      represents the event that the patient actually has Lyme disease
LC      represents the event that the patient actually does not have Lyme disease
The following probabilities were reported in the article:
Probability
Interpretation
PsLd 5 .00207
The prevalence of Lyme disease in the population. About .207% of the population 
actually has Lyme disease.
PsLC d 5 .99793
99.793% of the population does not have Lyme disease.
Ps1uLd 5 .937
93.7% of those with Lyme disease test positive.
Ps2uLd 5 .063
6.3% of those with Lyme disease test negative.
Ps1uLC d 5 .03
3% of those who do not have Lyme disease test positive.
Ps2uLC d 5 .97
97% of those who do not have Lyme disease test ­negative.
Notice the form of the known conditional probabilities. For example, Ps1uLd is the prob-
ability of a positive test given that a person selected at random from the population actually 
has Lyme disease. Bayes’ converse problem poses a question of a different form: Given 
that a person tests positive for the disease, what is the probability that he or she actually 
has Lyme disease? This converse problem is the one that is of primary interest in medical 
diagnosis problems.
Bayes reasoned as follows to obtain the answer to the converse problem of find­ing PsLu1d. 
We know from the defini­tion of conditional probability that
PsLu1d 5 PsL > 1d
Ps1d
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.6   Some General Probability Rules 
●  331
Because PsL > 1d 5 Ps1 > Ld, we can use the general multiplication rule to get
PsL > 1d 5 Ps1 > Ld 5 Ps1uLdPsLd
This helps, because both Ps1uLd and P(L)are known. We now have
PsLu1d 5 Ps1uLdPsLd
Ps1d
The denominator P(1) can be evaluated using the law of total probability, because L and 
LC are mutually exclusive with P(L) 1 P(LC) 5 1. Applying the law of total probability to 
the denominator, we obtain
Ps1d 5 Ps1 > Ld 1 Ps1 > LCd
	
 5 Ps1uLdPsLd 1 Ps1uLCdPsLCd
We now have all we need to answer the converse problem:
 PsLu1d 5
Ps1uLdPsLd
Ps1uLdPsLd 1 Ps1uLCdPsLCd
	
 5
s.937ds.00207d
s.937ds.00207d 1 s.03ds.99793d
	
5 .0019
.0319
	
5 .0596 
The probability PsLu1d is a conditional probability. PsLu1d 5 .0596 means that, in the long 
run, only 5.96% of those who test positive actually have the disease. Notice the difference 
between PsLu1d and the previously reported conditional probability Ps1uLd 5 .937, which 
means that 93.7% of those with Lyme disease test positive.	
■
The accompanying box formalizes this reasoning in the statement of Bayes’ rule.
If B1 and B2 are mutually exclusive events with PsB1d 1 PsB2d 5 1, then for 
any event E
   PsB1uE d 5
PsE uB1dPsB1d
PsE uB1dPsB1d 1 PsE uB2dPsB2d
More generally, if B1, B2, … , Bk are mutually exclusive events with 
PsB1d 1 PsB2d 1 Á 1  PsBkd 5 1 then for any event E,
   PsBiuE d 5
PsE uBidPsBid
PsE uB1dPsB1d 1 PsE uB2dPsB2d 1 Á 1 PsE uBkdPsBkd
Bayes’ Rule
Example 6.28 
Internet Addiction
Internet addiction has been defined by researchers as a disorder characterized by exces-
sive time and effort spent on the Internet, impaired judgment and decision-making ability, 
social withdrawal, and depression. The paper “The Association between Aggressive Behav-
iors and Internet Addiction and Online Activities in Adolescents” (Journal of Adolescent Health 
[2009]: 598–605) reported on a study of more than 9400 adolescents. 
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

332 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
Each participant in the study was assessed using the Chen Internet Addiction Scale to 
determine if he or she suffered from Internet addiction. The following statements are based 
on the survey results:
1.	51.8% of the study participants were female and 48.2% were male.
2.	13.1% of the females suffered from Internet addiction.
3.	24.8% of the males suffered from Internet addiction.
Consider the chance experiment that consists of selecting a study participant at random. 
Let’s define the following events:
  F ​5 ​the event that the selected participant is female
  M ​5 ​the event that the selected participant is male
     I ​5 ​the event that the selected participant suffers from Internet addiction
The three statements from the paper define the following probabilities:
PsFd 5 .518	
PsMd 5 .482
PsIuFd 5 .131	 PsIuMd 5 .248
Suppose that we want to know the proportion of those who suffer from Internet addiction 
who are female. This is equivalent to PsFuId.
Notice that we know PsIuFd but not PsFuId. We can use Bayes’ rule to evaluate PsFuId as 
follows (with F and M playing the role of B1 and B2 and I playing the role of E in the formula 
for Bayes’ rule):
PsFuId 5
PsIuFdPsFd
PsIuFdPsFd 1 PsIuMdPsMd
	
 5
s.131ds.518d
s.131ds.518d 1 s.482ds.248d
	
 5
.068
.068 1 .120
	
 5 068
.188
	
5 .362
This tells us that 36.2% of those who suffered from Internet addiction were female.	
■
Consider the data ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
exercises 6.59 - 6.77
6.59	 ▼ A certain university has 10 vehicles available for 
use by faculty and staff. Six of these are vans and 
four are cars. On a particular day, only two requests 
for vehicles have been made. Suppose that the two 
vehicles to be assigned are chosen in a completely 
random fashion from among the 10.
a.	 Let E denote the event that the first vehicle as-
signed is a van. What is PsEd? 
b.	Let F denote the event that the second vehicle 
­assigned is a van. What is PsFuEd? 
c.	 Use the results of Parts (a) and (b) to calculate 
PsE and Fd (Hint: See Example 6.23.) 
6.60	 A construction firm bids on two different contracts. 
Let E1 be the event that the bid on the first contract is 
successful, and define E2 analogously for the second 
contract. Suppose that P(E1) 5 .4 and P(E2) 5 .3 and 
that E1 and E2 are independent events.
a.	 Calculate the probability that both bids are success-
ful (the probability of the event E1 and E2). 
b.	Calculate the probability that neither bid is success-
ful (the probability of the event (not E1) and (not E2)). 
c.	 What is the probability that the firm is success-
ful in at least one of the two bids? (Hint: See 
Example 6.22.) 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.6   Some General Probability Rules 
●  333
6.61	 There are two traffic lights on the route used by a 
certain individual to go from home to work. Let E 
denote the event that the individual must stop at the 
first light, and define the event F in a similar manner 
for the second light. Suppose that PsEd 5 .4,  
PsFd 5 .3, and PsE > Fd 5 .15.
a.	 What is the probability that the individual must 
stop at at least one light; that is, what is the prob-
ability of the event E ø F? 
b.	What is the probability that the individual doesn’t 
have to stop at either light? 
c.	 What is the probability that the individual must 
stop at exactly one of the two lights? 
d.	What is the probability that the individual must 
stop just at the first light? (Hint: How is the prob-
ability of this event related to PsEd and PsE > Fd? 
A Venn diagram might help.) 
6.62	 Let F denote the event that a randomly selected 
registered voter in a certain city has signed a peti-
tion to recall the mayor. Also, let E denote the event 
that the randomly selected registered voter actually 
votes in the recall election. Describe the event E > F 
in words. If PsFd 5 .10 and PsEuFd 5 .80, determine 
PsE > Fd. 
6.63	 According to a July 31, 2013, posting on cnn.com, 
a 2010 study in the journal Pediatrics found that 8% 
of children younger than age 18 in the United States 
have at least one food allergy. Among those with  
food allergies, about 39% had a history of severe 
reaction.
a.	 If a child younger than 18 is randomly selected, 
what is the probability that he or she has at 
least one food allergy and has a history of severe 
reaction? 
b.	It was also reported that 30% of those with an 
allergy in fact are allergic to multiple foods. If a 
child younger than 18 is randomly selected, what 
is the probability that he or she is allergic to mul-
tiple foods?
6.64	 Blue Cab operates 15% of the taxis in a certain city, 
and Green Cab operates the other 85%. After a night-
time hit-and-run accident involving a taxi, an eyewit-
ness said the vehicle was blue. Suppose, though, that 
under night vision conditions, only 80% of individu-
als can correctly distinguish between a blue and a 
green vehicle. What is the probability that the taxi at 
fault was blue? (Hint: A tree diagram might help.)
6.65	 A large cable company reports the following:
●	 80% of its customers subscribe to cable TV service
●	 42% of its customers subscribe to Internet service
●	 32% of its customers subscribe to telephone service
●	 25% of its customers subscribe to both cable TV 
and Internet service
●	 21% of its customers subscribe to both cable TV 
and phone service
●	 23% of its customers subscribe to both Internet 
and phone service
●	 15% of its customers subscribe to all three  
services
Consider the chance experiment that consists of 
selecting one of the cable company customers at ran-
dom. Find and interpret the following probabilities:
a.	 P(cable TV only) 
b.	P(Internet | cable TV) 
c.	 P(exactly two services) 
d.	P(Internet and cable TV only) 
6.66	 Refer to the information given in the previous exer-
cise about customers of a large cable company.
a.	 Suppose two customers are to be selected at 
random. Would it be reasonable to consider the 
events C1 ​5 ​event that the first customer selected 
subscribes to cable TV and C2 ​5 event that the 
second customer selected subscribes to cable TV 
as independent events? Explain.
b.	With C1 and C2 as defined in Part (a), find 
PsC1 > C2d. 
6.67	 The authors of the paper “Do Physicians Know when 
Their Diagnoses Are Correct?” (Journal of General Inter-
nal Medicine [2005]: 334–339) presented detailed case 
studies to medical students and to faculty at medical 
schools. Each participant was asked to provide a 
diagnosis in the case and also to indicate whether his 
or her confidence in the correctness of the diagnosis 
was high or low. Define the events C, I, and H as 
follows:
C ​5 ​event that diagnosis is correct
    I ​5 event that diagnosis is incorrect
      H ​5 ​event that confidence in the correctness of the 
diagnosis is high
a.	 Data appearing in the paper were used to estimate 
the following probabilities for medical students:
  PsCd 5 .261	
	
PsId 5 .739
  PsHuCd 5 .375	 	
PsHuId 5 .073
Use Bayes’ rule to compute the probability of a cor-
rect diagnosis given that the student’s confidence 
level in the correctness of the diagnosis is high. 
b.	Data from the paper were also used to estimate the 
following probabilities for medical school faculty:
  PsCd 5 .495	
	
PsId 5 .505
  PsHuCd 5 .537	 	
PsHuId 5 .252
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

334 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
Compute PsCuHd for medical school faculty. How 
does the value of this probability compare to the 
value of PsCuHd for students computed in Part (a)? 
6.68	 A study of how people are using online services 
for medical consulting is described in the paper 
“Internet Based Consultation to Transfer Knowledge 
for Patients Requiring Specialized Care” (British Medical 
Journal [2003]: 696–699). Patients using a particular 
online site could request any combination of three 
services: specialist opinion, assessment of imaging 
studies (such as X-ray and MRI), and assessment of 
pathology results. 
The accompanying table shows the combinations 
of services that were requested by 79 patients in their 
online consultations. 
Combination of Services Provided
Number of 
Patients
Specialist opinion only
37
Assessment of pathology results only
  1
Specialist opinion and assessment of 
pathology results only
11
Specialist opinion and assessment of imaging 
studies only
14
Specialist opinion, assessment of imaging 
studies, and assessment of pathology results
16
For a randomly selected patient from this study, 
define the events O, I, and A as follows:
O ​5 ​event that the online consultation involves a 
specialist opinion
  I ​5 ​event that the online consultation involves the 
assessment of imaging studies
 A ​5 ​event that the online consultation involves the 
assessment of pathology results
Use the given information to find the following prob-
abilities:
a.	 PsOd 
b.	Psnot Ad 
c.	 PsO > Id 
d.	PsIuOd 
e.	 PsOuId 
6.69	 The report “Twitter in Higher Education: Usage Habits 
and Trends of Today’s College Faculty” (Magna Publica-
tions, September 2009) describes results of a survey of 
nearly 2000 college faculty. The report indicates the 
following:
●	 30.7% reported that they use Twitter and 69.3% 
said that they did not use Twitter.
●	 Of those who use Twitter, 39.9% said they some-
times use Twitter to communicate with students.
●	 Of those who use Twitter, 27.5% said that they some-
times use Twitter as a learning tool in the classroom.
Consider the chance experiment that selects one of 
the study participants at random and define the fol-
lowing events:
T ​5 ​ ​event that selected faculty member uses Twitter
C 5 ​event that selected faculty member sometimes 
uses Twitter to communicate with students
L ​5 ​ ​event that selected faculty member sometimes 
uses Twitter as a learning tool in the classroom
a.	 Use the given information to determine the fol-
lowing probabilities:
i.	  PsTd 
ii.	 PsT Cd 
iii. PsCuTd 
iv.	 PsLuTd 
v.	  PsC > Td 
b.	Interpret each of the probabilities computed in 
Part (a).
c.	 What proportion of the faculty surveyed sometimes 
use Twitter to communicate with students? [Hint: 
Use the law of total probability to find P(C).]   
d.	What proportion of faculty surveyed sometimes use 
Twitter as a learning tool in the classroom? 
6.70	 The accompanying table summarizes data from 
a medical expenditures survey carried out by the 
National Center for Health Statistics (“Assessing the 
Effects of Race and Ethnicity on Use of Complementary 
and Alternative Therapies in the USA,” Ethnicity and 
Health [2005]: 19–32).
Use of Alternative Therapies by Education Level
Education Level
Percent Using  
Alternative Therapies
High school or less
  4.3%
College—1 to 4 years
  8.2%
College—5 years or more
11.0%
These percentages were based on data from 7320 
people whose education level was high school or less, 
4793 people with 1 to 4 years of college, and 1095 
people with 5 or more years of college.
a.	 Use the information given to determine the 
number of respondents falling into each of the 
six cells of the table below.
Uses Alternative 
Therapies
Does Not Use 
Alternative 
Therapies
Total
HS/less
7320
College: 1–4 yrs
4793
College: $5 yrs
1095
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.6   Some General Probability Rules 
●  335
b.	Construct a table of estimated probabilities by 
dividing the count in each of the six table cells by 
the total sample size, n ​5 ​13,208.
c.	 The authors of the study indicated that the sample 
was selected in a way that makes it reasonable to 
regard the estimated probabilities in the table from 
Part (b) as representative of the adult population 
in the United States. Use the information in that 
table to estimate the following probabilities for 
adults in the United States.
i.	 The probability that a randomly selected indi-
vidual has 5 or more years of college. 
ii.	The probability that a randomly selected indi-
vidual uses alternative therapies. 
iii.	The probability that a randomly selected indi-
vidual uses alternative therapies given that he 
or she has 5 or more years of college. 
iv.	The probability that a randomly selected indi-
vidual uses alternative therapies given that he 
or she has an education level of high school or 
less. 
v.	 The probability that a randomly selected in-
dividual who uses alternative therapies has an 
education level of high school or less. 
vi.	The probability that a randomly selected 
individual with some college uses alternative 
therapies. 
d.	Are the events H ​5 ​event that a randomly selected 
individual has an education level of high school 
or less and A ​5 ​event that a randomly selected 
individual uses alternative therapies independent 
events? Explain. 
6.71	 Suppose that we define the following events: 
C 5 event that a randomly selected driver is 
observed to be using a cell phone
A 5 event that a randomly selected driver is 
observed driving a passenger automobile
V 5 event that a randomly selected driver is 
observed driving a van or SUV
T 5 event that a randomly selected driver is observed 
driving a pickup truck
Based on the article “Three Percent of Drivers on 
Hand-Held Cell Phones at Any Given Time” (San Luis 
Obispo Tribune, July 24, 2001), the following probabil-
ity estimates are reasonable: 
       PsCd 5 .03
PsCuAd 5 .026 
PsCuVd 5 .048 
PsCuTd 5 .019
Explain why PsCd is not just the average of the three 
given conditional probabilities.
6.72	 The article “Checks Halt over 200,000 Gun Sales” 
(San Luis Obispo Tribune, June 5, 2000) reported that 
required background checks blocked 204,000 gun 
sales in 1999. The article also indicated that state and 
local police reject a higher percentage of would-be 
gun buyers than does the FBI, stating, 
“The FBI performed 4.5 million of the 8.6 million 
checks, compared with 4.1 million by state and local 
agencies. The rejection rate among state and ­local agen-
cies was 3%, compared with 1.8% for the FBI.”
Define the following events: 
F 5 event that a randomly selected gun purchase 
background check is performed by the FBI
S 5 event that a randomly selected gun purchase 
background check is performed by a state or 
local agency
R 5 event that a randomly selected gun purchase 
background check results in a blocked sale
a.	 Use the given information to estimate the follow-
ing probabilities:
i.	 PsFd 
ii.	PsSd 
iii.	PsRuFd 
iv.	PsRuSd 
b.	Use the probabilities from Part (a) to evaluate 
PsSuRd, and write a sentence interpreting this value 
in the context of this problem. 
6.73	 Radiologists are often asked to predict the gender of 
a baby from ultrasound images made during preg-
nancy. The authors of the paper “The Use of Three-
Dimensional Ultrasound for Fetal Gender Determination 
in the First Trimester” (The British Journal of Radiology, 
[2003]: 448–451) followed up on 159 predictions made 
by a particular radiologist (Radiologist 1) to determine 
whether or not they were correct. Data from the paper 
is summarized in the accompanying table.
Radiologist 1
Predicted  
Male
Predicted  
Female
Baby Is Male
74
12
Baby Is Female
14
59
a.	 Assuming that these data are representative of 
gender predictions made by Radiologist 1, esti-
mate the probability that a gender prediction is 
correct, given that the baby is male.
b.	Assuming that these data are representative of 
gender predictions made by Radiologist 1, esti-
mate the probability that a gender prediction is 
correct, given that the baby is female.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

336 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
c.	 For Radiologist 1, is a gender prediction more 
likely to be correct if the baby is male? Explain.
d.	Estimate the probability that a gender prediction 
made by Radiologist 1 is correct.
6.74	 The paper referenced in the previous exercise also 
included data for a second radiologist, Radiologist 2. 
Based on the data from the previous exercise for 
Radiologist 1 and the data in the accompanying table 
for Radiologist 2, write a paragraph comparing the 
accuracy of gender predictions made by these two 
radiologists.
Radiologist 2
Predicted Male
Predicted 
Female
Baby Is Male
81
  8
Baby Is Female
  7
58
6.75	 In an article that appears on the web site of the 
American Statistical Association (www.amstat.org),  
Carlton Gunn, a public defender in Seattle, Washington, 
wrote about how he uses statistics in his work as an 
attorney. He states:
I personally have used statistics in trying to challenge 
the reliability of drug testing results. Suppose the chance 
of a mistake in the taking and processing of a urine 
sample for a drug test is just 1 in 100. And your client 
has a “dirty” (i.e., positive) test result. Only a 1 in 100 
chance that it could be wrong? Not necessarily. If the 
vast majority of all tests given—say 99 in 100—are truly 
clean, then you get one false dirty and one true dirty in 
every 100 tests, so that half of the dirty tests are false.
Define the following events as:
TD 5 event that the test ­result is dirty
TC   5 event that the test result is clean
    D 5 event that the person tested is actually dirty  
     C 5 event that the person tested is actually clean
a.	 Using the information in the quote, what are the  
values of
i.  ​PsTDuDd 	
iii.  ​PsCd 
ii.  ​PsTDuCd 	
iv.  ​PsDd 
b.	Use the law of total probability to find PsTDd. 
c.	 Use Bayes’ rule to evaluate PsCuTDd. Is this value 
consistent with the argument given in the quote? 
Explain. 
6.76	 According to a study released by the federal Sub-
stance Abuse and Mental Health Services Admin-
istration (Knight Ridder Tribune, Sep­tem­ber 9, 1999), 
approximately 8% of all adult full-time workers are 
drug users and approximately 70% of adult drug 
users are employed full-time.
a.	 Is it possible for both of the reported percentages 
to be correct? Explain.
b.	Define the events D and E as D 5 event that a 
randomly selected adult is a drug user and E  5 
event that a randomly selected adult is employed 
full-time. What are the estimated values of PsDuEd 
and PsEuDd? 
c.	 Is it possible to determine P(D), the probability 
that a randomly selected adult is a drug user, from 
the information given? If not, what additional 
information would be needed?
6.77	 Only 0.1% of the individuals in a certain population  
have a particular disease (an incidence rate of .001). 
Of those who have the disease, 95% test positive 
when a certain diagnostic test is applied. Of those 
who do not have the disease, 90% test negative 
when the test is applied. Suppose that an individual 
from this population is randomly selected and given 
the test.
a.	 Construct a tree diagram having two first-generation 
branches, for has disease and doesn’t have disease, 
and two second-generation branches leading out 
from each of these, for positive test and negative 
test. Then enter appropriate probabilities on the 
four branches.
b.	Use the general multiplication rule to calculate 
 P(has disease and positive test). 
c.	 Calculate P(positive test). 
d.	Calculate P(has disease u positive test). Does the 
result surprise you? Give an intuitive explanation 
for why this probability is small.
 6.7  
Estimating Probabilities Empirically Using Simulation
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
In the examples presented so far, reaching conclusions required knowledge of the prob-
abilities of various outcomes. In some cases, this is reasonable, and we know the actual 
long-run proportion of the time that each outcome will occur. In other situations, these 
probabilities are not known. Sometimes probabilities can be determined analytically, by 
using mathematical rules and probability properties, including the basic ones introduced 
in this chapter. However, when an analytical approach is impossible, impractical, or just 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.7   Estimating Probabilities Empirically Using Simulation 
●  337
beyond the limited probability tools of the intro­ductory course, we can estimate probabili-
ties empirically through observation or by simulation.
Estimating Probabilities Empirically
It is fairly common practice to use observed long-run proportions to estimate probabilities. 
The process of estimating probabilities empirically is simple:
1.	Observe a very large number of chance outcomes under controlled circumstances.
2.	Estimate the probability of an event to be the observed proportion of occurrence 
by appealing to the interpretation of probability as a long-run relative frequency 
and to the law of large numbers.
This process is illustrated in Examples 6.29 and 6.30.
Example 6.29 
Fair Hiring Practices
The Biology Department at a university plans to recruit a new faculty member and intends 
to advertise for someone with a Ph.D. in biology and at least 10 years of college-level 
teaching experience. A member of the department expresses the belief that the experience 
requirement will exclude many potential applicants and will exclude far more female ap-
plicants than male applicants. The Biology Department would like to determine the prob-
ability that an applicant with a Ph.D. in biology would be eliminated from consideration 
because of the experience requirement.
A similar university just completed a search in which there was no requirement for prior 
teaching experience, but the information about prior teaching experience was recorded. 
The 410 applications yielded the following data:
Number of Applicants
Less Than  
10 Years of 
Experience
10 Years of  
Experience  
or More
Total
Male
178
112
290
Female
  ​99
  ​21
120
Total
277
133
410
Let’s assume that the populations of applicants for the two positions can be regarded 
as the same. We can use the available information to approximate the probability that an 
applicant will fall into each of the four gender–experience combinations.
The estimated probabilities (obtained by dividing the number of applicants for each 
gender–experience combination by 410) are given in Table 6.1. From Table 6.1, the estimate 
of P(candidate excluded because of the experience requirement) 5 .4341 1 .2415 5 .6756.
Table 6.1  Estimated Probabilities for Example 6.29
Less Than  
10 Years of  
Experience
10 Years of  
Experience  
or More
Male
.4341
.2732
Female
.2415
.0512
We can also assess the impact of the experience requirement separately for male and for 
female applicants. From the given information, the proportion of male ­applicants who have 
less than 10 years of experience is 178/290 5 .6138, whereas the corresponding propor-
tion for females is 99/120 5 .8250. Therefore, approximately 61% of the male applicants 
would be eliminated by the experience requirement, and about 83% of the female appli-
cants would be eliminated.
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

338 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
These subgroup proportions—.6138 for males and .8250 for females—are estimates 
of conditional probabilities, which show how the original probability changes in light of 
new information. In this example, the probability that a potential candidate has less than 
10 years of experience is .6756, but this probability changes to .8250 if we know that a 
candidate is female. These probabilities can be expressed as
P(less than 10 years of experience) 5 .6756  (an unconditional probability)
and
Psless than 10 years of experienceufemaled 5 .8250 sa conditional probabilityd	
■
Example 6.30 
Who Has the Upper Hand?
Men and women frequently express intimacy through the simple act of holding hands. 
Some researchers have suggested that hand-holding is not only an expression of intimacy 
but also communicates status differences. For two people to hold hands, one must assume 
an overhand grip and one an underhand grip. Research in this area has shown that it is 
predominantly the male who assumes the overhand grip. 
In the view of some investigators, the overhand grip is seen to imply status or superior-
ity. The authors of the paper “Men and Women Holding Hands: Whose Hand Is Uppermost?” 
(Perceptual and Motor Skills [1999]: 537–549) investigated an alternative explanation—perhaps 
the positioning of hands is a function of the heights of the individuals. Because men, on 
average, tend to be taller than women, maybe comfort, not status, dictates the positioning. 
Investigators at two separate universities observed hand-holding male–female pairs and 
recorded the data in the accompanying table.
Number of Hand-Holding Couples
Sex of Person with  
Uppermost Hand
Male
Female
Total
Man Taller
2149
299
2448
Equal Height
  780
246
1026
Woman Taller
  241
205
  446
Total
3170
750
3920
Assuming that these hand-holding couples are representative of hand-holding couples 
in general, we can use the available information to estimate various probabilities. For 
example, if a hand-holding couple is selected at random, then
estimate of P(man’s hand uppermost) 5 3170
3920 5 0.809
For a randomly selected hand-holding couple, if the man is taller, then the probability that 
the male has the uppermost hand is
2149/2448 5 0.878.
On the other hand—so to speak—if the woman is taller, the probability that the female has 
the uppermost hand is
205/446 5 0.460.
Notice that these are estimates of the conditional probabilities P(male uppermost u male 
taller) and P(female uppermost u female taller), respectively. Also, because P(male upper-
most u male taller) is not equal to P(male uppermost), the events male uppermost and male 
taller are not independent events. Even when the female is taller, the male is still more 
likely to have the upper hand!	
■
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.7   Estimating Probabilities Empirically Using Simulation 
●  339
Estimating Probabilities Using Simulation
Simulation provides a way to estimate probabilities when we are unable to determine prob-
abilities analytically and when it is impractical to estimate them empirically by observation. 
Simulation is a method that generates “observations” by performing a chance experiment 
that is as similar as possible in structure to the real situation of interest.
To illustrate the idea of simulation, consider the situation in which a professor wishes to 
estimate the probabilities of different possible scores on a 20-question true–false quiz when 
students are just guessing at the answers. Because each question is a true–false question, a 
person who is guessing should be equally likely to answer correctly or incorrectly on any 
given question. 
Rather than asking a guessing student to select true or false and then comparing the 
choice to the correct answer, an equivalent process would be to pick a ball at random 
from a box that contains half red balls and half blue balls, with a blue ball representing a 
correct answer. Making 20 selections from the box (with replacement) and then counting 
the number of correct choices (the number of times a blue ball is selected) is a physical 
substitute for an observation from a student who has guessed at the answers to 20 true–
false questions. Any particular number of blue balls in 20 selections should have the same 
probability as the same number of correct responses to the quiz when a student is guessing.
For example, 20 selections of balls might produce the following results:
Selection      ​1      ​2      ​3      ​4      ​5      ​6      ​7      ​8      ​9    10
	
          ​R        ​R        ​B      ​R      ​B      ​B      ​R      ​R      ​R       B
Selection    11    12    13    14    15    16    17    18    19    20
	
          ​R      ​R      ​B      ​R      ​R      ​B      ​B      ​R      ​R     B
Because 8 of the 20 selections resulted in a blue ball, this would correspond to a quiz with 
eight correct responses, and it would provide us with one observation for estimating the 
probabilities of interest. This process could then be repeated a large number of times to 
generate additional observations. For example, we might find the following:
Repetition
Number of  
“Correct” Responses
1
  8
2
11
3
10
4
12
 
Á
 
Á
1000
11
The 1000 simulated quiz scores could then be used to construct a table of estimated prob-
abilities.
Taking this many balls out of a box and writing down the results would be cumbersome 
and tedious. The process can be sim­plified by using random digits to substitute for draw-
ing balls from the box. For example, a single digit could be selected at random from the 
10 digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. When using random digits, each of the 10 possibilities 
is equally likely to occur, so we can use the even digits (including 0) to indicate a correct 
response and the odd digits to indicate an incorrect ­response. This would maintain the 
important property that a correct response and an incorrect response are equally likely, 
because correct and incorrect are each represented by 5 of the 10 digits.
To aid in carrying out such a simulation, tables of random digits (such as Appendix A 
Table 1) or computer-generated random digits can be used. The numbers in Appendix A 
Table 1 were generated using a computer’s random number generator. 
To see how a table of random numbers can be used to carry out a simulation, let’s 
reconsider the quiz example. We use a random digit to represent the guess on a single ques-
tion, with an even digit representing a correct response. A series of 20 digits represents the 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

340 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
answers to the 20 quiz questions. We pick an arbitrary starting point in ­Appendix A Table 1. 
Suppose that we start at row 10 and take the 20 digits in a row to represent one quiz. The 
first five “quizzes” and the corresponding number correct (number of even digits) are:
Quiz
Random Digits
Number Correct
1
9  ​4  ​6  ​0  ​6  ​9  ​7  ​8  ​8  ​2  ​5  ​2  ​9  ​6  ​0  ​1  ​4  ​6  ​0  ​5
13
2
6  ​6  ​9  ​5  ​7  ​4  ​4  ​6  ​3  ​2  ​0  ​6  ​0  ​8  ​9  ​1  ​3  ​6  ​1  ​8
12
3
0  ​7  ​1  ​7  ​7  ​7  ​2  ​9  ​7  ​8  ​7  ​5  ​8  ​8  ​6  ​9  ​8  ​4  ​1  ​0
  ​9
4
6  ​1  ​3  ​0  ​9  ​7  ​3  ​3  ​6  ​6  ​0  ​4  ​1  ​8  ​3  ​2  ​6  ​7  ​6  ​8
11
5
2  ​2  ​3  ​6  ​2  ​1  ​3  ​0  ​2  ​2  ​6  ​6  ​9  ​7  ​0  ​2  ​1  ​2  ​5  ​8
13
This process would be repeated to generate a large number of observations, which would 
then be used to construct a table of estimated probabilities.
The method for generating observations must preserve the important characteristics of 
the actual process being considered if simulation is to be successful. For example, it would 
be easy to adapt the simulation procedure for the true–false quiz to one for a multiple-
choice quiz. Suppose that each of the 20 questions on the quiz has five possible responses, 
only one of which is correct. For any particular question, we would expect a student to be 
able to guess the correct answer only one-fifth of the time in the long run. 
To simulate this situation, we could select at random from a box that contained four red 
balls and only one blue ball (or, more generally, four times as many red balls as blue balls). 
If we are using random digits for the simulation, we could use 0 and 1 to represent a correct 
response and 2, 3, Á , 9 to represent an incorrect ­response.
1.	 Design a method that uses a random mechanism (such as a random num-
ber generator or table, the selection of a ball from a box, the toss of a coin, 
etc.) to represent an observation. Be sure that the important characteristics 
of the actual process are preserved.
2.	 Generate an observation using the method from Step 1, and determine 
whether the outcome of interest has occurred.
3.	 Repeat Step 2 a large number of times.
4.	 Calculate the estimated probability by dividing the number of observa-
tions for which the outcome of interest occurred by the total number of 
observations generated.
Using Simulation to Approximate a Probability
The simulation process is illustrated in Examples 6.31–6.33.
Example 6.31 
Building Permits
Many California cities limit the number of building permits that are issued each year. Because 
of limited water resources, one such city plans to issue permits for only 10 dwelling units in 
the upcoming year. The city will decide who is to receive permits by holding a lottery. 
Suppose that you are one of 39 individuals who apply for permits. Thirty of these indi-
viduals are requesting permits for a single-family home, eight are requesting permits for 
a duplex (which counts as two dwelling units), and one person is requesting a permit for 
a small apartment building with eight units (which counts as eight dwelling units). Each 
request will be entered into the lottery. 
Requests will be selected at random one at a time, and if there are enough permits 
remaining, the request will be granted. This process will continue until all 10 permits 
have been issued. If your request is for a single-family home, what is the probability that 
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.7   Estimating Probabilities Empirically Using Simulation 
●  341
you receive a permit? We can use simulation to estimate this probability. (It is not easy to 
determine analytically.)
To carry out the simulation, we can view the requests as being numbered from  
1 to 39 as follows:
01–30    Requests for single-family homes
31–38    Requests for duplexes
39         Request for 8-unit apartment
For ease of discussion, let’s assume that your request is number 01.
One method for simulating the permit lottery consists of these three steps:
1.	Choose a random number between 01 and 39 to indicate which permit request is 
selected first, and grant this request.
2.	Select another random number between 01 and 39 to indicate which permit ­ 
request is considered next. Determine the number of dwelling units for the 
selected request. Grant the request only if there are enough permits remaining to 
satisfy the request.
3.	Repeat Step 2 until permits for 10 dwelling units have been granted.
We used Minitab to generate random numbers between 01 and 39 to imitate the lottery 
drawing. (The random number table in Appendix A Table 1 could also be used by select-
ing two digits and ignoring 00 and any value over 39.) The first sequence generated by 
Minitab was
Random  
Number
Type of Request
Total Number  
of Units So Far
25
Single-family home
  ​1
07
Single-family home
  ​2
38
Duplex
  ​4
31
Duplex
  ​6
26
Single-family home
  ​7
12
Single-family home
  ​8
33
Duplex
10
We would stop at this point, because permits for 10 units would have been issued. In this 
simulated lottery, Request 01 was not selected, so you would not have received a permit.
The next simulated lottery (using Minitab to generate the selections) was as ­follows:
Random  
Number
Type of Request
Total Number  
of Units So Far
38
Duplex
  ​2
16
Single-family home
  ​3
30
Single-family home
  ​4
39
Apartment—not granted, 
since there are not 
8 permits remaining
  ​4
14
Single-family home
  ​5
26
Single-family home
  ​6
36
Duplex
  ​8
13
Single-family home
  ​9
15
Single-family home
10
Again, Request 01 was not selected, so you would not have received a permit in this simu-
lated lottery.
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

342 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
Now that a strategy for simulating a lottery has been devised, the tedious part of the 
simulation begins. We would now simulate a large number of lottery drawings, determin-
ing for each one whether Request 01 was granted. We simulated 500 such drawings and 
found that Request 01 was selected in 85 of the lotteries. This results in
estimated probability of receiving a building permit 5 85
500 5 .17
■
Example 6.32 
One-Boy Family Planning
Suppose that couples who wanted children were to continue having children until  
a boy is born. Assuming that each newborn child is equally likely to be a boy or  
a girl, would this behavior change the proportion of boys in the population? This question 
was posed in an article that appeared in The American Statistician (“What Some Puzzling 
Problems Teach About the Theory of Simulation and the Use of Resampling” [1994]: 290–293), 
and many people answered the question incorrectly. 
We will use simulation to estimate the long-run proportion of boys in the population if 
families were to continue to have children until they have a boy. This proportion is an esti-
mate of the probability that a randomly selected child from this population is a boy. Notice 
that in this population, every sibling group would have exactly one boy.
We use a single-digit random number to represent a child. The odd digits (1, 3, 5, 7, 9) 
will represent a male birth, and the even digits will represent a female birth. An observa-
tion is constructed by selecting a sequence of random digits. If the first random number 
obtained is odd (a boy), the observation is complete. If the first selected number is even (a 
girl), another digit is chosen. We continue in this way until an odd digit is obtained. For 
example, reading across row 15 of the random number table (Appendix A Table 1), the 
first 10 digits are
0 7 1 7 4 2 0 0 0 1
Using these numbers to simulate sibling groups, we get
Sibling group 1		
0  ​7	
	
girl, boy
Sibling group 2		
1	
	
boy
Sibling group 3		
7	
	
boy
Sibling group 4		
4  ​2  ​0  ​0  ​0  ​1	
girl, girl, girl, girl, girl, boy
Continuing along row 15 of the random number table,
Sibling group 5		
3	
	
boy
Sibling group 6		
1	
	
boy
Sibling group 7		
2  ​0  ​4  ​7		
girl, girl, girl, boy
Sibling group 8		
8  ​4  ​1	 	
girl, girl, boy
After simulating eight sibling groups, we have 8 boys among 19 children. The proportion 
of boys is 8/19, which is close to .5. Continuing the simulation to obtain a large number  
of observations suggests that the long-run proportion of boys in the population would still 
be .5, which is indeed the case.
■
Example 6.33 
ESP?
Can a close friend read your mind? Try the following chance experiment. Write the word 
blue on one piece of paper and the word red on another, and place the two slips of paper in 
a box. Select one slip of paper from the box, look at the word written on it, and then try to 
convey the word by sending a mental message to a friend who is seated in the same room. 
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.7   Estimating Probabilities Empirically Using Simulation 
●  343
Ask your friend to select either red or blue, and record whether the response is correct. 
Repeat this 10 times and determine the number of correct responses. How did your friend 
do? Is your friend receiving your mental messages or just guessing?
Let’s investigate by using simulation to get the approximate probabilities of the vari-
ous possible numbers of correct responses for someone who is guessing. Someone who is 
guessing should have an equal chance of responding correctly or incorrectly. We can use 
a random digit to represent a response, with an even digit representing a correct response 
(C) and an odd digit representing an incorrect response (X). A sequence of 10 digits can be 
used to simulate performing the chance experiment one time.
For example, using the last 10 digits in row 25 of the random number table ­(Appendix A  
Table 1) gives
5
2
8
3
4
3
0
7
3
5
X
C
C
X
C
X
C
X
X
X
which is a simulated chance experiment resulting in four correct responses. We used 
Minitab to generate 150 sequences of 10 random digits and obtained the following results:
Sequence 
Number
Digits
Number 
Correct
    1
3996285890
5
    2
1690555784
3
    3
9133190550
2
   
Á
 
Á
 
Á
149
3083994450
5
150
9202078546
7
Table 6.2 summarizes the results of our simulation.
The estimated probabilities in Table 6.2 are based on the assumption that a correct and 
an incorrect response are equally likely (guessing). Evaluate your friend’s performance in 
light of the information in Table 6.2. Is it likely that someone who is guessing would have 
been able to get as many correct as your friend did? Do you think your friend was receiving 
your mental messages? How are the estimated probabilities in Table 6.2 used to support 
your answer?
Table 6.2  Estimated Probabilities for Example 6.33
Number Correct
Number of Sequences
 Estimated Probability
  0
    0
  .0000
  1
    1
  .0067
  2
    8
  .0533
  3
  16
  .1067
  4
  30
  .2000
  5
  36
  .2400
  6
  35
  .2333
  7
  17
  .1133
  8
    7
  .0467
  9
    0
  .0000
10
    0
  .0000
Total
150
1.0000

■
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

344 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
6.78	 The Los Angeles Times (June 14, 1995) reported that 
the U.S. Postal Service is getting speedier, with  
higher overnight on-time delivery rates than in the 
past. The Price Waterhouse accounting firm con-
ducted an independent ­audit by seeding the mail 
with letters and recording on-time delivery rates for 
these letters. 
Suppose that the results were as follows (these 
numbers are fictitious but are compatible with sum-
mary values given in the article):
Number  
of Letters Mailed
Number of Letters 
Arriving on Time
Los Angeles
  ​500
  ​425
New York
  ​500
  ​415
Washington, D.C.
  ​500
  ​405
Nationwide
6000
5220
Use the given information to estimate the following 
probabilities. (Hint: See Example 6.30.)
a.	 The probability of an on-time delivery in Los 
Angeles 
b.	The probability of late delivery in Washington, 
D.C. 
c.	 The probability that two letters mailed in New 
York are both delivered on time 
d.	The probability of on-time delivery nationwide
6.79	 Five hundred first-year students at a state university 
were classified according to both high school GPA 
and whether they were on academic probation at the 
end of their first semester. The data are summarized 
in the accompanying table.
Probation
High School GPA
2.5 to 
,3.0
3.0 to 
,3.5
3.5 and 
Above
Total
Yes
50
  ​55
  ​30
135
No
45
135
185
365
Total
95
190
215
500
a.	 Construct a table of the estimated probabilities 
for each GPA–probation combination. (Hint: See 
Example 6.25.)
b.	Use the table constructed in Part (a) to approxi-
mate the probability that a randomly selected first-
year student at this university will be on academic 
probation at the end of the first semester. 
c.	 What is the estimated probability that a randomly 
selected first-year student at this university had a 
high school GPA of 3.5 or above? 
d.	Are the two events selected student has a high 
school GPA of 3.5 or above and selected student is on 
academic probation at the end of the first semester 
indepen­dent events? How can you tell?
e.	 Estimate the proportion of first-year students with 
high school GPAs between 2.5 and 3.0 who are on 
academic probation at the end of the first semester.
f.	 Estimate the proportion of those first-year stu-
dents with high school GPAs 3.5 and above who 
are on academic probation at the end of the first 
semester. 
6.80	 ▼ The table for Exercise 6.80 at the bottom of the 
page describes (approximately) the distribution of 
students by gender and college at a mid-sized public 
university in the West. Suppose that we will randomly 
select one student from this university:
a.	 What is the probability that the selected student is 
a male? 
b.	What is the probability that the selected student is 
in the College of Agriculture? 
c.	 What is the probability that the selected student is 
a male in the College of Agriculture? 
d.	What is the probability that the selected student is 
a male who is not from the College of Agriculture? 
6.81	 On April 1, 2010, the Bureau of the Census in the 
United States attempted to count every U.S. resident. 
Suppose that the counts in the table for Exercise 6.81 
at the top of the next page are obtained for four 
counties in one region.
exercises 6.78 - 6.86
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Table for Exercise 6.80
College
Gender
Education
Engineering
Liberal Arts
Science  
and Math
Agriculture
Business
Architecture
Male
200
3200
2500
1500
2100
1500
200
Female
300
  800
1500
1500
  900
1500
300
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 6.7   Estimating Probabilities Empirically Using Simulation 
●  345
a.	 If one person is selected at random from this 
region, what is the estimated probability that the 
selected person is from Ventura County? 
b.	If one person is selected at random from Ventura 
County, what is the estimated probability that the 
selected person is Hispanic? 
c.	 If one Hispanic person is selected at random from 
this region, what is the estimated probability that the 
selected individual is from Ventura County? 
d.	If one person is selected at random from this 
region, what is the estimated probability that the 
selected person is an Asian from San Luis Obispo 
County? 
e.	 If one person is selected at random from this 
region, what is the estimated probability that the 
person is either Asian or from San Luis Obispo 
County? 
f.	 If one person is selected at random from this 
region, what is the estimated probability that the 
person is Asian or from San Luis Obispo County 
but not both? 
g.	If two people are selected at random from this 
region, what is the estimated probability that both 
are Caucasians? 
h.	If two people are selected at random from this re-
gion, what is the estimated probability that neither 
is Caucasian? 
i.	 If two people are selected at random from this re-
gion, what is the estimated probability that exactly 
one is a Caucasian? 
j.	 If two people are selected at random from this 
region, what is the estimated probability that both 
are residents of the same county? 
k.	If two people are selected at random from this 
region, what is the estimated probability that both 
are from different racial/ethnic groups? 
6.82	 A medical research team wishes to evaluate two dif-
ferent treatments for a disease. Subjects are selected 
two at a time, and then one of the pair is assigned  
to each of the two treatments. The treatments  
are applied, and each is either a success (S) or a 
failure (F). 
The researchers keep track of the total number of 
successes for each treatment. They plan to continue 
the chance experiment until the number of successes 
for one treatment exceeds the number of successes 
for the other treatment by 2. For example, they might 
observe the results in the table for Exercise 6.82 
given below. The chance experiment would stop  
after the sixth pair, because Treatment 1 has two 
more successes than Treatment 2. The researchers 
would conclude that Treatment 1 is pref­er­able to 
Treatment 2.
Suppose that Treatment 1 has a success rate of .7 
(that is, P(success) 5 .7 for Treatment 1) and that 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Table for Exercise 6.81
Race/Ethnicity
County
Caucasian
Hispanic
Black
Asian
American 
Indian
Monterey
163,000
139,000
24,000
39,000
4,000
San Luis Obispo
180,000
  37,000
  7,000
  9,000
3,000
Santa Barbara
230,000
121,000
12,000
24,000
5,000
Ventura
430,000
231,000
18,000
50,000
7,000
Table for Exercise 6.82
Pair
Treatment 1
Treatment 2
Total Number 
of Successes 
for Treatment 1
Total Number 
of Successes 
for Treatment 2
1
S
F
1
0
2
S
S
2
1
3
F
F
2
1
4
S
S
3
2
5
F
F
3
2
6
S
F
4
2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

346 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
Treatment 2 has a success rate of .4. Use simulation 
to estimate the probabilities in Parts (a) and (b) by 
using the following procedure: 
1.  Use a pair of random digits to simulate one pair 
of subjects. Let the first digit represent Treatment 
1 and use 1–7 as an indication of a success and 8, 
9, and 0 to indicate a failure. Let the second digit 
represent Treatment 2, with 1–4 representing a 
success. For example, if the two digits selected to 
represent a pair were 8 and 3, you would record 
failure for Treatment 1 and success for Treatment 2. 
2.  Continue to select pairs, keeping track of the total 
number of successes for each treatment. Stop the 
trial as soon as the number of successes for one 
treatment exceeds that for the other by 2. This 
would complete one trial. 
3.  Repeat this whole process until you have results 
for at least 20 trials (more is better). 
4.  Use the simulation results to estimate the desired 
probabilities.
a.	 Estimate the probability that more than five pairs 
must be treated before a conclusion can be reached. 
(Hint: P(more than 5) 5 1 2 P(5 or fewer).)
b.	Estimate the probability that the researchers will 
­incor­rectly conclude that Treatment 2 is the better 
treatment.
6.83	 Many cities regulate the number of taxi licenses, and 
there is a great deal of competition for both new and 
existing licenses. Suppose that a city has decided to 
sell 10 new licenses for $25,000 each. A lottery will 
be held to determine who gets the licenses, and no 
one may request more than three licenses. 
Twenty individuals and taxi companies have 
entered the lottery. Six of the 20 entries are requests 
for 3 licenses, 9 are requests for 2 licenses, and the 
rest are requests for a single license. The city will 
select requests at random, fill­ing as many of the 
requests as possible. 
For example, the city might fill requests for 2, 
3, 1, and 3 licenses and then select a request for 3. 
Because there is only one license left, the last request 
selected would receive a license, but only one.
a.	 An individual has put in a request for a single 
license. Use simulation to approximate the prob-
ability that the request will be granted. Perform at 
least 20 simulated lotteries (more is better!).
b.	Do you think that this is a fair way of distributing 
licenses? Can you propose an alternative proce-
dure for ­distribution? 
6.84	 Four students must work together on a group project. 
They decide that each will take responsibility for a 
particular part of the project, as follows:
Person
Maria
Alex
Juan
Jacob
Task
Survey 
design
Data  
collection
Analysis
Report 
writing
Because of the way the tasks have been divided, one 
student must fin­ish before the next student can begin 
work. 
To ensure that the project is completed on time, 
a schedule is established, with a deadline for each 
team member. If any one of the team members is late, 
the timely completion of the project is jeopardized. 
Assume the following probabilities:
1.  The probability that Maria completes her part on 
time is .8.
2.  ​If Maria completes her part on time, the probability 
that Alex completes on time is .9, but if Maria is late, 
the probability that Alex completes on time is only .6.
3.  ​If Alex completes his part on time, the probability 
that Juan completes on time is .8, but if Alex is late, 
the probability that Juan completes on time is only .5.
4.  ​If Juan completes his part on time, the probability that 
Jacob completes on time is .9, but if Juan is late, the 
probability that Jacob completes on time is only .7.
Use simulation (with at least 20 trials) to estimate  
the probability that the project is completed on time. 
Think carefully about this one. For example, you 
might use a random digit to represent each part of 
the project (four in all). For the first digit (Maria’s 
part), 1–8 could represent on time and 9 and 0 could 
represent late. Depending on what happened with 
Maria (late or on time), you would then look at the 
digit representing Alex’s part. If Maria was on time, 
1–9 would represent on time for Alex, but if Maria 
was late, only 1–6 would represent on time. The parts 
for Juan and Jacob could be handled ­similarly.
6.85	 In Exercise 6.84, the probability that Maria completes 
her part on time was .8. Suppose that this probabil-
ity is really only .6. Use simulation (with at least 20 
trials) to estimate the probability that the project is 
completed on time.
6.86	 Refer to Exercises 6.84 and 6.85. Suppose that 
the probabilities of timely completion are as in 
Exercise 6.84 for Maria, Alex, and Juan, but that 
Jacob has a probability of completing on time of .7  
if Juan is on time and .5 if Juan is late.
a.	 Use simulation (with at least 20 trials) to estimate 
the probability that the project is completed on time.
b.	Compare the probability from Part (a) to the one 
computed in Exercise 6.85. Which decrease in 
the probability of on-time completion (Maria’s or 
Jacob’s) made the bigger change in the probability 
that the project is completed on time?
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Background: The paper “What Is the Probability of a Kiss? 
(It’s Not What You Think)” (Journal of Statistics Education (online) 
[2002]) posed the following question: What is the probability 
that a Hershey’s Kiss will land on its base (as opposed to its 
side) if it is flipped onto a table? Unlike flipping a coin, there 
is no reason to believe that this probability would be .5.
ac tivit y 6.1 
Kisses
Working as a class, develop a plan that would enable you 
to estimate this probability empirically.
Once you have an acceptable plan, carry it out and use 
the resulting data to produce an estimate of the desired prob-
ability. Do you think that a kiss is equally likely to land on its 
base or on its side? Explain.
Background: The New Scientist (Janu­ary 4, 2002) reported 
on a controversy surrounding the Euro coins that have been 
introduced as a common currency across Europe. Each 
country mints its own coins, but these coins are accepted 
in any of the countries that have adopted the Euro as their 
currency.
A group in Poland claims that the Belgium-minted Euro 
does not have an equal chance of landing heads or tails. This 
claim was based on 250 tosses of the Belgium-minted Euro, 
of which 140 (56%) came up heads. Should this be cause for 
alarm for European sports fans, who know that “important” 
decisions are made by the flip of a coin?
In this activity, we will investigate whether this should be 
cause for alarm by examining whether observing 140 heads 
out of 250 tosses is an unusual outcome if the coin is fair.
1.	 For this first step, you can either (a) flip a U.S. 
penny 250 times, keeping a tally of the number of 
heads and tails observed (this won’t take as long as 
AC TIVIT Y 6.2 
A Crisis for European Sports Fans?
you think), or (b) simulate 250 coin tosses by using 
your calculator or a statistics software package to 
generate random numbers (if you choose this option, 
give a brief description of how you carried out the 
simulation).
2.	 For your sequence of 250 tosses, calculate the pro-
portion of heads observed.
3.	 Form a data set that consists of the values for propor-
tion of heads observed in 250 tosses of a fair coin for 
the entire class. Summarize this data set by construct-
ing a graphical display.
4.	 Working with a partner, write a paragraph explain-
ing why European sports fans should or should not 
be worried by the results of the Polish experiment. 
Your explanation should be based on the observed 
proportion of heads from the Polish experiment and 
the graphical display constructed in Step 3.
ac tivit y 6.3 
The “Hot Hand” in Basketball
Background: Consider a mediocre basketball player who 
has consistently made only 50% of his free throws over sev-
eral seasons. If we were to examine his free throw record over 
the last 50 free throw attempts, is it likely that we would see 
a streak of 5 in a row where he is successful in making the 
free throw? In this activity, we will investigate this question. 
We will assume that the outcomes of successive free throw 
attempts are independent and that the probability that the 
player is successful on any particular attempt is .5.
1.	 Begin by simulating a sequence of 50 free throws 
for this player. Because this player has probability of 
success of .5 for each attempt and the attempts are 
independent, we can model a free throw by tossing a 
coin. Using heads to represent a successful free throw 
and tails to represent a missed free throw, simulate 
50 free throws by tossing a coin 50 times, recording 
the outcome of each toss.
2.	 For your sequence of 50 tosses, identify the longest 
streak by looking for the longest string of heads in 
your sequence. Determine the length of this longest 
streak.
3.	 Combine your longest streak value with those from 
the rest of the class and construct a histogram or 
dotplot of these longest streak values.
4.	 Based on the graph from Step 3, does it appear likely 
that a player of this skill level would have a streak of 
5 or more successes sometime during a sequence of 
50 free throw attempts? Justify your answer based on 
the graph from Step 3.
5.	 Use the combined class data to estimate the prob-
ability that a player of this skill level has a streak of 
at least 5 somewhere in a sequence of 50 free throw 
attempts.
Activities 
●  347
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

348 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
6.	 Using basic probability rules, we can calculate the 
probability that a player of this skill level is successful 
on the next 5 free throw attempts:
PsSSSSSd 51
1
221
1
221
1
221
1
221
1
22 51
1
22
5
5 .031
which is relatively small. At first this might seem 
inconsistent with your answer in Step 5, but the 
estimated probability from Step 5 and the computed 
probability of .031 are really considering different 
situations. Explain why it is plausible that both prob-
abilities could be correct.
7.	 Do you think that the assumption that the outcomes 
of successive free throws are independent is reason-
able? Explain. (This is a hotly debated topic among 
both sports fans and statisticians!)
Summary 
Key Concepts and Formulas
Term or Formula
Chance experiment
Sample space
Event
Simple event
Events
  1.  not A, AC
  2.  A or B, A : B
  3.  A and B, A " B
Mutually exclusive events
Fundamental properties of probability
P(E ) 5 number of outcomes in E
N
P(E : F ) 5 P(E ) 1 P(F )
P(E1 : Á : Ek) 5 PsE1) 1 Á 1 P(Ek)
P(E z F ) 5 P(E " F )
P(F)
Independence of events E and F
P(E z F ) 5 P(E )
P(E " F ) 5 P(E )P(F )
P(E1 " Á " Ek) 5 P(E1)P(E2)ÁP(Ek)
P(E : F ) 5 P(E ) 1 P(F ) 2 P(E " F )
P(E " F) 5 P(E z F)P(F )
P(E) 5 P(E z B1)P(B1) 1 P(E z B2)P(B2)
        1 Á 1 P(E z Bk)P(Bk)
P(Bi z E) 5  
P(E z Bi)P(Bi)
P(E z B1)P(B1) 1 P(E z B2)P(B2) 1 Á 1 P(E z Bk)P(Bk)
Comment
Any experiment for which there is uncertainty concerning the resulting 
outcome.
The collection of all possible outcomes from a chance experiment.
Any collection of possible outcomes from a chance ­experiment.
An event that consists of a single outcome.
  1.  The event consisting of all outcomes not in A.
  2.  ​The event consisting of all outcomes in at least one of the two 
events.
  3.  ​The event consisting of outcomes common to both events.
Events that have no outcomes in common.
Fundamental properties of probability
  1.  ​The probability of any event must be a number between 0 and 1.
  2.  ​If S is the sample space for a chance experiment, P(S) 5 1
  3.  ​If E and F are mutually exclusive events, P(E ø F ) 5 P(E ) 1 P(F )
  4.  ​P(E ) 1 P(E C ) 5 1
P(E) when the outcomes are equally likely and where N is the number of 
outcomes in the sample space.
Addition rules when events are mutually exclusive.
The conditional probability of the event E given that the event F has 
occurred.
Events E and F are independent if the probability that E has occurred 
given F is the same as the probability that E will occur with no 
knowledge of F.
Multiplication rules for independent events.
The general addition rule for two events.
The general multiplication rule for two events.
The law of total probability, where B1, B2, … , Bk are
mutually exclusive events with P(B1) 1 P(B2) 1 Á 1 P(Bk) 5 1
Bayes’ rule, where B1, B2, … , Bk are mutually exclusive events 
with P(B1) 1 P(B2) 1 Á 1 P(Bk) 5 1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.87	 A company uses three different assembly lines— 
A1, A2, and A3—to manufacture a particular compo-
nent. Of those manufactured by A1, 5% need rework 
to remedy a defect, whereas 8% of A2’s components 
and 10% of A3’s components need rework. Suppose 
that 50% of all components are produced by A1,  
30% are produced by A2 and 20% are produced by A3.
a.	 ​Construct a tree diagram with first-generation 
branches corresponding to the three lines. Leading 
from each branch, draw one branch for rework (R) 
and another for no rework (N). Then enter appro-
priate probabilities on the branches.
b.	What is the probability that a randomly selected 
component came from A1 and needed rework?
c.	 What is the probability that a randomly selected 
component needed rework? 
6.88	 Consider the following information about passengers 
on a cruise ship on vacation: 40% check work e-mail, 
30% use a cell phone to stay connected to work, 
25% bring a laptop with them on vacation, 23% both 
check work e-mail and use a cell phone to stay con-
nected, and 51% neither check work e-mail nor use 
a cell phone to stay connected nor bring a laptop. In 
addition, 88% of those who bring a laptop also check 
work e-mail and 70% of those who use a cell phone 
to stay connected also bring a laptop. With 
E 5 event that a traveler on vacation checks work 
e-mail
C 5 event that a traveler on vacation uses a cell 
phone to stay connected
L 5 event that a traveler on vacation brought a 
laptop
use the given information to determine the following 
­probabilities. A Venn diagram may help.
a.	 PsEd 
b.	PsCd 
c.	 PsLd 
d.	PsE and Cd 
e.	 PsE C and CC and LCd 
f.	 PsE and C or Ld 
g.	 PsEuLd 		
j.  PsE and Ld 
h.	PsLuCd 		
k.  PsC and Ld 
i.	 PsE and C and Ld 	
l.  PsCuE and Ld 
6.89	 Online chat rooms allow people from all over the 
world to exchange opinions on various topics of in-
terest. A side effect of such conversations is “flaming,” 
which is negative criticism of others’ contributions to 
the conversation. The paper “Criticism on the Internet: 
An Analysis of Participant Reactions” (Communication 
Research Reports [1998]: 180–187) investigated the 
effect that personal criticism has on an individual. 
Data from a survey of 193 chat room users from this 
study are summarized here:
Have Been 
Personally 
Criticized
Have Not Been 
Personally 
Criticized
Total
Have Criticized  
  Others
19
    8
  27
Have Not Criticized  
  Others
23
143
166
Total
42
151
193
Assume that this data is representative of the larger 
group of all chat room users and that the frequencies 
in the table are indicative of the long-run behavior 
of chat room users. Suppose that a chat room user is 
selected at random, and define events
C 5 event that the selected individual has criti-
cized others
O 5 event that the selected individual has been 
personally criticized by others
Find and interpret each of the following probabilities:
a.	 PsCd 
b.	PsOd 
c.	 PsC > Od 
d.	PsCuOd 
e.	 PsOuCd 
6.90	 The Associated Press (San Luis Obispo Telegram-
Tribune, Au­gust 23, 1995) reported on the results of 
mass screening of schoolchildren for tuberculosis 
(TB). For Santa Clara County, California, the propor-
tion of all tested kindergartners who were found to 
have TB was .0006. The corresponding proportion 
for recent immigrants (thought to be a high-risk 
group) was .0075. Suppose that a Santa Clara County 
kindergartner is selected at random. Are the events 
selected student is a recent immigrant and selected 
Chapter Review 
Exercises 6.87 - 6.103
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Chapter Review Exercises 
●  349
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

350 
●  Chapter 6  Probability
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
student has TB independent or dependent events? 
Justify your answer using the given information.
6.91	 The Australian newspaper The Mercury (May 30, 1995) 
reported that, based on a survey of 600 reformed and 
current smokers, 11.3% of those who had attempted 
to quit smoking in the previous 2 years had used 
a nicotine aid (such as a nicotine patch). It also re-
ported that 62% of those who quit smoking without 
a nicotine aid began smoking again within 2 weeks 
and 60% of those who used a nicotine aid began 
smoking again within 2 weeks. 
If a smoker who is trying to quit smoking is se-
lected at random, are the events selected smoker who 
is trying to quit uses a nicotine aid and selected smoker 
who has attempted to quit begins smoking again within 
2 weeks independent or dependent events? Justify 
your answer using the given information.
6.92	 A certain company sends 40% of its overnight mail 
parcels by means of express mail service A1. Of these 
parcels, 2% arrive after the guaranteed delivery time. 
What is the probability that a randomly selected 
overnight parcel was shipped by mail service A1 and 
was late? 
6.93	 Return to the context of the previous exercise and 
suppose that 50% of the overnight parcels are sent by 
means of express mail service A2 and the remaining 
10% are sent by means of A3. Of those sent by means 
of A2, only 1% arrived late, whereas 5% of the parcels 
handled by A3 arrived late.
a.	 What is the probability that a randomly selected 
parcel arrived late? (Hint: A tree diagram should 
help.) 
b.	Suppose that a randomly selected overnight parcel 
arrived late. What is the probability that the parcel 
was shipped using mail service A1? That is, what is 
the probability of A1 given L, denoted PsA1uLd? 
c.	 What is PsA2uLd? 
d.	What is PsA3uLd? 
6.94	 Two individuals, A and B, are finalists for a chess 
championship. They will play a sequence of games, 
each of which can result in a win for A, a win for B, 
or a draw. Suppose that the outcomes of successive 
games are ­inde­pendent, with P(A wins game) 5 .3, 
P(B wins game) 5 .2, and P(draw) 5 .5. Each time a 
player wins a game, he earns 1 point and his oppo-
nent earns no points. The first player to win 5 points 
wins the championship. 
a.	 What is the probability that A wins the champion-
ship in just five games? 
b.	What is the probability that it takes just five games 
to obtain a champion? 
c.	 If a draw earns a half-point for each player, 
describe how you would perform a simulation to 
estimate P(A wins the championship). Assume 
that the championship will end in a draw if both 
players obtain 5 points at the same time.
6.95	 A single-elimination tournament with four players is 
to be held. In Game 1, the players seeded (rated) first 
and fourth play. In Game 2, the players seeded second 
and third play. In Game 3, the winners of Games 1 and  
2 play, with the winner of Game 3 declared the tour-
nament winner. Suppose that the following probabili-
ties are given:
P(seed 1 defeats seed 4) 5 .8
P(seed 1 defeats seed 2) 5 .6
P(seed 1 defeats seed 3) 5 .7
P(seed 2 defeats seed 3) 5 .6
P(seed 2 defeats seed 4) 5 .7
P(seed 3 defeats seed 4) 5 .6
a.	 Describe how you would use random digits to 
simulate Game 1 of this tournament.
b.	Describe how you would use random digits to 
simulate Game 2 of this tournament.
c.	 How would you use random digits to simulate 
Game 3 in the tournament? (This will depend on 
the outcomes of Games 1 and 2.)
d.	Simulate one complete tournament, giving an 
explanation for each step in the process.
e.	 Simulate 10 tournaments, and use the resulting 
information to estimate the probability that the 
first seed wins the tournament.
f.	 Ask four classmates for their simulation results. 
Along with your own results, this should give you 
information for 50 simulated tournaments. Use 
this information to ­estimate the probability that 
the first seed wins the tournament.
g.	 Why do the estimated probabilities from Parts (e) 
and (f) differ? Which do you think is a better 
estimate of the true probability? Explain.
6.96	 In a school machine shop, 60% of all machine 
breakdowns occur on lathes and 15% occur on drill 
presses. Let E denote the event that the next machine 
breakdown is on a lathe, and let F denote the event 
that a drill press is the next machine to break down. 
With PsEd 5 .60 and PsFd 5 .15, calculate:
a.	 PsE Cd 
b.	PsE ø Fd 
c.	 PsE C > F Cd 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
6.97	 There are five faculty members in a certain academic 
department. These individuals have 3, 6, 7, 10, and 
14 years of teaching experience. Two of these indi-
viduals are randomly selected to serve on a personnel 
review committee. What is the probability that the 
chosen representatives have a total of at least 15 years 
of teaching experience? (Hint: Consider all possible 
committees.) 
6.98	 The general addition rule for three events states that
PsA or B or Cd 5 PsAd 1 PsBd 1 PsCd
 
2PsA and Bd 2 PsA and Cd
 
2PsB and Cd 1 PsA and B and Cd
A new magazine publishes columns entitled “Art” (A), 
“Books” (B), and “Cinema” (C). Suppose that 
14% of all subscribers read A
23% read B
37% read C
  8% read A and B
  9% read A and C
13% read B and C
  5% read all three columns
What is the probability that a randomly selected 
subscriber reads at least one of these three 
columns? 
6.99	 A theater complex is currently showing four R-rated 
movies, three PG-13 movies, two PG movies, and 
one G movie. The following table gives the number 
of people at the first showing of each movie on a 
certain Saturday:
Theater
Rating
Number of Viewers
  ​1
R
600
  ​2
PG-13
420
  ​3
PG-13
323
  ​4
R
196
  ​5
G
254
  ​6
PG
179
  ​7
PG-13
114
  ​8
R
205
  ​9
R
139
10
PG
  ​87
Suppose that one of these people is randomly 
­selected.
a.	 What is the probability that the selected individual 
saw a PG movie? 
b.	What is the probability that the selected individual 
saw a PG or a PG-13 movie? 
c.	 What is the probability that the selected individual 
did not see an R movie? 
6.100	 Refer to Exercise 6.99, but now suppose that two 
viewers are randomly selected (without replacement). 
Let R1 and R2 denote the events that the first and 
second individuals, respectively, watched an R-rated 
movie. Are R1 and R2 independent events? Explain. 
From a practical point of view, can these events be 
regarded as independent? Explain.
6.101	Suppose that a box contains 25 light bulbs, of which  
20 are good and the other 5 are defective. Consider ran-
domly selecting three bulbs without replacement. Let  
E denote the event that the first bulb selected is good,  
F be the event that the second bulb is good, and G rep-
resent the event that the third bulb selected is good.
a.	 What is PsEd? 
b.	What is PsFuEd? 
c.	 What is PsGuE > Fd? 
d.	What is the probability that all three selected 
bulbs are good? 
6.102	 Return to Exercise 6.101, and suppose that 4 bulbs 
are randomly selected from the 25. 
a.	 What is the probability that all 4 are good? 
b.	What is the probability that at least 1 selected 
bulb is bad? 
6.103	A transmitter is sending a message using a binary 
code (a sequence of 0’s and 1’s). Each transmitted bit 
(0 or 1) must pass through three relays to reach the 
receiver. At each relay, the probability is .20 that the 
bit sent on is different from the bit received (a rever-
sal). Assume that the relays operate independently of 
one another:
transmitter → relay 1 → relay 2 → relay 3 → receiver
a.	 If a 1 is sent from the transmitter, what is the prob-
ability that a 1 is sent on by all three relays? 
b.	If a 1 is sent from the transmitter, what is the 
probability that a 1 is received by the receiver? 
(Hint: The eight experimental outcomes can be 
displayed on a tree diagram with three generations 
of branches, one generation for each relay.) 
Chapter Review Exercises 
●  351
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

352
This chapter is the first of two chapters that 
together link the basic ideas of probability 
explored in Chapter 6 with the methods of 
statistical inference. Chapter 6 used probability 
to describe the long-run relative frequency of 
occurrence of various types of outcomes. In this 
chapter we introduce probability models that can 
be used to describe the distribution of values of a 
variable. 
In Chapter 8, we will see how these same 
probability models can be used to describe the 
behavior of sample statistics. Such models play an 
important role in drawing conclusions based on 
sample data.
In a chance experiment, we often focus on 
some numerical aspect of the outcome. For 
example, an environmental scientist who obtains 
an air sample from a speci­fied location might be 
especially concerned with the concentration of 
ozone (a major constituent of smog). A quality 
control inspector who must decide whether to 
accept a large shipment of components may base the decision on the number of 
defective components in a group of 20 components randomly selected from the 
shipment.
Before selection of the air sample, the value of the ozone concentration is uncertain. 
Similarly, the number of defective components among the 20 selected might be any 
whole number between 0 and 20. Because the value of a variable quantity such as 
ozone concentration or number of defective components is subject to uncertainty, such 
variables are called random variables.
In this chapter we begin by distinguishing between discrete and continuous numerical 
random variables. We show how the behavior of both discrete and continuous numerical 
random variables can be described by a probability distribution. This distribution can 
then be used to make probability statements about values of the random variable. 
Special emphasis is given to three commonly encountered probability distributions: the 
binomial, geometric, and normal distributions.
Random Variables and Probability  
Distributions
©Mikeledray/Shutterstock.com
CHAPTER 7
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.1   Random Variables 
●  353
Chapter 7: Learning Objectives
Students will understand:
●
●that a probability distribution describes the long-run behavior of a random 
variable.
●
●that areas under a density curve for a continuous random variable are 
interpreted as probabilities.
Students will be able to:
●
●distinguish between discrete and continuous random variables.
●
●construct the probability distribution of a discrete random variable.
●
●compute and interpret the mean and standard deviation of a discrete random 
variable.
●
●distinguish between binomial and geometric random variables.
●
●compute and interpret binomial probabilities.
●
●compute probabilities involving continuous random variables whose density 
curves have a simple form.
●
●find an area under a normal curve and interpret this area as a probability.
●
●construct and interpret a normal probability plot.
 7.1  
Random Variables
*In some books, uppercase letters are used to name random variables, with lowercase letters representing a 
particular value that the variable might assume. We have chosen to use a simpler and less formal notation.
In most chance experiments, an investigator focuses attention on one or more variable 
quantities. For example, consider a management consultant who is studying the operation 
of a supermarket. A chance experiment might involve randomly selecting a customer 
leaving the store. One interesting numerical variable might be the number of items 
purchased by the customer. We can denote this variable using a letter, such as x. Possible 
values of this variable are 0, 1, 2, 3, and so on. The possible values of x are isolated points 
on the number line. Until a customer is selected and the number of items counted, the 
value of x is uncertain. 
Another variable of potential interest might be the time y (in minutes) spent in a 
checkout line. One possible value of y is 3.0 minutes and another is 4.0 minutes, but any 
other number between 3.0 and 4.0 is also a possibility. The possible y values form an entire 
interval (a continuum) on the number line.
Random variable: A numerical variable whose value depends on the outcome 
of a chance experiment. A random variable associates a numerical value with 
each outcome of a chance experiment.
Discrete random variable: A random variable is discrete if its set of possible 
values is a collection of isolated points along the number line.
Continuous random variable: A random variable is continuous if its set of 
possible values includes an entire interval on the number line.
DEFINITION
We use lowercase letters, such as x and y, to represent random variables.* Figure 7.1 
shows a set of possible values for each type of random variable. In practice, a discrete 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

354 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
random variable almost always arises in connection with counting (for example, the 
number of items purchased, the number of gas pumps in use, or the number of broken 
eggs in a carton). A continuous random variable is one whose value is typically obtained 
by mea­surement (temperature in a freezer compartment, weight of a pineapple, amount of 
time spent in a store, etc.). 
Because there is a limit to the accuracy of any measuring instrument, such as a watch or 
a scale, it may seem that any variable should be regarded as discrete. For example, when 
weight is measured to the nearest pound, the observed values appear to be isolated points 
along the number line, such as 2 pounds, 3 pounds, etc. But this is just a function of the 
accuracy with which weight is recorded and not because a weight between 2 and 3 pounds 
is impossible. In this case, the variable is continuous.
Example 7.1 
Book Sales
Consider an experiment in which the type of book, print (P) or digital (D), chosen by each 
of three successive customers making a purchase from on an online bookstore is noted. 
Define a random variable x by
x  number of customers purchasing a book in digital format
The experimental outcome in which the first and third customers purchase a digital book 
and the second customer purchases a print book can be abbreviated DPD. The associ-
ated x value is 2, because two of the three customers selected a digital book. Similarly, the 
x value for the outcome DDD (all three purchase a digital book) is 3. 
The eight possible experimental outcomes and the corresponding value of x are dis-
played in the following table:
Outcome 
PPP 
DPP 
PDP
PPD 
DDP 
DPD 
PDD
DDD
x value 
0 
1 
1 
1
2 
2 
2 
3
There are only four possible x values—0, 1, 2, and 3—and these are isolated points on the 
number line. This means that x is a discrete random variable.
■
In some situations, the random variable of interest is discrete, but the number of possible 
values is not finite. This is illustrated in Example 7.2.
Example 7.2 
This Could Be a Long Game . . .
Two friends agree to play a game that consists of a sequence of trials. The game continues 
until one player wins two trials in a row. One random variable of interest might be
x 5 number of trials required to complete the game
Let A denote a win for Player 1 and B denote a win for Player 2. The simplest possible 
experimental outcomes are AA (the case in which Player 1 wins the first two trials and the 
game ends) and BB (the case in which Player 2 wins the first two trials). With either of these 
two outcomes, x 5 2. There are also two outcomes for which x 5 3: ABB and BAA. Some 
other possible outcomes and associated x values are
Figure  7.1
Two different types of random 
variables.
Possible values of a
continuous random variable
Possible values of a
discrete random variable
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.1   Random Variables 
●  355
Outcomes
x value
AA, BB
  2
BAA, ABB
  3
ABAA, BABB
  4
ABABB, BABAA
  5
. . . 
. . . 
ABABABABAA, BABABABABB
10
and so on.
Any positive integer that is 2 or greater is a possible value. Because the values 2, 3, 4, … 
are isolated points on the number line, x is a discrete random variable even though there is 
no upper limit to the number of pos­sible values.
■
Example 7.3 
Stress
In an engineering stress test, pressure is applied to a thin 1-foot-long bar until the bar 
snaps. The precise location where the bar will snap is uncertain. Let x be the distance from 
the left end of the bar to the break. Then x 5 0.25 is one possibility, x 5 0.9 is another, and 
in fact any number between 0 and 1 is a possible value of x. (Figure 7.2 shows the case of 
the outcome x 5 0.6.) The set of possible values is an entire interval on the number line, 
so x is a continuous random variable.
Figure  7.2
The bar for Example 7.3 and the 
outcome x 5 0.6.
0
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
x = 0.6
Even though in practice we may only be able to measure the distance to the near­est tenth 
of an inch or hundredth of an inch, the actual distance could be any number between 0 
and 1. So, even though the recorded values might be rounded because of the accuracy of 
the measuring instrument, the variable is still continuous.
■
In data analysis, random variables often arise in the context of summarizing sample data 
when a sample is selected from some population. This is illustrated in Example 7.4.
Example 7.4 
College Plans
Suppose that a counselor plans to select a random sample of 50 seniors at a large high 
school and to ask each student in the sample whether he or she plans to attend college 
after graduation. The process of sampling is a chance experiment. The sample space for 
this experiment consists of all the different possible random samples of size 50 that might 
result (there is a very large number of these), and for simple random sampling, each of 
these outcomes is equally likely.
Suppose that the counselor is interested in the number of students in the sample who 
plan to attend college. We can use the letter x to represent this number:
x 5 number of students in the sample who plan to attend college
Then x is a random variable, because it associates a numerical value with each of the possible 
outcomes (random samples) that might occur. Possible values of x are 0, 1, 2, . . . , 50, and 
x is a discrete random variable.
■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

356 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
7.1	 State whether each of the following random variables 
is discrete or continuous:
a.	 The number of defective tires on a car 
b.	The body temperature of a hospital patient 
c.	 The number of pages in a book 
d.	The number of draws (with replacement) from a 
deck of cards until a heart is selected  ​
e.	 The lifetime of a lightbulb  ​
7.2	 Classify each of the following random variables as 
either discrete or continuous:
a.	 The fuel ef­fi­ciency (mpg) of an automobile ​
b.	The amount of rainfall at a particular location 
during the next year 
c.	 The distance that a person throws a baseball ​
d.	The number of questions asked during a 1-hour 
lecture 
e.	 The tension (in pounds per square inch) at which 
a tennis racket is strung 
f.	 The amount of water used by a household during 
a given month  ​
g.	 The number of traf­fic citations issued by the 
highway patrol in a particular county on a given 
day 
7.3	 Starting at a particular time, each car entering an 
intersection is observed to see whether it turns 
left (L) or right (R) or goes straight ahead (S). The 
experiment ter­minates as soon as a car is observed 
to go straight. Let y denote the number of cars 
observed. 
a.	 What are possible y values?  ​
b.	List five different outcomes and their associated 
y values. (Hint: See Example 7.2.)
7.4	 A point is randomly selected from  
the interior of the square pictured. 
Let x denote the distance from the lower left-hand 
corner A of the square to the selected point. 
a.	 What are possible values of x? 
b.	Is x a discrete or a continuous variable? (Hint: See 
Example 7.3.) 
7.5	 A point is randomly selected on the surface of a lake 
that has a maximum depth of 100 feet. Let y be the 
depth of the lake at the randomly chosen point.
a.	 What are possible values of y? 
b.	Is y discrete or continuous? 
7.6	 A person stands at the corner marked A of the square 
pictured in Exercise 7.4 and tosses a coin. If it lands 
heads up, the person moves one corner clockwise, 
to B. If the coin lands tails up, the person moves 
one corner counterclockwise, to D. This process 
is then repeated until the person arrives back at A. 
Let y denote the number of coin tosses. 
a.	 What are possible values of y? 
b.	Is y discrete or continuous? 
7.7	 A box contains four slips of paper marked 1, 2, 3, 
and 4. Two slips are selected without replacement. 
List the possible values for each of the following 
random variables:
a.	 x 5 sum of the two numbers  ​
b.	y 5 difference between the first and second 
numbers  ​
c.	 z 5 number of slips selected that show an even 
number  ​
d.	w 5 number of slips selected that show a 4  ​ 
A
D
B
C
1 foot
EXERCISES 7.1 - 7.7
 7.2  
Probability Distributions for Discrete Random Variables
The probability distribution for a random variable is a model that describes the long-run 
behavior of the variable. For example, suppose that the Department of Animal Regulation 
in a particular county is interested in studying the variable 
x 5 number of licensed dogs or cats for a household
County regulations prohibit more than five dogs or cats per household. If we consider the 
chance experiment of randomly selecting a household in this county, then x is a discrete 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.2   Probability Distributions for Discrete Random Variables 
●  357
random variable because it associates a numerical value (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5) with each of the 
possible outcomes (households) in the sample space. 
Although we know what the possible values for x are, it would also be useful to know 
how this variable behaves in repeated observation. What would be the most common 
value? What proportion of the time would x 5 5 be observed? x 5 3? A probability 
distribution provides this type of information about the long-run behavior of a random 
variable.
The probability distribution of a discrete random variable x gives the 
probability associated with each possible x value. Each probability is the long-run 
relative frequency of occurrence of the corresponding x value when the chance 
experiment is performed a very large number of times.
Common ways to display a probability distribution for a discrete random 
variable are a table, a probability histogram, or a formula.
Notation: If one possible value of x is 2, we often write p(2) in place of P(x 5 2). 
Similarly, p(5) denotes the probability that x 5 5, and so on.
Example 7.5 
Energy Efficient Refrigerators
Suppose that each of four randomly selected customers purchasing a refrigerator at a large 
appliance store chooses either an energy efficient model (E) or one from a less expensive 
group of models (G) that do not have an energy efficient rating. Assume that these customers 
make their choices independently of one another and that 40% of all customers select an 
energy efficient model. This implies that for any particular one of the four customers, 
P(E) 5 .4 and P(G) 5 .6. 
One possible experimental outcome is EGGE, where the first and fourth customers 
select energy efficient models and the other two choose less expensive models. Because 
the customers make their choices independently, the multiplication rule for independent 
events implies that
PsEGGEd Ps1st chooses E and 2nd chooses G and 3rd chooses G and 4th chooses Ed
PsEdPsGdPsGdPsEd
s.4ds.6ds.6ds.4d
.0576
Similarly,
PsEGEGd PsEdPsGdPsEdPsGd
s.4ds.6ds.4ds.6d
.0576    sidentical to PsEGGEdd
and
PsGGGEd s.6ds.6ds.6ds.4d .0864
The number among the four customers who purchase an energy efficient model is a random 
variable. We can denote this variable by x:
x 5 the number of energy efficient refrigerators purchased by the four customers
Table 7.1 displays the 16 possible experimental outcomes, the probability of each outcome, 
and the value of the random variable x that is associated with each outcome.
The probability distribution of x is easily obtained from this information. Consider the 
smallest possible x value, 0. The only outcome for which x 5 0 is GGGG, so
ps0d Psx 0d PsGGGGd .1296
Understand the context ❭
Do the work ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

358 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
Outcome
Probability
x Value
Outcome
Probability
x Value
GGGG
.1296
0
GEEG
.0576
2
EGGG
.0864
1
GEGE
.0576
2
GEGG
.0864
1
GGEE
.0576
2
GGEG
.0864
1
GEEE
.0384
3
GGGE
.0864
1
EGEE
.0384
3
EEGG
.0576
2
EEGE
.0384
3
EGEG
.0576
2
EEEG
.0384
3
EGGE
.0576
2
EEEE
.0256
4
Table 7.1  Outcomes and Probabilities for Example 7.5
There are four different outcomes for which x 5 1, so p(1) results from adding the four 
corresponding probabilities:
ps1d Psx 1d PsEGGG or GEGG or GGEG or GGGEd
PsEGGGd 1 PsGEGGd 1 PsGGEGd 1 PsGGGEd
.0864 1 .0864 1 .0864 1 .0864
4s.0864d
.3456
Similarly,
ps2d PsEEGGd 1 Á 1 PsGGEEd 6s.0576d .3456
ps3d 4s.0384d .1536
ps4d .0256
The probability distribution of x is summarized in the following table:
x Value
0
1
2
3
4
p(x) 5 Probability of Value
.1296
.3456
.3456
.1536
.0256
To interpret p(3) 5 .1536, think of performing the chance experiment repeatedly, each 
time with a new group of four customers. In the long run, 15.36% of these groups will have 
exactly three customers purchasing an energy efficient refrigerator. 
The probability distribution can be used to determine probabilities of various events 
involving x. For example, the probability that at least two of the four customers choose 
energy efficient models is
Psx $ 2d Psx 2 or x 3 or x 4d
ps2d 1 ps3d 1 ps4d
.5248
This means that, in the long run, a group of four refrigerator purchasers will include at least 
two who select energy efficient models 52.48% of the time.
■
A probability distribution table for a discrete variable shows the possible x values and also 
p(x) for each possible x value. Because p(x) is a probability, it must be a number between 
0 and 1, and because the probability distribution lists all possible x values, the sum of 
all the p(x) values must equal 1. These properties of discrete probability distributions are 
summarized in the following box.
Properties of Discrete Probability Distributions
1.	 For every possible x value, 0 # p(x) # 1.
2.	
o
all x values
 psxd 5 1
Properties of Discrete Probability Distributions
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.2   Probability Distributions for Discrete Random Variables 
●  359
A graphical representation of a discrete probability distribution is called a probability 
histogram. The picture has a rectangle centered above each possible value of x, and 
the area of each rectangle is proportional to the probability of the corresponding 
value. Figure 7.3 displays the probability histogram for the probability distribution of 
Example 7.5.
Figure  7.3
Probability histogram for the 
distribution of Example 7.5.
p(x)
x
.1
0
.2
.3
.4
0
1
2
3
4
In Example 7.5, the probability distribution was derived by starting with a chance 
experiment and using probability rules. When a derivation from fundamental probabilities 
is not possible because of the complexity of the experimental situation, an investigator 
often proposes an approximate probability distribution consistent with empirical evidence 
and prior knowledge. Probability distributions based on empirical evidence must still be 
consistent with rules of probability. Specifically,
1.	 p(x) $ 0 for every x value.
2.	
o
all x values
 
psxd 1
This is illustrated in Examples 7.6 and 7.7
Example 7.6 
Paint Flaws
In automobile manufacturing, one of the last steps in the process of assembling a new 
car is painting. Some minor blemishes in the paint surface are considered acceptable, but 
if there are too many, it becomes noticeable to a potential customer and the car must be 
repainted. Cars coming off the assembly line are carefully inspected and the number of 
minor blemishes in the paint surface is determined. Let x denote the number of minor 
blemishes on a randomly selected car from a particular manufacturing plant. A large 
number of automobiles were evaluated, and a probability distribution consistent with these 
observations is
x
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
p(x) 
.041 
.010 
.209 
.223 
.178 
.114 
.061 
.028 
.011 
.004 
.001
The corresponding probability histogram appears in Figure 7.4. The probabilities in this 
distribution reflect the car manufacturer’s experience. For example, p(3) 5 .223 indicates 
that 22.3% of new automobiles had 3 minor paint blemishes. The probability that the 
number of minor paint blemishes is between 2 and 5 inclusive is
P(2 # x # 5) 5 p(2) 1 p(3) 1 p(4) 1 p(5) 5 .724
If car after car of this type were examined, in the long run, 72.4% would have 2, 3, 4, or 
5 minor paint blemishes.
Understand the context ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

360 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions

■
Figure  7.4
Probability histogram for the 
distribution of the number of minor 
paint blemishes on a randomly 
selected car.
.05
0
.10
.15
.20
.25
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
p(x)
x
Example 7.7 
iPod Shuffles
The paper “Does Your iPod Really Play Favorites?” (American Statistician [2009]: 263–268) 
investigated the shuffle feature of the iPod. The shuffle feature takes a group of songs, called 
a playlist, and plays them in a random order. Some have questioned the “randomness” of 
the shuffle, citing examples of situations where several songs from the same artist were 
played in close proximity to each other. One such example appeared in a Newsweek article 
in 2005, where the author states that Steely Dan songs always seem to pop up in the 
first hour of play. (For those young readers unfamiliar with Steely Dan, see http://www 
.steelydan.com.) Is this consistent with a “random” shuffle?
To investigate the alleged non-randomness, suppose we create a playlist of 3000 songs 
that includes 50 songs by Steely Dan (this is the situation considered by the authors of the 
American Statistician paper). We could then carry out a simulation by creating a shuffle of 
20 songs (about one hour of playing time) from the playlist and noting the number of songs 
by Steely Dan that were among the 20. 
This could be done by thinking of the songs in the playlist as being numbered from 
1 to 3000, with numbers 1 to 50 representing the Steely Dan songs. A random number 
generator could then be used to select 20 random numbers between 1 and 3000. We 
would then count how many times a number between 1 and 50 was included in this list. 
This would correspond to the number of Steely Dan songs in this particular shuffle of 
20 songs. Repeating this process a large number of times would enable us to estimate the 
probabilities needed for the probability distribution of
x ​5 ​number of Steely Dan songs in a random shuffle consisting of 20 songs
The probabilities in the accompanying probability distribution are from the American 
Statistician paper. Even though possible values of x are 0, 1, 2, . . . , 20, the probability of x 
taking on a value of 4 or greater is very small, and so 4, 5, . . . , 20 have been grouped into 
a single entry in the probability distribution table.
Probability Distribution of  
x ​5 ​number of Steely Dan  
songs in a 20-song shuffle
x
p(x)
0
.7138
1
.2435
2
.0387
3
.0038
4 or more
.0002
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.2   Probability Distributions for Discrete Random Variables 
●  361
Notice that Psx $ 1d 1 2 .7138 .2862. This means that about 28.6% of the time, 
at least one Steely Dan song would occur in a random shuffle of 20 songs. Given that 
there are only 50 Steely Dan songs in the playlist of 3000 songs, this result surprises many 
people!
■
We have seen examples in which the probability distribution of a discrete random 
variable has been given as a table or as a probability histogram. It is also possible to give 
a formula that allows calculation of the probability for each possible value of the random 
variable. Examples of this approach are given in Section 7.5.
Interpret the results ❭
EXERCISES 7.8 - 7.19
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
7.8	 Let x be the number of courses for which a randomly 
selected student at a certain university is registered. 
The probability distribution of x appears in the 
following table:
x
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
p(x)
.02
.03
.09
.25
.40
.16
.05
a.	 What is P(x 5 4)? 
b.	What is P(x # 4)? 
c.	 What is the probability that the selected student is 
taking at most five courses? 
d.	What is the probability that the selected student 
is taking at least five courses? more than five 
courses? 
e.	 Calculate P(3 # x # 6) and P(3 , x , 6). Explain 
in words why these two probabilities are different. 
7.9	 ▼ Let y denote the number of broken eggs in a 
randomly selected carton of one dozen eggs. Suppose 
that the probability distribution of y is as follows:
y
0
1
2
3
4
p(y)
.65
.20
.10
.04
?
a.	 Only y values of 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 have positive 
probabilities. What is p(4)? (Hint: Consider 
the properties of a discrete probability 
distribution.) 
b.	How would you interpret p(1) 5 .20?
c.	 Calculate P(y # 2), the probability that the carton 
contains at most two broken eggs, and interpret 
this probability. 
d.	Calculate P(y , 2), the probability that the carton 
contains fewer than two broken eggs. Why is this 
smaller than the probability in Part (c)? 
e.	 What is the probability that the carton contains 
exactly 10 unbroken eggs? 
f.	 What is the probability that at least 10 eggs are 
unbroken? 
7.10	 Suppose that fund-raisers at a university call recent 
graduates to request donations for campus outreach 
programs. They report the following information for 
last year’s graduates:
Size of donation 
$0 
$10 
$25 
$50
Proportion of calls 
0.45 
0.30 
0.20 
0.05
Three attempts were made to contact each graduate. 
A donation of $0 was recorded both for those who 
were contacted but who declined to make a donation 
and for those who were not reached in three attempts. 
Consider the variable x 5 amount of donation for the 
population of last year’s graduates of this university.
a.	 Write a few sentences describing what you think 
you might see if the value of x was observed for 
each of 1000 graduates.
b.	What is the most common value of x in this 
population? 
c.	 What is P(x $ 25)? 
d.	What is P(x . 0)? 
7.11	 Airlines sometimes overbook flights. Suppose that for 
a plane with 100 seats, an airline takes 110 reserva-
tions. Define the variable x as the number of people 
who actually show up for a sold-out flight. From past 
experience, the probability distribution of x is given 
in the following table:
x
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
p(x)
.05
.10
.12
.14
.24
.17
.06
.04
x
103 104 105 106 107 108
109
110
p(x)
.03
.02
.01 .005 .005 .005 .0037 .0013
a.	 What is the probability that the airline can 
accommodate everyone who shows up for the 
flight? 
b.	What is the probability that not all passengers can 
be accommodated? 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

362 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
c.	 If you are trying to get a seat on such a flight and 
you are number 1 on the standby list, what is the 
probability that you will be able to take the flight? 
What if you are number 3? 
7.12	 Suppose that a computer manufacturer receives 
computer boards in lots of five. Two boards are 
selected from each lot for inspection. We can 
represent possible outcomes of the selection process 
by pairs. For example, the pair (1,2) represents the 
selection of Boards 1 and 2 for inspection.
a.	 List the 10 different possible outcomes.
b.	Suppose that Boards 1 and 2 are the only defective 
boards in a lot of five. Two boards are to be chosen 
at random. Define x to be the number of defective 
boards observed among those inspected. Find the 
probability distribution of x.
7.13	 Simulate the chance experiment described in the 
previous exercise using five slips of paper, with two 
marked defective and three marked nondefective. Place 
the slips in a box, mix them well, and draw out two. 
Record the number of defective boards. Replace 
the slips and repeat until you have 50 observations 
on the variable x. Construct a relative frequency 
distribution for the 50 observations, and compare 
this with the probability distribution obtained in the 
previous exercise.
7.14	 Of all airline flight requests received by a certain dis-
count ticket broker, 70% are for domestic travel (D) 
and 30% are for international flights (I). Let x be the 
number of requests among the next three requests 
received that are for domestic flights. Assuming 
independence of successive requests, determine the 
probability distribution of x. (Hint: See Example 7.5.)
7.15	 Suppose that 20% of all homeowners in an 
earthquake-prone area of California are insured 
against earthquake damage. Four homeowners are 
selected at random; let x denote the number among 
the four who have earthquake insurance.
a.	 Find the probability distribution of x. (Hint: Let S 
denote a homeowner who has insurance and F one 
who does not. Then one possible outcome is SFSS, 
with probability (.2)(.8)(.2)(.2) and associated 
x value of 3. There are 15 other outcomes.)
b.	What is the most likely value of x? 
c.	 What is the probability that at least two of the four 
selected homeowners have earthquake insurance? 
7.16	 A box contains five slips of paper, marked $1, $1, $1, 
$10, and $25. The winner of a contest selects two 
slips of paper at random and then gets the larger of 
the dollar amounts on the two slips. Define a random 
variable w by w 5 amount awarded. Determine the 
probability distribution of w. (Hint: Think of the slips 
as numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, so that an outcome of 
the experiment consists of two of these numbers.)
7.17	 Components coming off an assembly line are either 
free of defects (S, for success) or defective (F, for 
failure). Suppose that 70% of all such components 
are defect-free. Components are independently 
selected and tested one by one. Let y denote the 
number of components that must be tested until a 
defect-free component is obtained.
a.	 What is the smallest possible y value, and what 
experimental outcome gives this y value? What is 
the second smallest y value, and what outcome 
gives rise to it?
b.	What is the set of all possible y values? 
c.	 Determine the probability of each of the five 
smallest y values. You should see a pattern that 
leads to a simple formula for p(y), the probability 
distribution of y.
7.18	 A contractor is required by a county planning 
department to submit anywhere from one to five 
forms (depending on the nature of the project) 
in applying for a building permit. Let y be the 
number of forms required of the next applicant. The 
probability that y forms are required is known to be 
proportional to y; that is, p(y) 5 ky for y 5 1, . . . , 5.
a.	 What is the value of k? (Hint: o ps yd 1.) 
b.	What is the probability that at most three forms 
are required? 
c.	 What is the probability that between two and four 
forms (inclusive) are required? 
d.  ​Could ps yd y2y50 for y 5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 be the 
probability distribution of y? Explain. 
7.19	 A library subscribes to two different weekly news 
magazines, each of which is supposed to arrive in 
Wednesday’s mail. In actuality, each one could arrive 
on Wednesday (W), Thursday (T), Friday (F), or 
Saturday (S). Suppose that the two magazines ar-
rive independently of one another and that for each 
magazine 
P(W) 5 .4,  P(T) 5 .3,  P(F) 5 .2, and  P(S) 5 .1
Define a random variable y by 
y 5 the number of days beyond Wednesday that it 
takes for both magazines to arrive. 
For example, if the first magazine arrives on Friday 
and the second magazine arrives on Wednesday, then 
y 5 2, whereas y 5 1 if both magazines arrive on 
Thursday. Determine the probability distribution of y. 
(Hint: Draw a tree diagram with two generations of 
branches, the first labeled with arrival days for 
Magazine 1 and the second for Magazine 2.)5
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.3   Probability Distributions for Continuous Random Variables  
●  363
 7.3  
Probability Distributions for Continuous  
Random Variables
A continuous random variable is one that has possible values that form an entire interval 
on the number line. An example is the weight x (in pounds) of a full-term newborn child. 
Suppose for the moment that weight is recorded only to the nearest pound. Then a reported 
weight of 7 pounds would be used for any weight greater than or equal to 6.5 pounds and 
less than 7.5 pounds. 
The probability distribution can be pictured as a probability histogram in which 
rectangles are centered at 4, 5, and so on. The area of each rectangle is the probability of 
the corresponding weight value. The total area of all the rectangles is 1, and the probability 
that a weight (to the nearest pound) is between two values, such as 6 and 8, is the sum of 
the corresponding rectangular areas. Figure 7.5(a) illustrates this.
Now suppose that weight is measured to the nearest tenth of a pound. There are many 
more possible reported weight values than before, such as 5.0, 5.1, 5.7, 7.3, and 8.9. As 
shown in Figure 7.5(b), the rectangles in the probability histogram are much narrower, and 
this histogram has a much smoother appearance than the first one. Again, this histogram 
can be drawn so that the area of each rectangle equals the corresponding probability 
associated with the interval, and the total area of all the rectangles is 1. 
Figure 7.5(c) shows what happens as weight is measured to a greater and greater degree 
of accuracy. The sequence of probability histograms approaches a smooth curve. The curve 
cannot go below the horizontal measurement scale, and the total area under the curve is 1 
(because this is true of each probability histogram). The probability that x falls in an inter-
val such as 6 # x # 8 is represented by the area under the curve and above that interval.
Figure  7.5
Probability distribution for birth 
weight:  
(a) weight measured to the nearest 
pound;  
(b) weight measured to the nearest 
tenth of a pound;  
(c) limiting curve as measurement  
accuracy increases; shaded area 5  
P(6 # weight # 8).
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
(a)
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
(c)
5
4
10
6
7
8
9
(b)
A probability distribution for a continuous random variable x is specified by a 
curve called a density curve. The function that defines this curve is denoted by 
f(x) and it is called the density function.
The following are properties of all continuous probability distributions:
1.	 f(x) $ 0 (the curve cannot dip below the horizontal axis).
2.	 The total area under the density curve is equal to 1.
The probability that x falls in any particular interval is equal to the area 
under the density curve and above the interval.
Many probability calculations for continuous random variables involve the following 
three types of events:
1.	 a , x , b, the event that the random variable x assumes a value between two 
given numbers, a and b
2.	 x , a, the event that the random variable x assumes a value less than a given 
number a
3.	 x .b, the event that the random variable x assumes a value greater than a given 
number b (this can also be written as b , x)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

364 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
Figure 7.6 illustrates how the probabilities of these events are represented by areas under 
a density curve.
Example 7.8 
Application Processing Times
Suppose x represents the continuous random variable
x 5 amount of time (in minutes) taken by a clerk to process a certain type of  
applica­tion form
Suppose that x has a probability distribution with density function
fsxd 5
.5
4 , x , 6
0
otherwise
The graph of f(x), the density curve, is shown in Figure 7.7(a). It is especially easy to use 
this density curve to calculate probabilities, because it just requires finding the area of 
rectangles using the formula
area 5 (base)(height)
Understand the context ❭
Figure  7.7
The probability distribution for  
Example 7.8.
Density
0.5
4
5
6
Minutes
(a)
x
Density
0.5
4
4.5
5.5
4.5
5.5
5
6
Minutes
(b)
x
Density
0.5
4
5
6
Minutes
(c)
x
P(4.5 < x < 5.5)
P(x > 5.5)
Figure  7.6
Probabilities as areas under a 
probability density curve.
b
a
b
a
P(a < x < b)
P(x < a)
P(x > b)
The curve has positive height, 0.5, only between x 5 4 and x 5 6. The total area under 
the curve is just the area of the rectangle with base extending from 4 to 6 and with height 
0.5. This gives
area 5 (6 2 4)(0.5) 5 1
as required.
When the density is constant over an interval (resulting in a horizontal density curve), 
the probability distribution is called a uniform distribution.
As illustrated in Figure 7.7(b), the probability that x is between 4.5 and 5.5 is
Ps4.5 , x , 5.5d area of shaded rectangle
 sbase widthdsheightd
s5.5 2 4.5ds.5d
.5
Similarly (see Figure 7.7(c)), because in this context x . 5.5 is equivalent to 5.5 , x # 6, 
we have
Psx . 5.5d s6 2 5.5ds.5d .25
According to this model, in the long run, 25% of all forms that are processed will have 
processing times that exceed 5.5 min.	
■
Do the work ❭
Inerpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.3   Probability Distributions for Continuous Random Variables  
●  365
The probability that a discrete random variable x lies in the interval between two limits a 
and b can depend on whether either limit is included in the interval. For example, suppose 
that x is the number of major defects on a new automobile. Then
Ps3 # x # 7d ps3d 1 ps4d 1 ps5d 1 ps6d 1 ps7d
whereas
Ps3 , x , 7d ps4d 1 ps5d 1 ps6d
However, if x is a continuous random variable, such as task completion time, then
Ps3 # x # 7d Ps3 , x , 7d
because the area under a density curve and above a single value such as 3 or 7 is 0. 
Geometrically, we can think of finding the area above a single point as finding the area of a 
rectangle with width 5 0. For a continuous random variable, the area above an interval of 
values, therefore, does not depend on whether either endpoint is included.
If x is a continuous random variable, then for any two numbers a and b 
with a , b,
P(a # x # b) P(a , x # b) P(a # x , b) P(a , x , b)
Probabilities for continuous random variables are often calculated using cumulative 
areas. A cumulative area is all of the area under the density curve to the left of a particular 
value. Figure 7.8 illustrates the cumulative area to the left of .5, which represents P(x , .5). 
The probability that x is in any particular interval, P(a , x , b), can be expressed as the 
difference between two cumulative areas.
Figure  7.8
A cumulative area under a density 
curve.
.5
P(x < .5)
The probability that a continuous random variable x lies between a lower limit a 
and an upper limit b is
P(a , x , b) (cumulative area to the left of b) 2 (cumulative area to the left of a)
P(x , b) 2 P(x , a)
This property is illustrated in Figure 7.9 for the case of a 5 .25 and b 5 .75. We will use 
this result often in Section 7.6 when we calculate probabilities for random variables that 
have a normal distribution.
Figure  7.9
Calculation of P(a , x , b) using  
cumulative areas.
.5
.75
1
.25
0
.5
.75
1
.25
0
.5
.75
1
.25
0
P(.25 < x < .75)
P(x < .75)
P(x < .25)
=
–
For some continuous distributions, cumulative areas can be calculated using methods 
from the branch of mathematics called integral calculus. However, because we are not 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

366 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
assuming knowledge of calculus, we will rely on technology or tables that have been 
constructed for the commonly encountered continuous probability distributions. Most 
graphing calculators and statistical software packages will compute areas for the most 
widely used continuous probability distributions.
EXERCISES 7.20 - 7.26
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
7.20	 Let x denote the lifetime (in thousands of hours) of a 
certain type of fan used in diesel engines. The density 
curve of x is as pictured:
0
25
50
Shade the area under the curve corresponding to 
each of the following probabilities (draw a new curve 
for each part). (Hint: See Example 7.8.)
a.	 Ps10 , x , 25d
b.	Ps10 # x # 25d
c.	 Psx , 30d
d.	The probability that the lifetime is at least 25,000 
hours
e.	 The probability that the lifetime exceeds 25,000 
hours
7.21	 A particular professor never dismisses class early. Let 
x denote the amount of time past the hour (minutes) 
that elapses before the professor dismisses class. Sup-
pose that x has a uniform distribution on the interval 
from 0 to 10 minutes. The density curve is shown in 
the following figure:
1
10
10
0
Time
(minutes)
Density
x
a.	 What is the probability that at most 
5 minutes elapse before dismissal? (Hint: See 
Example 7.8.) 
b.	What is the probability that between 3 and 
5 minutes elapse before dismissal? 
7.22	 Refer to the probability distribution given in the 
previous exercise. Put the following probabilities in 
order, from smallest to largest: 
Ps2 , x , 3d, Ps2 # x # 3d, Psx , 2d, Psx . 7d 
Explain your reasoning. 
7.23	 The article “Modeling Sediment and Water Column 
Interactions for Hydrophobic Pollutants” (Water Research 
[1984]: 1169–​1174) suggests the uniform distribution 
on the interval from 7.5 to 20 as a model for 
x 5 depth (in centimeters) of the bioturbation layer 
in sediment for a certain region.
a.	 Draw the density curve for x. (Hint: See Example 7.8)
b.	What is the height of the density curve? 
c.	 What is the probability that x is at most 12? 
d.	What is the probability that x is between 10 
and 15? 
e.	 What is the probability that x is between 12 
and 17? 
f.	 Why are the two probabilities computed in Parts (d) 
and (e) equal? 
7.24	 Let x denote the amount of gravel sold (in tons) 
during a randomly selected week at a particular sales 
facility. Suppose that the density curve has height f(x) 
above the value x, where
fsxd 5
2s1 2 xd
0 # x # 1
0
otherwise
The density curve (the graph of f(x)) is shown in the 
following figure:
Density
x
2
0
1
Tons5  
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.4   Mean and Standard Deviation of a Random Variable 
●  367
Use the fact that the area of a triangle 1
2 sbasedsheightd 
to calculate each of the following probabilities. (Hint: 
Drawing a picture and shading the appropriate area 
will help.)
a.	 P1x , 1
22 
b.	P1x # 1
22 
c.	 P1x , 1
42 
d.	P1
1
4 , x , 1
22 (Hint: Use the results of  
Parts (a)–(c).) 
e.	 The probability that gravel sold exceeds 1
2 ton 
f.	 The probability that gravel sold is at least 1
4 ton
7.25	 Let x be the amount of time (in minutes) that a 
particular San Francisco commuter must wait for 
a BART train. Suppose that the density curve is as 
pictured (a uniform distribution):
0.05
20
0
Minutes
Density
x
a.	 What is the probability that x is less than 
10 minutes? more than 15 minutes? 
 7.4  
Mean and Standard Deviation of a Random Variable
b.	What is the probability that x is between 7 and 
12 minutes? 
c.	 Find the value c for which P(x , c) 5 .9.  
7.26	 Referring to the previous exercise, let x and y be 
waiting times on two independently selected days. 
Define a new random variable w by 
w 5 x 1 y
the sum of the two waiting times. The set of possible 
values for w is the interval from 0 to 40 (because both 
x and y can range from 0 to 20). It can be shown that 
the density curve of w is as pictured (this curve is 
called a triangular distribution, for obvious reasons!):
0.05
40
20
0
Minutes
Density
w
a.	 Verify that the total area under the density curve 
is equal to 1. (Hint: The area of a triangle is
 1
2 sbasedsheightd.)
b.	What is the probability that w is less than 20? 
c.	 What is the probability that w is less than 10? 
d.	What is the probability that w is greater 
than 30? 
e.	 What is the probability that w is between 10 
and 30? (Hint: It might be easier first to find the 
probability that w is not between 10 and 30.) 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
We study a random variable x, such as the number of insurance claims made by a homeowner 
(a discrete variable) or the birth weight of a baby (a continuous variable), to learn something 
about how its values are distributed along the measurement scale. The sample mean x and 
sample standard deviation s summarize center and spread for the values in a sample. Similarly, 
the mean value and standard deviation of a random variable describe where the variable’s 
probability distribution is centered and the extent to which it spreads out about the center.
The mean value of a random variable x, denoted by mx, describes where the 
probability distribution of x is centered.
The standard deviation of a random variable x, denoted by sx, describes 
variability in the probability distribution. When the value of sx is small, observed 
values of x will tend to be close to the mean value (little variability). When the 
value of sx is large, there will be more variability in observed x values.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

368 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
Consider the probability distributions in Figure 7.10. 
1.	 Figure 7.10(a) shows two discrete probability distributions with the same 
standard deviation (spread) but different means (center). One distribution has a 
mean of mx 5 6 and the other has mx 5 10. Which has the mean of 6 and which 
has the mean of 10? 
2.	 Figure 7.10(b) shows two continuous probability distributions that have the same 
mean but different standard deviations. Which distribution—(i) or (ii)—has the 
larger standard deviation? 
3.	 Figure 7.10(c) shows three continuous distributions with different means and 
standard deviations. Which of the three distributions has the largest mean? Which 
has a mean of about 5? Which distribution has the smallest standard deviation? 
The answers to these questions are the following: Figure 7.10(a)(ii) has a mean of 6, 
and Figure 7.10(a)(i) has a mean of 10; Figure 7.10(b)(ii) has the larger standard deviation; 
Figure 7.10(c)(iii) has the largest mean, Figure 7.10(c)(ii) has a mean of about 5, and 
Figure 7.10(c)(iii) has the smallest standard deviation.
It is customary to use the terms mean of the random variable x and mean of the probability 
distribution of x interchangeably. Similarly, the standard deviation of the random variable x 
.10
.20
.30
.40
0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
(a)
(i)
(ii)
p(x)
p(x)
.10
.20
.30
.40
0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
0.1
0.2
0
0
10
20
(b)
(i)
(ii)
Density
Density
0.1
0.2
0
0
10
20
Density
Density
Density
0.1
0.2
0
25
5
15
(c)
(i)
(ii)
0.1
0.2
0
25
5
15
(iii)
0.1
0.2
0
25
5
15
Figure  7.10
Some probability distributions:  
(a) different values of mx with the 
same value of sx;  
(b) different values of sx with the 
same value of mx;  
(c) different values of mx and sx.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.4   Mean and Standard Deviation of a Random Variable 
●  369
and the standard deviation of the probability distribution of x refer to the same thing. 
Although the mean and standard deviation are computed differently for discrete and 
continuous random variables, the interpretation is the same in both cases.
Mean Value of a Discrete Random Variable
Consider a chance experiment consisting of randomly selecting an automobile licensed in 
a particular state. Consider the discrete random variable x defined as 
x 5 the number of low-beam headlights on the selected car that need adjustment
Possible x values are 0, 1, and 2, and the probability distribution of x might be as follows:
x value 
 0
 1
 2
Probability 
.5 
.3 
.2
The corresponding probability histogram appears in Figure 7.11. In a sample of 100 cars, 
the sample relative frequencies might differ somewhat from the given probabilities (which 
are the limiting relative frequencies). For example, we might see:
x value 
  ​0 
  ​1 
  ​2
Frequency 
46 
33 
21
The sample average value of x for these 100 observations is then the sum of 46 zeros, 
33 ones, and 21 twos, all divided by 100:
x s46ds0d 1 s33ds1d 1 s21ds2d
100
1
46
1002s0d 11
33
1002s1d 11
21
1002s2d
srel. freq. of 0ds0d 1 srel. freq. of 1ds1d 1 srel. freq. of 2ds2d
.75
As the sample size increases, each relative frequency approaches the corresponding 
probability. In a very long sequence of experiments, the value of x approaches
mena value of x Psx 0ds0d 1 Psx 1ds1d 1 Psx 2ds2d
s.5ds0d 1 s.3ds1d 1 s.2ds2d
.70
Notice that the expression for x is a weighted average of possible x values. The weight 
of each value is the observed relative frequency. Similarly, the mean value of the random 
variable x is a weighted average, but now the weights are the probabilities from the 
probability distribution.
Figure  7.11
Probability histogram for the 
distribution of the number of 
headlights needing adjustment.
p(x)
x
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
0
2
1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

370 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
Mean value of a discrete random variable: The mean value of a discrete 
random variable x, denoted by mx, is computed by first multiplying each 
possible x value by the probability of observing that value and then adding the 
resulting quantities. Symbolically, 
mx 5 ox ? p(x)
The term expected value is sometimes used in place of mean value, and E(x) is 
alternative notation for mx.
all possible  
x values
DEFINITION
Example 7.9 
Exam Attempts
Individuals applying for a certain license are allowed up to four attempts to pass the 
licensing exam. Consider the random variable x defined as 
x 5 the number of attempts made by a randomly selected applicant
Suppose the probability distribution of x is as follows:
x 
1
2
3
4
p(x) 
.10 
.20 
.30 
.40
Then x has mean value
mx ox ? psxd
s1dps1d 1 s2dps2d 1 s3dps3d 1 s4dps4d
s1ds.10d 1 s2ds.20d 1 s3ds.30d 1 s4ds.40d
.10 1 .40 1 .90 1 1.60
3.00
This means that the mean number of exam attempts for individuals applying for the 
license is 3.
■
It is no accident that the symbol mx for the mean value is the same symbol used previously for 
a population mean. When the probability distribution describes how x values are distributed 
among the members of a population (and therefore the probabilities are population relative 
frequencies), the mean value of x is the average value of x in the population.
Example 7.10 
Apgar Scores
At 1 minute after birth and again at 5 minutes, each newborn child is given a numerical 
rating called an Apgar score. Possible values of this score are 0, 1, 2, . . . , 9, 10. A child’s 
score is determined by five factors: muscle tone, skin color, respiratory effort, strength of 
heartbeat, and reflex, with a high score indicating a healthy infant. 
Consider the random variable x defined as 
x 5 the Apgar score (at 1 minute) of a randomly selected newborn infant at a particular 
hospital 
Suppose that x has the following probability distribution:
x 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
p(x) 
.002 
.001 
.002 
.005 
.02 
.04 
.17 
.38 
.25 
.12 
.01
The mean value of x is
mx s0dps0d 1 s1dps1d 1 Á 1 s9dps9d 1 s10dps10d
s0ds.002d 1 s1ds.001d 1 Á 1 s9ds.12d 1 s10ds.01d
 7.16
Understand the context ❭
Do the work ❭
x 5 1,2,3,4
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
Do the work ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.4   Mean and Standard Deviation of a Random Variable 
●  371
The average Apgar score for a sample of newborn children born at this hospital may be 
x 7.05, x 8.30, or any one of a number of other possible values between 0 and 10. 
However, as child after child is born and rated, the average score will approach the value 
7.16. This value can be interpreted as the mean Apgar score for the population of all babies 
born at this hospital.
■
Standard Deviation of a Discrete Random Variable
The mean value mx provides only a partial summary of a probability distribution. Two 
different distributions can have the same value of mx, but a long sequence of observations 
from one distribution might exhibit considerably more variability than a long sequence of 
observations from the other distribution.
Example 7.11 
Glass Panels
Flat screen TVs require high quality glass with very few flaws. A television manufacturer 
receives glass panels from two different suppliers. Let x and y denote the number of flaws in 
a randomly selected glass panel from the first and second suppliers, respectively. Suppose 
that the probability distributions for x and y are as follows:
x 
 0 
 1 
 2 
 3 
4
y 
 0 
 1 
 2 
3 
4
p(x) 
.4 
.3 
.2 
.1 
0 
p(y) 
.2 
.6 
.2 
0 
0
Probability histograms for x and y are given in Figure 7.12.
It is easy to verify that the mean values of both x and y are 1, so for either supplier the 
long-run average number of flaws per panel is 1. However, the two probability histograms 
show that the probability distribution for the second supplier is concentrated closer to the 
mean value than is the first supplier’s distribution.
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
Figure  7.12
Probability distribution for the number 
of flaws in a glass panel in Example 7.11: 
(a) Supplier 1;  
(b) Supplier 2.
p(x)
x
.1
.2
.3
.4
0
2
(a)
(b)
3
mx = my = 1
4
1
p(y)
y
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
0
2
3
4
1
The greater spread of the first distribution implies that there will be more variability in a 
long sequence of observed x values than in an observed sequence of y values. For example, 
the y sequence will contain no 3’s, whereas in the long run, 10% of the observed x values 
will be 3.	
■
As with s2 and s, the variance and standard deviation of a random variable x involve squared 
deviations from the mean. A value far from the mean results in a large squared deviation. 
However, such a value does not contribute substantially to variability in x if the probability 
associated with that value is small. For example, if mx 5 1 and x 5 25 is a possible value, 
then the squared deviation is (25 2 1)2 5 576. However, if P(x 5 25) 5 .000001, the value 
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

372 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
25 will hardly ever be observed, so it won’t contribute much to variability in a long sequence of 
observations. This is why each squared deviation is multiplied by the probability associated with 
the value to obtain a measure of variability.
Variance of a discrete random variable: The variance of a discrete random 
variable x, denoted by 2x, is computed by 
1.	 subtracting the mean from each possible x value to obtain the deviations
2.	 squaring each deviation 
3.	 multiplying each squared deviation by the probability of the corresponding  
x value
4.	 adding these quantities
Symbolically, 
2x 5 o(x2xd2p(x)
Standard deviation of a discrete random variable: The standard deviation of 
a discrete random variable x, denoted by sx, is the square root of the variance.
all possible  
x values
DEFINITION
When the probability distribution describes how x values are distributed among members 
of a population (so that the probabilities are population relative frequencies), s2x and sx are 
the population variance and standard deviation of x, respectively.
Example 7.12 
Glass Panels Revisited
For x 5 number of flaws in a glass panel from the first supplier in Example 7.11,
s2x s0 2 1d2ps0d 1 s1 2 1d2ps1d 1 s2 2 1d2ps2d 1 s3 2 1d2ps3d
s1ds.4d 1 s0ds.3d 1 s1ds.2d 1 s4ds.1d
1.0
Therefore sx 5 1.0. 
For y 5 the number of flaws in a glass panel from the second supplier,
s2y s0 2 1d2s.2d 1 s1 2 1d2s.6d 1 s2 2 1d2s.2d .4
Then sy Ï.4 .632. 
The fact that sx . sy confirms the impression conveyed by Figure 7.12 concerning the 
variability of x and y.
■
Example 7.13 
More on Apgar Scores
Reconsider the distribution of Apgar scores for children born at a certain hospital, 
introduced in Example 7.10. What is the probability that a randomly selected child’s score 
will be within 2 standard deviations of the mean score? As Figure 7.13 shows, values of 
x within 2 standard deviations of the mean are those for which 
m 2 2s , x , m 1 2s
From Example 7.10 we already have mx 5 7.16. The variance is
s2 osx 2 md2psxd osx 2 7.16d2psxd
s0 2 7.16d2s.002d 1 s1 2 7.16d2s.001d 1 Á 1 s10 2 7.16d2s.01d
1.5684
Figure  7.13
Values within 2 standard deviations 
of the mean.
2s
2s
m – 2s
m + 2s
m 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.4   Mean and Standard Deviation of a Random Variable 
●  373
and the standard deviation is
s Ï1.5684 1.25
This gives (using the probabilities given in Example 7.10)
Psm 2 2s , x , m 1 2sd Ps7.16 2 2.50 , x , 7.16 1 2.50d
Ps4.66 , x , 9.66d
ps5d 1 Á 1 ps9d
.96

■
Mean and Standard Deviation When x Is Continuous
For continuous probability distributions, mx and sx can be defined and computed using 
methods from calculus. The details need not concern us. What is important is knowing 
that mx and sx play exactly the same role here as they do in the discrete case. The mean 
value mx locates the center of the continuous distribution and gives the approximate long-
run average of many observed x values. The standard deviation sx measures the extent 
that the continuous distribution (density curve) spreads out about mx and gives informa-
tion about the amount of variability that can be expected in a long sequence of observed 
x values.
Example 7.14 
A “Concrete” Example
A company receives concrete of a certain type from two different suppliers. Consider the 
random variables x and y defined as follows:
x 5 compressive strength of a randomly selected batch from Supplier 1
y 5 compressive strength of a randomly selected batch from Supplier 2
Suppose that
mx 5 4650 pounds/inch2    sx 5 200 pounds/inch2
my 5 4500 pounds/inch2    sy 5 275 pounds/inch2
The long-run average strength per batch for many, many batches from Supplier 1 will be 
roughly 4650 pounds/inch2. This is 150 pounds/inch2 greater than the long-run average 
for batches from Supplier 2. In addition, a long sequence of batches from Supplier 1 
will exhibit substantially less variability in compressive strength values than will a long 
sequence from Supplier 2. The first supplier is preferred to the second both in terms of 
mean value and variability. Figure 7.14 displays density curves that are consistent with 
this information.
Understand the context ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Figure  7.14
Density curves for Example 7.14.
4300
4500
4700
4900
my 5 4500
mx 5 4650
y distribution (sy 5 275)
x distribution (sx 5 200)

■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

374 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
Mean and Variance of Linear Functions and Linear Combinations
We have seen how the mean and standard deviation of one or more random variables 
provide useful information about the variables’ long-run behavior, but we might also be 
interested in the behavior of some function of these variables.
For example, consider the chance experiment in which a customer of a propane gas com­
pany is randomly selected. Suppose that the mean and standard deviation of the random 
variable
x 5 number of gallons required to fill a customer’s propane tank
are known to be 318 gallons and 42 gallons, respectively. The company is considering two 
different pricing models:
Model 1: $3 per gallon
Model 2: service charge of $50 1 $2.80 per gallon
The company is interested in the variable
y 5 amount billed
For each of the two models, y can be expressed as a function of the random variable x:
Model 1: ymodel 1 5 3x
Model 2: ymodel 2 5 50 1 2.8x
Both of these equations are examples of a linear function of x. The mean and standard 
deviation of a linear function of x can be computed from the mean and standard deviation 
of x, as described in the following box.
If x is a random variable with mean mx and variance sx and a and b are 
numerical constants, the random variable y deﬁned by
y 5 a 1 bx
is called a linear function of the random variable x.
The mean of y 5 a 1 bx is
my 5 ma1bx 5 a 1 bmx
The variance of y is
s2y 5 s2a1bx 5 b2s2x
from which it follows that the standard deviation of y is
sy 5 sa1bx 5 ubusx
The Mean, Variance, and Standard Deviation  
of a Linear Function
We can use the results in the preceding box to compute the mean and standard deviation 
of the billing amount variable for the propane gas example, as follows:
For Model 1:
mmodel 1 m3x 3mx 3s318d 954
s2model 1 s23x 32s2x 9s42d2 15,876
smodel 1 Ï15,876 126 3s42d
For Model 2:
mmodel 2 m5012.8x 50 1 2.8mx 50 1 2.8s318d 940.40
s2model 2 s25012.8x 2.82s2x s2.8d2s42d2 13,829.76
smodel 2 Ï13,829.76 117.60, which is equal to 2.8s42d
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.4   Mean and Standard Deviation of a Random Variable 
●  375
The mean billing amount for Model 1 is a bit higher than for Model 2, as is the variability 
in billing amounts. Model 2 results in slightly more consistency from bill to bill in the 
amount charged.
Linear Combinations
Now let’s consider a different type of problem. Suppose that you have three tasks that you 
plan to complete on the way home from school: stop at the library to return an overdue 
book for which you must pay a fine, deposit your most recent paycheck at the bank, and 
stop by the office supply store to purchase paper for your computer printer. Define the 
following variables:
x1 5 time required to return book and pay fine
x2 5 time required to deposit paycheck
x3 5 time required to buy printer paper
We can then define a new variable, y, to represent the total amount of time to complete 
these tasks:
y x1 1 x2 1 x3
Defined in this way, y is an example of a linear combination of random variables.
If x1, x2, . . . , xn are random variables and a1, a2, . . . , an are numerical constants, 
the random variable y defined as 
y a1x1 1 a2x2 1 Á 1 anxn
is a linear combination of the xi’s.
For example, y 5 10x1 2 5x2 1 8x3 is a linear combination of x1, x2, and x3 with a1 5 10, 
a2 5 25 and a3 5 8. 
It is easy to compute the mean of a linear combination of xi’s if the individual means 
m1, m2, . . . , mn are known. The variance and standard deviation of a linear combination 
of the xi’s are also easily computed if the xi’s are independent. Two random variables xi and 
xj are independent if any event defined solely by xi is independent of any event defined 
solely by xj. When the xi’s are not independent, computation of the variance and standard 
deviation of a linear combination of the xi’s is more complicated, and this case is not 
considered here.
If x1, x2, . . . , xn are random variables with means m1, m2, . . . , mn and 
variances s2
1, s2
2, . . . , s2n, respectively, and

y 5 a
1 x1 1 a2 x2 1 … 1 an xn
then
1.	 my 5 ma1x11a2x21 Á 1anxn 5 a1m1 1 a2m2 1 Á 1 anmn
This result is true regardless of whether the xi’s are independent.
2.	 When x1, x2, . . . , xn are independent random variables,
s2y 5 s2a1x11a2x21 Á 1anxn 5 a21s21 1 a22s22 1 Á 1 a2ns2n
sy 5 sa1x1 1 a2x2 1 Á 1 anxn 5 Ïa21s12 1 a22s22 1 Á 1 an2s2n
These formulas are appropriate only when the xi’s are independent.
Mean, Variance, and Standard Deviation for Linear Combinations
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

376 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
Examples 7.15–7.17 illustrate the use of these rules.
Example 7.15 
Freeway Traffic
Three different roads feed into a particular freeway entrance. Suppose that during a fixed 
time period, the number of cars coming from each road onto the freeway is a random 
variable with mean values as follows:
Road
1
2
3
Mean
800
1000
600
With xi representing the number of cars entering from road i, we can define the total 
number of cars entering the freeway y as 
y 5 x1 1 x2 1 x3. 
The mean value of y is
my mx11x21x3
mx1 1 mx2 1 mx3
800 1 1000 1 600
2400
	
■
Example 7.16 
Combining Exam Subscores
A nationwide standardized exam consists of a multiple-choice section and a free response 
section. For each section, the mean and standard deviation are reported to be as shown in 
the following table:
Mean
Standard Deviation
Multiple Choice
38
6
Free Response
30
7
Let’s define x1 and x2 as the multiple-choice score and the free-response score, respectively, 
of a student selected at random from those taking this exam. We are also interested in the 
variable y 5 overall exam score. 
Suppose that the free-response score is given twice the weight of the multiple-choice 
score in determining the overall exam score. Then the overall score is computed as 
y x1 1 2x2
What are the mean and standard deviation of y?
Because y x1 1 2x2 is a linear combination of x1 and x2, the mean of y is
my mx112x2
mx1 1 2mx2
38 1 2s30d
98
This means that the average overall score for students taking this exam is 98.
What about the variance and standard deviation of y? To use the formulas in the preced-
ing box, x1 and x2 must be independent. It is unlikely that the value of x1 (a student’s mul-
tiple-choice score) would be unrelated to the value of x2 (the same student’s free-response 
score), because it seems probable that students who score well on one section of the exam 
will also tend to score well on the other section. Therefore, it would not be appropriate to 
use the formulas mentioned above to calculate the variance and standard deviation.	
■
Understand the context ❭
Understand the context ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Do the work ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.4   Mean and Standard Deviation of a Random Variable 
●  377
Example 7.17 
Baggage Weights
A commuter airline flies small planes between San Luis Obispo and San Francisco. For 
small planes, the baggage weight is a concern, especially on foggy mornings, because the 
weight of the plane has an effect on how quickly the plane can ascend. Suppose that it 
is known that the variable x 5 weight (in pounds) of baggage checked by a randomly 
selected passenger has a mean of 42 and standard deviation of 16. 
Consider a flight on which 10 passengers, all traveling alone, are flying. If we use xi to 
denote the baggage weight for passenger i (for i ranging from 1 to 10), the total weight of 
checked baggage, y, is then
y x1 1 x2 1 Á 1 x10
Notice that y is a linear combination of the xi’s. The mean value of y is
my mx1 1 mx2 1 Á 1 mx10
42 1 42 1 Á 1 42
420
Since the 10 passengers are all traveling alone, it is reasonable to think that the 10 baggage 
weights are unrelated and that the xi’s are independent. (This might not be a reasonable 
assumption if the 10 passengers were not traveling alone.) Then the variance of y is
s2y s2x1 1 s2x2 1 Á 1 s2x10
162 1 162 1 Á 1 162
2650
and the standard deviation of y is
sy Ï2650 50.596
This means that the average total weight of checked baggage is 420 pounds. The large 
standard deviation of 50.596 pounds indicates that there will be a lot of variability in total 
checked baggage weight from flight to flight.
■
One Last Note on Linear Functions and Linear Combinations
In Example 7.17, the random variable of interest was x ​5 ​weight of baggage checked by a 
randomly selected airline passenger. However, when we considered a flight with multiple 
passengers, we added subscripts to create variables like
x1 5 baggage weight for passenger 1
and
x2 ​5 baggage weight for passenger 2
It is important to note that the sum of the baggage weights for two different passengers 
does not result in the same value as doubling the baggage weight of a single passenger. That 
is, the linear combination x1 1 x2 is different from the linear function 2x. 
Although the mean of x1 1 x2 and the mean of 2x are the same, the variances and standard 
deviations are different. For example, for the baggage weight distribution described in 
Example 7.17 (mean of 42 and standard deviation of 16), the mean of 2x is
m2x 2mx 2s42d 84
and the mean of x1 1 x2 is
mx11 x2 mx1 1 mx2 42 1 42 84
However, the variance of 2x is
s22x s2d2s2x 4s162d 1024
whereas the variance of x1 1 x2 is
s2x11 x2 s2x1 1 s2x2 162 1 162 256 1 256 512
Understand the context ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

378 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
This means that observations of 2x for randomly selected passengers will show more 
variability than observations of x1 1 x2 for two randomly selected passengers. This may 
seem counterintuitive, but it is true! For example, each row of the first two columns of 
the accompanying table show simulated baggage weights for two passengers (an x1 and an 
x2 value) that were selected at random from a probability distribution with mean 42 and 
standard deviation 16. The third column of the table contains the value of 2x1 (two times 
the passenger 1 baggage weight) and the last column contains the values of x1 1 x2 (the 
sum of the passenger 1 baggage weight and the passenger 2 baggage weight).
x1
x2
2x1
x1 1  x2
56
41
112
  97
30
  5
  60
  35
32
15
  64
  47
55
45
110
100
40
54
  80
  94
41
68
  82
109
42
35
  84
  77
33
47
  66
  80
46
52
  92
  98
73
40
146
113
x1
x2
2x1
x1 1  x2
44
23
  88
  67
48
54
  96
102
52
69
104
121
56
63
112
119
79
35
158
114
18
34
  36
  52
  8
71
  16
  79
51
58
102
109
18
49
  36
  67
41
46
  82
  87
Figure 7.15 shows dotplots of the 20 values of 2x1 and the 20 values of x1 1 x2. You can see 
that there is less variability in the x1 1 x2 values than in the values of 2x1.
Figure  7.15
Dotplots of 2x1 and x1 1 x2.
20
2(x1)
x1 + x2
40
60
80
100
120
140
Baggage weight
160
exercises 7.27 - 7.42
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
7.27	 Consider selecting a household in rural Thailand at 
random. Define the random variable x to be
x  5  number of individuals living in the selected 
household
Based on information in an article that appeared in 
the Journal of Applied Probability (2011: 173–188), the 
probability distribution of x is as follows:
x
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
p(x)
.140 .175 .220 .260 .155 .025 .015 .005 .004 .001
Calculate the mean value of the random variable x. 
(Hint: See Example 7.9.) 
7.28	 The probability distribution of x, the number of 
defective tires on a randomly selected automobile 
checked at a certain inspection station, is given in the 
following table:
x
0
1
2
3
4
p(x)
.54
.16
.06
.04
.20
a.	 Calculate the mean value of x. 
b.	What is the probability that x exceeds its mean 
value? 
7.29	 Consider the following probability distribution for 
y 5 the number of broken eggs in a carton:
y
0
1
2
3
4
p(y)
.65
.20
.10
.04
.01
a.	 Calculate and interpret my. 
b.	In the long run, for what percentage of cartons is 
the number of broken eggs less than my? Does this 
surprise you?  ​ 
c.	 Why doesn’t my s0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4dy5 2.0? 
Explain.
7.30	 Referring to the previous exercise, use the result of 
Part (a) along with the fact that a carton contains 
12 eggs to determine the mean value of z 5 the 
number of unbroken eggs. (Hint: z can be written as 
a linear function of y; see Example 7.15.) 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.4   Mean and Standard Deviation of a Random Variable 
●  379
7.31	 Exercise 7.8 gave the following probability distri- 
bution for x 5 the number of courses for which a 
randomly selected student at a certain university is 
registered:
x
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
p(x)
.02
.03
.09
.25
.40
.16
.05
It can be easily verified that m 5 4.66 and s 5 1.20.
a.	 Because m 2 s 5 3.46, the x values 1, 2, and 
3 are more than 1 standard deviation below the 
mean. What is the probability that x is more than 
1 standard deviation below its mean? (Hint: See 
Example 7.13.) 
b.	What x values are more than 2 standard deviations 
away from the mean value (either less than 
m 2 2s or greater than m 1 2s)? 
c. What is the probability that x is more than 2 
standard deviations away from its mean value?
7.32	 Example 7.11 gave the probability distributions 
of x 5 ​number of flaws in a randomly selected 
glass panel for two suppliers of glass used 
in the manufacture of flat screen TVs. If the 
manufacturer wanted to select a single supplier for 
glass panels, which of these two suppliers would 
you recommend? Justify your choice based on 
consideration of both center and variability. (Hint: 
See Example 7.11.)
7.33	 Consider a large ferry that can accommodate cars and 
buses. The toll for cars is $3, and the toll for buses is 
$10. Let x and y denote the number of cars and buses, 
respectively, carried on a single trip. Cars and buses are 
accommodated on different levels of the ferry, so the 
number of buses accommodated on any trip is inde-
pendent of the number of cars on the trip. Suppose that 
x and y have the following probability distributions:
x
0
1
2
3
4
5
p(x)
.05
.10
.25
.30
.20
.10
y
0
1
2
p(y)
.50
.30
.20
a.	 Compute the mean and standard deviation of x.
b.	Compute the mean and standard deviation of y.
c.	 Compute the mean and variance of the total 
amount of money collected in tolls from 
cars. 
d.	Compute the mean and variance of the total 
amount of money collected in tolls from 
buses. 
e.	 Compute the mean and variance of z 5 total 
number of vehicles (cars and buses) on the ferry. 
f.	 Compute the mean and variance of w 5 total 
amount of money collected in tolls. 
7.34	 Suppose that for a given computer salesperson, the 
probability distribution of x 5 the number of systems 
sold in 1 month is given by the following table:
x
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
p(x)
.05
.10
.12
.30
.30
.11
.01
.01
a.	 Find the mean value of x (the mean number of 
systems sold). 
b.	Find the variance and standard deviation of x. 
How would you interpret these values? 
c.	 What is the probability that the number of 
systems sold is within 1 standard deviation of its 
mean value? 
d.	What is the probability that the number of 
systems sold is more than 2 standard deviations 
from the mean? (Hint: See Example 7.13.) 
7.35	 A local television station sells 15-second, 30-second, 
and 60-second advertising spots. Let x denote the 
length of a randomly selected commercial appearing 
on this station, and suppose that the probability 
distribution of x is given by the following table:
x
15
30
60
p(x)
 .1
 .3
 .6
a.	 Find the average length for commercials appearing 
on this station. 
b.	If a 15-second spot sells for $500, a 30-second 
spot for $800, and a 60-second spot for $1000, 
find the average amount paid for commercials 
appearing on this station. (Hint: Consider a new 
variable, y 5 cost, and then find the probability 
distribution and mean value of y.)
7.36	 An author has written a book and submitted it to a 
publisher. The publisher offers to print the book and 
gives the author the choice between a flat payment 
of $10,000 and a royalty plan. Under the royalty 
plan the author would receive $1 for each copy of 
the book sold. The author thinks that the following 
table gives the probability distribution of the variable 
x 5 the number of books that will be sold:
x
1000
5000
10,000
20,000
p(x)
.05
.30
.40
.25
Which payment plan should the author choose? Why?
7.37	 A grocery store has an express line for customers 
purchasing five or fewer items. Let x be the number 
of items purchased by a randomly selected customer 
using this line. Give examples of two different 
assignments of probabilities such that the resulting 
distributions have the same mean but quite different 
standard deviations.
7.38	 An appliance dealer sells three different models of 
upright freezers having 13.5, 15.9, and 19.1 cubic 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

380 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
feet of storage space. Let x 5 the amount of storage 
space purchased by the next customer to buy a 
freezer. Suppose that x has the following probability 
distribution:
x
13.5
15.9
19.1
p(x) 
.2
.5
.3
a.	 Calculate the mean and standard deviation of x.
b.	If the price of the freezer depends on the size of 
the storage space, x, such that Price 5 25x 2  
8.5, what is the mean price paid by the next 
customer? 
c.	 What is the standard deviation of the price paid? 
7.39	 ▼ To assemble a piece of furniture, a wood peg 
must be inserted into a predrilled hole. Suppose 
that the diameter of a randomly selected peg is a 
random variable with mean 0.25 inch and standard 
deviation 0.006 inch and that the diameter of a 
randomly selected hole is a random variable with 
mean 0.253 inch and standard deviation 0.002 
inch. Let x1 5 peg diameter, and let x2 5 denote 
hole diameter.
a.	 Why would the random variable y, defined 
as y 5 x2 2 x1, be of interest to the furniture 
manufacturer?
b.	What is the mean value of the random variable y?
c.	 Assuming that x1 and x2 are independent, what is 
the standard deviation of y? 
d.	Is it reasonable to think that x1 and x2 are 
independent? Explain.
e.	 Based on your answers to Parts (b) and (c), do you 
think that finding a peg that is too big to fit in the 
predrilled hole would be a relatively common or a 
relatively rare occurrence? Explain.
7.40	 A multiple-choice exam consists of 50 questions. 
Each question has five choices, of which only one is 
correct. Suppose that the total score on the exam is 
computed as
y x1 2 1
4x2
where x1 5 number of correct responses and 
x2 5 number of incorrect responses. (Calculating 
a total score by subtracting a term based on the 
number of incorrect responses is known as a 
correction for guessing and is designed to discourage 
test takers from choosing answers at random.)
a.	 It can be shown that if a totally unprepared student 
answers all 50 questions by just selecting one of 
the five answers at random, then mx1 10 and 
mx2 40. What is the mean value of the total score, 
y? Does this surprise you? Explain. (Hint: See 
Example 7.16.)
b.	Explain why it is unreasonable to use the formulas 
given in this section to compute the variance or 
standard deviation of y. 
7.41	 Consider a game in which a red die and a blue die 
are rolled. Let xR denote the value showing on the 
uppermost face of the red die, and define xB similarly 
for the blue die.
a.	 The probability distribution of xR is
xR
1
2
3
4
5
6
p(xR)
1/6
1/6
1/6
1/6
1/6
1/6
Find the mean, variance, and standard deviation of xR.
b.	What are the values of the mean, variance, and 
standard deviation of xB? (You should be able to 
answer this question without doing any additional 
calculations.)
c.	 Suppose that you are offered a choice of the 
following two games:
Game 1:  ​Costs $7 to play, and you win y1 dollars, 
where y1 5 xR 1 xB.
Game 2:  ​Doesn’t cost anything to play initially, 
but you “win” 3y2 dollars, where 
y2 5 xR 2 xB. If y2 is negative, you must 
pay that amount; if it is positive, you 
receive that amount.
For Game 1, the net amount won in a game is 
w1 5 y1 2 7 5 xR 1 xB 2 7. What are the mean 
and standard deviation of w1? 
d.	For Game 2, the net amount won in a game is 
w2 5 3y2 5 3(xR 2 xB). What are the mean and 
standard deviation of w2? 
e.	 Based on your answers to Parts (c) and (d), if you had 
to play, which game would you choose and why?
7.42	 The states of Ohio, Iowa, and Idaho are often con-
fused, probably because the names sound so similar. 
Each year, the State Tourism Directors of these three 
states drive to a meeting in one of the state capitals to 
discuss strategies for attracting tourists to their states 
so that the states will become better known. 
The location of the meeting is selected at random 
from the three state capitals. The shortest highway 
distance from Boise, Idaho to Columbus, Ohio passes 
through Des Moines, Iowa. The highway distance 
from Boise to Des Moines is 1350 miles, and the 
distance from Des Moines to Columbus is 650 miles. 
Let d1 represent the driving distance from Columbus 
to the meeting, with d2 and d3 representing the 
distances from Des Moines and Boise, respectively.
a.	 Find the probability distribution of d1 and display 
it in a table.
b.	What is the expected value of d1? 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.5   Binomial and Geometric Distributions 
●  381
c.	 What is the value of the standard deviation of d1?
d.	Consider the probability distributions of d2 and 
d3. Is either probability distribution the same as 
the probability distribution of d1? Justify your 
answer.
e.	 Define a new random variable t d1 1 d2. Find 
the probability distribution of t.
f.	 For each of the following statements, indicate if 
the statement is true or false and provide statistical 
evidence to support your answer.
i.	 Estd Esd1d 1 Esd2d (Hint: E(t) is the expected 
value of t and another way of denoting the 
mean of t.) 
ii.	s2t s2
d1 1 s2
d2 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
 7.5  
Binomial and Geometric Distributions
In this section, we introduce two of the more commonly encountered discrete probability 
distributions: the binomial distribution and the geometric distribution. These distributions 
arise when the chance experiment of interest consists of making a sequence of dichotomous 
observations (two possible values for each observation). The process of making a single 
such observation is called a trial. 
For example, one characteristic of blood type is Rh factor, which can be either positive 
or negative. We can think of a chance experiment that consists of noting the Rh factor for 
each of 25 blood donors as a sequence of 25 dichotomous trials, where each trial consists 
of observing the Rh factor (positive or negative) of a single donor.
We could also conduct a different chance experiment that consists of observing the Rh factor 
of blood donors until a donor who is Rh-negative is encountered. This second experiment 
can also be viewed as a sequence of dichotomous trials, but the total number of trials in 
this experiment is not predetermined, as it was in the previous example, where we knew in 
advance that there would be 25 trials. Experiments of the two types just described are typical 
of those leading to the binomial and the geometric probability distributions, respectively.
Binomial Distributions
Suppose that we decide to record the gender of each of the next 25 newborn children at a 
particular hospital. What is the chance that at least 15 are female? What is the chance that 
between 10 and 15 are female? How many among the 25 can we expect to be female? These and 
other similar questions can be answered by studying the binomial probability distribution. 
The binomial distribution arises when the chance experiment of interest is a binomial 
experiment. Binomial experiments have the properties listed in the following box.
A binomial experiment consists of a sequence of trials with the following 
conditions:
1.	 There are a ﬁxed number of trials.
2.	 Each trial can result in one of only two possible outcomes, labeled success 
(S ) and failure (F ).
3.	 Outcomes of different trials are independent.
4.	 The probability that a trial results in a success is the same for each trial.
The binomial random variable x is deﬁned as
x 5 number of successes observed when a binomial experiment is performed
The probability distribution of x is called the binomial probability 
distribution.
Properties of a Binomial Experiment
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

382 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
The term success here does not necessarily have any of its usual connotations. Which of 
the two possible outcomes is labeled “success” is determined by the random variable of 
interest. For example, if the variable counts the number of female births among the next 
25 births at a particular hospital, then a female birth would be labeled a success (because 
this is what the variable counts). If male births were counted instead, a male birth would 
be labeled a success and a female birth a failure.
One situation in which a binominal probability distribution arises was given in 
Example 7.5. In that example, we considered x ​5 ​number among four customers who 
selected an energy efficient refrigerator (rather than a less expensive model). This is a 
binomial experiment with four trials, where the purchase of an energy efficient refrigerator 
is considered a success and P(success) ​5 ​P(E) ​5 ​.4. The 16 possible outcomes, along with 
the associated probabilities, were displayed in Table 7.1.
Consider now the case of five customers, a binomial experiment with five trials. The 
possible values of 
x ​5 ​number who purchase an energy efficient refrigerator
are 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. There are 32 possible outcomes of the binomial experiment, 
each one a sequence of five successes and failures. Five of these outcomes result in  
x 5 1: SFFFF, FSFFF, FFSFF, FFFSF, and FFFFS.
Because the trials are independent, the first of these outcomes has probability
PsSFFFFd PsSdPsFdPsFdPsFdPsFd
s.4ds.6ds.6ds.6ds.6d
s.4ds.6d4
.05184
The probability calculation will be the same for any outcome with only one success (x 5 1). 
It does not matter where in the sequence the single success occurs. It follows that
 ps1d Psx 1d
 PsSFFFF or FSFFF or FFSFF or FFFSF or FFFFSd
 .05184 1 .05184 1 .05184 1 .05184 1 .05184
 s5ds.05184d
 .25920
Similarly, there are 10 outcomes for which x 5 2, because there are 10 ways to select two 
from among the five trials to be the S’s: SSFFF, SFSFF, . . . , and FFFSS. The probability of 
each results from multiplying together (.4) two times and (.6) three times. For example,
 PsSSFFFd s.4ds.4ds.6ds.6ds.6d
 s.4d2s.6d3
 .03456
and so
 ps2d Psx 2d
PsSSFFFd 1 Á 1 PsFFFSSd
 s10ds.4d2s.6d3
 .34560
The general form of the formula for calculating the probabilities associated with the 
different possible values of x is
psxd Psx S’s among the five trialsd
snumber of outcomes with x S’sd?sprobability of any given outcome with x S’sd
snumber of outcomes with x S’sd?s.4dxs.6d52x
This form was seen previously where p(2) 5 10(.4)2(.6)3.
The letter n is used to denote the number of trials in the binomial experiment. Then the 
number of outcomes with x S ’s is the number of ways of selecting x from among the n trials 
to be the success trials. A simple expression for this quantity is
number of outcomes with x successes 
n!
x!sn 2 xd!
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.5   Binomial and Geometric Distributions 
●  383
where, for any positive whole number m, the symbol m! (read “m factorial”) is defined by
m! msm 2 1dsm 2 2d Á  s2ds1d
and 0! 5 1.
Notation:
n 5 number of independent trials in a binomial experiment
p 5 constant probability that any particular trial results in a success
Then
psxd 5 Psx successes among n trialsd
5
n!
x!sn 2 xd! pxs1 2 pdn2x  x 5 0, 1, 2, . . . , n
The expressions 1
n
x2 or nCx are sometimes used in place of 
n!
x!sn 2 xd!. Both 
are read as “n choose x” and represent the number of ways of choosing x items 
from a set of n. Using this notation, the binomial probability function can also 
be written as
psxd 51
n
x2pxs1 2 pdn2x x 5 0, 1, 2, . . . , n
or
psxd 5 nCxpxs1 2 pdn2x x 5 0, 1, 2, . . . , n
The Binomial Distribution
Notice that here the binomial probability distribution is specified using a formula that 
allows calculation of the various probabilities rather than by giving a table or a probability 
histogram.
Example 7.18 
Recognizing Your Roommate’s Scent
An interesting experiment was described in the paper “Sociochemosensory and Emotional 
Functions” (Psychological Science [2009]: 1118–1123). The authors of this paper wondered if 
college students could recognize their roommate by scent. They carried out an experiment in 
which female college students used fragrance-free soap, deodorant, shampoo, and laundry 
detergent for a period of time. Their bedding was also laundered using a fragrance-free 
detergent. Each person was then given a new t-shirt that she slept in for one night. The 
shirt was then collected and sealed in an airtight bag. Later, the roommate was presented 
with three identical t-shirts (one worn by her roommate and two worn by other women) 
and asked to pick the one that smelled most like her roommate. (Yes, hard to believe, but 
people really do research like this!) 
This process was repeated a second time, with the shirts refolded and rearranged before 
the second trial. The researchers recorded how many times (0, 1, or 2) that the shirt worn 
by the roommate was correctly identified.
This can be viewed as a binomial experiment consisting of n ​5 ​2 trials. Each trial results 
in either a correct identification or an incorrect identification. Because the researchers 
counted the number of correct identifications, a correct identification is considered a 
success. We can then define 
x ​5 ​number of correct identifications
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

384 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
Suppose that a participant is not able to identify her roommate by smell. If this is the 
case, she is essentially just picking one of the three shirts at random and so the probability 
of success (picking the correct shirt) is 1/3. And, if a participant can’t identify her roommate 
by smell, it is also reasonable to regard the two trials as independent. In this case, the 
experiment satisfies the conditions of a binomial experiment, and x is a binomial random 
variable with n ​5 ​2 and p ​5 ​1/3.
We can use the binomial probability distribution formula to compute the probability 
associated with each of the possible x values as follows:
ps0d 1
2
021
1
32
01
2
32
2
2!
0!2!1
1
32
01
2
32
2
s1ds1d1
2
32
2
.4444
ps1d 1
2
121
1
32
11
2
32
1
2!
1!1!1
1
32
11
2
32
1
s2d1
1
32
11
2
32
1
.4444
ps2d 1
2
221
1
32
21
2
32
0
2!
2!0!1
1
32
21
2
32
0
s1d1
1
32
2
s1d .1111
Summarizing in table form gives
x
p(x)
0
.4444
1
.4444
2
.1111
This means that about 44.4% of the time, a person who is just guessing would pick the 
correct shirt on neither trial, about 44.4% of the time the correct shirt would be identified 
on one of the two trials, and about 11.1% of the time the correct shirt would be identified 
on both trials.
The authors actually performed this experiment with 44 subjects. They reported that 
47.7% of the subjects identified the correct shirt on neither trial, 22.7% identified the 
correct shirt on one trial, and 31.7% identified the correct shirt on both trials. The fact 
that these observed percentages differed quite a bit from what would have been expected 
if participants were just guessing (as specified by the binomial probabilities in the table 
above) was interpreted by the authors as evidence that some women could in fact identify 
their roommates by smell.
■
Example 7.19 
Computer Sales
Sixty percent of all computers  sold by a large computer retailer are laptops and 40% are 
desktop models. The type of computer purchased by each of the next 12 customers will be 
noted. Define a random variable x as
x 5 number of computers among these 12 that are laptops
Because x counts the number of laptops, we use S to denote the sale of a laptop. Then x is a bino-
mial random variable with n 5 12 and p 5 P(S)5 .60. The probability distribution of x is given by
psxd 
12!
x!s12 2 xd! s.6dxs.4d122x x 0, 1, 2, . . . , 12
The probability that exactly four computers are laptops is
 ps4d Psx 4d
12!
4!8! s.6d4s.4d8
s495ds.6d4s.4d8
.042
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.5   Binomial and Geometric Distributions 
●  385
If group after group of 12 purchases is examined, the long-run percentage of those with 
exactly four laptops will be 4.2%. 
The probability that between four and seven (inclusive) are laptops is
Ps4 # x # 7d Psx 4 or x 5 or x 6 or x 7d
Since these outcomes are mutually exclusive, this is equal to
Ps4 # x # 7d ps4d 1 ps5d 1 ps6d 1 ps7d
12!
4!8! s.6d4s.4d8 1 Á 1 12!
7!5! s.6d7s.4d5
.042 1 .101 1 .177 1 .227
.547
Notice that
Ps4 , x , 7d Psx 5 or x 6d
ps5d 1 ps6d
.278
so the probability depends on whether , or # appears in the inequality. (This is typical of 
discrete random variables.)
■
The binomial distribution formula can be tedious to use unless n is small. Statistical 
software and most graphing calculators can compute binomial probabilities. If you don't 
have access to technology, Appendix Table 9 gives binomial probabilities for selected n in 
combination with various values of p. 
To ﬁnd p(x) for any particular value of x,
1.	 Locate the part of the table corresponding to your value of n (5, 10, 
15, 20, or 25).
2.	 Move down to the row labeled with your value of x.
3.	 Go across to the column headed by the speciﬁed value of p.
The desired probability is at the intersection of the designated x row and 
p column. For example, when n 5 20 and p 5 .8,
p(15) 5 P(x 5 15) 5 (entry at intersection of n 5 15 row and 
p 5 .8 column) 5 .175
Using Appendix Table 9
Although p(x) is positive for every possible x value, many probabilities are zero to three 
decimal places, so they appear as .000 in the table. More extensive binomial tables are 
available. 
Sampling Without Replacement
Usually, sampling is carried out without replacement. This means that once an element 
has been selected for the sample, it is not a candidate for future selection. If sampling is 
done by selecting an element from the population, observing whether it is a success or 
a failure, and then returning it to the population before the next selection is made, the 
variable 
x 5 number of successes 
observed in the sample would fit all the requirements of a binomial random variable. 
When sampling is done without replacement, the trials (individual selections) are not 
independent. In this case, the number of successes observed in the sample does not have 
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

386 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
a binomial distribution but rather a different type of distribution called a hypergeometric 
distribution. The probability calculations for this distribution are even more tedious than 
for the binomial distribution. Fortunately, when the sample size n is much smaller than 
N, the population size, probabilities calculated using the binomial distribution and 
the hypergeometric distribution are very close in value. They are so close, in fact, that 
statisticians often ignore the difference and use the binomial probabilities in place of 
the hypergeometric probabilities. You can use the following guideline for determining 
whether the binomial probability distribution is appropriate when sampling without 
replacement.
Let x denote the number of S’s in a sample of size n selected without replacement 
from a population consisting of N individuals or objects. If (n/N) # 0.05 (that is, 
at most 5% of the population is sampled), then the binomial distribution gives  
a good approximation to the actual (hypergeometric) probability distribution  
of x.*
*In Chapter 8, we will see a different situation where a similar condition is introduced, but where the requirement 
is that at most 10% of the population is included in the sample. Be careful not to confuse these rules.
Example 7.20 
Online Security
The 2009 National Cyber Security Alliance (NCSA) Symantec Online Safety Study 
found that only about 25% of adult Americans change passwords on online accounts at 
least quarterly as recommended by the NCSA (“New Study Shows Need for Americans to 
Focus on Securing Online Accounts and Backing Up Critical Data,” PRNewswire, October  29, 
2009). Suppose that exactly 25% of adult Americans change passwords quarterly. Con-
sider a random sample of n ​5 ​20 adult Americans (much less than 5% of the popula-
tion). Then 
x ​5 ​the number in the sample who change passwords quarterly 
has (approximately) a binomial distribution with n ​5 ​20 and p ​5 ​.25. The probability that 
five of those sampled change passwords quarterly is
Ps5d Psx 5d
entry in x 5 row and p .25 column in Appendix Table 9 for n 20
.202
The probability that at least half of those in the sample (that is, 10 or more) change 
passwords quarterly is
Psx $ 10d Psx 10, 11, 12, Á , 20d
ps10d 1 ps11d 1 Á 1 ps20d
.010 1 .003 1 .001 1 Á 1 .000
.014
If, in fact, p ​5 ​.25, only about 1.4% of all samples of size 20 would result in at least 10 
people who change passwords quarterly. Because Psx $ 10d is so small when p ​5 ​.25, if 
x $ 10 were actually observed, we would have to wonder whether the reported value of 
p 5 ​.25 is correct. 
Although it is possible that we would observe x $ 10 when p ​5 ​.25 (this would happen 
about 1.4% of the time in the long run), it might also be the case that p is actually greater 
than .25. In Chapter 10, we show how hypothesis-testing methods can be used to decide 
which of two contradictory claims about a population (such as p ​5 ​.25 or p . ​25) is more 
believable.
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.5   Binomial and Geometric Distributions 
●  387
Technology, the binomial formula or tables can be used to compute each of the 21 prob-
abilities p(0), p(1), . . . , p(20). Figure 7.16 shows the probability histogram for the bino-
mial distribution with n 5 20 and p 5 .25. Notice that the distribution is skewed to the 
right. (The binomial distribution is symmetric only when p 5 .5.)
■
Mean and Standard Deviation of a Binomial Random Variable
A binomial random variable x based on n trials has possible values 0, 1, 2, . . . , n, so the 
mean value is
mx oxpsxd s0dps0d 1 s1dps1d 1 Á 1 sndpsnd
and the variance of x is
s2x osx 2 mxd2 ? psxd
s0 2 mxd2ps0d 1 s1 2 mxd2ps1d 1 Á 1 sn 2 mxd2psnd
These expressions would be very tedious to evaluate for any particular values of n and p. 
Fortunately, there are simple formulas for the mean and standard deviation of a binomial 
random variable.
The mean value and the standard deviation of a binomial random variable x are, 
respectively,
mx np  and  sx Ïnp(1 2 p)
 
Example 7.21 
Credit Cards Paid in Full
The paper “Debt Literacy, Financial Experiences and Overindebtedness” (Social Science Research 
Network, Working Paper w14808, 2008) reported that 37% of credit card users pay their bills 
in full each month. This figure represents an average over different types of credit cards 
issued by many different banks. 
Suppose that 40% of all individuals holding Visa cards issued by a certain bank pay in 
full each month. A random sample of n 5 25 cardholders is to be selected. The bank is 
interested in the variable 
x 5 number in the sample who pay in full each month
Figure  7.16
The binomial probability histogram 
when n 5 20 and p 5 .25.
.05
.10
.15
.20
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
x
11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
p(x)
x
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

388 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
Even though sampling is done without replacement, the sample size n 5 25 is most likely very 
small compared to the total number of credit card holders, so we can approximate the prob-
ability distribution of x using a binomial distribution with n 5 25 and p 5 .4. We have defined 
“paid in full” as a success because this is the outcome counted by the random variable x. 
The mean value of x is then
mx np 25s.40d 10.0
and the standard deviation is
sx Ïnps1 2 pd Ï25s.40ds.60d Ï6 2.45
The probability that x is farther than 1 standard deviation from its mean value is
Psx , mx 2 sx or x . mx 1 sxd Psx , 7.55 or x . 12.45d
Psx # 7d 1 Psx $ 13d
ps0d 1 Á 1 ps7d 1 ps13d 1 Á 1 ps25d
.307 susing technology or Appendix Table 9d

■
The value of sx is 0 when p 5 0 or p 5 1. In these two cases, there is no uncertainty in x. 
We are sure to observe x 5 0 when p 5 0 and x 5 n when p 5 1. It is also easily verified 
that p(1 2 p) is largest when p 5 .5. This means that the binomial distribution spreads out 
the most when sampling from a 50–50 population. The farther p is from .5, the less spread 
out and the more skewed the binomial distribution.
Geometric Distributions
A binomial random variable is defined as the number of successes in n independent trials, 
where each trial can result in either a success or a failure and the probability of success 
is the same for each trial. Suppose, however, that we are not interested in the number of 
successes in a fixed number of trials but rather in the number of trials that must be carried 
out before a success occurs. Two examples are counting the number of boxes of cereal that 
must be purchased before finding one with a rare toy and counting the number of games 
that a professional bowler must play before achieving a score over 250.
The variable
x 5 number of trials to first success
is called a geometric random variable, and the probability distribution that describes its 
behavior is called a geometric probability distribution. 
Suppose an experiment consists of a sequence of trials with the following conditions:
1.	 The trials are independent.
2.	 Each trial can result in one of two possible outcomes, success and failure.
3.	 The probability of success is the same for all trials.
A geometric random variable is defined as
x 5 number of trials until the first success is observed (including the success trial) 
The probability distribution of x is called the geometric probability distribution.
For example, suppose that 40% of the students who drive to campus at your university 
carry jumper cables. Your car has a dead battery and you don’t have jumper cables, so you 
decide to stop students who are headed to the parking lot and ask them whether they have 
a pair of jumper cables. You might be interested in the number of students you would have 
to stop before finding one who has jumper cables. 
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.5   Binomial and Geometric Distributions 
●  389
If we define success as a student with jumper cables, a trial would consist of asking an 
individual student for help. The random variable 
x 5 number of students who must be stopped before finding one with jumper cables
is an example of a geometric random variable, because it can be viewed as the number of 
trials to the first success in a sequence of independent trials.
The probability distribution of a geometric random variable is easy to construct. We use p to 
denote the probability of success on any given trial. Possible outcomes can be denoted as follows:
Outcome
x 5 Number of Trials  
to First Success
S
1
FS
2
FFS
3
  o
o
FFFFFFS
7
  o
o
Each possible outcome consists of 0 or more failures followed by a single success. So,
psxd Psx trials to first successd
PsFF Á FSd
x 2 1 failures followed by a success on trial x
Because the probability of success is p for each trial, the probability of failure for each trial 
is 1 2 p. Because the trials are independent,
psxd Psx trials to first successd PsFF Á FSd
PsFdPsFd Á PsFdPsSd
s1 2 pds1 2 pd Á s1 2 pdp
s1 2 pdx21p
This leads us to the formula for the geometric probability distribution.
If x is a geometric random variable with probability of success 5 p for each 
trial, then
psxd 5 s1 2 pdx21p x 5 1, 2, 3, Á
Geometric Probability Distribution
Example 7.22 
Jumper Cables
Consider the jumper cable problem described previously. For this problem, p 5 .4,  
because 40% of the students who drive to campus carry jumper cables. The probability 
distribution of
x 5 number of students who must be stopped before finding a student with jumper 
cables
is
p(x) 5 (.6)x21(.4)	
x 5 1, 2, 3, . . .
The probability distribution can now be used to compute various probabilities. For 
example, the probability that the first student stopped has jumper cables (that is, x 5 1) is
p(1) 5 (.6)121(.4) 5 (.6)0(.4) 5 .4
Greg Ceo/Stone/Getty Images 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

390 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
The probability that three or fewer students must be stopped is
P(x # 3) 5 p(1) 1 p(2) 1 p(3)
5 (.6)0(.4) 1 (.6)1(.4) 1 (.6)2(.4)
5 .4 1 .24 1 .144
5 .784 

■
EXERCISES 7.43 - 7.62
7.43	 NBC News reported that 1 in 20 children in the 
U.S. has a food allergy (May 2, 2013). Consider 
selecting 10 children at random. Define the random 
variable x as
x 5 number of children in the sample of 10 that 
have a food allergy
Find the following probabilities. (Hint: See 
Examples 7.19 and 7.20.)
a.	 p(x , 3) 
b.	p(x # 3) 
c.	 p(x $ 4) 
d.	p(1# x # 3) 
7.44	 The article “Should You Report That Fender-Bender?” 
(Consumer Reports, 2013:15) reported that 7 in 10 
auto accidents involve a single vehicle. Suppose 
15 accidents are randomly selected. (Hint: See 
Examples 7.19 and 7.20.)
a. What is the probability that exactly four involve a 
single vehicle? 
b. What is the probability that at most four involve a 
single vehicle? 
c. What is the probability that exactly six involve 
multiple vehicles? 
7.45	 ▼ The Los Angeles Times (December 13, 1992) reported 
that what airline passengers like to do most on long 
flights is rest or sleep. In a survey of 3697 passen-
gers, almost 80% did so. Suppose that for a particu-
lar route the actual percentage is exactly 80%, and 
consider randomly selecting six passengers. Then 
x, the number among the selected six who rested or 
slept, is a binomial random variable with n 5 6 and 
p 5 .8.
a.	 Calculate p(4), and interpret this probability.
b.	Calculate p(6), the probability that all six selected 
passengers rested or slept. 5
c.	 Determine P(x $ 4). 
 5
7.46	 Refer to the previous exercise, and suppose that 
10 rather than six passengers are selected (n 5 10, 
p 5 .8). (Hint: Use technology or Appendix Table 9.)
a.	 What is p(8)? 
b.	Calculate P(x # 7). 
c.	 Calculate the probability that more than half of 
the selected passengers rested or slept. 
7.47	 Twenty-five percent of the customers of a grocery 
store use an express checkout. Consider five 
randomly selected customers, and let x denote 
the number among the five who use the express 
checkout.
a.	 What is p(2), that is, P(x 5 2)? 
b.	What is P(x # 1)? 
c.	 What is P(2 # x)? (Hint: Make use of your answer 
from Part (b).) 
d.	What is P(x Þ 2)? 
7.48	 Example 7.18 described a study in which a person 
was asked to determine which of three t-shirts 
had been worn by her roommate by smelling the 
shirts (“Sociochemosensory and Emotional Functions,” 
Psychological Science [2009]: 1118–1123). Suppose that 
instead of three shirts, each participant was asked 
to choose among four shirts and that the process 
was repeated five times. Then, assuming that the 
participant is choosing at random, x ​5 ​number of 
correct identifications is a binomial random variable 
with n ​5 ​5 and p ​5 ​¼.
a.	 What are the possible values of x? 
b.	For each possible value of x, find the associated 
probability p(x) and display the possible x values 
and p(x) values in a table.
c.	 Construct a probability histogram for the 
probability distribution of x.
7.49	 In a press release dated October 2, 2008, The National 
Cyber Security Alliance reported that approximately 
80% of adult Americans who own a computer claim 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.5   Binomial and Geometric Distributions 
●  391
to have a firewall installed on their computer to 
prevent hackers from stealing personal informa-
tion. This estimate was based on a survey of 3000 
people. It was also reported that in a study of 400 
computers, only about 40% actually had a firewall 
installed.
a.	 Suppose that the true proportion of computer 
owners who have a firewall installed is .80. If 20 
computer owners are selected at random, what is 
the probability that more than 15 have a firewall 
installed? 
b.	Suppose that the true proportion of computer 
owners who have a firewall installed is .40. If 20 
computer owners are selected at random, what is 
the probability that more than 15 have a firewall 
installed? 
c.	 Suppose that a random sample of 20 computer 
owners is selected and that 14 have a firewall 
installed. Is it more likely that the true proportion 
of computer owners who have a firewall installed 
is .40 or .80? Justify your answer based on 
probability calculations.
7.50	 A breeder of show dogs is interested in the number 
of female puppies in a litter. If a birth is equally 
likely to result in a male or a female puppy, give the 
probability distribution of the variable x 5 number 
of female puppies in a litter of size 5.
7.51	 The article “FBI Says Fewer than 25 Failed Polygraph 
Test” (San Luis Obispo Tribune, July 29, 2001) states that 
false-positives in polygraph tests (tests in which an 
individual fails even though he or she is telling the 
truth) are relatively common and occur about 15% 
of the time. Suppose that such a test is given to 
10 trustworthy individuals.
a.	 What is the probability that all 10 pass? 
b.	What is the probability that more than two fail, 
even though all are trustworthy? 
c.	The article indicated that 500 FBI agents were 
required to take a polygraph test. Consider the 
random variable x 5 number of the 500 tested 
who fail. If all 500 agents tested are trustwor-
thy, what are the mean and standard deviation 
of x? 
d.	The headline indicates that fewer than 25 of 
the 500 agents tested failed the test. Is this a 
surprising result if all 500 are trustworthy? 
Answer based on the values of the mean and 
standard deviation from Part (c).
7.52	 Industrial quality control programs often include 
inspection of incoming materials from suppliers. 
If parts are purchased in large lots, a typical plan 
might be to select 20 parts at random from a lot and 
inspect them. A lot might be judged acceptable if 
one or fewer defective parts are found among those 
inspected. Otherwise, the lot is rejected and returned 
to the supplier. Use technology or Appendix Table 
9 to find the probability of accepting lots that have 
each of the following (Hint: Identify success with a 
defective part):
a.	 5% defective parts 
b.	10% defective parts 
c.	 20% defective parts 
7.53	 Suppose that the probability is .1 that any 
given citrus tree will show measurable damage 
when the temperature falls to 308F. (Hint: See 
Example 7.21.) 
a.	 If the temperature does drop to 308F, what is the 
expected number of citrus trees showing damage 
in orchards of 2000 trees? 
b. What is the standard deviation of the number of 
trees that show damage? 
7.54	 Thirty percent of all automobiles undergoing an 
emissions inspection at a certain inspection station 
fail the inspection.
a.	 Among 15 randomly selected cars, what 
is the probability that at most five fail the 
inspection? 
b.	Among 15 randomly selected cars, what is the 
probability that between five and 10 (inclusive) 
fail to pass inspection? 
c.	 Among 25 randomly selected cars, what is the 
mean value of the number that pass inspection, 
and what is the standard deviation of the number 
that pass inspection? 
d.	What is the probability that among 25 randomly 
selected cars, the number that pass is within 1 
standard deviation of the mean value? (Hint: See 
Example 7.21.) 
7.55	 You are to take a multiple-choice exam consisting 
of 100 questions with five possible responses to 
each question. Suppose that you have not studied 
and so must guess (select one of the five answers 
in a completely random fashion) on each question. 
Let x represent the number of correct responses on 
the test.
a.	 What kind of probability distribution does x have?
b.	What is your expected score on the exam? (Hint: 
Your expected score is the mean value of the 
x distribution.) 
c.	 Compute the variance and standard deviation of x.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

392 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
d.	Based on your answers to Parts (b) and (c), is it 
likely that you would score over 50 on this exam? 
Explain the reasoning behind your answer.
7.56	 Suppose that 20% of the 10,000 signatures on a certain 
recall petition are invalid. Would the number of invalid 
signatures in a sample of 2000 of these signatures have 
(approximately) a binomial distribution? Explain.
7.57	 A city ordinance requires that a smoke detector be 
installed in all residential housing. There is concern 
that too many residences are still without detectors, 
so a costly inspection program is being contem-
plated. Let p be the proportion of all residences that 
have a detector. A random sample of 25 residences 
is selected. If the sample strongly suggests that 
p , .80 (less than 80% have detectors), as opposed 
to p $ .80, the program will be implemented. Let 
x be the number of residences among the 25 that 
have a detector, and consider the following decision 
rule: Reject the claim that p $ .8 and implement the 
program if x # 15.
a.	 What is the probability that the program is 
implemented when p 5 .80? 
b.	What is the probability that the program is not 
implemented if p 5 .70? 
c.	 What is the probability that the program is not 
implemented if p 5 .60? 
d.	How do the “error probabilities” of Parts (b) and 
(c) change if the value 15 in the decision rule is 
changed to 14?
7.58	 Suppose that 90% of all registered California voters 
favor banning the release of information from exit 
polls in presidential elections until after the polls in 
California close. A random sample of 25 registered 
California voters is to be selected.
a.	 What is the probability that more than 20 favor 
the ban? 
b.	What is the probability that at least 20 favor the ban?
c.	 What are the mean value and standard deviation 
of the number of voters in the sample who favor 
the ban? 
d.	If fewer than 20 voters in the sample favor the 
ban, is this at odds with the assertion that (at 
least) 90% of California registered voters favors 
the ban? (Hint: Consider P(x , 20) when p 5 .9.)
7.59	 Suppose a playlist on an MP3 music player consists 
of 100 songs, of which eight are by a particular artist. 
Suppose that songs are played by selecting a song at 
random (with replacement) from the playlist. The 
random variable x represents the number of songs 
played until a song by this artist is played.
a.	 Explain why the probability distribution of x is 
not binomial. 
b.	Find the following probabilities. (Hint: See 
Example 7.22.)
i.	   ps4d 
ii.	  Psx # 4d 
iii. Psx . 4d 
iv.	  Psx $ 4d 
c.	 Interpret each of the probabilities in Part (b) and 
explain the difference between them.
7.60	 Sophie is a dog that loves to play catch. Unfortu­
nately, she isn’t very good, and the probability that 
she catches a ball is only .1. Let x be the number of 
tosses required until Sophie catches a ball.
a.	 Does x have a binomial or a geometric 
distribution? 
b.	What is the probability that it will take exactly 
two tosses for Sophie to catch a ball? 
c.	 What is the probability that more than three tosses 
will be required? 
7.61	 Suppose that 5% of cereal boxes contain a prize and 
the other 95% contain the message, “Sorry, try again.” 
Consider the random variable x, where x 5 number 
of boxes purchased until a prize is found.
a.	 What is the probability that at most two boxes 
must be purchased? 
b.	What is the probability that exactly four boxes 
must be purchased? 
c.	 What is the probability that more than four boxes 
must be purchased? 
7.62	 ▼ The article on polygraph testing of FBI agents 
referenced in Exercise 7.51 indicated that the 
probability of a false-positive (a trustworthy person 
who nonetheless fails the test) is .15. Let x be the 
number of trustworthy FBI agents tested until 
someone fails the test.
a.	 Describe the probability distribution of x? 
b.	What is the probability that the first false-
positive will occur when the third person is 
tested? 
c.	 What is the probability that fewer than 
four are tested before the first false-positive 
occurs? 
d.	What is the probability that more than three 
agents are tested before the first false-positive 
occurs? 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.6   Normal Distributions 
●  393
 7.6  
Normal Distributions
Normal distributions formalize the notion of mound-shaped histograms introduced in 
Chapter 4. Normal distributions are widely used for two reasons. First, they provide a 
reasonable approximation to the distribution of many different variables. They also play a 
central role in many of the inferential procedures that will be discussed in later chapters.
Normal distributions are continuous probability distributions that are bell-shaped and 
symmetric, as shown in Figure 7.17. Normal distributions are sometimes referred to as 
normal curves.
There are many different normal distributions, and they are distinguished from one 
another by their mean m and standard deviation s. The mean m of a normal distribution 
describes where the corresponding curve is centered. The standard deviation s describes 
how much the curve spreads out around that center. As with all continuous probability 
distributions, the total area under any normal curve is equal to 1. 
Three normal distributions are shown in Figure 7.18. Notice that the smaller the 
standard deviation, the taller and narrower the corresponding curve. Remember that areas 
under a continuous probability distribution curve represent probabilities, so when the 
standard deviation is small, a larger area is concentrated near the center of the curve. This 
means that the chance of observing a value near the mean is much greater (because m is at 
the center).
Figure  7.17
A normal distribution.
Figure  7.18
Three normal distributions.
m = 10, s = 5
m = 40, s = 2.5
m = 70, s = 10
0.05
0
0.10
0.15
100
50
0
Density
The value of m is the number on the measurement axis lying directly below the top of 
the curve. The value of s can be approximated from a picture of the curve. Consider the 
normal curve in Figure 7.19. Starting at the top (above m 5 100) and moving to the right, 
the curve turns downward until it is above the value 110. After that point, it continues to 
decrease in height but is turning upward rather than downward. Similarly, to the left of 
m 5 100, the curve turns downward until it reaches 90 and then begins to turn upward. 
The curve changes from turning downward to turning upward at a distance of 10 on either 
side of m. In general, s is the distance to either side of m at which a normal curve changes 
from turning downward to turning upward, so s 5 10 for the normal curve in Figure 7.19.
If a particular normal distribution is to be used to describe the behavior of a random 
variable, a mean and a standard deviation must be specified. For example, a normal 
distribution with mean 7 and standard deviation 1 might be used as a model for the 
distribution of x 5 birth weight (in pounds). If this model is a reasonable description of 
the probability distribution, we could use areas under the normal curve with m 5 7 and 
s 5 1 to approximate various probabilities related to birth weight. 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

394 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
The probability that a birth weight is over 8 pounds (expressed symbolically as 
P(x . 8)) corresponds to the shaded area in Figure 7.20(a). The shaded area in 
Figure 7.20(b) represents the probability of a birth weight between 6.5 and 8 pounds, 
P(6.5 , x , 8).
Figure  7.20
Normal distribution for birth weight: 
(a) shaded area 5 P(x . 8);  
(b) shaded area 5 P(6.5 , x , 8).
(a)
7
P(x . 8)
P(6.5 , x , 8)
8
(b)
7
8
6
Unfortunately, direct computation of such probabilities (areas under a normal curve) is  
not simple. To overcome this difficulty, we rely on technology or a table of areas for a 
reference normal distribution, called the standard normal distribution.
DEFINITION
Standard normal distribution: The normal distribution with
m 5 0  and  s 5 1 
The corresponding density curve is called the standard normal curve. 
It is customary to use the letter z to represent a variable whose distribution is 
described by the standard normal curve. The term z curve is often used in place 
of standard normal curve.
Few naturally occurring variables have distributions that are well described by the standard 
normal distribution. However, this distribution is important because it is also used in probability 
calculations for other normal distributions. When we are interested in finding a probability 
based on some other normal curve, we either rely on technology or we first translate our 
problem into an equivalent problem that involves finding an area under the standard normal 
curve. A table for the standard normal distribution is then used to find the desired area. To be 
able to do this, we must first learn to work with the standard normal distribution.
The Standard Normal Distribution
In working with normal distributions, we need two general skills:
1.	 We must be able to use the normal distribution to compute probabilities, which 
are areas under a normal curve and above given intervals.
2.	 We must be able to characterize extreme values in the distribution, such as the 
largest 5%, the smallest 1%, and the most extreme 5% (which would include the 
largest 2.5% and the smallest 2.5%).
Figure  7.19
Mean m and standard deviation s for 
a normal curve.
80
90
m = 100
110
120
Curve turns downward
Curve turns upward
Curve turns upward
s = 10
s = 10
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.6   Normal Distributions 
●  395
Let’s begin by looking at how to accomplish these tasks when the distribution of interest is 
the standard normal distribution.
The standard normal or z curve is shown in Figure 7.21(a). It is centered at m 5 0, and the 
standard deviation, s 5 1, is a measure of the extent to which it spreads out about its mean. 
Figure  7.21
(a) A standard normal (z) curve;  
(b) a cumulative area.
z curve
(a)
0
1
2
3
–3
–2
–1
z 
Cumulative area =
area to the left of z value
(b)
0
1
2
3
–3
–2
–1
A particular z value
Notice that this picture is consistent with the Empirical Rule of Chapter 4. About 95% 
of the area (probability) is associated with values that are within 2 standard deviations of 
the mean (between 22 and 2), and almost all of the area is associated with values that are 
within 3 standard deviations of the mean (between 23 and 3).
In the examples that follow, Appendix Table 2 is used. If you have access to tech-
nology (a statistics program or a graphing calculator), you can use technology to 
work these examples.
Appendix Table 2 tabulates cumulative z curve areas of the sort shown in Figure 7.21(b) 
for many different values of z. The smallest value for which the cumulative area is given is 
23.89, a value far out in the lower tail of the z curve. The next smallest value for which 
the area appears is 23.88, then 23.87, then 23.86, and so on in increments of 0.01, 
terminating with the cumulative area to the left of 3.89.
For any number z* between 23.89 and 3.89 and rounded to two decimal 
places, Appendix Table 2 gives 
(area under z curve to the left of z*) 5 P(z , z*) 5 P(z # z*) 
where the letter z is used to represent a random variable whose distribution is 
the standard normal distribution.
To ﬁnd this probability using the table, locate the following:
1.	 The row labeled with the sign of z* and the digit to either side of the 
decimal point (for example, 21.7 or 0.5)
2.	 The column identiﬁed with the second digit to the right of the decimal 
point in z* (for example, .06 if z* 5 21.76) 
The number at the intersection of this row and column is the desired 
probability, P(z , z*).
Using the Table of Standard Normal Curve Areas
A portion of the table of standard normal curve areas appears in Figure 7.22. To 
find the area under the z curve to the left of 1.42, look in the row labeled 1.4 and the 
column labeled .02 (the highlighted row and column in Figure 7.22). From the table, the 
corresponding cumulative area is .9222. So
z curve area to the left of 1.42 5 .9222
We can also use the table to find the area to the right of a particular value. Because the 
total area under the z curve is 1, it follows that
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

396 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
sz curve area to the right of 1.42d 1 2 sz curve area to the left of 1.42d
1 2 .9222
.0778
Figure  7.22
Portion of the table of standard 
normal curve areas.
0.0              .5000           .5040           .5080           .5120            .5160           .5199
0.1              .5398           .5438           .5478           .5517            .5557           .5596
0.2              .5793           .5832           .5871           .5910            .5948           .5987
0.3              .6179           .6217           .6255           .6293            .6331           .6368
0.4              .6554           .6591           .6628           .6664            .6700           .6736
0.5              .6915           .6950           .6985           .7019            .7054           .7088
0.6              .7257           .7291           .7324           .7357            .7389           .7422
0.7              .7580           .7611           .7642           .7673            .7704           .7734
0.8              .7881           .7910           .7939           .7967            .7995           .8023
0.9              .8159           .8186           .8212           .8238            .8264           .8289
1.0              .8413           .8438           .8461           .8485            .8508           .8531
1.1              .8643           .8665           .8686           .8708            .8729           .8749
1.2              .8849           .8869           .8888           .8907            .8925           .8944
1.3              .9032           .9049           .9066           .9082            .9099           .9115
1.4              .9192           .9207           .9222           .9236            .9251           .9265
1.5              .9332           .9345           .9357           .9370            .9382           .9394
1.6              .9452           .9463           .9474           .9484            .9495           .9505
1.7              .9554           .9564           .9573           .9582            .9591           .9599
1.8              .9641           .9649           .9656           .9664            .9671           .9678
  z*              .00               .01               .02               .03                .04               .05
P(z , 1.42)
These probabilities can be interpreted to mean that in a long sequence of observations, 
approximately 92.22% of the observed z values will be smaller than 1.42, and 7.78% will 
be larger than 1.42.
Example 7.23 
Finding Standard Normal Curve Areas
The probability P(z , 21.76) is found at the intersection of the 21.7 row and the 
.06 column of the z table. The result is
P(z , 21.76) 5 .0392
as shown in the following figure: 
0
–1.76
z curve
Shaded area = .0392
In other words, in a long sequence of observations, approximately 3.9% of the observed 
z values will be smaller than 21.76. Similarly,
P(z # 0.58) 5 entry in 0.5 row and .08 column of Table 2 5 .7190
as shown in the following figure:
0
z curve
Shaded area = .7190
0.58
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.6   Normal Distributions 
●  397
Now consider P(z , 24.12). This probability does not appear in Appendix Table 2; there is 
no 24.1 row. However, it must be less than P(z , 23.89), the smallest z value in the table, 
because 24.12 is farther out in the lower tail of the z curve. Since P(z , 23.89) < .0000 
(that is, zero to four decimal places), it follows that
P(z , 24.12) < 0
Similarly,
P(z , 4.18) . P(z , 3.89) < 1.0000
from which we conclude that
P(z , 4.18) < 1	
■
As illustrated in Example 7.23, we can use the cumulative areas tabulated in Appendix 
Table 2 to calculate other probabilities involving z. The probability that z is larger than a 
value c is
P(z . c) 5 area under the z curve to the right of c 5 1 2 P(z # c)
In other words, the area to the right of a value (a right-tail area) is 1 minus the corresponding 
cumulative area. This is illustrated in Figure 7.23.
Figure  7.23
The relationship between an 
upper-tail area and a cumulative area.
c
P(z . c)
5
1
–
c
P(z # c)
Similarly, the probability that z falls in the interval between a lower limit a and an upper 
limit b is
Psa , z , bd area under the z curve and above the interval from a to b
Psz , bd 2 Psz , ad
That is, P(a , z , b) is the difference between two cumulative areas, as illustrated in 
Figure 7.24.
b
a
b
a
P(a < z < b)
=
P(z < b)
P(z < a)
–
Figure  7.24
P(a , z , b) as the difference 
between the two cumulative areas.
Example 7.24 
More About Standard Normal Curve Areas
The probability that z is between 21.76 and 0.58 is
Ps21.76 , z , 0.58d Psz , 0.58d 2 Psz , 21.76d
.7190 2 .0392
.6798
as shown in the following figure: 
0
–1.76
0.58
Shaded area = .6798
z curve
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

398 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
The probability that z is between 22 and 12 (within 2 standard deviations of its mean, 
since m 5 0 and s 5 1) is
Ps22.00 , z , 2.00d Psz , 2.00d 2 Psz , 22.00d
.9772 2 .0228
.9544
< .95
as shown in the following figure: 
0
2.00
–2.00
Shaded area = .9544
z curve
This last probability is the basis for one part of the Empirical Rule, which states that when 
a histogram is well approximated by a normal curve, approximately 95% of the values are 
within 2 standard deviations of the mean.
The probability that the value of z exceeds 1.96 is
Psz . 1.96d 1 2 Psz , 1.96d
1 2 .9750
.0250
as shown in the following figure:
Shaded area = .0250
z curve
0
1.96
That is, 2.5% of the area under the z curve lies to the right of 1.96 in the upper tail.
Similarly,
Psz . 21.28d  area to the right of 21.28
1 2 Psz , 21.28d
1 2 .1003
.8997
< .90
	
■
Identifying Extreme Values
Suppose that we want to describe the values included in the smallest 2% of a distribution 
or the values making up the most extreme 5% (which includes the largest 2.5% and the 
smallest 2.5%). Let’s see how we can identify extreme values in the distribution by working 
through Examples 7.25 and 7.26.
Example 7.25 
Identifying Extreme Values
Suppose that we want to describe the values that make up the smallest 2% of the standard 
normal distribution. Symbolically, we are trying to find a value (call it z*) such that
P(z , z*) 5 .02
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.6   Normal Distributions 
●  399
This is illustrated in Figure 7.25, which shows that the cumulative area for z* is .02. There-
fore, we look for a cumulative area of .0200 in the body of Appendix Table 2. The closest 
cumulative area in the table is .0202, in the 22.0 row and .05 column. We will use z* 5 
22.05, the best approximation from the table. Variable values less than 22.05 make up the 
smallest 2% of the standard normal distribution.
Figure  7.25
The smallest 2% of the standard  
normal distribution.
Smallest
2%
z curve
z*
{
.02
0
Now suppose that we had been interested in the largest 5% of all z values. We would 
then be trying to find a value of z* for which
P(z . z*) 5 .05
as illustrated in Figure 7.26. Because Appendix Table 2 always works with cumulative area 
(area to the left), the first step is to determine
area to the left of z* 5 1 2 .05 5 .95
Figure  7.26
The largest 5% of the standard  
normal distribution.
z curve
z*
0
.05
Largest 
5%
Looking for the cumulative area closest to .95 in Appendix Table 2, we find that .95 
falls exactly halfway between .9495 (corresponding to a z value of 1.64) and .9505 
(corresponding to a z value of 1.65). Because .9500 is exactly halfway between the two 
areas, we use a z value that is halfway between 1.64 and 1.65. (If one value had been closer 
to .9500 than the other, we would just use the z value corresponding to the closest area.) 
This gives
z* 1.64 1 1.65
2
1.645
Values greater than 1.645 make up the largest 5% of the standard normal distribution. By 
symmetry, 21.645 separates the smallest 5% of all z values from the others.
■
Example 7.26 
More Extremes
Sometimes we are interested in identifying the most extreme (unusually large or small) 
values in a distribution. Consider describing the values that make up the most extreme 5% 
of the standard normal distribution. That is, we want to separate the middle 95% from the 
extreme 5%. This is illustrated in Figure 7.27.
Because the standard normal distribution is symmetric, the most extreme 5% is equally 
divided between the high side and the low side of the distribution, resulting in an area of 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

400 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
.025 for each of the tails of the z curve. Symmetry about 0 implies that if z* denotes the value 
that separates the largest 2.5%, the value that separates the smallest 2.5% is simply 2z*.
To find z*, first determine the cumulative area for z*, which is 
area to the left of z* 5 .95 1 .025 5 .975
The cumulative area .9750 appears in the 1.9 row and .06 column of Appendix Table 2, so 
z* 5 1.96. For the standard normal distribution, 95% of the variable values fall between 
21.96 and 1.96; the most extreme 5% are those values that are either greater than 1.96 or 
less than 21.96.
■
Other Normal Distributions
We now show how z curve areas can be used to calculate probabilities and to describe 
values for any normal distribution. Remember that the letter z is reserved for those 
variables that have a standard normal distribution. The letter x is used more generally for 
any variable whose distribution is described by a normal curve with mean m and standard 
deviation s.
Suppose that we want to compute P(a , x , b), the probability that the variable x lies 
in a particular range. This probability corresponds to an area under a normal curve and 
above the interval from a to b, as shown in Figure 7.28(a).
Figure  7.28
Equality of nonstandard and standard 
normal curve areas.
Equal area
m
0
b*
a*
b
a
P(a , x , b)
P(a* , z , b*)
(a)
(b)
Figure  7.27
The most extreme 5% of the standard 
normal distribution.
Middle
95%
Most extreme 5%
z*
2z*
.025
.025
.95
The strategy for obtaining this probability is to find an equivalent problem involving 
the standard normal distribution. Finding an equivalent problem means determining an 
interval (a*, b*) that has the same probability for z (same area under the z curve) as does 
the interval (a, b) in our original normal distribution (see Figure 7.28). The asterisk is used 
to distinguish a and b, the values for the original normal distribution with mean m and 
standard deviation s, from a* and b*, the values for the z curve. 
To find a* and b*, we simply calculate z scores for the endpoints of the interval for which 
a probability is desired. This process is called standardizing the endpoints. For example, 
suppose that the variable x has a normal distribution with mean m 5 100 and standard 
deviation s 5 5. To find
P(98 , x , 107)
we first translate this problem into an equivalent problem for the standard normal 
distribution. 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.6   Normal Distributions 
●  401
Recall from Chapter 4 that a z score, or standardized score, tells how many standard deviations 
away from the mean a value lies. The z score is calculated by first subtracting the mean and then 
dividing by the standard deviation. Converting the lower endpoint a 5 98 to a z score gives
a* 98 2 100
5
22
5 2.40
and converting the upper endpoint yields
b* 107 2 100
5
7
5 1.40
Then
P(98 , x , 107) 5 P(2.40 , z , 1.40)
The probability P(2.40 , z , 1.40) can now be evaluated using technology or Appendix Table 2.
To calculate probabilities for any normal distribution, standardize the relevant 
values and then use technology or the table of z curve areas. More specifically, 
if x is a variable whose behavior is described by a normal distribution with 
mean m and standard deviation s, then 
P(x , b) 5 P(z , b*)
P(x . a) 5 P(z . a*)
P(a , x , b) 5 P(a* , z , b*)
where z is a variable whose distribution is standard normal and
a* 5 a 2 m
s  b* 5 b 2 m
s
Finding Probabilities
Example 7.27 
Newborn Birth Weights
Data from the paper “Fetal Growth Parameters and Birth Weight: Their Relationship to Neonatal 
Body Composition” (Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology [2009]: 441–446) suggest that a 
normal distribution with mean m ​5 ​3500 grams and standard deviation s ​5 ​600 grams 
is a reasonable model for the probability distribution of the continuous numerical variable 
x 5 ​birth weight of a randomly selected full-term baby. What proportion of birth weights 
are between 2900 and 4700 grams?
To answer this question, we must find
P(2900 , x , 4700)
First, we translate the interval endpoints to equivalent endpoints for the standard normal 
distribution:
a* a 2 m
s
2900 2 3500
600
21.00
b* b 2 m
s
4700 2 3500
600
2.00
Then
Ps2900 , x , 4700d Ps21.00 , z , 2.00d
sz curve area to the left of 2.00d
2 sz curve area to the left of 21.00d
.9772 2 .1587
.8185
Understand the context ❭
Step-by-step technology  
instructions available  
online
Do the work ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

402 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
The probabilities for x and z are shown in Figure 7.29. If birth weights were observed for many 
babies from this population, about 82% of them would fall between 2900 and 4700 grams.
Interpret the results ❭
Figure  7.29
P (2900 , x , 4700) and 
corresponding z curve area for the 
birth weight distribution of 
Example 7.27.
2900
Shaded area
= .8185
Normal curve with
m = 3500, s = 600
z curve
3500
4100
4700
–1
0
1
2
What is the probability that a randomly chosen baby will have a birth weight greater than 
4500? To evaluate P(x . 4500), we first compute
a* a 2 m
s
4500 2 3500
600
1.67
Then (see Figure 7.30)
Psx . 4500d Psz . 1.67d
z curve area to the right of 1.67
1 2 sz curve area to the left of 1.67d
1 2 .9525
.0475
Figure  7.30
P(x . 4500) and corresponding  
z curve area for the birth weight  
distribution of Example 7.27.
Shaded area
= .0475
Normal curve with
m = 3500, s = 600
z curve
3500
4500
0
1.67

■
Example 7.28 
IQ Scores
Although there is some controversy regarding the appropriateness of IQ scores as a measure 
of intelligence, IQ scores are commonly used for a variety of purposes. One commonly 
used IQ scale (the Stanford-Binet) has a mean of 100 and a standard deviation of 15, and 
IQ scores are approximately normally distributed. (IQ score is actually a discrete variable 
[because it is based on the number of correct responses on a test], but its population 
distribution closely resembles a normal curve.) If we define the random variable
x 5 IQ score of a randomly selected individual
then x has approximately a normal distribution with m 5 100 and s 5 15.
One way to become eligible for membership in Mensa, an organization purportedly for 
those of high intelligence, is to have a Stanford–Binet IQ score above 130. What proportion 
of the population would qualify for Mensa membership? An answer to this question 
requires evaluating P(x . 130). This probability is shown in Figure 7.31. With a 5 130,
a* a 2 m
s
130 2 100
15
2.00
So (see Figure 7.32)
 Psx . 130d Psz . 2.00d
z curve area to the right of 2.00
1 2 sz curve area to the left of 2.00d
1 2 .9772
.0228
Understand the context ❭
Do the work ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.6   Normal Distributions 
●  403
Only 2.28% of the population would qualify for Mensa membership.
Figure  7.32
P(x . 130) and corresponding z curve 
area for the IQ distribution of 
Example 7.28.
Shaded area
= .0228
Normal curve with
m = 100, s = 15
z curve
100
130
.9772
.9772
0
2.00
Interpret the results ❭
Figure  7.31
Normal distribution and desired  
proportion for Example 7.28.
P(x . 130) = proportion who are eligible for Mensa
100
130
Suppose that we are interested in the proportion of the population with IQ scores below 
80—that is, P(x , 80). With b 5 80,
b* b 2 m
s
80 2 100
15
21.33
So
Psx , 80d Psz , 21.33d
z curve area to the left of 21.33
.0918
as shown in Figure 7.33. This probability (.0918) tells us that just a little over 9% of the 
population has an IQ score below 80.
Figure  7.33
P(x , 80) and corresponding z curve 
area for the IQ distribution of 
Example 7.28.
Shaded area = .0918
100
80
0
21.33
Now consider the proportion of the population with IQs between 75 and 125. Using 
a 5 75 and b 5 125, we obtain
a* 75 2 100
15
21.67   b* 125 2 100
15
1.67
so
Ps75 , x , 125d Ps21.67 , z , 1.67d
z curve area between 21.67 and 1.67
sz curve area to the left of 1.67d
2 sz curve area to the left of 21.67d
.9525 2 .0475
 5 .9050
This is illustrated in Figure 7.34. The calculation tells us that 90.5% of the population has 
an IQ score between 75 and 125. Of the 9.5% whose IQ score is not between 75 and 125, 
half of them (4.75%) have scores over 125, and the other half have scores below 75.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

404 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions

■
Figure  7.34
P(75 , x , 125) and corresponding 
z curve area for the IQ distribution of  
Example 7.28.
Shaded area = .9050
0
–1.67
1.67
100
75
125
When we translate from a problem involving a normal distribution with mean m and 
standard deviation s to a problem involving the standard normal distribution, we convert 
to z scores:
z x 2 m
s
Because a z score can be interpreted as giving the distance of an x value from the mean 
in units of the standard deviation, a z score of 1.4 corresponds to an x value that is 1.4 
standard deviations above the mean, and a z score of 22.1 corresponds to an x value that 
is 2.1 standard deviations below the mean.
Suppose that we are trying to evaluate P(x , 60) for a variable whose distribution is 
normal with m 5 50 and s 5 5. Converting the endpoint 60 to a z score gives
z 60 2 50
5
2
which tells us that the value 60 is 2 standard deviations above the mean. We then have
P(x , 60) 5 P(z , 2)
where z is a standard normal variable. Notice that for the standard normal distribution, 
the value 2 is also 2 standard deviations above the mean, because the mean is 0 and the 
standard deviation is 1. The value z 5 2 is located the same distance (measured in stan-
dard deviations) from the mean of the standard normal distribution as is the value x 5 
60 from the mean in the normal distribution with m 5 50 and s 5 5. This is why the 
translation using z scores results in an equivalent problem involving the standard normal 
distribution.
Describing Extreme Values in a Normal Distribution
To describe the extreme values for a normal distribution with mean m and standard 
deviation s, we first solve the corresponding problem for the standard normal distribution 
and then translate our answer into one for the normal distribution of interest. This process 
is illustrated in Example 7.29.
Example 7.29 
Registration Times
Data on the length of time required to complete registration for classes using an online 
registration system suggest that the distribution of the variable
x 5 time to register
for students at a particular university can be well approximated by a normal distribution 
with mean m 5 12 minutes and standard deviation s 5 2 minutes. (The normal distribution 
might not be an appropriate model for x 5 time to register at another university. Many 
factors influence the shape, center, and spread of such a distribution.) 
Because some students do not log off properly, the university would like to log off stu-
dents automatically after some amount of time has elapsed. This time will be chosen so that 
only 1% of the students are logged off while they are still attempting to register. To 
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.6   Normal Distributions 
●  405
determine the amount of time that should be allowed before disconnecting a student, we 
need to describe the largest 1% of the distribution of time to register. These are the indi-
viduals who will be mistakenly disconnected. This is illustrated in Figure 7.35(a). To deter-
mine the value of x*, we first solve the analogous problem for the standard normal distri-
bution, as shown in Figure 7.35(b).
Figure  7.35
Capturing the largest 1% of the 
registration times
12
Largest 1%
x*
{
.01
Largest 1%
z*
{
.01
z curve
Normal curve
m = 12, s = 2
(a)
(b)
By looking at Appendix Table 2 for a cumulative area of .99, we find the closest entry 
(.9901) in the 2.3 row and the .03 column, from which z* 5 2.33. For the standard 
normal distribution, the largest 1% of the distribution is made up of those values greater 
than 2.33. 
An equivalent statement is that the largest 1% are those with z scores greater than 
2.33. This implies that in the distribution of x 5 time to register (or any other normal 
distribution), the largest 1% are those values with z scores greater than 2.33 or, equivalently, 
those x values more than 2.33 standard deviations above the mean. Here, the standard 
deviation is 2, so 2.33 standard deviations is 2.33(2), and it follows that
x* 5 12 1 2.33(2) 5 12 1 4.66 5 16.66
The largest 1% of the distribution for time to register is made up of values that are 
greater than 16.66 minutes. If the university system was set to log off students after 
16.66 minutes, only 1% of the students registering would be logged off before completing 
their registration.
■
A general formula for converting a z score back to an x value results from solving 
z* x* 2 m
s
 for x*, as shown in the accompanying box.
To convert a z score z* back to an x value x*, use
x* 5 m 1 z*s
Example 7.30 
Garbage Truck Processing Times
Garbage trucks entering a particular waste management facility are weighed and then 
they offload garbage into a landfill. Data from the paper “Estimating Waste Transfer Station 
Delays Using GPS” (Waste Management [2008]: 1742–1750) suggest that a normal distribution 
with mean m ​5 ​13 minutes and s ​5 ​3.9 minutes is a reasonable model for the probability 
distribution of the random variable x ​5 ​total processing time for a garbage truck at this 
waste management facility (total processing time includes waiting time as well as the time 
required to weigh the truck and offload the garbage). 
Suppose that we want to describe the total processing times of the trucks making up 
the 10% with the longest processing times. These trucks would be the 10% with times 
corresponding to the shaded region in the accompanying illustration.
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

406 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
13
Longest 10%
x*
.10
Normal curve
m = 13, s = 3.9
For the standard normal distribution, the largest 10% are those with z values greater than 
z* 5 1.28 (from Appendix Table 2, based on a cumulative area of .90).
Then
x* m 1 z*s
13 1 1.28s3.9d
13 1 4.992
17.992
About 10% of the garbage trucks using this facility would have a total processing time of 
more than 17.992 minutes.
The 5% with the fastest processing times would be those with z values less than 
z* 5 21.645 (from Appendix Table 2, based on a cumulative area of .05). Then
x* m 1 z*s
13 1 s21.645ds3.9d
13 2 6.416
6.584
About 5% of the garbage trucks processed at this facility will have total processing times of 
less than 6.584 minutes.	
■
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
EXERCISES 7.63 - 7.82
7.63	 Determine the following standard normal (z) curve 
areas. (Hint: See Examples 7.23 and 7.24.)
a.	 The area under the z curve to the left of 1.75
b.	The area under the z curve to the left of 20.68 
c.	 The area under the z curve to the right of 1.20
d.	The area under the z curve to the right of 22.82 
e.	 The area under the z curve between 22.22 
and 0.53 
f.	 The area under the z curve between 21 and 1
g.	The area under the z curve between 24 and 4 
7.64	 Determine each of the following areas under the 
standard normal (z) curve:
a.	 To the left of 21.28  ​
b.	To the right of 1.28  ​
c.	 Between 21 and 2 
d.	To the right of 0 
e.	 To the right of 25 
f.	 Between 21.6 and 2.5  ​
g.	 To the left of 0.23  ​
7.65	 Let z denote a random variable that has a standard 
normal distribution. Determine each of the following 
probabilities:
a.	 P(z , 2.36) 
b.	P(z # 2.36) 
c.	 P(z , 21.23) 
d.	P(1.14 , z , 3.35) 
e.	 P(20.77 # z # 20.55) 
f.	 P(z . 2) 
g.	P(z $ 23.38) 
h.	P(z , 4.98) 
7.66	 Let z denote a random variable having a normal 
distribution with m 5 0 and s 5 1. Determine 
each of the following probabilities. (Hint: See 
Examples 7.27 and 7.28.)
a.	 P(z , 0.10) 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.6   Normal Distributions 
●  407
b.	P(z , 20.10) 
c.	 P(0.40 , z , 0.85) 
d.	P(20.85 , z , 20.40) 
e.	 P(20.40 , z , 0.85) 
f.	 P(z . 21.25) 
g.	 P(z , 21.50 or z . 2.50) 
7.67	 Let z denote a variable that has a standard normal 
distribution. Determine the value z* to satisfy the 
following conditions. (Hint: See Example 7.25.)
a.	 P(z , z*) 5 .025 
b.	P(z , z*) 5 .01 
c.	 P(z , z*) 5 .05 
d.	P(z . z*) 5 .02 
e.	 P(z . z*) 5 .01 
f.	 P(z . z* or z , 2z*) 5 .20 
7.68	 Determine the value z* that
a.	 Separates the largest 3% of all z values from the 
others (Hint: See Example 7.26.) 
b.	Separates the largest 1% of all z values from the 
others 
c.	 Separates the smallest 4% of all z values from the 
others 
d.	Separates the smallest 10% of all z values from the 
others 
7.69	 Determine the value of z* such that
a.	 2z* and z* separate the middle 95% of all 
z values from the most extreme 5% (Hint: See 
Example 7.26.) 
b.	2z* and z* separate the middle 90% of all 
z values from the most extreme 10% 
c.	 2z* and z* separate the middle 98% of all 
z values from the most extreme 2% 
d.	2z* and z* separate the middle 92% of all 
z values from the most extreme 8% 
7.70	 Because P(z , .44) 5 .67, 67% of all z values are 
less than .44, and .44 is the 67th percentile of the 
standard normal distribution. Determine the value 
of each of the following percentiles for the standard 
normal distribution (Hint: If the cumulative area that 
you must look for does not appear in the z table, use 
the closest entry, see Example 7.27.):
a.	 The 91st percentile (Hint: Look for area .9100.) 
b.	The 77th percentile 
c.	 The 50th percentile 
d.	The 9th percentile 
e.	 What is the relationship between the 70th  
z percentile and the 30th z percentile? 
7.71	 Consider the population of all 1-gallon cans of 
dusty rose paint manufactured by a particular paint 
company. Suppose that a normal distribution with 
mean m 5 5 ml and standard deviation s 5 0.2 
ml is a reasonable model for the distribution of the 
variable x 5 amount of red dye in the paint mixture. 
Use the normal distribution model to calculate the 
following probabilities. (Hint: See Examaples 7.27 
and 7.28.)
a.	 P(x , 5.0) 
	
b.	P(x , 5.4) 
c.	 P(x # 5.4) 
	
d.	P(4.6 , x , 5.2) 
e.	 P(x . 4.5) 
	
f.	 P(x . 4.0) 
7.72	 Consider babies born in the “normal” range of 
37–43 weeks gestational age. The paper referenced 
in Example 7.27 (“Fetal Growth Parameters and 
Birth Weight: Their Relationship to Neonatal Body 
Composition,” Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology 
[2009]: 441–446) suggests that a normal distribution 
with mean m ​5 ​3500 grams and standard deviation 
s ​5 ​600 grams is a reasonable model for the 
probability distribution of the continuous numerical 
variable x ​5 ​birth weight of a randomly selected full-
term baby.
a.	 What is the probability that the birth weight of a 
randomly selected full-term baby exceeds 4000 g? 
b. What is the probability that the birth weight of a 
randomly selected full-term baby is between 3000 
and 4000 g? 
c.	 What is the probability that the birth weight of 
a randomly selected full-term baby is either less 
than 2000 g or greater than 5000 g? 
d.	What is the probability that the birth weight 
of a randomly selected full-term baby exceeds 
7 pounds? (Hint: 1 lb 5 453.59 g.) 
e.	 How would you characterize the most extreme 
0.1% of all full-term baby birth weights? 
f.	 If x is a random variable with a normal 
distribution and a is a numerical constant (a Þ 0), 
then y 5 ax also has a normal distribution. Use 
this formula to determine the distribution of 
full-term baby birth weight expressed in pounds 
(shape, mean, and standard deviation), and then 
recalculate the probability from Part (d). How 
does this compare to your previous answer?
7.73	 Emissions of nitrogen oxides, which are major con-
stituents of smog, can be modeled using a normal 
distribution. Let x denote the amount of this pollut-
ant emitted by a randomly selected vehicle (in parts 
per billion). The distribution of x can be described 
by a normal distribution with m 5 1.6 and s 5 0.4. 
Suppose that the EPA wants to offer some sort of 
incentive to get the worst polluters off the road. 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

408 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
What emission levels constitute the worst 10% of the 
vehicles? 
 
7.74	 The paper referenced in Example 7.30 (“Estimating 
Waste Transfer Station Delays Using GPS,” Waste 
Management [2008]: 1742–1750) describing processing 
times for garbage trucks also provided information 
on processing times at a second facility. At this 
second facility, the mean total processing time 
was 9.9 minutes and the standard deviation of the 
processing times was 6.2 minutes. Explain why a 
normal distribution with mean 9.9 and standard 
deviation 6.2 would not be an appropriate model for 
the probability distribution of the variable x ​5 ​total 
processing time of a randomly selected truck entering 
this facility.
7.75	 The size of the left upper chamber of the heart is one 
measure of cardiovascular health. When the upper left 
chamber is enlarged, the risk of heart problems is in-
creased. The paper “Left Atrial Size Increases with Body 
Mass Index in Children” (International Journal of Cardiolo­
gy [2009]: 1–7) described a study in which the left atrial 
size was measured for a large number of children age 
5 to 15 years. Based on this data, the authors con-
cluded that for healthy children, left atrial diameter 
was approximately normally distributed with a mean 
of 26.4 mm and a standard deviation of 4.2 mm.
a.	 Approximately what proportion of healthy 
children have left atrial diameters less than 
24 mm? 
b.	Approximately what proportion of healthy 
children have left atrial diameters greater than 
32 mm? 
c.	 Approximately what proportion of healthy 
children have left atrial diameters between 25 and 
30 mm? 
d.	For healthy children, what is the value for which 
only about 20% have a larger left atrial diameter? 
7.76	 The paper referenced in the previous exercise also 
included data on left atrial diameter for children 
who were considered overweight. For these children, 
left atrial diameter was approximately normally 
distributed with a mean of 28 mm and a standard 
deviation of 4.7 mm.
a.	 Approximately what proportion of overweight 
children have left atrial diameters less than 25 mm?
b.	Approximately what proportion of overweight 
children have left atrial diameters greater than 
32 mm? 
c.	 Approximately what proportion of overweight 
children have left atrial diameters between 25 and 
30 mm? 
d.	What proportion of overweight children has left 
atrial diameters greater than the mean for healthy 
children? 
7.77	 According to the paper “Commuters’ Exposure to Par-
ticulate Matter and Carbon Monoxide in Hanoi, Vietnam” 
(Transportation Research [2008]: 206–211), the carbon 
monoxide exposure of someone riding a motorbike 
for 5 km on a highway in Hanoi is approximately 
normally distributed with a mean of 18.6 ppm. Sup-
pose that the standard deviation of carbon monoxide 
exposure is 5.7 ppm. Approximately what propor-
tion of those who ride a motorbike for 5 km on a 
Hanoi highway will experience a carbon monoxide 
exposure of 
a. more than 20 ppm? 
b. more than 25 ppm? 
7.78	 A machine that cuts corks for wine bottles operates 
in such a way that the distribution of the diameter 
for the corks produced is well approximated by a 
normal distribution with mean 3 cm and standard 
deviation 0.1 cm. The specifications call for corks 
with diameters between 2.9 and 3.1 cm. A cork not 
meeting the specifications is considered defective. 
(A cork that is too small leaks and causes the wine to 
deteriorate. A cork that is too large doesn’t fit in the 
bottle.) What proportion of corks produced by this 
machine are defective? 
7.79	 Refer to the previous exercise. Suppose that there 
are two machines available for cutting corks. The 
machine described in the preceding problem pro-
duces corks with diameters that are approximately 
normally distributed with mean 3 cm and standard 
deviation 0.1 cm. The second machine produces 
corks with diameters that are approximately normally 
distributed with mean 3.05 cm and standard devia-
tion 0.01 cm. Which machine would you recom-
mend? (Hint: Which machine would produce fewer 
defective corks?) 
7.80	 A gasoline tank for a certain car is designed to 
hold 15 gallons of gas. Suppose that the variable 
x 5 actual capacity of a randomly selected tank has 
a distribution that is well approximated by a normal 
curve with mean 15.0 gallons and standard deviation 
0.1 gallon.
a.	 What is the probability that a randomly selected 
tank will hold at most 14.8 gallons? 
b.	What is the probability that a randomly selected 
tank will hold between 14.7 and 15.1 gallons? 
c.	 If two such tanks are independently selected, 
what is the probability that both hold at most 
15 gallons? 
 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.7   Checking for Normality and Normalizing Transformations 
●  409
7.81	 ▼ The time that it takes a randomly selected job 
applicant to perform a certain task has a distribution 
that can be approximated by a normal distribution 
with a mean value of 120 seconds and a standard 
deviation of 20 seconds. The fastest 10% are to be 
given advanced training. What task times qualify 
individuals for such training? 
7.82	 ▼ Suppose that the distribution of typing speed 
in words per minute (wpm) for experienced 
typists using a new type of split keyboard can be 
approximated by a normal curve with mean 60 wpm 
and standard deviation 15 wpm (“The Effects of 
Split Keyboard Geometry on Upper body Postures,” 
Ergonomics [2009]: 104–111).
a.	 What is the probability that a randomly selected 
typist’s speed is at most 60 wpm? 
b. What is the probability that a randomly selected 
typist’s speed is less than 60 wpm? 
c.	 What is the probability that a randomly selected 
typist’s speed is between 45 and 90 wpm? 
d.	Would you be surprised to find a typist 
in this population whose speed exceeded 
105 wpm?  
e.	 Suppose that two typists are independently 
selected. What is the probability that both their 
typing speeds exceed 75 wpm? 
f.	 Suppose that special training is to be made 
available to the slowest 20% of the typists. What 
typing speeds would qualify individuals for this 
training? 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
 7.7  
Checking for Normality and Normalizing Transformations
Some of the most frequently used statistical methods are valid only when a sample 
x1, x2, . . . , xn has come from a population distribution that is at least approximately 
normal. One way to see whether an assumption of population normality is plausible is to 
construct a normal probability plot of the data. 
One version of this plot uses quantities called normal scores. The values of the normal 
scores depend on the sample size n. For example, the normal scores when n 5 10 are as 
follows:
21.539
21.001
2.656
2.376
2.123
.123
.376
.656
1.001
1.539
To interpret these numbers, think of selecting sample after sample from a standard 
normal distribution, each one consisting of n 5 10 observations. Then 21.539 is the 
long-run average of the smallest observation from each sample, 21.001 is the long-run 
average of the second smallest observation from each sample, and so on. In other words, 
21.539 is the mean value of the smallest observation in a sample of size 10 from the 
z distribution and 21.001 is the mean value of the second smallest observation, and so on.
Tables of normal scores for many different sample sizes are available. Alternatively, many 
software packages (such as Minitab and JMP) and some graphing calculators can compute 
these scores on request and then construct a normal probability plot. Not all calculators and 
software packages use the same algorithm to compute normal scores. However, these dif-
ferences in normal scores do not change the overall character of a normal probability plot, 
so either the tabulated values or those given by the computer or calculator can be used.
After the sample observations are ordered from smallest to largest, the smallest normal 
score is paired with the smallest observation, the second smallest normal score with the 
second smallest observation, and so on. The first number in a pair is the normal score, and 
the second number in the pair is the observed data value. A normal probability plot is just 
a scatterplot of these (normal score, observed value) pairs.
If the sample has been selected from a standard normal distribution, the second number in 
each pair should be reasonably close to the first number (ordered observation < correspond-
ing mean value). Then the n plotted points will fall near a line with slope equal to 1 (a 458 
line) passing through (0, 0). When the sample has been obtained from some normal popula-
tion distribution (but not necessarily the standard normal distribution), the plotted points 
should be close to some straight line (but not necessarily one with slope 1 and intercept 0).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

410 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
Normal probability plot: A scatterplot of the (normal score, observed value) pairs. 
A strong linear pattern in a normal probability plot suggests it is plausible that 
the population distribution is normal. On the other hand, systematic departure 
from a straight-line pattern (such as curvature in the plot) indicates that it is not 
reasonable to assume that the population distribution is normal.
DEFINITION
Example 7.31 
Egg Weights
The following data represent egg weights (in grams) for a sample of 10 eggs. These data 
are consistent with summary quantities in the paper “Evaluation of Egg Quality Traits of 
Chickens Reared under Backyard System in Western Uttar Pradesh” (Indian Journal of Poultry 
Science, 2009).
53.04
53.50
52.53
53.00
53.07
52.86
52.66
53.23
53.26
53.16
Arranging the sample observations in order from smallest to largest results in
52.53
52.66
52.86
53.00
53.04
53.07
53.16
53.23
53.26
53.50
Pairing these ordered observations with the normal scores for a sample of size 10 
(previously given) results in the following 10 pairs that can be used to construct the normal 
probability plot:
(21.539, 52.53)
(21.001, 52.66)
(20.656, 52.86)
(20.376, 53.00)
(20.123, 53.04)
(0.123, 53.07)
(0.376, 53.16)
(0.656, 53.23)
(1.001, 53.26)
(1.539, 53.50)
The normal probability plot is shown in Figure 7.36. The linear pattern in the plot in-
dicates that it is plausible that the egg-weight distribution from which these observations 
were selected is normal.
Understand the context ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Figure  7.36
A normal probability plot for data of 
Example 7.31.
52.50
52.75
53.00
Egg weight
53.25
53.50
–2.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Normal score
2.0

■
The decision as to whether a normal probability plot shows a strong linear pattern is 
somewhat subjective. Particularly when n is small, normality should not be ruled out unless 
the departure from linearity is clear-cut. Figure 7.37 displays several plots that suggest a 
nonnormal population distribution.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.7   Checking for Normality and Normalizing Transformations 
●  411
Transforming Data to Obtain a Distribution  
That Is Approximately Normal (Optional)
Many of the most frequently used statistical methods are valid only when the sample is 
selected at random from a population whose distribution is at least approximately normal. 
When a sample histogram shows a distinctly nonnormal shape, it is common to use a 
transformation or reexpression of the data. 
By transforming data, we mean applying some specified mathematical function (such as 
the square root, logarithm, or reciprocal) to each data value to produce a set of transformed 
data. We can then study and summarize the distribution of these transformed values using 
methods that require normality. 
We saw in Chapter 5 that, with bivariate data, one or both of the variables can be 
transformed in an attempt to find two variables that are linearly related. With univariate data, 
a transformation is usually chosen to produce a distribution of transformed values that is more 
symmetric and more closely approximated by a normal curve than the original distribution.
Example 7.32 
Rainfall Data
● Data that have been used by several investigators to introduce the concept of transformation 
consist of values of March precipitation for Minneapolis–St. Paul over a period of 30 years. 
These values are given in Table 7.2, along with the square root of each value. Histograms 
of both the original and the transformed data appear in Figure 7.38. 
The distribution of the original data is clearly skewed, with a long upper tail. The 
square-root transformation results in a substantially more symmetric distribution, with a 
typical value of around 1.1.
Figure  7.37
Plots suggesting nonnormality:  
(a) indication that the population 
distribution is skewed;  
(b) indication that the population 
distribution has heavier tails than a 
normal curve;  
(c) presence of an outlier.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Understand the context ❭
● Data set available online
Table 7.2  Original and Square-Root-Transformed Values of March Precipitation  
in Minneapolis–St. Paul over a 30-year Period
Year
Precipitation
ÏPrecipitation
Year
Precipitation
ÏPrecipitation
  ​1
  ​.77
  ​.88
16
1.62
1.27
  ​2
1.74
1.32
17
1.31
1.14
  ​3
  ​.81
  ​.90
18
  ​.32
  ​.57
  ​4
1.20
1.10
19
  ​.59
  ​.77
  ​5
1.95
1.40
20
  ​.81
  ​.90
  ​6
1.20
1.10
21
2.81
1.68
  ​7
  ​.47
  ​.69
22
1.87
1.37
  ​8
1.43
1.20
23
1.18
1.09
  ​9
3.37
1.84
24
1.35
1.16
10
2.20
1.48
25
4.75
2.18
11
3.00
1.73
26
2.48
1.57
12
3.09
1.76
27
  ​.96
  ​.98
13
1.51
1.23
28
1.89
1.37
14
2.10
1.45
29
  ​.90
  ​.95
15
  ​.52
  ​.72
30
2.05
1.43
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

412 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions

■
Logarithmic transformations are also common and, as with bivariate data, either the 
natural logarithm or the base 10 logarithm can be used. A logarithmic transformation is 
usually applied to data that are positively skewed (a long upper tail). This affects values in 
the upper tail substantially more than values in the lower tail, yielding a more symmetric—
and often more nearly normal—distribution.
Example 7.33 
Markers for Kidney Disease
Two measures of kidney function are the levels of a substance called AGT found in blood 
and urine. The paper “Urinary Angiotensinogen as a Potential Biomarker of Severity of Chronic 
Kidney Diseases” (Journal of the American Society of Hypertension [2008]: 349–354) describes 
a study in which blood plasma AGT levels and urinary AGT levels were measured for 
a sample of adults with chronic kidney disease. Representative data (consistent with 
summary quantities and descriptions given in the paper) for 40 patients are given in 
Table 7.3.
Plasma AGT
Plasma AGT
Urinary AGT
Urinary AGT
21.0
16.7
  56.2
    41.7
36.0
20.2
288.4
    29.5
22.9
24.5
  45.7
  208.9
  8.0
18.5
426.6
  229.1
27.3
40.2
190.6
  186.2
32.4
18.8
616.6
    29.5
17.2
28.1
  97.7
  229.1
30.9
26.8
  66.1
    13.5
27.2
24.1
    2.6
  407.4
30.0
14.1
  74.1
1122.0
35.1
18.9
  14.5
    66.1
21.6
25.6
  56.2
      7.4
22.7
10.2
812.8
  177.8
  2.5
29.2
  11.5
      6.2
30.2
29.5
346.7
    67.6
27.3
24.3
    9.6
    20.0
19.6
22.3
288.4
    28.8
19.0
16.5
147.9
  186.2
13.4
25.6
  17.0
  141.3
18.0
23.0
575.4
  724.4
Table 7.3  Plasma and Urinary AGT Levels
Figure  7.38
Histograms of the precipitation  
data used in Example 7.32:  
(a) untransformed data;  
(b) square-root transformed data.
0
1
2
3
4
5
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
(b)
(a)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.7   Checking for Normality and Normalizing Transformations 
●  413
The authors of the paper stated that the distribution of plasma AGT levels was 
approximately normal. Minitab was used to construct the histogram and normal 
probability plot for the plasma AGT levels shown in Figure 7.39. The histogram is 
reasonably symmetric and the normal probability plot shows a strong linear pattern. This 
is consistent with the authors’ statement about the approximate normality of the plasma 
AGT levels.
When the authors considered urinary AGT levels, they found that the distribution of the 
sample data was skewed, and they used a log transformation in order to obtain a distribution 
that was more approximately normal. Table 7.4 gives the urinary AGT levels along with the 
log-transformed data. Figure 7.40 shows histograms of the original urinary AGT data and the 
Urinary AGT
Log(Urinary AGT)
Urinary AGT
Log(Urinary AGT)
  56.2
1.75
    41.7
1.62
288.4
2.46
    29.5
1.47
  45.7
1.66
  208.9
2.32
426.6
2.63
  229.1
2.36
190.6
2.28
  186.2
2.27
616.6
2.79
    29.5
1.47
  97.7
1.99
  229.1
2.36
  66.1
1.82
    13.5
1.13
    2.6
0.41
  407.4
2.61
  74.1
1.87
1122.0
3.05
  14.5
1.16
    66.1
1.82
  56.2
1.75
      7.4
0.87
812.8
2.91
  177.8
2.25
  11.5
1.06
      6.2
0.79
346.7
2.54
    67.6
1.83
    9.6
0.98
    20.0
1.30
288.4
2.46
    28.8
1.46
147.9
2.17
  186.2
2.27
  17.0
1.23
  141.3
2.15
575.4
2.76
  724.4
2.86
Table 7.4  Urinary AGT Levels and Log-Transformed Levels
Figure  7.39
Graphical displays for the plasma 
AGT data of Example 7.33:  
(a) histogram;  
(b) normal probability plot.
0
Plasma AGT
40
30
20
10
–2
Normal score
2
1
0
–1
0
2
4
6
8
10
Frequency
12
Plasma AGT
(b)
(a)
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

414 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
Figure  7.40
Histograms of urinary AGT data from 
Example 7.33:  
(a) untransformed data;  
(b) transformed data.
0
5
Frequency
20
15
10
Urinary AGT
(a)
1050
900
750
600
450
300
150
0
0
2
Frequency
12
10
8
6
4
Log urinary AGT
(b)
0.5
0.0
1.5
1.0
2.5
2.0
3.5
3.0
transformed urinary AGT data. Notice that the histogram for the transformed data is more 
nearly symmetric and more mound shaped than the histogram of the untransformed data.
Figure 7.41 displays Minitab normal probability plots for the original data and for the 
transformed data. The plot for the transformed data is clearly more nearly linear in appear-
ance than the plot for the original data.
Figure  7.41
Minitab normal probability plots 
for the urinary AGT data of  
(a) original data;  
(b) transformed data.
0
Urinary AGT
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
Normal score
(a)
2
1
0
–1
–2
Log urinary AGT
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
Normal score
(b)
–2
–1
0
1
2

■
Selecting a Transformation
Occasionally, a particular transformation can be dictated by some theoretical argument, 
but often this is not the case and you may want to try several different transformations to 
find one that is satisfactory. Figure 7.42, from the article “Distribution of Sperm Counts in 
Suspected Infertile Men” (Journal of Reproduction and Fertility [1983]: 91–96), shows what can 
result from such a search. Other investigators in this field had previously used all three of 
the transformations illustrated, but the log transformation shown in Figure 7.42(b) appears 
to be the best choice.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.7   Checking for Normality and Normalizing Transformations 
●  415
Figure  7.42
Histograms of sperm concentrations for 1711  
suspected infertile men:  
(a) untransformed data (highly skewed);  
(b) log-transformed data (reasonably symmetric);  
(c) square-root-transformed data;  
(d) cube-root-transformed data.
(a)
(b)
Number of cases
(c)
(d)
Sperm concentrations (106/ml)
Sperm concentrations (106/ml)
Number of cases
EXERCISES 7.83 - 7.93
7.83	 ● The authors of the paper “Development of Nutri-
tionally At-Risk Young Children is Predicted by Malaria, 
Anemia, and Stunting in Pemba, Zanzibar” (The Journal 
of Nutrition [2009]:763–772) studied factors that might 
be related to dietary deficiencies in children. Chil-
dren were observed for a length of time and the time 
spent in various activities was recorded. One variable 
of interest was the length of time (in minutes) a child 
spent fussing. 
The authors comment that the distribution of 
fussing times was skewed and that they used a square 
root transformation to create a distribution that was 
more approximately normal. Data consistent with 
summary quantities in the paper for 15 children are 
given in the accompanying table. Normal scores for a 
samples size of 15 are also given.
Fussing Time
Normal Score
  0.05
21.739
  0.10
21.245
  0.15
20.946
  0.40
20.714
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
continued
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

416 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
Fussing Time
Normal Score
  0.70
20.515
  1.05
20.333
  1.95
20.165
  2.15
  0.000
  3.70
  0.165
  3.90
  0.335
  4.50
  0.515
  6.00
  0.714
  8.00
  0.946
11.00
  1.245
14.00
  1.739
a.	 Construct a normal probability plot for the fussing 
time data. (Hint: See Example 7.31.) 
b. Does the plot from Part (a) look linear? Do you 
agree with the authors of the paper that the 
fussing time distribution is not normal?
c.	 Transform the data by taking the square root of 
each data value. Construct a normal probability 
plot for the square root transformed data. 
d. How do the normal probability plots from Parts 
(a) and (c) compare?
7.84	 ● The paper “Risk Behavior, Decision Making, and 
Music Genre in Adolescent Males” (Marshall University, 
May 2009) examined the effect of type of music play-
ing and performance on a risky, decision-making task.
a.	 Participants in the study responded to a 
questionnaire that was used to assign a risk 
behavior score. Risk behavior scores (read 
from a graph that appeared in the paper) for 
15 participants follow. Use these data to construct 
a normal probability plot (the normal scores for a 
sample of size 15 appear in the previous exercise).
102
105
113
120
125
127
134
135
139
141
144
145
149
150
160
b.	Participants also completed a positive and 
negative affect scale (PANAS) designed to measure 
emotional response to music. PANAS values (read 
from a graph that appeared in the paper) for 
15 participants follow. Use these data to construct 
a normal probability plot (the normal scores for a 
sample of size 15 appear in the previous exercise).
36
40
45
47
48
49
50
52
53
54
56
59
61
62
70
c.	 The author of the paper states that he believes 
that it is reasonable to consider both risk behavior 
scores and PANAS scores to be approximately 
normally distributed. Do the normal probability 
plots from Parts (a) and (b) support this 
conclusion? Explain.
7.85	 ● Measures of nerve conductivity are used in the 
diagnosis of certain medical conditions. The paper 
“Effects of Age, Gender, Height, and Weight on Late 
Responses and Nerve Conduction Study Parameters” 
(Acta Neurologica Taiwanica [2009]: 242–249) describes 
a study in which the ulnar nerve was stimulated in 
healthy patients and the amplitude and velocity of 
the response was measured. 
Representative data (consistent with summary 
quantities and descriptions given in the paper) for 
30 patients for the variable x ​5 ​response velocity 
(m/s) are given in the accompanying table. Also given 
are values of the log of x and the square root of x.
x
log(x)
sqrt(x)
60.1
1.78
7.75
48.7
1.69
6.98
51.7
1.71
7.19
52.9
1.72
7.27
50.5
1.70
7.11
58.5
1.77
7.65
53.6
1.73
7.32
60.3
1.78
7.77
64.5
1.81
8.03
50.4
1.70
7.10
56.5
1.75
7.52
55.5
1.74
7.45
53.0
1.72
7.28
50.5
1.70
7.11
54.0
1.73
7.35
53.6
1.73
7.32
55.2
1.74
7.43
57.9
1.76
7.61
61.5
1.79
7.84
58.0
1.76
7.62
57.6
1.76
7.59
67.1
1.83
8.19
56.2
1.75
7.50
53.8
1.73
7.33
55.7
1.75
7.46
52.9
1.72
7.27
54.0
1.73
7.35
52.6
1.72
7.25
61.8
1.79
7.86
62.8
1.80
7.92
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.7   Checking for Normality and Normalizing Transformations 
●  417
a.	 Construct a histogram of the untransformed data. 
b. Does the distribution of x appear to be 
approximately normal? Explain.
c.	 Construct a histogram of the log transformed data. 
d. Is the histogram of the transformed data 
more symmetric than the histogram of the 
untransformed data?
e.	 Construct a histogram of the square root 
transformed data. 
f.	 Do either of the two transformations (square root 
or log) result in a histogram that is more nearly 
normal in shape? (Hint: See Example 7.33.)
7.86	 ● Macular degeneration is the most common cause of 
blindness in people older than 60 years. One variable 
thought to be related to a type of inflammation 
associated with this disease is level of a substance 
called soluble Fas ligand (sFasL) in the blood. 
The accompanying table contains representative 
data on x ​5 ​sFasL level for 10 patients with 
age-related macular degeneration. These data are 
consistent with summary quantities and descriptions 
of the data given in the paper “Associations of Plasma-
Soluble Fas Ligand with Aging and Age-Related Macular 
Degeneration” (Investigative Ophthalmology & Visual 
Science [2008]: 1345–1349). 
The authors of the paper noted that the distribution 
of sFasL level was skewed and recommended a 
cube-root transformation. The cube-root values and 
the normal scores for a sample size of 10 are also given 
in the accompanying table.
x
Cube Root of x
Normal Score
0.069
0.41
21.539
0.074
0.42
21.001
0.176
0.56
20.656
0.185
0.57
20.376
0.216
0.60
20.123
0.287
0.66
   0.123
0.343
0.70
   0.376
0.343
0.70
   0.656
0.512
0.80
   1.001
0.729
0.90
   1.539
a.	 Construct a normal probability plot using the 
untransformed data. 
b. Does the normal probability plot appear linear or 
curved?
c.	 Construct a normal probability plot using the 
transformed data. Does the normal probability 
plot appear more nearly linear than the plot for 
the untransformed data?
7.87	 The following normal probability plot was 
constructed using part of the data appearing in the 
paper “Trace Metals in Sea Scallops” (Environmental 
Concentration and Toxicology 19: 1326–1334).
+
-
-
+
-
-
-
-
+
-
-
-
-
++-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+
-1.60
-0.80
0.00
0.80
1.60
2.40
Observation
Normal
score
-
-
-
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
The variable under study was the amount of 
cadmium in North Atlantic scallops. Do the sample 
data suggest that the cadmium concentration 
distribution is not normal? Explain.
7.88	 ● Consider the following 10 observations on the 
lifetime (in hours) for a certain type of power 
supply: 152.7, 172.0, 172.5, 173.3, 193.0, 204.7, 
216.5, 234.9, 262.6, and 422.6. Construct a normal 
probability plot, and comment on the plausibility of 
a normal distribution as a model for power supply 
lifetime. (The normal scores for a sample of size 10 
are 21.539, 21.001, 2.656, 2.376, 2.123, .123, 
.376, .656, 1.001, and 1.539.)
7.89	 ● Consider the following sample of 25 observations 
on the diameter x (in centimeters) of a disk used in a 
certain system:
16.01 16.08 16.13 15.94 16.05 16.27 15.89
15.84 15.95 16.10 15.92 16.04 15.82 16.15
16.06 15.66 15.78 15.99 16.29 16.15 16.19
16.22 16.07 16.13 16.11
The 13 largest normal scores for a sample of size 
25 are 1.965, 1.524, 1.263, 1.067, 0.905, 0.764, 
0.637, 0.519, 0.409, 0.303, 0.200, 0.100, and 0. 
The 12 smallest scores result from placing a negative 
sign in front of each of the given nonzero scores. 
Construct a normal probability plot. Does it appear 
plausible that disk diameter is normally distributed? 
Explain.
7.90	 ● Example 7.32 examined rainfall data for 
Minneapolis–St. Paul. The square-root transformation 
was used to obtain a distribution of values that was 
more nearly symmetric than the distribution of 
the original data. Another transformation that has 
been suggested by meteorologists is the cube root: 
transformed value 5 (original value)1/3. The original 
values and their cube roots (the transformed values) 
are given in the following table:
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

418 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
Original
Transformed
Original 
Transformed
0.32
0.68
1.51
1.15
0.47
0.78
1.62
1.17
0.52
0.80
1.74
1.20
0.59
0.84
1.87
1.23
0.77
0.92
1.89
1.24
0.81
0.93
1.95
1.25
0.81
0.93
2.05
1.27
0.90
0.97
2.10
1.28
0.96
0.99
2.20
1.30
1.18
1.06
2.48
1.35
1.20
1.06
2.81
1.41
1.20
1.06
3.00
1.44
1.31
1.09
3.09
1.46
1.35
1.11
3.37
1.50
1.43
1.13
4.75
1.68
Construct a histogram of the transformed data. 
Compare your histogram to those given in 
Figure 7.38. Which of the cube-root and square-root 
transformations appear to result in a histogram that is 
more nearly symmetric?
7.91	 The article “The Distribution of Buying Frequency 
Rates” (Journal of Marketing Research [1980]: 210–216) 
reported the results of a 31
2-year study of toothpaste 
purchases. The investigators conducted their research 
using a national sample of 2071 households and re-
corded the number of toothpaste purchases for each 
household participating in the study. The results are 
given in the following frequency distribution:
Number of Purchases
Number of Households 
(Frequency)
​10 to ,20
904
​20 to ,30
500
​30 to ,40
258
​40 to ,50
167
​50 to ,60
  ​94
​60 to ,70
  ​56
​70 to ,80
  ​26
​80 to ,90
  ​20
  ​90 to ,100
  ​13
100 to ,110
    9
110 to ,120
    7
120 to ,130
    6
130 to ,140
    6
140 to ,150
    3
150 to ,160
    0
160 to ,170
    2
a.	 Draw a histogram for this frequency distribution. 
Would you describe the histogram as positively or 
negatively skewed?
b.	Does the square-root transformation result in a 
histogram that is more nearly symmetric than 
that of the original data? (Be careful! This one is 
a bit tricky because you don’t have the raw data; 
transforming the endpoints of the class intervals will 
result in class intervals that are not necessarily of 
equal widths, so the histogram of the transformed 
values will have to be drawn with this in mind.)
7.92	 ● The paper “Temperature and the Northern 
Distributions of Wintering Birds” (Ecology [1991]: 
2274–2285) gave the following body masses (in 
grams) for 50 different bird species:
    7.7
10.1
21.6
  ​8.6
12.0
11.4
16.6
  ​9.4
  ​11.5
  ​9.0
  ​8.2
20.2
48.5
21.6
26.1
  ​6.2
  ​19.1
21.0
28.1
10.6
31.6
  ​6.7
  ​5.0
68.8
  ​23.9
19.8
20.1
  ​6.0
99.6
19.8
16.5
  ​9.0
448.0
21.3
17.4
36.9
34.0
41.0
15.9
12.5
  ​10.2
31.0
21.5
11.9
32.5
  ​9.8
93.9
10.9
  ​19.6
14.5
a.	 Draw a histogram based on class intervals 
5 to ,10, 10 to ,15, 15 to ,20, 20 to ,25, 
25 to ,30, 30 to ,40, 40 to ,50, 50 to ,100, 
and 100 to ,500. Is a transformation of the data 
desirable? Explain.
b.	Use a calculator or statistical computer package 
to calculate logarithms of these observations, and 
construct a histogram. Is the log transformation 
successful in producing a more symmetric 
distribution?
c.	 Consider transformed value 5 
1
Ïoriginal value 
and construct a histogram of the transformed 
data. Does the histogram appear to resemble a 
normal curve?
7.93	 The following figure appeared in the paper “EDTA-
Extractable Copper, Zinc, and Manganese in Soils of the 
Canterbury Plains” (New Zealand Journal of Agricultural 
Research [1984]: 207–217). A large number of topsoil 
samples were analyzed for manganese (Mn), zinc 
(Zn), and copper (Cu), and the resulting data were 
summarized using histograms. 
The investigators transformed each data set using 
logarithms in an effort to obtain more nearly sym-
metric distributions of values. Do you think the 
transformations were successful? Explain.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.8   Using the Normal Distribution to Approximate a Discrete Distribution (Optional)  
●  419
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
10
20
30
Cu
Untransformed data
–0.6
0.0
Cu
Log-transformed data
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
10
20
30
Zn
Number of samples
Number of samples
Number of samples
–0.6
0.0
Zn
1.0
2.0
Mn
15
30
45
10
20
30
Mn
60
mg/g
log10(mg/g)
 7.8  
Using the Normal Distribution to Approximate  
a Discrete Distribution (Optional)
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
The distributions of many random variables can be approximated by a carefully chosen 
normal distribution. In this section, we show how probabilities for some discrete random 
variables can be approximated using a normal curve. The most important case of this is the 
approximation of binomial probabilities.
The Normal Curve and Discrete Variables
The probability distribution of a discrete random variable x is represented graphically by 
a probability histogram. The probability of a particular value is the area of the rectangle 
centered at that value. Possible values of x are isolated points on the number line, usually 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

420 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
whole numbers. For example, if x 5 the IQ of a randomly selected 8-year-old child, then 
x is a discrete random variable, because an IQ score must be a whole number.
Often, a probability histogram can be well approximated by a normal curve, as 
illustrated in Figure 7.43. In such cases, it is customary to say that x has approximately a 
normal distribution. The normal distribution can then be used to calculate approximate 
probabilities of events involving x.
Figure  7.43
A normal curve approximation to a 
probability histogram.
Example 7.34 
Express Mail Packages
The number of express mail packages mailed at a certain post office on a randomly selected 
day is approximately normally distributed with mean 18 and standard deviation 6. Let’s 
first calculate the approximate probability that x 5 20. 
Figure 7.44(a) shows a portion of the probability histogram for x with the approximating 
normal curve superimposed. The area of the shaded rectangle is P(x 5 20). The left edge 
of this rectangle is at 19.5 on the horizontal scale, and the right edge is at 20.5. Therefore, 
the desired probability is approximately the area under the normal curve between 19.5 
and 20.5. 
Standardizing these limits gives
20.5 2 18
6
.42   19.5 2 18
6
.25
from which we get
P(x 5 20) < P(.25 , z , .42) 5 .6628 2 .5987 5 .0641
In a similar fashion, Figure 7.44(b) shows that P(x # 10) is approximately the area under 
the normal curve to the left of 10.5. Then
Psx # 10d < P1z # 10.5 2 18
6
2 Psz # 21.25d
.1056
Understand the context ❭
Figure  7.44
The normal approximation for 
Example 7.34.
18
20
6
8
10
19.5 20.5
10.5
(a)
(b)
Shaded area = P(x = 20)
Shaded area = P(x # 10)
	
■
The calculation of probabilities in Example 7.34 illustrates the use of what is known as 
a continuity correction. Because the rectangle for x 5 10 extends to 10.5 on the right, we 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.8   Using the Normal Distribution to Approximate a Discrete Distribution (Optional)  
●  421
use the normal curve area to the left of 10.5 rather than 10. In general, if possible x values 
are consecutive whole numbers, then P(a # x # b) will be approximately the normal curve 
area between limits a 2 1
2 and b 1 1
2.
Normal Approximation to a Binomial Distribution
Figure 7.45 shows the probability histograms for two binomial distributions, one with 
n 5 25, p 5 .4, and the other with n 5 25, p 5 .1. For each distribution, we computed 
m 5 np and s Ïnps12pd and then we superimposed a normal curve with this m and s 
on the corresponding probability histogram. 
A normal curve fits the probability histogram well in the first case (Figure 7.45(a)). 
When this happens, binomial probabilities can be accurately approximated by areas under 
the normal curve. Because of this, statisticians say that both x (the number of successes) 
and x/n (the proportion of successes) are approximately normally distributed. 
In the second case (Figure 7.45(b)), the normal curve does not give a good approximation 
because the probability histogram is skewed, whereas the normal curve is symmetric.
Figure  7.45
Normal approximations to binomial 
distributions.
(a)
(b)
0
0.05
0.10
0.15
1
2
5
10
15
20
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
0
5
10
0
.2
.4
x:
:
x–n
x:
:
x–n
n = 25, p = .4,
m = 10, s = 2.45
n = 25, p = .1,
m = 2.5, s = 1.5
3
Let x be a binomial random variable based on n trials and success probability p, 
so that
m np  and  s Ïnp(1 2 p)
If n and p are such that
np $ 10 and n(1 2 p) $ 10 
then the distribution of x is approximately normal.
Combining this result with the continuity correction implies that
P(a # x # b) P1
a 2 1
2 2 m
s
# z # b 1 1
2 2 m
s
2
That is, the probability that x is between a and b inclusive is approximately the 
area under the approximating normal curve between a 2 1
2 and b 1 1
2.
Similarly, 
P( x # b) < P1z # b 1 1
2 2 m
s
2        P(a # x) < P1
a 2 1
2 2 m
s
# z2
When either np , 10 or n(1 2 p) , 10, the binomial distribution is too skewed 
for the normal approximation to give reasonably accurate probability estimates.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

422 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
Example 7.35 
Premature Babies
Premature babies are those born before 37 weeks, and those born before 34 weeks are most 
at risk. The paper “Some Thoughts on the True Value of Ultrasound” (Ultrasound in Obstetrics 
and Gynecology [2007]: 671–674) reported that 2% of births in the United States occur before 
34 weeks. 
Suppose that 1000 births are randomly selected and that the number of these births that 
occurred prior to 34 weeks, x, is to be determined. Because
np 1000s.02d 20 $ 10
ns1 2 pd 1000s.98d 980 $ 10
the distribution of x is approximately normal with
m np 1000s.02d 20
s Ïnps1 2 pd Ï1000s.02ds.98d Ï19.60 4.427
The probability that the number of babies in a sample of 1000 born prior to 34 weeks 
will be between 10 and 25 (inclusive) is
Ps10 # x # 25d P1
9.5 2 20
4.427
# z # 25.5 2 20
4.427 2
Ps 2 2.37 # z # 1.29d
.9015 2 .0089
.8926
as shown in the following figure:
9.5
25.5
10
20
25
Normal curve for m = 20, s = 4.427
	
■
Understand the context ❭
Do the work ❭
EXERCISES 7.94 - 7.104
7.94	 Let x denote the IQ of an individual selected at 
random from a certain population. The value 
of x must be a whole number. Suppose that 
the distribution of x can be approximated by a 
normal distribution with mean value 100 and 
standard deviation 15. Approximate the following 
probabilities. (Hint: See Example 7.34.)
a.	 P(x 5 100) 
b.	P(x # 110) 
c.	 P(x , 110) (Hint: x , 110 is the same as x # 109.)
d.	P(75 # x # 125) 
7.95	 Suppose that the distribution of 
x 5 the number of items produced by an assembly 
line during an 8-hour shift 
can be approximated by a normal distribution with 
mean value 150 and standard deviation 10.
a.	 What is the approximate probability that the num-
ber of items produced is at most 120? 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.8   Using the Normal Distribution to Approximate a Discrete Distribution (Optional)  
●  423
b.	What is the approximate probability that at least 
125 items are produced? 
c.	 What is the approximate probability that 
between 135 and 160 (inclusive) items are 
produced? 
7.96	 The number of vehicles leaving a turnpike at a 
certain exit during a particular time period has 
approximately a normal distribution with mean 
value 500 and standard deviation 75. What is the 
approximate probability that the number of cars 
exiting during this period is
a.	 at least 650? 
b.	strictly between 400 and 550? (Strictly means that 
the values 400 and 550 are not included.) 
c.	 between 400 and 550 (inclusive)?  
7.97	 Suppose that x has a binomial distribution with 
n 5 50 and p 5 .6, so that m 5 np 5 30 and s 5 
Ïnps12pd 5 3.4641. Approximate the following 
probabilities using the normal approximation with 
the continuity correction. (Hint: See Example 7.35.)
a.	 P(x 5 30) 
b.	P(x 5 25) 
c.	 P(x # 25) 
d.	P(25 # x # 40) 
e.	 P(25 , x , 40) (Hint: 25 , x , 40 is the same 
as 26 # x # 39.) 
7.98	 Symptom validity tests (SVTs) are sometimes used to 
confirm diagnosis of psychiatric disorders. The paper 
“Developing a Symptom Validity Test for Post-Traumatic 
Stress Disorder: Application of the Binomial Distribution” 
(Journal of Anxiety Disorders [2008]: 1297–1302) 
investigated the use of SVTs in the diagnosis of post-
traumatic stress disorder. 
One SVT proposed is a 60-item test (called the 
MENT test), where each item has only a correct or 
incorrect response. The MENT test is designed so 
that responses to the individual questions can be 
considered independent of one another. For this 
reason, the authors of the paper believe that the 
score on the MENT test can be viewed as a binomial 
random variable with n ​5 ​60. 
The MENT test is designed to help in 
distinguishing fictitious claims of post-traumatic 
stress disorder. The items on the MENT test are 
written so that the correct response to an item 
should be relatively obvious, even to people 
suffering from stress disorders. Researchers have 
found that a patient with a fictitious claim of stress 
disorder will try to “fake” the test, and that the 
probability of a correct response to an item for these 
patients is .7 (compared to .96 for other patients). 
The authors used a normal approximation to the 
binomial distribution with n ​5 ​60 and p5 ​.70 to 
approximate various probabilities of interest, where 
x ​5 ​number of correct responses on the MENT test 
for a patient who is trying to fake the test.
a.	 Verify that it is appropriate to use a normal 
approximation to the binomial distribution in this 
situation.
b.	Approximate the following probabilities:
i.	 Psx 42d
ii.	Psx , 42d
iii.	Psx # 42d
c.	 Explain why the probabilities computed in 
Part (b) are not all equal.
d.	The authors computed the exact binomial 
probability of a score of 42 or less for someone who 
is not faking the test. Using p ​5 ​.96, they found
psx # 42d .000000000013
Explain why the authors computed this probability 
using the binomial formula rather than using a 
normal approximation.
e.	 The authors propose that someone who scores 
42 or less on the MENT exam is faking the test. 
Explain why this is reasonable, using some 
of the probabilities from Parts (b) and (d) as 
justification.
7.99	 Studies have found that women diagnosed with 
cancer in one breast also sometimes have cancer in 
the other breast that was not initially detected by 
mammogram or physical examination (“MRI Evalua-
tion of the Contralateral Breast in Women with Recently 
Diagnosed Breast Cancer,” The New England Journal of 
Medicine [2007]: 1295–1303). 
To determine if magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
could detect missed tumors in the other breast, 
969 women diagnosed with cancer in one breast had 
an MRI exam. The MRI detected tumors in the other 
breast in 30 of these women.
a.	 Use p 30
969 .031 as an estimate of the 
probability that a woman diagnosed with cancer 
in one breast has an undetected tumor in the 
other breast. Consider a random sample of 
500 women diagnosed with cancer in one breast. 
Explain why it is reasonable to think that the 
random variable 
x ​5 ​number in the sample who have an 
undetected tumor in the other breast 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

424 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
has a binomial distribution with n ​5 ​500 and 
p 5 .031.
b.	Is it reasonable to use the normal distribution to 
approximate probabilities for the random variable 
x defined in Part (a)? Explain why or why not.
c.	 Approximate the following probabilities:
i.	   Psx , 10d 
ii.	  Ps10 # x # 25d 
iii. Psx . 20d 
d.	For each of the probabilities in Part (c), write a 
sentence interpreting the probability.
7.100	 Seventy percent of the bicycles sold by a certain 
store are mountain bikes. Among 100 randomly 
selected bike purchases, what is the approximate 
probability that
a.	 At most 75 are mountain bikes? 
b.	Between 60 and 75 (inclusive) are mountain 
bikes? 
c.	 More than 80 are mountain bikes? 
d.	At most 30 are not mountain bikes? 
7.101	Suppose that 25% of the fire alarms in a large city are 
false alarms. Let x denote the number of false alarms 
in a random sample of 100 alarms. Approximate the 
following probabilities:
a.	 P(20 # x # 30) 
b.	P(20 , x , 30) 
c.	 P(x  $ ​35) 
d.	The probability that x is farther than 2 standard 
deviations from its mean value 
7.102	 Suppose that 65% of all registered voters in a certain 
area favor a 7-day waiting period before purchase of 
a handgun. Among 225 randomly selected registered 
voters, what is the approximate probability that
a.	 At least 150 favor such a waiting period? 
b.	More than 150 favor such a waiting period? 
c.	 Fewer than 125 favor such a waiting period? 
7.103	Flashlight bulbs manufactured by a certain company 
are sometimes defective.
a.	 If 5% of all such bulbs are defective, could the 
techniques of this section be used to approximate 
the probability that at least five of the bulbs in 
a random sample of size 50 are defective? If so, 
calculate this probability; if not, explain why not.
b.	Reconsider the question posed in Part (a) for the 
probability that at least 20 bulbs in a random 
sample of size 500 are defective.
7.104	 A company that manufactures mufflers for cars 
offers a lifetime warranty on its products, provided 
that ownership of the car does not change. Suppose 
that only 20% of its mufflers are replaced under this 
warranty.
a.	 In a random sample of 400 purchases, what is 
the approximate probability that between 75 
and 100 (inclusive) mufflers are replaced under 
warranty? 
b.	Among 400 randomly selected purchases, 
what is the approximate probability that at 
most 70 mufflers are ultimately replaced under 
warranty? 
c.	 If you were told that fewer than 50 among 400 
randomly selected purchases were ever replaced 
under warranty, would you question the 20% 
figure? Explain. 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Background: Three students were asked to complete an 
assignment that asked them to do the following:
a.  Flip a coin 30 times, and note the number of heads ob-
served in the 30 flips.
b.  Repeat Step (a) 100 times, to obtain 100 observations 
of the random variable x ​5 ​number of heads in 30 flips.
c.  Construct a dotplot of the 100 x values.
Because this was a tedious assignment, one or more of the did 
not really carry out the coin flipping and just made up 100 
values of x that they thought would look “real.” The dotplots 
produced by these three students are shown at the top of the 
next page.
1.	 Do you think that any of the three students made 
up the x values shown in their dotplot? If so, 
which ones, and what about the dotplot makes 
you think the student did not actually do the coin 
flipping?
2.	 Working as a group, each student in your class 
should flip a coin 30 times and note the number  
of heads in the 30 tosses. If there are fewer than  
50 students in the class, each student should 
repeat this process until there are a total of at least 
50 observations of x ​5 ​number of heads in 30 flips. 
Using the data from the entire class, construct a 
dotplot of the x values.
AC TIVIT Y 7.1 
Is It Real?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.	 After looking at the dotplot in Step 2 that resulted 
from actually flipping a coin 30 times and observing 
number of heads, reconsider your answers in 
Question 1. For each of the three students, explain 
why you now think that he or she did or did not 
actually do the coin flipping.
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
Student 3
Student 2
Student 1
x = Number of heads
AC TIVIT Y 7.2 
Rotten Eggs?
Background: The Salt Lake Tribune (October 11, 2002) printed 
the following account of an exchange between a restaurant 
manager and a health inspector:
The recipe calls for four fresh eggs for each quiche. A Salt Lake 
County Health Department inspector paid a visit recently and 
pointed out that research by the Food and Drug Administration 
indicates that one in four eggs carries salmonella bacterium, so 
restaurants should never use more than three eggs when prepar-
ing quiche. The manager on duty wondered aloud if simply 
throwing out three eggs from each dozen and using the remaining 
nine in four-egg quiches would serve the same purpose.
1.	 Working in a group or as a class, discuss the folly of 
the above statement!
2.	 Suppose the following argument is made for three-
egg quiches rather than four-egg quiches: Let 
x # number of eggs that carry salmonella. Then
p(0) 5 p(x 5 0) 5 (0.75)3 5 .422
for three-egg quiches and
p(0) 5 p(x 5 0) 5 (0.75)4 5 .316
for four-egg quiches. What assumption must be made 
to justify these probability calculations? Do you think 
this is reasonable or not? Explain.
3.	 Suppose that a carton of one dozen eggs does happen 
to have exactly three eggs that carry salmonella and 
that the manager does as he proposes: selects three 
eggs at random and throws them out, then uses 
the remaining nine eggs in four-egg quiches. Let 
x 5 number of eggs that carry salmonella among four 
eggs selected at random from the remaining nine.
Working with a partner, conduct a simulation to 
approximate the distribution of x by carrying out the 
following sequence of steps:
a.  Take 12 identical slips of paper and write “Good” 
on nine of them and “Bad” on the remaining 
three. Place the slips of paper in a paper bag or 
some other container.
b.  Mix the slips and then select three at random and 
remove them from the bag.
c.  Mix the remaining slips and select four “eggs” 
from the bags.
d.  Note the number of bad eggs among the four 
selected. (This is an observed x value.)
e.  Replace all slips, so that the bag now contains all 
12 “eggs.”
f.  Repeat Steps (b)–(d) at least 10 times, each time 
recording the observed x value.
4.	 Combine the observations from your group with 
those from the other groups. Use the resulting data 
to approximate the distribution of x. Comment on 
the resulting distribution in the context of the risk 
of salmonella exposure if the manager’s proposed 
procedure is used.
Activities 
●  425
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

426 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
SUMMARY 
Key Concepts and Formulas
Term or Formula
Comment
Random variable: discrete 
or continuous
A numerical variable with a value 
determined by the outcome of a chance 
experiment. A random variable is 
discrete if its possible values are isolated 
points along the number line and 
continuous if its possible values form an 
entire interval on the number line.
Probability distribution 
of a discrete random 
variable x
A formula, table, or graph that gives the 
probability associated with each possible 
x value. Conditions on p(x) are
(1)  p(x) $ 0, and
(2)  opsxd 1, where the sum is over all 
possible x values.
Probability distribution 
of a continuous random 
variable x
Specified by a smooth (density) curve for 
which the total area under the curve is 1. 
The probability P(a , x , b) is the area 
under the curve and above the interval 
from a to b; this is also P(a # x # b).
mx and sx
The mean and standard deviation, 
respectively, of a random variable x. 
These quantities describe the center and 
extent of spread about the center of the 
variable’s probability distribution.
mx 5 oxp(x)
The mean value of a discrete random 
variable x. It locates the center of the 
variable’s probability distribution.
s 2x 5 o(x 2 mx)2p(x) 
sx 5 Ïs2x
The variance and standard deviation, 
respectively, of a discrete random 
variable. These are measures of the 
extent to which the variable’s distribution 
spreads out about the mean mx.
Term or Formula
Comment
Binomial probability 
distribution
p( x) 5
n!
x!(n 2 x)! px(1 2 p)n2x
This formula gives the probability of 
observing x successes (x 5 0, 1, . . . , n) 
among n trials of a binomial experiment.
mx 5 np
sx 5 Ïnp(1 2 p)
The mean and standard deviation of a 
binomial random variable.
Normal distribution
A continuous probability distribution 
that has a bell-shaped density curve. A 
particular normal distribution is deter-
mined by specifying values of m and s.
Standard normal  
distribution
This is the normal distribution with m 5 0 
and s 5 1. The density curve is called 
the z curve, and z is the letter commonly 
used to denote a variable having this 
distribution. Areas under the z curve to 
the left of various values are given in 
Appendix Table 2.
z 5
x 2 m
s
z is obtained by “standardizing”: 
subtracting the mean and then dividing 
by the standard deviation. When x has 
a normal distribution, z has a standard 
normal distribution. 
Normal probability plot
A graph used to judge the plausibility 
of the assumption that a sample has 
been selected from a normal population 
distribution. If the plot is reasonably 
straight, this assumption is reasonable.
Normal approximation to 
the binomial distribution
When both np $ 10 and n(1 2 p) $ 10, 
binomial probabilities are well approxi-
mated by corresponding areas under 
a normal curve with m 5 np and 
s Ïnp(12p).
CHAPTER REVIEW 
Exercises 7.105 - 7.126
7.105	Let x denote the duration of a randomly selected 
pregnancy (the time elapsed between conception 
and birth). Accepted values for the mean value and 
standard deviation of x are 266 days and 16 days, 
respectively. Suppose that the probability distribution 
of x is (approximately) normal.
a.	 What is the probability that the duration of 
pregnancy is between 250 and 300 days? 
b.	What is the probability that the duration of 
pregnancy is at most 240 days? 
c.	 What is the probability that the duration of 
pregnancy is within 16 days of the mean duration? 
d.	A “Dear Abby” column dated January 20, 1973, 
contained a letter from a woman who stated 
that the duration of her pregnancy was exactly 
310 days. (She wrote that the last visit with her 
husband, who was in the Navy, occurred 310 days 
before birth.) What is the probability that duration 
of pregnancy is 310 days or more? Does this 
probability make you a bit skeptical of the claim?
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
e.	 Some insurance companies will pay the medical 
expenses associated with childbirth only if 
the insurance has been in effect for more than 
9 months (275 days). This restriction is designed 
to ensure that the insurance company pays 
benefits for only those pregnancies for which 
conception occurred during coverage. Suppose 
that conception occurred 2 weeks after coverage 
began. What is the probability that the insurance 
company will refuse to pay benefits because of the 
275-day insurance requirement? 
7.106	 A soft-drink machine dispenses only regular Coke 
and Diet Coke. Sixty percent of all purchases from 
this machine are diet drinks. The machine currently 
has 10 cans of each type. If 15 customers want to 
purchase drinks before the machine is restocked, 
what is the probability that each of the 15 is able 
to purchase the type of drink desired? (Hint: Let x 
denote the number among the 15 who want a diet 
drink. For which possible values of x is everyone 
satisfied?) 
7.107	A business has six customer service telephone lines. 
Let x denote the number of lines in use at a specified 
time. Suppose that the probability distribution of x is 
as follows:
x
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
p(x)
.10
.15
.20
.25
.20
.06
.04
Write each of the following events in terms of x, and 
then calculate the probability of each one:
a.	 At most three lines are in use 
b.	Fewer than three lines are in use 
c.	 At least three lines are in use 
d.	Between two and five lines (inclusive) are in use
e.	 Between two and four lines (inclusive) are not in use
f.	 At least four lines are not in use 
7.108	 Refer to the probability distribution of the previous 
exercise.
a.	 Calculate the mean value and standard deviation  
of x. 
b.	What is the probability that the number of lines in 
use is farther than 3 standard deviations from the 
mean value? 
7.109	A new battery’s voltage may be acceptable (A) or 
unacceptable (U). A certain flashlight requires 
two batteries, so batteries will be independently 
selected and tested until two acceptable ones have 
been found. Suppose that 80% of all batteries have 
acceptable voltages, and let y denote the number of 
batteries that must be tested.
a.	 What is p(2), that is, P(y 5 2)? 
b.	What is p(3)? (Hint: There are two different 
outcomes that result in y 5 3.) 
c.	 In order to have y 5 5, what must be true of the 
fifth battery selected? List the four outcomes for 
which y 5 5, and then determine p(5). 
d.	Use the pattern in your answers for Parts (a)–(c) 
to obtain a general formula for p(y).
7.110	 A pizza company advertises that it puts 0.5 pounds 
of real mozzarella cheese on its medium pizzas. 
Suppose that the amount of cheese on a randomly 
selected medium pizza is normally distributed with a 
mean value of 0.5 pounds and a standard deviation 
of 0.025 pounds.
a.	 What is the probability that the amount of cheese 
on a medium pizza is between 0.525 and 0.550 
pounds? 
b.	What is the probability that the amount of cheese 
on a medium pizza exceeds the mean value by 
more than 2 standard deviations? 
c.	 What is the probability that three randomly 
selected medium pizzas all have at least 
0.475 pounds of cheese? 
7.111	Suppose that fuel efficiency for a particular model 
car under specified conditions is normally distrib-
uted with a mean value of 30.0 mpg and a standard 
deviation of 1.2 mpg.
a.	 What is the probability that the fuel efficiency for 
a randomly selected car of this type is between 29 
and 31 mpg? 
b.	Would it surprise you to find that the efficiency of 
a randomly selected car of this model is less than 
25 mpg? 5
c.	 If three cars of this model are randomly selected, 
what is the probability that all three have 
efficiencies exceeding 32 mpg? 
d.	Find a number c* such that 95% of all cars of 
this model have efficiencies exceeding c* (i.e., 
P(x . c*) 5 .95). 
7.112	 A coin is flipped 25 times. Let x be the number of 
flips that result in heads (H). Consider the following 
rule for deciding whether or not the coin is fair:
Judge the coin fair if 8 # x # 17.
Judge the coin biased if either x # 7 or x $ 18.
a.	 What is the probability of judging the coin biased 
when it is actually fair? 
b.	What is the probability of judging the coin fair 
when P(H) 5 .9, so that there is a substantial bias? 
Repeat for P(H) 5 .1. 
Chapter Review Exercises 
●  427
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

428 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
c.	 What is the probability of judging the coin fair when 
P(H) 5 .6? when P(H) 5 .4? Why are these probabili-
ties so large compared to the probabilities in Part (b)?
d.	What happens to the “error probabilities” of 
Parts (a) and (b) if the decision rule is changed 
so that the coin is judged fair if 7 # x # 18 and 
unfair otherwise? Is this a better rule than the one 
first proposed? Explain.
7.113	The probability distribution of x, the number of 
defective tires on a randomly selected automobile 
checked at a certain inspection station, is given in the 
following table:
x
0
1
2
3
4
p(x)
.54
.16
.06
.04
.20
The mean value of x is mx 5 1.2. Calculate the values 
of s 2x and sx. 
7.114	 The amount of time spent by a statistical consultant 
with a client at their first meeting is a random 
variable having a normal distribution with a mean 
value of 60 minutes and a standard deviation of 
10 minutes.
a.	 What is the probability that more than 45 minutes 
is spent at the first meeting? 
b.	What amount of time is exceeded by only 10% of 
all clients at a first meeting? 
c.	 If the consultant assesses a fixed charge of $10 (for 
overhead) and then charges $50 per hour, what is 
the mean revenue from a client’s first meeting? 
7.115	The lifetime of a certain brand of battery is nor-
mally distributed with a mean value of 6 hours and 
a standard deviation of 0.8 hours when it is used 
in a particular DVD player. Suppose that two new 
batteries are independently selected and put into the 
player. The player ceases to function as soon as one 
of the batteries fails.
a.	 What is the probability that the player functions 
for at least 4 hours? 
b.	What is the probability that the DVD player works 
for at most 7 hours? 
c.	 Find a number c* such that only 5% of all DVD 
players will function without battery replacement 
for more than c* hours. 
7.116	 A machine producing vitamin E capsules operates so 
that the actual amount of vitamin E in each capsule 
is normally distributed with a mean of 5 mg and a 
standard deviation of 0.05 mg. What is the prob-
ability that a randomly selected capsule contains less 
than 4.9 mg of vitamin E? at least 5.2 mg? 
7.117	The Wall Street Journal (February 15, 1972) reported 
that General Electric was sued in Texas for sex 
discrimination over a minimum height requirement 
of 5 ft. 7 in. The suit claimed that this restriction 
eliminated more than 94% of adult females from 
consideration. Let x represent the height of a ran-
domly selected adult woman. Suppose that x is ap-
proximately normally distributed with mean 66 inches 
(5 ft. 6 in.) and standard deviation 2 inches.
a.	 Is the claim that 94% of all women are shorter 
than 5 ft. 7 in. correct? 5
b.	What proportion of adult women would be 
excluded from employment as a result of the 
height restriction? 
7.118	 The longest “run” of S’s in the sequence SSFSSSSFFS 
has length 4, corresponding to the S’s on the fourth, 
fifth, sixth, and seventh positions. Consider a 
binomial experiment with n 5 4, and let y be the 
length in the longest run of S’s.
a.	 When p 5 .5, the 16 possible outcomes are 
equally likely. Determine the probability 
distribution of y in this case (first list all outcomes 
and the y value for each one). Then calculate my.
b.	Repeat Part (a) for the case p 5 .6.
c.	 Let z denote the longest run of either S’s or F’s. 
Determine the probability distribution of z when 
p 5 .5.
7.119	 Two sisters, Allison and Teri, have agreed to meet 
between 1 and 6 p.m. on a particular day. In fact,  
Allison is equally likely to arrive at exactly 1 p.m., 
2 p.m., 3 p.m.,  4 p.m., 5 p.m., or 6 p.m. Teri is also 
equally likely to arrive at each of these six times, 
and Allison’s and Teri’s arrival times are indepen-
dent of one another. Thus there are 36 equally likely 
(Allison, Teri) arrival-time pairs, for example, (2, 3) 
or (6, 1). Suppose that the first person to arrive waits 
until the second person arrives; let w be the amount 
of time the first person has to wait.
a.	 What is the probability distribution of w?
b.	On average, how much time do you expect to 
elapse between the two arrivals? 
7.120	Four people—a, b, c, and d—are waiting to give 
blood. Of these four, a and b have type AB blood, 
whereas c and d do not. An emergency call has just 
come in for some type AB blood. If blood dona-
tions are taken one by one from the four people 
in random order and x is the number of donations 
needed to obtain an AB individual (so possible 
x values are 1, 2, and 3), what is the probability 
distribution of x?
7.121	Kyle and Lygia are going to play a series of Trivial 
Pursuit games. The first person to win four games 
will be declared the winner. Suppose that outcomes 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

of successive games are independent and that the 
probability of Lygia winning any particular game 
is .6. Define a random variable x as the number of 
games played in the series.
a.	 What is p(4)? (Hint: Either Kyle or Lygia could 
win four straight games.) 
b.	What is p(5)? (Hint: For Lygia to win in exactly 
five games, what has to happen in the first four 
games and in Game 5?) 
c.	 Determine the probability distribution of x.
d.	On average, how many games will the series last? 
7.122	 Refer to the previous exercise, and let y be the num-
ber of games won by the series loser. Determine the 
probability distribution of y.
7.123	Suppose that your statistics professor tells you that 
the scores on a midterm exam were approximately 
normally distributed with a mean of 78 and a stan-
dard deviation of 7. The top 15% of all scores have 
been designated A’ s. Your score is 89. Did you receive 
an A? Explain. 
7.124	 Suppose that the pH of soil samples taken from a 
certain geographic region is normally distributed 
with a mean pH of 6.00 and a standard deviation of 
0.10. If the pH of a randomly selected soil sample 
from this region is determined, answer the following 
questions about it:
a.	 What is the probability that the resulting pH is 
between 5.90 and 6.15? 5
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
b.	What is the probability that the resulting pH 
exceeds 6.10? 
c.	 What is the probability that the resulting pH is at 
most 5.95? 
d.	What value will be exceeded by only 5% of all 
such pH values? 
7.125	The lightbulbs used to provide exterior lighting for 
a large office building have an average lifetime of 
700 hours. If length of life is approximately normally 
distributed with a standard deviation of 50 hours, 
how often should all the bulbs be replaced so that no 
more than 20% of the bulbs will have already burned 
out? 
7.126	 There are approximately 40,000 travel agencies in the 
United States, of which 11,000 are members of the 
American Society of Travel Agents (booking a tour 
through an ASTA member increases the likelihood of 
a refund in the event of cancellation).
a.	 If x is the number of ASTA members among 
5000 randomly selected agencies, could you 
use the methods of Section 7.8 to approximate 
P(1200 , x , 1400)? Why or why not?
b.	In a random sample of 100 agencies, what are the 
mean value and standard deviation of the number 
of ASTA members? 
c.	 If the sample size in Part (b) is doubled, does the 
standard deviation double? Explain.
TECHNOLOGY NOTES
Finding Normal Probabilities
JMP
1.  After opening a new data table, click Rows then select 
Add rows
2.  Type 1 in the box next to How many rows to add:
3.  Click OK
4.  Double-click on the Column 1 heading
5.  Click Column Properties and select Formula
6.  Click Edit Formula
7.  In the box under Functions (grouped) click Probability 
then select Normal Distribution
8.  In the white box at the bottom half of the screen, 
double-click in the red box around x
Technology Notes 
●  429
© Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.  Type the value that you would like to find a probability 
for and click OK
10.  Click OK
Note: This procedure outputs the value for P(X # x). If you 
want to find the value for P(X $ x) you will need to subtract 
the output from one.
Minitab
1.  Click Calc then click Probability Distributions then 
click Normal…
2.  In the box next to Mean: type the mean of the normal 
distribution that you are working with
3.  In the box next to Standard deviation: type the 
standard deviation of the normal distribution that you 
are working with
4.  Click the radio button next to Input constant:
5.  Click in the box next to Input constant: and type the 
value that you are finding the probability for
6.  Click OK
Note: This procedure outputs the value for P(X # x). If you 
want to find the value for P(X $ x) you will need to subtract 
the output from one.
Note: You may also type a column of values for which you 
would like to find probabilities (these must ALL be from the 
SAME distribution) and use the Input Column option to 
find probabilities for each value in the column selected.
SPSS
1.  Type in the values that you would like to find the 
probabilities for in one column (this column will be 
automatically titled VAR00001)
2.  Click Transform and select Compute Variable…
3.  In the box under Target Variable: type NormProb (this 
will be the title of a new column that lists the cumulative 
probabilities for each value in VAR00001)
4.  Under Function group: select CDF & Noncentral 
CDF
5.  Under Functions and Special Variables: double-click 
Cdf.Normal
6.  In the box under Numeric Expression: you should see 
CDF.NORMAL(?,?,?)
7.  Highlight the first ? and double-click VAR00001
8.  Highlight the second ? and type the mean of the normal 
distribution that you are working with
9.  Highlight the third ? and type the standard deviation of 
the normal distribution that you are working with
10.  Click OK
Note: This procedure outputs the value for P(X # x). If you 
want to find the value for P(X $ x) you will need to subtract 
the output from one.
Excel
1.  Click in an empty cell
2.  Click the Formulas ribbon
3.  Select Insert Function
4.  Select Statistical from the drop-down menu for category
5.  Select NORMDIST from the Select a function: box
6.  Click OK
7.  Click in the box next to X and type the data value that 
you would like to find the probability for
8.  Click in the box next to Mean and type the mean of the 
Normal distribution that you are working with
9.  Click in the box next to Standard_dev and type the 
standard deviation of the Normal distribution that you 
are working with
10.  Click in the box next to Cumulative and type TRUE
11.  Click OK
Note: This procedure outputs the value for P(X # x). If you 
want to find the value for P(X $ x) you will need to subtract 
the output from one.
TI-83/84
P(x1 , X , x2)
1.  Press the 2nd key then press the VARS key
2.  Highlight normalcdf( and press ENTER
3.  Type in the lower bound x1
4.  Type a comma
5.  Type in the upper bound x2
6.  Type a comma
7.  Type in the value of the mean
8.  Type a comma
9.  Type in the value of the standard deviation
© Cengage Learning®
430 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.8   Using the Normal Distribution to Approximate a Discrete Distribution (Optional)  
●  431
10.  Type a right parenthesis
11.  Press ENTER
Note: If you are looking for P(X , x), use a lower bound of 
210,000,000. If you are looking for P(X . x), use an upper 
bound of 10,000,000.
TI-Nspire
P(x1 , X , x2)
1.  Enter the Scratchpad
2.  Press the menu key and select 5:Probablity then 
5:Distributions then 2:Normal Cdf… then press enter
3.  In the box next to Lower Bound type the value for x1
4.  In the box next to Upper Bound type the value for x2
5.  In the box next to m type the value of the mean
6.  In the box next to s type the value of the standard deviation
7.  Press OK
Note: If you are looking for P(X , x), use a lower bound of 
210,000,000. If you are looking for P(X . x), use an upper 
bound of 10,000,000.
Finding Binomial Probabilities
JMP
P(X # x)
1.  After opening a new data table, click Rows then select 
Add rows
2.  Type 1 in the box next to How many rows to add:
3.  Click OK
4.  Double-click on the Column 1 heading
5.  Click Column Properties and select Formula
6.  Click Edit Formula
7.  In the box under Functions (grouped) click Discrete 
Probability then select Binomial Distribution
8.  In the white box at the bottom half of the screen, 
double-click in the red box around p and type the value 
for the success probability, p, and press enter on your 
keyboard
9.  Double-click in the red box around n and type the value 
for the number of trials, n, and press enter on your 
keyboard
10.  Double-click in the red box around k and type the value 
for the number of successes for which you would like to 
find the probability
11.  Click OK
12.  Click OK
P(X 5 x)
1.  After opening a new data table, click Rows then select 
Add rows
2.  Type 1 in the box next to How many rows to add:
3.  Click OK
4.  Double-click on the Column 1 heading
5.  Click Column Properties and select Formula
6.  Click Edit Formula
7.  In the box under Functions (grouped) click Discrete 
Probability then select Binomial Probability
8.  In the white box at the bottom half of the screen, double-click 
in the red box around p and type the value for the success 
probability, p, and press enter on your keyboard
9.  Double-click in the red box around n and type the value 
for the number of trials, n, and press enter on your 
keyboard
10.  Double-click in the red box around k and type the value 
for the number of successes for which you would like to 
find the probability
11.  Click OK
12.  Click OK
Minitab
P(X # x)
1.  Click Calc then click Probability Distributions then 
click Binomial…
2.  In the box next to Number of Trials: input the value for 
n, the total number of trials
3.  In the box next to Probability of Success: input the 
value for p, the success probability
4.  Click the radio button next to Input Constant
5.  In the box next to Input Constant: type the value that 
you want to find the probability for
6.  Click OK
Note: You may also type a column of values for which you 
would like to find probabilities (these must ALL be from the 
SAME distribution) and use the Input Column option to 
find probabilities for each value in the column selected.
P(X 5 x)
1.  Click Calc then click Probability Distributions then 
click Binomial…
2.  Click the radio button next to Probability
3.  In the box next to Number of Trials: input the value for 
n, the total number of trials
4.  In the box next to Probability of Success: input the 
value for p, the success probability
5.  Click the radio button next to Input Constant
6.  In the box next to Input Constant: type the value that 
you want to find the probability for
7.  Click OK
Note: You may also type a column of values for which you 
would like to find probabilities (these must ALL be from the 
SAME distribution) and use the Input Column option to 
find probabilities for each value in the column selected.
SPSS
P(X 5 x)
1.  Type in the values that you would like to find the 
probabilities for in one column (this column will be 
automatically titled VAR00001)
2.  Click Transform and select Compute Variable…
3.  In the box under Target Variable: type BinomProb (this 
will be the title of a new column that lists the cumulative 
probabilities for each value in VAR00001)
Technology Notes 
●  431
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

432 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
4.  Under Function group: select CDF & Noncentral 
CDF
5.  Under Functions and Special Variables: double-click 
Cdf.Binom
6.  In the box under Numeric Expression: you should see 
CDF.BINOM(?,?,?)
7.  Highlight the first ? and double-click VAR00001
8.  Highlight the second ? and type the value for n, the total 
number of trials
9.  Highlight the third ? and type success probability, p
10.  Click OK
P(X 5 x)
1.  Type in the values that you would like to find the 
probabilities for in one column (this column will be 
automatically titled VAR00001)
2.  Click Transform and select Compute Variable…
3.  In the box under Target Variable: type BinProb (this 
will be the title of a new column that lists the cumulative 
probabilities for each value in VAR00001)
4.  Under Function group: select PDF & Noncentral PDF
5.  Under Functions and Special Variables: double-click 
Pdf.Binom
6.  In the box under Numeric Expression: you should see 
PDF.BINOM(?,?,?)
7.  Highlight the first ? and double-click VAR00001
8.  Highlight the second ? and type the value for n, the total 
number of trials
9.  Highlight the third ? and type success probability, p
10.  Click OK
Excel
1.  Click in an empty cell
2.  Click the Formulas ribbon
3.  Select Insert Function
4.  Select Statistical from the drop-down menu for category
5.  Select BINOMDIST from the Select a function: box
6.  Click OK
7.  Click in the box next to Number_s and type the number 
of successes that you are finding a probability for
8.  Click in the box next to Trials and type the value for n, 
the total number of trials
9.  Click in the box next to Probability_s and type success 
probability, p
10.  Click in the box next to Cumulative and type TRUE 
if you are finding P(X # x) or type FALSE if you are 
finding P(X 5 x)
11.  Click OK
Note: This procedure outputs the value for P(X # x) when 
TRUE is used as input for Cumulative. If you want to find the 
value for P(X $ x) you will need to subtract this output from one.
TI-83/84
P(X # x)
1.  Press the 2nd key then press the VARS key
2.  Highlight the binomcdf( option and press the ENTER key
3.  Type in the number of trials, n
4.  Type a comma
5.  Type in the success probability, p
6.  Type a comma
7.  Type the value for x
8.  Type a right parenthesis
9.  Press ENTER
P(X 5 x)
1.  Press the 2nd key then press the VARS key
2.  Highlight the binompdf( option and press the ENTER 
key
3.  Type in the number of trials, n
4.  Type a comma
5.  Type in the success probability, p
6.  Type a comma
7.  Type the value for x
8.  Type a right parenthesis
9.  Press ENTER
TI-Nspire
P(x1 # X # x2)
1.  Enter the Scratchpad
2.  Press the menu key and select 5:Probability then select 
5:Distributions then select E:Binomial Cdf… and 
press the enter key
3.  In the box next to Num Trials, n type in the number 
of trials, n
4.  In the box next to Prob Success, p type in the success 
probability, p
5.  In the box next to Lower Bound type in the value for x1
6.  In the box next to Upper Bound type in the value for x2
7.  Press OK
Note: In order to find P(X # x) input a 0 for the lower 
bound.
P(X 5 x)
1.  Enter the Calculate Scratchpad
2.  Press the menu key and select 5:Probability then select 
5:Distributions then select D:Binomial Pdf… and 
press the enter key
3.  In the box next to Num Trials, n type in the number 
of trials, n
4.  In the box next to Prob Success, p type in the success 
probability, p
5.  In the box next to X Value type the value for x
6.  Press OK
Normal Probability Plots
JMP
1.  Enter the raw data into a column
2.  Click Analyze then select Distribution
3.  Click and drag the column name containing the data 
from the box under Select Columns to the box next to 
Y, Columns
4.  Click OK
5.  Click the red arrow next to the column name
6.  Select Normal Quantile Plot
432 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 7.8   Using the Normal Distribution to Approximate a Discrete Distribution (Optional)  
●  433
Minitab
1.  Input the data for which you would like to check 
Normality into a column
2.  Click Graph then click Probability Plot…
3.  Highlight the Single plot
4.  Click OK
5.  Double click the column name for the column that contains 
your data to move it into the Graph Variables: box
6.  Click OK
SPSS
1.  Input the data for which you would like to check 
Normality into a column
2.  Click Analyze then select Descriptive Statistics then 
select Q-Q Plots…
3.  Highlight the column name for the variable
4.  Click the arrow to move the variable to the Variables: 
box
5.  Click OK
Note: The normal probability plot is output with several 
other plots and statistics. This plot can be found under the 
title Normal Q-Q Plot.
Excel
Excel does not have the functionality to automatically pro-
duce Normal Probability Plots.
However, Excel can produce Normal Probability Plots in the 
course of running a regression using the Analysis ToolPak.
TI-83/84
1.  Input the raw data into L1 (In order to access lists press 
the STAT key, highlight the option called Edit… then 
press ENTER)
2.  Press the 2nd key then press the Y 5 key
3.  Highlight Plot1 and press ENTER
4.  Highlight On and press ENTER
5.  Highlight the plot type on the second row, third column 
and press ENTER
6.  Press GRAPH
TI-Nspire
1.  Enter the data into a data list (In order to access data 
lists select the spreadsheet option and press enter)
Note: Be sure to title the list by selecting the top row of the 
column and typing a title.
2.  Press menu and select 3:Data then 6:QuickGraph then 
press enter
3.  Press menu and select 1:Plot Type then select 4:Normal 
Probability Plot and press enter
CUMULATIVE REVIEW Exercises 
CR7.1 - CR7.21
CR7.1  The paper “The Psychology of Security” (Communi­
cations of the ACM [2008]: 36–41) states that people are more 
likely to gamble for a loss than to accept a guaranteed loss. 
For example, the authors indicate that when presented 
with a scenario that allows people to choose between a 
guaranteed gain of $5 and a gain of $10 if the flip of a coin 
results in a head, more people will choose the guaranteed 
gain. However, when presented with a scenario that involves 
choosing between a guaranteed loss of $5 and a loss of $10 
if the flip of a coin results in a head, more people will choose 
the gambling option. Describe how you would design an 
experiment that would allow you to test this theory.
CR7.2 
● The article “Water Consumption in the Bay Area” 
(San Jose Mercury News, January 16, 2010) reported the 
accompanying values for water consumption (gallons per 
person per day) for residential customers of 27 San Francisco 
Bay area water agencies:
49
52
53
59
59
61
69
70
70
73
79
80
85
87
89
90
92
93
93
95
96
97 114 149
208 318 334
a.  Use the given water consumption values to construct a 
boxplot. Describe any interesting features of the box-
plot. Are there any outliers in the data set?
b.  Compute the mean and standard deviation for this data set. 
c.  If the two largest values were deleted from the data set, 
would the standard deviation of this new data set be 
larger or smaller than the standard deviation you com-
puted for the entire data set?
d.    How do the values of the mean and median of the entire 
data set compare? Is this consistent with the shape of the 
boxplot from Part (a)? Explain.
CR7.3  Red-light cameras are used in many places 
to deter drivers from running red lights. The following 
graphical display is similar to one that appeared in the 
article “Communities Put a Halt to Red-Light Cameras” (USA 
Today, January 18, 2010). Based on this graph, would it be 
correct to conclude that there were fewer red-light cameras 
in 2009 than in 2002? Explain.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Cumulative Review Exercises 
●  433
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

40%
80%
120%
141%
32%
16%
Seeing red
The pace of communities installing red-light cameras
slowed in 2009. Percent increase in the number of
communities installing them:
0
02
09
00
Source: Insurance Institute for Highway Safety
CR7.4  The following quote is from USA Today (January 21, 
2010):
Most Americans think the Census is important, and the 
majority say they will participate in the count this spring—
although Hispanics, younger people and the less educated are 
not as enthusiastic, a Pew Research Center survey found. The 
poll of 1504 adults found that perceptions differ: 74% of blacks 
and 72% of Hispanics rate the Census “very important” vs. 
57% of whites. Believing it’s important doesn’t necessarily mean 
participating: Fewer than half of Hispanics, 57% of blacks and 
61% of whites say they will fill out and mail the forms. Age is 
the greatest factor in participation: Only 36% of respondents 
who are 30 or younger say they will definitely participate.
Suppose that it is reasonable to regard survey participants as 
representative of adult Americans.
a.  Suppose that an adult American is to be selected at 
random and consider the following events:
  I ​5 ​the event that the selected individual thinks that 
the Census is very important
W ​5 ​the event that the selected individual is white
Are the events I and W independent or dependent events? 
Explain. 
b.  Give an example of two census-related events different 
than the ones defined in Part (a) and indicate whether 
they are independent or dependent events. Explain your 
reasoning. 
CR7.5  Beverly is building a fireplace. She is using special 
decorative 8-inch bricks for the bottom row of the fireplace. 
Although the bricks are advertised as 8-inch bricks, the 
actual length of a brick is variable, and the brick lengths are 
approximately normally distributed with a mean of 8 inches 
and a standard deviation of 0.2 inches. 
Unfortunately, Beverly didn’t buy enough of the 8-inch 
bricks, and needs to get two more bricks to try to fill the 
remaining 15.9 inches. The two additional bricks cannot have 
a combined length of more than 15.9 inches and must fit in the 
15.9-inch space with no more than .1 inch of space left over. 
What is the probability that two randomly selected 
bricks will allow Beverly to complete the bottom row of the 
fireplace? (Hint: Define b1 ​5 ​length of the first brick and 
b2 ​5 ​length of the second brick. A variable that is a linear 
combination of independent variables that have normal 
distributions also has a normal distribution.) 
CR7.6 
● Manatees are large marine mammals found along 
the coast of Florida. Data on the total number of manatee 
deaths per year reported by the Florida Marine Research Center 
is given in the accompanying table. Construct a time series 
plot of these data and comment on any trends over time.
Year
Number of 
Manatee Deaths
1974
    7
1975
  28
1976
  58
1977
109
1978
  77
1979
  72
1980
  56
1981
112
1982
111
1983
  71
1984
119
Year
Number of 
Manatee Deaths
1985
112
1986
117
1987
109
1988
127
1989
164
1990
199
1991
166
1992
156
1993
137
1994
177
CR7.7  Two shipping services offer overnight delivery of 
parcels, and both promise delivery before 10 a.m. A mail-
order catalog company ships 30% of its overnight packages 
using service 1 and 70% using service 2. Service 1 fails to 
meet the 10 a.m. delivery promise 10% of the time, whereas 
Service 2 fails to deliver by 10 a.m. 8% of the time. 
Suppose that you made a purchase from this company and 
were expecting your package by 10 a.m., but it is late. Which 
shipping service was more likely to have been used?
CR7.8  The paper “The Effect of Temperature and Humidity 
on Size of Segregated Traffic Exhaust Particle Emissions” 
(Atmospheric Environment [2008]: 2369–2382) gave the 
following summary quantities for a measure of traffic flow 
(vehicles/second) during peak traffic hours at a particular 
location recorded daily over a long sequence of days:
Mean ​5 ​0.41  Standard Deviation ​5 ​0.26  Median ​5 0.45
5th percentile ​5 ​0.03	
Lower quartile ​5 ​0.18
Upper quartile ​5 ​0.57	
95th percentile ​2 ​0.86
Based on these summary quantities, do you think that the 
distribution of the measure of traffic flow could have been 
approximately normal? Explain your reasoning.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Source: USA TODAY, January 18, 2010
434 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
CR7.9  The article “Doctors Misdiagnose More Women, 
Blacks” (San Luis Obispo Tribune, April  20, 2000) gave the 
following information, which is based on a large study of 
more than 10,000 patients treated in emergency rooms in the 
eastern and midwestern United States:
1.	 Doctors misdiagnosed heart attacks in 2.1% of all 
­patients.  5
2.	 Doctors misdiagnosed heart attacks in 4.3% of black 
patients. 5
3.	 Doctors misdiagnosed heart attacks in 7% of women 
under 55 years old.   5
Use the following event defini­tions: 
M 5 event that a heart attack is misdiagnosed, 
B 5 event that a patient is black, and 
W 5 event that a patient is a woman under 55 years old. 
Translate each of the three given statements into probability 
notation.
CR7.10  The Cedar Rapids Gazette (No­vem­ber  20, 1999) 
­reported the following information on compliance with child 
restraint laws for cities in Iowa:
City
Number of
Children
Observed
Number
Properly
Restrained
Cedar Falls
210
173
Cedar Rapids
231
206
Dubuque
182
135
Iowa City (city)
175
140
Iowa City (interstate)
   63
  47
a.  Use the information provided to estimate the following 
probabilities:
i.  The probability that a randomly selected child is 
properly restrained given that the child is observed 
in Dubuque. 
ii.  The probability that a randomly selected child is 
properly restrained given that the child is observed 
in a city that has “Cedar” in its name. 
b.  Suppose that you are observing children in the Iowa 
City area. Use a tree diagram to illustrate the possible 
outcomes of an observation that considers both the 
location of the observation (city or interstate) and 
whether the child observed was properly restrained.
CR7.11  According to a study conducted by a risk 
assessment firm (Associated Press, De­cem­ber 8, 2005), drivers 
residing within 1 mile of a restaurant are 30% more likely 
to be in an accident in a given policy year. Consider the 
following two events:
A 5 event that a driver has an accident during a policy 
year
R 5 event that a driver lives within 1 mile of a restaurant
Which of the following four probability statements is 
consistent with the findings of this survey? Justify your 
choice. 
i.	
PsAuRd .3    iii.  ​PsAuRd
PsAuRCd .3
ii.	 PsAuRCd .3     iv.  ​PsAuRd 2 PsAuRCd
PsAuRCd
.3
CR7.12  The article “Men, Women at Odds on Gun Control” 
(Cedar Rapids Gazette, Sep­tem­ber 8, 1999) included the following 
statement: “The survey found that 56% of American adults 
favored stricter gun control laws. Sixty-six percent of women 
favored the tougher laws, compared with 45% of men.” These 
fig­ures are based on a large telephone survey conducted by 
Associated Press Polls. If an adult is selected at random, are 
the events selected adult is female and selected adult ­favors stricter 
gun control independent events? Explain.
CR7.13  Suppose that a new Internet company Mumble 
.com requires all employees to take a drug test. Mumble.com 
can afford only the inexpensive drug test—the one with a 5% 
false-positive rate and a 10% false-negative rate. (That means 
that 5% of those who are not using drugs will incorrectly test 
positive and that 10% of those who are actually using drugs 
will test negative.) Suppose that 10% of those who work 
for Mumble.com are using the drugs for which Mumble is 
checking. (Hint: It may be helpful to draw a tree diagram to 
answer the questions that follow.)
a.  If one employee is chosen at random, what is the 
­probability that the employee both uses drugs and tests 
positive? 
b.  If one employee is chosen at random, what is the 
­prob­a­bility that the employee does not use drugs but 
tests positive anyway? 
c.  If one employee is chosen at random, what is the 
probability that the employee tests positive? 
d.  If we know that a randomly chosen employee has test-
ed positive, what is the probability that he or she uses 
drugs? 
CR7.14  ​Refer to the previous exercise. Suppose that 
because of the high rate of false-positives for the drug test, 
Mumble.com has instituted a mandatory independent second 
test for those who test positive on the first test.
a.  If one employee is selected at random, what is the 
probability that the selected employee uses drugs and 
tests positive twice? 
b.  If one employee is selected at random, what is the 
probability that the employee tests positive twice?
c.  If we know that the randomly chosen employee has 
tested positive twice, what is the probability that he or 
she uses drugs? 
d.  What is the chance that an individual who does use drugs 
doesn’t test positive twice (either this employee tests 
Cumulative Review Exercises 
●  435
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

negative on the first round and doesn’t need a retest, or 
this employee tests positive the first time and that result 
is followed by a negative result on the retest)? 
e.  Discuss the benefits and drawbacks of using a retest 
scheme such as the one proposed in this question.
CR7.15  A chemical supply company currently has in 
stock 100 pounds of a certain chemical, which it sells to cus-
tomers in 5-pound lots. Let x 5 the number of lots ordered 
by a randomly chosen customer. The probability distribu-
tion of x is as follows:
x
1
2
3
4
p(x)
.2
.4
.3
.1
a.  Calculate the mean value of x. 
b.  Calculate the variance and standard deviation of x. 
CR7.16  Return to the previous exercise, and let y denote 
the amount of material (in pounds) left after the next 
customer’s order is shipped. Find the mean and variance 
of y. (Hint: y is a linear function of x.) 
CR7.17  An experiment was conducted to investigate 
whether a graphologist (a handwriting analyst) could distin-
guish a normal person’s handwriting from that of a psychotic. 
A well-known expert was given 10 files, each containing 
handwriting samples from a normal person and from a per-
son diagnosed as psychotic, and asked to identify the psy-
chotic’s handwriting. 
The graphologist made correct identifications in 6 of 
the 10 trials (data taken from Statistics in the Real World, by 
R. J. Larsen and D. F. Stroup [New York: Macmillan, 1976]). Does 
this evidence indicate that the graphologist has an ability to 
distinguish the handwriting of psychotics? (Hint: What is 
the probability of correctly guessing six or more times out of 
10? Your answer should depend on whether this probability 
is relatively small or relatively large.)
CR7.18  A machine that produces ball bearings has 
initially been set so that the true average diameter of the 
bearings it produces is 0.500 inches. A bearing is acceptable 
if its diameter is within 0.004 inches of this target value. 
Suppose, however, that the setting has changed during 
the course of production, so that the distribution of the 
diameters produced is well approximated by a normal 
distribution with mean 0.499 inches and standard deviation 
0.002 inches. What percentage of the bearings produced 
will not be acceptable? 
CR7.19  Consider the variable
x 5 time required for a college student to complete a 
standardized exam
Suppose that for the population of students at a particular 
university, the distribution of x is well approximated by a 
normal distribution with mean 45 minutes and standard 
deviation 5 minutes.
a.  If 50 minutes is allowed for the exam, what proportion 
of students at this university would be unable to finish 
in the allotted time? 
b.  How much time should be allowed for the exam if we 
wanted 90% of the students taking the test to be able to 
finish in the allotted time? 
c.  How much time is required for the fastest 25% of all 
students to complete the exam? 
CR7.20 
● The paper “The Load-Life Relationship for 
M50 Bearings with Silicon Nitride Ceramic Balls” (Lubrication 
Engineering [1984]: 153–159) reported the accompanying data 
on bearing load life (in millions of revolutions). The corre-
sponding normal scores are also given.
x
Normal Score
x
Normal Score
  ​47.1
21.867
240.0
0.062
  ​68.1
21.408
240.0
0.187
  ​68.1
21.131
278.0
0.315
  ​90.8
20.921
278.0
0.448
103.6
20.745
289.0
0.590
106.0
20.590
289.0
0.745
115.0
20.448
367.0
0.921
126.0
20.315
385.9
1.131
146.6
20.187
392.0
1.408
229.0
20.062
395.0
1.867
Construct a normal probability plot. Is it plausible that load-
bearing life is a normal distribution?
CR7.21 
● The following data are a sample of survival 
times (days from diagnosis) for patients suffering from 
chronic leukemia of a certain type:
    ​7
  47
  58
  74
  ​177
  ​232
  ​273
  ​285
  ​317
  ​429
  ​440
  ​445
  ​455
  ​468
  ​495
  ​497
  ​532
  ​571
  ​579
  ​581
  ​650
  ​702
  ​715
  ​779
  ​881
  ​900
  ​930
  ​968
1077
1109
1314
1334
1367
1534
1712
1784
1877
1886
2045
2056
2260
2429
2509
a.  Construct a relative frequency distribution for this data 
set, and draw the corresponding histogram.
b.  Would you describe this histogram as having a positive 
or a negative skew? 
c.  Would you recommend transforming the data? Explain.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
436 
●  Chapter 7  Random Variables and Probability Distributions
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

437
The inferential methods presented in Chapters 9–​15 use 
information contained in a sample to reach conclusions 
about one or more characteristics of the population from 
which the sample was selected. For example, let m denote 
the true mean fat content of quarter-pound hamburgers 
marketed by a national fast-food chain. To learn something 
about m, we might obtain a sample of n 5 50 hamburgers 
and determine the fat content for each one. The sample 
data might produce a mean of x 5 28.4 grams. How close is 
this sample mean to the ­population mean, m? If we selected 
another sample of 50 quarter-pound burgers and then de-
termine the sample mean fat content, would this second 
value be near 28.4, or might it be quite different? 
These questions can be addressed by studying what is 
called the sampling distribution of x. Just as the probability 
distribution of a numerical variable describes its long-run 
behavior, the sampling distribution of x provides informa-
tion about the long-run behavior of x when sample after 
sample is selected.
In this chapter, we also consider the sampling distribution of a sample proportion (the 
fraction of individuals or objects in a sample that have some characteristic of interest). 
The sampling distribution of a sample proportion, p⁄, provides information about the 
long-run behavior of the sample proportion. This knowledge allows us to make infer-
ences about a population proportion.
Sampling Variability and  
Sampling Distributions
Chapter 8: Learning Objectives
Students will understand:
●
●that the value of a sample statistic varies from sample to sample.
●
●that sampling distribution describes sample-to-sample variability in the val-
ues of a statistic.
●
●how the standard deviations of the sampling distributions of x and p⁄ are 
related to sample size.
Christian Petersen/Getty Images Sport/Getty Images 
CHAPTER 8
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

438 
●  Chapter 8  Sampling Variability and Sampling Distributions
  8.1  
Statistics and Sampling Variability
A quantity computed from the values in a sample is called a statistic. Values of statistics 
such as the sample mean x, the sample median, the sample standard deviation s, or the 
proportion of individuals in a sample that possess a particular property p⁄, are our primary 
sources of information about various population characteristics.
The usual way to obtain information about the value of a population characteristic is by 
selecting a sample from the population. For example, to gain insight about the mean credit 
card balance for students at a particular university, we might select a sample of 50 students 
at the university. Each student would be asked about his or her credit card balance to yield 
a value of x 5 current balance. 
We could construct a histogram of the 50 sample x values, and we could view this his-
togram as a rough approximation of the population distribution of x. In a similar way, we 
can view the sample mean x (the mean of a sample of n values) as an approximation of m, 
the mean of the population distribution. 
It would be nice if the value of x were equal to the value of the population mean m, but 
this is not usually the case. Not only will the value of x for a particular sample from a popu-
lation usually differ from m, but the x values from different samples also usually differ from 
one another. For example, two different samples of 50 student credit card balances will 
usually result in different x values. This sample-to-sample variability makes it challenging 
to generalize from a sample to the population from which it was selected. An understand-
ing of sample-to-sample variability enables us to meet this challenge.
EXAMPLE 8.1 
Exploring Sampling Variability
Consider a small population consisting of the 20 students enrolled in an upper division 
class. The amount of money (in dollars) each of the 20 students spent on textbooks for the 
current semester is shown in the following table:
Student
Amount Spent on 
Books
Student
Amount Spent on 
Books
Student
Amount Spent on 
Books
1
367
5
375
  9
378
2
358
6
395
10
268
3
442
7
322
11
419
4
361
8
370
12
363
Statistic: A quantity computed from values in a sample.
Sampling variability: The observed value of a statistic depends on the particu-
lar sample selected from the population and it will vary from sample to sample. 
This variability is called sampling variability.
DEFINITION
Students will be able to:
●
●describe general properties of the sampling distribution of x.
●
●describe general properties of the sampling distribution of p⁄.
●
●determine when the sampling distribution of x or p⁄ is approximately normal.
●
●use properties of the sampling distribution to reason informally about the 
value of a population mean or a population proportion.
continued
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

  8.1   Statistics and Sampling Variability 
●  439
Student
Amount Spent on 
Books
Student
Amount Spent on 
Books
Student
Amount Spent on 
Books
13
365
16
284
19
330
14
362
17
331
20
423
15
433
18
259
For this population,
m 5 367 1 358 1 Á 1 423
20
5 360.25
Suppose we don’t know the value of the population mean, so we decide to estimate m by 
taking a random sample of five students and computing x, the sample mean amount spent 
on textbooks. Is this a reasonable thing to do? Is the estimate that results likely to be close 
to the value of m, the population mean? 
To answer these questions, consider a simple experiment that allows us to examine the 
behavior of the statistic x when random samples of size 5 are repeatedly selected. (This sce-
nario is not realistic. If a population consisted of only 20 individuals, we would probably 
conduct a census rather than select a sample. However, this small population size is easier 
to work with as we develop the idea of sampling variability.)
Let’s first select a random sample of size 5 from this population. This can be done by 
writing the numbers from 1 to 20 on otherwise identical slips of paper, mixing them well, 
and then selecting 5 slips without replacement. The numbers on the slips selected identify 
which of the 20 students will be included in our sample. Alternatively, either a table of 
random digits or a random number generator can be used to determine which 5 students 
should be selected. 
We used Minitab to obtain five random numbers between 1 and 20, resulting in 17, 20, 
7, 11, and 9. This results in the following sample of amounts spent on books:
331    ​423    ​322    ​419    ​378
For this sample,
x 5 1873
5
5 374.60
The sample mean is larger than the population mean of $360.25 by about $15.  
Is this difference typical, or is this particular sample mean unusually far away from m? 
­Taking more samples will provide some additional insight.
Four more random samples (Samples 2–​5) from this same population are shown here.
Sample 2
Sample 3
Sample 4
Sample 5
Student
x
Student
x
Student
x
Student
x
  4
361
15
433
20
423
18
259
15
433
12
363
16
284
  8
370
12
363
  3
442
19
330
  9
378
  1
367
  7
322
  1
367
  7
322
18
259
18
259
  8
370
14
362
x
356.60
x
363.80
x
354.80
x
338.20
Because m 5 360.25, we can see the following:
1.	 The value of x varies from one random sample to another (sampling variability).
2.	 Some samples produced x values larger than m (Samples 1 and 3), whereas others 
produced values smaller than m (Samples 2, 4, and 5).
3.	 Samples 2, 3, and 4 produced x values that were fairly close to the population 
mean, but Sample 5 resulted in a value that was $22 below the population mean.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

440 
●  Chapter 8  Sampling Variability and Sampling Distributions
Continuing with the experiment, we selected 45 additional random samples of size n 5 5. 
The resulting sample means are as follows:
Sample
x
Sample
x
Sample
x
  ​6
374.6
21
355.0
36
353.4
  ​7
356.6
22
407.2
37
379.6
  ​8
363.8
23
380.0
38
352.6
  ​9
354.8
24
377.4
39
342.2
10
338.2
25
341.2
40
362.6
11
375.6
26
316.0
41
315.4
12
379.2
27
370.0
42
366.2
13
341.6
28
401.0
43
361.4
14
355.4
29
347.0
44
375
15
363.8
30
373.8
45
401.4
16
339.6
31
382.8
46
337
17
348.2
32
320.4
47
387.4
18
430.8
33
313.6
48
349.2
19
388.8
34
387.6
49
336.8
20
352.8
35
314.8
50
364.6
Figure 8.1 is a density histogram of the 50 sample means. It provides insight about 
the behavior of x. Most samples resulted in x values that are reasonably near m 5 
360.25, falling between 335 and 395. A few samples, however, produced values that 
were far from m. If we were to take a sample of size 5 from this population and use 
x as an estimate of the population mean m, we should not necessarily expect x to be 
close to m.
450
430
410
390
370
350
330
310
0.000
0.016
0.018
0.014
0.012
0.010
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
Sample mean
Density
Figure  8.1
​Density histogram of x values from the 
50 random samples of Example 8.1.
The density histogram in Figure 8.1 visually conveys information about the sampling 
variability in the statistic x. It provides an approximation to the distribution of x values that 
would have been observed if we had considered every different possible sample of size 5 
from this population.
■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

  8.1   Statistics and Sampling Variability 
●  441
In the example just considered, we obtained the approximate sampling distribution of 
the statistic x by considering just 50 different samples. The actual sampling distribution 
comes from considering all possible samples of size n.
Sampling distribution: The distribution that would be formed by considering 
the value of a sample statistic for every possible different sample of a given size 
from a population.
DEFINITION
EXERCISES 8.1 - 8.9
8.1	 Explain the difference between a population charac-
teristic and a statistic.
8.2	 What is the difference between x and m? between s 
and s?
8.3	 ▼ For each of the following statements, identify the 
number that appears in boldface type as the value of  
either a population characteristic or a statistic:
a.	 A department store reports that 84% of all cus-
tomers who use the store’s credit plan pay their 
bills on time.  ​
b.	A sample of 100 students at a large university had 
a mean age of 24.1 years.  ​
c.	 The Department of Motor Vehicles reports that 
22% of all vehicles registered in a particular state 
are imports.  ​
d.	A hospital reports that based on the 10 most 
recent cases, the mean length of stay for surgical 
patients is 6.4 days.  ​
e.	 A consumer group, after testing 100 batteries of a 
certain brand, reported an average life of 63 hours  
of use. 
8.4	 Consider a population consisting of the following five 
values, which represent the number of DVD rentals 
during the academic year for each of five housemates:
	
8  ​  ​  ​14    ​  ​16    ​  ​10    ​  ​11
a.	 Compute the mean of this population.  ​
b.	Select a random sample of size 2 by writing the 
five numbers in this population on slips of paper, 
mixing them, and then selecting two. Compute 
the mean for your sample.
c.	 Repeatedly select random samples of size 2, and 
compute the x value for each sample until you 
have the x values for 25 samples.
d.	Construct a density histogram using the 25 x val-
ues. Are most of the x values near the population 
mean? Do the x values differ a lot from sample to 
sample, or do they tend to be similar? (Hint: See 
Example 8.1.)
8.5	 Select 10 additional random samples of size 5 from 
the population of 20 students given in Example 8.1, 
and compute the mean amount spent on books for 
each of the 10 samples. Are the x values consistent 
with the results of the sampling experiment summa-
rized in Figure 8.1?  
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
The sampling distribution of a statistic, such as x, provides important information about 
variation in the values of the statistic. The density histogram of Figure 8.1 is an approxima-
tion of the sampling distribution of the statistic x for samples of size 5 from the population 
described in Example 8.1. 
We could have determined the actual sampling distribution of x by considering every 
possible sample of size 5 from the population of 20 students, computing the mean for each 
sample, and then constructing a density histogram of the x values. But this would have 
been a lot of work—there are 15,504 different possible samples of size 5. And, for more 
realistic situations with larger population and sample sizes, the situation becomes even 
worse because there are so many possible samples that must be considered. 
Fortunately, as we look at a few more examples in the sections that follow, patterns 
emerge that enable us to describe some important aspects of the sampling distributions for 
some statistics without actually having to look at all possible samples.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

442 
●  Chapter 8  Sampling Variability and Sampling Distributions
8.6	 Suppose that the sampling experiment described in 
Example 8.1 had used samples of size 10 rather than 
size 5. 
a.	 If 50 samples of size 10 were selected, the x 
value for each sample computed, and a density 
histogram constructed, how do you think this 
histogram would differ from the density histogram 
constructed for samples of size 5 (Figure 8.1)? 
b.	In what way do you think the density histograms 
would be similar? 
8.7	 ▼ Consider the following population: {1, 2, 3, 4}. 
For this population the mean is
m 5 1 1 2 1 3 1 4
4
5 2.5
Suppose that a random sample of size 2 is to be selected 
without replacement from this population. There 
are 12 possible samples (provided that the order in 
which observations are selected is taken into account):
1, 2    ​1, 3  ​  ​  1, 4  ​  ​2, 1  ​  ​2, 3  ​  ​2, 4
3, 1  ​  ​3, 2  ​   ​3, 4  ​  ​4, 1  ​  ​4, 2  ​  ​4, 3
a.	 Compute the sample mean for each of the 12 pos-
sible samples. 
b.	Use the sample means to construct the sampling 
distribution of x. Display the sampling distribu-
tion as a density histogram.
c.	 Suppose that a random sample of size 2 is to be 
selected, but this time sampling will be done with 
replacement. Using a method similar to that of 
Part (a), construct the sampling distribution of x. 
(Hint: There are 16 different possible samples in 
this case.)
d.	In what ways are the two sampling distributions 
of Parts (b) and (c) similar? In what ways are they 
different?
8.8	 Simulate sampling from the population of Exercise 
8.7 by using four slips of paper individually marked 
1, 2, 3, and 4. Select a sample of size 2 without 
replacement, and compute x. Repeat this process 50 
times, and construct a density histogram of the 50 x 
values. How does this sampling distribution compare 
to the actual sampling distribution of x from Exercise 
8.7, Part (b)? 
8.9	 Consider the following population: {2, 3, 3, 4, 4}. 
The value of m is 3.2, but suppose that this is not 
known to an investigator. Three possible statistics for 
estimating m are
Statistic 1: the sample mean, x
Statistic 2: the sample median
Statistic 3: the average of the largest and the 
smallest values in the sample
A random sample of size 3 will be selected without 
replacement. Provided that we disregard the order 
in which the observations are selected, there are 10 
possible samples that might result (writing 3 and 3*, 
4 and 4* to distinguish the two 3’s and the two 4’s in 
the population):
2, 3, 3*
2, 3, 4
2, 3, 4*
2, 3*, 4
2, 3*, 4*
2, 4, 4* 3, 3*, 4 3, 3*, 4* 3, 4, 4* 3*, 4, 4*
a.	 For each of these 10 samples, compute Statistics 
1, 2, and 3. 
b.	Construct the sampling distribution of each of 
these statistics. 
c.	 Which statistic would you recommend for  
estimating m and why?
 8.2  
The Sampling Distribution of a Sample Mean
When the objective of a statistical investigation is to learn about the value of a population 
mean m, it is natural to consider the sample mean x. To understand how inferential pro-
cedures based on x work, we must first study how sampling variability causes x to vary in 
value from one sample to another. 
The behavior of x is described by its sampling distribution. The sample size n and char-
acteristics of the population—its shape, mean value m, and standard deviation s—are 
important in determining properties of the sampling distribution of x.
It is helpful first to consider the results of some sampling experiments. In Examples 8.2 
and 8.3, we start with a specified population distribution, fix a sample size n, and ­select 500 
different random samples of this size. We then compute x for each sample and construct a 
sample histogram of these 500 x values. Because 500 is reasonably large (a ­reasonably long 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 8.2   The Sampling Distribution of a Sample Mean 
●  443
sequence of samples), the density histogram of the x values should closely resemble the 
actual sampling distribution of x (which would be obtained from an unending sequence 
of x values). 
We then repeat the experiment for several different values of n to see how the choice 
of sample size affects the sampling distribution. This enables us to identify some patterns 
that will be helpful in understanding important properties of the sampling distribution 
of x.
EXAMPLE 8.2 
Blood Platelet Volume
The paper “Mean Platelet Volume in Patients with Metabolic 
Syndrome and Its Relationship with Coronary Artery Disease” 
(Thrombosis Research [2007]: 245–250) includes data that 
suggest that the distribution of platelet volume for pa-
tients who do not have metabolic syndrome (a combina-
tion of factors that indicates a high risk of heart disease) is 
approximately normal with mean m 5 8.25 and standard 
deviation s 5 0.75.
Figure 8.2 shows a normal curve centered at 8.25, the mean value of platelet volume. 
The value of the population standard deviation, 0.75, determines the extent to which the x 
distribution spreads out about its mean value.
SCIEPRO/Science Photo Library/Alamy 
Activated platelet
Figure  8.2
​Normal distribution of platelet size  
(m 5 8.25 and s 5 0.75).
s = 0.75
m = 8.25
6.00
6.75
7.50
9.00
9.75
10.50
We first used Minitab to select 500 random samples from this population distribution, 
with each sample consisting of n 5 5 observations. A density histogram of the resulting 
500 x values appears in Figure 8.3(a). This procedure was repeated for samples of size 
n 5 10, n 5 20, and n 5 30. The resulting density histograms of the x values are displayed 
in Figure 8.3(b)–​(d).
The first thing to notice about the histograms is their shape. Each of the four histograms 
is approximately normal in shape. The resemblance would be even more striking if each 
histogram had been based on many more than 500 x values. 
Second, notice that each histogram is centered approximately at 8.25, the mean of the 
population being sampled. Had the histograms been based on an unending sequence of  
x values, their centers would have been exactly equal to the population mean, 8.25.
The final aspect of the histograms to note is their spread relative to one another. The 
smaller the value of n, the greater the extent to which the sampling distribution spreads out 
around the population mean value. This is why the histograms for n 5 20 and n 5 30 are 
based on narrower class intervals than those for the two smaller sample sizes. For the larger 
sample sizes, most of the x values are quite close to 8.25. This is the effect of averaging. 
When n is small, a single unusual x value can result in an x value far from the center. With 
a larger sample size, any unusual x values, when averaged with the other sample values, 
still tend to yield an x value close to m. Combining these insights yields a result that should 
appeal to your intuition: x based on a large sample will tend to be closer to m than x based on 
a small sample.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

444 
●  Chapter 8  Sampling Variability and Sampling Distributions

■
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Density
1.8
(b)
7.2
7.6
8.0
8.4
8.8
9.2
x–
n 5 10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Density
7.2
7.6
8.0
8.4
8.8
9.2
x–
n 5 5
(d)
(a)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Density
2.5
(c)
7.2
7.5
7.8
8.1
8.4
8.7
9.0
x–
n 5 20
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Density
3.0
2.5
7.2
7.5
7.8
8.1
8.4
8.7
9.0
x–
n 5 30
Figure  8.3
Density histograms for x based on 
500 samples, each consisting of  
n observations, for Example 8.2:  
(a) n 5 5; (b) n 5 10; (c) n 5 20;  
(d) n 5 30.
EXAMPLE 8.3 
Time to First Goal in Hockey
Now consider properties of the x distribution when the population is quite skewed (and 
thus very unlike a normal distribution). The paper “Is the Overtime Period in an NHL Game 
Long Enough?” (American Statistician [2008]: 151–154) gave data on the time (in minutes) from 
the start of the game to the first goal scored for the 281 regular season games from the 
2005–2006 season that went into overtime. 
Figure 8.4 displays a density histogram of the data (read from a graph that appeared in 
the paper). The histogram has a long upper tail, indicating that the first goal is scored in the 
first 20 minutes of most games, but that for some games, the first goal is not scored until 
much later in the game.
If we think of the 281 values as a population, the histogram in Figure 8.4 shows the dis-
tribution of values in that population. The skewed shape makes identification of the mean 
value from the picture more difficult than for a normal distribution, but we computed the 
average of the 281 values to be m 5 13 minutes. 
For each of the sample sizes n 5 5, 10, 20, and 30, we selected 500 random samples of 
size n. This was done with replacement to approximate more nearly the usual situation, in 
which the sample size n is only a small fraction of the population size. We then constructed 
a histogram of the 500 x values for each of the four sample sizes. These histograms are 
displayed in Figure 8.5.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 8.2   The Sampling Distribution of a Sample Mean 
●  445
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Density
0.06
Time to ﬁrst goal
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
32
36
40
44
48
52
56
x
Figure  8.4
The population distribution for  
Example 8.3 (m 5 13).
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
Density
0.14
(a)
4
28
24
20
16
12
8
x–
n 5 5
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Density
0.20
(c)
4
28
24
20
16
12
8
x–
n 5 20
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
Density
0.14
(b)
4
28
24
20
16
12
8
x–
n 5 10
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Density
0.25
(d)
4
28
24
20
16
12
8
x–
n 5 30
Figure  8.5
Four histograms of 500 x values for Example 8.3: 
(a) n 5 5; (b) n 5 10; (c) n 5 20; (d) n 5 30.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

446 
●  Chapter 8  Sampling Variability and Sampling Distributions
As with samples from a normal population, the averages of the 500 x values for the four 
different sample sizes are all close to the population mean m 5 13. If each histogram had 
been based on an unending sequence of sample means rather than just 500 of them, each 
one would have been centered at exactly 13. 
Comparison of the four x histograms in Figure 8.5 also shows that as n increases, the 
histogram’s spread around its center decreases. This was also true of increasing sample sizes 
from a normal population: x is less variable (varies less from sample to sample) for a large 
sample size than it is for a small sample size.
One aspect of these histograms distinguishes them from the distribution of x based on 
a sample from a normal population. They are skewed and differ in shape more, but they 
become progressively more symmetric as the sample size increases. We can also see that 
for n 5 30, the histogram has a shape much like a normal curve. Again this is the effect 
of averaging. Even when n is large, one of the few large x values in the population doesn’t 
appear in the sample very often. When one does appear, its contribution to x is swamped 
by the contributions of more typical sample values. 
The normal shape of the histogram for n 5 30 is what is predicted by the Central Limit 
Theorem, which will be introduced shortly. According to this theorem, even if the popula-
tion distribution is not well described by a normal curve, the sampling distribution of x is 
approximately normal in shape when the sample size n is reasonably large.
■
General Properties of the Sampling Distribution of x 
Examples 8.2 and 8.3 suggest that for any n, the center of the x distribution (the mean 
value of x) coincides with the mean of the population being sampled. We also see that 
the spread of the x distribution decreases as n increases. This indicates that the standard 
deviation of x is smaller for large n than for small n. The histograms in Figures 8.3 and 8.5 
also suggest that in some cases, the x distribution is approximately normal in shape. These 
observations are stated more formally in the following general rules.
Notation 
x		
sample mean
n		
sample size
m		
population mean
s		
population standard deviation
mx	
mean of the x sampling distribution
sx	
standard deviation of the x sampling distribution
When random samples are selected from a population, the following are prop-
erties of the sampling distribution of x :
Property 1.	
mx 5 m.
Property 2.	
sx 5 s
Ïn. 
	
This formula is exact if the population is infinite, and is approxi-
mately correct if the population is finite and no more than 10% 
of the population is included in the sample.
Property 3.	
​When the population distribution is normal, the sampling distri-
bution of x is also normal for any sample size n.
Property 4.	
​(Central Limit Theorem) When n is sufficiently large, the sam-
pling distribution of x is well approximated by a normal curve, 
even when the population distribution is not itself normal.
General Properties of the Sampling Distribution of x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 8.2   The Sampling Distribution of a Sample Mean 
●  447
Property 1, m x 5 m, states that the sampling distribution of x is always centered at the 
mean of the population sampled. 
Property 2, s x 5 s
Ïn, not only states that the spread of the sampling distribution of 
x decreases as n increases, but also gives a precise relationship between the standard de-
viation of the x distribution and the population standard deviation and sample size. For 
example, when n 5 4,
s x 5 s
Ïn 5 s
Ï4 5 s
2
so the x distribution has a standard deviation only half as large as the population standard 
deviation. 
Properties 3 and 4 specify when the x distribution is normal (when the population is 
normal) or approximately normal (when the sample size is large). 
Figure 8.6 illustrates these rules by showing several x distributions superimposed over a 
graph of the population distribution.
Figure  8.6
​Population distribution and sampling 
distributions of x: 
(a) symmetric population;  
(b) skewed population.
n 5 16
n 5 4
Population
(a)
n 5 16
n 5 4
Population
(b)
The Central Limit Theorem, Property 4, states that when n is sufficiently large, the x 
distribution is approximately normal, no matter what the shape of the population distri-
bution. This result has enabled statisticians to develop procedures for making inferences 
about a population mean m using a large sample, even when the shape of the population 
distribution is unknown.
Recall that a variable is standardized by subtracting the mean value and then dividing by 
its standard deviation. Using Properties 1 and 2 to standardize x gives an important conse-
quence of the last two properties.
If n is large or the population distribution is normal, the standardized variable
z 5 x 2 mx
sx
5 x 2 m
s
Ïn
has (at least approximately) a standard normal (z) distribution.
Application of the Central Limit Theorem in specific situations requires a rule of thumb 
for deciding when n is sufficiently large. Such a rule is not as easy to come by as one might 
think. Look back at Figure 8.5, which shows the approximate sampling distribution of x 
for n 5 5, 10, 20, and 30 when the population distribution is quite skewed. Certainly the 
histogram for n 5 5 is not well described by a normal curve, and this is still true of the 
histogram for n 5 10, particularly in the tails of the histogram. Among the four histograms, 
only the histogram for n 5 30 has a reasonably normal shape.
On the other hand, when the population distribution is normal, the sampling distribu-
tion of x is normal for any n. If the population distribution is somewhat skewed but not to 
the extent of Figure 8.4, we might expect the x sampling distribution to be a bit skewed for 
n 5 5 but quite well described by a normal curve for n as small as 10 or 15. 
 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

448 
●  Chapter 8  Sampling Variability and Sampling Distributions
How large n must be for the x distribution to be approximately normal depends on how 
much the population distribution differs from a normal distribution. The closer the popu-
lation distribution is to being normal, the smaller the value of n necessary for the Central 
Limit Theorem approximation to be accurate.
Many statisticians recommend the following conservative rule:
The Central Limit Theorem can safely be applied if n is greater than or equal 
to 30.
If the population distribution is believed to be reasonably close to a normal distribution, 
an n of 15 or 20 is often large enough for x to have approximately a normal distribution. 
At the other extreme, we can imagine a distribution with a much longer tail than that of 
Figure 8.4, in which case even n 5 40 or 50 would not suffice for approximate normality 
of x. In practice, however, a sample size of 30 or more is usually sufficient.
EXAMPLE 8.4 
Courting Scorpion Flies
The authors of the paper “Should I Stay or Should I Go? Condition- and Status-Dependent 
Courtship Decisions in the Scorpion Fly Panorpa Cognate” (Animal Behaviour [2009]: 491–497) 
studied the courtship behavior of mating scorpion flies. One variable of interest was x 5 
courtship time, which was defined as the time from the beginning of a female-male interac-
tion until mating. 
Data from the paper suggest that it is reasonable to think that the mean and standard 
deviation of x are m 5 117.1 minutes and s 5 109.1 minutes. Notice that the distribution 
of courtship times cannot be normal because for a normal distribution centered at 117.1 
and with such a large standard deviation, it would not be uncommon to observe negative 
values, but courtship time can’t have a negative value.
The sampling distribution of 
x 5 mean courtship time for a random sample of 20 scorpion fly mating pairs 
would have mean
mx 5 m 5 117.1 minutes
So the sampling distribution is centered at 117.1. The standard deviation of x is
sx 5 s
Ïn 5 109.1
Ï20 5 24.40
which is smaller than the population standard deviation s. Because the population distri-
bution is not normal and because the sample size is smaller than 30, we cannot assume  
that the sampling distribution of x is approximately normal in shape.
■
EXAMPLE 8.5 
Soda Volumes
A soft-drink bottler claims that, on average, cans contain 12 ounces of soda. Let x denote the 
actual volume of soda in a randomly selected can. Suppose that x is normally distributed with 
s 5 0.16 ounces. Sixteen cans are to be selected, and the soda volume will be determined for 
each one. Let x denote the resulting sample mean soda volume. Because the x distribution is 
normal, the sampling distribution of x is also normal. If the bottler’s claim is correct, the sam-
pling distribution of x has a mean value of mx 5 m 5 12 and a standard deviation of
sx 5 s
Ïn 5 .16
Ï16 5 .04
Understand the context ❭
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 8.2   The Sampling Distribution of a Sample Mean 
●  449
To calculate a probability involving x, we standardize by subtracting the mean value, 12, 
and dividing by the standard deviation (of x), which is 0.04. For example, the probability 
that the sample mean soda volume is between 11.96 ounces and 12.08 ounces is the area 
between 11.96 and 12.08 under the normal curve with mean 12 and standard deviation 
0.04, as shown in the following figure.
11.96
12
12.08
This area is calculated by first standardizing the interval limits:
Lower limit a* 5 11.96 2 12
.04
5 21.0
Upper limit b* 5 12.08 2 12
.04
5 2.0
Then (using Appendix Table 2)
P(11.96 # x # 12.08) 5 area under the z curve between 21.0 and 2.0
	
5 (area to the left of 2.0) 2 (area to the left of 21.0)
	
5 .9772 2 .1587
	
5 .8185
The probability that the sample mean soda volume is at most 11.9 ounces is
Psx # 11.9d 5 P1z # 11.9 2 12
.04
5 22.52
	
5 (area under the z curve to the left of 22.5) 5 .0062
If the x distribution is as described and the bottler’s claim is correct, a sample mean soda 
volume based on a random sample of 16 observations is less than 11.9 ounces for fewer 
than 1% of all such samples. If we observed an x value that is smaller than 11.9 ounces, 
this would cast doubt on the bottler’s claim that the average soda volume is 12 ounces. ■
EXAMPLE 8.6 
Fat Content of Hot Dogs
A hot dog manufacturer claims that one of its brands of hot dogs has an average fat content 
of m 5 18 grams per hot dog. Consumers of this brand would probably not be disturbed 
if the mean is less than 18 but would be unhappy if it exceeds 18. Let x denote the fat 
content of a randomly selected hot dog, and suppose that s, the standard deviation of the 
x distribution, is 1.
An independent testing organization is asked to analyze a random sample of 36 hot dogs. 
Let x be the average fat content for this sample. The sample size, n 5 36, is large enough 
to rely on the Central Limit Theorem and to regard the x distribution as approximately 
normal. The standard deviation of the x distribution is
s x 5 s
Ïn 5
1
Ï36 5 .1667
If the manufacturer’s claim is correct, we know that m x 5 m 5 18 grams. 
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

450 
●  Chapter 8  Sampling Variability and Sampling Distributions
Suppose that the sample resulted in a mean of x 5 18.4 grams. Does this result suggest 
that the manufacturer’s claim is incorrect?
We can answer this question by looking at the sampling distribution of x. Because of 
sampling variability, even if m 5 18, we know that x will not usually be exactly 18. But, 
is it likely that we would see a sample mean at least as large as 18.4 when the population 
mean is really 18? 
If the company’s claim is correct,
Psx $ 18.4d < P1z $ 18.4 2 18
.1667 2
	
5 P(z $ 2.4) 
	
5 area under the z curve to the right of 2.4
	
5 1 2 .9918 5 .0082
Values of x at least as large as 18.4 will be observed only about 0.82% of the time when a 
random sample of size 36 is taken from a population with mean 18 and standard devia-
tion 1. The value x 5 18.4 is enough greater than 18 that we would question the manufac-
turer’s claim.
■
Other Cases
We now know a great deal about the sampling distribution of x in two cases: for a nor-
mal population distribution and for a large sample size. What happens when the popula-
tion distribution is not normal and n is small? Although it is still true that m x 5 m and 
sx 5 s
Ïn, unfortunately there is no general result about the shape of the distribution. 
When the objective is to make an inference about the center of such a population, one 
way to proceed is to make an assumption about the shape of the distribution. Statisticians 
have proposed and studied a number of such models. Theoretical methods or simulation 
can be used to describe the x distribution corresponding to the assumed model. 
An alternative strategy is to use one of the transformations presented in Chapter 7 to cre-
ate a data set that more closely resembles a sample from a normal population and then to 
base inferences on the transformed data. Yet another path is to use an inferential procedure 
based on a statistic other than x. Consult a statistician or a more advanced text for more 
information.
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
EXERCISES 8.10 - 8.22
8.10	 A random sample is selected from a population with 
mean m 5 100 and standard deviation s 5 10. 
Determine the mean and standard deviation of the 
x sampling distribution for each of the following 
sample sizes:
a.	 n 5 9  ​	
d.	 n 5 50  ​
b.	n 5 15  ​	
e.	 n 5 100 
c.	 n 5 36  ​
	
f.	 n 5 400 
8.11	 For which of the sample sizes given in the previous 
exercise would it be reasonable to think that the x 
sampling distribution is approximately normal in 
shape? ​
8.12	 Explain the difference between s and s x and  
between m and m x.
8.13	 ▼ Suppose that a random sample of size 64 is to be 
selected from a population with mean 40 and stan-
dard deviation 5.
a.	 What are the mean and standard deviation of the 
x sampling distribution? Describe the shape of the 
x sampling distribution. 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 8.2   The Sampling Distribution of a Sample Mean 
●  451
b.	What is the approximate probability that x will 
be within 0.5 of the population mean m? (Hint: 
See Examples 8.5 and 8.6.)  ​
c.	 What is the approximate probability that x will 
differ from m by more than 0.7?  ​
8.14	 The time that a randomly selected individual waits 
for an elevator in an office building has a uniform 
distribution over the interval from 0 to 1 minute. 
For this distribution m 5 0.5 and s 5 0.289.
a.	 Let x be the sample mean waiting time for a 
random sample of 16 individuals. What are the 
mean and standard deviation of the sampling 
distribution of x? 
b.	Answer Part (a) for a random sample of 50 indi-
viduals. 
c.	 Draw a picture of a good approximation to the 
sampling distribution of x when n 5 50.​
8.15	 Let x denote the time (in minutes) that it takes a 
fifth-grade student to read a certain passage. Sup-
pose that the mean value and standard deviation of x 
are m 5 2 minutes and s 5 0.8 minutes, respectively.
a.	 If x is the sample mean time for a random sample 
of n 5 9 students, where is the x distribution 
centered, and how much does it spread out 
around the center (as described by its standard 
deviation)? 
b.	Repeat Part (a) for a sample of size of n 5 20 and 
again for a sample of size n 5 100. How do the 
centers and spreads of the three x distributions 
compare to one another? 
c.	 Which of the sample sizes in Part (b) would be 
most likely to result in an x value close to m, 
and why?
8.16	 In the library on a university campus, there is a sign 
in the elevator that indicates a limit of 16 persons. 
In addition, there is a weight limit of 2500 pounds. 
Assume that the average weight of students, fac-
ulty, and staff on campus is 150 pounds, that the 
standard deviation is 27 pounds, and that the 
distribution of weights of individuals on campus is 
approximately normal. Suppose a random sample of 
16 persons from the campus will be selected. 
a.	 What is the mean of the x sampling distribu-
tion? 
b.	What is the standard deviation of the x sampling 
distribution? 
c.	 What average weights for a sample of 16 people 
will result in the total weight exceeding the 
weight limit of 2500 pounds? 
d.	What is the chance that a random sample of  
16 people will exceed the weight limit? 
8.17	 Suppose that the mean value of interpupillary dis-
tance (the distance between the pupils of the left and 
right eyes) for adult males is 65 mm and that the 
population standard deviation is 5 mm.
a.	 If the distribution of interpupillary distance is 
normal and a random sample of n 5 25 adult 
males is to be selected, what is the probability 
that the sample mean distance x for these 25 
will be between 64 and 67 mm? at least 68 mm? 
(Hint: See Examples 8.5 and 8.6.) 
b.	Suppose that a random sample of 100 adult 
males is to be obtained. Without assuming that 
interpu­pillary distance is normally distributed, 
what is the approximate probability that the 
sample mean distance will be between 64 and  
67 mm? at least 68 mm?  ​
8.18	 Suppose that a sample of size 100 is to be drawn 
from a population with standard deviation 10.
a.	 What is the probability that the sample mean will 
be within 1 of the value of m? 
b.	For this example (n 5 100, s 5 10), complete 
each of the following statements by computing 
the appropriate value:
i.	 ​Approximately 95% of the time, x will be 
within _____ of m. 
ii.	​Approximately 0.3% of the time, x will be 
farther than _____ from m.  ​
8.19	 A manufacturing process is designed to produce 
bolts with a 0.5-inch diameter. Once each day, a 
random sample of 36 bolts is selected and the bolt 
diameters are recorded. If the resulting sample mean 
is less than 0.49 inches or greater than 0.51 inches, 
the process is shut down for adjustment. The stan-
dard deviation for diameter is 0.02 inches. 
What is the probability that the manufacturing 
line will be shut down unnecessarily? (Hint: Find 
the probability of observing an x in the shut-
down range when the true process mean really is 
0.5 ­inches.)  ​
8.20	 College students with checking accounts typically 
write relatively few checks in any given month, 
whereas adults who are not students typically write 
many more checks during a month. Suppose that 
50% of a bank’s accounts are held by students and 
that 50% are held by adults who are not students. 
Let x denote the number of checks written in a given 
month by a randomly selected bank customer.
a.	 Give a sketch of what the probability distribution 
of x might look like.
b.	Suppose that the mean value of x is 22.0 and that 
the standard deviation is 16.5. A random sample 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

452 
●  Chapter 8  Sampling Variability and Sampling Distributions
of n 5 100 customers is to be selected. Where 
is the sampling distribution of x centered, and 
what is the standard deviation of the x distribu-
tion? Sketch a rough picture of the sampling 
distribution.
c.	 Referring to Part (b), what is the approximate 
probability that x is at most 20? at least 25? ​
8.21	 ▼ An airplane with room for 100 passengers has a 
total baggage limit of 6000 pounds. Suppose that the 
total weight of the baggage checked by an individual 
passenger is a random variable x with a mean value 
of 50 pounds and a standard deviation of 20 pounds. 
If 100 passengers will board a flight, what is the ap-
proximate probability that the total weight of their 
baggage will exceed the limit? (Hint: With n 5 100, 
the total weight exceeds the limit when the average 
weight x exceeds 6000/100.) 
8.22	 The thickness (in millimeters) of the coating applied 
to disk drives is one characteristic that determines 
the usefulness of the product. When no unusual cir-
cumstances are present, the thickness (x) has a nor-
mal distribution with a mean of 2 mm and a standard 
deviation of 0.05 mm. Suppose that the process will 
be monitored by selecting a random sample of 16 
drives from each shift’s production and determining  
x, the mean coating thickness for the sample.
a.	 Describe the sampling distribution of x for a ran-
dom sample of size 16.
b.	When no unusual circumstances are present, we 
expect x to be within 3s x of 2 mm, the desired 
value. An x value farther from 2 than 3s x is in-
terpreted as an indication of a problem that needs 
attention. Compute 2 6 3s x. 
c.	 Referring to Part (b), what is the probability that 
a sample mean will be outside 2 6 3s x just by 
chance (that is, when there are no unusual cir-
cumstances)?   
d.	Suppose that a machine used to apply the coating  
is out of adjustment, resulting in a mean coating  
thickness of 2.05 mm. What is the probability that 
a problem will be detected when the next sample 
is taken? (Hint: This will occur if x . 2 1 3s x or 
x , 2 2 3s x when m 5 2.05.)  ​
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
 8.3  
The Sampling Distribution of a Sample Proportion
The objective of many statistical investigations is to draw a conclusion about the propor-
tion of individuals or objects in a population that possess a specified property—for ex-
ample, cell phones that don’t require service during the warranty period or coffee drinkers 
who regularly drink decaffeinated coffee. Traditionally, any individual or object that pos-
sesses the property of interest is labeled a success (S), and one that does not possess the 
property is termed a failure (F). 
The letter p is used to denote the proportion of successes in the population. The value of 
p is a number between 0 and 1, and 100p is the percentage of successes in the population. 
For example, if p 5 .75, 75% of the population members are successes, and if p 5 .01, the 
population contains only 1% successes and 99% failures.
The value of p is usually unknown. When a random sample of size n is selected from this 
type of population, some of the individuals in the sample are successes, and the rest are 
failures. The statistic that provides a basis for making inferences about p is p⁄, the sample 
proportion of successes:
p⁄ 5 number of S’s in the sample
n
For example, if there are three successes in a sample of size 5, then p⁄ 5 3/5 5 .6.
Just as making inferences about m requires knowing something about the sampling dis-
tribution of the statistic x, making inferences about p requires first learning about proper-
ties of the sampling distribution of the statistic p⁄. For example, when n 5 5, the six possible 
values of p⁄ are 0, .2 (from 1/5), .4, .6, .8, and 1. The sampling distribution of p⁄ gives the 
probability of each of these six possible values. These probabilities are the long-run propor-
tions of the time that these values would occur if random samples with n 5 5 were selected 
over and over again.
As we did for the sample mean, we will look at some simulation experiments to de-
velop an intuitive understanding of the distribution of the sample proportion before stat-
ing general properties. In each example, 500 random samples of size n are selected from a 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 8.3   The Sampling Distribution of a Sample Proportion 
●  453
population having a specified value of p. We compute p⁄ for each sample and then construct 
a density histogram of the 500 values.
EXAMPLE 8.7 
Gender of College Students
In the fall of 2008, there were 18,516 students enrolled at California Polytechnic State 
University, San Luis Obispo. Of these students, 8091 (43.7%) were female. To illustrate 
properties of the sampling distribution of a sample proportion, we will simulate sampling 
from this Cal Poly student population. 
With S denoting a female student and F a male student, the proportion of S’s in the 
population is p 5 .437. A statistical software package was used to select 500 samples of 
size n 5 10, then 500 samples of size n 5 25, then 500 samples with n 5 50, and finally 
500 samples with n 5 100. Histograms of the 500 values of p⁄ for each of the four sample 
sizes are displayed in Figure 8.7.
The most noticeable feature of the histogram shapes is that all are approximately symmetric.
All four histograms appear to be centered at roughly .437, the value of p for the population 
sampled. Had the histograms been based on an unending sequence of samples, each histo-
gram would have been centered at exactly .437. Finally, as was the case with the sampling 
distribution of x, the histograms spread out more for small sample sizes than for large 
sample sizes. Not surprisingly, the value of p⁄ based on a large sample size tends to be closer 
to p, the population proportion of successes, than does p⁄ from a small sample.
(b)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Density
2.5
(a)
0.0
pˆ
n 5 10
0
1
Density
6
5
4
3
2
0.00
0.15
0.30
0.45
0.60
0.75
0.90
pˆ
n 5 50
0
1
Density
6
5
8
7
4
3
2
0.00
0.15
0.30
0.45
0.60
0.75
0.90
pˆ
n 5 100
(d)
0
1
Density
6
5
7
4
3
2
0.00
0.15
0.30
0.45
0.60
0.75
0.90
0.15
0.30
0.45
0.60
0.75
0.90
pˆ
n 5 25
(c)
Figure  8.7
Histograms for 500 values of p⁄  
(p 5 .437) for Example 8.7:  
(a) n 5 10; (b) n 5 25; (c) n 5 50;  
(d) n 5 100.

■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

454 
●  Chapter 8  Sampling Variability and Sampling Distributions
EXAMPLE 8.8 
Contracting Hepatitis from Blood Transfusion
The development of viral hepatitis after a blood transfusion can cause serious complica-
tions for a patient. The article “Lack of Awareness Results in Poor Autologous Blood Transfu-
sion” (Health Care Management, May 15, 2003) reported that hepatitis occurs in 7% of patients 
who receive blood transfusions during heart surgery. Here, we simulate sampling from the 
population of blood recipients, with S denoting a recipient who contracts hepatitis (not the 
sort of characteristic one usually thinks of as a success, but the S–​F labeling is arbitrary), 
so p 5 .07. Figure 8.8 displays histograms of 500 values of p⁄ for the four sample sizes  
n 5 10, 25, 50, and 100.
As was the case in Example 8.7, all four histograms are centered at approximately the 
value of p for the population being sampled. (The average of the p⁄ values for these simula-
tions are .0690, .0677, .0707, and .0694.) If the histograms had been based on an unend-
ing sequence of samples, they would all have been centered at exactly p 5 .07. 
The spread of a histogram based on a large n is smaller than the spread of a histogram 
resulting from a small sample size. The larger the value of n, the closer the sample propor-
tion p⁄ tends to be to the value of the population proportion p.
Also notice that there is a progression toward the shape of a normal curve as n increases. 
The histograms for n 5 10 and n 5 25 exhibit substantial skew, and the skew of the his-
togram for n 5 50 is still moderate (compare Figure 8.8(c) with Figure 8.8(d)). Only the 
n 5 10
n 5 25
n 5 50
n 5 100
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
0
.1
.2
.3
.4
(a)
Relative frequency
Relative frequency
Relative frequency
Relative frequency
.1
0
.08
.16
(b)
.2
.3
.24
.05
.10
.15
.20
.25
0 .04 .08
(c)
.12 .16 .2
.05
.10
.15
.20
.25
.02 .04
(d)
.06 .08 .10 .12 .14 .16
pˆ
pˆ
pˆ
pˆ
Figure  8.8
Histograms of 500 values of p⁄  
(p 5 .07) for Example 8.8:  
(a) n 5 10; (b) n 5 25; (c) n 5 50;  
(d) n 5 100.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 8.3   The Sampling Distribution of a Sample Proportion 
●  455
histogram for n 5 100 is described reasonably well by a normal curve. It appears that 
whether a normal curve provides a good approximation to the sampling distribution of p⁄ 
depends on the values of both n and p. Knowing only that n 5 50 is not enough to guar-
antee that the shape of the histogram is approximately normal.	
■
General Properties of the Sampling Distribution of p⁄
Examples 8.7 and 8.8 suggest that the sampling distribution of p⁄ depends on both n, the 
sample size, and p, the proportion of successes in the population. Key results are stated 
more formally in the following general rules.
Notation 
p⁄		
sample proportion
n		
sample size
p		
population proportion
p⁄	
mean of the p⁄ sampling distribution
⁄p	
standard deviation of the p⁄ sampling distribution
When random samples are selected from a population, the following are prop-
erties of the sampling distribution of p⁄: 
Property 1.	
⁄p 5 p.
Property 2.	
⁄p5Î
ps1 2 pd
n
. 
	 	
	
This formula is exact if the population is infinite, and is approxi-
mately correct if the population is finite and no more than 10% 
of the population is included in the sample.
Property 3.	
​When n is large and p is not too near 0 or 1, the sampling distri-
bution of p⁄ is approximately normal.
General Properties of the Sampling Distribution of p⁄
The sampling distribution of p⁄ is always centered at the value of the population success 
proportion p, and the extent to which the distribution spreads out about p decreases as the 
sample size n increases.
Examples 8.7 and 8.8 indicate that both p and n must be considered in judging whether 
the sampling distribution of p⁄ is approximately normal.
The farther the value of p is from .5, the larger n must be in order for the sam-
pling distribution of p⁄ to be approximately normal. 
A conservative rule of thumb is that if both 
np $ 10 and n(1 2 p) $ 10, 
then a normal distribution provides a reasonable approximation to the sampling 
distribution of p⁄.
A sample size of n 5 100 is not by itself sufficient to justify the use of a normal ap-
proximation. If p 5 .01, the distribution of p⁄ is positively skewed even when n 5 100, 
so a bell-shaped curve does not give a good approximation. Similarly, if n 5 100 and  
p 5 .99 (so that n(1 2 p) 5 1 , 10), the distribution of p⁄ has a substantial negative skew. 
The conditions np $ 10 and n(1 2 p) $ 10 ensure that the sampling distribution of p⁄ is not 
too skewed. If p 5 .5, the normal approximation can be used for n as small as 20, whereas 
for p 5 .05 or .95, n should be at least 200.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

456 
●  Chapter 8  Sampling Variability and Sampling Distributions
EXAMPLE 8.9 
Blood Transfusions Continued
The proportion of all cardiac patients receiving blood transfusions who contract hepatitis 
was given as .07 in the article referenced in Example 8.8. Suppose that a new blood screen-
ing procedure is believed to reduce the incidence rate of hepatitis. Blood screened using 
this procedure is given to n 5 200 blood recipients. Only 6 of the 200 patients contract 
hepatitis. 
This appears to be a favorable result, because p⁄ 5 6/200 5 .03. The question of interest 
to medical researchers is, Does this result indicate that the true (long-run) proportion of 
patients who contract hepatitis when the new screening procedure is used is less than .07, 
or could this result be plausibly attributed to sampling variability (that is, to the fact that p⁄ 
typically differs from the population proportion, p)? 
If the screening procedure is not effective and so p 5 .07,
	 mp⁄ 5 0.7
s⁄p 5Î
ps1 2 pd
200
5Î
s.07ds.93d
200
5 .018
Because
np 5 200(.07) 5 14 $ 10
and
n(1 2 p) 5 200(.93) 5 186 $ 10
the sampling distribution of p⁄ is approximately normal. 
Then, if the screening procedure is not effective,
Psp⁄ # .03d 5 P1z # .03 2 .07
.018 2
	
5 Psz # 22.22d
	 	
5.0132
This small probability tells us that it is unlikely that a sample proportion .03 or smaller 
would be observed if the screening procedure was not effective. The new screening proce-
dure appears to yield a smaller incidence rate for hepatitis.	
■
Understand the context ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
EXERCISES 8.23 - 8.31
8.23	 A random sample is to be selected from a popula-
tion that has a proportion of successes p 5 .65. 
Determine the mean and standard deviation of the 
sampling distribution of p⁄ for each of the following 
sample sizes:
a.	 n 5 10  ​
	
d.	n 5 50  ​
b.	n 5 20  ​
	
e.	 n 5 100  ​
c.	 n 5 30  ​
	
f.	 n 5 200  ​
8.24	 a.	  For which of the sample sizes given in the previ-
ous exercise would the sampling distribution of p⁄ 
be approximately normal if p 5 .65? 
b.	For which of the sample sizes given in the previous 
exercise would the sampling distribution be ap-
proximately normal if p 5 .2?
8.25	 ▼ The article “Unmarried Couples More Likely to Be Inter-
racial” (San Luis Obispo Tribune, March 13, 2002) reported 
that 7% of married couples in the United States are 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 8.3   The Sampling Distribution of a Sample Proportion 
●  457
mixed racially or ethnically. Consider the population 
consisting of all married couples in the United States. 
(Hint: See Example 8.9.) 
a.	 A random sample of n 5 100 couples will be se-
lected from this population and p⁄, the ­proportion 
of couples that are mixed racially or ethnically, 
will be computed. What are the mean and stan-
dard deviation of the sampling distribution  
of p⁄? 
b.	Is it reasonable to assume that the sampling distri-
bution of p⁄ is approximately normal for random 
samples of size n 5 100? Explain.  ​
c.	 Suppose that the sample size is n 5 200 rather 
than n 5 100, as in Part (b). Does the change in 
sample size change the mean and standard devia-
tion of the sampling distribution of p⁄? If so, what 
are the new values for the mean and standard 
deviation? If not, explain why not.
d.	Is it reasonable to assume that the sampling distri-
bution of p⁄ is approximately normal for random 
samples of size n 5 200? Explain.
e.	 When n 5 200, what is the probability that the pro-
portion of couples in the sample who are racially or 
ethnically mixed will be greater than .10?  ​
8.26	 The article referenced in the previous exercise reported 
that for unmarried couples living together, the propor-
tion that are racially or ethnically mixed is .15. Answer 
the questions posed in Parts (a)–​(e) of the previous 
exercise for the population of unmarried couples liv-
ing together.
8.27	 ▼ A certain chromosome defect occurs in only 1 in 
200 adult Caucasian males. A random sample of  
n 5 100 adult Caucasian males is to be obtained.
a.	 What is the mean value of the sample propor-
tion p⁄, and what is the standard deviation of the 
sample proportion? 
b.	Does p⁄ have approximately a normal distribution 
in this case? Explain.
c.	 What is the smallest value of n for which the sampling 
distribution of p⁄ is approximately normal?  ​
8.28	 The article “Should Pregnant Women Move? Linking 
Risks for Birth Defects with Proximity to Toxic Waste 
Sites” (Chance [1992]: 40–​45) reported that in a large 
study carried out in the state of New York, approxi-
mately 30% of the study subjects lived within 1 mile 
of a hazardous waste site. Let p denote the proportion 
of all New York residents who live within 1 mile of 
such a site, and suppose that p 5 .3.
a.	 Would p⁄ based on a random sample of only 10 
residents have approximately a normal distribu-
tion? Explain why or why not. 
b.	What are the mean value and standard deviation of p⁄ 
based on a random sample of size 400? 
c.	 When n 5 400, what is P(.25 # p⁄ # .35)? (Hint: 
See Example 8.9.) 
d.	Is the probability calculated in Part (c) larger 
or smaller than would be the case if n 5 500? 
Answer without actually calculating this probabil-
ity. 
8.29	 The article “Thrillers” (Newsweek, April 22, 1985) stated, 
“Surveys tell us that more than half of America’s col-
lege graduates are avid readers of mystery novels.” 
Let p denote the actual proportion of college gradu-
ates who are avid readers of mystery novels. Consider 
a sample proportion p⁄ that is based on a random 
sample of 225 college graduates.
a.	 If p 5 .5, what are the mean value and standard 
deviation of p⁄? Answer this question for p 5 .6. 
Does p⁄ have approximately a normal distribution 
in both cases? Explain.
b.	Calculate P(p⁄ $ .6) for both p 5 .5 and p 5 .6.
c.	 Without doing any calculations, how do you think 
the probabilities in Part (b) would change if n 
were 400 rather than 225?
8.30	 Suppose that a particular candidate for public office 
is in fact favored by 48% of all registered voters in the 
district. A polling organization will take a random sam-
ple of 500 voters and will use p⁄, the sample proportion, 
to estimate p. What is the approximate probability that 
p⁄ will be greater than .5, causing the polling organiza-
tion to incorrectly predict the result of the upcoming 
election? (Hint: See Example 8.9.)  ​
8.31	 ▼ A manufacturer of computer printers purchases 
plastic ink cartridges from a vendor. When a large 
shipment is received, a random sample of 200 car-
tridges is selected, and each cartridge is inspected. 
If the sample proportion of defective cartridges is 
more than .02, the entire shipment is returned to the 
vendor.
a.	 What is the approximate probability that a ship-
ment will be returned if the true proportion of de-
fective cartridges in the shipment is .05? 
b.	What is the approximate probability that a ship-
ment will not be returned if the true proportion of 
defective cartridges in the shipment is .10?  
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

458 
●  Chapter 8  Sampling Variability and Sampling Distributions
AC TIVIT Y 8.1 
Do Students Who Take the SATs Multiple Times Have an Advantage  
in College Admissions?
Technology activity: Requires use of a computer or a 
graphing calculator.
Background: The Chronicle of Higher Education (Janu­ary  29, 
2003) summarized an article that appeared on the American 
Prospect web site titled “College Try: Why Universities Should 
Stop Encouraging Applicants to Take the SATs Over and Over 
Again.” This paper argued that current college admission 
policies that permit applicants to take the SAT exam mul-
tiple times and then use the highest score for consideration of 
admission favor students from families with higher incomes 
(who can afford to take the exam many times). The author 
proposed two alternatives that he believes would be fairer 
than using the highest score: (1) Use the average of all test 
scores, or (2) use only the most recent score.
In this activity, you will investigate the differences between 
the three possibilities by looking at the sampling distribu-
tions of three statistics for a test taker who takes the exam 
twice and for a test taker who takes the exam five times. The 
three statistics are
    Max 5 maximum score
  Mean 5 average score
  Recent 5 most recent score
An individual’s score on the SAT exam fluctuates between 
test administrations. Suppose that a particular student’s “true 
ability” is reflected by an SAT score of 1200 but, because of 
chance fluctuations, the test score on any particular adminis-
tration of the exam can be considered a random variable that 
has a distribution that is approximately normal with mean 
1200 and standard deviation 30. If we select a sample from 
this normal distribution, the resulting set of observations can 
be viewed as a collection of test scores that might have been 
obtained by this student.
Part 1: Begin by considering what happens if this student 
takes the exam twice. You will use simulation to generate 
samples of two test scores, Score1 and Score2, for this stu-
dent. Then you will compute the values of Max, Mean, and 
Recent for each pair of scores. The resulting values of Max, 
Mean, and Recent will be used to construct approximations 
to the sampling distributions of the three statistics.
The instructions that follow assume the use of Minitab. If 
you are using a different software package or a graphing cal-
culator, your instructor will provide alternative instructions.
a.  Obtain 500 sets of two test scores by generating obser-
vations from a normal distribution with mean 1200 and 
standard deviation 30.
Minitab:    ​Calc → Random Data → Normal
Enter 500 in the Generate box (to get 500 sets of scores)
Enter C1-C2 in the Store in Columns box (to get two test  
scores in each set)
Enter 1200 in the Mean box (because we want scores from  
a normal distribution with mean 1200)
Enter 30 in the Standard Deviation box (because we want 
scores from a normal distribution with standard deviation 30)
Click on OK
b.  Looking at the Minitab worksheet, you should  
now see 500 rows of values in each of the first two col-
umns. The two values in any particular row can be re-
garded as the test scores that might be observed when the 
student takes the test twice. For each pair of test scores, 
we now calculate the values of Max, Mean, and Recent.
    i.  Recent is just the last test score, so the values in C2 
are the values of Recent. Name this column recent2 
by typing the name into the gray box at the top of C2.
  ii.  Compute the maximum test score (Max) for each pair 
of scores, and store the values in C3, as follows:
Minitab:    ​Calc → Row statistics
Click the button for maximum
Enter C1-C2 in the Input variables box 
Enter C3 in the Store Result In box.
Click on OK
You should now see the maximum value for each pair in C3. 
Name this column max2.
iii.  Compute the average test score (Mean) for each pair of 
scores, and store the values in C4, as follows:
Minitab:  ​  ​Calc → Row statistics
Click the button for mean
Enter C1-C2 in the Input Variables box
Enter C4 in the Store Result In box.
Click on OK
You should now see the average for each pair in C4. Name 
this column mean2.
c.  Construct density histograms for each of the three statis-
tics (these density histograms approximate the sampling 
distributions of the three statistics), as follows:
Minitab:  ​  ​Graph → Histogram
Enter max2, mean2, and recent2 into the first three rows of the 
Graph Variables box
Click on the Options button. Select Density. Click on OK. (This 
will produce histograms that use the density scale rather 
than the frequency scale.)
Click on the Frame drop-down menu, and select Multiple 
Graphs. Select Same X and Same Y. (This will cause Minitab 
to use the same scales for all three histograms, so that they 
can be easily compared.)
Click on OK.
Part 2: Now you will produce approximate sampling distri-
butions for these same three statistics, but for the case of a 
student who takes the exam five times. Follow the same steps 
as in Part 1, with the following modifications:
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

a.  Obtain 500 sets of five test scores, and store these values 
in columns C11–​ C15.
b.  Recent will just be the values in C15; name this column 
recent5. Compute the Max and Mean values, and store 
them in columns C16 and C17. Name these columns 
max5 and mean5.
c.  Construct density histograms for max5, mean5, and recent5.
Part 3: Now use the approximate sampling distributions con-
structed in Parts 1 and 2 to answer the following questions.
a.  The statistic that is the average of the test scores is just a 
sample mean (for a sample of size 2 in Part 1 and for a 
sample of size 5 in Part 2). How do the sampling distribu-
tions of mean2 and mean5 compare to what is expected 
based on the general properties of the x distribution given 
in Section 8.2? Explain.
b.  Based on the three distributions from Part 1, for a two-
time test taker, describe the advantage of using the maxi-
mum score compared to using either the average score or 
the most recent score.
c.  Now consider the approximate sampling distributions of 
the maximum score for two-time and for five-time test 
takers. How do these two distributions compare?
d.  Does a student who takes the exam five times have a big 
advantage over a student of equal ability who takes the 
exam only twice if the maximum score is used for college 
admission decisions? Explain.
e.  If you were writing admission procedures for a selective 
university, would you recommend using the maximum 
test score, the average test score, or the most recent test 
score in making admission decisions? Write a paragraph 
explaining your choice.
SUMMARY 
Key Concepts and Formulas
Term or Formula
Comment
Statistic
Any quantity whose value is computed 
from sample data.
Sampling distribution
The probability distribution of a statistic. 
The sampling distribution describes the 
long-run behavior of the statistic.
Sampling distribution 
of x
The probability distribution of the sample 
mean x based on a random sample of  
size n. Properties of the x sampling 
distribution:  mx 5 m and sx 5 s
Ïn
(where m and s are the population mean 
and standard deviation, respectively). In 
addition, when the population distribu-
tion is normal or the sample size is 
large, the sampling distribution of x is 
(approximately) normal.
Term or Formula
Comment
Central Limit Theorem
This important theorem states that when 
n is sufficiently large, the x distribution will 
be approximately normal. The standard 
rule of thumb is that the theorem can 
safely be applied when n is greater than or 
equal to 30.
Sampling distribution 
of p⁄
The probability distribution of the sample 
proportion p⁄, based on a random sample 
of size n. When the sample size is suffi-
ciently large, the sampling distribution of  
p⁄ is approximately normal, with
mp⁄ 5 p and sp⁄ 5Î
p(1 2 p)
n
 where p is
the value of the population proportion.
CHAPTER REVIEW 
Exercises 8.32 - 8.37
8.32	 The nicotine content in a single cigarette of a par-
ticular brand has a distribution with mean 0.8 mg 
and standard deviation 0.1 mg. If 100 randomly 
selected cigarettes of this brand are analyzed, what is 
the probability that the resulting sample mean 
nicotine content will be less than 0.79? less than 
0.77? 
8.33	 Let x1, x2, . . . , x100 denote the actual net weights (in 
pounds) of 100 randomly selected bags of fertilizer. 
Suppose that the weight of a randomly selected bag 
has a distribution with mean 50 pounds and variance  
1 pound2. Let x be the sample mean weight (n 5 100).
a.	 Describe the sampling distribution of x.
b.	What is the probability that the sample mean is 
between 49.75 pounds and 50.25 pounds?  ​
c.	 What is the probability that the sample mean is 
less than 50 pounds? 
8.34	 Suppose that 20% of the subscribers of a cable televi-
sion company watch the shopping channel at least 
once a week. The cable company is trying to decide 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Chapter Review Exercises 
●  459
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

460 
●  Chapter 8  Sampling Variability and Sampling Distributions
whether to replace this channel with a new local 
­station. A survey of 100 subscribers will be under-
taken. The cable company has decided to keep the 
shopping channel if the sample proportion is greater 
than .25. 
What is the approximate probability that the cable 
company will keep the shopping channel, even 
though the proportion of all subscribers who watch it 
is only .20? 
8.35	 Water permeability of concrete can be measured by 
letting water flow across the surface and determin-
ing the amount lost (in inches per hour). Suppose 
that the permeability index x for a randomly selected 
concrete specimen of a particular type is normally 
distributed with mean value 1000 and standard 
deviation 150.
a.	 How likely is it that a single randomly selected 
specimen will have a permeability index between 
850 and 1300?  ​
b.	If the permeability index is to be determined for 
each specimen in a random sample of size 10, 
how likely is it that the sample mean permeability 
index will be 
	
  i.  between 950 and 1100? 
	
ii.  between 850 and 1300? 
8.36	 Suppose that 40% of all U.S. employees contribute to 
a retirement plan (p 5 .40).
a.	 In a random sample of 100 employees, what is the 
approximate probability that at least half of those in 
the sample contribute to a retirement plan?  ​
b.	Suppose you were told that at least 60 of the 100 
employees in a sample from your state contribute 
to a retirement plan. Would you think p 5 .40 for 
your state? Explain.  ​
8.37	 The amount of money spent by a customer at a dis-
count store has a mean of $100 and a standard devia-
tion of $30. What is the probability that a randomly 
selected group of 50 shoppers will spend a total of 
more than $5300? (Hint: The total will be more than 
$5300 when the sample mean exceeds what value?)  ​
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

461
Most American college students make use of the Inter-
net for both academic and social purposes. The authors of 
the paper “U.S. College Students’ Internet Use: Race, Gender 
and Digital Divides” (Journal of Computer-Mediated Communi-
cation [2009]: 244–264) describe the results of a survey of 
7421 students at 40 colleges and universities. The sample 
was selected in a way that the authors believed would 
result in a sample that reflected general demographics of 
college students in the U.S. 
The authors wanted to use the sample data to estimate 
the proportion of college students who spend more than 
3  hours a day on the Internet. The methods introduced 
in this chapter can be used to estimate this proportion. 
Because the estimate will be based only on a sample rather 
than on a census of all U.S. college students, it is important 
that this estimate be constructed in a way that also conveys 
information about the anticipated accuracy.
Estimation Using  
a Single Sample
Chapter 9: Learning Objectives
Students will understand:
●
●what it means for a statistic to be an unbiased estimator of a population 
characteristic. 
●
●the relationships between sample size, margin of error, and the width of a 
confidence interval.
●
●the factors that affect the width of a confidence interval.
●
●the meaning of the confidence level associated with a confidence interval.
Students will be able to:
●
●construct and interpret a confidence interval for a population proportion.
●
●construct and interpret a confidence interval for a population mean.
●
●determine the sample size necessary to achieve a desired bound on error 
when estimating a population proportion or a population mean.
 George Hall/Documentary Value/Corbis 
CHAPTER 9
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

462 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
The simplest approach to estimating a population characteristic involves using sample data 
to compute a single number that can be regarded as a plausible value of the population 
characteristic. For example, sample data might suggest that 1000 hours is a plausible value 
for m, the mean lifetime for all lightbulbs of a particular brand. A sample survey of students 
at a particular university might lead to the statement that .41 is a plausible value for p, the 
proportion of all students at the university who favor a fee for recreational facilities.
Point estimate: A single number that is based on sample data and represents a 
plausible value of a population characteristic.
DEFINITION
A point estimate is obtained by first selecting an appropriate statistic. The value of the 
statistic for a given sample is then used as the point estimate. For example, the computed 
value of the sample mean is one point estimate of a population mean m, and the sample 
proportion is a point estimate of a population proportion, p.
Example 9.1 
Internet Use by College Students
One of the purposes of the survey described in the chapter introduction was to estimate 
the proportion of college students who spend more than 3 hours a day on the Internet. 
Based on information given in the paper, 2998 of the 7421 students surveyed reported 
Internet use of more than 3 hours per day. We can use this information to estimate p, 
where p is the proportion of all U.S. college students who use the Internet more than 
3 hours a day. 
With a success identified as a student who uses the Internet more than 3 hours a day,  
p is the population proportion of successes. The statistic
p⁄ 5 number of successes in the sample
n
which is the sample proportion of successes, is an obvious choice for obtaining a point 
estimate of p. Using the reported information, the point estimate of p is
p⁄ 5 2998
7421 5 .404
Based on this random sample, we estimate that 40.4% of college students in the United 
States spend more than 3 hours a day on the Internet.
■
For purposes of estimating a population proportion p, there is no obvious alternative to 
the statistic p⁄ . In other situations, such as the one illustrated in Example 9.2, there may be 
several statistics that might be used to obtain an estimate.
Example 9.2 
Academic Reading
The paper “The Impact of Internet and Television Use on the Reading Habits and Practices of 
College Students” (Journal of Adolescent and Adult Literacy [2009]: 609–619) investigates the 
reading habits of college students. The authors distinguished between recreational reading 
and academic reading and asked students to keep track of time spent reading. The follow-
ing observations represent the number of hours spent on academic reading in 1 week by 
Understand the context ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
   9.1  
Point Estimation
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   9.1   Point Estimation 
●  463
20 college students (these data are compatible with summary values given in the paper and 
have been arranged in order from smallest to largest):
1.7
3.8
4.7
9.6
11.7
12.3
12.3
12.4
12.6
13.4
14.1
14.2
15.8
15.9
18.7
19.4
21.2
21.9
23.3
28.2
A dotplot of the data is shown here:
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
Academic reading time (hours)
From the dotplot, we can see that the distribution of academic reading time is approxi-
mately symmetric.
Suppose a point estimate of m, the mean academic reading time per week for all college 
students, is desired. An obvious choice of a statistic for estimating m is the sample mean, x. 
However, there are other possibilities. We might consider using the sample median, be-
cause the data set exhibits some symmetry. (If the corresponding population distribution is 
symmetric, the population mean m and the population median are equal).
The estimates of m based on the mean and the median for this sample are
 sample mean 5 x 5 ox
n 5 287.2
20
5 14.36
 sample median 5 13.4 1 14.1
2
5 13.75
The estimates of the mean academic reading time per week for college students differ 
somewhat from one another. The choice between them should depend on which statistic 
tends, on average, to produce an estimate closest to the actual value of m. The following 
subsection discusses criteria for choosing among competing statistics.
■
Choosing a Statistic for Computing an Estimate
As illustrated in Example 9.2, there may be more than one statistic that is reasonable to use 
as a point estimate of a specified population characteristic. We would like to use a statistic 
that tends to produce an accurate estimate—that is, an estimate close to the value of the 
population characteristic. Information about the accuracy of estimation for a particular 
statistic is provided by the statistic’s sampling distribution. 
Figure 9.1 displays the sampling distributions of three different statistics. The value of 
the population characteristic, which is denoted by true value in the figure, is marked on the 
measurement axis. The distribution in Figure 9.1(a) is that of a statistic unlikely to yield an 
Consider the data ❭
Do the work ❭
Figure  9.1
​Sampling distributions of three differ-
ent statistics for estimating a popula-
tion characteristic.
True
value
(a)
True
value
(b)
True
value
(c)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

464 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
estimate close to the true value. The distribution is centered to the right of the true value, 
making it very likely that an estimate (a value of the statistic for a particular sample) will 
be larger than the true value. If this statistic is used to compute an estimate based on a first 
sample, then another estimate based on a second sample, and another estimate based on a 
third sample, and so on, the long-run average value of these estimates will be greater than 
the true value.
The sampling distribution of Figure 9.1(b) is centered at the true value. This means 
that although one estimate may be smaller than the true value and another may be larger, 
when this statistic is used many times over with different random samples, there will be no 
long-run tendency to over- or underestimate the true value. Notice that even though the 
sampling distribution is correctly centered, it spreads out quite a bit around the true value. 
Because of this, some estimates resulting from the use of this statistic will be far above or 
far below the true value, even though there is no systematic tendency to underestimate or 
overestimate the true value.
In contrast, the mean value of the statistic with the distribution shown in Figure 9.1(c) 
is equal to the true value of the population characteristic (implying no systematic tendency 
to over- or underestimate the actual value). The statistic’s standard deviation is relatively 
small. This means that estimates based on this third statistic will almost always be quite 
close to the true value—certainly more often than estimates resulting from the statistic with 
the sampling distribution shown in Figure 9.1(b).
Unbiased statistic: A statistic whose mean value is equal to the value of the 
population characteristic being estimated. 
Biased statistic: A statistic that is not unbiased.
DEFINITION
As an example of a statistic that is biased, consider using the sample range as an estimate 
of the population range. Because the range of a population is defined as the difference 
between the largest value in the population and the smallest value, the range for a sample 
tends to underestimate the population range. This is because the largest value in a sample 
must be less than or equal to the largest value in the population and the smallest sample value  
must be greater than or equal to the smallest value in the population. The sample range 
equals the population range only if the sample happens to include both the largest and 
the smallest values in the population. In all other instances, the value of the sample range 
is smaller than the population range. This means that msample range is less than the population 
range, implying bias.
One of the general results concerning the sampling distribution of x, the sample mean, 
is that mx 5 m. This result says that the x values from all possible random samples of size n 
center around m, the population mean. For example, if m 5 100, the x distribution is cen-
tered at 100, whereas if m 5 5200, then the x distribution is centered at 5200. This means 
that x is an unbiased statistic for estimating m. Similarly, because the sampling distribution 
of p⁄ is centered at p, it follows that p⁄ is an unbiased statistic for estimating a population 
proportion.
Using an unbiased statistic that also has a small standard deviation ensures that there will 
be no systematic tendency to under- or overestimate the value of the population character-
istic and that estimates will almost always be relatively close to the  value of the population 
characteristic.
Given several unbiased statistics that could be used for estimating a population 
characteristic, the best choice is the statistic with the smallest standard deviation.
Consider the problem of estimating a population mean, m. The obvious choice of statis-
tic for obtaining a point estimate of m is the sample mean, x, an unbiased statistic for this 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   9.1   Point Estimation 
●  465
purpose. However, when the population distribution is symmetric, x is not the only choice. 
Other unbiased statistics for estimating m in this case include the sample median. Which 
statistic should be used? If the population distribution is normal, then x has a smaller stan-
dard deviation than any other unbiased statistic for estimating m. This means that if the 
population distribution is normal, the sample mean would be the best choice.
Now consider estimating another population characteristic, the population variance, s2. 
The sample variance
s2 5 osx 2 xd2
n 2 1
is a good choice for obtaining a point estimate of the population variance, s2. It can be 
shown that s2 is an unbiased statistic for estimating s2. This means that whatever the value 
of s2, the sampling distribution of s2 is centered at that value. This is the reason that the 
divisor (n 2 1) is used. An alternative statistic is the average squared deviation
osx 2 xd2
n
which has a more natural divisor than s2. However, the average squared deviation is biased, 
with its values tending to be smaller, on average, than the value of s2.
Example 9.3 
Airborne Times for Flights from San Francisco 
to Washington, D.C.
The Bureau of Transportation Statistics provides data on U.S. airline flights. The airborne 
times (in minutes) for nonstop flights from San Francisco to Washington Dulles airport for 
10 randomly selected flights in June 2009 are:
270
256
267
285
274
275
266
258
271
281
For these data ox 5 2703, ox2 5 731,373, n 5 10, and
 osx 2 xd2 5 o x2 2 soxd2
n
	
 5 731,373 2 s2703d2
10
	
 5 752.1
We use s2 to denote the actual variance in airborne time for June 2009 nonstop flights 
from San Francisco to Washington Dulles airport. Using the sample variance s2 to provide 
a point estimate of s2 yields
s2 5 osx 2 xd2
n 2 1
5 752.1
9
5 83.57
Using the average squared deviation (with divisor n 5 10), the resulting point estimate is
osx 2 xd2
n
5 752.1
10
5 75.21
Because s2 is an unbiased statistic for estimating s2, most statisticians would recommend 
using the point estimate 83.57.	
■
An obvious choice of a statistic for estimating the population standard deviation s is the 
sample standard deviation s. For the data given in Example 9.3,
s 5 Ï83.57 5 9.14
Understand the context ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

466 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
Unfortunately, the fact that s2 is an unbiased statistic for estimating s2 does not imply that s 
is an unbiased statistic for estimating s. The sample standard deviation tends to underesti-
mate slightly the true value of s. However, unbiasedness is not the only criterion by which 
a statistic can be judged, and there are other good reasons for using s to estimate s. In what 
follows, whenever we need to estimate s based on a single random sample, we will use the 
statistic s to obtain a point estimate.
9.1	 ▼ Three different statistics are being considered for 
estimating a population characteristic. The sampling 
distributions of the three statistics are shown in the 
following illustration:
True value of
population
characteristic
Statistic II
Statistic III
Statistic I
Which statistic would you recommend? Explain your 
choice. (Hint: See the section on choosing a statistic.)
9.2	 a.  Why is an unbiased statistic generally preferred 
over a biased statistic for estimating a population 
characteristic? 
b.	Does unbiasedness alone guarantee that the esti-
mate will be close to the true value? Explain. 
c.	 Under what circumstances might you choose a 
biased statistic over an unbiased statistic if two 
statistics are available for estimating a population 
characteristic?
9.3	 Consumption of fast food is a topic of interest to re-
searchers in the field of nutrition. The article “Effects 
of Fast-Food Consumption on Energy Intake and Diet 
Quality Among Children” (Pediatrics [2004]: 112–118) 
reported that 1720 of those in a random sample of 
6212 U.S. children indicated that on a typical day, 
they ate fast food. Estimate p, the proportion of 
children in the United States who eat fast food on a 
typical day.  ​  ​
9.4	 ● Data consistent with summary quantities in the 
article referenced in the previous exercise on total 
calorie consumption on a particular day are given 
for a sample of children who did not eat fast food 
on that day and for a sample of children who did eat 
fast food on that day. Assume that it is reasonable to 
regard these samples as representative of the popula-
tion of children in the United States.
No Fast Food
2331
1918
1009
1730
1469
2053
2143
1981
1852
1777
1765
1827
1648
1506
2669
Fast Food
 2523
1758
  ​934
2328
2434
2267
2526
1195
  890
1511
  875
2207
1811
1250
2117
a.	 Use the given information to estimate the mean 
calorie intake for children in the United States on 
a day when no fast food is consumed.  ​  ​
b.	Use the given information to estimate the mean 
calorie intake for children in the United States on 
a day when fast food is consumed.  ​ ​
c.	 Use the given information to produce estimates of 
the standard deviations of calorie intake for days 
when no fast food is consumed and for days when 
fast food is consumed. 
9.5	 Each person in a random sample of 20 students at a 
particular university was asked whether he or she is 
registered to vote. The responses (R 5 registered,  
N 5 not registered) are given here:
R  R  N  R  N  N  R  R  R  N  R  R  R  R  R  N  R  R  R  N
Use these data to estimate p, the proportion of  
all students at the university who are registered 
to vote. 
9.6	 Suppose that each of 935 smokers received a nicotine 
patch, which delivers nicotine to the bloodstream but 
at a much slower rate than cigarettes do. Dosage was 
decreased to 0 over a 12-week period. Suppose that 
245 of the subjects were still not smoking 6 months 
after treatment. Assuming it is reasonable to regard 
this sample as representative of all smokers, estimate 
the percentage of all smokers who, when given this 
treatment, would refrain from smoking for at least  
6 months. 
exercises 9.1 - 9.9
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

  9.2   Large-Sample Confidence Interval for a Population Proportion 
●  467
9.7	 ● Given below are the sodium contents (in mg) for 
seven brands of hot dogs rated as “very good” by 
Consumer Reports (www.consumerreports.org):
420
470
350
360
270
550
530
a.	 Use the given data to produce a point estimate of 
m, the true mean sodium content for hot dogs.
b.	Use the given data to produce a point estimate of  
s2, the variance of sodium content for hot dogs.
c.	 Use the given data to produce an estimate of s, the 
standard deviation of sodium content. Is the sta-
tistic you used to produce your estimate unbiased? 
(Hint: See the discussion following Example 9.3.)
9.8	 ● A random sample of n 5 12 four-year-old red pine 
trees was selected, and the diameter (in inches) of 
each tree’s main stem was measured. The resulting 
observations are as follows:
11.3
10.7
12.4
15.2
10.1
12.1
16.2
10.5
11.4
11.0
10.7
12.0
a.	 Compute a point estimate of s, the population 
standard deviation of main stem diameter. What 
statistic did you use to obtain your estimate?
b.	Suppose that the diameter distribution is nor-
mal. Then the 90th percentile of the diameter 
distribution is m 1 1.28s (so 90% of all trees 
have diameters less than this value). Compute a 
point estimate for this percentile. (Hint: First com-
pute an estimate of m and then use it along with 
your estimate of s from Part (a).)
9.9	 ● A random sample of 10 houses heated with natural 
gas in a particular area is selected, and the amount 
of gas (in therms) used during the month of January 
is determined for each house. The resulting observa-
tions are as follows:
103
156
118
89
125
147
122
109
138
99
a.	 Let mJ denote the average gas usage during 
January by all houses in this area. Compute a 
point estimate of mJ.  ​ 
b.	Suppose that 10,000 houses in this area use natu-
ral gas for heating. Let t denote the total amount 
of gas used by all of these houses during January. 
Estimate t using the given data. What statistic did 
you use in computing your estimate?  ​  ​
c.	 Use the data in Part (a) to estimate p, the propor-
tion of all houses that used at least 100 therms.
d.	Give a point estimate of the population median 
usage based on the sample of Part (a). Which 
statistic did you use?  ​  ​
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
In Section 9.1, we saw how to use a statistic to produce a point estimate of a population 
characteristic. The value of a point estimate depends on which sample, out of all the pos-
sible samples, happens to be selected. Different samples usually produce different estimates 
as a result of chance differences from one sample to another. Because of sampling vari-
ability, rarely is the point estimate from a sample exactly equal to the actual value of the 
population characteristic. We hope that the chosen statistic produces an estimate that is 
close, on average, to the true value. 
Although a point estimate may represent our best single-number estimate for the value of the 
population characteristic, it is not the only plausible value. As an alternative to a point estimate, 
we can use the sample data to report an interval of plausible values for the population charac-
teristic. For example, we might be confident that for all text messages sent from cell phones, the 
proportion p of messages that are longer than 50 characters is in the interval from .53 to .57. 
The narrowness of this interval implies that we have rather precise information about the value 
of p. If, with the same high degree of confidence, we could only state that p was between .32 and 
.74, it would be clear that we had relatively imprecise knowledge of the value of p.
  9.2   Large-Sample Confidence Interval for a Population Proportion
Confidence interval: An interval of plausible values for a population 
characteristic.  
A confidence interval is constructed so that we have a chosen degree of confi-
dence that the actual value of the population characteristic will be between the 
lower and upper endpoints of the interval.
DEFINITION
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

468 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
Associated with each confidence interval is a confidence level. The confidence level pro-
vides information on how much “confidence” we can have in the method used to construct 
the interval estimate (not our confidence in any one particular interval). 
Usual choices for confidence levels are 90%, 95%, and 99%, although other confidence 
levels are also possible. If we were to construct a 95% confidence interval using the method 
to be described shortly, we would be using a method that is “successful” 95% of the time. 
This means that if this method was used to generate an interval estimate over and over 
again with different random samples, in the long run 95% of the resulting intervals would 
include the actual value of the characteristic being estimated. Similarly, a 99% confidence 
interval is one that is constructed using a method that is, in the long run, successful in 
capturing the actual value of the population characteristic 99% of the time.
Confidence level: The success rate of the method used to construct a confidence 
interval.
DEFINITION
One goal of many statistical studies is to estimate the proportion of individuals or objects 
in a population that possess a particular property of interest (whatever we have defined as 
a “success”). For example, a university administrator might be interested in the proportion 
of students who prefer a new registration system to the previous registration method. In 
a different setting, a quality control engineer might be concerned about the proportion of 
defective parts produced by a particular manufacturing process.
Recall that p denotes the proportion of the population that possess the property of 
interest (successes). Previously, we used the sample proportion
p⁄ 5 number in the sample that possess the property of interest
n
to calculate a point estimate of p. We can also use p⁄  to construct a confidence interval  
for p.
Although a small-sample confidence interval for p can be obtained, our focus is on the 
large-sample case. The construction of the large-sample interval is based on properties of 
the sampling distribution of the statistic p⁄: 
1.	The sampling distribution of p⁄  is centered at p. This means that mp⁄ 5 p, so p⁄  is an 
unbiased statistic for estimating p.
2.	As long as the sample size is less than 10% of the population size, the standard 
deviation of p⁄ is well approximated by sp⁄ 5Î
ps1 2 pd
n
3.	As long as n is large (np $ 10 and n(1 2 p) $ 10), the sampling distribution of  
p⁄  is well approximated by a normal curve.
The accompanying box summarizes these properties.
When n is large and the sample size is less than 10% of the population size, the 
statistic p⁄ has a sampling distribution that is approximately 
normal with mean p and standard deviation Î
p(1 2 p)
n
.
The development of a confidence interval for p is easier to follow if we begin by selecting 
a particular confidence level. For a confidence level of 95%, the table of standard normal 
(z) curve areas (Appendix Table 2) can be used to determine a value z* such that a central 
area of .95 falls between 2z* and z*. In this case, the remaining area of .05 is divided 
equally between the two tails, as shown in Figure 9.2. The total area to the left of the 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

  9.2   Large-Sample Confidence Interval for a Population Proportion 
●  469
Generalizing this result to normal distributions other than the standard normal distri-
bution tells us that for any normal distribution, about 95% of the values are within 1.96 
standard deviations of the mean. For large random samples, the sampling distribution of  
p⁄ is approximately normal with mean mp⁄ 5 p and standard deviation sp⁄ 5Î
ps1 2 pd
n
, 
and we get the following result.
When n is large, approximately 95% of all random samples of size n will result in a 
value of p⁄ that is within 1.96sp⁄ 5 1.96Î
ps1 2 pd
n
 of the actual value of the 
population proportion p.
If p⁄ is within 1.96Î
ps1 2 pd
n
 of p, this means the interval
p⁄ 2 1.96Î
ps1 2 pd
n  to  p⁄ 1 1.96Î
ps1 2 pd
n
will capture p. This will happen for 95% of all possible samples. However, if p⁄ is farther away 
from p than 1.96Î
ps1 2 pd
n
 (which will happen for about 5% of all possible samples), the 
interval will not include the value of p. This is shown in Figure 9.3.
desired z* is .975 (.95 central area 1 .025 area below 2z*). By locating .9750 in the body 
of Appendix Table 2, we find that the corresponding z critical value is z* 5 1.96.
Figure  9.2
​Capturing a central area of .95 under 
the z curve.
Central area 5 .95
Upper-tail
area 5 .025
Lower-tail
area 5 .025
2z* 5 21.96
z* 5 1.96
Figure  9.3
The population proportion p is 
captured in the interval from 
p⁄ 2 1.96Î
p(1 2 p)
n
 to 
p⁄ 1 1.96Î
p(1 2 pd
n
 when 
p⁄ is within 1.96Î
p(1 2 p)
n
 of p.
(
)
(
)
Approximate
sampling distribution
of ˆp
p(1 2 p)
–––––––
n
1.96
 p(1 2 p)
  ––––––_–
n
ˆp 2 1.96
 p(1 2 p)
 ––––––_–
n
ˆp 2 1.96
 p(1 2 p)
 ––––––_–
n
ˆp 1 1.96
 p(1 2 p)
 ––––––_–
n
ˆp 1 1.96
p(1 2 p)
–––––––
n
p
1.96
ˆp
ˆp
interval
captures p
interval does
not capture p 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

470 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
Because p⁄ is within 1.96sp⁄ of p for 95% of all possible random samples, this means that 
in repeated random sampling, 95% of the intervals
p⁄ 2 1.96Î
ps1 2 pd
n  to p⁄ 1 1.96Î
ps1 2 pd
n
will contain p.
Since the value of p is unknown, Î
ps1 2 pd
n
 must be estimated. As long as the sample 
size is large, the value of Î
p⁄s1 2 p⁄d
n
 can be used in place of Î
ps1 2 pd
n
.
When n is large, a 95% conﬁdence interval for p is 
1p⁄ 2 1.96Î
p⁄(1 2 p⁄)
n
,  p⁄ 1 1.96Î
p⁄(1 2 p⁄)
n 2
An abbreviated formula for the interval is 
p⁄ 6 1.96Î
p⁄(1 2 p⁄)
n
where p⁄ 1 1.96Î
p⁄(1 2 p⁄)
n
 gives the upper endpoint of the interval and 
p⁄ 2 1.96Î
p⁄(1 2 p⁄)
n
 gives the lower endpoint of the interval.
The interval can be used as long as 
1.	 np⁄ $ 10 and n(1 2 p⁄) $ 10,
2.	 the sample size is less than 10% of the population size if sampling is without  
replacement, and
3.	 the sample can be regarded as a random sample from the population of interest.
Example 9.4 
College Education Essential for Success?
The article “How Well Are U.S. Colleges Run?” (USA Today, February 17, 2010) describes a sur-
vey of 1031 adult Americans. The survey was carried out by the National Center for Public 
Policy and the sample was selected in a way that makes it reasonable to regard the sample 
as representative of adult Americans. Of those surveyed, 567 indicated that they believed a 
college education is essential for success. 
With p denoting the proportion of all adult Americans who believe that a college educa-
tion is essential for success, a point estimate of p is
p⁄ 5 567
1031 5 .55
Before computing a confidence interval to estimate p, we should check to make sure that 
the three necessary conditions are met:
1.	np⁄ 5 1031s.55d 5 567 and ns1 2 p⁄d 5 1031s1 2 .55d 5 1031s.45d 5 364 are 
both greater than or equal to 10, so the sample size is large enough to proceed.
2.	The sample size of n ​5 ​1031 is much smaller than 10% of the population size (the 
number of adult Americans).
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

  9.2   Large-Sample Confidence Interval for a Population Proportion 
●  471
3.	The sample was selected in a way designed to produce a representative sample. So, 
it is reasonable to regard the sample as a random sample from the population.
Because all three conditions are met, it is appropriate to use the sample data to construct a 
95% confidence interval for p.
A 95% confidence interval for p is
 p⁄ 6 1.96Î
p⁄s1 2 p⁄d
n
5 .55 6 1.96Î
s.55ds1 2 .55d
1031
	
5 .55 6 s1.96ds.015d
	
5 .55 6 .029
	
5 s.521, .579d
Based on this sample, we can be 95% confident that p, the proportion of adult Americans 
who believe a college education is essential for success, is between .521 and .579. We used 
a method to construct this estimate that in the long run will successfully capture the actual 
value of p 95% of the time.	
■
The 95% confidence interval for p calculated in Example 9.4 is (.521, .579). It is tempt-
ing to say that there is a “probability” of .95 that p is between .521 and .579. Do not yield to 
this temptation! The 95% refers to the percentage of all possible samples resulting in an in-
terval that includes the value of p. In other words, if we take random sample after random 
sample from the population and use each one separately to compute a 95% confidence 
interval, in the long run roughly 95% of these intervals will capture the value of p. 
Figure 9.4 illustrates this concept for intervals generated from 100 different random 
samples. In this particular set of 100 intervals, 93 include p, whereas 7 do not. Any 
specific interval, and our interval (.521, .579) in particular, either includes p or it does not 
(remember, the value of p is fixed but not known to us). We cannot make a chance (prob-
ability) statement concerning this particular interval. The confidence level 95% refers to the 
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Figure  9.4
One hundred 95% confidence intervals 
for p computed from 100 different 
random samples (asterisks identify 
intervals that do not include p).
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
p
p
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

472 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
Why settle for 95% confidence when 99% confidence is possible? Because the higher 
confidence level comes at a price. The resulting interval is wider than the 95% interval. 
The width of the 95% interval is 211.96Î
p⁄s1 2 p⁄d
n 2, whereas the 99% interval has width 
212.58Î
p⁄s1 2 p⁄d
n 2. The higher reliability of the 99% interval (where “reliability” is speci-
fied by the confidence level) entails a loss in precision (as indicated by the wider interval). 
In the opinion of many investigators, a 95% confidence interval produces a reasonable 
compromise between reliability and precision.
method used to construct the interval rather than to any particular interval, such as the one we 
obtained.
The formula given for a 95% confidence interval can easily be adapted for other con-
fidence levels. The choice of a 95% confidence level led to the use of the z value 1.96 
(chosen to capture a central area of .95 under the standard normal curve) in the confidence 
interval formula. Any other confidence level can be obtained by using an appropriate  
z critical value in place of 1.96. 
For example, suppose that we wanted to achieve a confidence level of 99%. To obtain a 
central area of .99, the appropriate z critical value would have a cumulative area (area to 
the left) of .995, as illustrated in Figure 9.5. From Appendix Table 2, we find that the cor-
responding z critical value is z 5 2.58. A 99% confidence interval for p is then obtained by 
using 2.58 in place of 1.96 in the formula for the 95% confidence interval.
Figure  9.5
Finding the z critical value for a 99% 
confidence level.
central area
.99
2z*
z*
Cumulative area 5 .995
5 .005
.01
2
.01
2
5 .005
lower-tail area
upper-tail area
The general formula for a confidence interval for a population proportion p when
1.	 p⁄ is the sample proportion from a simple random sample, 
2.	 the sample size n is large (np⁄ $ 10 and n(1 2 p⁄) $ 10), and
3.	 if the sample is selected without replacement, the sample size is small relative to the population size (n is 
at most 10% of the population size)*
is 
p⁄ 6 sz critical valuedÎ
p⁄s1 2 p⁄d
n
The desired confidence level determines which z critical value is used. The three most commonly used confi-
dence levels, 90%, 95%, and 99%, use z critical values 1.645, 1.96, and 2.58, respectively.
Note: This interval is not appropriate for small samples. It is possible to construct a confidence interval in the 
small-sample case, but this is beyond the scope of this textbook.
*In Chapter 7, we saw a different situation where a similar condition is introduced, but where the requirement was that at most 5% of the 
population is included in the sample. Be careful not to confuse these two rules.
The Large-Sample Confidence Interval for p
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

  9.2   Large-Sample Confidence Interval for a Population Proportion 
●  473
Example 9.5 
Dangerous Driving
The article “Nine Out of Ten Drivers Admit in Survey to Hav-
ing Done Something Dangerous” (Knight Ridder Newspapers, 
July 8, 2005) reported the results of a survey of 1100 driv-
ers. Of those surveyed, 990 admitted to careless or aggressive 
driving during the previous 6 months. Assuming that it is 
reasonable to regard this sample of 1100 as representative of 
the population of drivers, we can use this information to con-
struct an estimate of p, the proportion of all drivers who have 
engaged in careless or aggressive driving in the past 6 months.
For this sample
p⁄ 5 990
1100 5 .900
Because the sample size is less than 10% of the population size and np⁄ 5 990 and n(1 2 p⁄) 5 
110 are both greater than or equal to 10, the conditions necessary for appropriate use of 
the formula for a large-sample confidence interval are met. 
A 90% confidence interval for p is then
p⁄ 6 sz critical valuedÎ
p⁄s1 2 p⁄d
n
5 .900 6 1.645Î
s.900ds.100d
1100
	
5 .900 6 s1.645ds.009d
	
5 .900 6 .015
	
5 s.885, .915d
Based on these sample data, we can be 90% confident that the proportion of all drivers  
who have engaged in careless or aggressive driving in the past 6 months is between  
.885 and .915. We have used a method to construct this interval estimate that has a  
10% error rate.	
■
The confidence level for the z confidence interval for a population proportion is 
only approximate. When we report a 95% confidence interval for a population pro-
portion, the 95% confidence level implies that we have used a method that produc-
es an interval that includes the actual value of the population proportion 95% of the 
time in repeated random sampling. In fact, because the normal distribution is only  
an approximation to the sampling distribution of p⁄, the actual confidence level 
may differ somewhat from the reported value. If the conditions (1) np⁄ $ 10 and  
n(1 2 p⁄) $ 10 and (2) n is at most 10% of the population size if sampling without replace-
ment are met, the normal approximation is reasonable and the actual confidence level 
is usually not too different from the reported level. This is why it is important to check 
these conditions before computing and reporting a large-sample z confidence interval for 
a population proportion.
What should you do if these conditions are not met? If the sample size is too small to 
satisfy the np⁄ and n(1 2 p⁄) greater than or equal to 10 condition, an alternative procedure 
can be used. Consult a statistician or a more advanced textbook in this case. If the condi-
tion that the sample size is less than 10% of the population size when sampling without 
replacement is not satisfied, the large-sample z confidence interval tends to be conservative 
(that is, it tends to be wider than is necessary to achieve the desired confidence level). In 
this case, a finite population correction factor can be used to obtain a more precise interval. 
Again, it would be wise to consult a statistician or a more advanced textbook.
An Alternative to the Large-Sample z Interval
Investigators have shown that in some instances, even when the sample size conditions 
of the large-sample z confidence interval for a population proportion are met, the actual 
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
 Wilfried Krecichwost /The Image Bank/Getty Images 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

474 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
confidence level associated with the method may be noticeably different from the reported 
confidence level. 
A modified interval that has an actual confidence level that is closer to the reported con-
fidence level is based on a modified sample proportion, p⁄
mod, the proportion of successes 
after adding two successes and two failures to the sample. Then p⁄
mod is
p⁄
mod 5 number of successes 1 2
n 1 4
p⁄
mod is used in place of p⁄ in the usual confidence interval formula. Properties of this modi-
fied confidence interval are investigated in Activity 9.2 at the end of the chapter.
General Form of a Confidence Interval
Many confidence intervals have the same general form as the large-sample z confidence 
interval for p just considered. We started with a statistic p⁄, from which a point estimate for 
p was obtained. The standard deviation of this statistic is Ïps1 2 pdyn. This resulted in a 
confidence interval of the form
1
point estimate using
a specified statistic2 6 scritical valued1
standard deviation
of the statistic 2
Because p was unknown, we estimated the standard deviation of the statistic by Ïp⁄s1 2 p⁄dyn, 
which yielded an interval of the form
1
point estimate using
a specified statistic2 6 scritical valued1
estimated
standard deviation
of the statistic 2
For a population characteristic other than p, a statistic for estimating the characteristic 
is selected. Then (drawing on statistical theory) a formula for the standard deviation of the 
statistic is given. In practice, it is almost always necessary to estimate this standard devia-
tion, so that the interval
1
point estimate using
a specified statistic2 6 scritical valued1
estimated
standard deviation
of the statistic 2 
is the prototype confidence interval. It is common practice to refer to both the standard de-
viation of a statistic and the estimated standard deviation of a statistic as the standard error. 
In this textbook, when we use the term standard error, we mean the estimated standard 
deviation of a statistic.
Standard error: The estimated standard deviation of a statistic.
DEFINITION
The 95% confidence interval for p is based on the fact that, for approximately 95% of 
all random samples, p⁄ is within 1.96Î
ps1 2 pd
n
 of p. The quantity 1.96Î
ps1 2 pd
n
 is 
sometimes called the bound on the error of estimation associated with a 95% confidence 
level. This means that we have 95% confidence that the point estimate p⁄ is no farther than 
this quantity from p.
Bound on error: If the sampling distribution of a statistic is (at least approxi-
mately) normal, the bound on error of estimation, B, associated with a 95% 
confidence interval is (1.96)?(standard error of the statistic).
DEFINITION
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

  9.2   Large-Sample Confidence Interval for a Population Proportion 
●  475
Choosing the Sample Size
Before collecting any data, an investigator may wish to determine a sample size for which a 
particular value of the bound on the error is achieved. For example, with p representing the 
actual proportion of students at a university who purchase textbooks online, the objective 
of an investigation may be to estimate p to within .05 with 95% confidence. 
The value of n necessary to achieve this is obtained by setting 1.96Î
ps1 2 pd
n
 equal to 
.05 and solving for n.
In general, suppose that we wish to estimate p to within an amount B (the specified 
bound on the error of estimation) with 95% confidence. To find the necessary sample size, 
consider the equation
B 5 1.96Î
ps1 2 pd
n
Solving this equation for n results in
n 5 ps1 2 pd1
1.96
B 2
2
Unfortunately, the use of this formula requires the value of p, which is unknown. One pos-
sible way to proceed is to carry out a preliminary study and use the resulting data to get a 
rough estimate of p. In other cases, prior knowledge may suggest a reasonable estimate of p. 
If there is no reasonable basis for estimating p and a preliminary study is not feasible, a 
conservative solution follows from the observation that p(1 2 p) is never larger than .25 (its 
value when p 5 .5). Replacing p(1 2 p) with .25, the maximum value, yields
n 5 .251
1.96
B 2
2
Using this formula to obtain n gives us a sample size for which we can be 95% confident 
that p⁄ will be within B of p, no matter what the value of p.
The sample size required to estimate a population proportion p to within an 
amount B with 95% confidence is 
n 5 p(1 2 p)1
1.96
B 2
2
The value of p may be estimated using prior information. In the absence of any 
such information, using p 5 .5 in this formula gives a conservatively large value 
for the required sample size (this value of p gives a larger n than would any 
other value).
Example 9.6 
Sniffing Out Cancer
Researchers have found biochemical markers of cancer in the exhaled breath of cancer 
patients, but chemical analysis of breath specimens has not yet proven effective in clinical 
diagnosis. The authors of the paper “Diagnostic Accuracy of Canine Scent Detection in Early- 
and Late-Stage Lung and Breast Cancers” (Integrative Cancer Therapies [2006]: 1–10) describe 
a study to investigate whether dogs can be trained to identify the presence or absence of 
cancer by sniffing breath specimens. 
Suppose we want to collect data that would allow us to estimate the long-run proportion 
of accurate identifications for a particular dog that has completed training. The dog has 
been trained to lie down when presented with a breath specimen from a cancer patient and 
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

476 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
to remain standing when presented with a specimen from a person who does not have can-
cer. How many different breath specimens should be used if we want to estimate the long-
run proportion of correct identifications for this dog to within .05 with 95% confidence?
Using a conservative value of p 5 .5 in the formula for required sample size gives
n 5 ps1 2 pd1
1.96
B 2
2
5 s.5ds.5d1
1.96
.052
2
5 384.16
Thus, a sample of at least 385 breath specimens should be used. Notice that in sample size 
calculations, we always round up.
■
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
exercises 9.10 - 9.33
9.10	 ▼ For each of the following choices, explain which 
would result in a wider large-sample confidence 
interval for p. (Hint: Consider the confidence interval 
formula.)
a.	 90% confidence level or 95% confidence level
b.	n 5 100 or n 5 400  ​  ​
9.11	 The formula used to compute a large-sample confi-
dence interval for p is
p⁄ 6 sz critical valuedÎ
p⁄s1 2 p⁄d
n
What is the appropriate z critical value for each of 
the following confidence levels?
a.	 95%  ​  ​
	
d.  80%  ​  ​
b.	90%  ​  ​
	
e.  85%  ​  ​
c.	 99%  ​  ​
9.12	 The use of the interval
p⁄ 6 sz critical valuedÎ
p⁄s1 2 p⁄d
n
requires a large sample. For each of the following com-
binations of n and p⁄, indicate whether the sample size is 
large enough for use of this interval to be appropriate.
a.	 n 5 50 and p⁄ 5 .30  ​  ​
	
b.	n 5 50 and p⁄ 5 .05  ​  ​
	
c.	 n 5 15 and p⁄ 5 .45  ​  ​
	
d.	n 5 100 and p⁄ 5 .01  ​  ​
e.	 n 5 100 and p⁄ 5 .70  ​  ​
f.	 n 5 40 and p⁄ 5 .25  ​  ​
g.	 n 5 60 and p⁄ 5 .25  ​  ​
h.	n 5 80 and p⁄ 5 .10  ​  ​
9.13	 Discuss how each of the following factors affects the 
width of the confidence interval for p. (Hint: Con-
sider the confidence interval formula.)
a.	 The confidence level
b.	The sample size
c.	 The value of p⁄ 
9.14	 The article “Career Expert Provides DOs and DON’Ts 
for Job Seekers on Social Networking” (CareerBuilder 
.com, August 19, 2009) included data from a survey of 
2667 hiring managers and human resource profes-
sionals. The article noted that many employers are 
using social networks to screen job applicants and 
that this practice is becoming more common. Of the 
2667 people who participated in the survey, 1200 
indicated that they use social networking sites (such 
as Facebook, MySpace, and LinkedIn) to research job 
applicants. 
For the purposes of this exercise, assume that 
the sample is representative of hiring managers and 
human resource professionals. Construct and inter-
pret a 95% confidence interval for the proportion of 
hiring managers and human resource professionals 
who use social networking sites to research job 
applicants. (Hint: See Example 9.4.)
9.15	 Based on data from a survey of 1200 randomly 
selected Facebook users (USA Today, March 24, 2010), 
the following is a 90% confidence interval for the 
proportion of all Facebook users who say it is not 
OK to “friend” someone who reports to you at work:  
(0.60, 0.64). What is the meaning of the 90% confi-
dence level associated with this interval? 
9.16	 In a survey on supernatural experiences, 722 of 4013 
adult Americans surveyed reported that they had 
seen or been with a ghost (“What Supernatural Experi-
ences We’ve Had,” USA Today, February 8, 2010).
a.	 What assumption must be made in order for it to 
be appropriate to use the formula of this section 
to construct a confidence interval to estimate the 
proportion of all adult Americans who have seen 
or been with a ghost?
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

  9.2   Large-Sample Confidence Interval for a Population Proportion 
●  477
b.	Construct and interpret a 90% confidence 
interval for the proportion of all adult Americans 
who have seen or been with a ghost. (Hint: See 
Example 9.5.) 
c.	 Would a 99% confidence interval be narrower 
or wider than the interval computed in Part (b)? 
Justify your answer. 
9.17	 If a hurricane was headed your way, would you evac-
uate? The headline of a press release issued January 21,  
2009 by the survey research company International 
Communications Research (icrsurvey.com) states, 
“Thirty-one Percent of People on High-Risk Coast 
Will Refuse Evacuation Order, Survey of Hurricane 
Preparedness Finds.” This headline was based on a 
survey of 5046 adults who live within 20 miles of the 
coast in high hurricane risk counties of eight south-
ern states. In selecting the sample, care was taken to 
ensure that the sample would be representative of the 
population of coastal residents in these states. 
a.	 Use this information to estimate the proportion of 
coastal residents who would evacuate using a 98% 
confidence interval. 
b.	Write a few sentences interpreting the interval and 
the confidence level associated with the interval.
9.18	 The study “Digital Footprints” (Pew Internet & American 
Life Project, www.pewinternet.org, 2007) reported that 
47% of Internet users have searched for information 
about themselves online. The 47% figure was based 
on a random sample of Internet users. For purposes  
of this exercise, suppose that the sample size was  
n ​5 ​300 (the actual sample size was much larger). 
Construct and interpret a 90% confidence inter-
val for the proportion of Internet users who have 
searched online for information about themselves.
9.19	 The article “Kids Digital Day: Almost 8 Hours” (USA 
Today, January 20, 2010) summarized results from a 
national survey of 2002 Americans age 8 to 18. The 
sample was selected in a way that was expected to 
result in a sample representative of Americans in this 
age group. 
a.	 Of those surveyed, 1321 reported owning a cell 
phone. Use this information to construct and 
interpret a 90% confidence interval estimate of the 
proportion of all Americans age 8 to 18 who own 
a cell phone. 
b.	Of those surveyed, 1522 reported owning an MP3 
music player. Use this information to construct 
and interpret a 90% confidence interval estimate 
of the proportion of all Americans age 8 to 18 who 
own an MP3 music player. 
c.	 Explain why the confidence interval from Part (b) 
is narrower than the confidence interval from 
Part (a) even though the confidence level and the 
sample size used to compute the two intervals was 
the same.
9.20	 The article “Students Increasingly Turn to Credit 
Cards” (San Luis Obispo Tribune, July 21, 2006) reported 
that 37% of college freshmen and 48% of college 
seniors carry a credit card balance from month to 
month. Suppose that the reported percentages were 
based on random samples of 1000 college freshmen 
and 1000 college seniors.
a.	 Construct a 90% confidence interval for the pro-
portion of college freshmen who carry a credit card 
balance from month to month.  ​  ​
b.	Construct a 90% confidence interval for the pro-
portion of college seniors who carry a credit card 
balance from month to month.  ​  ​
c.	 Explain why the two 90% confidence intervals 
from Parts (a) and (b) are not the same width.
9.21	 ▼ The article “CSI Effect Has Juries Wanting More 
Evidence” (USA Today, August 5, 2004) examines how 
the popularity of crime-scene investigation television 
shows is influencing jurors’ expectations of what 
evidence should be produced at a trial. In a survey of 
500 potential jurors, one study found that 350 were 
regular watchers of at least one crime-scene forensics 
television series.
a.	 Assuming that it is reasonable to regard this 
sample of 500 potential jurors as representative 
of potential jurors in the United States, use the 
given information to construct and interpret a 
95% confidence interval for the proportion of all 
potential jurors who regularly watch at least one 
crime-scene investigation series.  ​  ​
b.	Would a 99% confidence interval be wider or 
narrower than the 95% confidence interval from 
Part (a)?  ​  ​ 
9.22	 In a survey of 1000 randomly selected adults in 
the United States, participants were asked what 
their most favorite and what their least favorite 
subject was when they were in school (Associated 
Press, August 17, 2005). In what might seem like a 
contradiction, math was chosen more often than any 
other subject in both categories! Math was chosen 
by 230 of the 1000 as the favorite subject, and it was 
also chosen by 370 of the 1000 as the least favorite 
subject.
a.	 Construct a 95% confidence interval for the 
proportion of U.S. adults for whom math was the 
favorite subject in school.  ​  ​
b.	Construct a 95% confidence interval for the 
proportion of U.S. adults for whom math was the 
least favorite subject.  ​  ​
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

478 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
9.23	 The report “2005 Electronic Monitoring & Surveillance 
Survey: Many Companies Monitoring, Recording, 
Videotaping—and Firing—Employees” (American 
Management Association, 2005) summarized the 
results of a survey of 526 U.S. businesses. The report 
stated that 137 of the 526 businesses had fired 
workers for misuse of the Internet and 131 had fired 
workers for e-mail misuse. For purposes of this exer-
cise, assume that it is reasonable to regard this sample 
as representative of businesses in the United States.
a.	 Construct and interpret a 95% confidence interval 
for the proportion of U.S. businesses that have 
fired workers for misuse of the Internet.
b.	What are two reasons why a 90% confidence 
interval for the proportion of U.S. businesses that 
have fired workers for misuse of e-mail would be 
narrower than the 95% confidence interval com-
puted in Part (a)?
9.24	 In an AP-AOL sports poll (Associated Press, Decem-
ber 18, 2005), 394 of 1000 randomly selected U.S. 
adults indicated that they considered themselves to 
be baseball fans. Of the 394 baseball fans, 272 stated 
that they thought the designated hitter rule should 
either be expanded to both baseball leagues or  
eliminated.
a.	 Construct a 95% confidence interval for the pro-
portion of U.S. adults who consider themselves to 
be baseball fans.  ​  ​
  ​
b.	Construct a 95% confidence interval for the pro-
portion of those who consider themselves to be 
baseball fans who think the designated hitter rule 
should be expanded to both leagues or eliminated. 
c.	 Explain why the confidence intervals of Parts (a) 
and (b) are not the same width even though they 
both have a confidence level of 95%. 
9.25	 The article “Viewers Speak Out Against Reality TV” 
(Associated Press, September 12, 2005) included the 
following statement: “Few people believe there’s much 
reality in reality TV: a total of 82% said the shows are 
either ‘totally made up’ or ‘mostly distorted.’ ” This 
statement was based on a survey of 1002 randomly 
selected adults. Compute and interpret a bound on 
the error of estimation for the reported proportion 
of .82. (Hint: See the definition of bound on error.) 
9.26	 One thousand randomly selected adult Americans 
participated in a survey conducted by the Associ-
ated Press (June 2006). When asked “Do you think it 
is sometimes justified to lie or do you think lying is 
never justified?” 52% responded that lying was never 
justified. When asked about lying to avoid hurting 
someone’s feelings, 650 responded that this was often 
or sometimes okay.​
a.	 Construct a 90% confidence interval for the 
proportion of adult Americans who think lying is 
never justified. 
b.	Construct a 90% confidence interval for the 
proportion of adult Americans who think that it 
is often or sometimes okay to lie to avoid hurting 
someone’s feelings. 
c.	 Comment on the apparent inconsistency in the 
responses given by the individuals in this sample.
9.27	 USA Today (October 14, 2002) reported that 36% of 
adult drivers admit that they often or sometimes 
talk on a cell phone when driving. This estimate was 
based on data from a sample of 1004 adult drivers, 
and a bound on the error of estimation of 3.1% was 
reported. Assuming a 95% confidence level, do you 
agree with the reported bound on the error? Explain.
9.28	 The Gallup Organization conducts an annual survey 
on crime. It was reported that 25% of all households 
experienced some sort of crime during the past 
year. This estimate was based on a sample of 1002 
randomly selected households. The report states, 
“One can say with 95% confidence that the margin 
of sampling error is 63 percentage points.” Explain 
how this statement can be justified.
9.29	 The article “Hospitals Dispute Medtronic Data on 
Wires” (The Wall Street Journal, February 4, 2010) 
describes several studies of the failure rate of defibril-
lators used in the treatment of heart problems. In one 
study conducted by the Mayo Clinic, it was reported 
that failures were experienced within the first 
2 years by 18 of 89 patients under 50 years old and 
13 of 362 patients age 50 and older who received a 
particular type of defibrillator. Assume it is reason-
able to regard these two samples as representative of 
patients in the two age groups who receive this type 
of defibrillator.
a.	 Construct and interpret a 95% confidence interval 
for the proportion of patients under 50 years old 
who experience a failure within the first 2 years after 
receiving this type of defibrillator. 
b.	Construct and interpret a 99% confidence interval 
for the proportion of patients age 50 and older who 
experience a failure within the first 2 years after 
receiving this type of defibrillator. 
c.	 Suppose that the researchers wanted to estimate 
the proportion of patients under 50 years old 
who experience a failure within the first 2 years 
after receiving this type of defibrillator to within 
.03 with 95% confidence. How large a sample 
should be used? Use the results of the study as a 
preliminary estimate of the population proportion. 
(Hint: See Example 9.6.) 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   9.3    Confidence Interval for a Population Mean 
●  479
9.30	 Based on a representative sample of 511 U.S. teen-
agers age 12 to 17, International Communications 
Research estimated that the proportion of teens who 
support keeping the legal drinking age at 21 is p⁄ ​5 ​
0.64 (64%). The press release titled “Majority of Teens 
(Still) Favor the Legal Drinking Age” (www.icrsurvey 
.com, January 21, 2009) also reported a margin of error 
of 0.04 (4%) for this estimate. Show how the reported 
value for the margin of error was computed. 
9.31	 A discussion of digital ethics appears in the article 
“Academic Cheating, Aided by Cell Phones or Web, 
Shown to be Common” (Los Angeles Times, June 17, 
2009). One question posed in the article is: What 
proportion of college students have used cell phones 
to cheat on an exam? Suppose you have been asked 
to estimate this proportion for students enrolled at a 
large university. How many students should you in-
clude in your sample if you want to estimate this pro-
portion to within .02 with 95% confidence? 
9.32	 In spite of the potential safety hazards, some people 
would like to have an Internet connection in their 
car. A preliminary survey of adult Americans 
has estimated this proportion to be somewhere 
around .30 (USA Today, May 1, 2009).
a.	 Use the given preliminary estimate to determine the 
sample size required to estimate the proportion of 
adult Americans who would like an Internet connec-
tion in their car to within .02 with 95% confidence.
b.	The formula for determining sample size given 
in this section corresponds to a confidence level 
of 95%. How would you modify this formula if a 
99% confidence level was desired?
c.	 Use the given preliminary estimate to determine the 
sample size required to estimate the proportion of 
adult Americans who would like an Internet connec-
tion in their car to within .02 with 99% confidence. 
9.33	 Data from a survey of a representative sample was 
used to estimate that 32% of computer users in 2011 
had tried to get on a Wi-Fi network that was not their 
own in order to save money (USA Today, May 16, 2011). 
Suppose you decide to conduct a survey to estimate 
this proportion for the current year. What is the 
required sample size if you want to estimate this pro-
portion with a margin of error of 0.05? Compute the 
required sample size first using 0.32 as a preliminary 
estimate of p and then using the conservative value 
of 0.5. How do the two sample sizes compare? What 
sample size would you recommend for this study?
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
   9.3   
Confidence Interval for a Population Mean
In this section, we consider how to use information from a random sample to construct a 
confidence interval estimate of a population mean, m. We begin by considering the case 
in which s, the population standard deviation, is known and the sample size n is large 
enough for the Central Limit Theorem to apply. In this case, the following three properties 
about the sampling distribution of x hold:
1.	The sampling distribution of x is centered at m, so x is an unbiased statistic for 
estimating m smx 5 md.
2.	The standard deviation of x is sx 5 s
Ïn.
3.	As long as n is large (generally n $ 30), the sampling distribution of x is approxi-
mately normal, even when the population distribution itself is not normal.
The same reasoning that was used to develop the large-sample confidence interval for a 
population proportion p can be used to obtain a confidence interval estimate for m.
The general formula for a confidence interval for a population mean m when
1.	 ​x is the sample mean from a simple random sample,
2.	 the sample size n is large (generally n $ 30), and
3.	 s, the population standard deviation, is known
is
x 6 sz critical valued1
s
Ïn2
The One-Sample z Confidence Interval for m
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

480 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
Example 9.7 
Cosmic Radiation
Cosmic radiation levels rise with increasing altitude, prompting researchers to consider 
how pilots and flight crews might be affected by increased exposure to cosmic radiation. 
The paper “Estimated Cosmic Radiation Doses for Flight Personnel” (Space Medicine and 
Medical Engineering [2002]: 265–269) reported a mean annual cosmic radiation dose of 219 
mrems for a sample of flight personnel of Xinjiang Airlines. Suppose that this mean was 
based on a random sample of 100 flight crew members.
Let m denote the mean annual cosmic radiation exposure for all Xinjiang Airlines flight 
crew members. Although s, the true population standard deviation, is not usually known, 
suppose for illustrative purposes that s 5 35 mrem is known. Because the sample size is 
large and s is known, a 95% confidence interval for m is
x 6 sz critical valued1
s
Ïn2 5 219 6 s1.96d1
35
Ï1002
	
5 219 6 6.86
	
5 s212.14, 225.86d
Based on this sample, plausible values of m, the actual mean annual cosmic radiation 
exposure for Xinjaing Airlines flight crew members, are between 212.14 and 225.86 
mrem. A 95% confidence level is associated with the method used to produce this interval 
estimate.	
■
The confidence interval just introduced is appropriate when s is known and n is large, 
and it can be used regardless of the shape of the population distribution. This is because 
this confidence interval is based on the Central Limit Theorem, which says that when n is 
sufficiently large, the sampling distribution of x is approximately normal for any popula-
tion distribution. 
When n is small, the Central Limit Theorem cannot be used to justify the normality 
of the x sampling distribution, so the z confidence interval can not be used. One way to 
proceed in the small-sample case is to make a specific assumption about the shape of the 
population distribution and then to use a method that is valid under this assumption.
One instance where this is easy to do is when it is reasonable to believe that the popula-
tion distribution is normal in shape. Recall that for a normal population distribution the 
sampling distribution of x is normal even for small sample sizes. So, if n is small but the 
population distribution is normal, the same confidence interval formula just introduced 
can still be used.
If it is reasonable to believe that the distribution of values in the population is 
normal, a confidence interval for m (when s is known) is
x 6 (z critical value)1
s
Ïn2
This interval is appropriate even when n is small, as long as it is reasonable to 
think that the population distribution is normal in shape.
There are several ways that sample data can be used to assess the plausibility of normal-
ity. Two common ways are to look at a normal probability plot of the sample data (looking 
for a plot that is reasonably straight) or to construct a dotplot or a boxplot of the data (look-
ing for approximate symmetry and no outliers).
Confidence Interval for m When s Is Unknown
The confidence interval just developed has an obvious drawback: To compute the interval 
endpoints, s must be known. Unfortunately, this is rarely the case in practice. We now 
Understand the context ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   9.3    Confidence Interval for a Population Mean 
●  481
turn our attention to the situation when s is unknown. The development of the confidence 
interval in this instance depends on the assumption that the population distribution is 
normal. This assumption is not critical if the sample size is large, but it is important when 
the sample size is small.
To understand the derivation of this confidence interval, begin by taking another look 
at the previous 95% confidence interval. We know that mx 5 m and sx 5 s
Ïn. Also, when 
the population distribution is normal, the x distribution is normal. These facts imply that 
the standardized variable
z 5 x 2 m
s
Ïn
has approximately a standard normal distribution. Because the interval from 21.96 to 1.96 
captures an area of .95 under the z curve, approximately 95% of all samples result in an  
x value that satisfies
21.96 , x 2 m
s
Ïn
, 1.96
Manipulating these inequalities to isolate m in the middle results in the equivalent 
inequalities:
x 2 1.961
s
Ïn2 , m , x 1 1.961
s
Ïn2
The term x 2 1.961
s
Ïn2 is the lower endpoint of the 95% large-sample confidence interval 
for m, and x 1 1.961
s
Ïn2 is the upper endpoint.
If s is unknown, we must use the sample data to estimate s. If we use the sample stan-
dard deviation as our estimate, the result is a different standardized variable denoted by t:
t 5 x 2 m
s
Ïn
The value of s may not be all that close to s, especially when n is small. As a conse-
quence, the use of s in place of s introduces extra variability. The value of z varies from 
sample to sample, because different samples generally result in different x values. There is 
even more variability in t, because different samples may result in different values of both 
x and s. Because of this, the distribution of t is more spread out than the standard normal 
(z) distribution.
To develop an appropriate confidence interval, we must investigate the probability distri-
bution of the standardized variable t for a sample from a normal population. This requires 
that we first learn about probability distributions called t distributions.
t Distributions
Just as there are many different normal distributions, there are also many different t dis-
tributions. While normal distributions are distinguished from one another by their mean 
m and standard deviation s, t distributions are distinguished by a positive whole number 
called the number of degrees of freedom (df). There is a t distribution with 1 df, another with 
2 df, and so on.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

482 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
1.	 The t distribution corresponding to any particular number of degrees of 
freedom is bell shaped and centered at zero (just like the standard normal 
(z) distribution).
2.	 Each t distribution is more spread out than the standard normal (z)  
distribution.
3.	 As the number of degrees of freedom increases, the spread of the 
corresponding t distribution decreases.
4.	 As the number of degrees of freedom increases, the corresponding sequence 
of t distributions approaches the standard normal (z) distribution.
Important Properties of t Distributions
The properties discussed in the preceding box are illustrated in Figure 9.6, which shows 
two t curves along with the z curve.
Appendix Table 3 gives selected critical values for various t distributions. The central 
areas for which values are tabulated are .80, .90, .95, .98, .99, .998, and .999. To find a 
particular critical value, go down the left margin of the table to the row labeled with the 
desired number of degrees of freedom. Then move over in that row to the column headed 
by the desired central area. 
For example, the value in the 12-df row under the column corresponding to central 
area .95 is 2.18, so 95% of the area under the t curve with 12 df lies between 22.18 
and 2.18. Moving over two columns, we find the critical value for central area .99 (still 
with 12 df) to be 3.06 (see Figure 9.7). Moving down the .99 column to the 20-df row, 
we see the critical value is 2.85, so the area between 22.85 and 2.85 under the t curve 
with 20 df is .99.
Figure  9.6
Comparison of the z curve and 
t curves for 12 df and 4 df.
0
21
22
23
3
1
2
z curve
t curve for 12 df
t curve for 4 df
Figure  9.7
t critical values illustrated.
t curve
for 12 df
Shaded area 5 .95
0
23.06
3.06
0
22.18
2.18
Shaded area 5 .99
Notice that the critical values increase from left to right in each row of Appendix Table 3. 
This makes sense because as we move to the right, we capture larger central areas. In each 
column, the critical values decrease as we move downward, reflecting decreasing spread for 
t distributions with larger degrees of freedom.
The larger the number of degrees of freedom, the more closely the t curve resembles the 
z curve. To emphasize this, we have included the z critical values as the last row of the  
t table. Furthermore, once the number of degrees of freedom exceeds 30, the critical values 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   9.3    Confidence Interval for a Population Mean 
●  483
change little as the number of degrees of freedom increases. For this reason, Appendix 
Table 3 jumps from 30 df to 40 df, then to 60 df, then to 120 df, and finally to the row of 
z critical values. 
If we need a critical value for a number of degrees of freedom between those tabulated, 
we just use the critical value for the closest df. For df . 120, we use the z critical values. 
Many graphing calculators calculate t critical values for any number of degrees of freedom, 
so if you are using such a calculator, it is not necessary to approximate the t critical values 
as described.
One-Sample t Confidence Interval
The fact that the sampling distribution of x 2 m
ssyÏnd is approximately the z (standard normal) 
distribution when n is large led to the z confidence interval when s is known. In the same 
way, the following proposition allows us to obtain a confidence interval when the popula-
tion distribution is normal but s is unknown.
If x and s are the mean and standard deviation of a random sample from a 
­normal population distribution, then the probability distribution of the 
­standardized variable 
t 5 x 2 m
s
Ïn
is the t distribution with df 5 n 2 1.
To see how this result leads to the desired confidence interval, consider the case n 5 25.  
We use the t distribution with df 5 n 2 1 5 24. From Appendix Table 3, the interval 
between 22.06 and 2.06 captures a central area of .95 under the t curve with 24 df. This 
means that 95% of all samples of size n 5 25 from a normal population result in values of 
x and s for which
22.06 , x 2 m
s
Ïn
, 2.06
Algebraically manipulating these inequalities to isolate m yields
x 2 2.061
s
Ï252 , m , x 1 2.061
s
Ï252
The 95% confidence interval for m in this situation extends from the lower endpoint 
x 2 2.061
s
Ï252 to the upper endpoint x 1 2.061
s
Ï252. This interval can also be written
x 6 2.061
s
Ï252 
The differences between this interval and the interval when s is known are the use of the 
t critical value 2.06 rather than the z critical value 1.96 and the use of the sample standard 
deviation as an estimate of s. The extra uncertainty that results from estimating s causes 
the t interval to be wider than the z interval.
If the sample size is something other than 25 or if the desired confidence level  
is something other than 95%, a different t critical value (obtained from Appendix Table 3 
or by using technology) is used in place of 2.06.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

484 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
The general formula for a confidence interval for a population mean m based 
on a sample of size n when
1.	 ​x is the sample mean from a simple random sample,
2.	 the population distribution is normal, or the sample size n is large  
(generally n $ 30), and
3.	 s, the population standard deviation, is unknown
is 
x 6 st critical valued1
s
Ïn2
where the t critical value is based on df 5 n 2 1. Appendix Table 3 gives criti-
cal values appropriate for each of the confidence levels 90%, 95%, and 99%, as 
well as several other less frequently used confidence levels.
The One-Sample t Confidence Interval for m
If n is large (generally n $ 30), the normality of the population distribution is not critical. 
However, this confidence interval is appropriate for small n only when the population distribution 
is (at least approximately) normal. If this is not the case, as might be suggested by a normal 
probability plot or boxplot, another estimation method should be used.
Example 9.8 
Drive-Through Medicine
During a flu outbreak, many people visit emergency rooms, where they often must wait in 
crowded waiting rooms where other patients may be exposed. The paper “Drive-Through 
Medicine: A Novel Proposal for Rapid Evaluation of Patients during an Influenza Pandemic” 
(Annals of Emergency Medicine [2010]: 268–273) describes an interesting study of the feasi-
bility of a drive-through model where flu patients are evaluated while they remain in their 
cars. One of the interesting observations from this study was that not only were patients 
kept relatively isolated and away from other patients, but the time to process a patient was 
shorter because delays related to turning over examination rooms were eliminated.
In the experiment, 38 volunteers were each given a scenario from a randomly selected 
set of flu cases seen in the emergency room. The scenarios provided the volunteer with a 
medical history and a description of symptoms that would allow the volunteer to respond 
to questions from the examining physician. These volunteer patients were then processed 
using a drive-through procedure that was implemented in the parking structure of Stanford 
University Hospital. The time to process each case from admission to discharge was recorded.
Data read from a graph that appears in the paper was used to compute the following 
summary statistics for admission-to-discharge processing times (in minutes):
n ​5 ​38    x 5 26    s ​5 ​1.57
A boxplot of the 38 processing times did show a couple of outliers on the high end, corre-
sponding to unusually long processing times, suggesting that it is probably not reasonable 
to think of the population distribution of drive-through processing times as being approxi-
mately normal. However, because the sample size is greater than 30 and the distribution 
of sample processing times was not extremely skewed, it is appropriate to consider using 
the t confidence interval to estimate the mean admission-to-discharge processing time for 
flu patients using the drive-through procedure. Because the 38 flu scenarios were thought 
to be representative of the population of flu patients seen in emergency rooms and the 
sample size is large, we can use the formula for the t confidence interval to compute a 95% 
confidence interval.
For this example, n ​5 ​38, df ​5 ​37, and the appropriate t critical value is 2.02 (from the 
40-df row of Appendix Table 3). The 95% confidence interval is then
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   9.3    Confidence Interval for a Population Mean 
●  485
 x 6 st critical valued1
s
Ïn2 5 26 6 s2.02d1
1.57
Ï382
	
5 26 6 .514
	
5 s25.486, 26.514d
Based on the sample data, we believe that the actual mean admission-to-discharge 
processing time for flu patients processed using the drive-through procedure is between 
25.486 minutes and 25.514 minutes. We used a method that has a 5% error rate to con-
struct this interval. The authors of the paper indicated that the average processing time for 
flu patients seen in the emergency room was about 90 minutes, so it appears that the drive-
through procedure has promise both in terms of keeping flu patients isolated and also in 
reducing processing time.
■
Example 9.9 
Waiting for Surgery
The Cardiac Care Network in Ontario, Canada, collected information on the time between 
the date a patient was recommended for heart surgery and the surgery date for cardiac pa-
tients in Ontario (“Wait Times Data Guide,” Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care, Ontario, 
Canada, 2006). The reported mean wait times (in days) for samples of patients for two car-
diac procedures are given in the accompanying table. (The standard deviations in the table 
were estimated from information on wait-time variability included in the report.)
Surgical Procedure
Sample Size
Mean Wait Time
Standard Deviation
Bypass
539
19
10
Angiography
847
18
  ​9
If we had access to the raw data (the 539 1 847 5 1386 individual wait-time observa-
tions), we might begin by looking at boxplots. Data consistent with the given summary 
quantities were used to generate the boxplots of Figure 9.8. The boxplots for the two sur-
gical procedures are similar. There are outliers in both data sets, which might cause us to 
question the normality of the two wait-time distributions, but because the sample sizes are 
large, it is still appropriate to use the t confidence interval.
As a next step, we can use the confidence interval of this section to estimate the actual 
mean wait time for each of the two procedures. Let’s first focus on the sample of bypass 
patients. For this group,
	
  sample size 5 n 5 539
	    sample mean wait time 5 x 5 19
sample standard deviation 5 s 5 10
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Figure  9.8
Boxplots for Example 9.9.
Angiography
Bypass
**
***
**
*
Wait time (days)
10
0
20
30
40
50
60
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

486 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
The report referenced here indicated that it is reasonable to regard these data as representa-
tive of the Ontario population. So, with m denoting the mean wait time for bypass surgery 
in Ontario, we can estimate m using a 90% confidence interval.
From Appendix Table 3, we use t critical value 51.645 (from the z critical value row 
because df 5 n 2 1 5 538 .120, the largest number of degrees of freedom in the table). 
The 90% confidence interval for m is
x 6 st critical valued1
s
Ïn2 5 19 6 s1.645d1
10
Ï5392
	
5 19 6 .709
	
5 s18.291, 19.709d
Based on this sample, we are 90% confident that m is between 18.291 days and 19.709 
days. This interval is fairly narrow, indicating that our information about the value of m is 
relatively precise.
A graphing calculator or any of the commercially available statistical computing pack-
ages can produce t confidence intervals. Confidence interval output from Minitab for the 
angiography data is shown here.
One-Sample T
N
Mean
StDev
SE Mean
90% CI
847
18.0000
9.0000
0.3092
(17.4908, 18.5092)
The 90% confidence interval for mean wait time for angiography extends from 17.4908 days 
to 18.5092 days. This interval is narrower than the 90% interval for bypass surgery wait 
time for two reasons: the sample size is larger (847 rather than 539) and the sample stan-
dard deviation is smaller (9 rather than 10).
■
Example 9.10 
Selfish Chimps?
● ​The article “Chimps Aren’t Charitable” (Newsday, November 2, 2005) summarized the re-
sults of a research study published in the journal Nature. In this study, chimpanzees learned 
to use an apparatus that dispensed food when either of two ropes was pulled. When one 
of the ropes was pulled, only the chimp controlling the apparatus received food. When the 
other rope was pulled, food was dispensed both to the chimp controlling the apparatus and 
also to a chimp in the adjoining cage. 
The accompanying data (approximated from a graph in the paper) represent the number 
of times out of 36 trials that each of seven chimps chose the option that would provide food 
to both chimps (the “charitable” response).
23    22    21    24    19    20    20
Figure 9.9 is a normal probability plot of these data. The plot is reasonably straight, so 
it seems plausible that the population distribution of number of charitable responses is 
approximately normal.
For purposes of this example, let’s suppose it is reasonable to regard this sample of seven 
chimps as representative of the population of all chimpanzees. Calculation of a confidence 
interval for the mean number of charitable responses for the population of all chimps 
requires x and s. From the given data, we compute
x 5  21.29 s 5 1.80
The t critical value for a 99% confidence interval based on 6 df is 3.71. The interval is
x 6 st critical valued1
s
Ïn2 5 21.29 6 s3.71d1
1.80
Ï72
	
5 21.29 6 2.52
	
5 s18.77, 23.81d
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Alan and Sandy Carey /Photodisc/Getty Images 
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Step-by-step technology  
instructions available  
online
Do the work ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   9.3    Confidence Interval for a Population Mean 
●  487
A statistical software package could also have been used to compute the 99% confidence 
interval. The following is output from SPSS. The slight discrepancy between the hand-
calculated interval and the one reported by SPSS occurs because SPSS uses more decimal 
accuracy in x, s, and t critical values.
One-Sample Statistics
N
Mean
Std. Deviation
Std. Error Mean
CharitableResponses
7
21.2857
1.79947
.68014
One-Sample
99% Confidence Interval
Lower
Upper
CharitableResponses
18.7642
23.8073
With 99% confidence, we estimate the population mean number of charitable 
responses (out of 36 trials) to be between 18.77 and 23.81. Remember that the 99% 
confidence level implies that if the same formula is used to calculate intervals for sample 
after sample randomly selected from the population of chimps, in the long run 99% 
of these intervals will capture the value of m between the lower and upper confidence 
limits.
Notice that based on this interval, we would conclude that, on average, chimps choose 
the charitable option more than half the time (more than 18 out of 36 trials). The Newsday 
headline “Chimps Aren’t Charitable” was based on additional data from the study indicat-
ing that chimps’ charitable behavior was no different when there was another chimp in  
the adjacent cage than when the adjacent cage was empty. We will revisit this study in 
Chapter 11 to investigate this further.
■
Choosing the Sample Size
When estimating m using a large sample or using a small sample from a normal population, 
the bound B on the error of estimation associated with a 95% confidence interval is
B 5 1.961
s
Ïn2
Before collecting any data, an investigator may wish to determine a sample size for which 
a particular value of the bound is achieved. For example, with m representing the average 
fuel efficiency (in miles per gallon, mpg) for all cars of a certain type, the objective of an 
Interpret the results ❭
Figure  9.9
Normal probability plot for data of 
Example 9.10 
24
23
22
21
Normal Score
19
20
2
1
0
21
22
Number of Charitable Responses
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

488 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
investigation may be to estimate m to within 1 mpg with 95% confidence. The value of n 
necessary to achieve this is obtained by setting B 5 1 and then solving 
1 5 1.961
s
Ïn2 
for n.
In general, suppose that we wish to estimate m to within an amount B (the specified 
bound on the error of estimation) with 95% confidence. Finding the necessary sample size 
requires solving the equation 
B 5 1.961
s
Ïn2 
for n. The result is
n 51
1.96s
B 2
2
Notice that the greater the variability in the population (larger s), the greater the required 
sample size will be. And, of course, the smaller the desired bound on error is, the larger the 
required sample size will be.
Use of the sample-size formula requires that s be known, but this is rarely the case in 
practice. One possible strategy for estimating s is to carry out a preliminary study and use 
the resulting sample standard deviation (or a somewhat larger value, to be conservative) to 
determine n for the main part of the study. Another possibility is simply to make an educated 
guess about the value of s and to use that value to calculate n. For a population distribution 
that is not too skewed, dividing the anticipated range (the difference between the largest 
and the smallest values) by 4 often gives a rough idea of the value of the standard deviation.
The sample size required to estimate a population mean m to within an amount 
B with 95% confidence is 
n 51
1.96s
B 2
2
If s is unknown, it may be estimated based on previous information or, for a pop-
ulation that is not too skewed, by using (range)/4.
If the desired confidence level is something other than 95%, 1.96 is replaced by 
the appropriate z critical value (for example, 2.58 for 99% confidence).
Example 9.11 
Cost of Textbooks
The financial aid office wishes to estimate the mean cost of textbooks per quarter for 
students at a particular university. For the estimate to be useful, it should be within $20 
of the true population mean. How large a sample should be used to be 95% confident of 
achieving this level of accuracy?
To determine the required sample size, we must have a value for s. The financial aid 
office is pretty sure that the amount spent on books varies widely, with most values between 
$150 and $550. A reasonable estimate of s is then
range
4
5 550 2 150
4
5 400
4
5 100
The required sample size is
n 51
1.96s
B 2
2
51
s1.96ds100d
20
2
2
5 s9.8d2 5 96.04
Rounding up, a sample size of 97 or larger is recommended.	
■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   9.3    Confidence Interval for a Population Mean 
●  489
9.34	 Given a variable that has a t distribution with the 
specified degrees of freedom, what percentage of the 
time will its value fall in the indicated region?
a.	 10 df, between 21.81 and 1.81    ​
b.	10 df, between 22.23 and 2.23    ​
c.	 24 df, between 22.06 and 2.06    ​
d.	24 df, between 22.80 and 2.80    ​
e.	 24 df, outside the interval from 22.80 to 2.80 
f.	 24 df, to the right of 2.80    ​
g.	 10 df, to the left of 21.81    ​
9.35	 The formula used to compute a confidence interval for 
the mean of a normal population when n is small is
x 6 st critical valued s
Ïn
What is the appropriate t critical value for each of the 
following confidence levels and sample sizes?
a.	 95% confidence, n 5 17  ​  ​
b.	90% confidence, n 5 12  ​  ​
c.	 99% confidence, n 5 24  ​  ​
d.	90% confidence, n 5 25  ​  ​
e.	 90% confidence, n 5 13  ​  ​
f.	 95% confidence, n 5 10  ​  ​
9.36	 The two intervals (114.4, 115.6) and (114.1, 115.9) 
are confidence intervals (computed using the 
same sample data) for m 5 true average resonance 
frequency (in hertz) for all tennis rackets of a certain 
type.
a.	 What is the value of the sample mean resonance 
frequency? (Hint: Where is the confidence interval 
centered?)  ​  ​
b.	The confidence level for one of these intervals is 
90% and for the other it is 99%. Which is which, 
and how can you tell?
9.37	 ▼ Samples of two different models of cars were se-
lected, and the actual speed for each car was deter-
mined when the speedometer registered 50 mph. The 
resulting 95% confidence intervals for mean actual 
speed were (51.3, 52.7) and (49.4, 50.6). Assuming 
that the two sample standard deviations are equal, 
which confidence interval is based on the larger 
sample size? Explain your reasoning.
9.38	 The authors of the paper “Deception and Design: The 
Impact of Communication Technology on Lying Behavior” 
(Proceedings of Computer Human Interaction [2004]) 
asked 30 students in an upper division communica-
tions course at a large university to keep a journal for 
7 days, recording each social interaction and whether 
or not they told any lies during that interaction. A 
lie was defined as “any time you intentionally try to 
mislead someone.” The paper reported that the mean 
number of lies per day for the 30 students was 1.58 
and the standard deviation of number of lies per day 
was 1.02.
a.	 What assumption must be made in order for 
the t confidence interval of this section to be an 
appropriate method for estimating m, the mean 
number of lies per day for all students at this 
university?
b.	Would you recommend using the t confidence 
interval to construct an estimate of m as defined in 
Part (a)? Explain why or why not.
9.39	 In a study of academic procrastination, the authors of 
the paper “Correlates and Consequences of Behavioral 
Procrastination” (Procrastination, Current Issues and 
New Directions [2000]) reported that for a sample of 
411 undergraduate students at a midsize public uni-
versity preparing for a final exam in an introductory 
psychology course, the mean time spent studying for 
the exam was 7.74 hours and the standard deviation 
of study times was 3.40 hours. For purposes of this 
exercise, assume that it is reasonable to regard this 
sample as representative of students taking introduc-
tory psychology at this university.
a.	 Construct a 95% confidence interval to estimate 
m, the mean time spent studying for the final 
exam for students taking introductory psychology 
at this university. (Hint: See Example 9.8.) 
b.	The paper also gave the following sample statistics 
for the percentage of study time that occurred in 
the 24 hours prior to the exam:
n ​5 ​411    x 5 43.18    s ​5 ​21.46
Construct and interpret a 90% confidence interval for 
the mean percentage of study time that occurs in the 
24 hours prior to the exam. 
9.40	 Medical research has shown that repeated wrist 
extensions beyond 20 degrees increase the risk of 
wrist and hand injuries. Each of 24 students at Cornell 
University used a proposed new computer mouse 
design, and while using the mouse, each student’s 
wrist extension was recorded. Data consistent with 
summary values given in the paper “Comparative 
Study of Two Computer Mouse Designs” (Cornell 
Human Factors Laboratory Technical Report RP7992) 
are given here. 
27  28  24  26  27  25  25  24  24  24  25  28
22  25  24  28  27  26  31  25  28  27  27  25
exercises 9.34 - 9.52
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

490 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
a.	 Use these data to estimate the mean wrist exten-
sion for people using this new mouse design using 
a 90% confidence interval. 
b.	Are any assumptions required in order for it to 
be appropriate to generalize your estimate to the 
population of Cornell students? To the population 
of all university students?
c.	 Based on your interval from Part (a), do you 
think there is reason to believe that the mean 
wrist extension for people using the new mouse 
design is greater than 20 degrees? Explain why or 
why not.
9.41	 In June 2009, Harris Interactive conducted its 
Great Schools Survey. In this survey, the sample 
consisted of 1086 adults who were parents of school-
aged children. The sample was selected in a way that 
makes it reasonable to regard it as representative of 
the population of parents of school-aged children. 
One question on the survey asked respondents how 
much time (in hours) per month they spent volun-
teering at their children’s school during the previous 
school year. The following summary statistics for 
time volunteered per month were given:
n ​5 ​1086    x 5 5.6    median ​5 ​1
a.	 What does the fact that the mean is so much 
larger than the median tell you about the distribu-
tion of time spent volunteering per month? 
b.	Based on your answer to Part (a), explain why it is 
not reasonable to assume that the population distri-
bution of time spent volunteering is approximately 
normal. 
c.	 Explain why it is appropriate to use the t confidence 
interval to estimate the mean time spent volunteer-
ing for the population of parents of school-aged 
children even though the population distribution is 
not approximately normal. 
d.	Suppose that the sample standard deviation was  
s ​5 ​5.2. Compute and interpret a 98% confidence 
interval for m, the mean time spent volunteering 
for the population of parents of school-aged 
children. 
9.42	 The authors of the paper “Driven to Distraction” 
(Psychological Science [2001]: 462–466) describe an ex-
periment to evaluate the effect of using a cell phone 
on reaction time. Subjects were asked to perform a 
simulated driving task while talking on a cell phone. 
While performing this task, occasional red and green 
lights flashed on the computer screen. If a green light 
flashed, subjects were to continue driving, but if a 
red light flashed, subjects were to brake as quickly as 
possible. The reaction time (in msec) was recorded. 
The following summary statistics are based on a 
graph that appeared in the paper:
n ​5 ​48    x 5 530    s ​5 ​70
a.	 Construct and interpret a 95% confidence interval 
for m, the mean time to react to a red light while 
talking on a cell phone. 
b.	What assumption must be made in order to gener-
alize this confidence interval to the population of 
all drivers? 
c.	 Suppose that the researchers wanted to estimate 
the mean reaction time to within 5 msec with 95% 
confidence. Using the sample standard deviation 
from the study described as a preliminary esti-
mate of the standard deviation of reaction times, 
compute the required sample size. (Hint: See 
Example 9.11.) 
9.43	 Suppose that a random sample of 50 bottles of a 
particular brand of cough medicine is selected and 
the alcohol content of each bottle is determined. Let 
m denote the mean alcohol content (in percent) for 
the population of all bottles of the brand under study. 
Suppose that the sample of 50 results in a 95% confi-
dence interval for m of (7.8, 9.4).
a.	 Would a 90% confidence interval have been nar-
rower or wider than the given interval? Explain 
your answer. 
b.	Consider the following statement: There is a 95% 
chance that m is between 7.8 and 9.4. Is this state-
ment correct? Why or why not?
c.	 Consider the following statement: If the process 
of selecting a random sample of size 50 and then 
computing the corresponding 95% confidence 
interval is repeated 100 times, 95 of the resulting 
intervals will include m. Is this statement correct? 
Why or why not? 
9.44	 ▼ Acrylic bone cement is sometimes used in hip and 
knee replacements to fix an artificial joint in place. 
The force required to break an acrylic bone cement 
bond was measured for six specimens under speci-
fied conditions, and the resulting mean and standard 
deviation were 306.09 Newtons and 41.97 Newtons, 
respectively. Assuming that it is reasonable to believe 
that breaking force under these conditions has a dis-
tribution that is approximately normal, estimate the 
mean breaking force for acrylic bone cement under 
the specified conditions using a 95% confidence 
interval.​ 
9.45	 The article “The Association Between Television View-
ing and Irregular Sleep Schedules Among Children 
Less Than 3 Years of Age” (Pediatrics [2005]: 851–​856) 
reported the accompanying 95% confidence intervals ​
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

   9.3    Confidence Interval for a Population Mean 
●  491
for average TV viewing time (in hours per day) for 
three different age groups.
Age Group
95% Confidence Interval
Less than 12 months
(0.8, 1.0)
12 to 23 months
(1.4, 1.8)
24 to 35 months
(2.1, 2.5)
a.	 Suppose that the sample sizes for each of the 
three age group samples were equal. Based on the 
given confidence intervals, which of the age group 
samples had the greatest variability in TV viewing 
time? Explain your choice. (Hint: Consider the 
formula for the confidence interval.)
b.	Now suppose that the sample standard deviations 
for the three age group samples were equal, but 
that the three sample sizes might have been dif-
ferent. Which of the three age-group samples had 
the largest sample size? Explain your choice.
c.	 The interval (.768, 1.032) is either a 90% confi-
dence interval or a 99% confidence interval for 
the mean TV viewing time computed using the 
sample data for children less than 12 months old. 
Is the confidence level for this interval 90% or 
99%? Explain your choice.
9.46	 The article “Most Canadians Plan to Buy Treats, Many 
Will Buy Pumpkins, Decorations and/or Costumes” 
(Ipsos-Reid, October 24, 2005) summarized results 
from a survey of 1000 randomly selected Canadian 
residents. Each individual in the sample was asked 
how much he or she anticipated spending on 
Halloween during 2005. The resulting sample mean 
and standard deviation were $46.65 and $83.70, 
respectively.
a.	 Explain how it could be possible for the standard 
deviation of the anticipated Halloween expense to 
be larger than the mean anticipated expense.
b.	Is it reasonable to think that the distribution of the 
variable anticipated Halloween expense is approxi-
mately normal? Explain why or why not.
c.	 Is it appropriate to use the t confidence interval to 
estimate the mean anticipated Halloween expense 
for Canadian residents? Explain why or why not.
d.	If appropriate, construct and interpret a 99% 
confidence interval for the mean anticipated 
Halloween expense for Canadian residents.  ​  ​
9.47	 Because of safety considerations, in May 2003 the 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) changed its 
guidelines for how small commuter airlines must 
estimate passenger weights. Under the old rule, air-
lines used 180 pounds as a typical passenger weight 
(including carry-on luggage) in warm months and 
185 pounds as a typical weight in cold months. 
The Alaska Journal of Commerce (May 25, 2003) 
reported that Frontier Airlines conducted a study to 
estimate average passenger plus carry-on weights. 
They found an average summer weight of 183 pounds 
and a winter average of 190 pounds. Suppose that 
each of these estimates was based on a random sam-
ple of 100 passengers and that the sample standard 
deviations were 20 pounds for the summer weights 
and 23 pounds for the winter weights.
a.	 Construct and interpret a 95% confidence interval 
for the mean summer weight (including carry-on 
luggage) of Frontier Airlines passengers. 
b.	Construct and interpret a 95% confidence interval 
for the mean winter weight (including carry-on 
luggage) of Frontier Airlines passengers. 
c.	 The new FAA recommendations are 190 pounds 
for summer and 195 pounds for winter. Comment 
on these recommendations in light of the confi-
dence interval estimates from Parts (a) and (b).
9.48	 ●  Example 9.3 gave the following airborne times  
(in minutes) for 10 randomly selected flights from 
San Francisco to Washington Dulles airport:
270 256 267 285 274 275 266 258 271 281
a.	 Compute and interpret a 90% confidence inter-
val for the mean airborne time for flights from 
San Francisco to Washington Dulles. (Hint: See 
Example 9.10.)  ​  ​
b.	Give an interpretation of the 90% confidence level 
associated with the interval estimate in Part (a).
c.	 If a flight from San Francisco to Washington 
Dulles is scheduled to depart at 10 a.m., what 
would you recommend for the published arrival 
time? Explain.  ​  ​
9.49	 ● Fat content (in grams) for seven randomly selected 
hot dogs that were rated as very good by Consumer 
Reports (www.consumerreports.org) is shown below. 
Is it reasonable to use this data and the t confidence 
interval of this section to construct a confidence 
interval for the mean fat content of hot dogs rated 
as very good by Consumer Reports? Explain why or 
why not. (Hint: See Example 9.10.)
14    15    11    10    6    15    16
9.50	 ● Five students visiting the student health center for 
a free dental examination during National Dental 
Hygiene Month were asked how many months 
had passed since their last visit to a dentist. Their 
responses were as follows:
6    17    11    22    29
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

492 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
Assuming that these five students can be considered 
a random sample of all students participating in the 
free checkup program, construct a 95% confidence 
interval for the mean number of months elapsed 
since the last visit to a dentist for the population of 
students participating in the program.  ​  ​
9.51	 The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms 
(BATF) has been concerned about lead levels in 
California wines. In a previous testing of wine 
specimens, lead levels ranging from 50 to 700 parts 
per billion were recorded. How many wine speci-
mens should be tested if the BATF wishes to esti-
mate the true mean lead level for California wines 
to within 10 parts per billion with 95% confidence? 
(Hint: See Example 9.11.)  ​ ​
9.52	 The formula described in this section for determin-
ing sample size corresponds to a confidence level of 
95%. What would be the appropriate formula for 
determining sample size when the desired confidence 
level is 90%? 98%?
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
  9.4  
Interpreting and Communicating the Results 
of Statistical Analyses
The purpose of most surveys and many research studies is to produce estimates of popu-
lation characteristics. One way of providing such an estimate is to construct and report a 
confidence interval for the population characteristic of interest.
Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses
When using sample data to estimate a population characteristic, a point estimate or a 
confidence interval estimate might be used. Confidence intervals are generally preferred 
because a point estimate by itself does not convey any information about the accuracy of 
the estimate. For this reason, whenever you report the value of a point estimate, it is a good 
idea to also include an estimate of the bound on the error of estimation.
Reporting and interpreting a confidence interval estimate requires a bit of care. First, 
always report both the confidence interval and the confidence level associated with the 
method used to produce the interval. Then, remember that both the confidence interval 
and the confidence level should be interpreted. 
A good strategy is to begin with an interpretation of the confidence interval in the con-
text of the problem and then to follow that with an interpretation of the confidence level. 
For example, if a 90% confidence interval for p, the proportion of students at a particular 
university who own a laptop computer, is (.56, .78), we might say
          
interpretation of interval     
  5
We can be 90% confident that between  
56% and 78% of the students at this  
university own laptops.
   
explanation of “90% confidence”  
interpretation of confidence level   
  5
We have used a method to produce  
this estimate that is successful in  
capturing the actual population  
proportion 90% of the time.
When providing an interpretation of a confidence interval, remember that the interval 
is an estimate of a population characteristic and be careful not to say that the interval 
applies to individual values in the population or to the values of sample statistics. For 
example, if a 99% confidence interval for m, the mean amount of ketchup in bottles 
labeled as 12 ounces, is (11.94, 11.98), this does not tell us that 99% of 12-ounce 
ketchup bottles contain between 11.94 and 11.98 ounces of ketchup. Nor does it tell 
us that 99% of samples of the same size would have sample means in this particular 
range. The confidence interval is an estimate of the mean for all bottles in the population 
of interest.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

  9.4   Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses 
●  493
Interpreting the Results of Statistical Analyses
Unfortunately, there is no customary way of reporting the estimates of population charac-
teristics in published sources. Possibilities include
confidence interval
estimate 6 bound on error
estimate 6 standard error
If the population characteristic being estimated is a population mean, then you may  
also see
sample mean 6 sample standard deviation
If the interval reported is described as a confidence interval, a confidence level should 
accompany it. These intervals can be interpreted just as we have interpreted the confidence 
intervals in this chapter. The confidence level specifies the long-run error rate associated 
with the method used to construct the interval. For example, a 95% confidence level speci-
fies a 5% long-run error rate.
A form particularly common in news articles is estimate 6 bound on error, where the 
bound on error is also sometimes called the margin of error. The bound on error reported 
is usually two times the standard deviation of the estimate. This method of reporting is a 
little less formal than a confidence interval and, if the sample size is reasonably large, is 
roughly equivalent to reporting a 95% confidence interval. You can interpret these intervals 
as you would a confidence interval with approximate confidence level of 95%.
You must use care in interpreting intervals reported in the form of an estimate 6 standard 
error. Recall from Section 9.2 that the general form of a confidence interval is
estimate 6 (critical value)(standard deviation of the estimate)
In journal articles, the estimated standard deviation of the estimate is usually referred to as 
the standard error. The critical value in the confidence interval formula was determined by 
the form of the sampling distribution of the estimate and by the confidence level. Notice 
that the reported form, estimate 6 standard error, is equivalent to a confidence inter-
val with the critical value set equal to 1. For a statistic whose sampling distribution is 
approximately normal (such as the mean of a large sample or a large-sample proportion), a 
critical value of 1 corresponds to an approximate confidence level of about 68%. Because a 
confidence level of 68% is rather low, you may want to use the given information and the 
confidence interval formula to convert to an interval with a higher confidence level.
When researchers are trying to estimate a population mean, they sometimes report sam-
ple mean 6 sample standard deviation. Be particularly careful here. To convert this infor-
mation into a useful interval estimate of the population mean, you must first convert the 
sample standard deviation to the standard error of the sample mean (by dividing by Ïn) 
and then use the standard error and an appropriate critical value to construct a confidence 
interval.
For example, suppose that a random sample of size 100 is used to estimate the popula-
tion mean. If the sample resulted in a sample mean of 500 and a sample standard deviation 
of 20, you might find the published results summarized in any of the following ways:
95% confidence interval for the population mean: (496.08, 503.92)
mean 6 bound on error: 500 6 4
mean 6 standard error: 500 6 2
mean 6 standard deviation: 500 6 20
What to Look For in Published Data
Here are some questions to ask when you encounter interval estimates in published ­reports.
●
●Is the reported interval a confidence interval, mean 6 bound on error, mean 6 stan-
dard error, or mean 6 standard deviation? If the reported interval is not a confidence 
interval, you may want to construct a confidence interval from the given information.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

494 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
●
●What confidence level is associated with the given interval? Is the choice of confidence 
level reasonable? What does the confidence level say about the long-run error rate of 
the method used to construct the interval?
●
●Is the reported interval relatively narrow or relatively wide? Has the population char-
acteristic been estimated precisely?
For example, the article “Use of a Cast Compared with a Functional Ankle Brace After 
Operative Treatment of an Ankle Fracture” (Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery [2003]: 205–​211) 
compared two different methods of immobilizing an ankle after surgery to repair damage 
from a fracture. The article includes the following statement:
The mean duration (and standard deviation) between the operation and return to work was 
63613 days (median, sixty-three days; range, thirty three to ninety-eight days) for the cast 
group and 65619 days (median, sixty-two days; range, eight to 131 days) for the brace group; 
the difference was not significant.
This is an example of a case where we must be careful—the reported intervals are 
of the form estimate 6 standard deviation. We can use this information to construct a 
confidence interval for the mean time between surgery and return to work for each method 
of immobilization. One hundred patients participated in the study, with 50 wearing a 
cast after surgery and 50 wearing an ankle brace (random assignment was used to assign 
patients to treatment groups). Because the sample sizes are both large, we can use the  
t confidence interval formula
mean 6 st critical valued1
s
Ïn2
Each sample has df 5 50 2 1 5 49. The closest df value in Appendix Table 3 is for  
df 5 40, and the corresponding t critical value for a 95% confidence level is 2.02. The 
corresponding intervals are
Cast: 63 6 2.021
13
Ï502 5 63 6 3.71 5 s59.29, 66.71d
 Brace: 65 6 2.021
19
Ï502 5 65 6 5.43 5 s59.57, 70.43d
The chosen confidence level of 95% implies that the method used to construct each of 
the intervals has a 5% long-run error rate. Assuming that it is reasonable to view these sam-
ples as representative of the patient population, we can interpret these intervals as follows: 
We can be 95% confident that the mean return-to-work time for those treated with a cast 
is between 59.29 and 66.71 days. We can be 95% confident that the mean return-to-work 
time for those treated with an ankle brace is between 59.57 and 70.43 days. 
These intervals are relatively wide, indicating that the values of the treatment means have 
not been estimated as precisely as we might like. This is not surprising, given the sample 
sizes and the variability in each sample. Note that the two intervals overlap. This supports 
the statement that the difference between the two immobilization methods was not signifi-
cant. Formal methods for directly comparing two groups, covered in Chapter 11, could be 
used to further investigate this issue.
A Word to the Wise: Cautions and Limitations
When working with point and confidence interval estimates, here are a few things you 
need to keep in mind:
1.	In order for an estimate to be useful, we must know something about accuracy. 
You should beware of point estimates that are not accompanied by a bound on 
error or some other measure of accuracy.
2.	A confidence interval estimate that is wide indicates that we don’t have very 
precise information about the population characteristics being estimated. Don’t be 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

  9.4   Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses 
●  495
fooled by a high confidence level if the resulting interval is wide. High confidence, 
while desirable, is not the same thing as saying we have precise information about 
the value of a population characteristic.
The width of a confidence interval is affected by the confidence level, the sample 
size, and the standard deviation of the statistic used as the basis for constructing the 
interval. The best strategy for decreasing the width of a confidence interval is to take 
a larger sample. It is far better to think about this before collecting data and to use  
the required sample size formulas to determine a sample size that will result in a 
confidence interval estimate that is narrow enough to provide useful information.
3.	The accuracy of estimates depends on the sample size, not the population size. 
This may be counter to intuition, but as long as the sample size is small relative to 
the population size (n less than 10% of the population size), the bound on error 
for estimating a population proportion with 95% confidence is approximately 
2Î
p⁄s1 2 p⁄d
n
 and for estimating a population mean with 95% confidence is 
approximately 2 s
Ïn.
Notice that each of these involves the sample size n, and both bounds decrease 
as the sample size increases. Neither approximate bound on error depends on the 
population size.
The size of the population does need to be considered if sampling is without 
replacement and the sample size is more than 10% of the population size. In this 
case, a finite population correction factor Î
N 2 n
N 2 1 is used to adjust the bound on 
error (the given bound is multiplied by the correction factor). Since this correction 
factor is always less than 1, the adjusted bound on error is smaller.
4.	Assumptions and “plausibility” conditions are important. The confidence interval 
procedures of this chapter require certain assumptions. If these assumptions are met, 
the confidence intervals provide us with a method for using sample data to estimate 
population characteristics with confidence. When the assumptions associated with 
a confidence interval procedure are in fact true, the confidence level specifies a cor-
rect success rate for the method. However, assumptions (such as the assumption of 
a normal population distribution) are rarely exactly met in practice. Fortunately, in 
most cases, as long as the assumptions are approximately met, the confidence inter-
val procedures still work well.
In general, we can only determine if assumptions are “plausible” or approxi-
mately met, and that we are in the situation where we expect the inferential 
procedure to work reasonably well. This is usually confirmed by knowledge of the 
data collection process and by using the sample data to check certain “plausibility 
conditions.”
The formal assumptions for the large-sample z confidence interval for a population 
proportion are
1.	The sample is a random sample from the population of interest.
2.	The sample size is large enough for the sampling distribution of p⁄  to be 
approximately normal.
3.	Sampling is without replacement.
Whether the random sample assumption is plausible will depend on how the sample 
was selected and the intended population. Plausibility conditions for the other two 
assumptions are the following:
np⁄  $ 10 and n(1 2 p⁄) $ 10 (so the sampling distribution of p⁄  is approximately 
normal), and
n is less than 10% of the population size (so that the formula for the standard devia-
tion of p⁄  provides a good approximation to the actual standard deviation).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

496 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
The formal assumptions for the t confidence interval for a population mean are
1.	The sample is a random sample from the population of interest.
2.	The population distribution is normal, so that the distribution of t 5 x 2 m
syÏn 
has a t distribution.
As was the case for proportions, the plausibility of the random sample assumption 
will depend on how the sample was selected and the population of interest. The 
plausibility conditions for the normal population distribution assumption are the 
following:
	 A normal probability plot of the data is reasonably straight (indicating that the 
population distribution is approximately normal) 
or
	 The data distribution is approximately symmetric and there are no outliers. This 
may be confirmed by looking at a dotplot, boxplot, stem-and-leaf display, or histo-
gram of the data.
Alternatively, if n is large (n $ 30), the sampling distribution of x will be approxi-
mately normal even for nonnormal population distributions. This implies that use of 
the t interval is appropriate even if population normality is not plausible.
In the end, you must decide that the assumptions are met or that they are “plausible” 
and that the inferential method used will provide reasonable results. This is also true 
for the inferential methods introduced in the chapters that follow.
	 5.	Watch out for the “6” when reading published reports. Don’t fall into the trap 
of thinking confidence interval every time you see a 6 in an expression. As was 
discussed earlier in this section, published reports are not consistent, and in ad-
dition to confidence intervals, it is common to see estimate 6 standard error and 
estimate 6 sample standard deviation reported.
exercises 9.53 - 9.55
9.53	 The following quote is from the article “Credit Card 
Debt Rises Faster for Seniors” (USA Today, July 28, 
2009):
The study, which will be released today by Demos, a 
liberal public policy group, shows that low- and 
middle-income consumers 65 and older carried 
$10,235 in average credit card debt last year.
What additional information would you want in 
order to evaluate the accuracy of this estimate? 
Explain.
9.54	 Authors of the news release titled “Major Gaps 
Still Exist Between the Perception and the Reality of 
Americans’ Internet Security Protections, Study Finds” 
(The National Cyber Security Alliance) estimated 
the proportion of Americans who claim to have a 
firewall installed on their computer to protect them 
from computer hackers to be .80 based on a survey 
conducted by the Zogby market research firm. They 
also estimated the proportion of those who actually 
have a firewall installed to be .42, based on checkups 
performed by Norton’s PC Help software. The follow-
ing quote is from the news release:
For the study, NCSA commissioned a Zogby survey of 
more than 3000 Americans and Symantec conducted 
checkups of 400 Americans’ personal computers performed 
by PC Help by Norton (www.norton.com/tuneup). The 
Zogby poll has a margin of error of 1/2 1.6% and the 
checkup has a margin of error of 1/2 5%.
Explain why the margins of error for the two esti-
mated proportions are different.
9.55	 The paper “The Curious Promiscuity of Queen Honey 
Bees (Apis mellifera): Evolutionary and Behavioral 
Mechanisms” (Annals of Zoology Fennici [2001]:255–265) 
describes a study of the mating behavior of queen 
honeybees. The following quote is from the paper:
Queens flew for an average of 24.2 6 9.21 minutes on 
their mating flights, which is consistent with previous 
findings. On those flights, queens effectively mated 
with 4.6 6 3.47 males (mean 6 SD).
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

a.	 The intervals reported in the quote from the paper 
were based on data from the mating flights of  
n ​5 ​30 queen honeybees. One of the two intervals 
reported is stated to be a confidence interval for 
a population mean. Which interval is this? Justify 
your choice.
b.	Use the given information to construct a 95% confi-
dence interval for the mean number of partners on 
a mating flight for queen honeybees. For purposes 
of this exercise, assume that it is reasonable to con-
sider these 30 queen honeybees as representative of 
the population of queen honeybees. 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
AC TIVIT Y 9.1 
Getting a Feel for Confidence Level
Technology Activity (Applet): Open the applet (avail-
able at www.cengagebrain.com) called ConfidenceIntervals. 
You should see a screen like the one shown here.
the interval is drawn in green; if 100 is not in the confidence 
interval, the interval is shown in red. Your screen should look 
something like the following.
Part 1: Click on the “Sample” button several more times, 
and notice how the confidence interval estimate changes 
from sample to sample. Also notice that at the bottom of 
the left-hand side of the display, the applet is keeping track 
of the proportion of all the intervals calculated so far that 
include the actual value of m. If we were to construct a 
large number of intervals, this proportion should closely 
approximate the capture rate for the confidence interval 
method.
To look at more than one interval at a time, change the 
“Intervals” box from 1 to 100, and then click the sample but-
ton. You should see a screen similar to the one at the top left 
of the next page, with 100 intervals in the display on the 
right-hand side. Again, intervals containing 100 (the value 
of m in this case) will be green and those that do not contain 
100 will be red. Also note that the capture proportion on 
the left-hand side has also been updated to reflect what hap-
pened with the 100 newly generated intervals.
Getting Started: If the “Method” box does not say 
“Means,” use the drop-down menu to select Means. In the 
box just below, select “t’ from the drop-down menu. This 
applet will select a random sample from a specified nor-
mal population distribution and then use the sample to 
construct a confidence interval for the population mean. 
The interval is then plotted on the display, and you can 
see if the resulting interval contains the actual value of the 
population mean.
For purposes of this activity, we will sample from a normal 
population with mean 100 and standard deviation 5. We will 
begin with a sample size of n 5 10. In the applet window, set 
m 5 100, s 5 5, and n 5 10. Leave the conf-level box set 
at 95%. Click the “Recalculate” button to rescale the picture 
on the right. Now click on the sample button. You should 
see a confidence interval appear on the display on the right-
hand side. If the interval contains the actual mean of 100, 
Activities 
●  497
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

498 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
Continue generating intervals until you have seen  
at least 1000 intervals, and then answer the following 
question:
a.  How does the proportion of intervals constructed that 
contain m 5 100 compare to the stated confidence level of 
95%? On how many intervals was your proportion based? 
(Note—if you followed the instructions, this should be at 
least 1000.)
Experiment with three other confidence levels of your 
choice, and then answer the following question:
b.  In general, is the proportion of computed t confidence in-
tervals that contain m 5 100 close to the stated confidence 
level?
Part 2: When the population is normal but s is unknown, 
we construct a confidence interval for a population mean us-
ing a t critical value rather than a z critical value. How impor-
tant is this distinction?
Let’s investigate. Use the drop-down menu to change the 
box just below the method box that says “Means” from “t” 
to “z with s.” The applet will now construct intervals using 
the sample standard deviation, but will use a z critical value 
rather than the t critical value.
Use the applet to construct at least 1000 95% intervals, 
and then answer the following question:
c.  Comment on how the proportion of the computed inter-
vals that include the actual value of the population mean 
compares to the stated confidence level of 95%. Is this 
surprising? Explain why or why not.
Now experiment with some different samples sizes. What 
happens when n 5 20? n 5 50? n 5 100? Use what you have 
learned to write a paragraph explaining what these simula-
tions tell you about the advisability of using a z critical value 
in the construction of a confidence interval for m when s is 
unknown.
AC TIVIT Y 9.2 
An Alternative Confidence Interval for a Population Proportion
Technology Activity (Applet): This activity presumes 
that you have already worked through Activity 9.1.
Background: In Section 9.2, it was suggested that a confi-
dence interval of the form
p⁄
mod 6 sz critical valuedÎ
p⁄
mods1 2 p⁄
modd
n
where p⁄
mod 5 successes 1 2
n 1 4
 is an alternative to the usual 
large-sample z confidence interval. This alternative interval 
is preferred by many statisticians because, in repeated sam-
pling, the proportion of intervals constructed that include 
the actual value of the population proportion, p, tends to be 
closer to the stated confidence level. In this activity, we will 
explore how the “capture rates” for the two different interval 
estimation methods compare.
Open the applet (available at www.cengagebrain.com) 
called ConfidenceIntervals. You should see a screen like the 
one shown.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Select “Proportion” from the Method box drop-down 
menu, and then select “Large Sample z” from the drop-down 
menu of the second box. We will consider sampling from a 
population with p 5 .3 using a sample size of 40. In the ap-
plet window, enter p 5 .3 and n 5 40. Note that n 5 40 is 
large enough to satisfy np $ 10 and n(1 2 p) $ 10.
Set the “Intervals” box to 100, and then use the applet to 
construct a large number (at least 1000) of 95% confidence 
intervals.
1.	 How does the proportion of intervals constructed 
that include p 5 .3, the population proportion, com-
pare to .95? Does this surprise you? Explain.
Now use the drop-down menu to change “Large 
Sample z” to “Modified.” Now the applet will con-
struct the alternative confidence interval that is based 
on p⁄
mod. Use the applet to construct a large number (at 
least 1000) of 95% confidence intervals.
2.	 How does the proportion of intervals constructed 
that include p 5 .3, the population proportion, com-
pare to .95? Is this proportion closer to .95 than was 
the case for the large-sample z interval?
3.	 Experiment with different combinations of values 
of sample size and population proportion p. Can 
you find a combination for which the large sample 
z interval has a capture rate that is close to 95%? Can 
you find a combination for which it has a capture 
rate that is even farther from 95% than it was for  
n 5 40 and p 5 .3? How does the modified interval 
perform in each of these cases?
AC TIVIT Y 9.3 
Verifying Signatures on a Recall Petition
Background: In 2003, petitions were submitted to the 
California Secretary of State calling for the recall of Governor 
Gray Davis. Each of California’s 58 counties then had to 
report the number of valid signatures on the petitions from 
that county so that the State could determine whether there 
were enough valid signatures to certify the recall and set a 
date for the recall election. The following paragraph appeared 
in the San Luis Obispo Tribune (July 23, 2003):
In the campaign to recall Gov. Gray Davis, the secretary of 
state is reporting 16,000 verified signatures from San Luis 
Obispo County. In all, the County Clerk’s Office received 
18,866 signatures on recall petitions and was instructed by 
the state to check a random sample of 567. Out of those, 
84.48% were good. The verification process includes checking 
whether the signer is a registered voter and whether the ad-
dress and signature on the recall petition match the voter 
registration.
1.	 Use the data from the random sample of 567 San 
Luis Obispo County signatures to construct a 95% 
confidence interval for the proportion of petition 
signatures that are valid.
2.	 How do you think that the reported figure of 16,000 
verified signature for San Luis Obispo County was 
obtained?
3.	 Based on your confidence interval from Step 1, 
explain why you think that the reported figure of 
16,000 verified signatures is or is not reasonable.
AC TIVIT Y 9.4 
A Meaningful Paragraph
Write a meaningful paragraph that includes the following 
six terms: sample, population, confidence level, estimate, 
mean, margin of error.
A “meaningful paragraph” is a coherent piece writing in 
an appropriate context that uses all of the listed words. The 
paragraph should show that you understand the meanings of 
the terms and their relationship to one another. A sequence of 
sentences that just define the terms is not a meaningful para-
graph. When choosing a context, think carefully about the 
terms you need to use. Choosing a good context will make 
writing a meaningful paragraph easier.
Activities 
●  499
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

500 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
SUMMARY 
Key Concepts and Formulas
Term or Formula
Comment
Point estimate
A single number, based on 
sample data, that represents a 
plausible value of a population 
characteristic.
Unbiased statistic
A statistic that has a sampling 
distribution with a mean equal to 
the value of the population char-
acteristic to be estimated.
Confidence interval
An interval computed from sam-
ple data that provides a range of 
plausible values for a population 
characteristic.
Confidence level
A number that provides informa-
tion on how much “confidence” 
we can have in the method used 
to construct a confidence interval 
estimate. The confidence level 
specifies the percentage of all 
possible samples that will produce 
an interval containing the value of 
the population characteristic.
p⁄  6 (z critical value)Î
p⁄(1 2 p⁄)
n
A formula used to construct a 
confidence interval for p when 
the sample size is large.
Term or Formula
Comment
n 5 p(1 2 p)1
1.96
B 2
2
A formula used to compute the 
sample size necessary for esti-
mating p to within an amount B 
with 95% confidence. (For other 
confidence levels, replace 1.96 
with an appropriate z critical 
value.)
x 6 (z critical value) s
Ïn
A formula used to construct a 
confidence interval for m when s 
is known and either the sample 
size is large or the population 
distribution is normal.
x 6 (t critical value) s
Ïn
A formula used to construct a 
confidence interval for m when s 
is unknown and either the sam-
ple size is large or the population 
distribution is normal.
n 51
1.96s
B 2
2
A formula used to compute the 
sample size necessary for esti-
mating m to within an amount B 
with 95% confidence. (For other 
confidence levels, replace 1.96 
with an appropriate z critical 
value.)
CHAPTER REVIEW 
Exercises 9.56 - 9.69
9.56	 How much money do people spend on graduation 
gifts? In 2007, the National Retail Federation (www 
.nrf.com) surveyed 2815 consumers who reported 
that they bought one or more graduation gifts that 
year. The sample was selected in a way designed to 
produce a sample representative of adult Americans 
who purchased graduation gifts in 2007. For this 
sample, the mean amount spent per gift was $55.05. 
Suppose that the sample standard deviation was $20. 
Construct and interpret a 98% confidence interval 
for the mean amount of money spent per graduation 
gift in 2007. 
9.57	 ▼ “Tongue Piercing May Speed Tooth Loss, Researchers 
Say” is the headline of an article that appeared 
in the San Luis Obispo Tribune (June 5, 2002). The 
article describes a study of 52 young adults with 
pierced tongues. The researchers found receding 
gums, which can lead to tooth loss, in 18 of the 
participants. 
a.	 Construct a 95% confidence interval for the pro-
portion of young adults with pierced tongues who 
have receding gums. 
b.	What assumptions must be made for use of the 
z confidence interval to be appropriate?
9.58	 In a study of 1710 schoolchildren in Australia (Herald 
Sun, October 27, 1994), 1060 children indicated that 
they normally watch TV before school in the morn-
ing. (Interestingly, only 35% of the parents said their 
children watched TV before school!) 
a.	 Construct a 95% confidence interval for the true 
proportion of Australian children who say they 
watch TV before school.  
b.	What assumption about the sample must be true 
for the method used to construct the interval to be 
valid?
9.59	 The authors of the paper “Short-Term Health and 
Economic Benefits of Smoking Cessation: Low Birth 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Weight” (Pediatrics [1999]: 1312–​1320) investigated the 
medical cost associated with babies born to mothers 
who smoke. The paper included estimates of mean 
medical cost for low-birth-weight babies for differ-
ent ethnic groups. For a sample of 654 Hispanic 
low-birth-weight babies, the mean medical cost was 
$55,007 and the standard error (s/Ïn) was $3011. 
For a sample of 13 Native American low-birth-weight 
babies, the mean and standard error were $73,418 
and $29,577, respectively. Explain why the two stan-
dard errors are so different. 
9.60	 The article “Consumers Show Increased Liking for 
Diesel Autos” (USA Today, January 29, 2003) reported 
that 27% of U.S. consumers would opt for a diesel 
car if it ran as cleanly and performed as well as a 
car with a gas engine. Suppose that you suspect that 
the proportion might be different in your area and 
that you want to conduct a survey to estimate this 
proportion for the adult residents of your city. 
a.	 What is the required sample size if you want to 
estimate this proportion to within .05 with 95% 
confidence? Compute the required sample size 
first using .27 as a preliminary estimate of p and 
then using the conservative value of .5. 
b.	How do the two sample sizes compare? What 
sample size would you recommend for this study?
9.61	 Seventy-seven students at the University of Virginia 
were asked to keep a diary of conversations with 
their mothers, recording any lies they told during 
these conversations (San Luis Obispo Telegram-Tribune, 
August 16, 1995). It was reported that the mean num-
ber of lies per conversation was 0.5. Suppose that the 
standard deviation (which was not reported) was 0.4.
a.	 Suppose that this group of 77 is a random sample 
from the population of students at this university. 
Construct a 95% confidence interval for the 
mean number of lies per conversation for this 
population. 
b.	The interval in Part (a) does not include 0. Does 
this imply that all students lie to their mothers? 
Explain.
9.62	 A manufacturer of small appliances purchases plastic 
handles for coffeepots from an outside vendor. If a 
handle is cracked, it is considered defective and must 
be discarded. A large shipment of plastic handles is 
received. The proportion of defective handles p is 
of interest. How many handles from the shipment 
should be inspected to estimate p to within 0.1 with 
95% confidence? 
9.63	 An article in the Chicago Tribune (August 29, 1999) 
reported that in a poll of residents of the Chicago 
suburbs, 43% felt that their financial situation had 
improved during the past year. The following state-
ment is from the article: “The findings of this Tribune 
poll are based on interviews with 930 randomly 
selected suburban residents. The sample included 
suburban Cook County plus DuPage, Kane, Lake, 
McHenry, and Will Counties. In a sample of this size, 
one can say with 95% certainty that results will dif-
fer by no more than 3%t from results obtained if all 
residents had been included in the poll.”
Comment on this statement. Give a statistical argu-
ment to justify the claim that the estimate of 43% is 
within 3% of the true proportion of residents who 
feel that their financial situation has improved. 
9.64	 A manufacturer of college textbooks is interested in 
estimating the strength of the bindings produced 
by a particular binding machine. Strength can be 
measured by recording the force required to pull the 
pages from the binding. If this force is measured in 
pounds, how many books should be tested to esti-
mate the mean force required to break the binding 
to within 0.1 pounds with 95% conficence? Assume 
that s is known to be 0.8 pound.
9.65	 High-profile legal cases have many people reevalu-
ating the jury system. Many believe that juries in 
criminal trials should be able to convict on less than 
a unanimous vote. To assess support for this idea, in-
vestigators asked each individual in a random sample 
of Californians whether they favored allowing convic-
tion by a 10–2 verdict in criminal cases not involv-
ing the death penalty. The Associated Press (San Luis 
Obispo Telegram-Tribune, September 13, 1995) reported 
that 71% supported the 10–2 verdict. Suppose that 
the sample size for this survey was n 5 900. Compute 
and interpret a 99% confidence interval for the pro-
portion of Californians who favor the 10–​2 verdict.
9.66	 The confidence intervals presented in this chapter 
give both lower and upper bounds on plausible val-
ues for the population characteristic being estimated. 
In some instances, only an upper bound or only a 
lower bound is appropriate. Using the same reasoning 
that gave the large sample interval in Section 9.3, we 
can say that when n is large, 99% of all samples have
m , x 1 2.33 s
Ïn
(because the area under the z curve to the left of 2.33 
is .99). Thus, x 1 2.33 s
Ïn is a 99% upper confi-
dence bound for m. Use the data of Example 9.9 to 
calculate the 99% upper confidence bound for the 
true mean wait time for bypass patients in Ontario.  ​  ​
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Chapter Review Exercises 
●  501
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

502 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
9.67	 When n is large, the statistic s is approximately 
unbiased for estimating s and has approximately a 
normal distribution. The standard deviation of this 
statistic when the population distribution is normal 
is ss < s
Ï2n which can be estimated by 
s
Ï2n. An 
approximate large-sample confidence interval for the 
population standard deviation s is then
s 6 sz critical valued
s
Ï2n
Use the data of Example 9.9 to obtain a 95% con-
fidence interval for the true standard deviation of 
waiting time for angiography.  ​  ​
9.68	 The interval from 22.33 to 1.75 captures an area  
of .95 under the z curve. This implies that another 
large-sample 95% confidence interval for m has lower 
limit x 2 2.33 s
Ïn and upper limit x 1 1.75 s
Ïn. 
Would you recommend using this 95% interval over 
the 95% interval x 6 1.96 s
Ïn discussed in the text? 
Explain. (Hint: Look at the width of each interval.) 
9.69	 The eating habits of 12 bats were examined in the 
article “Foraging Behavior of the Indian False Vampire 
Bat” (Biotropica [1991]: 63–​67). These bats consume 
insects and frogs. For these 12 bats, the mean time 
to consume a frog was x 5 21.9 minutes. Suppose 
that the standard deviation was s 5 7.7 minutes. 
Construct and interpret a 90% confidence interval 
for the mean suppertime of a vampire bat whose 
meal consists of a frog. What assumptions must 
be reasonable for the one-sample t interval to be 
appropriate?  ​  ​
​
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Technology Notes
Confidence Intervals for Proportions
JMP
Summarized data
1.  Enter the data table into the JMP data table with catego-
ries in the first column and counts in the second column
2.  Click Analyze and select Distribution
3.  Click and drag the first column name from the box un-
der Select Columns to the box next to Y, Columns
4.  Click and drag the second column name from the box 
under Select Columns to the box next to Freq
5.  Click OK
6.  Click the red arrow next to the column name and click 
Confidence Interval then select the appropriate level or 
select Other to input a level that is not listed
Raw Data
1.  Enter the raw data into a column
2.  Click Analyze and select Distribution
3.  Click and drag the first column name from the box un-
der Select Columns to the box next to Y, Columns
4.  Click OK
5.  Click the red arrow next to the column name and click 
Confidence Interval then select the appropriate level or 
select Other to input a level that is not listed
Minitab
Summarized data
1.  Click Stat then click Basic Statistics then click  
1 Proportion…
2.  Click the radio button next to Summarized data
3.  In the box next to Number of Trials: type the value for 
n, the total number of trials
4.  In the box next to Number of events: type the value for 
the number of successes
5.  Click Options…
6.  Input the appropriate confidence level in the box next to 
Confidence Level
7.  Check the box next to Use test and interval based on 
normal distribution
8.  Click OK
9.  Click OK
Raw data
1.  Input the raw data into a column
2.  Click Stat then click Basic Statistics then click  
1 Proportion…
© Cengage Learning® 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.  Click in the box under Samples in columns:
4.  Double click the column name where the raw data is 
stored
5.  Click Options…
6.  Input the appropriate confidence level in the box next to 
Confidence Level
7.  Check the box next to Use test and interval based on 
normal distribution
8.  Click OK
9.  Click OK
SPSS
SPSS does not have the functionality to automatically pro-
duce confidence intervals for a population proportion.
Excel
Excel does not have the functionality to automatically pro-
duce confidence intervals for a population proportion. How-
ever, you can manually type in the formula for the lower and 
upper limits separately into two different cells to have Excel 
calculate the result for you.
TI-83/84
1.  Press the STAT key
2.  Highlight TESTS
3.  Highlight 1-PropZInterval and press ENTER
4.  Next to x type the number of successes
5.  Next to n type the number of trials, n
6.  Next to C-Level type the value for the confidence level
7.  Highlight Calculate and press ENTER
TI-Nspire
1.  Enter the Calculate Scratchpad
2.  Press the menu key then select 6:Statistics then select 
6:Confidence Intervals then 5:1-Prop z Interval… 
then press enter
3.  In the box next to Successes, x type the number of 
successes
4.  In the box next to n type the number of trials, n
5.  In the box next to C Level type the confidence level
6.  Press OK
Confidence Interval for m Based on t-distribution
JMP
1.  Input the data into a column
2.  Click Analyze and select Distribution
3.  Click and drag the column name from the box under 
Select Columns to the box next to Y, Response
4.  Click OK
5.  Click the red arrow next to the column name and select 
Confidence Interval then select the appropriate confi-
dence level or click Other to specify a level
Minitab
Summarized data
1.  Click Stat then click Basic Statistics then click  
1-sample t…
2.  Click the radio button next to Summarized data
3.  In the box next to Sample size: type the value for n, the 
sample size
4.  In the box next to Mean: type the value for the sample 
mean
5.  In the box next to Standard deviation: type the value 
for the sample standard deviation
6.  Click Options…
7.  Input the appropriate confidence level in the box next to 
Confidence Level
8.  Click OK
9.  Click OK
Raw data
1.  Input the raw data into a column
2.  Click Stat then click Basic Statistics then click  
1-sample t…
3.  Click in the box under Samples in columns:
4.  Double click the column name where the raw data are 
stored
5.  Click Options…
6.  Input the appropriate confidence level in the box next to 
Confidence Level
7.  Click OK
8.  Click OK
SPSS
1.  Input the data into a column
2.  Click Analyze then select Compare Means then select 
One-Sample T Test…
3.  Highlight the column name for the variable
4.  Click the arrow to move the variable to the Test 
Variable(s): box
5.  Click Options…
6.  Input the appropriate confidence level in the box next to 
Confidence Interval Percentage: 
7.  Click Continue
8.  Click OK
Note: The confidence interval for the population means is in 
the One-Sample Test table.
Excel
Note: Excel does not have the functionality to produce a 
confidence interval for a single population mean automati-
cally. However, you can use Excel to produce the estimate for 
the sample mean and the margin of error for the confidence 
interval using the steps below.
1.  Input the raw data into a column
2.  Click the Data ribbon
3.  Click Data Analysis in the Analysis group
Note: If you do not see Data Analysis listed on the 
Ribbon, see the Technology Notes for Chapter 2 for 
instructions on installing this add-on.
4.  Select Descriptive Statistics from the dialog box and  
click OK
Technology Notes 
●  503
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

504 
●  Chapter 9  Estimation Using a Single Sample
5.  Click in the box next to Input Range: and select the data 
(if you used a column title, check the box next to Labels in  
first row)
6.  Click the box next to Confidence Level for Mean: 
7.  In the box to the right of Confidence Level for Mean: 
type in the confidence level you are using
8.  Click OK
Note: The margin of error can be found in the row titled 
Confidence Level. In order to find the lower limit of the 
confidence interval, subtract this from the mean shown in 
the output. To find the upper limit of the confidence interval, 
add this to the mean shown in the output.
TI-83/84
Summarized data
1.  Press STAT
2.  Highlight TESTS
3.  Highlight TInterval… and press ENTER
4.  Highlight Stats and press ENTER
5.  Next to x input the value for the sample mean
6.  Next to sx input the value for the sample standard  
deviation
7.  Next to n input the value for the sample size
8.  Next to C-Level input the appropriate confidence level
9.  Highlight Calculate and press ENTER
Raw data
1.  Enter the data into L1 (In order to access lists press the 
STAT key, highlight the option called Edit… then press 
ENTER)
2.  Press STAT
3.  Highlight TESTS
4.  Highlight TInterval… and press ENTER
5.  Highlight Data and press ENTER
6.  Next to C-Level input the appropriate confidence level
7.  Highlight Calculate and press ENTER
TI-Nspire
Summarized data
1.  Enter the Calculate Scratchpad
2.  Press the menu key and select 6:Statistics then 6:Con-
fidence Intervals then 2:t Interval… and press enter
3.  From the drop-down menu select Stats
4.  Press OK
5.  Next to x input the value for the sample mean
6.  Next to sx input the value for the sample standard  
deviation
7.  Next to n input the value for the sample size
8.  Next to C Level input the appropriate confidence level
9.  Press OK
Raw data
1.  Enter the data into a data list (In order to access data lists 
select the spreadsheet option and press enter)
Note: Be sure to title the list by selecting the top row of 
the column and typing a title.
2.  Press the menu key and select 4:Statistics then 3:Con-
fidence Intervals then 2:t Interval… and press enter
3.  From the drop-down menu select Data
4.  Press OK
5.  Next to List select the list containing your data
6.  Next to C-Level input the appropriate confidence level
7.  Press OK
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

505
In Chapter 9, we considered situations in which the 
primary goal was to estimate the unknown value of 
some population characteristic. Sample data can also 
be used to decide whether some claim or hypothesis 
about a population characteristic is plausible. 
For example, sharing of prescription drugs is a 
practice that has many associated risks. Is this a 
common practice among teens? Is there evidence 
that more than 10% of teens have shared prescription 
medications with a friend? The article “Many Teens 
Share Prescription Drugs” (Calgary Herald, August 3, 2009) 
summarized the results of a survey of a representative 
sample of 592 U.S. teens age 12 to 17 and reported 
that 118 of those surveyed admitted to having shared 
a prescription drug with a friend. With p representing 
this proportion for all U.S. teens age 12 to 17, we can 
use the hypothesis testing methods of this chapter to 
decide whether the sample data provide convincing 
evidence that p is greater than .10.
As another example, a report released by the National Association of Colleges and 
Employers stated that the average starting salary for students graduating with a 
bachelor’s degree in 2010 is $48,351 (“Winter 2010 Salary Survey,” www.naceweb.org). 
Suppose that you are interested in investigating whether the mean starting salary for 
students graduating from your university this year is greater than the 2010 average of 
$48,351. You select a random sample of n 5 40 graduates from the current graduating 
class of your university and determine the starting salary of each one. 
If this sample produced a mean starting salary of $49,958 and a standard deviation 
of $1214, is it reasonable to conclude that m, the mean starting salary for all graduates 
in the current graduating class at your university, is greater than $48,351? We will see 
in this chapter how the sample data can be analyzed to decide whether m . 48,351 is a 
reasonable conclusion.
Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
Chapter 10: Learning Objectives
Students will understand:
●
●that rejecting the null hypothesis implies strong support for the alternative 
hypothesis.
●
●why failing to reject the null hypothesis does not imply strong support for the 
null hypothesis.
●
●the reasoning used to reach a decision in a hypothesis test.
PictureNet/Spirit/Corbis 
CHAPTER 10
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

506 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
A hypothesis is a claim or statement about the value of a single population characteristic 
or the values of several population characteristics. The following are examples of legitimate 
hypotheses:
m 5 1000, where m is the mean number of characters in an e-mail message
p , .01, where p is the proportion of e-mail messages that are undeliverable
In contrast, the statements x 5 1000 and p⁄ 5 .01 are not hypotheses, because x and p⁄ are 
sample characteristics.
A test of hypotheses is a method that uses sample data to decide ­between two competing 
claims (hypotheses) about a population characteristic. One hypothesis might be m 5 1000 
and the other m Þ 1000 or one hypothesis might be p 5 .01 and the other p , .01. If it 
were possible to carry out a census of the entire population, we would know which of the 
two hypotheses is correct, but usually we must decide between them using information 
from a sample.
A criminal trial is a familiar situation in which a choice between two contradictory 
claims must be made. The person accused of the crime must be judged either guilty or 
not guilty. Under the U.S. system of justice, the individual on trial is initially presumed 
not guilty. Only strong evidence to the contrary causes the not guilty claim to be rejected 
in favor of a guilty verdict. The burden is thus put on the prosecution to prove the guilty 
claim. The French perspective in criminal proceedings is the opposite. Once enough evi-
dence has been presented to justify bringing an individual to trial, the initial assumption 
is that the accused is guilty. The burden of proof then falls on the accused to establish 
otherwise.
As in a judicial proceeding, we initially assume that a particular hypothesis, called the 
null hypothesis, is the correct one. We then consider the evidence (the sample data) and 
reject the null hypothesis in favor of the competing hypothesis, called the alternative 
hypothesis, only if there is convincing evidence against the null hypothesis.
Null hypothesis: A claim about a population characteristic that is initially 
assumed to be true. The null hypothesis is denoted by H0.
Alternative hypothesis: A competing claim about a population characteristic. 
The alternative hypothesis is denoted by Ha.
In carrying out a test of H0 versus Ha, the null hypothesis H0 will be rejected in 
favor of Ha only if sample evidence strongly suggests that H0 is false. 
If the sample does not provide such evidence, H0 will not be rejected. 
The two possible conclusions are reject H0 or fail to reject H0.
DEFINITION
Students will be able to:
●
●translate a research question into null and alternative hypotheses.
●
●describe Type I and Type II errors in context.
●
●carry out a large-sample z test for a population proportion and interpret the 
results in context.
●
●carry out a t test for a population mean and interpret the results in context.
●
●describe the effect of the significance level and the sample size on the power 
of a test.
  10.1  
Hypotheses and Test Procedures
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

  10.1   Hypotheses and Test Procedures 
●  507
Example 10.1 
Tennis Ball Diameters
Because of variation in the manufacturing process, tennis balls produced by a particu-
lar machine do not have identical diameters. Let m denote the mean diameter for all 
tennis balls currently being produced. Suppose that the machine was initially calibrated 
to achieve the design specification m 5 3 inches. However, the manufacturer is now 
concerned that the diameters no longer conform to this specification. If sample evidence 
suggests that m ? 3 inches, the production process will be halted while the machine is 
recalibrated. Because stopping production is costly, the manufacturer wants to be quite 
sure that m ? 3 inches before undertaking recalibration. Under these circumstances, a 
sensible choice of hypotheses is
H0:  ​m 5 3 (the specification is being met, so recalibration is unnecessary)
Ha:  ​m ? 3 (the specification is not being met, so recalibration is necessary)
H0 would be rejected in favor of Ha only if the sample provides convincing evidence against 
the null hypothesis.
■
Example 10.2 
Compact Florescent Lightbulb Lifetimes
Compact fluorescent (cfl) lightbulbs are much more energy efficient than standard 
incandescent light bulbs. Ecobulb brand 60-watt cfl lightbulbs state on the package 
“Average life 8,000 hours.” Let m denote the true mean life of Ecobulb 60-watt cfl lightbulbs. 
Then the advertised claim is m 5 8000 hours. People who purchase this brand would be 
unhappy if m is actually less than the advertised value. 
Suppose that a sample of Ecobulb cfl lightbulbs is selected and tested. The lifetime 
for each bulb in the sample is recorded. The sample results can then be used to test the 
hypothesis m 5 8000 hours against the hypothesis m , 8000 hours. The accusation 
that the company is overstating the mean lifetime is a serious one, and it is reasonable to 
require convincing evidence before concluding that m , 8000. This suggests that the claim 
m 5 8000 should be selected as the null hypothesis and that m , 8000 should be selected 
as the alternative hypothesis. Then
H0:  ​m 5 8000
would be rejected in favor of
Ha:  ​m , 8000
only if sample evidence strongly suggests that the initial assumption, m 5 8000 hours, is 
not plausible.
■
Because the alternative hypothesis in Example 10.2 asserted that m , 8000 (the 
actual mean lifetime is less than the advertised value), it might have seemed sensible to 
state H0 as the inequality m $ 8000. The assertion m $ 8000 is in fact the implicit null 
hypothesis, but we will state H0 explicitly as a claim of equality. There are several reasons 
for this. First, the development of a decision rule is most easily understood if there is 
only a single hypothesized value of m (or p or whatever other population characteristic is 
under consideration). Second, suppose that the sample data provided compelling evidence 
that H0: m 5 8000 should be rejected in favor of Ha: m , 8000. This means that we 
were convinced by the sample data that the population mean was smaller than 8000. It 
follows that we would have also been convinced that the population mean could not have 
been 8001 or 8010 or any other value that was larger than 8000. As a consequence, the 
conclusion when testing H0: m 5 8000 versus Ha: m , 8000 is always the same as the 
conclusion for a test where the null hypothesis is H0: m $ 8000. For these reasons, it is 
customary to state the null hypothesis H0 as a claim of equality.
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

508 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
The form of a null hypothesis is 
H0:  ​population characteristic 5 hypothesized value 
where the hypothesized value is a specific number determined by the problem 
context.
The alternative hypothesis will have one of the following three forms:
Ha:  ​population characteristic . hypothesized value 
Ha:  ​population characteristic , hypothesized value
Ha:  ​population characteristic ? hypothesized value
Notice that we can test H0: p 5 .1 versus Ha: p , .1, but we can’t test H0: m 5 50 versus 
Ha: m . 100. The number appearing in the alternative hypothesis must be identical to the 
hypothesized value in H0.
Example 10.3 illustrates how the selection of H0 (the claim initially assumed to be true) 
and Ha depends on the objectives of a study.
Example 10.3 
Evaluating a New Medical Treatment
A medical research team has been given the task of evaluating a new laser treatment for 
certain types of tumors. Consider the following two scenarios:
Scenario 1:  ​The current standard treatment is considered reasonable and safe by the 
medical community, has no major side effects, and has a known success rate 
of 0.85 (85%).
Scenario 2:  ​The current standard treatment sometimes has serious side effects, is costly, 
and has a known success rate of 0.30 (30%).
In the first scenario, research efforts would probably be directed toward determining 
whether the new treatment has a higher success rate than the standard treatment. Unless 
convincing evidence of this is presented, it is unlikely that current medical practice would 
be changed. With p representing the true proportion of successes for the laser treatment, 
the following hypotheses would be tested:
H0:  ​p 5 .85  versus  Ha:  ​p . .85
In this case, rejection of the null hypothesis indicates convincing evidence that the success 
rate is higher for the new treatment.
In the second scenario, the current standard treatment does not have much to recommend 
it. The new laser treatment may be considered preferable because of cost or because it has 
fewer or less serious side effects, as long as the success rate for the new procedure is no worse 
than that of the standard treatment. Here, researchers might decide to test the hypothesis
H0:  ​p 5 .30  versus  Ha:  ​p , .30
If the null hypothesis is rejected, the new treatment will not be put forward as an alternative 
to the standard treatment, because there is strong evidence that the laser method has a 
lower success rate.
If the null hypothesis is not rejected, we are able to conclude only that there is not 
convincing evidence that the success rate for the laser treatment is lower than that for the 
standard. This is not the same as saying that we have evidence that the laser treatment is as 
good as the standard treatment. If medical practice were to embrace the new procedure, 
it would not be because it has a higher success rate but rather because it costs less or has 
fewer side effects, and there is not strong evidence that it has a lower success rate than the 
standard treatment.	
■
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

  10.1   Hypotheses and Test Procedures 
●  509
A statistical hypothesis test is only capable of demonstrating strong support for 
the alternative hypothesis (by rejection of the null hypothesis). When the null 
­hypothesis is not rejected, it does not mean strong support for H0—only lack of 
strong evidence against it.
In the lightbulb scenario of Example 10.2, if H0: m 5 8000 is rejected in favor of 
Ha: m , 8000, it is because we have strong evidence that actual mean lifetime is less than 
the advertised value. However, nonrejection of H0 does not necessarily provide strong sup-
port for the advertised claim. If the objective is to demonstrate that the average lifetime 
is greater than 8000 hours, the hypotheses that would be tested are H0: m 5 8000 versus 
Ha: m . 8000. Then rejection of H0 indicates strong evidence that m . 8000. When deciding 
which alternative hypothesis to use, keep the research objectives in mind.
EXERCISES 10.1 - 10.11
10.1	 Explain why the statement x 5 50 is not a legitimate 
hypothesis.
10.2	 For the following pairs, indicate which do not 
comply with the rules for setting up hypotheses, and 
explain why:
a.	 H0: m 5 15, Ha: m 5 15
b.	H0: p 5 .4, Ha: p . .6
c.	 H0: m 5 123, Ha: m , 123 ​ ​
d.	H0: m 5 123, Ha: m 5 125
e.	 H0: p⁄ 5 .1, Ha: p⁄ Þ .1
10.3	 To determine whether the pipe welds in a nuclear 
power plant meet specifications, a random sample 
of welds is selected and tests are conducted on each 
weld in the sample. Weld strength is measured as 
the force required to break the weld. Suppose that 
the specifications state that the mean strength of 
welds should exceed 100 lb/in2. The inspection team 
decides to test H0: m 5 100 versus Ha: m . 100. 
Explain why this alternative hypothesis was chosen 
rather than m , 100.
10.4	 Do state laws that allow private citizens to carry 
concealed weapons result in a reduced crime rate? 
The author of a study carried out by the Brookings 
Institution is reported as saying, “The strongest thing 
I could say is that I don’t see any strong evidence 
that they are reducing crime” (San Luis Obispo Tribune, 
January 23, 2003).
a.	 Is this conclusion consistent with testing
H0:  ​concealed weapons laws reduce crime
versus
Ha:  ​concealed weapons laws do not reduce crime
or with testing
H0:  ​concealed weapons laws do not reduce crime
versus
Ha:  ​concealed weapons laws reduce crime
Explain.
b.	Does the stated conclusion indicate that the null 
hypothesis was rejected or not rejected? Explain.
10.5	 The MMR vaccine is a measles-mumps-rubella 
vaccine. Consider the following quote from the 
article “Review Finds No Link Between Vaccine and 
Autism” (San Luis Obispo Tribune, October 19, 2005): 
“‘We found no evidence that giving MMR causes 
Crohn’s disease and/or autism in the children that 
get the MMR,’ said Tom Jefferson, one of the authors 
of The Cochrane Review. ‘That does not mean it 
doesn’t cause it. It means we could find no evidence 
of it.’ ” 
In the context of a hypothesis test with the null 
hypothesis being that MMR vaccine does not cause 
autism, explain why the author could not conclude 
that the MMR vaccine does not cause autism. (Hint: 
See discussion following Example 10.3.)
10.6	 CareerBuilder.com conducted a survey to learn 
about the proportion of employers who had ever 
sent an employee home because they were dressed 
inappropriately (June 17, 2008, www.careerbuilder 
.com). Suppose you are interested in determining 
if the resulting data provided strong evidence in 
support of the claim that more than one-third of 
employers have sent an employee home to change 
clothes. What pair of hypotheses should you test in 
order to answer this question?
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

510 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
10.7	 A study sponsored by the American Savings Educa-
tion Council (“Preparing for Their Future: A Look at 
the Financial State of Gen X and Gen Y,” March 2008) 
included data from a survey of 1752 people age 19 
to 36. One of the survey questions asked participants 
how satisfied they were with their current financial 
situation. Suppose you want to determine if the 
survey data provides convincing evidence that fewer 
than 10% of adults age 19 to 39 are very satisfied 
with their current financial situation. With p 5 the 
proportion of adults age 19 to 39 who are very satis-
fied with their financial situation, what hypotheses 
should you test? ​ ​ ​ ​
10.8	 A researcher speculates that because of differences in 
diet, Japanese children may have a lower mean blood 
cholesterol level than U.S. children do. Suppose that 
the mean level for U.S. children is known to be 170. 
Let m represent the mean blood cholesterol level for 
all Japanese children. What hypotheses should the 
researcher test?  ​ ​
10.9	 A county commissioner must vote on a resolution 
that would commit substantial resources to the 
construction of a sewer in an outlying residential 
area. Her fiscal decisions have been criticized in the 
past, so she decides to take a survey of constituents 
to find out whether they favor spending money for
a sewer system. She will vote to appropriate funds 
only if she is convinced that a majority of the people 
in her district favor the measure. What hypotheses 
should she test?  ​ ​
10.10	  A cruise ship charges passengers $3 for a can of 
soda. Because of passenger complaints, the ship 
manager has decided to try out a plan with a lower 
price. He thinks that with a lower price, more cans 
will be sold, which would mean that the ship would 
still make a reasonable total profit. With the old 
pricing, the mean number of cans sold per passenger 
for a 10-day trip was 10.3 cans.
Suppose m represents the mean number of cans 
per passenger for the new pricing. What hypotheses 
should the ship manager test if he wants to 
determine if the mean number of cans sold is higher 
for the new pricing plan?  ​ ​
10.11	 The report “How Teens Use Media” (Nielsen, June 2009) 
says that 83% of U.S. teens use text messaging. Sup-
pose you plan to select a random sample of 400 students 
at the local high school and will ask each one if he or 
she uses text messaging. You plan to use the resulting 
data to decide if there is evidence that the proportion 
of students at the high school who use text messaging 
differs from the national figure given in the Nielsen 
report. What hypotheses should you test?
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available ​ ​ ​ ​
Once hypotheses have been formulated, a test procedure uses sample data to determine 
whether H0 should be rejected. Just as a jury may reach the wrong verdict in a trial, there 
is some chance that using a test procedure with sample data may lead us to the wrong 
conclusion about a population characteristic. In this section, we discuss the kinds of errors 
that can occur and consider how the choice of a test procedure influences the chances of 
these errors.
One erroneous conclusion in a criminal trial is for a jury to convict an innocent person, 
and another is for a guilty person to be set free. Similarly, there are two different types of 
errors that might be made when making a decision in a hypothesis testing problem. One 
type of error involves rejecting H0 even though the null hypothesis is true. The second type 
of error results from failing to reject H0 when it is false. These errors are known as Type I 
and Type II errors, respectively.
Type I error: The error of rejecting H0 when H0 is true
Type II error: The error of failing to reject H0 when H0 is false
DEFINITION
The only way to guarantee that neither type of error occurs is to base the decision on a 
census of the entire population. Risk of error is the price paid for basing the decision on 
sample data.
 10.2  
Errors in Hypothesis Testing
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 10.2   Errors in Hypothesis Testing 
●  511
Example 10.4 
On-Time Arrivals
The U.S. Bureau of Transportation Statistics reports that for the 12 months ending in July 2012, 
83.7% of all domestic passenger flights arrived on time (meaning within 15 minutes of the 
scheduled arrival). Suppose that an airline with a poor on-time record decides to offer its 
employees a bonus if, in an upcoming month, the airline’s proportion of on-time flights 
exceeds the overall industry rate of .837. We can use p to represent the actual proportion of 
the airline’s flights that are on time during the month of interest. A random sample of flights 
might be selected and used as a basis for choosing between
H0:  ​p 5 .837  and  Ha:  ​p . .837
In this context, a Type I error (rejecting a true H0) results in the airline rewarding its 
employees when in fact the actual proportion of on-time flights did not exceed .837.  
A Type II error (not rejecting a false H0) results in the airline employees not receiving a 
reward that they deserved.
■
Example 10.5 
Slowing the Growth of Tumors
In 2004, Vertex Pharmaceuticals, a biotechnology company, issued a press release 
announcing that it had filed an application with the Food and Drug Administration to 
begin clinical trials of an experimental drug VX-680 that had been found to reduce the 
growth rate of pancreatic and colon cancer tumors in animal studies (New York Times, 
February 24, 2004).
Let m denote the true mean growth rate of tumors for patients receiving the experimental 
drug. Data resulting from the planned clinical trials can be used to test
H0:  ​m 5 mean growth rate of tumors without the experimental drug
versus
Ha:  ​m , mean growth rate of tumors without the experimental drug
The null hypothesis states that the experimental drug is not effective—that the mean growth 
rate of tumors for patients receiving the experimental drug is the same as for patients who 
do not take the experimental drug. The alternative hypothesis states that the experimental 
drug is effective in reducing the mean growth rate of tumors. 
In this context, a Type I error consists of incorrectly concluding that the experimental 
drug is effective in slowing the growth rate of tumors. A potential consequence of making 
a Type I error would be that the company would continue to devote resources to the 
development of the drug when it really is not effective. 
A Type II error consists of not concluding that the experimental drug is effective when in 
fact the mean growth rate of tumors is reduced. A potential consequence of making a Type II 
error is that the company might abandon development of a drug that was effective.
■
Examples 10.4 and 10.5 illustrate the two different types of error that might occur when 
testing hypotheses. The associated consequences of making a Type I and a Type II error are 
quite different. The accompanying box introduces the terminology and notation used to 
describe error probabilities.
The probability of a Type I error is denoted by a and is called the significance 
level of the test. For example, a test with a 5 .01 is said to have a significance 
level of .01.
The probability of a Type II error is denoted by b.
Understand the context ❭
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

512 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
Example 10.6 
Blood Test for Ovarian Cancer
Women with ovarian cancer usually are not diagnosed until the disease is in an advanced 
stage, when it is most difficult to treat. The paper “Diagnostic Markers for Early Detection 
of Ovarian Cancer” (Clinical Cancer Research [2008]: 1065–1072) describes a new approach to 
diagnosing ovarian cancer that is based on using six different blood biomarkers (a blood 
biomarker is a biochemical characteristic that is measured in laboratory testing). The 
authors report the following results using the six biomarkers:
●
●For 156 women known to have ovarian cancer, the biomarkers correctly identified 
151 as having ovarian cancer.
●
●For 362 women known not to have ovarian cancer, the biomarkers correctly identified 
360 of them as being ovarian cancer free.
We can think of using this blood test to choose between two hypotheses:
H0:  ​woman has ovarian cancer
Ha:  ​woman does not have ovarian cancer
Notice that although these are not “statistical hypotheses” (statements about a population 
characteristic), the possible decision errors are analogous to Type I and Type II errors.
In this situation, believing that a woman with ovarian cancer is cancer free would be a 
Type I error—rejecting the hypothesis of ovarian cancer when it is in fact true. Believing 
that a woman who is actually cancer free does have ovarian cancer is a Type II error—not 
rejecting the null hypothesis when it is in fact false. 
Based on the  study results, we can estimate the error probabilities. The probability of 
a Type I error, a, is approximately 5/156 5 .032. The probability of a Type II error, b, is 
approximately 2/362 5 .006.
■
The ideal test procedure would result in both a 5 0 and b 5 0. However, if we must base 
our decision on incomplete information—a sample rather than a census—it is impossible 
to achieve this ideal. The standard test procedures allow us to control a, but they provide 
no direct control over b. Because a represents the probability of  rejecting a true null 
hypothesis, selecting a significance level a 5 .05 results in a test procedure that, used over 
and over with different random samples, rejects a true H0 about 5 times in 100. Selecting 
a 5 .01 results in a test procedure with a Type I error rate of 1% in long-term repeated use. 
Choosing a small value for a implies that the user wants  a procedure for which the risk of 
a Type I error is quite small.
One question arises naturally at this point: If we can select a, the probability of making a 
Type I error, why would we ever select a 5 .05 rather than a 5 .01? Why not always select 
a very small value for a? To achieve a small probability of making a Type I error, we would 
need the corresponding test procedure to require the evidence against H0 to be very strong 
before the null hypothesis can be rejected. Although this makes a Type I error unlikely, it 
increases the risk of a Type II error (not rejecting H0 when it should have been rejected). 
The choice will depend on the consequences of Type I and Type II errors. If a Type II error 
has serious consequences, it may be a good idea to select a somewhat larger value for a.
In general, there is a compromise between small a and small b, leading to the following 
widely accepted principle for specifying a test procedure.
After assessing the consequences of Type I and Type II errors, identify the largest a 
that is tolerable for the problem. Then use a test procedure with this maximum  
acceptable value as the level of significance (because using a smaller a increases b). 
In other words, use the largest acceptable value for a.
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 10.2   Errors in Hypothesis Testing 
●  513
Example 10.7 
Lead in Tap Water
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has adopted what is known as the Lead and 
Copper Rule, which defines drinking water as unsafe if the concentration of lead is 15 parts 
per billion (ppb) or greater or if the concentration of copper is 1.3 parts per million (ppm) 
or greater. 
With m denoting the mean concentration of lead, the manager of a community water 
system might use lead level measurements from a sample of water specimens to test
H0:  ​m 5 15  versus  Ha:  ​m , 15
The null hypothesis (which also implicitly includes the m . 15 case) states that the mean 
lead concentration is excessive by EPA standards. The alternative hypothesis states that 
the mean lead concentration is at an acceptable level and that the water system meets EPA 
standards for lead.
In this context, a Type I error leads to the conclusion that a water source meets EPA 
standards for lead when in fact it does not. Possible consequences of this type of error 
include health risks associated with excessive lead consumption (for example, increased 
blood pressure, hearing loss, and, in severe cases, anemia and kidney damage). 
A Type II error is to conclude that the water does not meet EPA standards for lead 
when in fact it actually does. Possible consequences of a Type II error include elimination 
of a community water source. Because a Type I error might result in potentially serious 
public health risks, a small value of a (Type I error probability), such as a 5 .01, could 
be selected. Of course, selecting a small value for a increases the risk of a Type II error. 
If the community has only one water source, a Type II error could also have very serious 
consequences for the community, and we might want to rethink the choice of a.	
■
Understand the context ❭
10.12	 Researchers at the University of Washington and 
Harvard University analyzed records of breast cancer 
screening and diagnostic evaluations (“Mammo-
gram Cancer Scares More Frequent than Thought,” 
USA Today, April 16, 1998). Discussing the benefits 
and downsides of the screening process, the article 
states that, although the rate of false-positives is 
higher than previously thought, if radiologists were 
less ­aggressive in following up on suspicious tests, 
the rate of false-positives would fall but the rate of 
missed cancers would rise. 
Suppose that such a screening test is used to 
decide between a null hypothesis of 
H0: no cancer is present 
and an alternative hypothesis of 
Ha: cancer is present. 
(Although these are not hypotheses about a 
population characteristic, this exercise illustrates the 
definitions of Type I and Type II errors.) (Hint: See 
Example 10.6.)
a.	Would a false-positive (thinking that cancer is 
present when in fact it is not) be a Type I error or 
a Type II error? 
b.	Describe a Type I error in the context of this 
problem, and discuss the possible consequences 
of making a Type I error.
c.	Describe a Type II error in the context of this 
problem, and discuss the possible consequences 
of making a Type II error.
d.	What aspect of the relationship between the 
probability of Type I and Type II errors is being 
described by the statement in the article that if 
radiologists were less aggressive in following up 
on suspicious tests, the rate of false-positives 
would fall but the rate of missed cancers would 
rise?
10.13	 The paper “MRI Evaluation of the Contralateral 
Breast in Women with Recently Diagnosed Breast 
Cancer” (New England Journal of Medicine [2007]: 
1295–1303) describes a study of the use of MRI 
(Magnetic Resonance Imaging) exams in the 
EXERCISES 10.12 - 10.22
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

514 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
diagnosis of breast cancer. The purpose of the study 
was to determine if MRI exams do a better job than 
mammograms of determining if women who have 
recently been diagnosed with cancer in one breast 
have cancer in the other breast. The study partici-
pants were 969 women who had been diagnosed 
with cancer in one breast and for whom a mammo-
gram did not detect cancer in the other breast. 
These women had an MRI exam of the other 
breast, and 121 of those exams indicated 
possible cancer. After undergoing biopsies, it 
was determined that 30 of the 121 did in fact 
have cancer in the other breast, whereas 91 did 
not. The women were all followed for one year, 
and three of the women for whom the MRI exam 
did not indicate cancer in the other breast were 
subsequently diagnosed with cancer that the 
MRI did not detect. The accompanying table 
summarizes this information.
Cancer 
Present
Cancer Not 
Present
Total
MRI Positive for Cancer
30
  91
121
MRI Negative for Cancer
  3
845
848
Total
33
936
969
Suppose that for women recently diagnosed with 
cancer in only one breast, the MRI is used to decide 
between the two “hypotheses”
H0: woman has cancer in the other breast
Ha: woman does not have cancer in the other breast
(Although these are not hypotheses about a population 
characteristic, this exercise illustrates the definitions of 
Type I and Type II errors.) (Hint: See Example 10.7.)
a.	One possible error would be deciding that a 
woman who does have cancer in the other breast 
is cancer-free. Is this a Type I or a Type II error? 
Use the information in the table to approximate 
the probability of this type of error. 
b.	There is a second type of error that is possible 
in this setting. Describe this error and use the 
information in the given table to approximate the 
probability of this type of error.
10.14	 Medical personnel are required to report suspected 
cases of child abuse. Because some diseases have 
symptoms that mimic those of child abuse, doctors 
who see a child with these symptoms must decide 
between two competing hypotheses:
H0:  ​symptoms are due to child abuse
Ha:  ​symptoms are due to disease
(Although these are not hypotheses about a popu-
lation characteristic, this exercise illustrates the 
definitions of Type I and Type II errors.) The article 
“Blurred Line Between Illness, Abuse Creates Prob-
lem for Authorities” (Macon Telegraph, February 28, 
2000) included the following quote from a doctor 
in Atlanta regarding the consequences of making an 
incorrect decision: “If it’s disease, the worst you have 
is an ­angry family. If it is abuse, the other kids (in 
the family) are in deadly danger.”
a.	For the given hypotheses, describe Type I and 
Type II errors.
b.	Based on the quote regarding consequences of the 
two kinds of error, which type of error does the 
doctor quoted consider more serious? Explain. ​ ​
10.15	 Ann Landers, in her advice column of October 24, 
1994 (San Luis Obispo Telegram-Tribune), described 
the reliability of DNA paternity testing as follows: 
“To get a completely accurate result, you would 
have to be tested, and so would (the man) and your 
mother. The test is 100% accurate if the man is not 
the father and 99.9% accurate if he is.”
a.	Consider using the results of DNA paternity testing 
to decide between the following two hypotheses:
H0:  ​a particular man is the father
Ha:  ​a particular man is not the father
In the context of this problem, describe Type I and 
Type II errors. (Although these are not hypotheses 
about a population characteristic, this exercise 
illustrates the definitions of Type I and Type II 
errors.)
b.	Based on the information given, what are the 
values of a, the probability of a Type I error, and 
b, the probability of a Type II error? ​ ​
c.	Ann Landers also stated, “If the mother is not 
tested, there is a 0.8% chance of a false positive.” 
For the hypotheses given in Part (a), what is the 
value of b if the decision is based on DNA testing 
in which the mother is not tested? ​ ​
10.16	 A television manufacturer claims that (at least) 90% 
of its TV sets will not need service during the first 
3 years of operation. A consumer agency wishes to 
check this claim, so it obtains a random sample of 
n 5 100 purchasers and asks each whether the set 
purchased needed repair during the first 3 years 
after purchase. Let p⁄  be the sample proportion of 
responses indicating no repair (so that no repair is 
identified with a success). Let p denote the actual 
proportion of successes for all sets made by this 
manufacturer. 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 10.2   Errors in Hypothesis Testing 
●  515
The agency does not want to claim false 
advertising unless sample evidence strongly suggests 
that p , .9. The appropriate hypotheses are then  
H0: p 5 .9 versus Ha: p , .9.
a.	In the context of this problem, describe Type I 
and Type II errors, and discuss the possible 
consequences of each.
b.	Would you recommend a test procedure that uses 
a 5 .10 or one that uses a 5 .01? Explain.
10.17	 A manufacturer of hand-held calculators receives 
large shipments of printed circuits from a supplier. 
It is too costly and time-consuming to inspect all 
incoming circuits, so when each shipment arrives, a 
sample is selected for inspection. Information from 
the sample is then used to test H0: p 5 .01 versus 
Ha: p . .01, where p is the actual proportion of 
defective circuits in the shipment. 
If the null hypothesis is not rejected, the 
shipment is accepted, and the circuits are used in 
the production of calculators. If the null hypothesis 
is rejected, the entire shipment is returned to the 
supplier because of inferior quality. (A shipment is 
defined to be of inferior quality if it contains more 
than 1% defective circuits.)
a.	In this context, define Type I and Type II errors.
b.	From the calculator manufacturer’s point of view, 
which type of error is considered more serious?
c.	From the printed circuit supplier’s point of view, 
which type of error is considered more serious?
10.18	 Water specimens are taken from water used for 
cooling as it is being discharged from a power plant 
into a river. It has been determined that as long as 
the mean temperature of the discharged water is at 
most 1508F, there will be no negative effects on the 
river’s ecosystem. To investigate whether the plant 
is in compliance with regulations that prohibit a 
mean discharge water temperature above 1508F, re-
searchers will take 50 water specimens at randomly 
selected times and record the temperature of each 
specimen. The resulting data will be used to test the 
hypotheses H0: m 5 1508F versus Ha: m . 1508F. 
a.	In the context of this example, describe Type I 
and Type II errors. 
b.	Which type of error would you consider more 
serious? Explain.
10.19	 Suppose that for a particular hypothesis test, the 
consequences of a Type I error are very serious. 
Would you want to carry out the test using a small 
significance level a (such as 0.01) or a larger sig-
nificance level (such as 0.10)? Explain the reason 
for your choice. (Hint: See discussion just before 
Example 10.7.)
10.20	 Suppose that you are an inspector for the Fish and 
Game Department and that you are given the task of 
determining whether to prohibit fishing along part 
of the Oregon coast. You will close an area to fishing 
if it is determined that fish in that region have an 
unacceptably high mercury content.
a.	 Assuming that a mercury concentration of 5 ppm is 
considered the maximum safe concentration, which 
of the following pairs of hypotheses would you test:
H0: m 5 5  versus  Ha: m . 5
or
H0: m 5 5  versus  Ha: m , 5
Give the reasons for your choice.
b.	Would you prefer a significance level of .1 or .01 
for your test? Explain. (Hint: See discussion just 
before Example 10.7.) ​ ​
10.21	 The National Cancer Institute conducted a 2-year 
study to determine whether cancer death rates for 
areas near nuclear power plants are higher than 
for areas without nuclear facilities (San Luis Obispo 
Telegram-Tribune, September 17, 1990). A spokes-
person for the Cancer Institute said, “From the data 
at hand, there was no convincing evidence of any 
increased risk of death from any of the cancers sur-
veyed due to living near nuclear facilities. However, 
no study can prove the absence of an effect.”
a.	 Let p denote the proportion of the population in 
areas near nuclear power plants who die of cancer 
during a given year. The researchers at the Cancer 
Institute might have considered the two rival 
hypotheses of the form
H0:  ​p 5 value for areas without nuclear facilities
Ha:  ​p . value for areas without nuclear facilities
Did the researchers reject H0 or fail to reject H0?
b.	If the Cancer Institute researchers were incorrect 
in their conclusion that there is no increased 
cancer risk associated with living near a nuclear 
power plant, are they making a Type I or a Type II 
error? Explain.​ 
c.	 Comment on the spokesperson’s last statement 
that no study can prove the absence of an effect. 
Do you agree with this statement?
10.22	 An automobile manufacturer is considering using 
robots for part of its assembly process. Converting to 
robots is an expensive process, so it will be undertak-
en only if there is strong evidence that the proportion 
of defective installations is lower for the robots than 
for human assemblers. Let p denote the proportion of 
defective installations for the robots. It is known that 
human assemblers have a defect proportion of .02.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

516 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
a.	 Which of the following pairs of hypotheses should 
the manufacturer test:
H0: p 5 .02 versus Ha: p , .02
or
H0: p 5 .02 versus Ha: p . .02
Explain your answer.  ​  ​
b.	In the context of this exercise, describe Type I and 
Type II errors.
c.	 Would you prefer a test with a 5 .01 or a 5 .1? 
Explain your reasoning.   
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Now that the basic concepts of hypothesis testing have been introduced, we are ready to 
consider how to use sample data to decide between a null and an alternative hypothesis. In 
a hypothesis test, there are two possible conclusions: We either reject H0 or we fail to reject 
H0. The fundamental idea behind hypothesis-testing procedures is this: We reject the null 
hypothesis if the observed sample is very unlikely to have occurred when H0 is true. 
In this section, we consider testing hypotheses about a population proportion when the 
sample size n is large. As before, p denotes the proportion of individuals or objects in a 
specified population that possess a certain property. A random sample of n individuals or 
objects is selected from the population. The sample proportion
p⁄ 5 number in the sample that possess the property
n
serves as the basis for testing hypotheses about p.
The large-sample test procedure is based on the same properties of the sampling 
distribution of p⁄  that were used previously to obtain a confidence interval for p:
1.	 mp⁄ 5 p
2.	 sp⁄ 5Î
ps1 2 pd
n
3.	 When n is large, the sampling distribution of p⁄ is approximately normal.
These three results imply that the standardized variable
z 5
p⁄ 2 p
Î
ps1 2 pd
n
has approximately a standard normal distribution when n is large. Example 10.8 shows 
how this information allows us to make a decision in a hypothesis test.
Example 10.8 
Impact of Food 
Labels
In June 2006, an Associated Press survey was 
conducted to investigate how people use the 
nutritional information provided on food package 
labels. Interviews were conducted with 1003 
randomly selected adult Americans, and each 
participant was asked a series of questions, including 
the following two:
Question 1:  ​When purchasing packaged food, how often do you check the nutrition 
labeling on the package?
C. Sherburne/PhotoDisc/Getty Images
Understand the context ❭
 10.3  
Large-Sample Hypothesis Tests for a Population Proportion
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 10.3   Large-Sample Hypothesis Tests for a Population Proportion 
●  517
Question 2:  ​How often do you purchase foods that are bad for you, even after you’ve 
checked the nutrition labels?
It was reported that 582 responded “frequently” to the question about checking labels and 
441 responded very often or somewhat often to the question about purchasing “bad” foods 
even after checking the label.
Let’s start by looking at the responses to the first question. Based on these data, is it 
reasonable to conclude that a majority of adult Americans frequently check the nutritional 
labels when purchasing packaged foods? We can answer this question by considering
p 5 actual proportion of adult Americans who frequently check nutritional labels
and testing the following hypotheses:
H0:  ​p 5 .5
Ha:  ​p . .5 (The proportion of adult Americans who frequently check nutritional labels is 
greater than .5. That is, more than half (a majority) frequently check nutritional labels.)
Recall that in a hypothesis test, the null hypothesis is rejected only if there is convincing 
evidence against it—in this case, convincing evidence that p . .5. If H0 is rejected, there is 
strong support for the claim that a majority of adult Americans frequently check nutritional 
labels when purchasing packaged foods.
For this sample,
p⁄ 5 582
1003 5 .58
The observed sample proportion is certainly greater than .5, but this could just be due to 
sampling variability. That is, when p 5 .5 (meaning H0 is true), the sample proportion p⁄
usually differs somewhat from .5 simply because of chance variation from one sample to 
another. Is it plausible that a sample proportion of p⁄ 5 .58 occurred as a result of this 
chance variation, or is it unusual to observe a sample proportion this large when p 5 .5?
To answer this question, we form a test statistic, the quantity used as a basis for making a 
decision between H0 and Ha. Creating a test statistic involves replacing p with the hypoth-
esized value in the z variable z 5
p⁄ 2 p
Ïps1 2 pdyn to obtain
z 5
p⁄ 2 .5
Î
s.5ds.5d
n
If the null hypothesis is true and the sample size is large, this statistic should have 
approximately a standard normal distribution, because in this case
1.	 mp⁄ 5 .5
2.	 sp⁄ 5Î
s.5ds.5d
n
3.	 p⁄ has approximately a normal distribution.
The calculated value of z expresses the distance between p⁄ and the hypothesized value of 
p as a number of standard deviations. For example, if z 5 3, then the value of p⁄ that came 
from the sample is 3 standard deviations (of p⁄) greater than what we would have expected 
if the null hypothesis were true. How likely is it that a z value at least this inconsistent with 
H0 would be observed if in fact H0 is true? If H0 is true, the test statistic has (approximately) 
a standard normal distribution. This means that
P(z $ 3 when H0 is true) 5 area under the z curve to the right of 3.00 5 .0013
It follows that if H0 is true, fewer than 1% of all samples produce a value of z at least 
as inconsistent with H0 as z 5 3. Because this z value is in the most extreme 1% of the 
z distribution, it is sensible to reject H0.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

518 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
For our data,
z 5
p⁄ 2 .5
Î
s.5ds.5d
n
5 .58 2 .5
Î
s.5ds.5d
1003
5 .08
.016 5 5.00
That is, p⁄  5 .58 is 5 standard deviations greater than what we would expect it to be if the 
null hypothesis H0: p 5 .5 was true. The sample data appear to be much more consistent 
with the alternative hypothesis, Ha: p . .5. In particular,
P(value of z is at least as contradictory to H0 as 5.00 when H0 is true)
    5 P(z $ 5.00 when H0 is true)
    5 area under the z curve to the right of 5.00
    < 0
There is virtually no chance of seeing a sample proportion and corresponding z value this 
extreme as a result of chance variation alone when H0 is true. If p⁄ is 5 standard deviations 
or more away from .5, how can we believe that p 5 .5? The evidence for rejecting H0 in 
favor of Ha is very compelling.
Interestingly, in spite of the fact that there is strong evidence that a majority of adult 
Americans frequently check nutritional labels, the data on responses to the second question 
suggest that the percentage of people who then ignore the information on the label and 
purchase “bad” foods anyway is not small—the sample proportion who responded very 
often or somewhat often was .44.
■
The preceding example illustrates the reasoning behind large-sample procedures for 
testing hypotheses about p (and other test procedures as well). We begin by assuming that 
the null hypothesis is true. The sample is then examined in light of this assumption. If the 
observed sample proportion would not be unusual when H0 is true, then chance variability 
from one sample to another is a plausible explanation for what has been observed, and H0 
should not be rejected. On the other hand, if the observed sample proportion would have 
been quite unlikely when H0 is true, we would take the sample as convincing evidence 
against the null hypothesis and we should reject H0. We base a decision to reject or to fail 
to reject the null hypothesis on an assessment of how extreme or unlikely the observed 
sample is if H0 is true.
The assessment of how inconsistent the observed data are with H0 is based on first 
computing the value of the test statistic
z 5
p⁄ 2 hypothesized value
Î
shypothesized valueds1 2 hypothesized valued
n
We then calculate the P-value, the probability, assuming that H0 is true, of obtaining a 
z value at least as inconsistent with H0 as what was actually observed.
Test statistic: A value computed using sample data. It is the value used to make 
the decision to reject or fail to reject H0.
P-value: A measure of inconsistency between the hypothesized value for a 
population characteristic and the observed sample. It is the probability, 
assuming that H0 is true, of obtaining a test statistic value at least as inconsistent 
with H0 as what was observed. The P-value is also sometimes called the 
observed significance level.
DEFINITION
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 10.3   Large-Sample Hypothesis Tests for a Population Proportion 
●  519
Example 10.9 
Detecting Plagiarism
Plagiarism is a growing concern among college and university faculty members, and many 
universities are now using software tools to detect student work that is not original. 
Researchers at an Australian university that introduced the use of plagiarism detection 
software in a number of courses surveyed 171 students enrolled in those courses (“Student 
and Staff Perceptions of the Effectiveness of Plagiarism Detection Software,” Australian 
Journal of Educational Technology [2008]: 222–240). In the survey, 58 of the 171 students 
indicated that they believed that the use of plagiarism-detection software unfairly targeted 
students.
Assuming it is reasonable to regard the sample as representative of students at this 
university, does the sample provide convincing evidence that more than one-third of the 
students at the university believe that the use of plagiarism-detection software unfairly 
targets students?
With
p ​5 ​proportion of all students at the university who believe that the use of plagiarism-
detection software unfairly targets students
the relevant hypotheses are
H0: p 5 1
3 5 .33
Ha: p . .33
The sample proportion is p⁄ 5 58
171 5 .34.
Is the value of p⁄ enough greater than one-third that we shold reject H0?
Because the sample size is large, the statistic
z 5
p⁄ 2 .33
Î
s.33ds1 2 .33d
n
has approximately a standard normal distribution when H0 is true. The calculated value of 
the test statistic is
z 5
.34 2 .33
Î
s.33ds1 2 .33d
171
5 .01
.036 5 0.28
The probability that a z value at least this inconsistent with H0 would be observed if in fact 
H0 is true is
P-value 5 P(z $ 0.28 when H0 is true)
5 area under the z curve to the right of 0.28
5 1 2 .6103
5 .3897
This probability indicates that when p 5 .33, it would not be unusual to observe a 
sample proportion as large as .34. When H0 is true, roughly 40% of all samples would have 
a sample proportion as large as or larger than .34. This means that a sample proportion 
of .34 is reasonably consistent with the null hypothesis. Although .34 is larger than the 
hypothesized value of p 5 .33, chance variation from sample to sample is a plausible 
explanation for what was observed. There is not strong evidence that the proportion of 
students who believe that the use of plagiarism detection software unfairly targets students 
is greater than one-third.
■
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

520 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
As illustrated by Examples 10.8 and 10.9, small P-values indicate that sample results are 
inconsistent with H0, whereas larger P-values are interpreted as meaning that the data are 
consistent with H0 and that sampling variability alone is a plausible explanation for what 
was observed in the sample. As you probably noticed, the two cases examined (P-value < 0 
and P-value 5 .3897) were such that a decision between rejecting or not rejecting H0 was 
clear-cut. A decision in other cases might not be so obvious. For example, what if the 
sample had resulted in a P-value of .04? Is this unusual enough to warrant rejection of H0? 
How small must the P-value be before H0 should be rejected?
The answers to these questions depend on the significance level, a (the probability of a 
Type I error), selected for the test. For example, suppose that we set a 5 .05. This implies 
that the probability of rejecting a true null hypothesis is .05. To obtain a test procedure 
with this probability of Type I error, we would reject the null hypothesis if the sample 
result is among the most unusual 5% of all samples when H0 is true. We would reject H0 if 
the computed P-value # .05. If we had selected a 5 .01, H0 would be rejected only if we 
observed a sample result so extreme that it would be among the most unusual 1% if H0 is 
true (which occurs when P-value # .01).
A decision to reject or to fail to reject H0 results from comparing the P-value to 
the chosen a:
Reject H0 if P-value # a.
Fail to reject H0 if P-value . a.
Suppose, for example, that the P-value 5 .0352 and that a significance level of .05 is 
chosen. Then, because
P-value 5 .0352 # .05 5 a
H0 would be rejected. This would not be the case, though, for a 5 .01, because then 
P-value . a.
Computing a P-Value for a Large-Sample Test Concerning p
The computation of the P-value depends on the form of the inequality in the alternative 
hypothesis, Ha. Suppose, for example, that we wish to test
H0:  ​p 5 .6  ​  ​  ​  ​versus  ​  ​  ​  ​Ha:  ​p . .6
based on a large sample. The appropriate test statistic is
z 5
p⁄ 2 .6
Î
s.6ds1 2 .6d
n
Values of p⁄ inconsistent with H0 and much more consistent with Ha are those much greater 
than .6 (because p 5 .6 when H0 is true and p . .6 when H0 is false and Ha is true). Such 
values of p⁄ correspond to z values considerably greater than 0. 
If n 5 400 and p⁄ 5 .679, then
z 5
.679 2 .6
Î
s.6ds1 2 .6d
400
5 .079
.025 5 3.16
The value p⁄ 5 .679 is more than 3 standard deviations larger than what we would have 
expected if H0 were true. Then,
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 10.3   Large-Sample Hypothesis Tests for a Population Proportion 
●  521
 P-value 5 P(z at least as inconsistent with H0 as 3.16 when H0 is true)
       ​  ​5 P(z $ 3.16)
       ​  ​5 area under the z curve to the right of 3.16
       ​  ​5 1 2 .9992
       ​  ​5 .0008
This P-value is illustrated in Figure 10.1. If H0 is true, in the long run, only 8 out of 10,000 
samples would result in a z value as or more extreme than what actually resulted. Most 
people would consider such a z quite unusual. Using a significance level of .01, we would 
reject the null hypothesis because P-value 5 .0008 # .01 5 a.
Figure  10.1
Calculating a P-value.
P-value 5 .0008
z curve
0
Calculated z 5 3.16
Now consider testing H0: p 5 .3 versus Ha: p ? .3. A value of p⁄ either much greater 
than .3 or much less than .3 is inconsistent with H0 and provides support for Ha. Such a p⁄  
corresponds to a z value far out in either tail of the z curve. If
z 5
p⁄ 2 .3
Î
s.3ds1 2 .3d
n
5 1.75
then (as shown in Figure 10.2)
P-value 5 P(z value at least as inconsistent with H0 as 1.75 when H0 is true)
    5 P(z $ 1.75 or z # 21.75)
    5 (z curve area to the right of 1.75) 1 (z curve area to the left of 21.75)
    5 (1 2 .9599) 1 .0401
    5 .0802
If z 5 21.75, the P-value in this situation is also .0802 because 1.75 and 21.75 are equally 
inconsistent with H0.
The symmetry of the z curve implies that when the test is two-tailed (the “not equal” 
alternative), it is not necessary to add two curve areas. Instead,
If z is positive, P-value 5 2(area to the right of z).
If z is negative, P-value 5 2(area to the left of z).
Figure  10.2
P-value as the sum of two tail areas.
21.75
Total area 5 .0802 5 P-value
z curve
Calculated z 5 1.75
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

522 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
1.	 Upper-tailed test:
Ha:  ​p . hypothesized value
P-value computed as illustrated:
P-value 5 area in upper tail
z curve
Calculated z 
2.	 Lower-tailed test:
Ha:  ​p , hypothesized value
P-value computed as illustrated:
P-value 5 area in lower tail
z curve
Calculated z 
3.	 Two-tailed test:
Ha: p ? hypothesized value
P-value computed as illustrated:
P-value 5 sum of area in two tails
z curve
Calculated z, 2z
Determination of the P-Value When the Test Statistic Is z
Example 10.10 
Water Conservation
Suppose that in December 2014, a county-wide water conservation campaign was conducted 
in a particular county. In January 2015, a random sample of 500 homes is selected, and 
water usage is recorded for each home in the sample. The county supervisors wanted to 
know whether the data supported the claim that fewer than half the households in the 
county reduced water consumption. The relevant hypotheses are
H0:  ​p 5 .5  ​  ​  ​  ​versus  ​  ​  ​  ​Ha:  ​p , .5
where p is the proportion of all households in the county with reduced water usage.
Suppose that the sample results were n 5 500 and p⁄ 5 .440. Because the sample size 
is large and this is a lower-tailed test, we can compute the P-value by first calculating the 
value of the z test statistic
z 5
p⁄ 2 5
Î
s.5ds1 2 .5d
n
and then finding the area under the z curve to the left of this z.
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 10.3   Large-Sample Hypothesis Tests for a Population Proportion 
●  523
Based on the observed sample data,
z 5
.440 2 .5
Î
s.5ds1 2 .5d
500
5 2.060
.0224 5 22.68
The P-value is then equal to the area under the z curve and to the left of 22.68. From the 
entry in the 22.6 row and .08 column of Appendix Table 2, we find that
P-value 5 .0037
Using a .01 significance level, we reject H0 (because .0037 # .01), leading us to conclude 
that there is convincing evidence that the proportion with reduced water usage was less 
than .5. Notice that rejection of H0 would not be justified if a very small significance level, 
such as .001, had been selected.
■
Example 10.10 illustrates the calculation of a P-value for a lower-tailed test. The use of 
P-values in upper-tailed and two-tailed tests is illustrated in Examples 10.11 and 10.12. 
But first we summarize large-sample tests of hypotheses about a population proportion and 
introduce a step-by-step procedure for carrying out a hypothesis test.
Null hypothesis:  ​  ​H0:  ​p 5 hypothesized value
Test statistic:  ​  ​z 5
p⁄ 2 hypothesized value
Î
shypothesized valueds1 2 hypothesized valued
n
Alternative Hypothesis:	
P-Value:
Ha:  ​p . hypothesized value	
Area under z curve to right of calculated z
Ha:  ​p , hypothesized value	
Area under z curve to left of calculated z
Ha:  ​p ? hypothesized value	
(1)  ​2(area to right of z) if z is positive, or 
	
(2)  ​2(area to left of z) if z is negative
Assumptions:	 1.  ​p⁄ is the sample proportion from a random sample.
2.  ​The sample size is large. This test can be used if n satisfies 
both n(hypothesized value) $ 10 and 
n(1 2 hypothesized value) $ 10.
3.  ​If sampling is without replacement, the sample size is no 
more than 10% of the population size.
Summary of Large-Sample z Test for p
We recommend that the following sequence of steps be used when carrying out a 
hypothesis test.
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
1.	 Describe the population characteristic about which hypotheses are to be tested.
2.	 State the null hypothesis H0.
3.	 State the alternative hypothesis Ha. 
4.	 Select the significance level a for the test.
5.	 Display the test statistic to be used, with substitution of the hypothesized 
value identified in Step 2 but without any computation at this point.
6.	 Check to make sure that any assumptions required for the test are reasonable.
Steps in a Hypothesis Test
continued
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

524 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
Example 10.11 
Unfit Teens
The article “7 Million U.S. Teens Would Flunk Treadmill Tests” (Associated Press, 
December 11, 2005) summarized the results of a study in which 2205 adolescents age 12 to 
19 took a cardiovascular treadmill test. The researchers conducting the study indicated that 
the sample was selected in such a way that it could be regarded as representative of adolescents 
nationwide. Of the 2205 adolescents tested, 750 showed a low level of cardiovascular fitness. 
Does this sample provide support for the claim that more than 30% of adolescents have a 
low level of cardiovascular fitness? We answer this question by following the nine steps for 
carrying out a hypothesis test. We will use a .05 significance level for this example.
1.	 Population characteristic of interest:
p 5 proportion of all adolescents who have a low level of cardiovascular fitness
2.	 Null hypothesis:  ​H0: p 5 .3
3.	 Alternative hypothesis:  ​Ha: p . .3  ​(the percentage of adolescents with a low 
fitness level is greater than 30%)
4.	 Significance level:  ​a 5 .05
5.	 Test statistic:
z 5
p⁄ 2 hypothesized value
Î
shypothesized valueds1 2 hypothesized valued
n
5
p⁄ 2 .3
Î
s.3ds1 2 .3d
n
6.	 Assumptions:  ​This test requires a random sample and a large sample size. The 
given sample was considered to be representative of adolescents nationwide, and if 
this is the case, it is reasonable to regard the sample as if it were a random sample. 
The sample size was n 5 2205. Since 2205(.3) $ 10 and 2205(1 2 .3) $ 10, the 
large-sample test is appropriate. The population is all adolescents age 12 to 19, so 
the sample size is small compared to the population size.
7.	 Computations:  ​n 5 2205 and p⁄ 5 750/2205 5 .34, so
z 5
.34 2 .3
Î
s.3ds1 2 .3d
2205
5 .04
.010 5 4.00
8.	 P-value:  ​This is an upper-tailed test (the inequality in Ha is .), so the P-value is 
the area to the right of the computed z value. Since z 5 4.00 is so far out in the 
upper tail of the standard normal distribution, the area to its right is negligible, and
P-value < 0
9.  Conclusion:  ​Since P-value # a (0 # .05), H0 is rejected at the .05 level of sig-
nificance. We conclude that the proportion of adolescents who have a low level of 
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
7.	 Compute all quantities appearing in the test statistic and then the value of 
the test statistic itself.
8.	 Determine the P-value associated with the observed value of the test statistic.
9.	 State the conclusion (which is reject H0 if P-value # a and fail to reject 
H0 otherwise). The conclusion should then be stated in the context of the 
problem, and the level of significance should be included.
Steps 1–4 constitute a statement of the problem, Steps 5–8 give the analysis 
that leads to a decision, and Step 9 provides the conclusion.
Step-by-step technology  
instructions available  
online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 10.3   Large-Sample Hypothesis Tests for a Population Proportion 
●  525
cardiovascular fitness is greater than .3. That is, the sample provides convincing 
evidence in support of the claim that more than 30% of adolescents have a low 
­fitness level.
■
Example 10.12 
College Attendance
The report “California’s Education Skills Gap: Modest Improvements Could Yield Big Gains” 
(Public Policy Institute of California, April 16, 2008, www.ppic.org) states that nationwide, 
61% of high school graduates go on to attend a two-year or four-year college the year after 
graduation. The college-going rate for high school graduates in California was estimated 
to be 55%. Suppose that the estimate of 55% was based on a random sample of 1500 
California high school graduates in 2009. 
Can we reasonably conclude that the proportion of California high school graduates in 
2009 who attended college the year after graduation is different from the national figure? 
We will use the nine-step hypothesis testing procedure and a significance level of a 5 ​.01 
to answer this question.
1.	 p 5 proportion of all 2009 high school graduates who attended college the year 
after graduation
2.	 H0:  ​p 5 .61
3.	 Ha:  ​p ? .61 (differs from the national proportion)
4.	 Significance level:  ​a 5 .01
5.	 Test statistic:
z 5
p⁄ 2 hypothesized value
Î
shypothesized valueds1 2 hypothesized valued
n
5
p⁄ 2 .61
Î
s.61ds.39d
n
6.	 Assumptions:  ​This test requires a random sample and a large sample size. The 
given sample was a random sample, the population size is much larger than the 
sample size, and the sample size was n 5 1500. Because 1500(.61) $ 10 and 
1500(.39) $ 10, the large-sample test is appropriate.
7.	 Computations: p⁄ 5 .55, so
z 5
.55 2 .61
Î
s.61ds.39d
1500
5 2.06
.013 5 24.62
8.	 P-value:  ​The area under the z curve to the left of 24.62 is approximately 0, so 
P-value < 2(0) 5 0.
9.    Conclusion:  ​At significance level .01, we reject H0 because P-value < 0 , .01 5 a. 
The data provide convincing evidence that the proportion of 2009 California high 
school graduates who attended college during the year after graduation differs from 
the nationwide proportion.
■
Most statistical computer packages and graphing calculators can calculate and report 
P-values for a variety of hypothesis-testing situations, including the large sample test for 
a proportion. Minitab was used to carry out the test of Example 10.10, and the resulting 
computer output follows:
Test and Confidence Interval for One Proportion
Test of p 5 0.5 vs p , 0.5
Sample
X
N
Sample p
95.0 % CI
Z-Value
P-Value
1
220
500
0.440000
(0.396491, 0.483509)
22.68
0.004
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

526 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
From the Minitab output, z 5 22.68, and the associated P-value is .004. The small 
difference between the P-value here and the one computed in Example 10.10 (.0037) is 
the result of rounding.
It is also possible to compute the value of the z test statistic and then use a statistical 
computer package or graphing calculator to determine the corresponding P-value as an area 
under the standard normal curve. For example, the user can specify a value and Minitab 
will determine the area to the left of this value for any particular normal distribution. 
Because of this, the computer can be used in place of Appendix Table 2. In Example 10.10, 
the computed z was 22.68. Using Minitab gives the following output:
Normal with mean 5 0 and standard deviation 5 1.00000
x
P(X # x)
22.6800
0.0037
From the output, we learn that the area to the left of 22.68 5 .0037, which agrees with 
the value obtained by using the tables.
EXERCISES 10.23 - 10.41
10.23	 Use the definition of the P-value to explain the fol-
lowing:
a.	Why H0 would be rejected if P-value 5 .0003
b.	Why H0 would not be rejected if P-value 5 .350
10.24	 For which of the following P-values will the null 
hypothesis be rejected when performing a test with 
a significance level of .05:
a.	 .001	
d.	 .047
b.	.021	
e.	 .148 ​ ​
c.	.078
10.25	 Pairs of P-values and significance levels, a, are 
given. For each pair, state whether you would reject 
H0 at the given significance level.
a.	P-value 5 .084, a 5 .05 
b.	P-value 5 .003, a 5 .001 
c.	P-value 5 .498, a 5 .05 
d.	P-value 5 .084, a 5 .10 
e.	P-value 5 .039, a 5 .01 
f.	 P-value 5 .218, a 5 .10 
10.26	 Let p denote the proportion of students at a particu-
lar university that use the fitness center on campus 
on a regular basis. For a large-sample z test of  
H0: p 5 .5 versus Ha: p . .5, find the P-value associ-
ated with each of the given values of the test statistic:
a.	 1.40 ​ ​	
d.	2.45 ​ ​
b.	0.93 ​ ​	
e.	 20.17 ​ ​
c.	1.96 ​ ​
10.27	 Assuming a random sample from a large popula-
tion, for which of the following null hypotheses and 
sample sizes n is the large-sample z test appropriate:
a.	H0: p 5 .2, n 5 25 ​ ​
b.	H0: p 5 .6, n 5 210 ​ ​
c.	H0: p 5 .9, n 5 100 ​ ​
d.	H0: p 5 .05, n 5 75 ​ ​
10.28	 In a survey conducted by CareerBuilder.com, em-
ployers were asked if they had ever sent an employ-
ee home because they were dressed inappropriately 
(June 17, 2008, www.careerbuilder.com). A total 
of 2765 employers responded to the survey, with 
968 saying that they had sent an employee home 
for inappropriate attire. In a press release, Career-
Builder makes the claim that more than one-third of 
employers have sent an employee home to change 
clothes. 
Do the sample data provide convincing evidence 
in support of this claim? Test the relevant hypotheses 
using a ​5 ​.05. For purposes of this exercise, 
assume that it is reasonable to regard the sample as 
representative of employers in the United States. 
(Hint: See Example 10.11.) 
10.29	 In a survey of 1000 women age 22 to 35 who work 
full time, 540 indicated that they would be will-
ing to give up some personal time in order to make 
more money (USA Today, March 4, 2010). The sample 
was selected in a way that was designed to produce 
a sample that was representative of women in the 
targeted age group.
a.	Do the sample data provide convincing evidence 
that the majority of women age 22 to 35 who 
work full-time would be willing to give up some 
personal time for more money? Test the relevant 
hypotheses using a ​5 ​.01. 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 10.3   Large-Sample Hypothesis Tests for a Population Proportion 
●  527
b.	 Would it be reasonable to generalize the 
conclusion from Part (a) to all working women? 
Explain why or why not. 
10.30	  The paper “Debt Literacy, Financial Experiences and 
Over-Indebtedness” (Social Science Research Network, 
Working paper W14808, 2008) included analysis of 
data from a national sample of 1000 Americans. 
One question on the survey was:
“You owe $3000 on your credit card. You pay a 
minimum payment of $30 each month. At an Annual 
Percentage Rate of 12% (or 1% per month), how 
many years would it take to eliminate your credit 
card debt if you made no additional charges?”
Answer options for this question were: (a) less than 
5 years; (b) between 5 and 10 years; (c) between 10 
and 15 years; (d) never—you will continue to be in 
debt; (e) don’t know; and (f) prefer not to answer.
a.	 Only 354 of the 1000 respondents chose the 
correct answer of never. For purposes of this 
exercise, you can assume that the sample is 
representative of adult Americans. Is there 
convincing evidence that the proportion of 
adult Americans who can answer this question 
correctly is less than .40 (40%)? Use a ​5 ​.05 
to test the appropriate hypotheses. (Hint: See 
Example 10.10.)
b.	 The paper also reported that 37.8% of those in 
the sample chose one of the wrong answers (a, 
b, and c) as their response to this question. Is it 
reasonable to conclude that more than one-third 
of adult Americans would select a wrong answer 
to this question? Use a 5 .05. 
10.31	  “Most Like it Hot” is the title of a press release issued 
by the Pew Research Center (March 18, 2009, www 
.pewsocialtrends.org). The press release states that 
“by an overwhelming margin, Americans want to 
live in a sunny place.” This statement is based on 
data from a nationally representative sample of 
2260 adult Americans. Of those surveyed, 1288 
indicated that they would prefer to live in a hot 
climate rather than a cold climate. 
Do the sample data provide convincing evidence 
that a majority of all adult Americans prefer a hot 
climate over a cold climate? Use the nine-step 
hypothesis testing process with a ​5 ​.01 to answer 
this question. 
10.32	
In a survey of 1005 adult Americans, 46% indicated 
that they were somewhat interested or very inter-
ested in having web access in their cars (USA Today, 
May 1, 2009). Suppose that the marketing manager 
of a car manufacturer claims that the 46% is based 
only on a sample and that 46% is close to half, so 
there is no reason to believe that the proportion of 
all adult Americans who want car web access is less 
than .50. Is the marketing manager correct in his 
claim? Provide statistical evidence to support your 
answer. For purposes of this exercise, assume that 
the sample can be considered as representative of 
adult Americans. 
10.33	  The paper “Teens and Distracted Driving” (Pew 
Internet & American Life Project, 2009) reported that 
in a representative sample of 283 American teens 
age 16 to 17, there were 74 who indicated that they 
had sent a text message while driving. For purposes 
of this exercise, assume that this sample is a ran-
dom sample of 16- to 17-year-old Americans. Do 
these data provide convincing evidence that more 
than a quarter of Americans age 16 to 17 have sent 
a text message while driving? Test the appropriate 
hypotheses using a significance level of 0.01.
10.34	  The report “How Teens Use Media” (Nielsen, June 
2009) says that 37% of teens in the U.S. access the 
Internet from a mobile phone. Suppose you plan to 
select a random sample of 500 students at the local 
high school and will ask each student in the sample 
if he or she accesses the Internet from a mobile 
phone. You plan to use the resulting data to decide 
if there is evidence that the proportion of students at 
the high school who access the web using a mobile 
phone differs from the national figure given in the 
Nielsen report. What hypotheses should you test?
10.35	  The article “Irritated by Spam? Get Ready for Spit” 
(USA Today, November 10, 2004) predicts that “spit,” 
spam that is delivered via Internet phone lines and 
cell phones, will be a growing problem as more 
people turn to web-based phone services. In a 2004 
poll of 5500 cell phone users conducted by the 
Yankee Group, 20% indicated that they had received 
commercial messages or ads on their cell phones. Is 
there sufficient evidence to conclude that the pro-
portion of cell phone users who have received com-
mercial messages or ads in 2004 was greater than the 
proportion of .13 reported for the previous year? ​ ​
10.36	  According to a Washington Post-ABC News poll, 331 
of 502 randomly selected U.S. adults interviewed 
said they would not be bothered if the National 
Security Agency collected records of personal 
telephone calls they had made. Is there sufficient 
evidence to conclude that a majority of U.S. adults 
feel this way? Test the appropriate hypotheses using 
a .01 significance level.
10.37	  According to a survey of 1000 adult Americans 
conducted by Opinion Research Corporation, 210 
of those surveyed said playing the lottery would 
be the most practical way for them to accumulate ​
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

528 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
$200,000 in net wealth in their lifetime (“One 
in Five Believe Path to Riches Is the Lottery,” San 
Luis Obispo Tribune, January 11, 2006). Although 
the article does not describe how the sample was 
selected, for purposes of this exercise, assume that 
the sample can be regarded as a random sample of 
adult Americans. Is there convincing evidence that 
more than 20% of adult Americans believe that 
playing the lottery is the best strategy for accumu-
lating $200,000 in net wealth?​
10.38	  The article “Cops Get Screened for Digital Dirt” (USA 
Today, Nov. 12, 2010) summarizes a report of law 
enforcement agencies regarding the use of social 
media to screen applicants for employment. The re-
port was based on a survey of 728 law enforcement 
agencies. One question on the survey asked if the 
agency routinely reviewed applicant’s social media 
activity during background checks. For purposes 
of this exercise, suppose that the 728 agencies were 
selected at random, and that you want to use the 
survey data to decide if there is convincing evidence 
that more than 25% of law enforcement agencies 
review applicants’ social media activity as part of 
routine background checks.
a.  The sampling distribution of p⁄ describes the 
behavior of p⁄ when random samples are selected 
from a particular population. Describe the shape, 
center, and spread of the sampling distribution of 
p⁄ for samples of size 728 if the null hypothesis  
H0: p 5 0.25 is true.
b.  Would you be surprised to observe a sample 
proportion of p⁄ 5 0.27 for a sample of size 
728 if the null hypothesis H0: p 5 0.25 is true? 
Explain why or why not.
c.  Would you be surprised to observe a sample 
proportion of p⁄ 5 0.31 for a sample of size 728 if 
the null hypothesis H0: p 5 0.25 is true? Explain 
why or why not.
10.39	 Refer back to the previous exercise. The actual 
­sample proportion observed in the study was 
p⁄ 5 0.33. Based on this sample proportion, is there 
convincing evidence that more than 25% of law 
enforcement agencies review social media activity as 
part of background checks, or is this sample propor-
tion consistent with what you would expect to see 
when the null hypothesis is true?
10.40	 The report “2007 Electronic Monitoring & Surveillance 
Survey: Many Companies Monitoring, Recording, 
Videotaping—and Firing—Employees” (American 
Management Association, 2007) summarized the 
results of a survey of 304 U.S. businesses. Of these 
companies, 201 indicated that they monitor employees’ 
web site visits. For purposes of this exercise, assume 
that it is reasonable to regard this sample as repre-
sentative of businesses in the United States.
a.	Is there sufficient evidence to conclude that more 
than 60% of U.S. businesses monitor employees’ 
web site visits? Test the appropriate hypotheses 
using a significance level of .01.
b.	Is there sufficient evidence to conclude that a 
majority of U.S. businesses monitor employees’ 
web site visits? Test the appropriate hypotheses 
using a significance level of .01. ​ ​
10.41	 The article “Fewer Parolees Land Back Behind Bars” 
(Associated Press, April 11, 2006) includes the follow-
ing statement: “Just over 38% of all felons who were 
released from prison in 2003 landed back behind 
bars by the end of the following year, the lowest rate 
since 1979.” Explain why it would not be neces-
sary to carry out a hypothesis test to determine if 
the proportion of felons released in 2003 was less 
than .40.​
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
We now turn our attention to developing a method for testing hypotheses about a popula-
tion mean. The test procedures in this case are based on the same two results that led to the 
z and t confidence intervals in Chapter 9: 
1.	 When n is large or the population distribution is approximately normal, then
z 5 x 2 m
s
Ïn
has approximately a standard normal distribution.
 10.4  
Hypothesis Tests for a Population Mean
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 10.4   Hypothesis Tests for a Population Mean 
●  529
2.	 When n is large or the population distribution is approximately normal, then
t 5 x 2 m
s
Ïn
has approximately a t distribution with df 5 n 2 1.
This means that if we are interested in testing a null hypothesis of the form
H0:  ​m 5 hypothesized value
and n is large or the population distribution is approximately normal, one of the following 
z or t test statistics can be used:
Case 1: s known
Test statistic:  ​z 5 x 2 hypothesized value
s
Ïn
P-value:  ​Computed as an area under the z curve
Case 2: s unknown
Test statistic:  ​t 5 x 2 hypothesized value
s
Ïn
P-value:  ​Computed as an area under the t curve with df 5 n 2 1
Because it is rarely the case that s, the population standard deviation, is known, we focus 
our attention on the test procedure for the case in which s is unknown.
When testing a hypothesis about a population mean, the null hypothesis specifies a 
particular hypothesized value for m. We write the null hypothesis as H0: m 5 hypothesized 
value. The alternative hypothesis has one of the following three forms, depending on the 
research question being addressed:
Ha:  ​m . hypothesized value
Ha:  ​m , hypothesized value
Ha:  ​m ? hypothesized value
If n is large or if the population distribution is approximately normal, the test statistic
t 5 x 2 hypothesized value
s
Ïn
can be used. For example, if the null hypothesis to be tested is H0: m 5 100, the test 
statistic becomes
t 5 x 2 100
s
Ïn
Consider the alternative hypothesis Ha: m . 100, and suppose that a sample of size 
n 5 24 results in x 5 104.20 and s 5 8.23. Then the test statistic value is
t 5 104.20 2 100
8.23
Ï24
5
4.20
1.6799 5 2.50
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

530 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
Because this is an upper-tailed test, the P-value is the area under an appropriate t curve 
(here with df 5 24 2 1 5 23) to the right of 2.50. 
Appendix Table 4 is a tabulation of t curve tail areas. Each column of the table is for a 
different number of degrees of freedom: 1, 2, 3, . . . , 30, 35, 40, 60, 120, and a last column 
for df 5 `, which is the same as for the z curve. The table gives the area under each t curve 
to the right of values ranging from 0.0 to 4.0 in increments of 0.1. Part of this table appears 
in Figure 10.3. For example,
area under the 23-df t curve to the right of 2.5 5 .010
	
5 P-value for an upper-tailed t test
Suppose that t 5 22.7 for a lower-tailed test based on 23 df. Then, because each t curve 
is symmetric about 0,
P-value 5 area to the left of 22.7 5 area to the right of 2.7 5 .006
As is the case for z tests, we double the tail area to obtain the P-value for two-tailed t tests. 
This means that if t 5 2.6 or if t 5 22.6 for a two-tailed t test with 23 df, then
P-value 5 2(.008) 5 .016
Once past 30 df, the tail areas change very little, so the last column (`) in Appendix Table 4 
provides a good approximation.
1.	 Upper-tailed test:
Ha: m . hypothesized value 	
	
P-value 5 area in upper tail
t curve for n 2 1 df
Calculated t 
0
Finding P-Values for a t Test
continued
A graphing calculator or a statistics package can also be used to compute P-values for t tests.
The following two boxes show how the P-value is obtained as a t curve area and give a 
general description of the test procedure.
Figure  10.3
​Part of Appendix Table 4: t curve tail 
areas.
Area under 23-df
t curve to right of 2.7
 1            2            . . .          22          23           24         . . .          60          120
. . .        .008       .008        .008        . . .
. . .        .010       .010        .010
. . .        .007       .006        .006        . . .
. . .        .005       .005        .005        . . .
df
t
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
  . . .
0.0
0.1
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
4.0
...
...
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 10.4   Hypothesis Tests for a Population Mean 
●  531
Example 10.13 
Time Stands Still (or So It Seems)
● A study conducted by researchers at Pennsylvania State University investigated whether 
time perception, an indication of a person’s ability to concentrate, is impaired during 
nicotine withdrawal. The study results were presented in the paper “Smoking Abstinence 
Impairs Time Estimation Accuracy in Cigarette Smokers” (Psychopharmacology Bulletin 
[2003]: 90–95). 
After a 24-hour smoking abstinence, 20 smokers were asked to estimate how much time 
had passed during a 45-second period. Suppose the resulting data on perceived elapsed 
time (in seconds) were as follows (these data are artificial but are consistent with summary 
quantities given in the paper):
69    65    72    73    59    55    39    52    67    57
56    50    70    47    56    45    70    64    67    53
2.	 Lower-tailed test:
Ha:  ​m , hypothesized value 	
	
t curve for n 2 1 df
P-value 5 area in lower tail
Calculated t 
0
3.	 Two-tailed test:
Ha:  ​m ? hypothesized value	
	
t curve for n 2 1 df
P-value 5 sum of area in two tails
Calculated t, 2t
0
Appendix Table 4 gives upper-tail t curve areas to the right of values 0.0, 0.1, . . . , 4.0. These areas are P-values for 
upper-tailed tests and, by symmetry, also for lower-tailed tests. Doubling an area gives the P-value for a two-tailed test.
Null hypothesis:  ​H0:  ​m 5 hypothesized value
Test statistic:  ​t 5 x 2 hypothesized value
s
Ïn
Alternative Hypothesis:	
P-Value:
Ha:  ​m . hypothesized value	 Area to the right of calculated t under t curve with df 5 n 2 1
Ha:  ​m , hypothesized value	 Area to the left of calculated t under t curve with df 5 n 2 1
Ha:  ​m ? hypothesized value	 (1)  ​2(area to the right of t) if t is positive, or
	 	
(2)  ​2(area to the left of t) if t is negative
Assumptions:  1. ​ x and s are the sample mean and sample standard deviation from a random sample.
	 	
2. The sample size is large (generally n $ 30) or the population distribution is at least 
approximately normal.
The One-Sample t Test for a Population Mean
 Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

532 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
From these data, we obtain
n 5 20  ​  ​  ​  ​x 5 59.30    ​  ​  ​s 5 9.84
The researchers wanted to determine whether smoking abstinence had a negative impact 
on time perception, causing elapsed time to be overestimated. With m representing the 
mean perceived elapsed time for smokers who have abstained from smoking for 24 hours, 
we can answer this question by testing
H0:  ​m 5 45 (no consistent tendency to overestimate the time elapsed)
versus
Ha:  ​m . 45 (tendency for elapsed time to be overestimated)
The null hypothesis is rejected only if there is convincing evidence that m . 45. The 
observed value, 59.30, is larger than 45, but can a sample mean as large as this be plausibly 
explained by chance variation from one sample to another when m 5 45? 
To answer this question, we carry out a hypothesis test with a significance level of .05 
using the nine-step procedure described in Section 10.3.
1.	 Population characteristic of interest:
m 5 mean perceived elapsed time for smokers who have abstained from smoking 
for 24 hours
2.	 Null hypothesis:  ​H0:  ​m 5 45
3.	 Alternative hypothesis:  ​Ha:  ​m . 45
4.	 Significance level:  ​a 5 .05
5.	 Test statistic:  ​t 5 x 2 hypothesized value
s
Ïn
5 x 2 45
s
Ïn
6.	 Assumptions:  ​This test requires a random sample and either a large sample size 
or a normal population distribution. The authors of the paper believed that it was 
reasonable to consider this sample as representative of smokers in general, and if 
this is the case, it is reasonable to regard it as if it were a random sample. Because 
the sample size is only 20, for the t test to be appropriate, we must be willing 
to assume that the population distribution of perceived elapsed times is at least 
approximately normal. Is this reasonable? The following graph gives a boxplot of 
the data:
40
50
60
Perceived elapsed time
70
Although the boxplot is not perfectly symmetric, it does not appear to be too skewed 
and there are no outliers, so the use of the t test is reasonable.
7.	 Computations:  ​n 5 20, x 5 59.30, and s 5 9.84, so
t 5 59.30 2 45
9.84
Ï20
5 14.30
2.20 5 6.50
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 10.4   Hypothesis Tests for a Population Mean 
●  533
8.	 P-value:  ​This is an upper-tailed test (the inequality in Ha is “greater than”), 
so the P-value is the area to the right of the computed t value. Because 
df 5 20 2 1 5 19, we can use the df 5 19 column of Appendix Table 4 to find 
the P-value. With t 5 6.50, we obtain P-value 5 area to the right of 6.50 < 0 
(because 6.50 is greater than 4.0, the largest tabulated value).
9.	 Conclusion:  ​Because P-value # a, we reject H0 at the .05 level of significance. 
There is almost no chance of seeing a sample mean this extreme as a result of 
just chance variation when H0 is true. There is convincing evidence that the 
mean perceived time elapsed is greater than the actual time elapsed of  
45 seconds.
This paper also looked at perception of elapsed time for a sample of nonsmokers and for 
a sample of smokers who had not abstained from smoking. The investigators found that 
the null hypothesis of m 5 45 could not be rejected for either of these groups.
■
Example 10.14 
Goofing Off at Work
● A growing concern of employers is time spent in activities like surfing the Internet 
and e-mailing friends during work hours. The San Luis Obispo Tribune summarized the 
findings from a survey of a large sample of workers in an article that ran under the 
headline “Who Goofs Off 2 Hours a Day? Most Workers, Survey Says” (August 3, 2006). 
Suppose that the CEO of a large company wants to determine whether the average 
amount of wasted time during an 8-hour work day for employees of her company is 
less than the reported 120 minutes. Each person in a random sample of 10 employees 
was contacted and asked about daily wasted time at work. (Participants would probably 
have to be guaranteed anonymity to obtain truthful responses!) The resulting data are 
the following:
108  ​  ​  ​112  ​  ​  ​117  ​  ​  ​130  ​  ​  ​111  ​  ​  ​131  ​  ​  ​113  ​  ​  ​113  ​  ​  ​105  ​  ​  ​128
Summary quantities are n 5 10, x 5 116.80, and s 5 9.45.
Do these data provide evidence that the mean wasted time for this company is 
less than 120 minutes? To answer this question, let’s carry out a hypothesis test with 
a 5 .05.
1.	 m 5 mean daily wasted time for employees of this company
2.	 H0:  ​m 5 120
3.	 Ha:  ​m , 120
4.	 a 5 .05
5.	 t 5 x 2 hypothesized value
s
Ïn
5 x 2 120
s
Ïn
6.	 This test requires a random sample and either a large sample or a normal 
population distribution. The given sample was a random sample of employees. 
Because the sample size is small, we must be willing to assume that the popula-
tion distribution of times is at least approximately normal. The accompanying 
normal probability plot appears to be reasonably straight, and although the 
normal probability plot and the boxplot reveal some skewness in the sample, 
there are no outliers.
Interpret the results ❭
Step-by-step technology  
instructions available  
online
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
 Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

534 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
105
110
115
120
Wasted time
125
130
105
22
21
0
1
2
110
115
120
125
130
Wasted time
Normal score
Based on these observations, it is plausible that the population distribution is 
approximately normal, so we proceed with the t test.
7.	 Test statistic:  ​t 5 116.80 2 120
9.45
Ï10
5 21.07
8.	 From the df 5 9 column of Appendix Table 4 and by rounding the test statistic 
value to 21.1, we get 
P-value 5 area to the left of 21.1 5 area to the right of 1.1 5 .150
as shown:
0
t curve with
df 5 9
.150
1.1
9.	 Because the P-value . a, we fail to reject H0. There is not sufficient evidence to 
conclude that the mean wasted time per 8-hour work day for employees at this 
company is less than 120 minutes.
Minitab could also have been used to carry out the test, as shown in the output below.
One-Sample T: Wasted Time
Test of mu 5 120 vs , 120
95%
Upper
Variable
N
Mean
StDev
SE Mean
Bound
T
P
Wasted Time
10
116.800
9.449
2.988
122.278
21.07
0.156
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 10.4   Hypothesis Tests for a Population Mean 
●  535
Although we had to round the computed t value to 21.1 to use Appendix Table 4, Minitab 
was able to compute the P-value corresponding to the actual value of the test statistic, 
which was P-value 5 0.156.
■
Example 10.15 
Cricket Love
The article “Well-Fed Crickets Bowl Maidens Over” 
(Nature Science Update, February 11, 1999) reported 
that female field crickets are attracted to males that 
have high chirp rates and hypothesized that chirp 
rate is related to nutritional status. The usual chirp 
rate for male field crickets was reported to vary 
around a mean of 60 chirps per second. To investigate whether chirp rate was related to 
nutritional status, investigators fed male crickets a high protein diet for 8 days, after which 
chirp rate was measured. 
The mean chirp rate for the crickets on the high protein diet was reported to be 109 chirps 
per second. Is this convincing evidence that the mean chirp rate for crickets on a high protein 
diet is greater than 60 (which would then imply an advantage in attracting the ladies)? 
Suppose that the sample size and sample standard deviation are n 5 32 and s 5 40. Let’s 
test the relevant hypotheses with a 5 .01.
1.	 m 5 mean chirp rate for crickets on a high protein diet
2.	 H0:  ​m 5 60
3.	 Ha:  ​m . 60
4.	 a 5 .01
5.	 t 5 x 2 hypothesized value
s
Ïn
5 x 2 60
s
Ïn
6.	 This test requires a random sample and either a large sample or a normal population 
distribution. Because the sample size is large (n 5 32), it is reasonable to proceed 
with the t test as long as we are willing to consider the 32 male field crickets in this 
study as if they were a random sample from the population of male field crickets.
7.	 Test statistic:  ​t 5 109 2 60
40
Ï32
5 49
7.07 5 6.93
8.	 This is an upper-tailed test, so the P-value is the area under the t curve with 
df 5 31 and to the right of 6.93. From Appendix Table 4, P-value < 0.
9.  Because P-value < 0, which is less than the significance level, a, we reject H0. There is 
convincing evidence that the mean chirp rate is higher for male field crickets that eat 
a high protein diet.
■
Statistical Versus Practical Significance
Carrying out a hypothesis test amounts to deciding whether the value obtained for the test 
statistic could plausibly have resulted when H0 is true. When the value of the test statistic 
leads to rejection of H0, it is customary to say that the result is statistically significant at 
the chosen significance level a. The finding of statistical significance means that, in the 
investigator’s opinion, the observed deviation from what was expected under H0 cannot 
reasonably be attributed to only chance variation. However, statistical significance is not 
the same as concluding that the true situation differs from what the null hypothesis states 
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Dynamic Graphics Group/Creatas/Alamy 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

536 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
in any practical sense. That is, even after H0 has been rejected, the data may suggest that 
there is no practical difference between the actual value of the population characteristic 
and what the null hypothesis states that value to be. This is illustrated in Example 10.16.
Example 10.16 
“Significant” but Unimpressive  
Test Score Improvement
Let m denote the average score on a standardized test for all children in a certain region of 
the United States. The average score for all children in the United States is 100. Regional 
education authorities are interested in testing H0: m 5 100 versus Ha: m . 100 using a 
significance level of .001. 
A sample of 2500 children resulted in the values n 5 2500, x 5 101.0, and s 5 15.0. Then
t 5 101.10 2 100
15
Ï2500
5 3.3
This is an upper-tailed test, so (using the z column of Appendix Table 4 because df 5 2499) 
P-value 5 area to the right of 3.33 < .000. Because P-value , .001, we reject H0. There is 
evidence that the mean score for this region is greater than 100.
However, with n 5 2500, the point estimate x 5101.0 is likely to be very close to the 
actual value of m. This means that it looks as though H0 was rejected because m < 101 
rather than 100. From a practical point of view, a 1-point difference is most probably of no 
practical importance.	
■
Understand the context ❭
Interpret the results ❭
EXERCISES 10.42 - 10.58
10.42	 Give as much information as you can about the 
P-value of a t test in each of the following situations:
a.	 Upper-tailed test, df 5 8, t 5 2.0    ​
b.	Upper-tailed test, n 5 14, t 5 3.2    ​
c.	 Lower-tailed test, df 5 10, t 5 22.4    ​
d.	Lower-tailed test, n 5 22, t 5 24.2    ​
e.	 Two-tailed test, df 5 15, t 5 21.6    ​
f.	 Two-tailed test, n 5 16, t 5 1.6    ​
g.	 Two-tailed test, n 5 16, t 5 6.3    ​
10.43	 Give as much information as you can about the 
P-value of a t test in each of the following situations:
a.	 Two-tailed test, df 5 9, t 5 0.73 
b.	Upper-tailed test, df 5 10, t 5 20.5 
c.	 Lower-tailed test, n 5 20, t 5 22.1 
d.	Lower-tailed test, n 5 20, t 5 25.1 
e.	 Two-tailed test, n 5 40, t 5 1.7 
10.44	 Paint used to paint lines on roads must reflect 
enough light to be clearly visible at night. Let m de-
note the mean reflectometer reading for a new type 
of paint under consideration. A test of H0: m 5 20 
versus Ha: m . 20 based on a sample of 15 observa-
tions gave t 5 3.2. What conclusion is appropriate at 
each of the following significance levels?
a.	a 5 .05  ​  ​	
c.	 a 5 .001  ​  ​
b.	a 5 .01  ​  ​
10.45	 A certain pen has been designed so that true aver-
age writing lifetime under controlled conditions 
(involving the use of a writing machine) is at least 
10 hours. A random sample of 18 pens is selected, 
the writing lifetime of each is determined, and a 
normal probability plot of the resulting data sup-
ports the use of a one-sample t test. The relevant 
hypotheses are H0: m 5 10 versus Ha: m , 10.
a.	 If t 5 22.3 and a 5 .05 is selected, what 
conclusion is appropriate?  ​  ​
b.	If t 5 21.83 and a 5 .01 is selected, what 
conclusion is appropriate?   ​  ​
c.	 If t 5 0.47, what conclusion is appropriate? 
10.46	 The true average diameter of ball bearings of a cer-
tain type is supposed to be 0.5 inch. What conclu-
sion is appropriate when testing H0: m 5 0.5 versus 
Ha: m ? 0.5 inch each of the following situations:
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 10.4   Hypothesis Tests for a Population Mean 
●  537
a.	 n 5 13, t 5 1.6, a 5 .05  ​  ​
b.	n 5 13, t 5 21.6, a 5 .05  ​  ​
c.	 n 5 25, t 5 22.6, a 5 .01  ​  ​
d.	n 5 25, t 5 23.6
10.47	 The paper “Playing Active Video Games Increases 
Energy Expenditure in Children” (Pediatrics [2009]: 
534–539) describes an interesting investigation of 
the possible cardiovascular benefits of active video 
games. Mean heart rate for healthy boys age 10 to 
13 after walking on a treadmill at 2.6 km/hour for 
6 minutes is 98 beats per minute (bpm). For each of 
14 boys, heart rate was measured after 15 minutes 
of playing Wii Bowling. The resulting sample mean 
and standard deviation were 101 bpm and 15 bpm, 
respectively. For purposes of this exercise, assume 
that it is reasonable to regard the sample of boys 
as representative of boys age 10 to 13 and that the 
distribution of heart rates after 15 minutes of Wii 
Bowling is approximately normal.
a.	 Does the sample provide convincing evidence 
that the mean heart rate after 15 minutes of Wii 
Bowling is different from the known mean heart 
rate after 6 minutes walking on the treadmill? 
Carry out a hypothesis test using  a ​5 ​.01.
b.	The known resting mean heart rate for boys in 
this age group is 66 bpm. Is there convincing evi-
dence that the mean heart rate after Wii Bowling 
for 15 minutes is higher than the known mean 
resting heart rate for boys of this age? Use a ​5 ​
.01. (Hint: See Example 10.15.) 
c.	 Based on the outcomes of the tests in Parts (a) 
and (b), write a paragraph comparing the benefits 
of treadmill walking and Wii Bowling in terms of 
raising heart rate over the resting heart rate.
10.48	 A study of fast-food intake is described in the paper 
“What People Buy From Fast-Food Restaurants” 
(Obesity [2009]: 1369–1374). Adult customers at three 
hamburger chains (McDonald’s, Burger King, and 
Wendy’s) at lunchtime in New York City were ap-
proached as they entered the restaurant and asked to 
provide their receipt when exiting. The receipts were 
then used to determine what was purchased and 
the number of calories consumed was determined. 
In all, 3857 people participated in the study. The 
sample mean number of calories consumed was 857 
and the sample standard deviation was 677.
a.	 The sample standard deviation is quite large. 
What does this tell you about number of calories 
consumed in a hamburger-chain lunchtime 
fast-food purchase in New York City?
b.	Given the values of the sample mean and 
standard deviation and the fact that the number 
of calories consumed can’t be negative, explain 
why it is not reasonable to assume that the 
distribution of calories consumed is normal.
c.	 Based on a recommended daily intake of 
2000 calories, the online Healthy Dining Finder 
(www.healthydiningfinder.com) recommends a 
target of 750 calories for lunch. Assuming that 
it is reasonable to regard the sample of 3857 
fast-food purchases as representative of all 
hamburger-chain lunchtime purchases in New 
York City, carry out a hypothesis test to determine 
if the sample provides convincing evidence that 
the mean number of calories in a New York City 
hamburger-chain lunchtime purchase is greater 
than the lunch recommendation of 750 calories. 
Use a 5 .01. (Hint: See Example 10.15.)
d.	Would it be reasonable to generalize the 
conclusion of the test in Part (c) to the lunchtime 
fast-food purchases of all adult Americans? 
Explain why or why not.
e.	 Explain why it is better to use the customer 
receipt to determine what was ordered rather 
than just asking a customer leaving the restaurant 
what he or she purchased.
f.	 Do you think that asking customers before they 
order to provide a receipt when they leave could 
have introduced a potential bias? Explain.
10.49	 The report “Highest Paying Jobs for 2009–10 Bachelor’s 
Degree Graduates” (National Association of Colleges and 
Employers, February 2010) states that the mean yearly 
salary offer for students graduating with a degree in 
accounting in 2010 is $48,722. Suppose that a random 
sample of 50 accounting graduates at a large univer-
sity who received job offers resulted in a mean offer of 
$49,850 and a standard deviation of $3300. Do the 
sample data provide strong support for the claim that 
the mean salary offer for accounting graduates of this 
university is higher than the 2010 national average of 
$48,722? Test the relevant hypotheses using a ​5 ​.05.
10.50	 ● The Economist collects data each year on the price 
of a Big Mac in various countries around the world. 
The price of a Big Mac for a sample of McDonald’s 
restaurants in Europe in January 2014 resulted in 
the following Big Mac prices (after conversion to 
U.S. dollars):
5.18  4.95  4.07  4.68  5.22  4.67 
4.14  4.98  5.15  5.56  5.36  4.60
The mean price of a Big Mac in the U.S. in 
January 2014 was $4.62. For purposes of this 
exercise, assume it is reasonable to regard the 
sample as representative of European McDonald’s 
restaurants. Does the sample provide convincing 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

538 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
evidence that the mean January 2014 price of a Big 
Mac in Europe is greater than the reported U.S. 
price? Test the relevant hypotheses using a ​5 ​.05.
10.51	 A credit bureau analysis of undergraduate students’ 
credit records found that the average number of 
credit cards in an undergraduate’s wallet was 4.09 
(“Undergraduate Students and Credit Cards in 2004,” 
Nellie Mae, May 2005). It was also reported that in a 
random sample of 132 undergraduates, the sample 
mean number of credit cards that the students said 
they carried was 2.6. The sample standard deviation 
was not reported, but for purposes of this exercise, 
suppose that it was 1.2. Is there convincing evi-
dence that the mean number of credit cards that 
undergraduates report carrying is less than the credit 
bureau’s figure of 4.09? (Hint: See Example 10.14.)
10.52	
 Medical research has shown that repeated wrist 
extension beyond 20 degrees increases the risk 
of wrist and hand injuries. Each of 24 students at 
Cornell University used a proposed new computer 
mouse design. While using the mouse, each stu-
dent’s wrist extension was recorded. Data consistent 
with summary values given in the paper “Compara-
tive Study of Two Computer Mouse Designs” (Cornell 
Human ­Factors Laboratory Technical Report RP7992) 
are given. Use these data to test the hypothesis that 
the mean wrist extension for people using this new 
mouse design is greater than 20 degrees. Are any as-
sumptions required in order for it to be appropriate 
to generalize the results of your test to the popula-
tion of Cornell students? To the population of all 
university students? (Hint: See Example 10.13.)
27  28  24  26  27  25  25  24  24  24  25  28 
22  25  24  28  27  26  31  25  28  27  27  25
10.53	 The international polling organization Ipsos reported 
data from a survey of 2000 randomly selected 
Canadians who carry debit cards (Canadian Account 
Habits Survey, July 24, 2006). Participants in this sur-
vey were asked what they considered the minimum 
purchase amount for which it would be acceptable to 
use a debit card. Suppose that the sample mean and 
standard deviation were $9.15 and $7.60, respec-
tively. (These values are consistent with a histogram 
of the sample data that appears in the report.) 
Do these data provide convincing evidence that 
the mean minimum purchase amount for which 
Canadians consider the use of a debit card to be 
appropriate is less than $10? Carry out a hypothesis 
test with a significance level of .01. ​
10.54	 A comprehensive study conducted by the National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development 
tracked more than 1000 children from an early age 
through elementary school (New York Times, Novem-
ber 1, 2005). The study concluded that children who 
spent more than 30 hours a week in child care be-
fore entering school tended to score higher in math 
and reading when they were in the third grade. The 
researchers cautioned that the findings should not 
be a cause for alarm because the effects of child care 
were found to be small. 
Explain how the difference between the sample 
mean math score for third graders who spent long 
hours in child care and the known overall mean 
for third graders could be small but the researchers 
could still reach the conclusion that the mean for 
the child care group is significantly higher than the 
overall mean for third graders. (Hint: See discussion 
of statistical versus practical significance.)
10.55	 In a study of computer use, 1000 randomly selected 
Canadian Internet users were asked how much time 
they spend using the Internet in a typical week  
(Ipsos Reid, August 9, 2005). The mean of the sample 
observations was 12.7 hours.
a.	 The sample standard deviation was not reported, 
but suppose that it was 5 hours. Carry out a 
hypothesis test with a significance level of .05 to 
decide if there is convincing evidence that the 
mean time spent using the Internet by Canadians 
is greater than 12.5 hours.
b.	Now suppose that the sample standard deviation 
was 2 hours. Carry out a hypothesis test with 
a significance level of .05 to decide if there is 
convincing evidence that the mean time spent 
using the Internet by Canadians is greater than 
12.5 hours. 
c.	 Explain why the null hypothesis was rejected in 
the test of Part (b) but not in the test of Part (a).
10.56	 The paper titled “Music for Pain Relief” (The Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews, April 19, 2006) con-
cluded, based on a review of 51 studies of the effect 
of music on pain intensity, that 
“Listening to music reduces pain intensity levels . . . 
However, the magnitude of these positive effects is 
small, the clinical relevance of music for pain relief 
in clinical practice is unclear.” 
Are the authors of this paper claiming that the pain 
reduction attributable to listening to music is not 
statistically significant, not practically significant, or 
neither statistically nor practically significant? Explain.
10.57	
 ▼ Many consumers pay careful attention to stated 
nutritional contents on packaged foods when mak-
ing purchases. It is therefore important that the 
information on packages be accurate. A random 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 10.5   Power and Probability of Type II Error 
●  539
sample of n 5 12 frozen dinners of a certain type 
was selected from production during a particular 
period, and the calorie content of each one was de-
termined. Here are the resulting observations, along 
with a boxplot and normal probability plot: 
255  244  239  242  265  245  259  248
225  226  251  233
225
235
245
255
265
Calories
225
21.5
20.5
Normal score
0.5
1.5
235
245
255
265
Calories
a.	Is it reasonable to test hypotheses about mean 
calorie content m by using a t test? Explain why 
or why not.
b.	The stated calorie content is 240. Does the  
boxplot suggest that actual average content  
differs from the stated value? Explain your  
reasoning.
c.	Carry out a formal test of the hypotheses suggested 
in Part (b).​
10.58	
 Much concern has been expressed regarding the 
practice of using nitrates as meat preservatives. In 
one study involving possible effects of these chemi-
cals, bacteria cultures were grown in a medium con-
taining nitrates. The rate of uptake of radio-labeled 
amino acid (in dpm, disintegrations per minute) was 
then determined for each culture, yielding the fol-
lowing observations:
7251   6871   9632   6866   9094   5849   8957   7978 
7064   7494   7883   8178   7523   8724   7468 0000
Suppose that it is known that the mean rate of 
uptake for cultures without nitrates is 8000. 
Do the data suggest that the addition of nitrates 
results in a decrease in the mean rate of uptake? Test 
the appropriate hypotheses using a significance level 
of .10.  ​  ​
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
 10.5  
Power and Probability of Type II Error
In this chapter, we have introduced test procedures for testing hypotheses about popula-
tion characteristics, such as m and p. What characterizes a “good” test procedure? It makes 
sense to think that a good test procedure is one that has both a small probability of rejecting 
H0 when it is true (a Type I error) and a high probability of rejecting H0 when it is false. 
The test procedures presented in this chapter allow us to directly control the probability 
of rejecting a true H0 by our choice of the significance level a. But what about the probabil-
ity of rejecting H0 when it is false? As we will see, several factors influence this probability. 
Let’s begin by considering an example.
Suppose that the student body president at a university is interested in studying the amount 
of money that students spend on textbooks each semester. The director of the financial aid 
office believes that the average amount spent on books is $500 per semester and uses this 
figure to determine the amount of financial aid for which a student is eligible. The student 
body president plans to ask each individual in a random sample of students how much he or 
she spent on books this semester and has decided to use the resulting data to test
H0: m 5 500  ​  ​versus  ​  ​Ha: m . 500
using a significance level of .05. If the actual mean is 500 (or less than 500), the correct 
decision is to fail to reject the null hypothesis. Incorrectly rejecting the null hypothesis is a 
Type I error. On the other hand, if the actual mean is 525 or 505 or even 501, the correct 
decision is to reject the null hypothesis. Not rejecting the null hypothesis is a Type II error. 
How likely is it that the null hypothesis will in fact be rejected?
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

540 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
If the actual mean is 501, the probability that we reject H0: m 5 500 is not very great. 
This is because when we carry out the test, we are essentially looking at the sample mean 
and asking, if it looks like what we would expect to see if the population mean were 500. 
As illustrated in Figure 10.4, if the actual mean is greater than but very close to 500, 
chances are that the sample mean will look pretty much like what we would expect to see 
if the population mean were 500, and we will not be convinced that the null hypothesis 
should be rejected. If the true mean is 525, it is less likely that the sample will be mistaken 
for a sample from a population with mean 500 because sample means will tend to cluster 
around 525. In this case, it is more likely that we will correctly reject H0. If the actual mean 
is 550, rejection of H0 is even more likely.
When we consider the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis, we are looking at 
what statisticians refer to as the power of the test.
Power of a test: The probability of rejecting the null hypothesis.
DEFINITION
From the previous discussion, it should be apparent that when a hypothesis about a 
population mean is being tested, the power of the test depends on the true value of the 
population mean, m. Because the actual value of m is unknown (if we knew the value of 
m we wouldn’t be doing the hypothesis test!), we cannot know what the power is for the 
actual value of m. However, it is possible to gain some insight into the power of a test by 
looking at a number of “what if” scenarios. For example, we might ask, What is the power if 
the actual mean is 525? or What is the power if the actual mean is 505? and so on. We can 
determine the power at m 5 525, the power at m 5 505, and the power at any other value 
of interest. Although it is technically possible to consider power when the null hypothesis 
is true, an investigator is usually concerned about the power only at values for which the 
null hypothesis is false.
In general, when testing a hypothesis about a population characteristic, there are three 
factors that influence the power of the test:
1.	 The size of the difference between the actual value of the population characteristic 
and the hypothesized value (the value that appears in the null hypothesis).
2.	 The choice of significance level, a.
3.	 The sample size. 
1.	 The larger the size of the discrepancy between the hypothesized value and 
the actual value of the population characteristic, the greater the power.
2.	 The larger the significance level, a, the greater the power of the test.
3.	 The larger the sample size, the greater the power of the test.
Effect of Various Factors on the Power of a Test
Let’s consider each of the statements in the box above. The first statement has already 
been discussed in the context of the textbook example. Because power is the probability of 
rejecting the null hypothesis, it makes sense that the power will be higher when the actual 
500 505
525
Figure  10.4
Sampling distribution of x for  
m 5 500, 505, 525.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 10.5   Power and Probability of Type II Error 
●  541
value of a population characteristic is quite different from the hypothesized value than 
when it is close to the hypothesized value.
The effect of significance level on power is not quite as obvious. To understand the 
relationship between power and significance level, it helps to consider the relationship 
between power and b, the probability of a Type II error.
When H0 is false, power 5 1 2 b.
This relationship follows from the definitions of power and Type II error. A Type II error 
results from not rejecting a false H0. Because power is the probability of rejecting H0, it fol-
lows that when H0 is false
power 5 probability of rejecting a false H0
5 1 2 probability of not rejecting a false H0
5 1 2 b
Recall from Section 10.2 that the choice of a, the Type I error probability, affects the value 
of b, the Type II error probability. Choosing a larger value for a results in a smaller value 
for b (and therefore a larger value for 1 2 b). In terms of power, this means that choosing 
a larger value for a results in a larger value for the power of the test. The larger the Type I 
error probability we are willing to tolerate, the more likely it is that the test will be able to 
detect any particular departure from H0.
The third factor that affects the power of a test is the sample size. When H0 is false, the 
power of a test is the probability that we will “detect” that H0 is false and, based on the ob-
served sample, reject H0. Intuition suggests that we will be more likely to detect a departure 
from H0 with a large sample than with a small sample. This is in fact the case—the larger 
the sample size, the higher the power.
For example, consider testing the hypotheses presented previously:
H0:  ​m 5 500  versus  Ha:  ​m . 500
The observations about power imply the following:
1.	 For any value of m exceeding 500, the power of a test based on a sample of size 
100 is greater than the power of a test based on a sample of size 75 (assuming the 
same significance level).
2.	 For any value of m exceeding 500, the power of a test using a significance level of 
.05 is greater than the power of a test using a significance level of .01 (assuming 
the same sample size).
3.	 For any value of m exceeding 500, the power of the test is greater if the actual 
mean is 550 than if the actual mean is 525 (assuming the same sample size and 
significance level).
As was mentioned previously in this section, it is impossible to calculate the exact power 
of a test because in practice we do not know the values of population characteristics. How-
ever, we can evaluate the power at a selected alternative value which would tell us whether 
the power would be high or low if this alternative value is the actual value.
The following optional subsection shows how Type II error probabilities and power can 
be evaluated for selected tests.
Calculating Power and Type II Error Probabilities  
for Selected Tests (Optional)
The test procedures presented in this chapter are designed to control the probability of a 
Type I error (rejecting H0 when H0 is true) at the desired significance level a. However, little 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

542 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
has been said so far about calculating the value of b, the probability of a Type II error (not 
rejecting H0 when H0 is false). Here, we consider the calculation of b and power for the 
hypothesis tests previously introduced.
When we carry out a hypothesis test, we specify the desired value of a, the probability 
of a Type I error. The probability of a Type II error, b, is the probability of not rejecting H0 
even though it is false. Suppose that we are testing
H0:  ​m 5 1.5  versus  Ha:  ​m . 1.5
Because we do not know the actual value of m, we cannot calculate the actual value of b. 
However, the probability of Type II error can be investigated by calculating b for several 
different potential values of m, such as m 5 1.55, m 5 1.6, and m 5 1.7. Once a value 
of b has been determined, the power of the test at the corresponding alternative value 
is just 1 2 b.
Example 10.17 
Calculating Power
An airline claims that the mean time on hold for callers to its customer service phone line 
is 1.5 minutes. We might investigate this claim by testing
H0:  ​m 5 1.5  versus  Ha:  ​m . 1.5
where m is the actual mean customer hold time. A random sample of n 5 36 calls is to be 
selected, and the resulting data will be used to reach a conclusion. 
Suppose that the standard deviation of hold time (s) is known to be 0.20 minutes and 
that a significance level of .01 is to be used. Our test statistic is
z 5 x 2 1.5
.20
Ïn
5 x 2 1.5
.20
Ï36
5 x 2 1.5
.0333
The inequality in Ha implies that
P-value 5 area under z curve to the right of calculated z
From Appendix Table 2, it is easily verified that the z critical value 2.33 captures an 
upper-tail z curve area of .01. This means that P-value # .01 only when z $ 2.33. This is 
equivalent to the decision rule
reject H0 if calculated z $ 2.33
which becomes
reject H0 if  x 2 1.5
.0333  $ 2.33
Solving this inequality for x we get
x $ 1.5 1 2.33s.0333d
or
x $ 1.578
So if x $ 1.578, we will reject H0, and if x , 1.578, we will fail to reject H0. This decision 
rule corresponds to a 5 .01.
Suppose now that m 5 1.6 (so that H0 is false). A Type II error will then occur if 
x , 1.578. What is the probability that this occurs? If m 5 1.6, the sampling distribution 
of x is approximately normal, centered at 1.6, and has a standard deviation of .0333. The 
probability of observing an x value less than 1.578 can then be determined by finding an 
area under a normal curve with mean 1.6 and standard deviation .0333, as illustrated in 
Figure 10.5.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 10.5   Power and Probability of Type II Error 
●  543
Because the curve in Figure 10.5 is not the standard normal (z) curve, we must first 
convert to a z score before using Appendix Table 2 or technology to find the area. Here,
z score for 1.578 5 1.578 2 mx
sx
5 1.578 2 1.6
.0333
5 2 .66
and
area under z curve to left of 20.66 5 .2546
So, if m 5 1.6, b 5 .2546. This means that if m is 1.6, about 25% of all samples would still 
result in x values less than 1.578, and we would not reject H0.
The power of the test at m 5 1.6 is then
(power at m 5 1.6) 5 1 2 (b when m is 1.6)
5 1 2 .2546
5 .7454
This means that if the actual mean is 1.6, the probability of rejecting H0: m 5 1.5 in favor 
of Ha: m . 1.5 is .7454. If m is 1.6 and the test is used repeatedly with random samples 
selected from the population, in the long run about 75% of the samples will result in the 
correct conclusion to reject H0.
Now consider b and power when m 5 1.65. The normal curve in Figure 10.5 would 
then be centered at 1.65. Because b is the area to the left of 1.578 and the curve has shifted 
to the right, b decreases. Converting 1.578 to a z score and using Appendix Table 2 gives  
b 5 .0154. Also,
(power at m 5 1.65) 5 1 2 .0154 5 .9846
As expected, the power at m 5 1.65 is greater than the power at m 5 1.6 because 1.65 is 
farther from the hypothesized value of 1.5.	
■
Statistical software and graphing calcultors can calculate the power for specified 
values of s, a, n, and the difference between the actual and hypothesized values of m. 
The following Minitab output shows power calculations corresponding to those in 
Example 10.17:
1-Sample Z Test
Testing mean 5 null (versus > null)
Alpha 5 0.01
Sigma 5 0.2
Sample Size 5 36
Difference 
Power
0.10
0.7497
0.15 
0.9851
The slight differences between the power values computed by Minitab and those previ-
ously obtained are due to rounding in Example 10.17.
The probability of a Type II error and the power for z tests concerning a population pro-
portion are calculated in a similar manner.
FIGURE  10.5
b for m 5 1.6 in Example 10.17.
1.6
b 5 P(    , 1.578)
1.578
distribution (normal with mean 
1.6 and standard deviation 0.0333)
x –
x –
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

544 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
Example 10.18 
Power for Testing Hypotheses  
About Proportions
A package delivery service advertises that at least 90% of all packages brought to its office 
by 9 a.m. for delivery in the same city are delivered by noon that day. Let p denote the actual 
proportion of all such packages that are delivered by noon. The hypotheses of interest are
H0:  ​p 5 .9  ​  ​versus  ​  ​Ha:  ​p , .9
where the alternative hypothesis states that the company’s claim is untrue. 
The value p 5 .8 represents a substantial departure from the company’s claim. If the hy-
potheses are tested using significance level .01 and a sample of n 5 225 packages, what is the 
probability that the departure from H0 represented by this alternative value will go undetected?
At significance level .01, H0 is rejected if P-value # .01. For the case of a lower-tailed test, 
this is the same as rejecting H0 if
z 5
p⁄ 2 mp⁄
sp⁄
5
p⁄ 2 .9
Î
s.9ds.1d
225
5
p⁄ 2 .9
.02
# 22.33
(Because 22.33 captures a lower-tail z curve area of .01, the smallest 1% of all z values 
satisfy z # 22.33.) This inequality is equivalent to p⁄ # .853, so H0 is not rejected if  
p⁄ . .853. When p 5 .8, p⁄ has approximately a normal distribution with
mp⁄ 5 .8
sp⁄ 5Î
s.8ds.2d
225
5 .0267
Then b is the probability of obtaining a sample proportion greater than .853, as illustrated 
in Figure 10.6.
 Sampling distribution of pˆ (normal with
mean 0.8 and standard deviation 0.0267)
0.8
0.853
b
Converting to a z score results in
z 5 .853 2 .8
.0267
5 1.99
and Appendix Table 2 gives
b 5 1 2 .9767 5 .0233
When p 5 .8 and a significance level of .01 is used, less than 3% of all samples of size n 5 225 
will result in a Type II error. The power of the test at p 5 .8 is 1 2 .0233 5 .9767. This means 
that the probability of rejecting H0: p 5 .9 in favor of Ha: p , .9 when p is really .8 is .9767, 
which is quite high.
■
b and Power for the t Test (Optional)
The power and b values for t tests can be approximated by using a set of curves specially 
constructed for this purpose or by using appropriate software. As with the z test, the value 
Figure  10.6
b for p 5 .8 in Example 10.18.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 10.5   Power and Probability of Type II Error 
●  545
of b depends not only on the actual value of m but also on the selected significance level 
a. b increases as a is made smaller. In addition, b depends on the number of degrees of 
freedom, n 2 1. For any fixed significance level a, it should be easier for the test to detect 
a specific departure from H0 when n is large than when n is small. For a fixed alternative 
value, b decreases as n 2 1 increases.
Unfortunately, there is one other quantity on which b depends: the population standard 
deviation s. As s increases, so does sx. This in turn makes it more likely that an x value 
far from m will be observed just by chance, resulting in an incorrect conclusion. Once a is 
specified and n is fixed, the determination of b at a particular alternative value of m requires 
that a value of s be chosen, because each different value of s yields a different value of b. 
(This did not present a problem with the z test because when using a z test, the value of s 
is known.) If the investigator can specify a range of plausible values for s, then using the 
largest such value will give a pessimistic b (one on the high side) and a pessimistic value 
of power (one on the low side).
Figure 10.7 shows three different b curves for a one-tailed t test (appropriate for Ha: m . 
hypothesized value or for Ha: m , hypothesized value). A more complete set of curves for 
both one- and two-tailed tests when a 5 .05 and when a 5 .01 appears in Appendix Table 5. 
To determine b, first compute the quantity
d 5 ualternative value 2 hypothesized valueu
s
Then locate d on the horizontal axis, move directly up to the curve for n 2 1 df, and move 
over to the vertical axis to find b.
Value of d
1
.4
d
.2
.6
.8
1.0
2
3
0
Associated
value of b
a 5 .01, df 5 6
a 5 .05, df 5 6
a 5 .01, df 5 19
b
Figure  10.7
​b curves for the one-tailed t test.
Example 10.19 
b and Power for t Tests
Consider testing
H0:  ​m 5 100  versus  Ha:  ​m . 100
and focus on the alternative value m 5 110. Suppose that s 5 10, the sample size is n 5 7, 
and a significance level of .01 has been selected. For s 5 10,
d 5 u110 2 100u
10
5 10
10 5 1
Figure 10.7 (using df 5 7 2 1 5 6) gives b ø .6. This means that if s 5 10, the sig-
nificance level is .01 and n 5 7, when m 5 110, roughly 60% of all samples result in an 
incorrect decision to not reject H0! Equivalently, the power of the test at m 5 110 is only  
1 2 .6 5 .4. The probability of rejecting H0 when m 5 110 is not very large.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

546 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
If a .05 significance level is used instead, then b ø .3, which is still rather large. Using 
a .01 significance level with n 5 20 (df 5 19) yields, from Figure 10.7, b ø .05. At the 
alternative value m 5 110, for s 5 10, a significance level of .01, and n 5 20, b is smaller 
than for a significance level of .05 with n 5 7. Substantially increasing n counterbalances 
using the smaller a.
Now consider the alternative m 5 105, again with s 5 10, so that
d 5 u105 2 100u
10
5 5
10 5 .5
Then, from Figure 10.7, b 5 .95 when a 5 .01, n 5 7; b 5 .7 when a 5 .05, n 5 7; and 
b 5 .65 when a 5 .01, n 5 20. These values of b are all quite large. With s 5 10, m 5 
105 is too close to the hypothesized value of 100 for any of these three tests to have a good 
chance of detecting such a departure from H0. A substantial decrease in b would require us-
ing a much larger sample size. For example, from Appendix Table 5, b 5 .08 when a 5 .05 
and n 5 40.
The curves in Figure 10.7 also give b when testing H0: m 5 100 versus Ha: m , 100. If 
the alternative value m 5 90 is of interest and s 5 10,
d 5 u90 2 100u
10
5 10
10 5 1
and values of b are the same as those given in the first paragraph of this example.	
■
Because curves for only selected degrees of freedom appear in Appendix Table 5, other de-
grees of freedom require a visual approximation. For example, the 27-df curve (for n 5 28)  
lies between the 19-df and 29-df curves, which do appear, and it is closer to the 29-df 
curve. This type of approximation is adequate because it is the general magnitude of b—
large, small, or moderate—that is of primary concern.
Minitab can also evaluate power for the t test. For example, the following output shows 
Minitab calculations for power at m 5 110 for samples of size 7 and 20 when a 5 .01. The 
corresponding approximate values from Appendix Table 5 found in Example 10.19 are 
fairly close to the Minitab values.
1-Sample t Test
Testing mean = null (versus > null)
Calculating power for mean = null + 10
Alpha = 0.01
Sigma = 10
Sample Size
Power
7 
0.3968
20 
0.9653
The b curves in Appendix Table 5 are those for t tests. When the alternative value in Ha 
corresponds to a value of d relatively close to 0, b for a t test may be rather large. One 
might wonder whether there is another type of test that has the same level of significance 
a as does the t test and smaller values of b. The following result provides the answer to 
this question.
When the population distribution is normal, the t test for testing hypotheses 
about m has smaller b than does any other test procedure that has the same 
level of significance a.
Stated another way, among all tests with level of significance a, the t test makes b as 
small as it can possibly be when the population distribution is normal. In this sense, the 
t test is a best test. Statisticians have also shown that when the population distribution 
is not too far from a normal distribution, no test procedure can improve on the t test 
by very much (i.e., no test procedure can have the same a and substantially smaller b). 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 10.5   Power and Probability of Type II Error 
●  547
EXERCISES 10.59 - 10.65
10.59	 The power of a test is influenced by the sample size 
and the choice of significance level.
a.	Explain how increasing the sample size affects the 
power (when significance level is held fixed).
b.	Explain how increasing the significance level 
affects the power (when sample size is held 
fixed).
10.60	 Water specimens are taken from water used for 
cooling as it is being discharged from a power plant 
into a river. It has been determined that as long as 
the mean temperature of the discharged water is at 
most 1508F, there will be no negative effects on the 
river’s ecosystem. To investigate whether the plant is 
in compliance with regulations that prohibit a mean 
discharge water temperature above 1508F, a scientist 
will take 50 water specimens at randomly selected 
times and will record the water temperature of each 
specimen. She will then use a z statistic
   z 5 x 2 150
s
Ïn
to decide between the hypotheses H0: m 5 150 and  
Ha: m . 150, where m is the mean temperature of 
discharged water. Assume that s is known to be 10.
a.	Explain why use of the z statistic is appropriate in 
this setting.  ​  ​
b.	Describe Type I and Type II errors in this context.
c.	The rejection of H0 when z $ 1.8 corresponds to 
what value of a? (That is, what is the area under 
the z curve to the right of 1.8?)  ​  ​
d.	Suppose that the actual value for m is 153 and 
that H0 is to be rejected if z $ 1.8. Draw a sketch 
(similar to that of Figure 10.5) of the sampling 
distribution of x, and shade the region that 
would represent b, the probability of making a 
Type II error.
e.	For the hypotheses and test procedure described, 
compute the value of b when m 5 153. (Hint: 
See Example 10.17.)  ​  ​
f.	 For the hypotheses and test procedure described, 
what is the value of b if m 5 160?  ​  ​
g.	 What would be the conclusion of the test if H0 is 
rejected when z $ 1.8 and x 5 152.4? What type 
of error might have been made in reaching this 
conclusion?  ​  ​
10.61	 ▼ Let m denote the true average lifetime (in hours) 
for a certain type of battery under controlled labora-
tory conditions. A test of H0: m 5 10 versus Ha:  
m , 10 will be based on a sample of size 36. 
Suppose that s is known to be 0.6, from which 
sx 5 .1. The appropriate test statistic is then
   z 5 x 2 10
0.1
a.	 What is a for the test procedure that rejects H0 if  
z # 21.28?  ​  ​
b.	If the test procedure of Part (a) is used, calculate 
b when m 5 9.8, and interpret this error prob-
ability.
c.	 Without doing any calculation, explain how b 
when m 5 9.5 compares to b when m 5 9.8. Then 
check your assertion by computing b when m 5 9.5.
d.	What is the power of the test when m 5 9.8? 
when m 5 9.5?  ​  ​
10.62	 The city council in a large city has become con-
cerned about the trend toward exclusion of renters 
with children in apartments within the city. The 
housing coordinator has decided to select a random 
sample of 125 apartments and determine for each 
whether children are permitted. Let p be the propor-
tion of all apartments that prohibit children. If the 
city council is convinced that p is greater than 0.75, 
it will consider appropriate legislation.
a.	 If 102 of the 125 sampled apartments exclude 
renters with children, would a level .05 test lead 
you to the conclusion that more than 75% of all 
apartments exclude children? 
b.	What is the power of the test when p 5 .8 and  
a 5 .05? (Hint: See Example 10.18.)  ​ ​
However, when the population distribution is believed to be strongly nonnormal (heavy-
tailed, highly skewed, or multimodal), the t test should not be used. Then it’s time to 
consult your friendly neighborhood statistician, who can provide you with alternative 
methods of analysis.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

548 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
The nine-step procedure that we have proposed for testing hypotheses provides a system-
atic approach for carrying out a complete test. However, you rarely see the results of a 
hypothesis test reported in publications in such a complete way.
Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses
When summarizing the results of a hypothesis test, it is important that you include several 
things in the summary in order to provide all the relevant information. These are:
1.	 Hypotheses. Whether specified in symbols or described in words, it is important 
that both the null and the alternative hypotheses be clearly stated. If you are using 
symbols to define the hypotheses, be sure to describe them in the context of the 
problem at hand (for example, m 5 population mean calorie intake).
2.	 Test procedure. You should be clear about what test procedure was used (for example,  
large-sample z test for proportions) and why you think it was reasonable to use 
this procedure. The plausibility of any required assumptions should be satisfacto-
rily addressed.
3.	 Test statistic. Be sure to include the value of the test statistic and the P-value.  
Including the P-value allows a reader who may have chosen a different significance 
level to see whether she would have reached the same or a different conclusion.
4.	 Conclusion in context. Never end the report of a hypothesis test with the statement 
“I rejected (or did not reject) H0.” Always provide a conclusion that is in the 
 10.6  
Interpreting and Communicating  
the Results of Statistical Analyses
10.63	 The amount of shaft wear after a fixed mileage was 
determined for each of seven randomly selected 
internal combustion engines, resulting in a mean of 
0.0372 inch and a standard deviation of 0.0125 inch.
a.	Assuming that the distribution of shaft wear is 
normal, Use a 5 .05 to test the hypotheses  
H0: m 5 .035 versus Ha: m . .035.
b.	Using s 5 0.0125, a 5 .05, and Appendix 
Table 5, what is the approximate value of b, the 
probability of a Type II error, when m 5 .04? 
(Hint: See Example 10.19.)  ​  ​
c.	What is the approximate power of the test when  
m 5 .04 and a 5 .05?  ​  ​
10.64	 Optical fibers are used in telecommunications to 
transmit light. Suppose current technology allows 
production of fibers that transmit light about 50 km. 
Researchers are trying to develop a new type of glass 
fiber that will increase this distance. In evaluating a 
new fiber, it is of interest to test H0: m 5 50 versus 
Ha: m . 50, with m denoting the mean transmission 
distance for the new optical fiber.
a.	Assuming s 5 10 and n 5 10, use Appendix 
Table 5 to approximate b, the probability of a 
Type II error, for each of the given alternative 
values of m when a test with significance level .05 
is employed:
	
i.  ​52  ​  ​  ​  ​ii.  ​55  ​  ​  ​  ​iii.  ​60  ​  ​  ​  ​iv.  ​70
b.	What happens to b in each of the cases in Part (a)  
if s is actually larger than 10? Explain your 
reasoning. 
10.65	 Let m denote the mean diameter for bearings of a 
certain type. A test of H0: m 5 0.5 versus Ha: m Þ 
0.5 will be based on a sample of n bearings. The 
diameter distribution is believed to be normal. 
Determine the value of b in each of the following 
cases:
a.	n 5 15, a 5 .05, s 5 0.02, m 5 0.52    ​
b.	n 5 15, a 5 .05, s 5 0.02, m 5 0.48    ​
c.	n 5 15, a 5 .01, s 5 0.02, m 5 0.52    ​
d.	n 5 15, a 5 .05, s 5 0.02, m 5 0.54    ​
e.	n 5 15, a 5 .05, s 5 0.04, m 5 0.54    ​
f.	n 5 20, a 5 .05, s 5 0.04, m 5 0.54    ​
g.	Is the way in which b changes as n, a, s, and m 
vary consistent with your intuition? Explain. 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 10.6   Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses  
●  549
context of the problem and that answers the original research question which the 
hypothesis test was designed to answer. Be sure also to indicate the level of signifi-
cance used as a basis for the decision.
Interpreting the Results of Statistical Analyses
When the results of a hypothesis test are reported in a journal article or other published 
source, it is common to find only the value of the test statistic and the associated P-value 
accompanying the discussion of conclusions drawn from the data. Often, especially in 
newspaper articles, only sample summary statistics are given, with the conclusion imme-
diately following. You may have to fill in some of the intermediate steps for yourself to see 
whether or not the conclusion is justified.
For example, the article “Physicians’ Knowledge of Herbal Toxicities and Adverse Herb-
Drug Interactions” (European Journal of Emergency Medicine, August 2004) summarizes the 
results of a study to assess doctors’ familiarity with adverse effects of herbal remedies as 
follows: 
“A total of 142 surveys and quizzes were completed by 59 attending physicians, 57 
resident physicians, and 26 medical students. The mean subject score on the quiz 
was only slightly higher than would have occurred from random guessing.” 
The quiz consisted of 16 multiple-choice questions. If each question had four possible 
choices, the statement that the mean quiz score was only slightly higher than would have 
occurred from random guessing suggests that the researchers considered the hypotheses 
H0: m 5 4 and Ha: m . 4, where m represents the mean score for the population of all phy-
sicians and medical students and the null hypothesis corresponds to the expected number 
of correct choices for someone who is guessing. Assuming that it is reasonable to regard 
this sample as representative of the population of interest, the data from the sample could 
be used to carry out a test of these hypotheses.
What to Look For in Published Data
Here are some questions to consider when you are reading a report that contains the results 
of a hypothesis test:
●
●What hypotheses are being tested? Are the hypotheses about a population mean, a 
population proportion, or some other population characteristic?
●
●Was the appropriate test used? Does the validity of the test depend on any assump-
tions about the sample or about the population from which the sample was selected? If 
so, are the assumptions reasonable?
●
●What is the P-value associated with the test? Was a significance level reported (as op-
posed to simply reporting the P-value)? Is the chosen significance level reasonable?
●
●Are the conclusions drawn consistent with the results of the hypothesis test?
For example, consider the following statement from the paper “Didgeridoo Playing as 
Alternative Treatment for Obstructive Sleep Apnoea Syndrome” (British Medical Journal 
[2006]: 266–270): “We found that four months of training of the upper airways by didg-
eridoo playing reduces daytime sleepiness in people with snoring and obstructive apnoea 
syndrome.” This statement was supported by data on a measure of daytime sleepiness 
called the Epworth scale. For the 14 participants in the study, the mean improvement in 
Epworth scale was 4.4 and the standard deviation was 3.7. 
The paper does not indicate what test was performed or what the value of the test statis-
tic was. It appears that the hypotheses of interest are H0: m 5 0 (no improvement) versus 
Ha: m . 0, where m represents the mean improvement in Epworth score after four months 
of didgeridoo playing for all people with snoring and obstructive sleep apnoea. Because 
the sample size is not large, the one-sample t test would be appropriate if the sample can 
be considered a random sample and the distribution of Epworth scale improvement scores 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

550 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
is approximately normal. If these assumptions are reasonable (something that was not 
addressed in the paper), the t test results in t 5 4.45 and an associated P-value of .000. 
Because the reported P-value is so small H0 would be rejected, supporting the conclusion 
in the paper that didgeridoo playing is an effective treatment. (In case you are wondering, 
a didgeridoo is an Australian Aboriginal woodwind instrument.)
A Word to the Wise: Cautions and Limitations
There are several things you should watch for when conducting a hypothesis test or when 
evaluating a written summary of a hypothesis test.
1.	 The result of a hypothesis test can never show strong support for the null 
hypothesis. Make sure that you don’t confuse “There is no reason to believe the 
null hypothesis is not true” with the statement “There is convincing evidence that 
the null hypothesis is true.” These are very different statements!
2.	 If you have complete information for the population, don’t carry out a hypothesis 
test! It should be obvious that no test is needed to answer questions about a 
population if you have complete information and don’t need to generalize from 
a sample, but people sometimes forget this fact. For example, in an article 
on growth in the number of prisoners by state, the San Luis Obispo Tribune 
(August 13, 2001) reported “California’s numbers showed a statistically insignifi-
cant change, with 66 fewer prisoners at the end of 2000.” The use of the term 
“statistically insignificant” implies some sort of statistical inference, which is 
not appropriate when a complete accounting of the entire prison population is 
known. Perhaps the author confused statistical and practical significance. Which 
brings us to . . .
3.	 Don’t confuse statistical significance with practical significance. When statistical 
significance has been declared, be sure to step back and evaluate the result in light 
of its practical importance. For example, we may be convinced that the propor-
tion who respond favorably to a proposed medical treatment is greater than .4, the 
known proportion that responds favorably for the currently recommended treat-
ments. But if our estimate of this proportion for the proposed treatment is .405, is 
this of any practical interest? It might be if the proposed treatment is less costly or 
has fewer side effects, but in other cases it may not be of any real interest. Results 
must always be interpreted in context.
points worse than Express—meaning that if 6% of 
Express patients’ arteries reclog, Boston Scientific would 
have to prove that Liberte’s rate of reclogging was less than 
9%. Anything more would be considered ‘inferior.’ . . . In 
the end, after nine months, the Atlas study found that 
85 of the patients suffered reclogging. In comparison, 
historical data on 991 patients implanted with the Ex-
press stent show a 7% rate. Boston Scientific then had to 
answer this question: Could the study have gotten such 
results if the Liberte were truly inferior to Express?”
Assume a 7% reclogging rate for the Express stent. 
Explain why it would be appropriate for Boston 
10.66	 In 2006, Boston Scientific sought approval for a new 
heart stent (a medical device used to open clogged 
arteries) called the Liberte. This stent was being 
proposed as an alternative to a stent called the Ex-
press that was already on the market. The following 
excerpt is from an article that appeared in The Wall 
Street Journal (August 14, 2008):
Boston Scientific wasn’t required to prove that the Lib-
erte was ‘superior’ than a previous treatment, the agency 
decided—only that it wasn’t ‘inferior’ to Express. Boston 
Scientific proposed—and the FDA okayed—a bench-
mark in which Liberte could be up to three percentage  
exercises 10.66 - 10.67
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
a.	 The journal article on which the LiveScience sum-
mary was based (“Preimplantation Sex-Selection 
Demand and Preferences in an Infertility Popula-
tion,” Fertility and Sterility [2005]: 649–658) states 
that of the 229 women who wanted to select the 
baby’s sex, 89 wanted a boy and 140 wanted a 
girl. Does this provide convincing evidence against 
the statement of no preference in the LiveScience 
summary? Test the relevant hypotheses using  
a ​5 ​.05. Be sure to state any assumptions you 
must make about the way the sample was selected 
in order for your test to be appropriate.
b.	The journal article also provided the following 
information about the study:
	
●  A survey with 19 questions was mailed to 
1385 women who had visited the Center 
for Reproductive Medicine at Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital.
	
●  561 women returned the survey.
	
Do you think it is reasonable to generalize the re-
sults from this survey to a larger population? Do you 
have any concerns about the way the sample was 
selected or about potential sources of bias? Explain.
Scientific to carry out a hypothesis test using the 
following hypotheses:
   H0: p 5 .10
   Ha: p , .10
where p is the proportion of patients receiving Liberte 
stents that suffer reclogging. Be sure to address both 
the choice of the hypothesized value and the form of 
the alternative hypothesis in your explanation.
10.67	 The article “Boy or Girl: Which Gender Baby Would You 
Pick?” (LiveScience, March 23, 2005, www.livescience 
.com) summarized the findings of a study that was 
published in Fertility and Sterility. The LiveScience 
article makes the following statements: “When given 
the opportunity to choose the sex of their baby, 
women are just as likely to choose pink socks as 
blue, a new study shows” and “Of the 561 women 
who participated in the study, 229 said they would 
like to choose the sex of a future child. Among these 
229, there was no greater demand for boys or girls.” 
These statements are equivalent to the claim that for 
women who would like to choose the baby’s sex, the 
proportion who would choose a girl is 0.50 or 50%.
Technology Activity: Requires use of a computer or a 
graphing calculator.
The instructions that follow assume the use of Minitab. If 
you are using a different software package or a graphing cal-
culator, your instructor will provide alternative instructions.
Background: Suppose a random sample will be selected 
from a population that is known to have a normal distribu-
tion. Then the statistic
z 5 x 2 m
s
Ïn
has a standard normal (z) distribution. Since it is rarely the 
case that s is known, inferences for population means are 
usually based on the statistic t 5 x 2 m
ss/Ïnd, which has a t dis-
tribution rather than a z distribution. The informal justifica-
tion for this was that the use of s to estimate s introduces 
additional variability, resulting in a statistic whose distribu-
tion is more spread out than is the z distribution.
In this activity, you will use simulation to sample from 
a known normal population and then investigate how the 
AC TIVIT Y 10.1 
Comparing the t and z Distributions
behavior of t 5 x 2 m
s/sÏnd compares with the behavior of 
z 5 x 2 m
s/sÏnd.
1.	 Generate 200 random samples of size 5 from a 
normal population with mean 100 and standard 
deviation 10.
	
Using Minitab, go to the Calc Menu. Then
Calc→ Random Data → Normal
In the “Generate” box, enter 200
In the “Store in columns” box, enter c1-c5
In the mean box, enter 100
In the standard deviation box, enter 10
Click on OK
	
You should now see 200 rows of data in each of the 
first 5 columns of the Minitab worksheet.
2.	 Each row contains five values that have been ran-
domly selected from a normal population with mean 
100 and standard deviation 10. Viewing each row 
as a sample of size 5 from this population, calculate 
the mean and standard deviation for each of the 
Activities 
●  551
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

552 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
200 samples (the 200 rows) by using Minitab’s row 
statistics functions, which can also be found under 
the Calc menu:
Calc→ Row statistics
Choose the “Mean” button
In the “Input Variables” box, enter c1-c5
In the “Store result in” box, enter c7
Click on OK
	
You should now see the 200 sample means in column 7 
of the Minitab worksheet. Name this column “x-bar” 
by typing the name in the gray box at the top of c7.
Now follow a similar process to compute the 200 
sample standard deviations, and store them in c8. 
Name c8 “s.”
3.	 Next, calculate the value of the z statistic for each of 
the 200 samples. We can calculate z in this example 
because we know that the samples were selected 
from a population for which s 5 10. Use the calcula-
tor function of Minitab to 
	
compute z 5 x 2 m
ss/Ïnd 5 x 2 100
s10/Ï5d as follows:
Calc → Calculator
In the “Store results in” box, enter c10
In the “Expression box” type in the following: (c7-100)/(10/sqrt(5))
Click on OK
	
You should now see the z values for the 200 samples 
in c11. Name c11 “z.”
4.	 Now calculate the value of the t statistic for each 
of the 200 samples. Use the calculator function 
of Minitab to compute t 5 x 2 m
ss/Ïnd 5 x 2 100
ss/Ï5d  as 
follows:
Calc → Calculator
In the “Store results in” box, enter c11
In the “Expression box” type in the following: (c7-100)/(c8/sqrt(5))
Click on OK
	
You should now see the t values for the 200 samples in 
c10. Name c10 “t.”
5.	 Graphs, at last! Now construct histograms of the 200 
z values and the 200 t values. These two graphical 
displays will provide insight about how each of these 
two statistics behaves in repeated sampling. Use the 
same scale for the two histograms so that it will be 
easier to compare the two distributions.
Graph → Histogram
In the “Graph variables” box, enter c10 for graph 1 and c11 for 
graph 2
Click the Frame dropdown menu and select multiple graphs.
Then under the scale choices, select “Same X and same Y.”
6.	 Now use the histograms from Step 5 to answer the 
following questions:
a.  Write a brief description of the shape, center, and 
spread for the histogram of the z values. Is what 
you see in the histogram consistent with what you 
would have expected to see? Explain. (Hint: In 
theory, what is the distribution of the z statistic?)
b.  How does the histogram of the t values compare 
to the z histogram? Be sure to comment on center, 
shape, and spread.
c.  Is your answer to Part (b) consistent with what 
would be expected for a statistic that has a t dis-
tribution? Explain.
d.  The z and t histograms are based on only 200 
samples, and they only approximate the corre-
sponding sampling distributions. The 5th per-
centile for the standard normal distribution is 
21.645 and the 95th percentile is 11.645. For 
a t distribution with df 5 5 2 1 5 4, the 5th and 
95th percentiles are 22.13 and 12.13, respec-
tively. How do these percentiles compare to those 
of the distributions displayed in the histograms? 
(Hint: Sort the 200 z values—in Minitab, choose 
“Sort” from the Manip menu. Once the values 
are sorted, percentiles from the histogram can be 
found by counting in 10 [which is 5% of 200] 
values from either end of the sorted list. Then re-
peat this with the t values.)
e.  Are the results of your simulation and analysis consis-
tent with the statement that the statistic z 5 x 2 m
ss/Ïnd 
has a standard normal (z) distribution and the  
statistic t 5 x 2 m
ss/Ïnd has a t distribution? Explain.
AC TIVIT Y 10.2 
A Meaningful Paragraph
Write a meaningful paragraph that includes the following six 
terms: hypotheses, P-value, reject H0, Type I error, statisti-
cal significance, practical significance.
A “meaningful paragraph” is a coherent piece of writing in 
an appropriate context that uses all of the listed words. The 
paragraph should show that you understand the meaning of 
the terms and their relationship to one another. A sequence of 
sentences that just define the terms is not a meaningful para-
graph. When choosing a context, think carefully about the 
terms you need to use. Choosing a good context will make 
writing a meaningful paragraph easier.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SUMMARY 
Key Concepts and Formulas
Term or Formula
Comment
Hypothesis
A claim about the value of a popula-
tion characteristic.
Null hypothesis, H0
The hypothesis initially assumed to 
be true. It has the form H0: population 
characteristic 5 hypothesized value.
Alternative hypothesis, Ha
A hypothesis that specifies a claim that 
is contradictory to H0 and is judged 
the more plausible claim when H0 is 
rejected.
Type I error
Rejecting H0 when H0 is true. The prob-
ability of a Type I error is denoted by 
a and is referred to as the significance 
level for the test.
Type II error
Not rejecting H0 when H0 is false. The 
probability of a Type II error is denoted 
by b.
Test statistic
A value computed from sample data 
that is then used as the basis for mak-
ing a decision between H0 and Ha.
P-value
The probability, computed assuming 
H0 is true, of obtaining a value of the 
test statistic at least as contradic-
tory to H0 as what actually resulted. 
H0 is rejected if P-value # a and not 
rejected if P-value . a, where a is the 
chosen significance level.
Term or Formula
Comment
z 5
p⁄ 2 hypothesized value
Î
(hyp. val)(1 2 hyp. val)
n
A test statistic for testing  
H0: p 5 hypothesized value when the 
sample size is large. The P-value is deter-
mined as an area under the z curve.
z 5
x 2 hypothesized value
s
Ïn
A test statistic for testing  
H0: m 5 hypothesized value when s 
is known and either the population 
distribution is normal or the sample 
size is large. The P-value is determined 
as an area under the z curve.
t 5
 x 2 hypothesized value
s
Ïn
A test statistic for testing  
H0: m 5 hypothesized value when s is 
unknown and either the population 
distribution is normal or the sample 
size is large. The P-value is determined 
from the t curve with df 5 n 2 1.
Power
The power of a test is the probability 
of rejecting the null hypothesis. Power 
is affected by the size of the difference 
between the hypothesized value and 
the actual value, the sample size, and 
the significance level.
10.68	 In a representative sample of 1000 adult Americans, 
only 430 could name at least one justice who is 
currently serving on the U.S. Supreme Court (Ipsos, 
January 10, 2006). Using a significance level of .01, 
carry out a hypothesis test to determine if there is 
convincing evidence to support the claim that fewer 
than half of adult Americans can name at least one 
justice currently serving on the Supreme Court. 
10.69	 ▼ In a national survey of 2013 adults, 1590 responded 
that lack of respect and courtesy in American society 
is a serious problem, and 1283 indicated that they 
believe that rudeness is a more serious problem than 
in past years (Associated Press, April 3, 2002). Is there 
convincing evidence that less than three-quarters 
of U.S. adults believe that rudeness is a worsen-
ing problem? Test the relevant hypotheses using a 
significance level of .05. ​ ​
10.70	 Students at the Akademia Podlaka conducted an 
experiment to determine whether the Belgium-
minted Euro coin was equally likely to land heads 
up or tails up. Coins were spun on a smooth sur-
face, and in 250 spins, 140 landed with the heads 
side up (New Scientist, January 4, 2002).
a.	Should the students interpret this result as con-
vincing evidence that the proportion of the time 
the coin would land heads up is not .5? Test the 
relevant hypotheses using a 5 .01.
b.	Would your conclusion be different if a signifi-
cance level of .05 had been used? Explain. ​
10.71	 An article titled “Teen Boys Forget Whatever It Was” 
appeared in the Australian newspaper The Mercury 
(April 21, 1997). It described a study of academic 
performance and attention span and reported 
CHAPTER REVIEW 
Exercises 10.68 - 10.82
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Chapter Review Exercises 
●  553
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

554 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
that the mean time to distraction for teenage boys 
working on an independent task was 4 minutes. 
Although the sample size was not given in the 
article, suppose that this mean was based on a ran-
dom sample of 50 teenage Australian boys and that 
the sample standard deviation was 1.4 minutes.
Is there convincing evidence that the average 
attention span for teenage boys is less than 5 min-
utes? Test the relevant hypotheses using a 5 .01.  ​  ​
10.72	 The authors of the article “Perceived Risks of Heart 
Disease and Cancer Among Cigarette Smokers” 
(Journal of the American Medical Association [1999]: 
1019–1021) expressed the concern that a major-
ity of smokers do not view themselves as being at 
increased risk of heart disease or cancer. A study of 
737 current smokers selected at random from U.S. 
households with telephones found that of the 737 
smokers surveyed, 295 indicated that they believed 
they have a higher than average risk of cancer.
Do these data suggest that p, the proportion of all 
smokers who view themselves as being at increased 
risk of cancer is in fact less than .5, as claimed by 
the authors of the paper? Test the relevant hypoth-
eses using a 5 .05.
10.73	 A number of initiatives on the topic of legalized 
gambling have appeared on state ballots. A politi-
cal candidate has decided to support legalization of 
casino gambling if he is convinced that more than 
two-thirds of U.S. adults approve of casino gam-
bling. Suppose that 1523 adults selected at random 
from households with telephones were asked whether 
they approved of casino gambling. The number 
in the sample who approved was 1035. Does the 
sample provide convincing evidence that more than 
two-thirds of U.S. adults approve?
10.74	 Although arsenic is known to be a poison, it also has 
some beneficial medicinal uses. In one study of the 
use of arsenic to treat acute promyelocytic leukemia 
(APL), a rare type of blood cell cancer, APL patients  
were given an arsenic compound as part of their 
treatment. Of those receiving arsenic, 42% were 
in remission and showed no signs of leukemia in a 
subsequent examination (Washington Post, Novem-
ber 5, 1998). It is known that 15% of APL patients go 
into remission after the conventional treatment.
Suppose that the study had included 100 
randomly selected patients (the actual number 
in the study was much smaller). Is there suffi-
cient evidence to conclude that the proportion in 
remission for the arsenic treatment is greater than 
.15, the remission proportion for the conventional 
treatment? Test the relevant hypotheses using a 
.01 significance level. 
10.75	 Many people have misconceptions about how profit-
able small, consistent investments can be. In a survey 
of 1010 randomly selected U.S. adults (Associated 
Press, October 29, 1999), only 374 responded that 
they thought that an investment of $25 per week 
over 40 years with a 7% annual return would result 
in a sum of over $100,000 (the correct amount is 
$286,640). Is there sufficient evidence to conclude 
that less than 40% of U.S. adults are aware that 
such an investment would result in a sum of over 
$100,000? Test the relevant hypotheses using a 5 .05. 
10.76	 The same survey described in the previous exercise 
also asked the individuals in the sample what they 
thought was their best chance to obtain more than 
$500,000 in their lifetime. Twenty-eight percent 
responded “win a lottery or sweepstakes.” Does this 
provide convincing evidence that more than one-
fourth of U.S. adults see a lottery or sweepstakes 
win as their best chance of accumulating $500,000? 
Carry out a test using a significance level of .01.​
10.77	 Speed, size, and strength are thought to be impor-
tant factors in football performance. The article 
“Physical and Performance Characteristics of NCAA 
Division I Football Players” (Research Quarterly for 
Exercise and Sport [1990]: 395–401) reported on 
physical characteristics of Division I starting football 
players in the 1988 football season. Information for 
teams ranked in the top 20 was obtained, and it was 
reported that the mean weight of starters on top-20 
teams was 105 kg. A random sample of 33 starting 
players (various positions were represented) from 
Division I teams that were not ranked in the top 20 
resulted in a sample mean weight of 103.3 kg and a 
sample standard deviation of 16.3 kg. Is there suf-
ficient evidence to conclude that the mean weight 
for non-top-20 starters is less than 105, the known 
value for top-20 teams? 
10.78	 Duck hunting in populated areas faces opposition 
on the basis of safety and environmental issues. In 
a survey to assess public opinion regarding duck 
hunting on Morro Bay (located along the central 
coast of California), a random sample of 750 local 
residents included 560 who strongly opposed hunt-
ing on the bay. Does this sample provide sufficient 
evidence to conclude that the majority of local 
residents oppose hunting on Morro Bay? Test the 
relevant hypotheses using a 5 .01. 
10.79	 Past experience has indicated that the true response 
rate is 40% when individuals are approached with 
a request to fill out a questionnaire and return it in 
a stamped and addressed envelope. An investigator 
believes that if the person distributing the question-
naire is stigmatized in some obvious way, potential ​
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

respondents would feel sorry for the distributor and 
thus tend to respond at a rate higher than 40%. To 
investigate this theory, a distributor is fitted with an 
eye patch. Of the 200 questionnaires distributed by 
this individual, 109 were returned. Does this provide 
convincing evidence that the response rate in this 
situation exceeds the rate in the past? State and test 
the appropriate hypotheses at significance level .05.  ​
10.80	
 An automobile manufacturer who wishes to ad-
vertise that one of its models achieves 30 mpg (miles 
per gallon) decides to carry out a fuel efficiency test. 
Six nonprofessional drivers were selected, and each 
one drove a car from Phoenix to Los Angeles. The 
resulting fuel efficiencies (in miles per gallon) are:
	
27.2  29.3  31.2  28.4  30.3  29.6
Assuming that fuel efficiency is normally distributed 
under these circumstances, do the data contradict 
the claim that true average fuel efficiency is (at least) 
30 mpg?
10.81	 A student organization uses the proceeds from a 
particular soft-drink dispensing machine to finance 
its activities. The price per can had been $0.75 for a 
long time, and the average daily revenue during that 
period was $75.00. The price was recently increased 
to $1.00 per can. A random sample of n 5 20 days 
after the price increase yielded a sample mean daily 
revenue and sample standard deviation of $70.00 
and $4.20, respectively.
Does this information suggest that the mean 
daily revenue has decreased from its value before 
the price increase? Test the appropriate hypotheses 
using a 5 .05.  ​  ​
10.82	 A hot tub manufacturer advertises that with its 
heating equipment, a temperature of 1008F can 
be achieved on average in 15 minutes or less. A 
random sample of 25 tubs is selected, and the time 
necessary to achieve a 1008F temperature is de-
termined for each tub. The sample mean time and 
sample standard deviation are 17.5 minutes and 
2.2 minutes, respectively. Does this information cast 
doubt on the company’s claim? Carry out a test of 
hypotheses using significance level .05.  ​ 
 
 
 
 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
z Test for Proportions
JMP
Summarized data
1.  Enter the data into the JMP data table with categories in 
the first column and counts in the second column
2.  Click Analyze and select Distribution
3.  Click and drag the first column name from the box under 
Select Columns to the box next to Y, Columns
4.  Click and drag the second column name from the box 
under Select Columns to the box next to Freq
5.  Click OK
6.  Click the red arrow next to the column name and click 
Test Probabilities
7.  Under the Test Probabilities section that appears in 
the output, click in the box across from Yes under the 
Hypoth Prob and type the hypothesized value for p
8.  Select the appropriate option for alternative
9.  Click Done
Note: In the two-sided case, JMP uses the square of the z test 
statistic, called the Chi-Square test statistic. The two methods 
are mathematically identical.
Note: In the one-sided cases, JMP uses the exact binomial 
test rather than the z test.
Raw data
1.  Enter the raw data into a column
2.  Click Analyze and select Distribution
3.  Click and drag the first column name from the box un-
der Select Columns to the box next to Y, Columns
4.  Click OK
5.  Click the red arrow next to the column name and click 
Test Probabilities
6.  Under the Test Probabilities section that appears in 
the output, click in the box across from Yes under the 
Hypoth Prob and type the hypothesized value for p
TECHNOLOGY NOTES
Technology Notes 
●  555
© Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.  Select the appropriate option for alternative
8.  Click Done
Note: In the two-sided case, JMP uses the square of the z test 
statistic, called the Chi-Square test statistic. The two methods 
are mathematically identical.
Note: In the one-sided cases, JMP uses the exact binomial 
test rather than the z test.
Minitab
Summarized data
1.  Click Stat then click Basic Statistics then click 
1 Proportion…
2.  Click the radio button next to Summarized data
3.  In the box next to Number of Trials: type the value for 
n, the sample size
4.  In the box next to Number of events: type the value for 
the number of successes
5.  Click Options…
6.  Input the appropriate hypothesized value in the box next 
to Test proportion:
7.  Select the appropriate alternative hypothesis from the 
drop-down menu next to Alternative
8.  Check the box next to Use test and interval based on 
normal distribution
9.  Click OK
10.  Click OK
Raw data
1.  Input the raw data into a column
2.  Click Stat then click Basic Statistics then click 
1 Proportion…
3.  Click in the box under Samples in columns:
4.  Double click the column name where the raw data are 
stored
5.  Click Options…
6.  Select the appropriate alternative hypothesis from the 
drop-down menu next to Alternative
7.  Check the box next to Use test and interval based on 
normal distribution
8.  Click OK
9.  Click OK
SPSS
SPSS does not have the functionality to automatically calcu-
late a z test for a testing a single proportion.
Excel
Excel does not have the functionality to automatically calculate 
a z test for a testing a single population proportion. You may 
type in the formula by hand into a cell to have Excel calculate 
the value of the test statistic for you. Then use methods from 
Chapter 6 to find the P-value using the Normal Distribution.
TI-83/84
1.  Press the STAT key
2.  Highlight TESTS
3.  Highlight 1-PropZTest… and press ENTER
4.  Next to p0 type the hypothesized value for p
5.  Next to x type the number of successes
6.  Next to n type the sample size, n
7.  Next to prop, highlight the appropriate alternative 
hypothesis
8.  Highlight Calculate and press ENTER
TI-Nspire
1.  Enter the Calculate Scratchpad
2.  Press the menu key then select 6:Statistics then select 
7:Stat Tests then 5:1-Prop z Test… then press enter
3.  In the box next to p0 type the hypothesized value for p
4.  In the box next to Successes, x type the number of 
successes
5.  In the box next to n type the sample size, n
6.  In the box next to Alternate Hyp choose the appropriate 
alternative hypothesis from the drop-down menu
7.  Press OK
t Test for population mean, m
JMP
1.  Input the data into a column
2.  Click Analyze and select Distribution
3.  Click and drag the column name from the box under 
Select Columns to the box next to Y, Response
4.  Click OK
5.  Click the red arrow next to the column name and select 
Test Mean
6.  In the box next to Specify Hypothesized Mean, type 
the hypothesized value of the mean, m0
7.  Click OK
Note: The output provides results for all three possible alter-
native hypotheses.
Minitab
Summarized data
1.  Click Stat then click Basic Statistics then click 
1-sample t…
2.  Click the radio button next to Summarized data
3.  In the box next to Sample size: type the value for n, the 
sample size
4.  In the box next to Mean: type the value for the sample 
mean
5.  In the box next to Standard deviation: type the value 
for the sample standard deviation
6.  In the box next to Test mean: type the hypothesized 
value of the population mean
7.  Click Options…
8.  Select the appropriate alternative hypothesis from the 
drop-down menu next to Alternative:
9.  Click OK
10.  Click OK
556 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Raw data
1.  Input the raw data into a column
2.  Click Stat then click Basic Statistics then click 
1-sample t…
3.  Click in the box under Samples in columns:
4.  Double click the column name where the raw data are 
stored
5.  In the box next to Test mean: type the hypothesized 
value of the population mean
6.  Click Options…
7.  Select the appropriate alternative hypothesis from the 
drop-down menu next to Alternative:
8.  Click OK
9.  Click OK
SPSS
1.  Input the data into a column
2.  Click Analyze then select Compare Means then select 
One-Sample T Test…
3.  Highlight the column name for the variable
4.  Click the arrow to move the variable to the Test 
Variable(s): box
5.  In the box next to Test Value: input the hypothesized 
test value
6.  Click OK
Note: This procedure produces a two-sided P-value.
Excel
Excel does not have the functionality to automatically pro-
duce a t test for a single population mean. However, you may 
type the formula into an empty cell manually to have Excel 
calculate the value of the test statistic for you. You can then 
use the steps below to find a P-value for the test statistic.
1.  Select an empty cell
2.  Click on Formulas
3.  Click Insert Function
4.  Select Statistical from the drop-down box for category
5.  Select TDIST and click OK
6.  Click in the box next to X and select the cell containing 
your test statistic or type it manually
7.  Click in the box next to Deg_freedom and type the 
number of degrees of freedom (n-1)
8.  Click in the box next to Tails and type 1 for a one-tailed 
P-value or 2 for a two-tailed P-value
9.  Click OK
Note: Choosing a one-tailed distribution in Step 8 will result 
in returning P(X $ x).
TI-83/84
Summarized data
1.  Press STAT
2.  Highlight TESTS
3.  Highlight T-Test…
4.  Highlight Stats and press ENTER
5.  Next to m0 type the hypothesized value for the popula-
tion mean
6.  Next to x input the value for the sample mean
7.  Next to sx input the value for the sample standard deviation
8.  Next to n input the value for the sample size
9.  Next to m highlight the appropriate alternative hypoth-
esis and press ENTER
10.  Highlight Calculate and press ENTER
Raw data
1.  Enter the data into L1 (In order to access lists press the 
STAT key, highlight the option called Edit… then press 
ENTER)
2.  Press STAT
3.  Highlight TESTS
4.  Highlight T-Test…
5.  Highlight Data and press ENTER
6.  Next to m0 type the hypothesized value for the popula-
tion mean
7.  Next to m highlight the appropriate alternative hypoth-
esis and press ENTER
8.  Highlight Calculate and press ENTER
TI-Nspire
Summarized data
1.  Enter the Calculate Scratchpad
2.  Press the menu key and select 6:Statistics then 7:Stat 
Tests then 2:t test… and press enter
3.  From the drop-down menu select Stats
4.  Press OK
5.  Next to m0 type the hypothesized value for the popula-
tion mean
6.  Next to x input the value for the sample mean
7.  Next to sx input the value for the sample standard deviation
8.  Next to n input the value for the sample size
9.  Next to Alternate Hyp select the appropriate alternative 
hypothesis from the drop-down menu
10.  Press OK
Raw data
1.  Enter the data into a data list (In order to access data lists 
select the spreadsheet option and press enter)
	
Note: Be sure to title the list by selecting the top row of 
the column and typing a title.
2.  Press the menu key and select 4:Statistics then 7:Stat 
Tests then 2:t test… and press enter
3.  From the drop-down menu select Data
4.  Press OK
5.  Next to m0 input the hypothesized value for the popula-
tion mean
6.  Next to List select the list containing your data
7.  Next to Alternate Hyp select the appropriate alternative 
hypothesis from the drop-down menu
8.  Press OK
Technology Notes 
●  557
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

558 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
CR10.1  The AARP Bulletin (March 2010) included the fol-
lowing short news brief:“Older adults who did 1 hour of 
tai chi twice weekly cut their pain from knee osteoarthritis 
considerably in a 12-week study conducted at Tufts Univer-
sity School of Medicine.” Suppose you were asked to design 
a study to investigate this claim. Describe an experiment that 
would allow comparison of the reduction in knee pain for 
those who did 1 hour of tai chi twice weekly to the reduc-
tion in knee pain for those who did not do tai chi. Include a 
discussion of how study participants would be selected, how 
pain reduction would be measured, and how participants 
would be assigned to experimental groups.
CR10.2  The following graphical display is similar to one 
that appeared in USA Today (June 3, 2009). Write a few sen-
tences critiquing this graphical display. Do you think it does 
a good job of creating a visual representation of the three per-
centages in the display?
States with the highest and lowest percentage of
roads in “poor” condition:
Report card: Roads getting an ‘F’
Source: American Association of
State Highway  and Transportation Ofﬁcials 
CR10.3 
 The article “Flyers Trapped on Tarmac Push for 
Rules on Release” (USA Today, July 28, 2009) included the ac-
companying data on the number of flights with a tarmac de-
lay of more than 3 hours between October 2008 and May 
2009 for U.S. airlines.
Airline
Number of  
Flights
Rate per 100,000 
Flights
AirTran
  7
0.4
Alaska
  0
0.0
American
48
1.3
American Eagle
44
1.6
Atlantic Southeast
11
0.6
Comair
29
2.7
Source: USA TODAY. June 3, 2009.
Cumulative Review Exercises 
CR10.1 - CR10.16
Airline
Number of  
Flights
Rate per 100,000 
Flights
Continental
72
4.1
Delta
81
2.8
ExpressJet
93
4.9
Frontier
  5
0.9
Hawaiian
  0
0.0
JetBlue
18
1.4
Mesa
17
1.1
Northwest
24
1.2
Pinnacle
13
0.7
SkyWest
29
0.8
Southwest
11
0.1
United
29
1.1
US Airways
46
1.6
a.	
Construct a dotplot of the data on number of flights 
delayed for more than 3 hours. Are there any unusual 
observations that stand out in the dot plot? What 
airlines appear to be the worst in terms of number of 
flights delayed on the tarmac for more than 3 hours?
b.	 Construct a dotplot of the data on rate per 100,000 
flights. Write a few sentences describing the interesting 
features of this plot.
c.	
If you wanted to compare airlines on the basis of tarmac 
delays, would you recommend using the data on num-
ber of flights delayed or on rate per 100,000 flights? 
Explain the reason for your choice.
CR10.4 
 The article “Wait Times on Rise to See Doctor” 
(USA Today, June 4, 2009) gave the accompanying data on av-
erage wait times in days to get an appointment with a medi-
cal specialist in 15 U.S. cities. Construct a boxplot of the 
average wait-time data. Are there any outliers in the data set?
City
Average Appointment  
Wait Time
Atlanta
11.2
Boston
49.6
Dallas
19.2
Denver
15.4
Detroit
12.0
Houston
23.4
Los Angeles
24.2
Miami
15.4
Minneapolis
19.8
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
continued
continued
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

City
Average Appointment  
Wait Time
New York
19.2
Philadelphia
27.0
Portland
14.4
San Diego
20.2
Seattle
14.2
Washington, D.C.
22.6
CR10.5  The report “New Study Shows Need for Americans 
to Focus on Securing Online Accounts and Backing up Critical 
Data” (PRNewswire, October 29, 2009) states that only 25% 
of Americans change computer passwords quarterly, in spite 
of a recommendation from the National Cyber Security Alli-
ance that passwords be changed at least once every 90 days. 
For purposes of this exercise, assume that the 25% figure is 
correct for the population of adult Americans.
a.	
If a random sample of 20 adult Americans is selected, 
what is the probability that exactly 3 of them change 
passwords quarterly? 
b.	 What is the probability that more than 8 people in a ran-
dom sample of 20 adult Americans change passwords 
quarterly? 
c.	
What is the mean and standard deviation of the variable 
x ​5 ​number of people in a random sample of 100 adult 
Americans who change passwords quarterly? 
d.	 Find the approximate probability that the number of 
people who change passwords quarterly in a random 
sample of 100 adult Americans is less than 20. 
CR10.6  The article “Should Canada Allow Direct-to-Consumer 
Advertising of Prescription Drugs?” (Canadian Family Physician 
[2009]: 130–131) calls for the legalization of advertising of 
prescription drugs in Canada. Suppose you wanted to con-
duct a survey to estimate the proportion of Canadians who 
would support allowing this type of advertising. How large a 
random sample would be required to estimate this propor-
tion to within .02 with 95% confidence? 
CR10.7  The National Association of Colleges and 
Employers carries out a student survey each year. A sum-
mary of data from the 2009 survey included the following 
information:
•	
26% of students graduating in 2009 intended to go on to 
graduate or professional school.
•	
Only 40% of those who graduated in 2009 received at 
least one job offer prior to graduation.
•	
Of those who received a job offer, only 45% had accepted 
an offer by the time they graduated.
Consider the following events:
O ​5 ​event that a randomly selected 2009 graduate received 
at least one job offer
A ​5 ​event that a randomly selected 2009 graduate accepted 
a job offer prior to graduation
G ​5 ​event that a randomly selected 2009 graduate plans to 
attend graduate or professional school
Compute the following probabilities.
a. 
P(O) 
b.  P(A) 
c.  P(G) 
d.  P(AuO) 
e.  P(OuA) 
f.  P(A > O) 
CR10.8  It probably wouldn’t surprise you to know that Val-
entine’s Day means big business for florists, jewelry stores, 
and restaurants. But would it surprise you to know that it is 
also a big day for pet stores? In January 2010, the National 
Retail Federation conducted a survey of consumers who they 
believed were selected in a way that would produce a sample 
representative of the population of adults in the United States 
(“This Valentine’s Day, Couples Cut Back on Gifts to Each Other, 
According to NRF Survey,” www.nrf.com). One of the ques-
tions in the survey asked if the respondent planned to spend 
money on a Valentine’s Day gift for his or her pet this year.
a.	
The proportion who responded that they did plan to 
purchase a gift for their pet was .173. Suppose that the 
sample size for this survey was n ​5 ​200. Construct and 
interpret a 95% confidence interval for the proportion of 
all U.S. adults who planned to purchase a Valentine’s Day 
gift for their pet in 2010. 
b.	 The actual sample size for the survey was much larger than 
200. Would a 95% confidence interval computed using the 
actual sample size have been narrower or wider than the 
confidence interval computed in Part (a)? 
c.	
Still assuming a sample size of n ​5 ​200, carry out a 
hypothesis test to determine if the data provides  
convincing evidence that the proportion who planned  
to buy a Valentine’s Day gift for their pet in  
2010 was greater than .15. Use a significance level  
of .05. 
CR10.9  The article “Doctors Cite Burnout in Mistakes” 
(San Luis Obispo Tribune, March 5, 2002) reported that many 
doctors who are completing their residency have financial 
struggles that could interfere with training. In a sample of 
115 residents, 38 reported that they worked moonlighting 
jobs and 22 reported a credit card debt of more than $3000. 
Suppose that it is reasonable to consider this sample of 115 as 
a random sample of all medical residents in the United States.
a.	
Construct and interpret a 95% confidence interval for 
the proportion of U.S. medical residents who work 
moonlighting jobs.  ​  ​
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Cumulative Review Exercises 
●  559
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

b.	 Construct and interpret a 90% confidence interval for 
the proportion of U.S. medical residents who have a 
credit card debt of more than $3000.  ​  ​
c.	
Give two reasons why the confidence interval in Part (a) 
is wider than the confidence interval in Part (b).
CR10.10  ​The National Geographic Society conducted a 
study that included 3000 respondents, age 18 to 24, in nine 
different countries (San Luis Obispo Tribune, November  21, 
2002). The society found that 10% of the participants could 
not identify their own country on a blank world map.
a.	
Construct a 90% confidence interval for the proportion 
who can identify their own country on a blank world 
map. 
b.	 What assumptions are necessary for the confidence interval 
in Part (a) to be valid?
c.	
To what population would it be reasonable to generalize 
the confidence interval estimate from Part (a)?
CR10.11  “Heinz Plays Catch-up After Under-Filling Ketchup 
Containers” is the headline of an article that appeared on 
CNN.com (November 30, 2000). The article stated that Heinz 
had agreed to put an extra 1% of ketchup into each ketchup 
container sold in California for a 1-year period. Suppose that 
you want to make sure that Heinz is in fact fulfilling its end 
of the agreement. You plan to take a sample of 20-oz bottles 
shipped to California, measure the amount of ketchup in 
each bottle, and then use the resulting data to estimate the 
mean amount of ketchup in 20-oz bottles. A small pilot study 
showed that the amount of ketchup in 20-oz bottles varied 
from 19.9 to 20.3 oz. How many bottles should be included 
in the sample if you want to estimate the true mean amount 
of ketchup to within 0.1 oz with 95% confidence?  ​  ​
CR10.12  ​In a survey conducted by Yahoo Small Business, 
1432 of 1813 adults surveyed said that they would alter their 
shopping habits if gas prices remain high (Associated Press, 
November 30, 2005). The article did not say how the sample 
was selected, but for purposes of this exercise, assume that it 
is reasonable to regard this sample as representative of adult 
Americans. Based on these survey data, is it reasonable to 
conclude that more than three-quarters of adult Americans 
plan to alter their shopping habits if gas prices remain high?
CR10.13  In an AP-AOL sports poll (Associated Press, 
December 18, 2005), 272 of 394 randomly selected baseball 
fans stated that they thought the designated hitter rule should 
either be expanded to both baseball leagues or eliminated. 
Based on the given information, is there sufficient evidence 
to conclude that a majority of baseball fans feel this way? ​ ​
CR10.14 
▼ The article “Americans Seek Spiritual Guidance 
on Web” (San Luis Obispo Tribune, October 12, 2002) reported 
that 68% of the general population belong to a religious com-
munity. In a survey on Internet use, 84% of “religion surfers” 
(defined as those who seek spiritual help online or who have 
used the web to search for prayer and devotional resources) 
belong to a religious community. Suppose that this result was 
based on a sample of 512 religion surfers. Is there convincing 
evidence that the proportion of religion surfers who belong 
to a religious community is different from .68, the proportion 
for the general population? Use a 5 .05. 
CR10.15  A survey of teenagers and parents in Canada 
conducted by the polling organization Ipsos (“Untangling the 
Web: The Facts About Kids and the Internet,” January 25, 2006) 
included questions about Internet use. It was reported that 
for a sample of 534 randomly selected teens, the mean num-
ber of hours per week spent online was 14.6 and the standard 
deviation was 11.6.
a.	
What does the large standard deviation, 11.6 hours, tell 
you about the distribution of online times for this sample 
of teens?
b.	 Do the sample data provide convincing evidence that the 
mean number of hours that teens spend online is greater 
than 10 hours per week? 
CR10.16  The same survey referenced in the previous 
exercise reported that for a random sample of 676 parents of 
Canadian teens, the mean number of hours parents thought 
their teens spent online was 6.5 and the sample standard 
deviation was 8.6.
a.	
Do the sample data provide convincing evidence that the 
mean number of hours that parents think their teens spend 
online is less than 10 hours per week? 
b.	 Write a few sentences commenting on the results of the test 
in Part (a) and of the test in Part (b) of the previous exercise.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
560 
●  Chapter 10  Hypothesis Testing Using a Single Sample
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

561
Many investigations are carried out for the purpose of 
comparing two populations or treatments. For example, 
the article “What Do Happy People Do?” (Social Indicators 
­Research [2008]: 565–571) investigates differences in the 
way happy people and unhappy people spend their time. 
By comparing data from a large national sample of people 
who described themselves as very happy to data from a 
large national sample of people who described them-
selves as not happy, the authors were able to investigate 
whether the mean amount of time spent in various activi-
ties was higher for one group than for the other. 
Using hypothesis tests to be introduced in this chapter, 
the authors were able to conclude that there was no sig-
nificant difference in the mean number of hours per day 
spent on the Internet for happy and unhappy people but 
that the mean number of hours per day spent watching TV 
was significantly higher for unhappy people. In this chapter, 
we will see hypothesis tests and confidence intervals that 
can be used to compare two populations or treatments.
CHAPTER 11
Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
Chapter 11: Learning Objectives
Students will understand:
●
●the difference between paired and independent samples.
Students will be able to:
●
●distinguish between paired and independent samples.
●
●carry out a test for a difference in population means using independent 
samples or paired samples and interpret the results in context.
●
●carry out a test for a difference in population proportions and interpret the 
results in context.
●
●construct a confidence interval estimate of a difference in population means 
using independent samples or paired samples and interpret the interval 
in context.
●
●construct a confidence interval estimate of a difference in population 
­proportions using independent samples and interpret the interval in context.
Andersen Ross/Digital Vision/Jupiter Images
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

562 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
  11.1  
Inferences Concerning the Difference Between Two  
Population or Treatment Means Using Independent Samples
In this section, we consider using sample data to compare two population means or  
two treatment means. An investigator may wish to estimate the difference between two 
population means or to test hypotheses about this difference. For example, a university 
financial aid director may want to determine whether the mean cost of textbooks is different 
for students enrolled in the engineering college than for students enrolled in the liberal arts 
college. Here, two populations (one consisting of all students enrolled in the engineering 
college and the other consisting of all students enrolled in the liberal arts college) are to be 
compared on the basis of their respective mean textbook costs. Information from two ran-
dom samples, one from each population, could be used to make such a comparison.
In other cases, an experiment might be carried out to compare two different treatments 
or to compare the effect of a treatment with the effect of no treatment. For example, an 
agricultural experimenter might wish to compare weight gains for animals placed on two 
different diets (each diet is a treatment). An educational researcher might wish to compare 
online instruction to traditional classroom instruction by studying the difference in mean 
scores on a common final exam (each type of instruction is a treatment).
In previous chapters, the symbol m was used to denote the mean of a single population 
under study. When comparing two populations or treatments, we must use notation that 
distinguishes between the characteristics of the first and those of the second. This is ac-
complished by using subscripts, as shown in the accompanying box.
Mean
Variance
Standard
Deviation
Population or Treatment 1
m1
s21
s1
Population or Treatment 2
m2
s22
s2
Sample Size
Mean
Variance
Standard 
Deviation
Sample from Population or Treatment 1
n1
x1
s21
s1
Sample from Population or Treatment 2
n2
x2
s22
s2
Notation
A comparison of means focuses on the difference, m1 2 m2. When m1 2 m2 5 0, the two 
population or treatment means are identical. That is,
m1 2 m2 5 0 is equivalent to m1 5 m2
Similarly,
m1 2 m2 . 0 is equivalent to m1 . m2
and
m1 2 m2 , 0 is equivalent to m1 , m2
Before developing methods for drawing conclusions about m1 2 m2, we must consider 
how the two samples, one from each population or treatment, are selected. Two samples are 
said to be independent samples if the selection of the individuals or objects that make up 
one sample does not influence the selection of individuals or objects in the other sample. 
When observations from the first sample are paired in some meaningful way with 
observations in the second sample, the samples are said to be paired. For example, to study 
the effectiveness of a speed-reading course, the reading speed of subjects could be measured 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

  11.1   Difference in Means with Independent Samples 
●  563
before they take the class and again after they complete the course. This gives rise to two 
related samples—one from the population of individuals who have not taken this particular 
course (the “before” measurements) and one from the population of individuals who have had 
such a course (the “after” measurements). These samples are paired. The two samples are not 
independently chosen, because the selection of individuals from the first (before) population 
completely determines which individuals make up the sample from the second (after) popula-
tion. In this section, we consider procedures based on independent samples. Methods for 
analyzing data resulting from paired samples are presented in Section 11.2. 
Because x1 provides an estimate of m1 and x2 gives an estimate of m2, it is natural to use 
x1 2 x2 as a point estimate of m1 2 m2. The value of x1 varies from sample to sample (it is 
a statistic), as does the value of x2. Since the difference x1 2 x2 is calculated from sample 
values, it is also a statistic and, therefore, has a sampling distribution.
For independent random samples: 
	1.	 mx1 2 x2 51
mean value
of  x1 2 x22 5 mx1 2 mx2 5 m1 2 m2
	 	 This means that the sampling distribution of  x1 2 x2 is always centered at the 
value of m1 2 m2, so x1 2 x2 is an unbiased statistic for estimating m1 2 m2.
	2.	 sx1 2 x2
2
51
variance of 
x1 2 x2 2 5 sx1
2 1 sx2
2 5 s12
n1 1 s22
n2
	 	 and
	 	 sx1 2 x2 51
standard deviation
of x1 2 x2 2 5Î
s21
n1 1 s22
n2
	3.	 If n1 and n2 are both large or the population distributions are (at least 
approximately) normal, x1 and x2 each have (at least approximately) a 
­normal distribution. This implies that the sampling distribution of x1 2 x2 
is also normal or approximately normal.
Properties of the Sampling Distribution of x1 2 x2
Properties 1 and 2 follow from the following general results:
1.	 The mean value of a difference in means is the difference of the two individual 
mean values.
2.	 The variance of a difference of independent quantities is the sum of the two indi-
vidual variances.
When the sample sizes are large or when the population distributions are approxi-
mately normal, the properties of the sampling distribution of x1 2 x2 imply that x1 2 x2 
can be standardized to obtain a variable with a sampling distribution that is approximately the 
standard normal (z) distribution. This leads to the following result.
When two random samples are independently selected and when n1 and n2 are 
both large or the population distributions are normal, the statistic 
z 5 x1 2 x2 2 (m1 2 m2)
Î
s21
n1
1 s22
n2
has a standard normal (z) distribution.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

564 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
Although it is possible to base a test procedure and confidence interval on this result, 
the values of s21 and s22 are rarely known. As a result, the z statistic is rarely used. When  
s21 and s22 are unknown, we must estimate them using the corresponding sample variances, 
s21 and s22. The result on which both a hypothesis test and confidence interval are based is 
given in the accompanying box.
When two random samples are independently selected and when n1 and n2 are 
both large or when the population distributions are normal, the standardized 
variable 
t 5 x1 2 x2 2 (m1 2 m2)
Î
s12
n1
1 s22
n2
has approximately a t distribution with 
df 5
(V1 1 V2)2
V 12
n1 2 1 1
V 22
n2 2 1
  where V1 5 s21
n1 and V2 5 s22
n2
The computed value of df should be truncated (rounded down) to obtain an  
integer value of df.
If one or both sample sizes are small, we must consider the shape of the population 
distributions. We can use normal probability plots or boxplots to evaluate whether it is 
reasonable to consider the population distributions to be approximately normal.
Hypothesis Tests
In a test designed to compare two population means, the null hypothesis is of the form
H0:  ​m1 2 m2 5 hypothesized value
Often the hypothesized value is 0, indicating that there is no difference between the popu-
lation means. The alternative hypothesis involves the same hypothesized value but uses one 
of three inequalities (less than, greater than, or not equal to), depending on the research 
question of interest. As an example, suppose m1 and m2 denote the average fuel efficiencies 
(in miles per gallon, mpg) for two models of a certain type of car equipped with 4-cylinder 
and 6-cylinder engines, respectively. The hypotheses under consideration might be
H0:  ​m1 2 m2 5 5  ​  ​versus  ​  ​Ha:  ​m1 2 m2 . 5
The null hypothesis is equivalent to the claim that the mean fuel efficiency for the 4-cylinder 
engine exceeds the mean fuel efficiency for the 6-cylinder engine by 5 mpg. The alternative 
hypothesis states that the difference between the mean fuel efficiencies is more than 5 mpg.
A test statistic is obtained by replacing m1 2 m2 in the standardized t variable (given in 
the box above) with the hypothesized value that appears in H0. The t statistic for testing 
H0: m1 2 m2 5 5 is
t 5 x1 2 x2 2 5
Î
s21
n1 1 s22
n2
When the sample sizes are large or when the population distributions are normal, the 
sampling distribution of the test statistic is approximately a t distribution when H0 is true. 
The P-value for the test is obtained by first computing the appropriate number of degrees 
of freedom and then using Appendix Table 4, a graphing calculator, or a statistical software 
package. The following box gives a general description of the test procedure.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Null hypothesis:  H0:  m1 2 m2 5 hypothesized value
Test statistic:  t 5 x1 2 x2 2 hypothesized value
Î
s21
n1 1 s22
n2
The appropriate df for the two-sample t test is 
df 5
sV1 1 V2d2
V 12
n1 2 1 1
V 22
n2 2 1
  where  V1 5 s21
n1  and  V2 5 s22
n2
The computed number of degrees of freedom should be truncated (rounded down) to an integer.
Alternative hypothesis:	
P-value: 
Ha:  m1 2 m2 . hypothesized value	
Area under appropriate t curve to the right of the computed t
Ha:  m1 2 m2 , hypothesized value	
Area under appropriate t curve to the left of the computed t
Ha:  m1 2 m2 ± hypothesized value	
(1) 2(area to the right of the computed t) if t is positive 
	 	
or 
	 	
(2) 2(area to the left of the computed t) if t is negative
Assumptions:  1.  The two samples are independently selected random samples from the populations of interest.  
2.  The sample sizes are large (generally 30 or larger)  
or the population distributions are (at least approximately) normal.
Summary of the Two-Sample t Test for Comparing Two Populations
Example 11.1 
Facebook and Grades
In a study of the ways in which college students who use Facebook differ from college 
students who do not use Facebook, each person in a sample of 141 college students who 
use Facebook was asked to report his or her college grade point average (GPA). College 
GPA was also reported by each person in a sample of 68 students who do not use Facebook 
(“Facebook and Academic Performance,” Computers in Human Behavior [2010]: 1237–1245). One 
question that the researchers were hoping to answer is whether the mean college GPA for 
students who use Facebook is lower than the mean college GPA of students who do not 
use Facebook. 
The two samples (141 students who were Facebook users and 68 students who were not 
Facebook users) were independently selected from students at a large, public Midwestern 
university. Although the samples were not selected at random, they were selected to be rep-
resentative of the two populations (students who use Facebook and students who do not 
use Facebook at this university). Data from these samples were used to compute sample 
means and standard deviations.
Population
Population Mean
Sample Size
Sample Mean
Sample Standard 
Deviation
Students at the university 
who use Facebook
m1 = mean college GPA 
for students who use 
Facebook
n1 5 141
x1 5 3.06
s1 5 0.95
Students at the university 
who do not use Facebook
m2 = mean college GPA 
for students who do not 
who use Facebook
n2 5 68
x2 5 3.82
s2 5 0.41
  11.1   Difference in Means with Independent Samples 
●  565
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

566 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
Do these data provide evidence that the mean GPA for students who use Facebook is lower 
than the mean GPA for students who do not use Facebook? We can answer this question 
by testing the relevant hypotheses using a .05 level of significance.
1.	 m1 5 mean GPA for students who use Facebook
m2 5 mean GPA for students who do not use Facebook
m1 2 m2 5 difference in mean GPA
2.	 H0: m1 2 m2 5 0 (no difference in mean GPA)
3.	 Ha: m1 2 m2 , 0 (mean GPA is smaller for Facebook users)
4.	 a 5 .05
5.	 Test statistic: t 5 x1 2 x2 2 sm1 2 m2d
Î
s21
n1 1 s22
n2
5 x1 2 x2 2 0
Î
s21
n1 1 s22
n2
  
6.	 Assumptions: From the study description, we know that the samples were inde-
pendently selected. We also know that the samples were selected to be representa-
tive of the two populations of interest. Both samples sizes are large (n1 5 141 $ 30  
and n2 5 68 $ 30) so it is reasonable to proceed with the two-sample t test.
7.	 Calculation: t 5 x1 2 x2 2 sm1 2 m2d
Î
s21
n1 1 s22
n2
5
3.06 2 3.82 2 0
Î
s0.95d2
141
1 s0.41d2
68
	
5 20.76
0.094
	
5 28.08
8.	 P-value: We first compute the df for the two-sample t test:
	
V1 5 s21
n1 5 0.0064   V2 5 s22
n2 5 0.0025
	
df 5
sV1 1 V2d2
V21
n1 2 1 1
V22
n2 2 1
	
5
s0.0064 1 0.0025d2
s0.0064d2
140
1 s0.0025d2
67
	
5 0.0000792
0.00000038
	
5 208.421
We truncate the number of df to 208. This is a lower-tailed test (the inequality in 
Ha is ,), so the P-value is the area under the t curve with df 5 208 and to the left 
of 28.08. Because the t curve is symmetric and centered at 0, this area is equal to 
the area under the t curve and to the right of 18.08. Because t 5 8.08 is greater 
than the largest tabled value in the ` df row of Appendix Table 4, the area to the 
right is approximately 0. This means that
	
P-value < 0
9.	 Conclusion: Because the P-value is less than the selected significance level, we 
reject the null hypothesis. Based on the sample data, there is convincing evidence 
that the mean college GPA for students at the university who use Facebook is lower 
than the mean college GPA for students at the university who do not use Facebook.
Based on this hypothesis test, we conclude that the sample mean GPA for students who 
use Facebook is enough lower than the sample mean GPA for students that do not use 
Facebook that we don’t think that this could have occurred just by chance due to sample-
to-sample variability when there is no difference in the population means. 
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

It is also possible to use statistical software or a graphing calculator to carry out the 
calcualtions in a hypothesis test. For example, Minitab output for the test is shown here.
Two-Sample T-Test
Sample
N
Mean
StDev
SE Mean
1
141
3.060
0.950
0.080
2
68
3.820
0.410
0.050
Difference 5 mu (1) 2 mu (2)
Estimate for difference: 20.760000
T-Test of difference 5 0 (vs ,): T-Value 5 28.07   P-Value 5 0.000   DF 5 205
From the Minitab output, we see that t 5 28.07, the associated degrees of freedom is  
df 5 205, and the P-value is 0.000. These values are slightly different from those we cal-
culated by hand only because Minitab uses greater decimal accuracy in the computations 
leading to the value of the test statistic and the degrees of freedom. You can use the Minitab 
values in the calculation and P-value steps, but just remember—these are only two of the 
steps in carrying out a hypothesis test. Even when you use technology, you still need to 
complete the other steps.	
■
Example 11.2 
Sex and Salary
● Are women still paid less than men for comparable work? The authors of the paper “Sex 
and Salary: A Survey of Purchasing and Supply Professionals” (Journal of Purchasing and Supply 
Management [2008]: 112–124) carried out a study in which salary data was collected from 
a random sample of men and a random sample of women who worked as purchasing 
managers and who were subscribers to Purchasing magazine. Salary data consistent with 
summary quantities given in the paper appear below (the actual sample sizes for the study 
were much larger):
Annual Salary (in thousands of dollars)
Men
81
69
81
76
76
74
69
76
79
65
Women
78 
60
67
61
62
73
71
58
68
48
Even though the samples were selected from subscribers of a particular magazine, the 
authors of the paper believed that it was reasonable to view the samples in the study as 
representative of the two populations of interest—male purchasing managers and female 
purchasing managers. For purposes of this example, we will assume that it is also reason-
able to consider the two samples given here as representative of the populations. 
We will use the given data and a significance level of .05 to determine if there is convinc-
ing evidence that the mean annual salary for male purchasing managers is greater than the 
mean annual salary for female purchasing managers.
1.	 m1 ​5 ​mean annual salary for male purchasing managers
	
m2 ​5 ​mean annual salary for female purchasing managers
	
m1 2 m2 ​5 ​difference in mean annual salary
2.	 H0:  ​m1 2 m2 5 0
3.	 Ha:  ​m1 2 m2 . 0
4.	 Significance level:  ​a 5 .05
5.	 Test statistic:  t 5 x1 2 x2 2 hypothesized value
Î
s21
n1 1 s22
n2
5 x1 2 x2 2 0
Î
s21
n1 1 s22
n2
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
 Data set available online
  11.1   Difference in Means with Independent Samples 
●  567
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

568 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
6.	 Assumptions:  ​For the two-sample t test to be appropriate, we must be willing to 
assume that the two samples can be viewed as independently selected random 
samples from the two populations of interest. As previously noted, we assume that 
this is reasonable. Because both of the sample sizes are small, it is also necessary 
to assume that the salary distribution is approximately normal for each of these 
two populations. Boxplots constructed using the sample data are shown here:
50
Male
Female
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
Annual salary (thousands of dollars)
Because the boxplots are reasonably symmetric and because there are no outliers, it is 
reasonable to proceed with the two-sample t-test.
7.	 Calculation: For the given data: 
x 5 74.6 s1 5 5.4 x2 5 64.6 s2 5 8.6, and
t 5 s74.6 2 64.6d 2 0
Î
s5.4d2
10
1 s8.6d2
10
5
10
Ï2.916 1 7.396 5
10
3.211 5 3.11
8.	 P-value: We first compute the df for the two-sample t test:
 V1 5 s21
n1 5 2.916 V2 5 s22
n2 5 7.396
df 5
sV1 1 V2d2
V21
n1 2 1 1
V22
n2 2 1
5
s2.916 1 7.396d2
s2.916d2
9
1 s7.396d2
9
5 106.337
7.023
5 15.14
We truncate df to 15. Appendix Table 4 shows that the area under the t curve with 
15 df to the right of 3.1 is .004, so P-value 5 .004.
9.	 Conclusion: Because the P-value of .004 is less than .05, we reject H0. There is 
convincing evidence that the mean annual salary for male purchasing managers is 
higher than mean annual salary for female purchasing managers.
Suppose the computed value of the test statistic in Step 7 had been 1.13 rather than 3.11. 
Then the P-value would have been .143 (the area to the right of 1.1 under the t curve with 
15 df) and the decision would have been to not reject the null hypothesis. We then would have 
concluded that there was not convincing evidence that the mean annual salary was higher for 
males than for females. Notice that when we fail to reject the null hypothesis of no difference 
between the population means, we are not saying that there is convincing evidence that the 
means are equal—we can only say that we were not convinced that they were different.
■
Many statistical computer packages can perform the calculations for the two-sample 
t test. The partial SPSS output on the next page shows summary statistics for the two 
groups of Example 11.2. The second part of the output gives the number of degrees of 
freedom, the test-statistic value, and a two-sided P-value. 
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Because the test in Example 11.2 is a one-sided test, we need to divide the two-
sided P-value in half to obtain the correct value for our test, which is .0072
2
5 .0036. 
This P-value differs from the value in Example 11.2 because Appendix Table 4 
gives only tail areas for t values to one decimal place and so we rounded the test sta-
tistic to 3.1. As a consequence, the P-value given in the example is only approximate.
Group Statistics
Sex
N
Mean
Std. Deviation Std. Error Mean
Salary
male
10
74.60
5.40
  ​1.71
female
10
64.60
    8.62
  ​2.73
95% Confidence 
Interval of the 
Difference
t
df
Sig. (2-tailed)
Mean Difference
Std. Error Difference
Lower
Upper
Equal Variances Not Assumed
3.11
15.14
  ​  ​ .0072
  ​  ​10.000
  ​  ​3.211
3.1454
16.8546
Comparing Treatments
When an experiment is carried out to compare two treatments (or to compare a single 
treatment with a control), the investigator is interested in the effect of the treatments on 
some response variable. The treatments are “applied” to individuals (as in an experiment to 
compare two different medications for decreasing blood pressure) or objects (as in an ex-
periment to compare two different baking temperatures on the density of bread). The value 
of some response variable (for example, blood pressure or density) is recorded. Based on 
the resulting data, we can determine whether there is a significant difference in the mean 
response for the two treatments.
In many actual experimental situations, the individuals or objects to which the treatments 
will be applied are not selected at random from some larger population. A consequence of 
this is that it is not possible to generalize the results of the experiment to some larger popula-
tion. However, if individuals or objects are randomly assigned to treatments (or treatments are ran-
domly assigned to individuals or objects), it is possible to test hypotheses about treatment differences.
It is common practice to use the two-sample t test statistic previously described if the 
experiment employs random assignment and if either the sample sizes are large or it is 
reasonable to think that the treatment response distributions (the distributions of response 
values that would result if the treatments were applied to a very large number of individuals 
or objects) are approximately normal.
When
1.	 individuals or objects are randomly assigned to treatments (or treatments are 
randomly assigned to individuals or objects), and 
2.	 the sample sizes are large (generally 30 or larger)  
or the treatment response distributions are approximately normal,
the two-sample t test can be used to test 
H0: m1 2 m2 5 hypothesized value
where m1 and m2 represent the mean response for treatments 1 and 2, respectively.
In this case, these two conditions replace the assumptions previously stated for 
comparing two population means. Whether the assumption of normality of 
the treatment response distributions is reasonable can be assessed by construct-
ing normal probability plots or boxplots of the response values in each sample.
Two-Sample t Test for Comparing Two Treatments
  11.1   Difference in Means with Independent Samples 
●  569
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

570 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
When the two-sample t test is used to compare two treatments when the individuals or 
objects used in the experiment are not randomly selected from some population, it is only 
an approximate test (the reported P-values are only approximate). However, this is still the 
most common way to analyze such data.
Example 11.3 
Reading Emotions
The paper “How Happy Was I, Anyway? A Retrospective Im-
pact Bias” (Social Cognition [2003]: 421–​446) reported on an 
experiment designed to assess the extent to which people 
rationalize poor performance. In this study, 246 college 
undergraduates were assigned at random to one of two 
groups—a negative feedback group or a positive feedback 
group. Each participant took a test in which they were 
asked to guess the emotions displayed in photographs of 
faces. At the end of the test, those in the negative feed-
back group were told that they had correctly answered 21 
of the 40 items and were assigned a “grade” of D. Those 
in the positive feedback group were told that they had answered 35 of 40 correctly and 
were assigned an A grade. 
After a brief time, participants were asked to answer two sets of questions. One set of 
questions asked about the validity of the test and the other set of questions asked about 
the importance of being able to read faces. The researchers hypothesized that those in the 
negative feedback group would tend to rationalize their poor performance by rating both 
the validity of the test and the importance of being a good face reader lower than those 
in the positive feedback group. Do the data from this experiment support the researchers’ 
hypotheses?
Pierre Bourrier/Iconica/Getty Images
Test Validity Rating
Face Reading  
Importance Rating
Group
Sample  
Size
Mean
Standard 
Deviation
Mean
Standard 
Deviation
Negative feedback
123
5.51
  .79
5.36
1.00
Positive feedback
123
6.95
1.09
6.62
1.19
We will test the relevant hypotheses using a significance level of .01, beginning with the 
hypotheses about the test validity rating.
1.	 Let m1 denote the mean test validity score for the negative feedback group and 
define m2 analogously for the positive feedback group. Then m1 2 m2 is the differ-
ence between the mean test validity scores for the two treatment groups.
2.	 H0:  ​m1 2 m2 5 0
3.	 Ha:  ​m1 2 m2 , 0
4.	 Significance level:  ​a 5 .01
5.	 Test statistic:  t 5 x1 2 x2 2 hypothesized value
Î
s21
n1 1 s22
n2
5 x1 2 x2 2 0
Î
s21
n1 1 s22
n2
​
6.	 Assumptions:  ​Subjects were randomly assigned to the treatment groups, and both 
sample sizes are large, so use of the two-sample t test is reasonable.
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.	 Calculation:  t 5 s5.51 2 6.95d 2 0
Î
s.79d2
123 1 s1.09d2
123
5 21.44
0.1214 5 211.86​
8.	 P-value:  ​We first compute the df for the two-sample t test:
V1 5 s21
n1 5 .0051 V2 5 s22
n2 5 .0097
df 5
sV1 1 V2d2
V21
n1 2 1 1
V22
n2 2 1
5
s.0051 1 .0097d2
s.0051d2
122
1 s.0097d2
122
5 .000219
.000001 5 219
This is a lower-tailed test, so the P-value is the area under the t curve with df 5 219 
and to the left of 211.86. Since 211.86 is so far out in the lower tail of this t curve, 
P-value < 0.
9.	 Conclusion:  ​Since P-value # a, H0 is rejected. There is evidence that the mean 
validity rating score for the positive feedback group is higher. The data support  
the conclusion that those who received negative feedback did not rate the validity of 
the test, on average, as highly as those who thought they had done well on the test.
We will use Minitab to test the researchers’ hypothesis that those in the negative feedback 
group would also not rate the importance of being able to read faces as highly as those in 
the positive group.
1.	 Let m1 denote the mean face reading importance rating for the negative feedback 
group and define m2 analogously for the positive feedback group. Then m1 2 m2 is 
the difference between the mean face reading ratings for the two treatment groups.
2.	 H0:  ​m1 2 m2 5 0
3.	 Ha:  ​m1 2 m2 , 0
4.	 Significance level:  ​a 5 .01
5.	 Test statistic:  t 5
x1 2 x2 2 hypothesized value
Î
s21
n1 1 s22
n2
5 x1 2 x2 2 0
Î
s21
n1 1 s22
n2
6.	 Assumptions:  ​Subjects were randomly assigned to the treatment groups, and both 
sample sizes are large, so use of the two-sample t test is reasonable.
7.	 Calculation:  ​Minitab output is shown here. From the output, t 5 28.99.
Two-Sample T-Test and CI
Sample
N
Mean
StDev
SE Mean
  ​  ​  ​  ​  ​1
123
5.36
1.00
0.090
  ​  ​  ​  ​  ​2
123
6.62
1.19
0.11
Difference 5 mu (1) 2 mu (2)
Estimate for difference: 21.26000
95% upper bound for difference: 21.02856
T-Test of difference 5 0 (vs ,): T-Value 5 28.99    ​P-Value 5 0.000    ​DF 5 236
8.	 P-value:  ​From the Minitab output, P-value 5 0.000.
9.	 Conclusion:  ​Since P-value # a, H0 is rejected. There is evidence that the mean 
face reading importance rating for the positive feedback group is higher.
■
You have probably noticed that evaluating the formula for number of degrees of freedom 
for the two-sample t test involves quite a bit of arithmetic. An alternative approach is to 
compute a conservative estimate of the P-value—one that is close to but larger than the 
actual P-value. If H0 is rejected using this conservative estimate, then it will also be rejected 
if the actual P-value is used. 
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Do he work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
  11.1   Difference in Means with Independent Samples 
●  571
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

572 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
A conservative estimate of the P-value for the two-sample t test can be found by 
using the t curve with the number of degrees of freedom equal to the smaller of 
(n1 2 1) and (n2 2 1).
The Pooled t Test
The two-sample t test procedure just described is appropriate when it is reasonable to 
assume that the population distributions are approximately normal. If it is also known 
that the variances of the two populations are equal ss21 5 s22d, an alternative procedure 
known as the pooled t test can be used. This test procedure combines information from both 
samples to obtain a “pooled” estimate of the common variance and then uses this pooled 
estimate of the variance in place of s21 and s22 in the t test statistic. 
This test procedure was widely used in the past, but it has fallen into some disfavor be-
cause it is quite sensitive to departures from the assumption of equal population variances. 
If the population variances are equal, the pooled t procedure has a slightly better chance 
of detecting departures from H0 than does the two-sample t test of this section. However, 
P-values based on the pooled t procedure can be seriously in error if the population vari-
ances are not equal, so, in general, the two-sample t procedure is a better choice than the 
pooled t test.
Comparisons and Causation
If the assignment of treatments to the individuals or objects used in a comparison of treat-
ments is not made by the investigators, the study is observational. As an example, the 
article “Lead and Cadmium Absorption Among Children near a Nonferrous Metal Plant” (Envi-
ronmental Research [1978]: 290–​308) reported data on blood lead concentrations for two dif-
ferent samples of children. The first sample was drawn from a population residing within 
1 km of a lead smelter. Those in the second sample were selected from a rural area much 
farther from the smelter. 
It was the parents of the children, rather than the investigators, who determined 
whether the children would be in the close-to-smelter group or the far-from-smelter 
group. As a second example, a letter in the Journal of the American Medical Association 
(May 19, 1978) reported on a comparison of doctors’ longevity after medical school gradu-
ation for those with an academic affiliation and those in private practice. (The letter 
writer’s stated objective was to see whether “publish or perish” really meant “publish and 
perish.”) Here again, an investigator did not start out with a group of doctors, assigning 
some to academic and others to nonacademic careers. The doctors themselves selected 
their groups.
The difficulty with drawing conclusions based on an observational study is that a sta-
tistically significant difference may be due to some underlying factors that have not been 
controlled rather than to conditions that define the groups. Does the type of medical prac-
tice itself have an effect on longevity, or is the observed difference in lifetimes caused by 
other factors, which themselves led graduates to choose academic or nonacademic careers? 
Similarly, is the observed difference in blood lead concentration levels due to proximity to 
the smelter? Perhaps other physical and socioeconomic factors are related both to choice of 
living area and to blood lead concentration.
In general, rejection of H0: m1 2 m2 5 0 in favor of Ha: m1 2 m2 . 0 suggests that, on 
average, higher values of the variable are associated with individuals in the first population 
or receiving the first treatment than with those in the second population or receiving the 
second treatment. But association does not imply causation. 
Strong statistical evidence for a causal relationship can be built up over time through 
many different comparative studies that point to the same conclusions (as in the many 
investigations linking smoking to lung cancer). A randomized controlled experiment, in 
which investigators assign subjects at random to the treatments or conditions being com-
pared, is particularly effective in suggesting causality. With such random assignment, 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

the investigator and other interested parties can have more confidence in the conclusion 
that an observed difference is caused by the difference in treatments or conditions. 
A Confidence Interval
A confidence interval for m1 2 m2 is easily obtained from the basic t variable developed in 
this section. Both the derivation of and the formula for the interval are similar to those of 
the one-sample t interval introduced in Chapter 9.
The general formula for a conﬁdence interval for m1 2 m2 when
1.	 the two samples are independently chosen random samples
2.	 the sample sizes are both large (generally n1 $ 30 and n2 $ 30  
or 
the population distributions are approximately normal
is 
sx1 2 x2d 6 st critical valuedÎ
s21
n1 1 s22
n2
The t critical value is based on 
df 5
sV1 1 V2d2
V 21
n1 2 1 1
V 22
n2 2 1
  where  V1 5 s21
n1  and  V2 5 s22
n2
df should be truncated (rounded down) to an integer. The t critical values for 
the usual conﬁdence levels are given in Appendix Table 3.
For a comparison of two treatments, when 
1.	 individuals or objects are randomly assigned to treatments (or vice versa)
2.	 the sample sizes are large (generally 30 or larger)
	     or
	     the treatment response distributions are approximately normal,
the two-sample t conﬁdence interval formula can be used to estimate m1 2 m2.
The Two-Sample t Confidence Interval for the Difference 
Between Two Population or Treatment Means
EXAMPLE 11.4 
Freshman Year Weight Gain
The paper “Predicting the ‘Freshman 15’: Environmental and Psychological Predictors of Weight 
Gain in First-Year University Students” (Health Education Journal [2010]: 321–332) described a 
study conducted by researchers at Carleton University in Canada. The researchers studied 
a random sample of first-year students who lived on campus and a random sample of first-
year students who lived off campus. Data on weight gain (in kg) during the first year, con-
sistent with summary quantities given in the paper, are given below. A negative weight gain 
represents a weight loss. The researchers believed that the mean weight gain of students 
living on campus was higher than the mean weight gain for students living off campus and 
were interested in estimating the difference in means for these two groups using a 95% 
confidence interval. 
Understand the context ❭
  11.1   Difference in Means with Independent Samples 
●  573
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

574 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
On Campus
Off Campus
2.0
1.6
2.3
3.1
1.1
−2.8
−2.0
0.0
−1.9
0.2
5.6
2.9
2.6
−0.9
1.1
3.8
5.6
0.7
8.2
−0.1
For these samples:
On campus: n1 5 10 x1 5 2.46 s1 5 3.26
Off campus: n2 5 10 x2 5 .85 s2 5 2.03
We want to estimate 
m1 2 m2 5 mean difference in weight gain
where
m1 5 mean weight gain for first-year students living on campus
and
m2 5 mean weight gain for first-year students living off campus
The samples were random samples from the two populations of interest (first-year stu-
dents who live on campus and first-year students who live off campus), so the samples 
were independently selected. Because the sample sizes were not large, we need to be will-
ing to assume that the population weight gain distributions are at least approximately nor-
mal. Boxplots constructed using the data from the two samples are shown below. There are 
no outliers in either data set and the boxplots are reasonably symmetric, suggesting that the 
assumption of approximate normality is appropriate for each of the populations.
24
0
22
Off Campus
On Campus
2
4
6
8
Data
To estimate m1 2 m2, the difference in mean diastolic blood pressure for the two treat-
ments, we will calculate a 95% confidence interval.
V1 5 s21
n1 5 s3.26d2
10
5 1.06 V2 5 s22
n2 5 s2.03d2
10
5 .41
Formulate a plan ❭
Do he work ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

df 5
sV1 1 V2d2
V21
n1 2 1 1
V22
n2 2 1
5
s1.06 1 .41d2
s1.06d2
9
1 s.41d2
9
5 2.16
.14 5 15.43
Truncating to an integer gives df 5 15. In the 15-df row of Appendix Table 3, the t critical 
value for a 95% confidence level is 2.13. The interval is then
sx1 2 x2d 6 st critical valued Î
s21
n1 1 s22
n2
5 s2.46 2 .85d 6 s2.13dÎ
s3.26d2
9
1 s2.03d2
9
5 1.61 6 s2.13ds1.283d
5 1.61 6 2.733
5 s21.123, 4.343d
This interval is rather wide, because the two sample sizes are small. Notice that the interval 
includes 0, so 0 is one of the plausible values for m1 2 m2. Because 0 is included in this 
interval, it is possible that there is no real difference in the mean weight gain for students 
who live on campus and those who live off campus. The 95% confidence level means that 
we used a method to produce this estimate that correctly captures the true value of m1 2 m2 
95% of the time in repeated sampling.
Suppose that the confidence interval had been (1.123, 4.343), so that the interval did 
not include 0. This interval would have been interpreted by saying that we are 95% con-
fident that the mean weight gain for those who live on campus is higher than the mean 
weight gain for those who live off campus by somewhere between 1.123 and 4.343 kg.
Most statistical computer packages can compute the two-sample t confidence interval. 
Minitab was used to construct a 95% confidence interval using the data of this example; 
the resulting output is shown here:
Two-sample T for On Campus vs. Off Campus
N
Mean
StDev
SE Mean
On Campus
10
2.46
3.26
1.0
Off Campus
10
0.85
2.03
0.64
Difference 5 mu (On Campus) 2 mu (Off Campus)
Estimate for difference:   1.61000
95% CI for difference: (20.97629, 4.19629)
The difference in the interval from Minitab and the interval computed by hand is due to 
rounding in the hand calculations.	
■
Interpret the results ❭
exercises 11.1 - 11.21
11.1	 Consider two populations for which m1 5 30,  
s1 5 2, m2 5 25, and s2 5 3. Suppose that two 
independent random samples of sizes n1 5 40 and  
n2 5 50 are selected. Describe the approximate 
sampling distribution of x1 2 x2 (center, spread,  
and shape).  
11.2	 An individual can take either a scenic route to work 
or a nonscenic route. She decides that use of the 
nonscenic route can be justified only if it reduces the 
mean travel time by more than 10 minutes.
a.	 If m1 is the mean for the scenic route and m2 for 
the nonscenic route, what hypotheses should be 
tested? 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
  11.1   Difference in Means with Independent Samples 
●  575
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

576 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
b.	If m1 is the mean for the nonscenic route and m2 
for the scenic route, what hypotheses should be 
tested?  ​  ​ ​
11.3	 The paper “Ladies First?” A Field Study of Discrimina-
tion in Coffee Shops” (Applied Economics [2008]: 1-19) 
describes a study in which researchers observed wait 
times in coffee shops in Boston. Both wait time and 
gender of the customer were observed. The mean 
wait time for a sample of 145 male customers was 
85.2 seconds. The mean wait time for a sample 
of 141 female customers was 113.7 seconds. The 
sample standard deviations (estimated from graphs 
that appeared in the paper) were 50 seconds for the 
sample of males and 75 seconds for the sample of 
females. For purposes of this exercise, suppose that 
these two samples are representative of the popula-
tions of wait times for female coffee shop customers 
and for male coffee shop customers. Is there convinc-
ing evidence that the mean wait time differs for males 
and females? Test the relevant hypotheses using a 
significance level of 0.05. (Hint: See Example 11.1.)
11.4	 In the paper “Happiness for Sale: Do Experiential 
Purchases Make Consumers Happier than Material 
Purchases?” (Journal of Consumer Research [2009]: 
188–197), the authors distinguish between spending 
money on experiences (such as travel) and spending 
money on material possessions (such as a car). In an 
experiment to determine if the type of purchase af-
fects how happy people are with the purchase after it 
has been made, 185 college students were randomly 
assigned to one of two groups. The students in the 
“experiential” group were asked to recall a time when 
they spent about $300 on an experience, and then 
they rated this purchase on three different happi-
ness scales that were then combined into an overall 
measure of happiness. The students assigned to the 
“material” group were asked to recall a time that they 
spent about $300 on an object. 
The mean happiness score was 5.75 for the expe-
riential group and 5.27 for the material group. Stan-
dard deviations and sample sizes were not given in 
the paper, but for purposes of this exercise, suppose 
that they were as follows:
Experiential
Material
n1 5 92
n2 5 93
s1 5 1.2
s2 5 1.5
Use the following Minitab output to carry out a 
hypothesis test to determine if the data supports 
the authors’ conclusion that “experiential purchases 
induced more reported happiness.” Use a ​5 ​.05.  
(Hint: See Example 11.3.)
Two-Sample T-Test and CI 
Sample
N
Mean
StDev
SE Mean
1
92
5.75
1.20
0.13
2
93
5.27
1.50
0.16
Difference ​5 ​mu (1) - mu (2)
Estimate for difference: 0.480000
95% lower bound for difference: 0.149917
T-Test of difference ​5 ​0 (vs .): T-Value ​5 ​2.40  
P-Value ​5 ​0.009 DF ​5 ​175
11.5	 ● The article “Plugged In, but Tuned Out” (USA Today, 
January 20, 2010) summarizes data from two surveys 
of kids age 8 to 18. One survey was conducted in 
1999 and the other was conducted in 2009. Data 
on number of hours per day spent using electronic 
media that are consistent with summary quanti-
ties given in the article are given below (the actual 
sample sizes for the two surveys were much larger). 
For purposes of this exercise, assume that it is rea-
sonable to regard the two samples as representative 
of kids age 8 to 18 in each of the 2 years that the 
surveys were conducted.
2009
5
9
5
8
7
6
7
9
7
9
6
9
10
9
8
1999
4
5
7
7
5
7
5
6
5
6
7
8
  5
6
6
a.	 Because the given sample sizes are small, in order 
for the two-sample t test to be appropriate, what 
assumption must be made about the ­distributions 
of electronic media use times? Use the given data 
to construct graphical displays that would be 
useful in determining whether this assumption is 
reasonable. Do you think it is reasonable to use 
these data to carry out a two-sample t test?
b.	Do the given data provide convincing evidence 
that the mean number of hours per day spent 
using electronic media was greater in 2009 than 
in 1999? Test the relevant hypotheses using a 
significance level of .01. (Hint: See Example 11.2.) 
c.	 Construct and interpret a 98% confidence 
interval estimate of the difference between the 
mean number of hours per day spent using 
electronic media in 2009 and 1999. (Hint: See 
­Example 11.4.) 
11.6	 Can moving their hands help children learn 
math? This question was investigated in the paper 
­“Gesturing Gives Children New Ideas about Math” 
(Psychological Science [2009]: 267–272). Eighty-five 
children in the third and fourth grades who did not 
answer any questions correctly on a test with six 
problems of the form 3 1 2 1 8 5 __ 1 8 were 
participants in an experiment. The children were 
randomly assigned to either a no-gesture group or a 
​
​
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

gesture group. All the children were given a lesson on 
how to solve problems of this form using the strategy 
of trying to make both sides of the equation equal. 
Children in the gesture group were also taught to 
point to the first two numbers on the left side of the 
equation with the index and middle finger of one 
hand and then to point at the blank on the right side 
of the equation. This gesture was supposed to em-
phasize that grouping is involved in solving the prob-
lem. The children then practiced additional problems 
of this type. All children were then given a test with 
six problems to solve, and the number of correct an-
swers was recorded for each child. Summary statistics 
read from a graph in the paper are given below.
n
x
s
No gesture
42
1.3
0.3
Gesture
43
2.2
0.4
Is there evidence to support the theory that learn-
ing the gesturing approach to solving problems of 
this type results in a higher mean number of correct 
responses? Test the relevant hypotheses using a ​5 ​.01.
11.7	
 The accompanying data on food intake (in Kcal) 
for 15 men on the day following two nights of only 
4 hours of sleep each night and for 15 men on the day 
following two nights of 8 hours of sleep each night 
is consistent with summary quantities in the paper 
“Short-Term Sleep Loss Decreases Physical Activity under 
Free-Living Conditions But Does Not Increase Food Intake 
under Time Deprived Laboratory Conditions in Healthy 
Men” (American Journal of Clinical Nutrition [2009]: 1476–
1482). The men participating in this experiment were 
randomly assigned to one of the two sleep conditions.
4-hour sleep group:
3585
4470
3068
5338
2221
4791
4435
3099
3187
3901
3868
3869
4878
3632
4518
8-hour sleep group:
4965
3918
1987
4993
5220
3653
3510
3338
4100
5792
4547
3319
3336
4304
4057
If appropriate, carry out a two-sample t test with  
a 5 .05 to determine if there is a significant differ-
ence in mean food intake for the two different sleep 
conditions.
11.8	 The paper “If It’s Hard to Read, It’s Hard to Do” (Psy-
chological Science [2008]: 986–988) described an 
interesting study of how people perceive the effort 
required to do certain tasks. Each of 20 students 
was randomly assigned to one of two groups. One 
group was given instructions for an exercise routine 
that were printed in an easy-to-read font (
 ). The 
​
​
other group received the same set of instructions, but 
printed in a font that is considered difficult to read  
(
 ).
After reading the instructions, subjects estimated 
the time (in minutes) they thought it would take to 
complete the exercise routine. Summary statistics are 
given below.
Easy font
Difficult font
n
10
   10
x
8.23
15.10
s
5.61
   9.28
The authors of the paper used these data to carry 
out a two-sample t test, and concluded that at 
the .10 significance level, there was convincing 
evidence that the mean estimated time to complete 
the exercise routine was less when the instructions 
were printed in an easy-to-read font than when 
printed in a difficult-to-read font. Discuss the ap-
propriateness of using a two-sample t test in this 
situation.
11.9	 Is injecting medical cement effective in reducing pain 
for people who have suffered fractured vertebrae? 
The paper “A Randomized Trial of Vertebroplasty for 
Osteoporotic Spinal Fractures” (New England Journal of 
Medicine [2009]: 569–578) describes an experiment to 
compare patients who underwent vertebroplasty (the 
injection of cement) to patients in a placebo group 
who underwent a fake procedure in which no cement 
was actually injected. Because the placebo procedure 
was similar to the vertebroplasty procedure except 
for the actual injection of cement, patients participat-
ing in the experiment were not aware of which treat-
ment they received. 
All patients were asked to rate their pain at three 
different times—3 days, 14 days, and 1 month after 
the procedure. Summary statistics are given in the 
accompanying table.
Pain Intensity
Vertebroplasty 
Group
Placebo Group
n 5 68
n 5 63
mean
sd
mean
sd
3 days
4.2
2.8
3.9
2.9
14 days
4.3
2.9
4.5
2.8
1 month
3.9
2.9
4.6
3.0
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
  11.1   Difference in Means with Independent Samples 
●  577
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

578 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
a.	 Briefly explain why the researchers may have 
chosen to include a placebo group that underwent 
a fake procedure rather than just comparing the 
vertebroplasty group to a group of patients who 
did not receive any treatment.
b.	Construct and interpret a 95% confidence 
interval for the difference in mean pain inten-
sity 3 days after treatment for the vertebroplasty 
­treatment and the fake treatment. (Hint: See 
Example 11.4.) 
c.	 Construct and interpret 95% confidence inter-
vals for the difference in mean pain intensity at 
14 days and at 1 month after treatment.
d.	Based on the confidence intervals from Parts (b) 
and (c), comment on the effectiveness of injecting 
cement as a way of reducing pain for those with 
fractured vertebrae.
11.10	 Do male college students spend more time than 
female college students using a computer? This was 
one of the questions investigated by the authors of 
the paper “An Ecological Momentary Assessment of the 
Physical Activity and Sedentary Behaviour Patterns of 
University Students” (Heath Education Journal [2010]: 
116–125). Each student in a random sample of 
46 male students at a university in England and each 
student in a random sample of 38 female students 
from the same university kept a diary of how he or 
she spent time over a three-week period. 
For the sample of males, the mean time spent 
using a computer per day was 45.8 minutes and the 
standard deviation was 63.3 minutes. For the sample 
of females, the mean time spent using a computer 
was 39.4 minutes and the standard deviation was 
57.3 minutes. Is there convincing evidence that the 
mean time male students at this university spend 
using a computer is greater than the mean time for 
female students? Test the appropriate hypotheses 
using a 5 0.05 
11.11	Each person in random samples of 247 male and 
253 female working adults living in Calgary, Canada, 
was asked how long, in minutes, his or her typical 
daily commute was (“Calgary Herald Traffic Study,” Ipsos, 
September 17, 2005). Use the accompanying sum-
mary statistics and an appropriate hypothesis test to 
­determine if there is convincing evidence that the 
mean commute times for male and female working 
Calgary residents differ. Use a significance level of .05.
Males
Females
Sample
Size
x
s
Sample
Size
x 
s
247
29.6
24.3
253 
27.3
24.0
11.12	 The paper “Mood Food: Chocolate and Depressive 
Symptoms in a Cross-Sectional Analysis” (Archives of 
Internal Medicine [2010]: 699–703) describes a study 
that investigated the relationship between depres-
sion and chocolate consumption. Participants in the 
study were 931 adults who were not currently taking 
medication for depression. These participants were 
screened for depression using a widely used screen-
ing test. The participants were then divided into two 
samples based on the score on the screening test. 
One sample consisted of people who screened posi-
tive for depression, and the other sample consisted 
of people who did not screen positive for depression. 
Each of the study participants also completed a food 
frequency survey. 
The researchers believed that the two samples were 
representative of the two populations of interest—
adults who would screen positive for depression and 
adults who would not screen positive. The paper 
reported that the mean number of servings of choco-
late for the sample of people that screened positive 
for depression was 8.39 servings per month and the 
sample standard deviation was 14.83. For the sample 
of people who did not screen positive for depression, 
the mean number of servings per month was 5.39 
and the standard deviation was 8.76. The paper did 
not say how many individuals were in each sample, 
but for the purposes of this exercise, you can assume 
that the 931 study participants were divided into 311 
who screened positive for depression and 620 who 
did not screen positive. 
Estimate the difference in the mean number of 
servings of chocolate per month in the population 
of people who would screen positive for depres-
sion and the mean number of chocolate servings 
per month in the population of people who would 
not screen positive for depression. Use a confidence 
level of 90% and be sure to interpret the interval in 
context.
11.13	In a study of malpractice claims where a settle-
ment had been reached, two random samples were 
selected: a random sample of 515 closed malpractice 
claims that were found not to involve medical errors 
and a random sample of 889 claims that were found 
to involve errors (New England Journal of Medicine 
[2006]: 2024–​2033). The following statement ap-
peared in the referenced paper: “When claims not 
involving errors were compensated, payments were 
significantly lower on average than were payments 
for claims involving errors ($313,205 vs. $521,560, 
P 5 0.004).”
a.	 What hypotheses must the researchers have tested 
in order to reach the stated conclusion?
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

b.	Which of the following could have been the value  
of the test statistic for the hypothesis test? Explain 
your reasoning.
	
i. ​t 5 5.00   ​ii. ​t 5 2.65   ​iii. ​t 5 2.33   ​iv. ​t 5 1.47
11.14	 Example 11.1 looked at a study comparing students 
who use Facebook and students who do not use 
Facebook (“Facebook and Academic Performance,” 
Computers in Human Behavior [2010]: 1237–1245). 
In addition to asking the students in the samples 
about GPA, each student was also asked how many 
hours he or she spent studying each day. The two 
samples (141 students who were Facebook users 
and 68 students who were not Facebook users) were 
independently selected from students at a large, 
public Midwestern university. Although the samples 
were not selected at random, they were selected to be 
representative of the two populations.
For the sample of Facebook users, the mean 
number of hours studied per day was 1.47 hours 
and the standard deviation was 0.83 hours. For the 
sample of students who do not use Facebook, the 
mean was 2.76 hours and the standard deviation was 
0.99 hours. Do these sample data provide convinc-
ing evidence that the mean time spent studying for 
Facebook users at this university is less than the 
mean time spent studying by students at the univer-
sity who do not use Facebook? Use a significance 
level of 0.01.
11.15	 The Nielsen Company conducts surveys each year 
about the use of various media, such as television 
and video viewing. A representative sample of adult 
Americans was surveyed in 2010, and the mean 
number of minutes per week spent watching “time-
shifted” ­television (watching television shows that 
were recorded and played back at a later time) for the 
people in this sample was 576 minutes. An indepen-
dently selected representative sample of adults was 
surveyed in 2011, and the mean time spent watching 
time-shifted television per week for this sample was 
646 minutes. Suppose that the sample size in each 
year was 1000 and that the sample standard devia-
tions were 60 minutes for the 2010 sample and 80 
minutes for the 2011 sample. Estimate the difference 
in the mean time spent watching time-shifted televi-
sion in 2010 and the mean time spent in 2011 using 
a 99% confidence interval. Interpret the interval in 
context.
11.16	 Do female college students spend more time than 
male college students watching TV? This was one of 
the questions investigated by the authors of the paper 
“An Ecological Momentary Assessment of the Physical 
Activity and Sedentary Behaviour Patterns of University 
Students” (Heath Education Journal [2010]: 116–125). 
Each student in a random sample of 46 male stu-
dents at a university in England and each student in a 
random sample of 38 female students from the same 
university kept a diary of how he or she spent time 
over a three-week period. 
For the sample of males, the mean time spent 
watching TV per day was 68.2 minutes and the 
standard deviation was 67.5 minutes. For the sample 
of females, the mean time spent watching TV per day 
was 93.5 minutes and the standard deviation was 
89.1 minutes. Is there convincing evidence that the 
mean time female students at this university spend 
watching TV is greater than the mean time for male stu-
dents? Test the appropriate hypotheses using a 5 0.05. 
11.17	A newspaper story headline reads “Gender Plays 
Part in Monkeys’ Toy Choices, Research Finds—Like 
Humans, Male Monkeys Choose Balls and Cars, While 
Females Prefer Dolls and Pots” (Knight Ridder News-
papers, December 8, 2005). The article goes on to 
summarize findings published in the paper “Sex 
Differences in Response to Children’s Toys in Nonhu-
man Primates” (Evolution and Human Behavior [2002]: 
467–​479). Forty-four male monkeys and 44 female 
monkeys were each given a variety of toys, and the 
time spent playing with each toy was recorded. 
The table on the previous page gives means and 
standard deviations (approximate values read from 
graphs in the paper) for the percentage of time 
that a monkey spent playing with a particular toy. 
Table for Exercise 11.17
Percent of Time
Female Monkeys
Male Monkeys
n
Sample  
Mean
Sample  
Standard Deviation
n
Sample Mean
Sample 
Standard 
Deviation
Police Car
44
  8
4
44
18
5
Toy
Doll
44
20
4
44
  9
2
Furry Dog
44
20
5
44
25
5
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
  11.1   Difference in Means with Independent Samples 
●  579
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

580 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
Assume that it is reasonable to regard these two 
samples of 44 monkeys as representative of the 
populations of male monkeys and female monkeys. 
Use a .05 significance level for any hypothesis tests 
that you carry out when answering the various parts 
of this exercise.
a.	 The police car was considered a “masculine toy.” 
Do these data provide convincing evidence that 
the mean percentage of the time spent playing 
with the police car is greater for male monkeys 
than for female monkeys? 
b.	The doll was considered a “feminine toy.” 
Do these data provide convincing evidence that  
the mean percentage of time spent playing with 
the doll is greater for female monkeys than for  
male monkeys? 
c.	 The furry dog was considered a “neutral toy.”  
Do these data provide convincing evidence that  
the mean percentage of time spent playing with 
the furry dog is not the same for male and female 
monkeys? 
d.	Based on the conclusions from the hypothesis 
tests of Parts (a)–​(c), is the quoted newspaper 
story headline a reasonable summary of the find-
ings? Explain.
e.	 Explain why it would be inappropriate to use the 
two-sample t test to decide if there was evidence 
that the mean percentage of time spent playing 
with the police car and the mean percentage of the 
time spent playing with the doll is not the same 
for female monkeys.
11.18	
 The paper “The Observed Effects of Teenage Passen-
gers on the Risky Driving Behavior of Teenage Drivers” 
(Accident Analysis and Prevention [2005]: 973–​982) 
investigated the driving behavior of teenagers by 
observing their vehicles as they left a high school 
parking lot and then again at a site approximately 
1
2 mile from the school. Assume that it is reasonable 
to regard the teen drivers in this study as representa-
tive of the population of teen drivers. Use a .01 level 
of significance for any hypothesis tests.
a.	 Data consistent with summary quantities 
­appearing in the paper are given in the accom-
panying table. The measurements represent 
the difference between the observed vehicle 
speed and the posted speed limit (in miles per 
hour) for a sample of male teenage drivers and 
a sample of female teenage drivers. Do these 
data provide convincing support for the claim 
that, on average, male teenage drivers exceed 
the speed limit by more than do female teenage 
drivers?  ​  ​
Amount by Which Speed  
Limit Was Exceeded
Male Driver
Female Driver
1.3
20.2
1.3
   0.5
0.9
   1.1
2.1
   0.7
0.7
   1.1
1.3
   1.2
  ​ 3
   0.1
1.3
   0.9
0.6
   0.5
2.1
   0.5
b.	Consider the average miles per hour over the 
speed limit for teenage drivers with passengers 
shown in the following table. For purposes of 
this exercise, suppose that each driver-passenger 
combination mean is based on a sample of size 
n 5 40 and that all sample standard deviations are 
equal to .8.
Male Passenger
Female Passenger
Male Driver
5.2
.3
Female Driver
2.3
.6
i.	 Is there sufficient evidence to conclude that 
the average number of miles per hour over 
the speed limit is greater for male drivers with 
male passengers than it is for male drivers with 
female passengers? 
ii.	Is there sufficient evidence to conclude that 
the average number of miles per hour over the 
speed limit is greater for female drivers with 
male passengers than it is for female drivers with 
female passengers? 
iii.	Is there sufficient evidence to conclude that 
the average number of miles per hour over 
the speed limit is smaller for male drivers with 
female passengers than it is for female drivers with 
male passengers? 
c.	 Write a few sentences commenting on the effects 
of gender on teenagers driving with passengers.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.19	Fumonisins are environmental toxins produced by 
a type of mold and have been found in corn and in 
products made from raw corn. The Center for Food 
Safety and Applied Nutrition provided recommen-
dations on allowable fumonisin levels in human 
food and in animal feed based on a study of corn 
meal. The study compared corn meal made from 
partially degermed corn (corn that has had the 
germ, the part of the kernel located at the bottom 
center of the kernel that is used to produce corn 
oil, partially removed) and corn meal made from 
corn that has not been degermed. Specimens of 
corn meal were analyzed and the total fumonisin 
level (ppm) was determined for each specimen. 
Summary statistics for total fumonisin level from 
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration’s web site 
are given here.
x
s
Partially Degermed
  ​.59
1.01
Not Degermed
1.21
1.71
a.	 If the given means and standard deviations had 
been based on a random sample of 10 partially 
degermed specimens and a random sample of 
10 specimens made from corn that was not 
degermed, explain why it would not be appropri-
ate to carry out a two-sample t test to determine 
if there is a significant difference in the mean 
fumonisin level for the two types of corn meal.
b.	Suppose instead that each of the random samples 
had included 50 corn meal specimens. Explain 
why it would now be reasonable to carry out a 
two-sample t test. 
c.	 Assuming that each random sample size was 50, 
carry out a test to determine if there is a signifi-
cant difference in mean fumonisin level for the 
two types of corn meal. Use a significance level 
of .01.
11.20	 A researcher at the Medical College of Virginia con-
ducted a study of 60 randomly selected male soccer 
players and concluded that frequently “heading” 
the ball in soccer lowers players’ IQs (USA Today, 
­August 14, 1995). The soccer players were divided 
into two groups, based on whether they averaged 10 
or more headers per game. 
Mean IQs were reported in the article, but the 
sample sizes and standard deviations were not given. 
Suppose that these values were as given in the ac-
companying table.
n
Sample 
Mean
Sample 
sd
Fewer Than 10 Headers
35
112 
​10
10 or More Headers
25
103
​  ​8
a.	 Do these data support the researcher’s conclusion? 
Test the relevant hypotheses using a 5 .05. 
b.	Can you conclude that heading the ball causes 
lower IQ? 
11.21	Do certain behaviors result in a severe drain on 
energy resources because a great deal of energy is 
expended in comparison to energy intake? The article 
“The Energetic Cost of Courtship and Aggression in a 
Plethodontid Salamander” (Ecology [1983]: 979–​983) 
reported on one of the few studies concerned with 
behavior and energy expenditure. The accompanying 
table gives oxygen consumption (mL/g/hr) for male-
female salamander pairs. 
Behavior
Sample 
Size
Sample 
Mean
Sample 
sd
Noncourting
11
.072
​.0066
Courting
15
.099
.0071
a.	 The pooled t test is a test procedure for testing  
H0: m1 2 m2 5 hypothesized value when it is rea-
sonable to assume that the two population distri-
butions are normal with equal standard deviations 
(s1 5 s2). The test statistic for the pooled t test is 
obtained by replacing both s1 and s2 in the two-
sample t test statistic with sp where
	
sp 5Î
sn1 2 1ds21 1 sn2 2 1ds22
n1 1 n2 2 2
	
When the population distributions are normal 
with equal standard deviations and H0 is true, the 
resulting pooled t statistic has a t distribution with 
df 5 n1 1 n2 2 2. For the reported data, the two 
sample standard deviations are similar. Use the 
pooled t test with a 5 .05 to determine whether 
the mean oxygen consumption for courting pairs 
is higher than the mean oxygen consumption for 
noncourting pairs.
b.	Would the conclusion in Part (a) have been differ-
ent if the two-sample t test had been used rather 
than the pooled t test? 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
  11.1   Difference in Means with Independent Samples 
●  581
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

582 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
Two samples are said to be independent if the selection of the individuals or objects that 
make up one of the samples has no bearing on the selection of individuals or objects in 
the other sample. In some situations, a study with independent samples is not the best 
way to obtain information about a possible difference between two populations. For ex-
ample, suppose that an investigator wants to determine whether regular aerobic exercise 
affects blood pressure. A random sample of people who jog regularly and a second random 
sample of people who do not exercise regularly are selected independently of one another.
The researcher uses the two-sample t test to conclude that a significant difference exists 
between the mean blood pressures for joggers and nonjoggers. But is it reasonable to think 
that the difference in mean blood pressure is the result of jogging? It is known that blood 
pressure is related to both diet and body weight. Maybe the joggers in the sample tend to 
be leaner and adhere to a healthier diet than the nonjoggers. This might account for the 
observed difference. On the basis of this study, the researcher would not be able to rule out 
the possibility that the observed difference in blood pressure is explained by weight differ-
ences between the people in the two samples and that aerobic exercise itself has no effect.
One way to avoid this difficulty is to match subjects by weight. The researcher could find 
pairs of subjects so that the jogger and nonjogger in each pair were similar in weight (al-
though weights for different pairs might vary widely). The factor weight could then be ruled 
out as a possible explanation for an observed difference in mean blood pressure between 
the two groups. Matching the subjects by weight results in two samples for which each 
observation in the first sample is paired in a meaningful way with a particular observation 
in the second sample. Such samples are said to be paired.
Paired data occurs in a number of different ways. Some studies involve using the same 
group of individuals with measurements recorded both before and after some intervening 
treatment. Other studies might use naturally occurring pairs, such as twins or husbands 
and wives, and some construct pairs by matching on factors with effects that might other-
wise make differences (or the lack of them) between the two populations difficult to detect 
(as might weight in the jogging example). Paired samples often provide more information 
than independent samples.
Example 11.5 
Benefits of Ultrasound
  Ultrasound is often used in the treatment of soft tissue injuries. In an experiment to in-
vestigate the effect of an ultrasound and stretch therapy on knee extension, range of motion 
was measured both before and after treatment for a sample of physical therapy patients. A 
subset of the data appearing in the paper “Location of Ultrasound Does Not Enhance Range of 
Motion Benefits of Ultrasound and Stretch Treatment” (University of Virginia Thesis, Trae Tashiro, 
2003) is given in the accompanying table.
Range of Motion
Subject
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Pre-treatment
31
53
45
57
50
43
32
Post-treatment
32
59
46
64
49
45
40
We can regard the data as consisting of two samples—a sample of knee range of motion 
measurements for physical therapy patients prior to treatment and a sample of physical 
therapy patients after ultrasound and stretch treatment. The samples are paired rather 
than independent because both samples are composed of observations on the same seven 
patients.
Is there evidence that the ultrasound and stretch treatment increases range of motion? We 
can use m1 to denote the mean range of motion for the population of all physical therapy 
Understand the context ❭
● Data set available online
 11.2  
Inferences Concerning the Difference Between Two 
Population or Treatment Means Using Paired Samples
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.2  Difference in Means with Paired Samples  
●  583
patients prior to treatment. Similarly, m2 denotes the mean range of motion for physical 
therapy patients after ultrasound and stretch treatment. Hypotheses of interest might be
H0:  ​m1 2 m2 5 0  ​  ​  ​  ​versus  ​  ​  ​  ​Ha:  ​m1 2 m2 , 0
The null hypothesis indicates that the mean range of motion before treatment and the 
mean after treatment are equal. The alternative hypothesis states that the mean range of 
motion after treatment is greater than the mean before treatment. 
Notice that in six of the seven data pairs, the range of motion measurement is higher 
after treatment than before treatment. Intuitively, this suggests that the population means 
may not be equal.
Disregarding the paired nature of the samples results in a loss of information. Both the 
pre-treatment and post-treatment range of motion measurements vary from one patient to 
another. It is this variability that may make the difference difficult to detect when the two-
sample t test is used. If we were to incorrectly use the two-sample t test for independent 
samples with the given data, the resulting t test statistic value would be 20.61. 
This value would not lead to rejection of the null hypothesis even at level of significance 
.10. This result might surprise you at first, but remember that this test procedure ignores 
the information about how the samples are paired. Two plots of the data are given in 
Figure 11.1. The first plot (Figure 11.1(a)) ignores the pairing, and the two samples look 
quite similar. The plot in which pairs are identified (Figure 11.1(b)) does suggest a differ-
ence, because for six of the seven pairs the post-treatment observation is greater than the 
pre-treatment observation.
	
■
Example 11.5 suggests that the methods of inference developed for independent samples 
are not adequate for dealing with paired samples. When sample observations from the first 
population are paired in some meaningful way with sample observations from the second 
population, inferences should be based on the differences between the two observations 
within each sample pair. The n sample differences can then be regarded as having been 
selected from a large population of differences. 
For example, in Example 11.5, we can think of the seven (pre-treatment 2 ​post-
treatment) differences as having been selected from an entire population of differences.
Consider the following notation:
md 5 mean value of the difference population
and
sd 5 standard deviation of the difference population
The relationship between the two individual population means and the mean difference is
md 5 m1 2 m2
This means that when the samples are paired, inferences about m1 2 m2 are equivalent to 
inferences about md. Since inferences about md can be based on the n observed sample dif-
ferences, the original two-sample problem becomes a familiar one-sample problem.
30
Post-treatment
Pre-treatment
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Data
30
Post-treatment
Pre-treatment
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Data
(b)
(a)
Figure  11.1
Two plots of the paired data from  
Example11.5:  
(a) pairing ignored;  
(b) pairs identified.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

584 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
Paired t Test
To compare two population or treatment means when the samples are paired, we first 
translate the hypotheses of interest from ones about the value of m1 2 m2 to equivalent 
hypotheses involving md:
	
	
Equivalent Hypothesis 
Hypothesis	
When Samples Are Paired
H0:  ​m1 2 m2 5 hypothesized value	
H0:  ​md 5 hypothesized value
Ha:  ​m1 2 m2 . hypothesized value	
Ha:  ​md . hypothesized value
Ha:  ​m1 2 m2 , hypothesized value	
Ha:  ​md , hypothesized value
Ha:  ​m1 2 m2 Þ hypothesized value	
Ha:  ​md Þ hypothesized value
Sample differences (Sample 1 value 2 Sample 2 value) are then computed and used as 
the basis for testing hypotheses about md. When the number of differences is large or when 
it is reasonable to assume that the population of differences is approximately normal, the 
one-sample t test based on the differences is the recommended test procedure. In general, 
if each of the two individual populations is normal, the population of differences is also 
normal. A normal probability plot or boxplot of the differences can be used to decide if the 
assumption of normality is reasonable.
Example 11.6 
Improve Memory  
by Playing Chess?
 Can taking chess lessons and playing chess daily im-
prove memory? The online article “The USA Junior Chess 
Olympics Research: Developing Memory and Verbal Reason-
ing” (New Horizons for Learning, April 2001; available at www 
.newhorizons.org) described a study in which sixth-grade 
students who had not previously played chess participated in a program in which they 
took chess lessons and played chess daily for 9 months. Each student took a memory test 
(the Test of Cognitive Skills) before starting the chess program and again at the end of the 
9-month period. Data (read from a graph in the article) and computed differences are given 
in the accompanying table.
 Data set available online
Null hypothesis:    H0:  md 5 hypothesized value
Test statistic:    t 5 xd 2 hypothesized value
sd
Ïn
 
where n is the number of sample differences and xd and sd are the mean and standard deviation of the sample 
differences. This test is based on df 5 n 2 1.
Alternative hypothesis:	
P-value:
Ha:  md . hypothesized value	
Area under the appropriate t curve to the right of the calculated t
Ha:  md , hypothesized value	
Area under the appropriate t curve to the left of the calculated t
Ha:  md Þ hypothesized value	
(1) 2(area to the right of t) if t is positive, or 	  
(2) 2(area to the left of t) if t is negative
Assumptions:	
1.  The samples are paired.
	 	
2.  The n sample differences can be viewed as a random sample from a population of differences.
	 	
3.  The number of sample differences is large (generally at least 30) or the population distribution 
of differences is approximately normal.
Summary of the Paired t Test for Comparing Two Population or ­Treatment Means
Ryan McVay/PhotoDisc/Getty Images
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.2  Difference in Means with Paired Samples   ●  585
The author of the article proposed using these data to test the theory that students who 
participated in the chess program tend to achieve higher memory scores after comple-
tion of the program. We can consider the pre-test scores as a sample of scores from the 
population of sixth-grade students who have not participated in the chess program and 
the post-test scores as a sample of scores from the population of sixth-grade students 
who have completed the chess training program. The samples were not independently 
chosen, because each sample is composed of the same 12 students.
Memory Test Score
Student
Pre-test
Post-test
Difference
  ​1
510
850
2340
  ​2
610
790
2180
  ​3
640
850
2210
  ​4
675
775
2100
  ​5
600
700
2100
  ​6
550
775
2225
  ​7
610
700
  ​290
  ​8
625
850
2225
  ​9
450
690
2240
10
720
775
  ​255
11
575
540
  ​  ​ 35
12
675
680
  ​  ​25
For this example,
m1 5 mean memory score for sixth-graders with no chess training
m2 5 mean memory score for sixth-graders after chess training
and
md 5 m1 2 m2 5 mean memory score difference between students with no chess training 
and students who have completed chess training
The question of interest can be answered by testing the hypothesis
H0:  ​md 5 0  ​  ​  ​  ​versus  ​  ​  ​  ​Ha:  md , 0
Using the 12 differences, we compute
	
odiff 5 21735 osdiff d2 5 383,325
	
 xd 5 odiff
n
5 21735
12
5 2144.58
	
s2d 5
osdiffd2 2 so diffd2
n
n 2 1
5
383,325 2 s21735d2
12
11
5 12,042.99
	
sd 5 Ïs2d 5 109.74
We now use the paired t test with a significance level of .05 to carry out the hypothesis test.
1.	 md 5 mean memory score difference between students with no chess training and 
students with chess training
2.	 H0:  ​md 5 0
3.	 Ha:  ​md , 0
4.	 Significance level: ​a 5 .05
5.	 Test statistic:  ​t 5 xd 2 hypothesized value
sd
Ïn
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

586 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
6.	 Assumptions:  ​Although the sample of 12 sixth-graders was not a random 
sample, the author believed that it was reasonable to view the 12 sample 
differences as a random sample of all such differences. A boxplot of the dif-
ferences is approximately symmetric and does not show any outliers, so the 
assumption of normality is not unreasonable and we will proceed with the 
paired t test.
7.	 Calculation:  ​t 5 2144.6 2 0
109.74
Ï12
5 24.56
8.	 P-value:  ​This is a lower-tailed test, so the P-value is the area to the left of the 
computed t value. The appropriate df for this test is df 5 12 2 1 5 11. From the 
11-df column of Appendix Table 4, we find that P-value , .001 because the area 
to the left of 24.0 is .001 and the test statistic (24.56) is even farther out in the 
lower tail.
9.	 Conclusion:  ​Because P-value # a, we reject H0. The data support the theory that  
the mean memory score is higher for sixth-graders after completion of the chess 
training than the mean score before training.
■
Using the two-sample t test (for independent samples) for the data in Example 11.6 
would have been incorrect, because the samples are not independent. Inappropriate use 
of the two-sample t test would have resulted in a computed test statistic value of 24.25. 
The conclusion would still be to reject the hypothesis of equal mean memory scores in this 
particular example, but this is not always the case.
Example 11.7 
Charitable Chimps
● The authors of the paper “Chimpanzees Are Indifferent to the Welfare of Unrelated Group 
Members” (Nature [2005]: 1357–​1359) concluded that “chimpanzees do not take advantage 
of opportunities to deliver benefits to individuals at no cost to themselves.” This conclusion 
was based on data from an experiment in which a sample of chimpanzees was trained to 
use an apparatus that would deliver food just to the subject chimpanzee when one lever 
was pushed and would deliver food to both the subject chimpanzee and another chimpan-
zee in an adjoining cage when another lever was pushed. After training, the chimps were 
observed when there was no chimp in the adjoining cage and when there was another 
chimp in the adjoining cage.
The researchers hypothesized that if chimpanzees were motivated by the welfare of 
others, they would choose the option that provided food to both chimpanzees more often 
when there was a chimpanzee in the adjoining cage. Data on the number of times the “feed 
both” option was chosen out of 36 opportunities (approximate values read from a graph in 
the paper) are given in the accompanying table.
Number of Times “Feed Both”  
Option Was Chosen
Chimp
No Chimp in  
Adjoining Cage
Chimp in  
Adjoining Cage
1
21
23
2
22
22
3
23
21
4
21
23
5
18
19
6
16
19
7
19
19
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
 Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.2  Difference in Means with Paired Samples  
●  587
Most statistical software packages will perform a paired t test, and we will use Minitab 
to carry out a test to determine if there is convincing evidence that the mean number of 
times the “feed both” option is selected is higher when another chimpanzee is present in 
the adjoining cage than when the subject chimpanzee is alone.
1.	 md 5 difference between mean number of “feed both” selections for chimpanzees 
who are alone and for chimpanzees who have company in the adjoining cage
2.	 H0:  ​md 5 0
3.	 Ha:  ​md , 0
4.	 Significance level:  ​a 5 .05
5.	 Test statistic:  ​t 5 xd 2 hypothesized value
sd
Ïn
6.	 Assumptions: ​Although the chimpanzees in this study were not randomly 
selected, the authors considered them to be representative of the population of 
chimpanzees. A boxplot of the differences is approximately symmetric and does 
not show any outliers, so the assumption of approximate normality is reasonable 
and we will proceed with the paired t test.
7.	 Calculation:  ​From the given Minitab output, t 5 21.35.
Paired T-Test and CI: Alone, Companion
Paired T for Alone - Companion
N
Mean
StDev
SE Mean
Alone
7
20.0000
2.4495
0.9258
Companion
7
20.8571
1.8645
0.7047
Difference
7
20.857143
1.676163
0.633530
95% CI for mean difference: (22.407335, 0.693050)
T-Test of mean difference 5 0 (vs not 5 0): T-Value 5 21.35    ​P-Value 5 0.225
8.	 P-value:  ​From the Minitab output, P-value 5 .225.
9.	 Conclusion:  ​Since P-value . a, H0 is not rejected. The data do not provide  
evidence that the mean number of times that the “feed both” option is chosen  
is greater when there is a chimpanzee in the adjoining cage. This is the basis  
for the statement quoted at the beginning of this example.
■
Notice that the numerators xd and x1 2 x2 of the paired t and the two-sample t test statis-
tics are always equal. The difference lies in the denominator. The variability in differences 
is usually smaller than the variability in each sample separately (because measurements in 
a pair tend to be similar). As a result, the value of the paired t statistic is usually larger in 
magnitude than the value of the two-sample t statistic. Pairing typically reduces variability 
that might make small but nevertheless significant differences difficult to detect.
A Confidence Interval
The one-sample t confidence interval for m given in Chapter 9 is easily adapted to obtain 
an interval estimate for md.
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
When
1.	 the samples are paired.
2.	 the n sample differences can be viewed as a random sample from a popula-
tion of differences. 
Paired t Confidence Interval for md
continued
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

588 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
Example 11.8 
Benefits of Ultrasound Revisited
 Let’s use the data from Example 11.5 to estimate the difference in mean range of motion 
prior to treatment and the mean range of motion after ultrasound and stretch treatment 
for physical therapy patients. The data and the computed differences are shown in the 
accompanying table.
Range of Motion
Subject
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Pre-treatment
31
53
45
57
50
43
32
Post-treatment
32
59
46
64
49
45
40
Difference
21
26
21
27
    1
22
28
We will use these data to estimate the mean change in range of motion using a 95% con-
fidence interval, assuming that the seven patients participating in this study can be consid-
ered as representative of physical therapy patients. The accompanying boxplot of the seven 
sample differences is not inconsistent with a difference population that is approximately 
normal, so the paired t confidence interval is appropriate.
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
The mean and standard deviation computed using the seven sample differences are 23.43 
and 3.51, respectively. The t critical value for df 5 6 and a 95% confidence level is 2.45, 
and so the confidence interval is
xd 6 st critical valued ? sd
Ïn 5 23.43 6 s2.45d ? 3.51
Ï7
5 23.43 6 3.25
5 s26.68, 20.18d
Based on the sample data, we can be 95% confident that the difference in mean range of 
motion is between 26.68 and 20.18. This means that we are 95% confident that the mean 
increase in range of motion after ultrasound and stretch therapy is somewhere between 
0.18 and 6.68.
Minitab output is shown on the next page. Minitab carries a bit more decimal accuracy, 
and reports a 95% confidence interval of (26.67025, 20.18690).
Do the work ❭
interpret the results ❭
3.	 the number of sample differences is large (generally at least 30) or the popula-
tion distribution of differences is approximately normal, 
the paired t conﬁdence interval for md is 
xd  6 st critical valued ?
sd
Ïn
For a speciﬁed conﬁdence level, the (n 2 1) df row of Appendix Table 3 gives 
the appropriate t critical values.
 Data set available online
0
22
24
28
26
Step-by-step technology  
instructions available  
online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.2  Difference in Means with Paired Samples  
●  589
Paired T-Test and CI: Pre, Post
Paired T for Pre – Post
N
Mean
StDev
SE Mean
Pre
7
44.4286
9.9976
3.7787
Post
7
47.8571
10.8847
4.1140
Difference
7
23.42857
3.50510
1.32480
95% CI for mean difference: (26.67025, 20.18690)
T-Test of mean difference 5 0 (vs not 5 0): T-Value 5 22.59    ​P-Value 5 0.041
■
When two populations must be compared to draw a conclusion on the basis of sample 
data, a researcher might choose to use independent samples or paired samples. In many 
situations, paired data provide a more effective comparison by screening out the effects of 
extraneous variables that might make differences between the two populations difficult to 
detect or that might suggest a difference when none exists.
EXERCISES 11.22 - 11.36
11.22	 Suppose that you were interested in investigating the 
effect of a drug that is to be used in the treatment of 
patients who have glaucoma in both eyes. A com-
parison between the mean reduction in eye pressure 
for this drug and for a standard treatment is desired. 
Both treatments are applied directly to the eye.
a.	 Describe how you would go about collecting  
data for your investigation.
b.	Does your method result in paired data?
c.	 Can you think of a reasonable method of collect-
ing data that would not result in paired samples? 
Would such an experiment be as informative as a 
paired experiment? Comment.
11.23	Head movement evaluations are important because 
disabled individuals may be able to operate com-
munications aids using head motion. The paper 
“Constancy of Head Turning Recorded in Healthy Young 
Humans” (J. of Biomedical Engineering [2008]: 428–436)
reported the accompanying data on neck rotation 
(in degrees) for 14 subjects both in the clockwise 
direction (CL) and in the counterclockwise direction 
(CO). For purposes of this exercise, you can assume 
that the 14 subjects are representative of the popula-
tion of adult Americans. Based on these data, is it 
reasonable to conclude that mean neck rotation is 
greater in the clockwise direction than in the coun-
terclockwise direction? Carry out a hypothesis test 
using a significance level of 0.01. (Hint: See Exam-
ples 11.6 and 11.7.) 
​
11.24	 ● ▼ To determine if chocolate milk was as effective 
as other carbohydrate replacement drinks, nine male 
cyclists performed an intense workout followed by a 
drink and a rest period. At the end of the rest period, 
each cyclist performed an endurance trial in which he 
exercised until exhausted and time to exhaustion was 
measured. Each cyclist completed the entire regimen 
on two different days. On one day the drink provided 
was chocolate milk and on the other day the drink 
provided was a carbohydrate replacement drink. 
Data consistent with summary quantities appear-
ing in the paper “The Efficacy of Chocolate Milk as a 
Recovery Aid” (Medicine and Science in Sports and Exer-
cise [2004]: S126) appear in the table at the ­bottom 
of the page. Is there evidence that the mean time 
to exhaustion is greater after chocolate milk than 
after carbohydrate replacement drink? Use a 
significance level of .05. (Hint: See Examples 11.6 
and 11.7.) 
​
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Time to Exhaustion (minutes)
Cyclist
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Chocolate Milk
24.85
50.09
38.30
26.11
36.54
26.14
36.13
47.35
35.08
Carbohydrate Replacement
10.02
29.96
37.40
15.52
  9.11
21.58
31.23
22.04
17.02
Table for Exercise 11.24
Subject: 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
CL:
57.9 35.7 54.5 56.8 51.1 70.8 77.3 51.6 54.7 63.6 59.2 59.2 55.8 38.5
CO:
44.2 52.1 60.2 52.7 47.2 65.6 71.4 48.8 53.1 66.3 59.8 47.5 64.5 34.5
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

590 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
11.25	● The humorous paper “Will Humans Swim Faster 
or Slower in Syrup?” (American Institute of Chemical 
Engineers Journal [2004]: 2646–​2647) investigates the 
fluid mechanics of swimming. Twenty swimmers each 
swam a specified distance in a water-filled pool and 
in a pool in which the water was thickened with food 
grade guar gum to create a syrup-like consistency. 
Velocity, in meters per second, was recorded. Values 
estimated from a graph that appeared in the paper are 
given. 
The authors of the paper concluded that swim-
ming in guar syrup does not change swimming 
speed. Are the given data consistent with this con-
clusion? Carry out a hypothesis test using a .01 sig-
nificance level. ​
Velocity (m/s)
Swimmer
Water
Guar Syrup
  ​1
0.90
0.92
  ​2
0.92
0.96
  ​3
1.00
0.95
  ​4
1.10
1.13
  ​5
1.20
1.22
  ​6
1.25
1.20
  ​7
1.25
1.26
  ​8
1.30
1.30
  ​9
1.35
1.34
10
1.40
1.41
11
1.40
1.44
12
1.50
1.52
13
1.65
1.58
14
1.70
1.70
15
1.75
1.80
16
1.80
1.76
17
1.80
1.84
18
1.85
1.89
19
1.90
1.88
20
1.95
1.95
11.26	 ● The study described in the paper “Marketing Actions 
Can Modulate Neural Representation of Experienced 
Pleasantness” (Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Science [2008]: 1050–1054) investigated whether price 
affects people’s judgment. Twenty people each tasted 
six cabernet sauvignon wines and rated how they 
liked them on a scale of 1 to 6. Prior to tasting each 
wine, participants were told the price of the wine. Of 
the six wines tasted, two were actually the same wine, 
but for one tasting the participant was told that the 
wine cost $10 per bottle and for the other tasting the 
participant was told that the wine cost $90 per bottle. 
The participants were randomly assigned either to 
taste the $90 wine first and the $10 wine second, or 
the $10 wine first and the $90 wine second. 
Differences were calculated by subtracting the rat-
ing for the tasting in which the participant thought 
the wine cost $10 from the rating for the tasting in 
which the participant thought the wine cost $90. The 
differences that follow are consistent with summary 
quantities given in the paper.
Difference ($90 2 $10)
2  4  1  2  1  0  0  3  0  2  1  3  3  1  4  1  2  2  1  21
Carry out a hypothesis test to determine if the 
mean rating assigned to the wine when the cost is 
described as $90 is greater than the mean rating as-
signed to the wine when the cost is described as $10. 
Use ​a 5 ​.01.
11.27	The article “A Shovel with a Perforated Blade Reduces 
Energy Expenditure Required for Digging Wet Clay” 
(Human Factors, 2010: 492–502) reported on a study in 
which each of 13 workers was provided with both a 
conventional shovel and a shovel whose blade was 
perforated with small holes. The authors of the cited 
article provided the following data on energy expen-
diture [(kcal/kg(subject)/lb(clay]:
Worker:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Conventional: .0011 .0014 .0018 .0022 .0010 .0016 .0028
Perforated:
.0011 .0010 .0019 .0013 .0011 .0017 .0024
Worker:
8
9
10
11
12
13
Conventional:
.0020 .0015 .0014 .0023 .0017 .0020
Perforated:
.0020 .0013 .0013 .0017 .0015 .0013
Do these data provide convincing evidence that the 
mean energy expenditure using the conventional shov-
el exceeds that using the perforated shovel? Test the 
relevant hypotheses using a significance level of 0.05.
11.28	 The paper “Less Air Pollution Leads to Rapid Reduction 
of Airway Inflammation and Improved Airway Function 
in Asthmatic Children” (Pediatrics [2009]: 1051–1058) 
describes a study in which children with mild asthma 
who live in a polluted urban environment were relo-
cated to a less polluted rural environment for 7 days. 
Various measures of respiratory function were recorded 
first in the urban environment and then again after 
7 days in the rural environment. The accompanying 
graphs show the urban and rural values for three of 
these measures: nasal eosinophils, exhaled FENO con-
centration, and peak expiratory flow (PEF). Urban and 
rural values for the same child are connected by a line. 
The authors of the paper used paired t tests to 
determine that there was a significant difference in  
the urban and rural means for each of these three 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.2  Difference in Means with Paired Samples   ●  591
measures. One of these tests resulted in a P-value less 
than .001, one resulted in a P-value between .001 and 
.01, and one resulted in a P-value between .01 and .05.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Urban
Rural
10
Eosinophils (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Urban
Rural
140
FENO (ppb)
0
100
200
300
400
500
Urban
Rural
600
PEF (L/min)
a.	 Which measure (Eosinophils, FENO, or PEF) do 
you think resulted in a test with the P-value that 
was less than .001? Explain your reasoning.
b.	Which measure (Eosinophils, FENO, or PEF) do 
you think resulted in the test with the largest  
P-value? Explain your reasoning.
11.29	The paper “The Truth About Lying in Online Dating Pro-
files” (Proceedings, Computer-Human Interactions [2007]: 
1–4) describes an investigation in which 40 men 
and 40 women with online dating profiles agreed to 
participate in a study. Each participant’s height (in 
inches) was measured and the actual height was com-
pared to the height given in that person’s online pro-
file. The differences between the online profile height 
and the actual height (profile 2 actual) were used to 
compute the values in the accompanying table.
Men
Women
xd 5 0.57
xd 5 0.03
 sd 5 0.81
 sd 5 0.75
  n ​5 ​40
 n ​5 ​40
For purposes of this exercise, assume it is reason-
able to regard the two samples in this study as being 
representative of male online daters and female online 
daters. (Although the authors of the paper believed 
that their samples were representative of these 
populations, participants were volunteers recruited 
through newspaper advertisements, so we should be a 
bit hesitant to generalize results to all online daters.)
a.	 Use the paired t test to determine if there is 
convincing evidence that, on average, male online 
daters overstate their height in online dating pro-
files. Use a 5 ​.05. 
b.	Construct and interpret a 95% confidence interval for 
the difference between the mean online dating profile 
height and mean actual height for female online 
daters. (Hint: See Example 11.8.) 
c.	 Use the two-sample t test of Section 11.1 to test  
H0: mm 2 mf 5 0 versus Ha: mm 2 mf . 0, where 
mm is the mean height difference (profile 2 actual) 
for male online daters and mf is the mean height 
difference (profile 2 actual) for female online daters.
d.	Explain why a paired t test was used in Part (a) 
but a two-sample t test was used in Part (c).
11.30	 The press release titled “Keeping Score When It counts: 
Graduation Rates and Academic Progress Rates” (The Insti-
tute for Diversity and Ethics in Sport, March 16, 2009) gave 
the 2009 graduation rates for African-American basketball 
players and for white basketball players at every NCAA 
Division I university with a basketball program. Explain 
why it is not necessary to use a paired t test to determine 
if the mean graduation rate for African-American bas-
ketball players differs from the mean graduation rate for 
white basketball players for Division I schools.
11.31	  Breast feeding sometimes results in a temporary 
loss of bone mass as calcium is depleted in the moth-
er’s body to provide for milk production. The paper 
“Bone Mass Is Recovered from Lactation to Postwean-
ing in Adolescent Mothers with Low Calcium Intakes” 
(American Journal of Clinical Nutrition [2004]: 1322–​1326) 
gave the accompanying data on total body bone min-
eral content (g) for a sample of mothers both during 
breast feeding (B) and in the postweaning period (P). 
Do the data suggest that true average total body bone 
mineral content during postweaning is greater than 
that during breast feeding by more than 25 g? State 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

592 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
and test the appropriate hypotheses using a signifi-
cance level of .05.​
Subject
1
2
3
4
5
6
B
1928
2549
2825
1924
1628
2175
P
2126
2885
2895
1942
1750
2184
Subject
7
8
9
10
B
2114
2621
1843
2541
P
2164
2626
2006
2627
11.32	
 The paper “Quantitative Assessment of Glenohumeral 
Translation in Baseball Players” (The American Journal of 
Sports Medicine [2004]: 1711–​1715) considered various 
aspects of shoulder motion for a sample of pitchers 
and another sample of position players. The authors 
kindly supplied the data shown below on anteropos-
terior translation (mm), a measure of the extent of 
anterior and posterior motion, both for the dominant 
arm and the nondominant arm.
a.	 Estimate the true average difference in translation 
between dominant and nondominant arms for 
pitchers using a 95% confidence interval. ​
b.	Estimate the true average difference in translation 
between dominant and nondominant arms for 
position players using a 95% confidence interval. 
c.	 The authors asserted that pitchers have greater 
difference in mean anteroposterior translation of 
their shoulders than do position players. Do you 
agree? Explain.
11.33	 Two proposed computer mouse designs were com-
pared by recording wrist extension in degrees for 24 
people who each used both mouse types (“Comparative 
Study of Two Computer Mouse Designs,” Cornell Human 
Factors Laboratory Technical Report RP7992). The differ-
ence in wrist extension was computed by subtracting 
extension for mouse type B from the wrist extension 
for mouse type A for each student. The mean differ-
ence was reported to be 8.82 degrees. Assume that 
it is reasonable to regard this sample of 24 people as 
representative of the population of computer users.
a.	 Suppose that the standard deviation of the dif-
ferences was 10 degrees. Is there convincing 
evidence that the mean wrist extension for mouse 
type A is greater than for mouse type B? Use a .05 
significance level. 
b.	Suppose that the standard deviation of the differ-
ences was 26 degrees. Is there convincing evidence 
that the mean wrist extension for mouse type A is 
greater than for mouse type B? Use a .05 signifi-
cance level. 
c.	 Briefly explain why different conclusions were 
reached in the hypothesis tests of Parts (a) and (b).
11.34	 The authors of the paper “Statistical Methods for 
Assessing Agreement Between Two Methods of Clinical 
Measurement” (International Journal of Nursing Studies 
[2010]: 931–936) compared two different instruments 
for measuring a person’s capacity for breathing out air. 
(This measurement is helpful in diagnosing various 
Data for Exercise 11.32
Player
Position Player 
Dominant Arm
Position Player 
Nondominant Arm
Pitcher
Pitcher  
Dominant Arm
Pitcher  
Nondominant Arm
  1
30.31
32.54
  1
27.63
24.33
  2
44.86
40.95
  2
30.57
26.36
  3
22.09
23.48
  3
32.62
30.62
  4
31.26
31.11
  4
39.79
33.74
  5
28.07
28.75
  5
28.50
29.84
  6
31.93
29.32
  6
26.70
26.71
  7
34.68
34.79
  7
30.34
26.45
  8
29.10
28.87
  8
28.69
21.49
  9
25.51
27.59
  9
31.19
20.82
10
22.49
21.01
10
36.00
21.75
11
28.74
30.31
11
31.58
28.32
12
27.89
27.92
12
32.55
27.22
13
28.48
27.85
13
29.56
28.86
14
25.60
24.95
14
28.64
28.58
15
20.21
21.59
15
28.58
27.15
16
33.77
32.48
16
31.99
29.46
17
32.59
32.48
17
27.16
21.26
18
32.60
31.61
19
29.30
27.46
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.2  Difference in Means with Paired Samples   ●  593
lung disorders.) The two instruments considered were 
a Wright peak flow meter and a mini-Wright peak flow 
meter. Seventeen people participated in the study, and 
for each person air flow was measured once using the 
Wright meter and once using the mini-Wright meter. 
The Wright meter is thought to provide a better 
measure of air flow, but the mini-Wright meter is easier 
to transport and to use. Use of the mini-Wright meter 
could be recommended as long as there is not convinc-
ing evidence that the mean reading for the mini-Wright 
meter is different from the mean reading for Wright 
meter. For purposes of this exercise, you can assume 
that it is reasonable to consider the 17 people who par-
ticipated in this study as representative of the popula-
tion of interest.
Use the given data to determine if there is convinc-
ing evidence that the mean reading differs for the two 
instruments. 
Subject
Mini Wright 
Meter
Wright  
Meter
  1
512
494
  2
430
395
  3
520
516
  4
428
434
  5
500
476
  6
600
557
  7
364
413
  8
380
442
  9
658
650
10
445
433
11
432
417
12
626
656
13
260
267
14
477
478
15
259
178
16
350
423
17
451
427
 
11.35	Babies born extremely prematurely run the risk of 
various neurological problems and tend to have 
lower IQ and verbal ability scores than babies that 
are not premature. The article “Premature Babies 
May Recover Intelligence, Study Says” (San Luis Obispo 
Tribune, February 12, 2003) summarized the results 
of medical research that suggests that the deficit 
observed at an early age may decrease as children 
age. Children who were born prematurely were given 
a test of verbal ability at age 3 and again at age 8. The 
test is scaled so that a score of 100 would be average 
for a normal-birth-weight child. Data that are consis-
tent with summary quantities given in the paper for 
50 children who were born prematurely were used 
to generate the accompanying Minitab output, where 
Age3 represents the verbal ability score at age 3 and 
Age8 represents the verbal ability score at age 8. Use 
the Minitab output to carry out a test to determine 
if there is evidence that the mean verbal ability score 
for children born prematurely increases between age 
3 and age 8. You may assume that it is reasonable to 
regard the sample of 50 children as a random sample 
from the population of all children born prematurely.
Paired T-Test and CI: Age8, Age3
Paired T for Age8 – Age3
N
Mean
StDev
SE Mean
Age8
50
97.21
16.97
2.40
Age3
50
87.30
13.84
1.96
Difference
50
9.91
22.11
3.13
T-Test of mean difference 5 0 (vs . 0): T-Value 5 3.17  P-Value 5 0.001
11.36	 The authors of the paper “Ultrasound Techniques 
Applied to Body Fat Measurement in Male and Female 
Athletes” (Journal of Athletic Training [2009]: 142–147) 
compared two different methods for measuring body 
fat percentage. One method uses ultrasound, and the 
other method uses X-ray technology. Body fat per-
centages using each of these methods for 16 athletes 
(a subset of the data given in a graph that appeared in 
the paper) are given in the accompanying table. For 
purposes of this exercise, you can assume that the 16 
athletes who participated in this study are representa-
tive of the population of athletes. Use these data to 
estimate the difference in mean body fat percentage 
measurement for the two methods. Use a confidence 
level of 95% and interpret the interval in context.
Athlete
X-ray
Ultrasound
  1
  5.00
  4.75
  2
  7.00
  3.75
  3
  9.25
  9.00
  4
  12.00
11.75
  5
  17.25
17.00
  6
  29.50
27.50
  7
  5.50
  6.50
  8
  6.00
  6.75
  9
  8.00
  8.75
10
  8.50
  9.50
11
  9.25
  9.50
12
  11.00
12.00
13
  12.00
12.25
14
  14.00
15.50
15
  17.00
18.00
16
  18.00
18.25
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

594 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
Large-sample methods for estimating and testing hypotheses about a single population propor-
tion were presented in Chapters 9 and 10. The symbol p was used to represent the proportion 
of individuals in the population who possess some characteristic (the successes). Inferences 
about the value of p were based on p⁄, the corresponding sample proportion of successes.
Many investigations are carried out to compare the proportion of successes in one popula-
tion (or resulting from one treatment) to the proportion of successes in a second population 
(or from a second treatment). As was the case for means, we use the subscripts 1 and 2 to 
distinguish between the two population proportions, sample sizes, and sample proportions.
 11.3  
Large-Sample Inferences Concerning the Difference 
Between Two Population or Treatment Proportions
When comparing two populations or treatments on the basis of “success” propor-
tions, we use p1 2 p2, the difference between the two proportions. Because p⁄
1 provides 
an estimate of p1 and p⁄
2 provides an estimate of p2, the obvious choice for an estimate of  
p1 2 p2 is p⁄
1 2 p⁄
2.
Because p⁄
1 and p⁄
2 each vary in value from sample to sample, so does the difference  
p⁄
1 2 p⁄
2. For example, a first sample from each of two populations might yield
p⁄
1 5 .69  ​  ​  ​  ​p⁄
2 5 .70  ​  ​  ​  p⁄
1 2 p⁄
2 5 .01
A second sample from each might result in
p⁄
1 5 .79  ​  ​  ​  ​p⁄
2 5 .67  ​  ​  ​  ​p⁄
1 2 p⁄
2 5 .12
and so on. Because the statistic p⁄
1 2 p⁄
2 is the basis for drawing inferences about  
p1 2 p2, we need to know something about its behavior.
Population or Treatment 1:  Proportion of “successes” 5 p1
Population or Treatment 2:  Proportion of “successes” 5 p2
Sample  
Size
Proportion  
of Successes
Sample from Population or Treatment 1
n1
p⁄
1 
Sample from Population or Treatment 2
n2
p⁄
2
Notation
For independently selected random samples, the following properties hold:
1.	 p⁄
1 2p⁄
2 5 p1 2 p2
This means that the sampling distribution of p⁄
1 2 p⁄
2 is centered at  
p1 2 p2, so p⁄
1 2 p⁄
2 is an unbiased statistic for estimating p1 2 p2.
	2.	 2
p⁄
1 2p⁄
2 5 2p⁄
1 1 2p⁄
2 5 p1s1 2 p1d
n1
1 p2s1 2 p2d
n2
	 	 and
p⁄
1 2p⁄
2 5Î
p1s1 2 p1d
n1
1 p2s1 2 p2d
n2
	3.	 If both n1 and n2 are large (if n1p1 $ 10, n1(1 2 p1) $ 10, n2p2 $ 10, and 
n2(1 2 p2) $ 10), then p⁄
1 and p⁄
2 each have a sampling distribution that is 
approximately normal. The difference p⁄
1 2 p⁄
2 also has a sampling distri-
bution that is approximately normal.
Properties of the Sampling Distribution of p⁄
1 2 p⁄
2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 11.3   Large-Sample Inferences Concerning the Difference Between Two Population or Treatment Proportions 
●  595
The properties in the box imply that when the samples are independently selected and 
when both sample sizes are large, the statistic
z 5
p⁄
1 2 p⁄
2 2 sp1 2 p2d
Î
p1s1 2 p1d
n1
1
p2s1 2 p2d
n2
has a distribution that is approximately standard normal.
A Large-Sample Test Procedure
Comparisons of p1 and p2 are often based on large, independently selected samples, and 
we restrict ourselves to this case. The most general null hypothesis of interest has the form
H0:  ​p1 2 p2 5 hypothesized value
However, when the hypothesized value is something other than 0, the appropriate  
test statistic differs somewhat from the test statistic used for H0: p1 2 p2 5 0. Because  
H0: p1 2 p2 5 0 is almost always the relevant null hypothesis in applied problems, we only 
consider this case. The test procedures we have seen so far control the probability of a Type 
I error at the desired level a. This requires using a test statistic with a sampling distribu-
tion that is known when H0 is true. That is, the test statistic should be developed under 
the assumption that p1 5 p2 (as specified by the null hypothesis p1 2 p2 5 0). In this case, 
p is used to denote the common value of the two population proportions. The z statistic 
obtained by standardizing p⁄
1 2 p⁄
2 then simplifies to
z 5
p⁄
1 2 p⁄
2
Î
ps1 2 pd
n1
1
ps1 2 pd
n2
Unfortunately, this cannot serve as a test statistic, because the denominator cannot be com-
puted. H0 says that there is a common value p, but it does not specify what that value is. 
However, a test statistic can be obtained by first estimating p from the sample data and then 
using this estimate in the denominator of z.
When p1 5 p2, both p⁄
1 and p⁄
2 are estimates of the common proportion p. However, a 
better estimate than either p⁄
1 or p⁄
2 is a weighted average of the two, in which more weight 
is given to the sample proportion based on the larger sample.
Combined estimate of a common population proportion:
p⁄
c 5 n1p⁄
1 1 n2p⁄
2
n1 1 n2
5 total number of S's in the two samples
total of the two sample sizes
DEFINITION
The test statistic for testing H0: p1 2 p2 5 0 results from using p⁄
c, the combined estimate, 
in place of p in the standardized z statistic given previously. This z statistic has approxi-
mately a standard normal distribution when H0 is true, so a test that has the desired signifi-
cance level a can be obtained by calculating a P-value using the z table.
Null hypothesis:  H0: p1 2 p2 5 0
Test statistic:  z 5
p⁄
1 2 p⁄
2
Î
p⁄
cs1 2 p⁄
cd
n1
1 p⁄
cs1 2 p⁄
cd
n2
 
Summary of Large-Sample z Tests for p1 2 p2 5 0
continued
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

596 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
Example 11.9 
Electric Cars
The article “Americans Say No to Electric Cars Despite Gas Prices” (USA Today, May 25, 2011) 
describes a survey of public opinion on issues related to rising gas prices. The survey 
was conducted by Gallup, a national polling organization. Each person in a representative 
sample of low-income adult Americans (annual income less than $30,000) and each per-
son in an independently selected representative sample of high-income adult Americans 
(annual income greater than $75,000) was asked whether he or she would consider buying 
an electric car if gas prices continue to rise. 
In the low-income sample, 65% said that they would not buy an electric car no matter 
how high gas prices were to rise. In the high-income sample, 59% responded this way. The 
article did not give the sample sizes, but for purposes of this example, we will use sample 
sizes of 300.
One question of interest is whether the proportion who would never consider buying an 
electric car is different for the two income groups. The following table summarizes what 
we know so far.
Population
Population Proportion
Sample Size
Sample Proportion
Low-income adult Americans
p1 5 proportion of all low-
income adult Americans who 
would not buy an electric car
n1 5 300
p⁄
1 5 0.65
High-income adult Americans
p2 5 proportion of all high-
income adult Americans who 
would not buy an electric car
n2 5 300
p⁄
2 5 0.59
Notice that the two sample proportions are not equal. But even if the two population 
proportions were equal, we wouldn’t expect the two sample proportions to be equal just 
because of sampling variability—the differences that occur from one sample to another 
just by chance. The important question is whether chance is a believable explanation for 
the observed difference in the two sample proportions, or whether this difference is large 
enough that we don’t think it would have occurred just by chance. A hypothesis test will 
help us to make this determination. 
1.	 p1 5 proportion of low-income adult Americans who would never consider buying 
an electric car 
p2 5 proportion of high-income adult Americans who would never consider buying 
an electric car 
p1 2 p2 is the difference between the proportion who would never consider buying an
electric car for low-income and high-income adult Americans
2.	 H0: p1 2 p2 5 0 (p1 5 p2)
3.	 Ha: p1 2 p2 Þ 0
Understand the context ❭
Alternative hypothesis:	 P-value:
Ha: p1 2 p2 . 0	
Area under the z curve to the right of the computed z
Ha: p1 2 p2 , 0	
Area under the z curve to the left of the computed z
Ha: p1 2 p2 fi 0	
(1) 2(area to the right of z) if z is positive 
	 	
or
	 	
(2) 2(area to the left of z) if z is negative
Assumptions:    1.  The samples are independently chosen random samples, or 
treatments were assigned at random.
	
2.  Both sample sizes are large:
n1p⁄
1 $ 10  n1(1 2 p⁄
1) $ 10  n2p⁄
2 $ 10  n2(1 2 p⁄
2) $ 10
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 11.3   Large-Sample Inferences Concerning the Difference Between Two Population or Treatment Proportions 
●  597
4.	 Significance level: a 5 .05
5.	 Test Statistic:
z 5
p⁄
1 2 p⁄
2
Î
p⁄
cs1 2 p⁄
cd
n1
1
p⁄
cs1 2 p⁄
cd
n2
 
6.	 Assumptions: There are two conditions that need to be met in order for the large 
sample test for a difference in population proportions to be appropriate.
The large samples condition is easily verified. The sample sizes are large enough 
because 
n1p⁄
1 5 300(.65) 5 195      n1(1 2 p⁄
1) 5 300(.35) 5 105
n2p⁄
2 5 300(.59) 5 177      n2(1 2 p⁄
2) 5 300(.61) 5 183
are all greater than 10.
From the study description, we know that the samples were independently selected. 
We also know that the samples were selected in a way that Gallup believed would 
result in samples that were representative of adult Americans in the two income 
groups.
7.	 Calculations: 
To calculate the value of the test statistic, we need to find the values of the sample 
proportions and the value of p⁄
c, the combined estimate of the common population 
proportion.
n1 5 300	
p⁄
1 5 0.65
n2 5 300	
p⁄
2 5 0.59
p⁄
c 5
n1p⁄
1 1 n2p⁄
2
n1 1 n2
5 300s.65d 1 300s.59d
600
5 0.62
We can now calculate the value of the test statistic:
z 5
p⁄
1 2 p⁄
2
Î
p⁄
cs1 2 p⁄
cd
n1
1
p⁄
cs1 2 p⁄
cd
n2
5
0.65 2 0.59
Î
s0.62ds0.38d
300
1 s0.62ds0.38d
300
5 0.06
0.04 5 1.50
8.	 P-value: This is a two-tailed test (the inequality in Ha is Þ), so the P-value is twice 
the area under the z curve and to the right of the computed z value:
P-Value 5 2(area under z curve to the right of 1.50)
	
5 2* P(z . 1.50)
	
5 2(0.0668)
	
5 0.1336
9.	 Because the P-value is greater than the selected significance level, we fail to reject 
the 	null hypothesis. Even though the two sample proportions were different 
(0.65 and 0.59), this difference could have occurred just by chance when there is 
no difference in the population proportions. So, based on the sample data, we are 
not convinced that there is a difference in the two population proportions.
It is also possible to use statistical software or a graphing calculator to calculate the 
value of the test statistic and the P-value. For example, Minitab output for this example 
is shown on the next page.
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

598 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
Test and CI for Two Proportions 
Sample
X
N
Sample p
1
195
300
0.650000
2
177
300 
0.590000
Difference 5 p(1) 2 p(2)
Estimate for difference: 0.06
95% CI for difference: (20.0175281, 0.137528)
Test for difference 5 0 (vs not 5 0):   Z 5 1.51   P-Value = 0.130
From the Minitab output, we see that z 5 1.51 and the associated P-value is 0.130. 
These values are slightly different from those calculated by hand only because Minitab uses 
greater decimal accuracy in the computations leading to the value of the test statistic. 
■
Example 11.10 
Not Enough Sleep?
Do people who work long hours have more trouble sleeping? This question was exam-
ined in the paper “Long Working Hours and Sleep Disturbances: The Whitehall II Prospective 
Cohort Study” (Sleep [2009]: 737–745). The data in the accompanying table are from two 
independently selected samples of British civil service workers, all of whom were employed 
full-time and worked at least 35 hours per week. The authors of the paper believed that 
these samples were representative of full-time British civil service workers who work 35 to  
40 hours per week and of British civil service workers who work more than 40 hours  
per week.
n
Number who usually get 
less than 7 hours of sleep 
a night
Work over 40 hours per week
1501
750
Work 35–40 hours per week
958
407
Do these data support the theory that the proportion that usually get less than 7 hours of 
sleep a night is greater for those who work more than 40 hours per week than for those 
who work between 35 and 40 hours per week? Let’s carry out a hypothesis test with a ​5 ​.01. 
For these samples
Over 40 hours per week
n1 5 1501
p⁄
1 5 750
1501 5 .500
Between 35 and 40 hours per week
n2 5 958
p⁄
2 5 407
958 5 .425
1.	 p1 ​5 ​proportion of those who work more than 40 hours per week who get less 
than 7 hours of sleep
p2 ​5 ​proportion of those who work between 35 and 40 hours per week who get less 
than 7 hours of sleep
2.	 H0:  ​p1 2 p2 5 0
3.	 Ha: p1 2 p2 . 0
4.	 Significance level:  ​a 5 .01
5.	 Test statistic:  z 5
p⁄
1 2 p⁄
2
Î
p⁄
cs1 2 p⁄
cd
n1
1
p⁄
cs1 2 p⁄
cd
n2
​
6.	 Assumptions:  ​The two samples were independently selected. It is reasonable  
to regard the samples as representative of the two populations of interest. Check-
ing to make sure that the sample sizes are large enough by using n1 5 1501,  
p⁄
1 5 .500, n2 5 958, and p⁄
2 5 .425, we have
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 11.3   Large-Sample Inferences Concerning the Difference Between Two Population or Treatment Proportions 
●  599
	
n1p⁄
1 5 750.50 $ 10
n1(1 2 p⁄
1) 5 750.50 $ 10
	
n2p⁄
2 5 407.15 $ 10
n2(1 2 p⁄
2) 5 550.85 $ 10
7.	 Calculations:  ​Minitab output is shown below. From the output, z 5 3.64.
Test for Two Proportions 
Sample
X
N
Sample p
1
750
1501
0.499667
2
407
958
0.424843
Difference ​5 ​p (1) 2 p (2)
Estimate for difference: 0.0748235
Test for difference ​5 ​0 (vs ​. ​0): Z ​5 ​3.64 P-Value ​5 ​0.000
8.	 P-value:  ​From the computer output, P-value 5 0.000
9.	 Conclusion:  ​Because P-value # a, the null hypothesis is rejected at significance 
level .01. There is strong evidence that the proportion who get less than 7 hours 
of sleep a night is higher for British civil service workers who work more than 40 
hours per week than it is for those who work between 35 and 40 hours per week. 
Notice that because the data were from an observational study, we are not able to 
conclude that there is a cause and effect relationship between work hours and sleep. 
Although we can conclude that a higher proportion of those who work long hours get 
less than 7 hours of sleep a night, we can’t conclude that working long hours is the 
cause of shorter sleep. We should also note that the sample was selected from British 
civil service workers, so it would not be a good idea to generalize this conclusion to 
all workers.
■
A Confidence Interval
A large-sample confidence interval for p1 2 p2 is a special case of the general z interval formula
point estimate 6 (z critical value)(estimated standard deviation)
The statistic p⁄
1 2 p⁄
2 gives a point estimate of p1 2 p2, and the standard deviation of this 
statistic is
sp⁄
1 2p⁄
2 5Î
p1s1 2 p1d
n1
1
p2s1 2 p2d
n2
An estimated standard deviation is obtained by using the sample proportions p⁄
1 and p⁄
2 in 
place of p1 and p2, respectively, under the square-root symbol. Notice that this estimated 
standard deviation differs from the one used previously in the test statistic. When con-
structing a confidence interval, there isn’t a null hypothesis that claims p1 5 p2, so there is 
no assumed common value of p to estimate.
Do the workt ❭
Interpret the results ❭
A Large-Sample Confidence Interval for p1 2 p2
When
1.	 the samples are independently selected random samples or treatments were 
assigned at random to individuals or objects (or vice versa), and
2.	 both sample sizes are large:
n1p⁄
1 $ 10    n1(1 2 p⁄
1) $ 10    n2 p⁄
2 $ 10    n2(1 2 p⁄
2) $ 10
a large-sample conﬁdence interval for p1 2 p2 is
sp⁄
1 2 p⁄
2d 6 sz critical valuedÎ
p⁄
1s1 2 p⁄
1d
n1
1 p⁄
2s1 2 p⁄
2d
n2
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

600 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
EXAMPLE 11.11 
Cell Phones in Bed
Many researchers have studied how people of different ages use mobile technology. As part 
of a study described in the report “I Can’t Get My Work Done!” (harmon.ie, 2011), each person 
in a sample of 258 cell phone users age 20 to 39 was asked if they use their cell phones to 
stay connected while they are in bed. The same question was also asked of each person in 
a sample of 129 cell phone users age 40 to 49. You might expect the proportion who stay 
connected while in bed to be higher for the 20 to 39 age group than for the 40 to 49 age 
group, but how much higher? Based on these sample data, what can we learn about the 
actual difference in proportions for these two populations?
To answer this question, we can construct a 90% confidence interval for a difference in 
population proportions. We will estimate the value of p1 2 p2, where p1 is the proportion 
for the 20 to 39 age group and p2 is the proportion for the 40 to 49 age group.
There are two conditions that need to be met in order to use the large sample confidence 
interval for a difference in population proportions. The large sample condition is easily ver-
ified. With “success” denoting a cell phone user who sleeps with his or her cell phone, the 
sample sizes are large enough because there are more than 10 successes (168 in sample 1  
and 61 in sample 2) and more than 10 failures (258 2 168 5 90 in sample 1 and 68 in 
sample 2). This is equivalent to checking that n1p⁄
1,n1(1 2 p⁄
1), n2p⁄
2, and n2(1 2 p⁄
2) are all 
greater than 10.
The requirement of independent random samples or samples that are representative of 
the corresponding populations is more difficult. No information was provided regarding 
how the samples were selected. In order to proceed, we need to assume that the samples 
were selected in a reasonable way. We will need to keep this in mind when we get to the 
step that involves interpretation.
A 90% confidence interval for p1 2 p2 can now be calculated:
n1 5 258	
n2 5 129
p⁄
1 5 168
258 5 0.65	
p⁄
2 5 61
129 5 0.47
For a confidence level of 90%, the appropriate z critical value is 1.645. Substituting the 
values for n1, n2, p⁄
1, and p⁄
2 into the 90% confidence interval formula results in
p⁄
1 2 p⁄
2 6 sz critical valuedÎ
p⁄
1s1 2 p⁄
1d
n1
1
p⁄
2s1 2 p⁄
2d
n2
s0.65 2 0.47d 6 s1.645dÎ
s0.65ds0.35d
258
1 s0.47ds0.53d
129
0.18 6 s1.645dÏ0.0028
0.18 6 (1.645)(0.05)
0.18 6 0.09
(0.09, 0.27)
Statistical software or a graphing calculator could also have been used to compute the 
end points of the confidence interval. Minitab output is shown here. (Minitab has used 
more decimal accuracy in computing the endpoints of the confidence interval.)
CI for Two Proportions 
Sample
X
N
Sample p
1
168
258
0.651163
2
61
29
0.472868
Difference 5 p(1)2 p(2)
Estimate for difference:   0.178295
90% CI for difference:   (0.0910599, 0.265529)
Assuming that the samples were selected in a reasonable way, we are 90% confident that 
the difference in the actual proportion of cell phone users who sleep with their cell phone for 
Understand the contest ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 11.3   Large-Sample Inferences Concerning the Difference Between Two Population or Treatment Proportions 
●  601
20- to 39-year-olds and for 40- to 49-year-olds is between 0.09 and 0.27. This means that 
we think that the proportion is higher for 20- to 39-year-olds than for 40- to 49-year-olds 
by somewhere between 0.09 and 0.27. The method used to construct this interval estimate 
is successful in capturing the actual value of the population proportion 90% of the time.
In this example, no information was given about how the samples were selected. Because 
of this, it is important to state that the interpretation is only valid if the samples were 
selected in a reasonable way.
■
11.37	Some people seem to believe that you can fix any-
thing with duct tape. Even so, many were skeptical 
when researchers announced that duct tape may be a 
more effective and less painful alternative than liquid 
nitrogen, which doctors routinely use to freeze warts. 
The article “What a Fix-It: Duct Tape Can Remove Warts” 
(San Luis Obispo Tribune, October 15, 2002) described a 
study conducted at Madigan Army Medical Center. 
Patients with warts were randomly assigned to either 
the duct tape treatment or the more traditional freez-
ing treatment. 
Those in the duct tape group wore duct tape over 
the wart for 6 days, then removed the tape, soaked the 
area in water, and used an emery board to scrape the 
area. This process was repeated for a maximum of 
2 months or until the wart was gone. Data consis-
tent with values in the article are summarized in the 
following table:
Treatment
n
Number with Wart 
Successfully Removed
Liquid nitrogen freezing
100
60
Duct tape
104
88
Do these data suggest that freezing is less successful 
than duct tape in removing warts? Test the relevant 
hypotheses using a significance level of .01. (Hint: 
See Example 11.9.) 
11.38	 The authors of the paper “Adolescents and MP3 Play-
ers: Too Many Risks, Too Few Precautions” (Pediatreics 
[2009]: e953–e958) concluded that more boys than 
girls listen to music at high volumes. This conclu-
sion was based on data from independent random 
samples of 764 Dutch boys and 748 Dutch girls age 
12 to 19. Of the boys, 397 reported that they almost 
always listen to music at a high volume setting. Of 
the girls, 331 reported listening to music at a high 
volume setting. 
Do the sample data support the authors’ conclu-
sion that the proportion of Dutch boys who listen to 
music at high volume is greater than this proportion 
for Dutch girls? Test the relevant hypotheses using a 
.01 significance level.
11.39	After the 2010 earthquake in Haiti, many charitable 
organizations conducted fundraising campaigns 
to raise money for emergency relief. Some of these 
campaigns allowed people to donate by sending a 
text message using a cell phone to have the donated 
amount added to their cell-phone bill. The report 
“Early Signals on Mobile Philanthropy: Is Haiti the Tip-
ping Point?” (Edge Research, 2010) describes the results 
of a national survey of 1526 people that investigated 
the ways in which people made donations to the 
Haiti relief effort. 
The report states that 17% of Gen Y respondents 
(those born between 1980 and 1988) and 14% of 
Gen X respondents (those born between 1968 and 
1979) said that they had made a donation to the 
Haiti relief effort via text message. The percentage 
making a donation via text message was much lower 
for older respondents. The report did not say how 
many respondents were in the Gen Y and Gen X sam-
ples, but for purposes of this exercise, suppose that 
both sample sizes were 400 and that it is reasonable 
to regard the samples as representative of the Gen Y 
and Gen X populations.
a.	 Is there convincing evidence that the proportion 
of those in Gen Y who donated to Haiti relief via 
text message is greater than the proportion for 
Gen X? Use a 5 .01.
b.	Estimate the difference between the propor-
tion of Gen Y and the proportion of Gen X that 
made a donation via text message using a 99% 
confidence interval. Provide an interpretation of 
both the interval and the associated confidence 
level. 
11.40	 Common Sense Media surveyed 1000 teens and 
1000 parents of teens to learn about how teens are 
using social networking sites such as Facebook and 
MySpace (“Teens Show, Tell Too Much Online,” San 
Francisco Chronicle, August 10, 2009). The two samples 
were independently selected and were chosen in 
EXERCISES 11.37 - 11.57
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

602 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
a way that makes it reasonable to regard them as 
representative of American teens and parents of 
American teens.
a.	 When asked if they check their online social 
networking sites more than 10 times a day, 220 
of the teens surveyed said yes. When parents of 
teens were asked if their teen checked his or her 
site more than 10 times a day, 40 said yes. Use a 
significance level of .01 to carry out a hypothesis 
test to determine if there is convincing evidence 
that the proportion of all parents who think their 
teen checks a social networking site more than 
10 times a day is less than the proportion of all 
teens who report that they check more than 
10 times a day.
b.	The article also reported that 390 of the teens 
surveyed said they had posted something on their 
networking site that they later regretted. Would 
you use the two-sample z test of this section to 
test the hypothesis that more than one-third of all 
teens have posted something on a social network-
ing site that they later regretted? Explain why or 
why not.
c.	 Using an appropriate test procedure, carry out a 
test of the hypothesis given in Part (b). Use  
a 5 .05 for this test. 
11.41	The report “Audience Insights: Communicating to 
Teens (Aged 12–17)” (www.cdc.gov, 2009) described 
teens’ attitudes about traditional media, such as TV, 
movies, and newspapers. In a representative sample 
of American teenage girls, 41% said newspapers were 
boring. In a representative sample of American teen-
age boys, 44% said newspapers were boring. Sample 
sizes were not given in the report.
a.	 Suppose that the percentages reported had been 
based on a sample of 58 girls and 41 boys. Is there 
convincing evidence that the proportion of those 
who think that newspapers are boring is different 
for teenage girls and boys? Carry out a hypothesis 
test using a 5 .05. 
b.	Suppose that the percentages reported had been 
based on a sample of 2000 girls and 2500 boys. 
Is there convincing evidence that the proportion 
of those who think that newspapers are boring is 
different for teenage girls and boys? Carry out a 
hypothesis test using a 5 .05. 
c.	 Explain why the hypothesis tests in Parts (a) and 
(b) resulted in different conclusions.
11.42	 USA Today (February 16, 2012) reported that the 
percentage of U.S. residents living in poverty was 
12.5% for men and 15.1% for women. These 
percentages were estimates based on data from large 
­representative samples of men and women. For 
purposes of this exercise, suppose that the sample 
sizes were 1200 for the sample of men and 1000 for 
the sample of women. Use the survey data to com-
pute and interpret a 90% confidence interval for the 
difference in the proportion living in poverty for men 
and women. 
11.43	The Insurance Institute for Highway Safety issued a 
press release titled “Teen Drivers Often Ignoring Bans 
on Using Cell Phones” (June 9, 2008). The following 
quote is from the press release:
Just 1–2 months prior to the ban’s Dec. 1, 2006 start, 
11 percent of teen drivers were observed using cell 
phones as they left school in the afternoon. About 
5 months after the ban took effect, 12% of teen drivers 
were observed using cell phones.
Suppose that the two samples of teen drivers (before 
the ban, after the ban) can be regarded as represen-
tative of these populations of teen drivers. Suppose 
also that 200 teen drivers were observed before the 
ban (so n15 200 and p⁄
1 5.11) and 150 teen drivers 
were observed after the ban.
a.	 Construct and interpret a 95% confidence interval 
for the difference in the proportion using a cell 
phone while driving before the ban and the pro-
portion after the ban. 
b.	Is zero included in the confidence interval of Part (c)? 
What does this imply about the difference in the 
population proportions? 
11.44	 The press release referenced in the previous exer-
cise also included data from independent surveys 
of teenage drivers and parents of teenage drivers. 
In response to a question asking if they approved 
of laws banning the use of cell phones and texting 
while driving, 74% of the teens surveyed and 95% 
of the parents surveyed said they approved. The 
sample sizes were not given in the press release, but 
for purposes of this exercise, suppose that 600 teens 
and 400 parents of teens responded to the surveys 
and that it is reasonable to regard these samples as 
representative of the two populations. 
Do the data provide convincing evidence that  
the proportion of teens that approve of bans on  
­cell phone use and texting while driving is less than 
the proportion of parents of teens who approve? 
Test the relevant hypotheses using a significance level 
of .05. 
11.45	The article “Fish Oil Staves Off Schizophrenia” (USA 
Today, February 2, 2010) describes a study in which 
81 patients age 13 to 25 who were considered at-risk 
for mental illness were randomly assigned to one of 
two groups. Those in one group took four fish oil 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 11.3   Large-Sample Inferences Concerning the Difference Between Two Population or Treatment Proportions 
●  603
capsules daily. The other group took a placebo. After 
1 year, 5% of those in the fish oil group and 28% of 
those in the placebo group had become psychotic.
Is it appropriate to use the two-sample z test of this 
section to test hypotheses about the difference in the 
proportions of patients receiving the fish oil and the 
placebo treatments who became psychotic? Explain 
why or why not.
11.46	 The report “Young People Living on the Edge” (Green-
berg Quinlan Rosner Research, 2008) summarizes 
a survey of people in two independent random 
samples. One sample consisted of 600 young adults 
(age 19 to 35) and the other sample consisted of 300 
parents of children age 19 to 35. The young adults 
were presented with a variety of situations (such as 
getting married or buying a house) and were asked if 
they thought that their parents were likely to provide 
financial support in that situation. The parents of 
young adults were presented with the same situations 
and asked if they would be likely to provide financial 
support to their child in that situation.
a.	 When asked about getting married, 41% of the 
young adults said they thought parents would 
provide financial support and 43% of the parents 
said they would provide support. Carry out a 
hypothesis test to determine if there is convincing 
evidence that the proportion of young adults who 
think parents would provide financial support 
and the proportion of parents who say they would 
provide support are different. 
b.	The report stated that the proportion of young 
adults who thought parents would help with 
buying a house or apartment was .37. For the 
sample of parents, the proportion who said they 
would help with buying a house or an apartment 
was .27. Based on these data, can you conclude 
that the proportion of parents who say they would 
help with buying a house or an apartment is sig-
nificantly less than the proportion of young adults 
who think that their parents would help? 
11.47	 The article “Freedom of What?” (Associated Press, Febru-
ary 1, 2005) described a study in which high school 
students and high school teachers were asked whether 
they agreed with the following statement: “Students 
should be allowed to report controversial issues in their 
student newspapers without the approval of school 
authorities.” It was reported that 58% of the students 
surveyed and 39% of the teachers surveyed agreed with 
the statement. The two samples—10,000 high school 
students and 8000 high school teachers—were selected 
from 544 different schools across the country.
Use the given information to determine if there 
is convincing evidence that there is a difference 
between the proportion of high school students who 
agree that students should be allowed to report con-
troversial issues in their student newspapers with-
out the approval of school authorities, p1, and the 
proportion of high school teachers who agree with the 
statement, p2. Use a significance level of .05.
11.48	 “Doctors Praise Device That Aids Ailing Hearts” (Associated 
Press, November 9, 2004) is the headline of an article 
that describes the results of a study of the effective-
ness of a fabric device that acts like a support stocking 
for a weak or damaged heart. In the study, 107 people 
who consented to treatment were assigned at random 
to either a standard treatment consisting of drugs or 
the experimental treatment that consisted of drugs 
plus surgery to install the stocking. After two years, 
38% of the 57 patients receiving the stocking had 
improved and 27% of the patients receiving the 
standard treatment had improved. 
Do these data provide convincing evidence that the 
proportion of patients who improve is greater for the 
experimental treatment than for the standard treat-
ment? Test the relevant hypotheses using a signifi-
cance level of .05.  ​ ​
11.49	The article “College Graduates Break Even by Age 33” 
(USA Today, September 21, 2010) reported that 2.6% 
of college graduates were unemployed in 2008 and 
4.6% of college graduates were unemployed in 2009. 
Suppose that the reported percentages were based on 
independently selected representative samples of 500 
college graduates in each of these two years. Con-
struct and interpret a 95% confidence interval for the 
difference in the proportion of college graduates who 
were unemployed in these two years.
11.50	The article referenced in the previous exercise also 
reported that 5.7% of high school graduates were un-
employed in 2008 and 9.7% of high school graduates 
were unemployed in 2009. Suppose that the reported 
percentages were based on independently selected 
representative samples of 400 high school graduates 
in each of these two years.
a.	 Construct and interpret a 99% confidence interval 
for the difference in the proportion of high school 
graduates who were unemployed in these two years.
b.	Is the confidence interval from Part (a) wider or 
narrower than the confidence interval computed 
in the previous exercise? What are two reasons 
why it is wider or narrower?
11.51	Public Agenda conducted a survey of 1379 parents 
and 1342 students in grades 6–​12 regarding the 
importance of science and mathematics in the school 
curriculum (Associated Press, February 15, 2006). It 
was reported that 50% of students thought that 
understanding science and having strong math skills 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

604 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
are essential for them to succeed in life after school, 
whereas 62% of the parents thought it was crucial 
for today’s students to learn science and higher-level 
math. The two samples—parents and students—
were selected independently of one another. 
Is there sufficient evidence to conclude that the 
proportion of parents who regard science and math-
ematics as crucial is different from the corresponding 
proportion for students in grades 6–​12? Test the 
relevant hypotheses using a significance level of .05. ​ ​
11.52	 The article “Spray Flu Vaccine May Work Better Than 
Injections for Tots” (San Luis Obispo Tribune, May 2, 2006) 
described a study that compared flu vaccine admin-
istered by injection and flu vaccine administered as a 
nasal spray. Each of the 8000 children under the age 
of 5 who participated in the study received both a 
nasal spray and an injection, but only one was the real 
vaccine and the other was salt water. At the end of the 
flu season, it was determined that 3.9% of the 4000 
children receiving the real vaccine by nasal spray got 
sick with the flu and 8.6% of the 4000 receiving the 
real vaccine by injection got sick with the flu.
a.	 Why would the researchers give every child both a 
nasal spray and an injection?
b.	Use the given data to estimate the difference in the 
proportion of children who get sick with the flu 
after being vaccinated with an injection and the 
proportion of children who get sick with the flu 
after being vaccinated with the nasal spray using a 
99% confidence interval. 
c.	 Based on the confidence interval, would you con-
clude that the proportion of children who get the 
flu is different for the two vaccination methods?  ​
11.53	“Smartest People Often Dumbest About Sunburns” is 
the headline of an article that appeared in the San  
Luis Obispo Tribune (July 19, 2006). The article states 
that “those with a college degree reported a higher 
incidence of sunburn than those without a high school 
degree—43% versus 25%.” For purposes of this 
exercise, suppose that these percentages were based 
on random samples of size 200 from each of the 
two groups of interest (college graduates and those 
without a high school degree). Is there convincing 
evidence that the proportion experiencing a sunburn 
is greater for college graduates than it is for those 
without a high school degree? Answer based on a test 
with a .05 significance level.  ​
11.54	 The following quote is from the article “Canadians Are 
Healthier Than We Are” (Associated Press, May 31, 2006): 
“The Americans also reported more heart disease 
and major depression, but those differences were too 
small to be statistically significant.” This ­statement 
was based on the responses of a sample of 5183 
Americans and a sample of 3505 Canadians. The 
proportion of Canadians who reported major depres-
sion was given as .082.
a.	 Assuming that the researchers used a one-sided test 
with a significance level of .05, could the sample 
proportion of Americans reporting major depression 
have been as large as .09? Explain why or why not.
b.	Assuming that the researchers used a significance 
level of .05, could the sample proportion of 
Americans reporting major depression have been 
as large as .10? Explain why or why not.
11.55	“Mountain Biking May Reduce Fertility in Men, Study 
Says” was the headline of an article appearing in the 
San Luis Obispo Tribune (December 3, 2002). This con-
clusion was based on an Austrian study that com-
pared sperm counts of avid mountain bikers (those 
who ride at least 12 hours per week) and nonbikers. 
Ninety percent of the avid mountain bikers studied 
had low sperm counts, as compared to 26% of the 
nonbikers. Suppose that these percentages were 
based on independent samples of 100 avid mountain 
bikers and 100 nonbikers and that it is reasonable to 
view these samples as representative of Austrian avid 
mountain bikers and nonbikers.
a.	 Do these data provide convincing evidence that the 
proportion of Austrian avid mountain bikers with 
low sperm count is greater than this proportion for 
Austrian nonbikers?  ​​
b.	Based on the outcome of the test in Part (a), is it rea-
sonable to conclude that mountain biking 12 hours 
per week or more causes low sperm count? Explain. ​ ​
11.56	 Women diagnosed with breast cancer whose tumors 
have not spread may be faced with a decision between 
two surgical treatments—mastectomy (removal of the 
breast)  or lumpectomy (only the tumor is removed). 
In a long-term study of the effectiveness of these two 
treatments, 701 women with breast cancer were ran-
domly assigned to one of two treatment groups. One 
group received mastectomies and the other group re-
ceived lumpectomies and radiation. Both groups were 
followed for 20 years after surgery. It was reported that 
there was no statistically significant difference in the 
proportion surviving for 20 years for the two treat-
ments (Associated Press, October 17, 2002). 
What hypotheses do you think the researchers 
tested in order to reach the given conclusion? Did the 
researchers reject or fail to reject the null hypothesis? ​
11.57	 In December 2001, the Department of Veterans Affairs 
announced that it would begin paying benefits to 
soldiers suffering from Lou Gehrig’s disease who had 
served in the Gulf War (The New York Times, December 11, 
2001). This decision was based on an analysis in which 
​
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 11.4   Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses 
●  605
 11.4  
Interpreting and Communicating the Results 
of Statistical Analyses
the Lou Gehrig’s disease incidence rate (the proportion 
developing the disease) for all of the approximately 
700,000 soldiers sent to the Gulf between August 1990 
and July 1991 was compared to the incidence rate for 
all of the approximately 1.8 million other soldiers who 
were not in the Gulf during this time period. 
Based on these data, explain why it is not appro-
priate to perform a formal inference procedure (such 
as the two-sample z test) and yet it is still reasonable 
to conclude that the incidence rate is greater for Gulf 
War veterans than for those who did not serve in the 
Gulf War.
Many different types of research involve comparing two populations or treatments. It is 
easy to find examples of the two-sample hypothesis tests introduced in this chapter in 
published sources in a wide variety of disciplines.
Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses
As was the case with one-sample hypothesis tests, it is important to include a description 
of the hypotheses, the test procedure used, the value of the test statistic, the P-value, and a 
conclusion in context when summarizing the results of a two-sample test.
Correctly interpreting confidence intervals in the two-sample case is more difficult than 
in the one-sample case, so take particular care when providing a two-sample confidence 
interval interpretation. Because the two-sample confidence intervals of this chapter estimate 
a difference (m1 2 m2 or p1 2 p2), the most important thing to note is whether or not the 
interval includes 0. If both endpoints of the interval are positive, then it is correct to say that, 
based on the interval, you believe that m1 is greater than m2 (or that p1 is greater than p2 if 
you are working with proportions) and then the interval provides an estimate of how much 
greater. Similarly, if both interval endpoints are negative, you would say that m1 is less than 
m2 (or that p1 is less than p2), with the interval providing an estimate of the size of the differ-
ence. If 0 is included in the interval, it is plausible that m1 and m2 (or p1 and p2) are equal.
Interpreting the Results of Statistical Analyses
As with one-sample tests, it is common to find only the value of the test statistic and the 
associated P-value (or sometimes only the P-value) in published reports. You may have to think 
carefully about the missing steps to determine whether or not the conclusions are justified.
What to Look For in Published Data
Here are some questions to consider when you are reading a report that contains the result 
of a two-sample hypothesis test or confidence interval:
●
●Are only two groups being compared? If more than two groups are being compared 
two at a time, then a different type of analysis is preferable (see Chapter 15).
●
●Were the samples selected independently, or were the samples paired? If the samples 
were paired, was the analysis that was performed appropriate for paired samples?
●
●If a confidence interval is reported, is it correctly interpreted as an estimate of a  
difference in population or treatment means or proportions?
●
●What hypotheses are being tested? Is the test one- or two-tailed?
●
●Does the validity of the test performed depend on any assumptions about the sampled 
populations (such as normality)? If so, do the assumptions appear to be reasonable?
●
●What is the P-value associated with the test? Does the P-value lead to rejection of the 
null hypothesis?
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

606 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
●
●Are the conclusions consistent with the results of the hypothesis test? In particular, if 
H0 was rejected, does this indicate practical significance or only statistical significance?
For example, the paper “Ginkgo for Memory Enhancement” (Journal of the American Medical 
Association [2003]: 835–​840) included the following statement in the summary of conclusions 
from an experiment where participants were randomly assigned to receive ginkgo or a placebo:
Figure 2 shows the 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for differences (treatment group minus control) 
for performance on each test in the modified intent-to-treat analysis. Each interval contains a zero, 
indicating that none of the differences are statistically significant.
Because participants were assigned at random to the two treatments and the sample sizes 
were large (115 in each sample), use of the two-sample t confidence interval was appropri-
ate. The 95% confidence intervals included in the paper (for example, (21.71, 0.65) and 
(22.25, 0.20) for two different measures of logical memory) did all include 0 and were 
interpreted correctly in the quoted conclusion.
As another example, we consider a study reported in the article “The Relationship Be-
tween Distress and Delight in Males’ and Females’ Reactions to Frightening Films” (Human Com-
munication Research [1991]: 625–​637).The investigators measured emotional responses of 50 
males and 60 females after the subjects viewed a segment from a horror film. The article 
included the following statement: 
“Females were much more likely to express distress than were males. While males did express 
higher levels of delight than females, the difference was not statistically significant.”
The following summary information was also contained in the article:
Gender
Distress Index Mean
Delight Index Mean
Males 
31.2
12.02
Females 
40.4 
  9.09
P-value , .001
Not significant (P-value . .05)
The P-values are the only evidence of the hypothesis tests that support the given conclu-
sions. The P-value , .001 for the distress index means that the hypothesis H0: mF 2 mM 5 0 
was rejected in favor of Ha: mF 2 mM . 0, where mF and mM are the  mean distress indexes for 
females and males, respectively.
The nonsignificant P-value (P-value . .05) reported for the delight index means that 
the hypothesis H0: mF 2 mM 5 0 (where mF and mM now refer to mean delight index for 
females and males, respectively) could not be rejected. Chance sample-to-sample variabil-
ity is a plausible explanation for the observed difference in sample means. We would want 
to be cautious about the author’s statement that males express higher levels of delight than 
females, because it is based only on the fact that 12.02 . 9.09, which could be explained 
by sampling variability alone.
The article describes the samples as consisting of undergraduates selected from the 
student body of a large Midwestern university. The authors generalize their results to all 
American men and women. If this type of generalization is considered unreasonable, we 
could be more conservative and view the sampled populations as male and female univer-
sity students or male and female Midwestern university students or even male and female 
students at this particular university.
The comparison of males and females was based on two independently selected groups 
(not paired). Because the sample sizes were large, the two-sample t test for means could 
reasonably have been used, and this would have required no specific assumptions about 
the shape of the two underlying populations.
In a newspaper article, you may find even less information than in a journal article. 
For example, the article “Prayer Is Little Help to Some Heart Patients, Study Shows” (Chicago 
Tribune, March 31, 2006) included the following paragraphs:
Bypass patients who consented to take part in the experiment were divided randomly into three 
groups. Some patients received prayers but were not informed of that. In the second group the 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 11.4   Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses 
●  607
patients got no prayers, and also were not informed one way or the other. The third group got 
prayers and were told so.
There was virtually no difference in complication rates between the patients in the first 
two groups. But the third group, in which patients knew they were receiving prayers, had a 
complication rate of 59 percent—significantly more than the rate of 52 percent in the no-prayer 
group.
Earlier in the article, the total number of participants in the experiment was given as 
1800. The author of this article has done a good job of describing the important aspects 
of the experiment. The final comparison in the quoted paragraph was probably based on 
a two-sample z test for proportions, comparing the sample proportion with complications 
for the 600 patients in the no-prayer group with the sample proportion with complications 
for the 600 participants who knew that someone was praying for them. 
For the reported sample sizes and sample proportions, the test statistic for testing  
H0: p1 2 p2 5 0 versus Ha: p1 2 p2 , 0 (where p1 represents the complication proportion 
for patients who did not receive prayers and p2 represents the complication proportion for 
patients who knew they were receiving prayers) is z 5 22.10. The associated P-value is 
.036, supporting the conclusion stated in the article.
A Word to the Wise: Cautions and Limitations
The three cautions that appeared at the end of Chapter 10 apply here as well. They were 
(see Chapter 10 for more detail):
1.	 Remember that the result of a hypothesis test can never show strong support for 
the null hypothesis. In two-sample situations, this means that we shouldn’t be 
convinced that there is no difference between population means or proportions 
based on the outcome of a hypothesis test.
2.	 If you have complete information (a census) of both populations, there is no need 
to carry out a hypothesis test or to construct a confidence interval—in fact, it 
would be inappropriate to do so.
3.	 Don’t confuse statistical significance and practical significance. In the two-sample 
setting, it is possible to be convinced that two population means or proportions 
are not equal even in situations where the actual difference between them is small 
enough that it is of no practical interest. After rejecting a null hypothesis of no 
difference (statistical significance), it is useful to look at a confidence interval 
estimate of the difference to get a sense of practical significance.
And here’s one new caution to keep in mind for two-sample tests:
4.	 Be sure to think carefully about how the data were collected, and make sure that 
an appropriate test procedure or confidence interval is used. A common mistake 
is to overlook pairing and to analyze paired samples as if they were independent. 
It is usually easy to tell if the samples are paired—you just have to remember to 
think about how the samples were selected.
EXERCISES 11.58 - 11.60
11.58	 The paper “The Psychological Consequences of 
Money” (Science [2006]: 1154–1156) describes sev-
eral experiments designed to investigate the way in 
which money can change behavior. In one experi-
ment, participants completed one of two versions of 
a task in which they were given lists of five words 
and were asked to rearrange four of the words to 
create a sensible phrase. For one group, half of the 
30 unscrambled phrases related to money, whereas 
the other half were phrases that were unrelated to 
money. For the second group (the control group), 
none of the 30 unscrambled phrases related to 
money. Participants were 44 students at Florida 
State University. 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

608 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
Participants received course credit and $2 for 
their participation. The following description of the 
experiment is from the paper:
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two 
conditions, in which they descrambled phrases that 
primed money or neutral concepts. Then participants 
completed some filler questionnaires, after which the 
experimenter told them that the experiment was fin-
ished and gave them a false debriefing. This step was 
done so that participants would not connect the 
donation opportunity to the experiment. As the experi-
menter exited the room, she mentioned that the lab 
was taking donations for the University Student Fund 
and that there was a box by the door if the participant 
wished to donate. Amount of money donated was the 
measure of helping. We found that participants primed 
with money donated significantly less money to the 
student fund than participants not primed with money 
[t(38) 5 2.13, P , 0.05].
The paper also gave the following information on 
amount donated for the two experimental groups.
Group
Mean
Standard Deviation
Money primed
$0.77
$0.74
Control
$1.34
$1.02
a.	 Explain why the random assignment of partici-
pants to experimental groups is important in this 
experiment.
b.	Use the given information to verify the values of 
the test statistic and degrees of freedom (38, given 
in parentheses just after the t in the quote from 
the paper) and the statement about the P-value. 
Assume that both sample sizes are 22.
c.	 Do you think that use of the two-sample t test 
was appropriate in this situation? Hint: Are the 
assumptions required for the two-sample t test 
reasonable?
11.59	An experiment to determine if an online intervention 
can reduce references to sex and substance abuse 
on social networking web sites of adolescents is 
described in the paper “Reducing At-Risk Adolescents’ 
Display of Risk Behavior on a Social Networking Web 
Site” (Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 
[2009]: 35–41). Researchers selected public MySpace 
profiles of people who described themselves as 
between 18 and 20 years old and who referenced sex 
or substance use (alcohol or drugs) in their profiles. 
The selected subjects were assigned at random to an 
intervention group or a control group. 
Those in the intervention group were sent an  
e-mail from a physician about the risks associated 
with having a public profile and of referencing sex 
or substance use in their profile. Three months later, 
networking sites were revisited to see if any changes 
had been made. The following excerpt is from 
the paper:
At baseline, 54.2% of subjects referenced sex and 
85.3% referenced substance use on their social network-
ing site profiles. The proportion of profiles in which 
references decreased to 0 was 13.7% in the intervention 
group vs. 5.3% in the control group for sex (P 5.05) 
and 26% vs. 22% for substance use (P 5.61). The 
proportion of profiles set to “private” at follow-up was 
10.5% in the intervention group and 7.4% in the con-
trol group (P 5 .45). The proportion of profiles in 
which any of these three protective changes were made 
was 42.1% in the intervention group and 29.5% in the 
control group (P 5.07).
a.	 The quote from the paper references four hypoth-
esis tests. For each test, indicate what hypotheses 
you think were tested and whether or not the null 
hypothesis was rejected.
b.	Based on the information provided by the hypoth-
esis tests, what conclusions can be drawn about 
the effectiveness of the e-mail intervention?
11.60	 The paper “Ready or Not? Criteria for Marriage Readi-
ness among Emerging Adults” (Journal of Adolescent 
Research [2009]: 349–375) surveyed emerging adults 
(defined as age 18 to 25) from five different colleges 
in the United States. Several questions on the survey 
were used to construct a scale designed to measure 
endorsement of cohabitation. The paper states that 
“on average, emerging adult men (M 5 3.75,  
SD 5 1.21) reported higher levels of cohabitation 
endorsement than emerging adult women (M 5 3.39, 
SD 51.17).” The sample sizes were 481 for women 
and 307 for men.
a.	 Carry out a hypothesis test to determine if the 
reported difference in sample means provides 
convincing evidence that the mean cohabitation 
endorsement for emerging adult women is signifi-
cantly less than the mean for emerging adult men 
for students at these five colleges. 
b.	What additional information would you want in 
order to determine whether it is reasonable to gen-
eralize the conclusion of the hypothesis test from  
Part (a) to all college students?
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

AC TIVIT Y 11.1 
Helium-Filled Footballs?
Technology activity: Requires Internet access.
Background: Do you think that a football filled with 
helium will travel farther than a football filled with air? Two 
researchers at the Ohio State University investigated this 
question by performing an experiment in which 39 people 
each kicked a helium-filled football and an air-filled football. 
Half were assigned to kick the air-filled football first and 
then the helium-filled ball, whereas the other half kicked the 
helium-filled ball first followed by the air-filled ball. Distance 
(in yards) was measured for each kick.
In this activity, you will use the Internet to obtain the data 
from this experiment and then carry out a hypothesis test to 
determine whether the mean distance is greater for helium-
filled footballs than for air-filled footballs.
1.	 Do you think that helium-filled balls will tend to 
travel farther than air-filled balls when kicked? Before 
looking at the data, write a few sentences indicat-
ing what you think the outcome of this experiment 
was and describing the reasoning that supports your 
prediction.
2.	 The data from this experiment can be found in the 
Data and Story Library at the following web site:
http://lib.stat.cmu.edu/DASL/Datafiles/heliumfootball.html
Go to this web site and print out the data for the 39 trials.
3.	 There are two samples in this data set. One consists 
of distances traveled for the 39 kicks of the air-filled 
football, and the other consists of the 39 distances for 
the helium-filled football. Are these samples indepen-
dent or paired? Explain.
4.	 Carry out an appropriate hypothesis test to determine 
whether there is convincing evidence that the mean 
distance traveled is greater for a helium-filled football 
than for an air-filled football.
5.	 Is the conclusion in the test of Step 4 consistent with 
your initial prediction of the outcome of this experi-
ment? Explain.
6.	 ​Write a paragraph for the sports section of your 
school newspaper describing this experiment and the 
conclusions that can be drawn from it.
AC TIVIT Y 11.2 
Thinking About Data Collection
Background: In this activity you will design two experi-
ments that would allow you to investigate whether people 
tend to have quicker reflexes when reacting with their domi-
nant hand than with their nondominant hand.
1.	 ​Working in a group, design an experiment to investi-
gate the given research question that would result in 
independent samples. Be sure to describe how you 
plan to measure quickness of reflexes, what extrane-
ous variables will be directly controlled, and the role 
that randomization plays in your design.
2.	 ​How would you modify the design from Step 1 so 
that the resulting data are paired? Is the way in which 
randomization is incorporated into the new design 
different from the way it is incorporated in the design 
from Step 1? Explain.
3.	 Which of the two proposed designs would you 
recommend, and why?
4.	 ​If assigned to do so by your instructor, carry out  
one of your experiments and analyze the result-
ing data. Write a brief report that describes the 
experimental design, includes both graphical and 
numerical summaries of the resulting data, and 
communicates the conclusions that follow from your 
data analysis.
AC TIVIT Y 11.3 
A Meaningful Paragraph
Write a meaningful paragraph that includes the following 
six terms: paired samples, significantly different, P-value, 
sample, population, alternative hypothesis.
A “meaningful paragraph” is a coherent piece of writing in 
an appropriate context that uses all of the listed words. The 
paragraph should show that you understand the meaning of 
the terms and their relationship to one another. A sequence of 
sentences that just define the terms is not a meaningful para-
graph. When choosing a context, think carefully about the 
terms you need to use. Choosing a good context will make 
writing a meaningful paragraph easier.
Activities 
●  609
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

610 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
Term or Formula 
Comment
Independent samples
Two samples where the individuals or objects in the first sample are selected indepen-
dently from those in the second sample.
Paired samples
Two samples for which each observation in one sample is paired in a meaningful way with 
a particular observation in a second sample.
t 5
(x1 2 x2) 2 hypothesized value
Î
s21
n1
1 s22
n2
The test statistic for testing H0: m1 2 m2 5 hypothesized value when the samples are inde-
pendently selected and the sample sizes are large or it is reasonable to assume that both 
population distributions are normal.
(x1 2 x2) 6 (t critical value)Î
s21
n1
1 s22
n2
A formula for constructing a confidence interval for m1 2 m2 when the samples are inde-
pendently selected and the sample sizes are large or it is reasonable to assume that the 
population distributions are normal.
df 5
(V1 1 V2)2
V21
n1 2 1 1
V22
n2 2 1
  ​​where V1 5 s21
n1
 and V2 5 s22
n2
The formula for determining df for the two-sample t test and confidence interval.
xd
The sample mean difference.
sd
The standard deviation of the sample differences.
md
The mean value for the population of differences.
sd
The standard deviation for the population of differences.
t 5
xd 2 hypothesized value
sd
Ïn
The paired t test statistic for testing 
  H0:  ​md 5 hypothesized value.
xd 6 (t critical value) sd
Ïn
 
The paired t confidence interval formula.
p⁄
c 5 n1 p⁄
1 1 n2 p⁄
2
n1 1 n2
p⁄
c is the statistic for estimating the common population proportion when p1 5 p2.
z 5
p⁄
1 2 p⁄
2
Î
p⁄
c(1 2 p⁄
c)
n1
1
p⁄
c(1 2 p⁄
c)
n2
The test statistic for testing 
  H0:  ​p1 2 p2 5 0  
when the samples are independently selected and both sample sizes are large.
(p⁄
1 2 p⁄
2) 6 (z critical value) Î
p⁄
1(1 2 p⁄
1)
n1
1
p⁄
2(1 2 p⁄
2)
n2
A formula for constructing a confidence interval for p1 2 p2 when both sample sizes 
are large.
SUMMARY 
Key Concepts and Formulas
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter Review Exercises 
●  611
11.61	Do faculty and students have similar perceptions of 
what types of behavior are inappropriate in the class-
room? This question was examined by the author of 
the article “Faculty and Student Perceptions of Class-
room Etiquette” (Journal of College Student Development 
(1998): 515–​516). Each individual in a random sample 
of 173 students in general education classes at a large 
public university was asked to judge various behav-
iors on a scale from 1 (totally inappropriate) to 5 
(totally appropriate). Individuals in a random sample 
of 98 faculty members also rated the same behaviors. 
The mean rating for three of the behaviors studied 
are shown here (the means are consistent with data 
provided by the author of the article). The sample 
standard deviations were not given, but for purposes 
of this exercise, assume that they are all equal to 1.0.
Student Behavior
Student 
Mean Rating
Faculty Mean 
Rating
Wearing hats in the classroom
2.80
3.63
Addressing instructor by first name
2.90
2.11
Talking on a cell phone
1.11
1.10
a.	 Is there sufficient evidence to conclude that the 
mean “appropriateness” score assigned to wearing 
a hat in class differs for students and faculty?
b.	Is there sufficient evidence to conclude that the 
mean “appropriateness” score assigned to address-
ing an instructor by his or her first name is greater 
for students than for faculty? 
c.	 Is there sufficient evidence to conclude that the 
mean “appropriateness” score assigned to talking 
on a cell phone differs for students and faculty?
d.	Does the result of the test in part (c) imply that 
students and faculty consider it acceptable to talk 
on a cell phone during class? 
11.62	 Are girls less inclined to enroll in science courses 
than boys? One study (“Intentions of Young Students 
to Enroll in Science Courses in the Future: An Examina-
tion of Gender Differences,” Science Education [1999]: 
55–76) asked randomly selected fourth-, fifth-, and 
sixth-graders how many science courses they intend 
to take. The following data were obtained:
n
Mean
Standard 
Deviation
Males
203
3.42
1.49
Females
224
2.42
1.35
a.	 Calculate a 99% confidence interval for the 
difference between males and females in mean 
number of science courses planned. Interpret  
your interval. 
b.	Based on your interval, how would you answer 
the question posed at the beginning of the 
exercise?
11.63	  A deficiency of the trace element selenium in the 
diet can negatively impact growth, immunity, muscle 
and neuromuscular function, and fertility. The 
introduction of selenium supplements to dairy cows 
is justified when pastures have low selenium levels. 
Authors of the paper “Effects of Short-Term Supple-
mentation with Selenised Yeast on Milk Production and 
Composition of Lactating Cows” (Australian Journal of 
Dairy Technology, [2004]: 199–​203) supplied the fol-
lowing data on milk selenium concentration (mg/L) 
for a sample of cows given a selenium supplement 
(the treatment group) and a control sample given no 
supplement, both initially and after a 9-day period.
Initial Measurement
After 9 Days
Treatment 
Control
Treatment
Control
11.4
  ​9.1
138.3
  ​9.3
  ​9.6
  ​8.7
104.0
  ​8.8
10.1
  ​9.7
  ​96.4
  ​8.8
  ​8.5
10.8
  ​89.0
10.1
10.3
10.9
  ​88.0
  ​9.6
10.6
10.6
103.8
  ​8.6
11.8
10.1
147.3
10.4
  ​9.8
12.3
  ​97.1
12.4
10.9
  ​8.8
172.6
  ​9.3
10.3
10.4
146.3
  ​9.5
10.2
10.9
  ​99.0
  ​8.4
11.4
10.4
122.3
  ​8.7
  ​9.2
11.6
103.0
12.5
10.6
10.9
117.8
  ​9.1
10.8
121.5
  ​8.2
  ​93.0
a.	 Use the given data for the treatment group to de-
termine if there is sufficient evidence to conclude 
that the mean selenium concentration is greater 
after 9 days of the selenium supplement.
b.	Are the data for the cows in the control group 
(no selenium supplement) consistent with the 
CHAPTER REVIEW 
Exercises 11.61 - 11.82
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

612 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
hypothesis of no significant change in mean 
selenium concentration over the 9-day period?
c.	 Would you use the paired t test to determine if 
there was a significant difference in the initial 
mean selenium concentration for the control 
group and the treatment group? Explain why or 
why not.  ​  ​
11.64	
 The Oregon Department of Health web site provides 
information on the cost-to-charge ratio (the per-
centage of billed charges that are actual costs to the 
hospital). The cost-to-charge ratios for both inpatient 
and outpatient care in 2002 for a sample of six hospi-
tals in Oregon follow.
Hospital
2002 
Inpatient 
Ratio
2002 
Outpatient 
Ratio
1
  ​68
54
2
100
75
3
  ​71
53
4
  ​74
56
5
100
74
6
  ​83
71
Is there evidence that the mean cost-to-charge ratio 
for Oregon hospitals is less for outpatient care than 
for inpatient care? Use a significance level of .05.  ​
11.65	The article “A ‘White’ Name Found to Help in Job 
Search” (Associated Press, January 15, 2003) described 
an experiment to investigate if it helps to have a 
“white-sounding” first name when looking for a job. 
Researchers sent 5000 resumes in response to ads 
that appeared in the Boston Globe and Chicago Tribune. 
The resumes were identical except that 2500 of them 
had “white-sounding” first names, such as Brett and 
Emily, whereas the other 2500 had “black-sounding” 
names such as Tamika and Rasheed. Resumes of the 
first type elicited 250 responses and resumes of the 
second type only 167 responses. 
Do these data support the theory that the propor-
tion receiving responses is greater for those resumes 
with “white-sounding first” names? 
11.66	 In a study of a proposed treatment for diabetes 
prevention, 339 people under the age of 20 who 
were thought to be at high risk of developing type I 
diabetes were assigned at random to two groups. One 
group received twice-daily injections of a low dose of 
insulin. The other group (the control) did not receive 
any insulin, but was closely monitored. Summary 
data (from the article “Diabetes Theory Fails Test,” USA 
Today, June 25, 2001) follow.
​
Group
n
Number  
Developing 
Diabetes
Insulin
169
25
Control
170
24
a.	 Use the given data to construct a 90% confidence 
interval for the difference in the proportion that 
develop diabetes for the control group and the 
insulin group. 
b.	Give an interpretation of the confidence interval 
and the associated confidence level.
c.	 Based on your interval from Part (a), write a few 
sentences commenting on the effectiveness of the 
proposed prevention treatment.
11.67	When a surgeon repairs injuries, sutures (stitched 
knots) are used to hold together and stabilize the 
injured area. If these knots elongate and loosen 
through use, the injury may not heal properly 
because the tissues would not be optimally posi-
tioned. Researchers at the University of California, 
San Francisco, tied a series of different types of knots 
with two types of suture material, Maxon and Ticron.
Suppose that 112 tissue specimens were available 
and that for each specimen the type of knot and su-
ture material were randomly assigned. The investiga-
tors tested the knots to see how much the loops elon-
gated. The elongations (in mm) were measured and 
the resulting data are summarized here. For purposes 
of this exercise, assume it is reasonable to regard the 
elongation distributions as approximately normal.
Maxon
Types of knot
n 
x
sd
Square (control)
10 
10.0 
  ​.1
Duncan Loop 
15 
11.0 
  ​.3
Overhand
15 
11.0 
  ​.9
Roeder
10 
13.5 
  ​.1
Snyder
10 
13.5 
2.0
Ticron
Types of knot
n 
x
sd
Square (control)
10 
  ​2.5 
 .06
Duncan Loop
11 
10.9 
  ​.40
Overhand
11 
  ​8.1 
1.00
Roeder
10 
  ​5.0 
  ​.04
Snyder
10 
  ​8.1 
  .06
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter Review Exercises 
●  613
a.	 Is there a significant difference in mean elongation 
between the square knot and the Duncan loop for 
Maxon thread? 
b.	Is there a significant difference in mean elongation 
between the square knot and the Duncan loop for 
Ticron thread?
c.	 For the Duncan loop knot, is there a significant 
difference in mean elongation between the Maxon 
and Ticron threads? 
11.68	 The article “Trial Lawyers and Testosterone: Blue-Collar 
Talent in a White-Collar World” (Journal of Applied Social 
Psychology [1998]: 84–​94) compared trial lawyers and 
nontrial lawyers on the basis of mean testosterone 
level. Random samples of 35 male trial lawyers, 
31 male nontrial lawyers, 13 female trial lawyers, and 
18 female nontrial lawyers were selected for study. 
The article includes the following statement: 
“Trial lawyers had higher testosterone levels than did 
nontrial lawyers. This was true for men, t(64) 5 3.75, 
p , .001, and for women, t(29) 5 2.26, p , .05.”
a.	 Based on the information given, is the mean tes-
tosterone level for male trial lawyers significantly 
greater than for male nontrial lawyers?  ​ ​
b.	Based on the information given, is the mean tes-
tosterone level for female trial lawyers significantly 
greater than for female nontrial lawyers?  ​  ​
c.	 Do you have enough information to carry out a 
test to determine whether there is a significant 
difference in the mean testosterone levels of male 
and female trial lawyers? If so, carry out such a 
test. If not, what additional information would 
you need to be able to conduct the test?
11.69	In a study of memory recall, eight students from a 
large psychology class were selected at random and 
given 10 minutes to memorize a list of 20 non-
sense words. Each was asked to list as many of the 
words as he or she could remember both 1 hour 
and 24 hours later. The data are as shown in the 
accompanying table. 
Is there evidence to suggest that the mean num-
ber of words recalled after 1 hour exceeds the mean 
recall after 24 hours by more than 3? Use a level .01 
test.  ​​
Subject
  1
  2
  3
4
  5
6
  7
 8
1 hour later
14
12
18 
7
11
9
16
15
24 hour later
10
  4
14 
6
  9 
6
12
12
11.70	 As part of a study to determine the effects of allow-
ing the use of credit cards for alcohol purchases in 
Canada (“Changes in Alcohol Consumption Patterns 
Following the Introduction of Credit Cards in Ontario 
 
Liquor Stores,” Journal of Studies on Alcohol [1999]: 
378–​382), randomly selected individuals were given 
a questionnaire asking them how many drinks they 
had consumed during the previous week. A year 
later (after liquor stores started accepting credit cards 
for purchases), these same individuals were again 
asked how many drinks they had consumed in the 
previous week. The values in the accompanying table 
are consistent with summary values presented in the 
article.
n
1994 
Mean
1995 
Mean
xd
sd
Credit-Card Shoppers
  ​96
6.72
6.34
.38
5.52
Non-Credit-Card Shoppers
850
4.09
3.97
.12
4.58
a.	 The standard deviations of the differences were 
quite large. Explain how this could be the case.
b.	Calculate a 95% confidence interval for the mean 
difference in drink consumption for credit-card 
shoppers between 1994 and 1995. Is there evi-
dence that the mean number of drinks decreased? ​
c.	 Test the hypothesis that there was no change in 
the mean number of drinks between 1994 and 
1995 for the non-credit-card shoppers. Be sure to 
calculate and interpret the P-value for this test.  ​  ​
11.71	  Several methods of estimating the number of seeds 
in soil samples have been developed by ecologists. 
An article in the Journal of Ecology (“A Comparison  
of Methods for Estimating Seed Numbers in the Soil” 
[1990]: 1079–​1093) gave the accompanying data on the 
number of seeds detected by the direct method and 
by the stratified method for 27 soil specimens.
Specimen
Direct
Stratified
Specimen
Direct
Stratified
  ​1 
24 
  ​8
  ​2 
32 
  ​36
  ​3 
  ​0 
  ​8 
  ​4 
60
  ​56
  ​5 
20
52 
  ​6 
64
  ​64
  ​7 
40 
28 
  ​8 
  ​8 
  ​  ​8
  ​9 
12 
  ​8 
10 
92 
100
11 
  ​4 
  ​0 
12 
68 
  ​56
13 
76 
68 
14 
24 
  ​52
15 
32 
28 
16 
  ​0 
  ​  ​0
17 
36 
36 
18 
16 
  ​12
19 
92 
92 
20 
  ​4 
  ​12
21 
40 
48 
22 
24 
  ​24
23 
  ​0 
  ​0 
24 
  ​8 
  ​12
25 
12 
40 
26 
16 
  ​12
27 
40 
76
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

614 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
Do the data provide sufficient evidence to conclude 
that the mean number of seeds detected differs for 
the two methods? Test the relevant hypotheses using 
a 5 .05.  ​
11.72	 Are college students who take a freshman orienta-
tion course more or less likely to stay in college than 
those who do not take such a course? The article 
“A Longitudinal Study of the Retention and Academic 
Performance of Participants in Freshmen Orientation 
Courses” (Journal of College Student Development [1994]: 
444–​449) reported that 50 of 94 randomly selected 
students who did not participate in an orientation 
course returned for a second year. Of 94 randomly 
selected students who did take the orientation 
course, 56 returned for a second year. Construct a 
95% confidence interval for p1 2 p2, the difference 
in the proportion returning for students who do not 
take an orientation course and those who do. Give an 
interpretation of this interval.
11.73	The article “Truth and DARE: Tracking Drug Education to 
Graduation” (Social Problems [1994]: 448–​456) com-
pared the drug use of 288 randomly selected high 
school seniors exposed to a drug education program 
(DARE) and 335 randomly selected high school 
seniors who were not exposed to such a program. 
Data for marijuana use are given in the accompany-
ing table. Is there evidence that the proportion using 
marijuana is lower for students exposed to the DARE 
program? Use a 5 .05.  ​
n
Number Who 
Use Marijuana
Exposed to DARE 
288
141
Not Exposed to DARE
335
181
11.74	 The article “Softball Sliding Injuries” (American Journal 
of Diseases of Children [1988]: 715–​716) provided a 
comparison of breakaway bases (designed to reduce 
injuries) and stationary bases. Consider the accompa-
nying data (which agree with summary values given 
in the paper).
Number of 
Games Played
Number of Games  
Where a Player Suffered  
a Sliding Injury
Stationary Bases
1250
90
Breakaway Bases
1250
20
a.	 Is the proportion of games with a player suffering 
a sliding injury significantly lower for games using 
breakaway bases? Answer by performing a level 
.01 test.  
b.	What did you have to assume in order for your 
conclusion to be valid? Do you think it is likely 
that this assumption was satisfied in this study?  ​
11.75	The positive effect of water fluoridation on dental 
health is well documented. One study that validates 
this is described in the article “Impact of Water Fluo-
ridation on Children’s Dental Health: A Controlled Study 
of Two Pennsylvania Communities” (American Statistical 
Association Proceedings of the Social Statistics Section 
[1981]: 262–​265). Two communities were compared. 
One had adopted fluoridation in 1966, whereas 
the other had no such program. Of 143 randomly 
selected children from the town without fluoridated 
water, 106 had decayed teeth, and 67 of 119 randomly 
selected children from the town with fluoridated 
water had decayed teeth. Let p1 denote the proportion 
of all children in the community with fluoridated 
water who have decayed teeth, and let p2 denote the 
analogous proportion for children in the community 
with unfluoridated water. Estimate p1 2 p2 using a 
90% confidence interval and interpret the interval.
11.76	 Wayne Gretzky was one of ice hockey’s most prolific 
scorers when he played for the Edmonton Oilers. 
During his last season with the Oilers, Gretzky 
played in 41 games and missed 17 games due to 
injury. The article “The Great Gretzky” (Chance [1991]: 
16–​21) looked at the number of goals scored by the 
Oilers in games with and without Gretzky, as shown 
in the accompanying table. If we view the 41 games 
with Gretzky as a random sample of all Oiler games 
in which Gretzky played and the 17 games without 
Gretzky as a random sample of all Oiler games in 
which Gretzky did not play, is there evidence that the 
mean number of goals scored by the Oilers is greater 
for games in which Gretzky played? Use a 5 .01.
n
Sample 
Mean
Sample  
sd
Games with Gretzky
41
4.73
1.29
Games without Gretzky
17
3.88
1.18
11.77	Here’s one to sink your teeth into: The authors of the 
article “Analysis of Food Crushing Sounds During Mas-
tication: Total Sound Level Studies” (Journal of Texture 
Studies [1990]: 165–​178) studied the nature of sounds 
generated during eating. Peak loudness (in decibels 
at 20 cm away) was measured for both open-mouth 
and closed-mouth chewing of potato chips and of 
tortilla chips. Forty subjects participated, with ten as-
signed at random to each combination of conditions 
(such as closed-mouth potato chip, and so on). We 
are not making this up! Summary values taken from  ​ ​
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter Review Exercises 
●  615
plots given in the article appear in the accompanying 
table. For purposes of this exercise, suppose that it is 
reasonable to regard the peak loudness distributions 
as approximately normal.
n
x
s
Potato Chip
Open mouth 
10 
63 
13
Closed mouth 
10 
54 
16
Tortilla Chip
Open mouth 
10 
60 
15
Closed mouth 
10 
53 
16
a.	 Construct a 95% confidence interval for the differ-
ence in mean peak loudness between open-mouth 
and closed-mouth chewing of potato chips. Inter-
pret the resulting interval.  ​  ​
b.	For closed-mouth chewing (the recommended 
method!), is there sufficient evidence to indicate 
that there is a difference between potato chips and 
tortilla chips with respect to mean peak loudness? 
Test the relevant hypotheses using a 5 .01.  ​  ​
c.	 The means and standard deviations given 
here were actually for stale chips. When ten 
measurements of peak loudness were recorded  
for closed-mouth chewing of fresh tortilla chips, 
the resulting mean and standard deviation were 
56 and 14, respectively. Is there sufficient evidence 
to conclude that chewing fresh tortilla chips is 
louder than chewing stale chips? Use a 5 .05.  ​
11.78	 Are very young infants more likely to imitate actions 
that are modeled by a person or simulated by an  
object? This question was the basis of a research study 
summarized in the article “The Role of Person and Object 
in Eliciting Early Imitation” (Journal of Experimental Child 
Psychology [1991]: 423–​433). One action examined was 
mouth opening. This action was modeled repeatedly 
by either a person or a doll, and the number of times 
that the infant imitated the behavior was recorded. 
Twenty-seven infants participated, with 12 exposed to 
a human model and 15 exposed to the doll. Summary 
values are shown below. 
Is there sufficient evidence to conclude that the 
mean number of imitations is higher for infants who 
watch a human model than for infants who watch a 
doll? Test the relevant hypotheses using a .01 signifi-
cance level.  ​
Person Model
Doll Model
x
5.14 
3.46
s
1.60 
1.30
11.79	Dentists make many people nervous. To see whether 
such nervousness elevates blood pressure, the blood 
pressure and pulse rates of 60 subjects were measured 
in a dental setting and in a medical setting (“The Effect 
of the Dental Setting on Blood Pressure Measurement,” 
American Journal of Public Health [1983]: 1210–​1214). 
For each subject, the difference (dental-setting blood 
pressure minus medical-setting blood pressure) was 
calculated. The analogous differences were also calcu-
lated for pulse rates. Summary data follow.
Mean 
Difference
Standard 
Deviation of 
Differences
Systolic Blood Pressure
    4.47
8.77
Pulse (beats/min)
21.33
8.84
a.	 Do the data strongly suggest that true mean blood 
pressure is greater in a dental setting than in a 
medical setting? Use a level .01 test. 
b.	Is there sufficient evidence to indicate that true 
mean pulse rate in a dental setting differs from the 
true mean pulse rate in a medical setting? Use a 
significance level of .05.  ​
11.80	 Key terms in survey questions are often not well 
understood, and such ambiguity can affect responses. 
As an example, the article “How Unclear Terms Affect 
Survey Data” (Public Opinion Quarterly [1992]: 218–​231) 
described a survey in which each individual in a 
sample was asked, “Do you exercise or play sports 
regularly?” But what constitutes exercise? The follow-
ing revised question was then asked of each indi-
vidual in the same sample: “Do you do any sports or 
hobbies involving physical activities, or any exercise, 
including walking, on a regular basis?” The resulting 
data are shown in the accompanying table.
Yes
No
Initial Question 
48 
52
Revised Question 
60 
40
Can a procedure from this chapter be used to an-
swer the following question: Is there any difference 
between the proportions of yes responses to these 
questions? If yes, carry out the test. If not, explain 
why not.
11.81	An electronic implant that stimulates the auditory 
nerve has been used to restore partial hearing to a 
number of deaf people. In a study of implant accept-
ability (Los Angeles Times, January 29, 1985), 250 adults 
born deaf and 250 adults who went deaf after 
learning to speak were followed for a period of time 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

616 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
after receiving an implant. Of those deaf from birth, 
75 had removed the implant, whereas only 25 of 
those who went deaf after learning to speak had done 
so. Does this suggest that the actual proportion who 
remove the implants differs for those who were born 
deaf and those who went deaf after learning to speak? 
Test the relevant hypotheses using a .01 significance 
level.  ​ ​
11.82	
 Both surface soil and subsoil specimens were taken 
from eight randomly selected agricultural locations in 
a particular county. The soil specimens were analyzed 
to determine both surface pH and subsoil pH, with 
the results shown in the accompanying table.
Location
​1
​2 
3
4
5
6
​7
​8
Surface pH
6.55
5.98
5.59
6.17
5.92
6.18 
6.43
5.68
Subsoil pH
6.78 
6.14 
5.80 
5.91
6.10
6.01
6.18 
5.88
a.	 Compute a 90% confidence interval for the mean 
difference between surface and subsoil pH for 
agricultural land in this county.  ​
b.	What assumptions are necessary for the interval 
in Part (a) to be valid?  ​  ​
JMP
1.  Input the raw data for both groups into the first column
2.  Input the group information into the second column
3.  Click Analyze and select Fit Y by X
4.  Click and drag the first column’s name from the box un-
der Select Columns to the box next to Y, Response
5.  Click and drag the second column’s name from the box 
under Select Columns to the box next to X, Factor
6.  Click OK
7.  Click the red arrow next to Oneway Analysis of… and 
select t Test
Minitab
Summarized data
1.  Click Stat then click Basic Statistics then click  
2-sample t…
2.  Click the radio button next to Summarized data
3.  In the boxes next to First: For the first sample, type the 
value for n, the sample size in the box under Sample 
size: and type the value for the sample mean in the 
box under Mean: and finally type the value for the 
sample standard deviation in the box under Standard 
deviation:
4.  In the boxes next to Second: For the second sample, type 
the value for n, the sample size in the box under Sample 
size: and type the value for the sample mean in the box 
under Mean: and finally type the value for the sample 
standard deviation in the box under Standard deviation:
5.  Click Options…
6.  Input the appropriate hypothesized value for the difference 
of the population means in the box next to Test difference:
7.  Select the appropriate alternative from the drop-down 
menu next to Alternative:
8.  Click OK
9.  Click OK
Note: You may also run this test with the assumption of equal 
variances by clicking the checkbox next to Assume equal 
variances after Step 8 in the above sequence.
Raw data
1.  Input the raw data into two separate columns
2.  Click Stat then click Basic Statistics then click  
2-sample t…
3.  Click the radio button next to Samples in different 
columns:
4.  Click in the box next to First:
5.  Double-click the column name where the first group’s 
data is stored
6.  Click in the box next to Second:
7.  Double-click the column name where the second group’s 
data is stored
8.  Click Options…
9.  Input the appropriate hypothesized value for the difference 
of the population means in the box next to Test difference:
10.  Select the appropriate alternative from the drop-down 
menu next to Alternative:
11.  Click OK
12.  Click OK
Note: You may also run this test with the assumption of equal 
variances by clicking the checkbox next to Assume equal 
variances after Step 11 in the above sequence.
Technology Notes
Two-sample t Test for m1 2 m2
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Technology Notes 
●  617
SPSS
1.  Input the raw data for BOTH groups into the first column
2.  Input the data for groups into the second column (input 
A for the first group and B for the second group)
3.  Click Analyze then click Compare Means then click 
Independent-Samples T Test
4.  Click the name of the column containing the raw data 
and click the arrow to move this variable to the Test 
Variable(s): box
5.  Click the name of the column containing the group in-
formation and click the arrow to move this variable to 
the Grouping Variable: box
6.  Click the Define Groups… button
7.  In the box next to Group 1: type A
8.  In the box next to Group 2: type B
9.  Click Continue
10.  Click OK
Note: This procedure produces two-sample t tests under the 
assumption of equal variances AND also when equal variances 
are not assumed. It also outputs a two-tailed P-value.
Excel
1.  Input the raw data for each group into two separate col-
umns
2.  Click on the Data ribbon
3.  Click Data Analysis in the Analysis group
Note: If you do not see Data Analysis listed on the Ribbon, 
see the Technology Notes for Chapter 2 for instructions on 
installing this add-on.
If you are performing a test where you are assuming equal 
variances, continue with Steps 4–9 below. If you are perform-
ing a test where you are not assuming equation variances, 
skip to Step 10.
4.  Select t-Test: Two Samples Assuming Equal Variances 
from the dialog box and click OK
5.  Click in the box next to Variable 1 Range: and select the 
first column of data
6.  Click in the box next to Variable 2 Range and select the 
second column of data (if you have used and selected 
column titles for BOTH variables, select the check box 
next to Labels)
7.  Click in the box next to Hypothesized Mean Difference 
and type your hypothesized value (in general, this will 
be 0)
8.  Click in the box next to Alpha: and type in the signifi-
cance level
9.  Click OK
10.  Select t-Test: Two Samples Assuming Unequal Vari-
ances from the dialog box and click OK
11.  Click in the box next to Variable 1 Range: and select the 
first column of data
12.  Click in the box next to Variable 2 Range and select the 
second column of data (if you have used and selected 
column titles for BOTH variables, select the check box 
next to Labels)
13.  Click in the box next to Hypothesized Mean Differ-
ence and type your hypothesized value (in general, this 
will be 0)
14.  Click in the box next to Alpha: and type in the signifi-
cance level
15.  Click OK
Note: This procedure outputs P-values for both a one-sided 
and two-sided test.
TI-83/84
Summarized data
1.  Press STAT
2.  Highlight TESTS
3.  Highlight 2-SampT-Test…
4.  Highlight Stats and press ENTER
5.  Next to ​x​1 input the value for the sample mean from the 
first sample
6.  Next to sx1 input the value for the sample standard de-
viation from the first sample
7.  Next to n1 input the value for the sample size from the 
first sample
8.  Next to ​x2 input the value for the sample mean from the 
second sample
9.  Next to sx2 input the value for the sample standard de-
viation from the second sample
10.  Next to n2 input the value for the sample size from the 
second sample
11.  Next to m1 highlight the appropriate alternative hypoth-
esis and press ENTER
12.  Highlight Calculate and press ENTER
Raw data
1.  Enter the data into L1 and L2 (In order to access lists 
press the STAT key, highlight the option called Edit… 
then press ENTER)
2.  Press STAT
3.  Highlight TESTS
4.  Highlight 2-SampT-Test…
5.  Highlight Data and press ENTER
6.  Next to m1 highlight the appropriate alternative hypoth-
esis and press ENTER
7.  Highlight Calculate and press ENTER
TI-Nspire
Summarized data
1.  Enter the Calculate Scratchpad
2.  Press the menu key and select 6:Statistics then 7:Stat 
Tests then 4:2-Sample t test… and press enter
3.  From the drop-down menu select Stats
4.  Press OK
5.  Next to x​1 input the value for the sample mean for the 
first sample
6.  Next to sx1 input the value for the sample standard de-
viation for the first sample
7.  Next to n1 input the value for the sample size for the 
first sample
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.  Next to x​2 input the value for the sample mean for the 
second sample
9.  Next to sx2 input the value for the sample standard de-
viation for the second sample
10.  Next to n2 input the value for the sample size for the 
second sample
11.  Next to Alternate Hyp select the appropriate alternative 
hypothesis from the drop-down menu
12.  Press OK
Raw data
1.  Enter the data into a data list (In order to access data lists 
select the spreadsheet option and press enter)
Note: Be sure to title the list by selecting the top row of 
the column and typing a title.
2.  Press the menu key and select 4:Statistics then 4:Stat 
Tests then 4:2-Sample t test… and press enter
3.  From the drop-down menu select Data
4.  Press OK
5.  Next to List 1 select the list containing your data from 
the first sample
6.  Next to List 2 select the list containing your data from 
the second sample
7.  Next to Alternate Hyp select the appropriate alternative 
hypothesis from the drop-down menu
8.  Press OK
Paired t Test for Difference of Population Means
JMP
1.  Enter the data for one sample in the first column
2.  Enter the paired data from the second sample in the 
second column
3.  Click Analyze and select Matched Pairs
4.  Click and drag the first column name from the box under 
Select Columns to the box next to Y, Paired Response
5.  Click and drag the second column name from the box un-
der Select Columns to the box next to Y, Paired ­Response
6.  Click OK
Minitab
Summarized data
1.  Click Stat then click Basic Statistics then click Paired 
t…
2.  Click the radio button next to Summarized data
3.  In the box next to Sample size: type the sample size, n
4.  In the box next to Mean: type the sample mean for the 
DIFFERENCE of each pair of data values
5.  In the box next to Standard deviation: type the sample 
standard deviation for the DIFFERENCE of each pair of 
data values
6.  Click Options…
7.  Input the appropriate hypothesized value for the differ-
ence of the paired population means in the box next to 
Test mean:
8.  Select the appropriate alternative from the drop-down 
menu next to Alternative:
9.  Click OK
10.  Click OK
Raw data
1.  Input the raw data into two separate columns
2.  Click Stat then click Basic Statistics then click Paired 
t…
3.  Click in the box next to First:
4.  Double click the column name where the first group’s 
data are stored
5.  Click in the box next to Second:
6.  Double click the column name where the second group’s 
data are stored
7.  Click Options…
8.  Input the appropriate hypothesized value for the differ-
ence of the paired population means in the box next to 
Test mean:
9.  Select the appropriate alternative from the drop-down 
menu next to Alternative:
10.  Click OK
11.  Click OK
SPSS
1.  Input the data for each group into two separate columns
2.  Click Analyze then click Compare Means then click 
Paired-Samples T Test
3.  Select the first column and click the arrow to move it 
into the Pair 1 row, Variable 1 column
4.  Select the second column and click the arrow to move it 
to the Pair 1 row, Variable 2 column
5.  Click OK
Note: This procedure produces a two-sided P-value.
Excel
1.  Input the raw data for each group into two separate columns
2.  Click on the Data ribbon
3.  Click Data Analysis in the Analysis group
Note: If you do not see Data Analysis listed on the Ribbon, 
see the Technology Notes for Chapter 2 for instructions on 
installing this add-on.
4.  Select t-Test: Paired Two Sample for Means from the 
dialog box and click OK
5.  Click in the box next to Variable 1 Range: and select the 
first column of data
6.  Click in the box next to Variable 2 Range and select the 
second column of data (if you have used and selected 
column titles for BOTH variables, select the check box 
next to Labels)
7.  Click in the box next to Hypothesized Mean Difference 
and type your hypothesized value (in general, this will be 0)
8.  Click in the box next to Alpha: and type in the signifi-
cance level
9.  Click OK
Note: This procedure outputs P-values for both a one-sided 
and two-sided test.
618 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

TI-83/84
The TI-83/84 does not provide the option for a paired t test. 
However, one can be found by entering the difference data 
into a list and following the procedures in Chapter 12.
TI-Nspire
The TI-Nspire does not provide the option for a paired t test. 
However, one can be found by entering the difference data 
into a list and following the procedures in Chapter 12.
Confidence Interval for m1 2 m2
1.  Input the raw data for both groups into the first column
2.  Input the group information into the second column
	
3.  Click Analyze and select Fit Y by X
4.  Click and drag the first column’s name from the box un-
der Select Columns to the box next to Y, Response
5.  Click and drag the second column’s name from the box 
under Select Columns to the box next to X, Factor
6.  Click OK
7.  Click the red arrow next to Oneway Analysis of… and 
select t Test
Note: The 95% confidence interval is automatically dis-
played. To change the confidence level, click the red arrow 
next to Oneway Analysis of… and select Set a Level then 
click the appropriate a-level or select Other and type the 
appropriate level.
Minitab
Summarized data
1.  Click Stat then click Basic Statistics then click  
2-sample t…
2.  Click the radio button next to Summarized data
3.  In the boxes next to First: For the first sample, type the 
value for n, the sample size in the box under Sample 
size: and type the value for the sample mean in the box 
under Mean: and finally type the value for the sample 
standard deviation in the box under Standard deviation:
4.  In the boxes next to Second: For the second sample, type 
the value for n, the sample size in the box under Sample 
size: and type the value for the sample mean in the box 
under Mean: and finally type the value for the sample 
standard deviation in the box under Standard deviation:
5.  Click Options…
6.  Input the appropriate confidence level in the box next to 
Confidence Level
7.  Click OK
8.  Click OK
Raw data
1.  Input the raw data for each group into a separate column
2.  Click Stat then click Basic Statistics then click  
2-sample t…
3.  Click the radio button next to Samples in different 
columns:
4.  Click in the box next to First:
5.  Double click the column name where the first group’s 
data are stored
6.  Click in the box next to Second:
7.  Double-click the column name where the second group’s 
data are stored
8.  Click Options…
9.  Input the appropriate confidence level in the box next to 
Confidence Level
10.  Click OK
11.  Click OK
SPSS
1.  Input the raw data for BOTH groups into the first 
column
2.  Input the data for groups into the second column 
(input A for the first group and B for the second group)
3.  Click Analyze then click Compare Means then click 
Independent-Samples T Test
4.  Click the name of the column containing the raw data 
and click the arrow to move this variable to the Test 
Variable(s): box
5.  Click the name of the column containing the group 
information and click the arrow to move this variable to 
the Grouping Variable: box
6.  Click the Define Groups… button
7.  In the box next to Group 1: type A
8.  In the box next to Group 2: type B
9.  Click Continue
10.  Click Options…
11.  Input the confidence level in the box next to Confidence 
Interval Percentage: 
12.  Click Continue
13.  Click OK
Note: This procedure produces confidence intervals under 
the assumption of equal variances AND also when equal vari-
ances are not assumed.
Technology Notes 
●  619
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Excel
Excel does not have the functionality to produce a confidence in-
terval automatically for the difference of two population means. 
However, you can manually type the formulas for the lower and 
upper limits into two separate cells and have Excel calculate the 
results for you. You may also use Excel to find the t critical value 
based on the confidence level using the following steps:
1.  Click in an empty cell
2.  Click Formulas
3.  Click Insert Function
4.  Select Statistical from the drop-down box for the category
5.  Select TINV and click OK
6.  In the box next to Probability type in the value repre-
senting one minus your selected confidence level
7.  In the box next to Deg_freedom type in the degrees of 
freedom (n 2 1)
8.  Click OK
TI-83/84
Summarized data
1.  Press STAT
2.  Highlight TESTS
3.  Highlight 2-SampTInt… and press ENTER
4.  Highlight Stats and press ENTER
5.  Next to x1 input the value for the sample mean from the 
first sample
6.  Next to sx1 input the value for the sample standard 
deviation from the first sample
7.  Next to n1 input the value for the sample size from the 
first sample
8.  Next to ​x​2 input the value for the sample mean from the 
second sample
9.  Next to sx2 input the value for the sample standard 
deviation from the second sample
10.  Next to n2 input the value for the sample size from the 
second sample
11.  Next to C-Level input the appropriate confidence level
12.  Highlight Calculate and press ENTER
Raw data
1.  Enter the data into L1 and L2 (In order to access lists 
press the STAT key, then press ENTER)
2.  Press STAT
3.  Highlight TESTS
4.  Highlight 2-SampTInt… and press ENTER
5.  Highlight Data and press ENTER
6.  Next to C-Level input the appropriate confidence level
7.  Highlight Calculate and press ENTER
TI-Nspire
Summarized data
1.  Enter the Calculate Scratchpad
2.  Press the menu key and select 6:Statistics then 
6:Confidence Intervals then 4:2-Sample t Interval… 
and press enter
3.  From the drop-down menu select Stats
4.  Press OK
5.  Next to x​1 input the value for the sample mean from the 
first sample
6.  Next to sx1 input the value for the sample standard 
deviation from the first sample
7.  Next to n1 input the value for the sample size from the 
first sample
8.  Next to ​x​2 input the value for the sample mean from the 
second sample
9.  Next to sx2 input the value for the sample standard 
deviation from the second sample
10.  Next to n2 input the value for the sample size from the 
second sample
11.  Next to C Level input the appropriate confidence level
12.  Press OK
Raw data
1.  Enter the data into two separate data lists (In order  
to access data lists select the spreadsheet option and 
press enter)
Note: Be sure to title the lists by selecting the top row of the 
column and typing a title.
2.  Press the menu key and select 4:Statistics then 3:Con-
fidence Intervals then 2:t Interval… and press enter
3.  From the drop-down menu select Data
4.  Press OK
5.  Next to List 1 select the list containing the first data 
sample from the drop-down menu
6.  Next to List 2 select the list containing the second data 
sample from the drop-down menu
7.  Next to C-Level input the appropriate confidence level
8.  Press OK
Confidence Interval for Paired Data
JMP
1.  Enter the data for one group in the first column
2.  Enter the paired data from the second group in the 
second column
3.  Click Analyze and select Matched Pairs
4.  Click and drag the first column name from the box under 
Select Columns to the box next to Y, Paired Response
620 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.  Click and drag the second column name from the box un-
der Select Columns to the box next to Y, Paired Response
6.  Click OK
Note: The 95% confidence interval is automatically dis-
played. To change the confidence level, click the red arrow 
next to Oneway Analysis of… and select Set a Level then 
click the appropriate a-level or select Other and type the 
appropriate level.
Minitab
Summarized data
1.  Click Stat then click Basic Statistics then click Paired t…
2.  Click the radio button next to Summarized data
3.  In the box next to Sample size: type the sample size, n
4.  In the box next to Mean: type the sample mean for the 
DIFFERENCE of each pair of data values
5.  In the box next to Standard deviation: type the sample 
standard deviation for the DIFFERENCE of each pair of 
data values
6.  Click Options…
7.  Input the appropriate confidence level in the box next to 
Confidence Level
8.  Click OK
9.  Click OK
Raw data
1.  Input the raw data into two separate columns
2.  Click Stat then click Basic Statistics then click Paired t…
3.  Click in the box next to First sample:
4.  Double click the column name where the first group’s 
data are stored
5.  Click in the box next to Second sample:
6.  Double click the column name where the second group’s 
data are stored
7.  Click Options…
8.  Input the appropriate confidence level in the box next to 
Confidence Level
9.  Click OK
10.  Click OK
SPSS
1.  Input the data for each group into two separate columns
2.  Click Analyze then click Compare Means then click 
Paired-Samples T Test
3.  Select the first column and click the arrow to move it 
into the Pair 1 row, Variable 1 column
4.  Select the second column and click the arrow to move it 
to the Pair 1 row, Variable 2 column
5.  Click Options…
6.  Input the appropriate confidence level in the box next to 
Confidence Interval Percentage:
7.  Click Continue
8.  Click OK
Excel
Excel does not have the functionality to produce a confidence 
interval automatically for the difference of two population means. 
However, you can manually type the formulas for the lower and 
upper limits into two separate cells and have Excel calculate the 
results for you. You may also use Excel to find the t critical 
value based on the confidence level using the following steps:
1.  Click in an empty cell
2.  Click Formulas
3.  Click Insert Function
4.  Select Statistical from the drop-down box for the category
5.  Select TINV and click OK
6.  In the box next to Probability type in the value repre-
senting one minus your selected confidence level
7.  In the box next to Deg_freedom type in the degrees of 
freedom (n 2 1)
8.  Click OK
TI-83/84
The TI-83/84 does not provide the option for a paired t confi-
dence interval. However, one can be found by entering the differ-
ence data into a list and following the procedures in Chapter 12.
TI-Nspire
The TI-Nspire does not provide the option for a paired t confi-
dence interval. However, one can be found by entering the differ-
ence data into a list and following the procedures in Chapter 12.
z Test for p­1 2 p2
JMP
JMP does not have the functionality to automatically provide 
the results of a z test for the difference of two proportions.
Minitab
Summarized data
1.  Click Stat then click Basic Statistics then click 2 
Proportions…
2.  Click the radio button next to Summarized data
3.  In the boxes next to First: type the value for n, the total 
sample size in the box under the Trials: column and the 
number of successes in the box under Events:
4.  In the boxes next to Second: type the value for n, the 
total sample size in the box under the Trials: column 
and the number of successes in the box under Events:
5.  Click Options…
6.  Input the appropriate hypothesized value in the box next 
to Test difference: (this is usually 0)
7.  Check the box next to Use pooled estimate of p for test
8.  Click OK
9.  Click OK
Raw data
1.  Input the raw data two separate columns
2.  Click Stat then click Basic Statistics then click 2 
Proportion…
3.  Select the radio button next to Samples in different 
columns
4.  Click in the box next to First:
5.  Double-click the column name where the first group’s 
raw data is stored
Technology Notes 
●  621
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.  Click in the box next to Second:
7.  Double-click the column name where the second group’s 
raw data are stored
8.  Click Options…
9.  Input the appropriate hypothesized value in the box next 
to Test difference: (this is usually 0)
10.  Check the box next to Use test and interval based on 
normal distribution
11.  Click OK
12.  Click OK
SPSS
SPSS does not have the functionality to automatically pro-
duce a z test for the difference of two proportions.
Excel
Excel does not have the functionality to automatically produce 
a z-test for the difference of two proportions. However, you 
can type the formulas into a cell for the test statistic in order to 
have Excel calculate this for you. Then use the methods from 
Chapter 6 to find the P-value using the Normal distribution.
TI-83/84
1.  Press the STAT key
2.  Highlight TESTS
3.  Highlight 2-PropZTest… and press ENTER
4.  Next to x1 type the number of successes from the first 
sample
5.  Next to n1 type the sample size from the first sample
6.  Next to x2 type the number of successes from the second 
sample
7.  Next to n2 type the sample size from the second sample
8.  Next to p1, highlight the appropriate alternative hypothesis
9.  Highlight Calculate and press ENTER
TI-Nspire
1.  Enter the Calculate Scratchpad
2.  Press the menu key then select 6:Statistics then select 
7:Stat Tests then 6:2-Prop z Test… then press enter
3.  In the box next to Successes, x1 type the number of 
successes from the first sample
4.  In the box next to n1 type the number of trials from the 
first sample
5.  In the box next to Successes, x2 type the number of 
successes from the second sample
6.  In the box next to n2 type the sample size from the sec-
ond sample
7.  In the box next to Alternate Hyp choose the appropriate 
alternative hypothesis from the drop-down menu
8.  Press OK
Confidence Interval for p1 2 p2
JMP
Summarized data
1.  Input the data into the JMP data table with categories for 
one variable in the first column, categories for the second 
variable in the second column, and counts for each com-
bination in the third column
2.  Click Analyze and select Fit Y by X
3.  Click and drag the first column containing the response 
variable from the box under Select Columns to the box 
next to X, Factor
4.  Click and drag the second column containing the group 
information from the box under Select Columns to the 
box next to Y, Response
5.  Click and drag the third column containing the counts for 
each combination from the box under Select Columns 
to the box next to Freq
6.  Click OK
7.  Click the red arrow next to Contingency Analysis of… 
and select Two Sample Test for Proportions
Note: You can change the response of interest (i.e., “Yes” 
instead of “No” or “Success” instead of “Failure”) by clicking 
the radio button at the bottom of the Two Sample Test for 
Proportions section.
Raw data
1.  Input the raw data into two separate columns: one con-
taining the response variable and one containing the 
group information
2.  Click Analyze and select Fit Y by X
622 
●  Chapter 11  Comparing Two Populations or Treatments
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.  Click and drag the first column containing the response 
variable from the box under Select Columns to the box 
next to Y, Response
4.  Click and drag the second column containing the group 
information from the box under Select Columns to the 
box next to X, Factor
5.  Click OK
6.  Click the red arrow next to Contingency Analysis of… 
and select Two Sample Test for Proportions
Note: You can change the response of interest (i.e., “Yes” in-
stead of “No” or “Success” instead of “Failure”) by clicking 
the radio button at the bottom of the Two Sample Test for 
Proportions section.
Minitab
Summarized data
1.  Click Stat then click Basic Statistics then click 2 
Proportions…
2.  Click the radio button next to Summarized data
3.  In the boxes next to First: type the value for n, the total 
sample size in the box under the Trials: column and the 
number of successes in the box under Events:
4.  In the boxes next to Second: type the value for n, the 
total sample size in the box under the Trials: column 
and the number of successes in the box under Events:
5.  Click Options…
6.  Input the appropriate confidence level in the box next to 
Confidence Level
7.  Click OK
8.  Click OK
Raw data
1.  Input the raw data two separate columns
2.  Click Stat then click Basic Statistics then click 2 
Proportion…
3.  Select the radio button next to Samples in different  
columns
4.  Click in the box next to First:
5.  Double click the column name where the first group’s 
raw data is stored
6.  Click in the box next to Second:
7.  Double click the column name where the second group’s 
raw data is stored
8.  Click Options…
9.  Input the appropriate confidence level in the box next to 
Confidence Level
10.  Click OK
11.  Click OK
SPSS
SPSS does not have the functionality to automatically produce 
a confidence interval for the difference of two proportions.
Excel
Excel does not have the functionality to automatically pro-
duce a confidence interval for the difference of two propor-
tions. However, you can type the formulas into two separate 
cells for the lower and upper limit to have Excel calculate 
these results for you.
TI-83/84
1.  Press the STAT key
2.  Highlight TESTS
3.  Highlight 2-PropZInt… and press ENTER
4.  Next to x1 type the number of successes from the first 
sample
5.  Next to n1 type the sample size from the first sample
6.  Next to x2 type the number of successes from the second 
sample
7.  Next to n2 type the sample size from the second sample
8.  Next to C-Level type the appropriate confidence level
9.  Highlight Calculate and press ENTER
TI-Nspire
1.  Enter the Calculate Scratchpad
2.  Press the menu key then select 6:Statistics then select 
6:Confidence Intervals then 6:2-Prop z Interval… 
then press enter
3.  In the box next to Successes, x1 type the number of 
successes from the first sample
4.  In the box next to n1 type the number of trials from the 
first sample
5.  In the box next to Successes, x2 type the number of 
successes from the second sample
6.  In the box next to n2 type the number of trials from the 
second sample
7.  In the box next to C Level input the appropriate confi-
dence level
8.  Press OK
Technology Notes 
●  623
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

624
It is often the case that information is collected 
on categorical variables, such as political affiliation, 
gender, or college major. As with numerical data, 
categorical data sets can be univariate (consisting 
of observations on a single categorical variable),  
bivariate (observations on two categorical vari-
ables), or even multivariate. In this chapter, 
we will first consider methods for analyzing  
univariate categorical data sets and then turn to 
methods appropriate for use with bivariate categor-
ical data.
The Analysis of Categorical Data  
and Goodness-of-Fit Tests
Greg Flume/NewSport/Corbis
Chapter 12: Learning Objectives
Students will understand:
●
●the differences between goodness-of-fit tests, tests for homogeneity, and 
tests of independence.
Students will be able to:
●
●test hypotheses about the distribution of a categorical variable using a 
goodness-of-fit test and interpret the results in context.
●
●test the hypothesis that the distribution of a categorical variable is the same 
for two or more populations or treatments using a test of homogeneity and 
interpret the results in context.
●
●test hypotheses about association between two categorical variables using a 
test of independence and interpret the results in context.
CHAPTER 12
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 12.1   Chi-Square Tests for Univariate Data 
●  625
 12.1  
Chi-Square Tests for Univariate Data
Univariate categorical data sets arise in a variety of settings. If each student in a sample 
of 100 is classified according to whether he or she is enrolled full-time or part-time, data 
on a categorical variable with two categories result. Each registered voter in a sample of  
100 selected from those registered in a particular city might be asked which of the five city 
council members he or she favors for mayor. This would yield observations on a categorical 
variable with five categories.
Univariate categorical data are most conveniently summarized in a one-way frequency 
table. For example, the article “Fees Keeping American Taxpayers From Using Credit Cards to 
Make Tax Payments” (IPSOS Insight, March 24, 2006) surveyed American taxpayers regarding 
their intent to pay taxes with a credit card. Suppose that 100 randomly selected taxpayers 
participated in such a survey, with possible responses being definitely will use a credit card 
to pay taxes next year, probably will use a credit card, probably won’t use a credit card, and 
definitely won’t use a credit card. The first few observations might be
Probably will
Definitely will not
Probably will not
Probably will not
Definitely will
Definitely will not
Counting the number of observations of each type might then result in the following one-
way table:
Outcome
Definitely Will
Probably Will
Probably Will Not
Definitely Will Not
Frequency
14
12
24
50
For a categorical variable with k possible values (k different categories), sample data are 
summarized in a one-way frequency table consisting of k cells, which can be displayed 
either horizontally or vertically.
In this section, we consider testing hypotheses about the proportions of the population 
that falls into the possible categories. For example, the manager of a tax preparation com-
pany might be interested in determining whether the four possible responses to the tax 
credit card question occur equally often. If this is indeed the case, the long-run proportion 
of responses falling into each of the four categories is 1/4, or .25. The test procedure to be 
presented shortly would allow the manager to decide whether the hypothesis that all four 
category proportions are equal to .25 is plausible.
k 5 number of categories of a categorical variable
p1 5 population proportion for Category 1
p2 5 population proportion for Category 2
	   
…
pk 5 population proportion for Category k 
(Note: p1 1 p2 1 Á 1 pk 5 1)
The hypotheses to be tested have the form
H0:  p1 5 hypothesized proportion for Category 1 
p2 5 hypothesized proportion for Category 2
 
…
pk 5 hypothesized proportion for Category k
Ha:  ​H0 is not true, so at least one of the population category proportions  
differs from the corresponding hypothesized value.
Notation and Hypotheses
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

626 
●  Chapter 12  The Analysis of Categorical Data and Goodness-of-Fit Tests
For the example involving responses to the tax survey, we could use
p1 5 the proportion of all taxpayers who will definitely pay by credit card
p2 5 the proportion of all taxpayers who will probably pay by credit card
p3 5 the proportion of all taxpayers who will probably not pay by credit card
and
p4 5 the proportion of all taxpayers who will definitely not pay by credit card
The null hypothesis of interest is then
H0:  ​p1 5 .25, p2 5 .25, p3 5 .25, p4 5 .25
A null hypothesis of the type just described can be tested by first selecting a random 
sample of size n and then classifying each sample response into one of the k possible cat-
egories. To decide whether the sample data are compatible with the null hypothesis, we 
compare the observed cell counts (frequencies) to the cell counts that would have been 
expected when the null hypothesis is true. The expected cell counts are
Expected cell count for Category 1 5 np1
Expected cell count for Category 2 5 np2
and so on. The expected cell counts when H0 is true result from using the corresponding 
hypothesized proportions to calculate the expected counts.
Example 12.1 
Births and the Lunar Cycle
 A common urban legend is that more babies than expected are born during certain  
phases of the lunar cycle, especially near the full moon. The paper “The Effect of the Lunar 
Cycle on Frequency of Births and Birth Complications” (American Journal of Obstetrics and Gyne-
cology [2005]: 1462–1464) classified births according to the lunar cycle. Data for a sample 
of randomly selected births occurring during 24 lunar cycles consistent with summary 
quantities appearing in the paper are given in Table 12.1.
We can define lunar phase category proportions as follows:
p1 5 proportion of births that occur during the new moon
p2 5 proportion of births that occur during the waxing crescent moon
p3 5 proportion of births that occur during the first quarter moon
p4 5 proportion of births that occur during the waxing gibbous moon
p5 5 proportion of births that occur during the full moon
p6 5 proportion of births that occur during the waning gibbous moon
p7 5 proportion of births that occur during the last quarter moon
p8 5 proportion of births that occur during the waning crescent moon
If there is no relationship between number of births and the lunar cycle, then the num-
ber of births in each lunar cycle category should be proportional to the number of days 
Anthony Ise/Photodisc/Getty Image
Understand the context ❭
Lunar Phase
Number of Days
Number of Births
New moon
  ​24
  ​7,680
Waxing crescent
152
48,442
First quarter
  ​24
  ​7,579
Waxing gibbous
149
47,814
Full moon
  ​24
  ​7,711
Waning gibbous
150
47,595
Last quarter
  ​24
  ​7,733
Waning crescent
152
48,230
● Data set available online
Table 12.1  Data for Example 12.1
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 12.1   Chi-Square Tests for Univariate Data 
●  627
included in that category. There are a total of 699 days in the 24 lunar cycles considered 
and 24 of those days are in the new moon category. This means that if there is no relation-
ship between number of births and lunar cycle,
p1 5 24
699 5 .0343
Similarly, in the absence of any relationship between births and lunar cycle,
p2 5 152
699 5 .2175  ​  ​  ​  ​p3 5 24
699 5 .0343
p4 5 149
699 5 .2132  ​  ​  ​  ​p5 5 24
699 5 .0343
p6 5 150
699 5 .2146  ​  ​  ​  ​p7 5 24
699 5 .0343
p8 5 152
699 5 .2175
The hypotheses of interest are then
H0:  ​p1 5 .0343, p2 5 .2175, p3 5 .0343, p4 5 .2132, p5 5 .0343, p6 5 .2146, 
p7 5 .0343, p8 5 .2175
Ha:  ​H0 is not true.
There were a total of 222,784 births in the sample, so if H0 is true, the expected counts for 
the first two categories are
 1
expected count
for new moon2 5 n1
hypothesized proportion
for new moon
2
 5 222,784s.0343d 5 7641.49
1
expected count
for waxing crescent2 5 n1
hypothesized proportion
for waxing crescent 2
 5 222,784s.2175d 5 48,455.52
Expected counts for the other six categories are computed in a similar fashion, and  
observed and expected cell counts are given in the following table.
Lunar Phase
Observed Number of Births
Expected Number of Births
New moon
  ​7,680
  ​7,641.49
Waxing crescent
48,442
48,455.52
First quarter
  ​7,579
  ​7,641.49
Waxing gibbous
47,814
47,497.55
Full moon
  ​7,711
  ​7,641.49
Waning gibbous
47,595
47,809.45
Last quarter
  ​7,733
  ​7,641.49
Waning crescent
48,230
48,455.52
Because the observed counts are based on a sample of births, it would be somewhat sur-
prising to see exactly 3.43% of the sample falling in the first category, exactly 21.75% in 
the second, and so on, even when H0 is true. If the differences between the observed and 
expected cell counts can reasonably be attributed to sampling variability, the data are con-
sidered compatible with H0. On the other hand, if the discrepancy between the observed 
and the expected cell counts is too large to be attributed solely to chance differences from 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

628 
●  Chapter 12  The Analysis of Categorical Data and Goodness-of-Fit Tests
one sample to another, H0 should be rejected in favor of Ha. To make a decision, we need 
an assessment of how different the observed and expected counts are.	
■
The goodness-of-fit statistic, denoted by X2, is a quantitative measure of the extent to which 
the observed counts differ from those expected when H0 is true. (The Greek letter x is often 
used in place of X. The symbol X2 is referred to as the chi-square [x2] statistic. In using X2 rather 
than x2, we are adhering to the convention of denoting sample quantities by Roman letters.)
For a sample of size n,
1
expected cell
count 2 5 n1
hypothesized value of corresponding
population proportion
2
The goodness-of-fit statistic, X2, results from first computing the quantity
sobserved cell count 2 expected cell countd2
expected cell count
for each cell. 
The X 2 statistic is the sum of these quantities for all k cells:
X2 5 o
all cells
sobserved cell count 2 expected cell countd2
expected cell count
The value of the X2 statistic reflects the magnitude of the discrepancies between observed 
and expected cell counts. When the differences are sizable, the value of X2 tends to be large. 
Therefore, large values of X2 suggest rejection of H0. A small value of X2 (it can never be 
negative) occurs when the observed cell counts are quite similar to those expected when 
H0 is true, and would be consistent with H0.
As with previous test procedures, a conclusion is reached by comparing a P-value to the 
significance level for the test. The P-value is computed as the probability of observing a 
value of X2 at least as large as the observed value when H0 is true. This requires information 
about the sampling distribution of X2 when H0 is true.
When the null hypothesis is true and the sample size is sufficiently large, the behavior 
of X2 is described approximately by a chi-square distribution. A chi-square distribution 
curve has no area associated with negative values and is asymmetric, with a longer tail on 
the right. There are actually many chi-square distributions, each one identified by a differ-
ent number of degrees of freedom. Curves corresponding to several chi-square distribu-
tions are shown in Figure 12.1.
For a test procedure based on the X2 statistic, the associated P-value is the area under the 
appropriate chi-square curve and to the right of the computed X2 value. Appendix Table 8  
gives upper-tail areas for chi-square distributions with up to 20 df. The chi-square table 
has a different appearance from the t table used in previous chapters. In the t table, there 
is a single “value” column on the far left and then a column of P-values (tail areas) for each 
different number of degrees of freedom. A single column of t values works for the t table 
because all t curves are centered at 0, and the t curves approach the z curve as the number 
of degrees of freedom increases. However, because the chi-square curves move farther and 
farther to the right and spread out more as the number of degrees of freedom increases, a 
single “value” column is impractical in this situation.
df = 8
df = 12
df = 20
Figure  12.1
Chi-square curves.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 12.1   Chi-Square Tests for Univariate Data 
●  629
To find the area to the right of a particular X2 value, locate the appropriate df column in  
Appendix Table 8. Determine which listed value is closest to the X2 value of interest, and 
read the right-tail area corresponding to this value from the left-hand column of the table. 
For example, for a chi-square distribution with df 5 4, the area to the right of X2 5 8.18 
is .085, as shown in Figure 12.2. For this same chi-square distribution (df 5 4), the area 
to the right of 9.70 is approximately .045 (the area to the right of 9.74, the closest entry in 
the table for df 5 4).
It is also possible to use computer software or a graphing calculator to compute 
areas under a chi-square distribution curve. This provides more accurate values for 
the area.
Goodness-of-Fit Tests
When H0 is true, the X2 goodness-of-fit statistic has approximately a chi-square  
distribution with df 5 (k 2 1), as long as none of the expected cell counts are too small. 
When expected counts are small, and especially when an expected count is less than 1, the 
value of sobserved cell count 2  expected cell countd2
expected cell count
 can be inflated because it involves 
dividing by a small number. It is generally agreed that use of the chi-square distribution is ap-
propriate when the sample size is large enough for every expected cell count to be at least 5. If any 
of the expected cell frequencies are less than 5, categories can be combined in a sensible 
way to create acceptable expected cell counts. Just remember to compute the number of 
degrees of freedom based on the reduced number of categories.
 8.18
Shaded area = .085
Chi-square curve for 4 df
Figure  12.2
A chi-square upper-tail area.
Hypotheses:  ​  ​H0:  ​p1 5 hypothesized proportion for Category 1
	
	
        
…
	
	
        pk 5 hypothesized proportion for Category k
	
         Ha:  ​H0 is not true
Test Statistic:  ​  ​X 2 5 o
all cells
sobserved cell count 2 expected cell countd2
expected cell count
P-values:  ​  ​When H0 is true and all expected counts are at least 5, X 2 has 
approximately a chi-square distribution with df 5 k 2 1. The P-value associated 
with the computed test statistic value is the area to the right of X 2 under the  
df 5 k 2 1 chi-square curve. Upper-tail areas for chi-square distributions are 
found in Appendix Table 8.
Assumptions:  1.  ​Observed cell counts are based on a random sample.
	
	
     2.  ​The sample size is large. The sample size is large enough 
for the chi-square test to be appropriate as long as every 
expected cell count is at least 5.
Goodness-of-Fit Test Procedure
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

630 
●  Chapter 12  The Analysis of Categorical Data and Goodness-of-Fit Tests
Example 12.2 
Births and the Lunar Cycle Revisited
We use the births data of Example 12.1 to test the hypothesis that number of births is unre-
lated to lunar cycle. Let’s use a .05 level of significance and the nine-step hypothesis-testing 
procedure illustrated in previous chapters.
1.  Let p1, p2, p3, p4, p5, p6, p7, and p8 denote the proportions of all births falling in the eight 
lunar cycle categories as defined in Example 12.1.
2.  H0:  ​p1 5 .0343, p2 5 .2175, p3 5 .0343, p4 5 .2132, p5 5 .0343, p6 5 .2146,  
p7 5 .0343, p8 5 .2175
3.  Ha:  ​H0 is not true.
4.  Significance level:  ​a 5 .05.
5.  Test statistic:  ​X2 5 o
all cells
sobserved cell count 2 expected cell countd2
expected cell count
6.  Assumptions:  ​The expected cell counts (from Example 12.1) are all greater than 5. 
The births represent a random sample of births occurring during the lunar cycles 
considered.
7.  Calculation:
X 2 5 s7680 2 7641.49d2
7641.49
1 s48442 2 48455.52d2
48455.52
1 Á 1 s48230 2 48455.52d2
48455.52
 5 .194 1 .004 1 .511 1 2.108 1 .632 1 .962 1 1.096 1 1.050
 5 6.557
8.  P-value:  ​The P-value is based on a chi-square distribution with df 5 8 2 1 5 7. The 
computed value of X2 is smaller than 12.01 (the smallest entry in the df 5 7 column of 
Appendix Table 8), so P-value . .10.
9.  Conclusion:  ​Because P-value . a, H0 cannot be rejected. There is not sufficient evi-
dence to conclude that number of births and lunar cycle are related. This is consistent 
with the conclusion in the paper: “We found no statistical evidence that deliveries oc-
curred in a predictable pattern across the phases of the lunar cycle.”
Statistical software can be used to perform a chi-square goodness-of-fit test. Minitab out-
put for the data and hypothesized proportions of this example is shown here.
Chi-Square Goodness-of-Fit Test for Observed Counts in Variable: Number of Births
Using category names in Lunar Phase
Category
Observed
Test
Proportion
Expected
Contribution
to Chi-Sq
First Quarter
7579
0.0343
7641.5
0.51105
Full Moon
7711
0.0343
7641.5
0.63227
Last Quarter
7733
0.0343
7641.5
1.09584
New Moon
7680
0.0343
7641.5
0.19406
Waning Crescent
48230
0.2175
48455.5
1.04961
Waning Gibbous
47595
0.2146
47809.4
0.96189
Waxing Crescent
48442
0.2175
48455.5
0.00377
Waxing Gibbous
47814
0.2132
47497.5
2.10835
N
DF
Chi-Sq
P-Value
222784
7
6.55683
0.476
Notice that Minitab has reordered the categories from smallest to largest based on the 
observed count. Minitab also carried a bit more decimal accuracy in the computation of 
the chi-square statistic, reporting X2 5 6.55683 and an associated P-value of .476. The 
computed P-value 5 .476 is consistent with the statement P-value . .10 from Step 8 of 
the hypothesis test.	
■
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the result ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 12.1   Chi-Square Tests for Univariate Data 
●  631
Example 12.3 
Tasty Dog Food?
The article “Can People Distinguish Pâté from Dog Food?” (American Association of Wine Econo-
mists, April 2009, www.wine-economics.org) describes a study that investigated whether peo-
ple can tell the difference between dog food, pâté (a spread made of finely chopped liver, 
meat, or fish), and processed meats (such as Spam and liverwurst).
Researchers used a food processor to make spreads that had the same texture and con-
sistency as pâté from Newman’s Own dog food and from the processed meats. Each par-
ticipant in the study tasted five spreads (duck liver pâté, Spam, dog food, pork liver pâté, 
and liverwurst). After tasting all five spreads, each participant was asked to choose the one 
that they thought was the dog food. The researchers recorded which of the five spreads 
was selected as the one the participant thought was dog food. Consider the data in the fol-
lowing table.
Spread Chosen as Dog Food
Duck liver pâté
Spam
Dog food
Pork liver pâté
Liverwurst
Frequency
3
11
8
6
22
(Note: The frequencies in the table are consistent with summary values given in the paper. 
However, the sample size in the study was not actually 50.)
We can use the dog food taste data to test the hypothesis that the five different spreads 
(duck liver pâté, Spam, dog food, pork liver pâté, and liverwurst) are chosen equally often 
when people who have tasted all five spreads are asked to identify the one that they think 
is the dog food. If this is the case, each category proportion would be 1/5 5 .20. Because 
the sample size was 50, the expected count for the duck liver category is 50(0.20) 5 10. 
Because the other hypothesized category proportions are also 0.20, all of the expected 
counts are equal to 10.
Expected counts:
Category 1: np1 5 50(0.20) 5 10
Category 2: np2 5 50(0.20) 5 10
Category 3: np3 5 50(0.20) 5 10
Category 4: np4 5 50(0.20) 5 10
Category 5: np5 5 50(0.20) 5 10
We are now ready to use the nine-step hypothesis testing procedure to test the hypoth-
eses of interest.
1.  p1 5 proportion of all people who would choose duck liver pâté as the dog food
p2 5 proportion of all people who would choose Spam as the dog food
p3 5 proportion of all people who would choose dog food as the dog food
p4 5 proportion of all people who would choose pork liver pâté as the dog food
p5 5 proportion of all people who would choose liverwurst as the dog food
2.  H0 : p1 5 0.20, p2 5 0.20, p3 5 0.20, p4 5 0.20, p5 5 0.20
3.  Ha: At least one of the population proportions is not 0.20.
4.  Significance level: a 5 .05.
5.  Test statistic: X2 5 o
all categories
sobserved count 2 expected countd2
expected count
6.  Assumptions: In order to use the chi-square goodness-of-fit test, we must be willing 
to assume that the participants in this study can be regarded as a random or 
representative sample. If this assumption is not reasonable, we should be very careful 
generalizing results from this analysis to any larger population. All expected counts are 
at least 5, so the sample size is large enough for the chi-square goodness-of-fit test to 
be appropriate.
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

632 
●  Chapter 12  The Analysis of Categorical Data and Goodness-of-Fit Tests
7.  Calculations: From Minitab
Chi-Square Goodness-of-Fit Test 
Category
Observed
Test Proportion
Contribution 
Expected
to Chi-Sq
1
  3
0.2
10
4.9
2
11
0.2
10
0.1
3
  8
0.2
10
0.4
4
  6
0.2
10
1.6
5
22
0.2
10
14.4
N     DF     Chi-Sq     P-Value
50     4        21.4         0.000
8.  P-value: From Minitab, the P-value is 0.000.
9.  Conclusion: Based on this sample data, there is convincing evidence that the proportion 
identifying a spread as dog food is not the same for all five spreads. Here, it is interest-
ing to note that the large differences between the observed counts and the counts that 
would have been expected if the null hypothesis of equal proportions was true are in 
the duck liver pâté and the liverwurst categories, indicating that fewer than expected 
chose the duck liver and many more than expected chose the liverwurst as the one they 
thought was dog food. So, although we reject the hypothesis that proportion choosing 
each of the five spreads is the same, it is not because people were actually able to iden-
tify which one was really dog food!	
■
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
EXERCISES 12.1 - 12.13
12.1	 A particular cell phone case is available in a choice 
of four different colors. A store sells all four colors. 
To test the hypothesis that sales are equally divided 
among the four colors, a random sample of 100 pur-
chases is identified.
a.	 If the resulting X2 value were 6.4, what conclusion 
would you reach when using a test with signifi-
cance level 0.05? 
b.	What conclusion would be appropriate at signifi-
cance level 0.01 if X2 5 15.3? 
c.	 If there were six different covers rather than just 
four, what would you conclude if X2 5 13.7 and a 
test with a 5 0.05 was used? 
12.2	 From the given information in each case below, state 
what you know about the P-value for a chi-square 
test and give the conclusion for a significance level of 
a 5 .01.
a.	 X2 5 7.5, df 5 2		
d.  X2 5 21.3, df 5 4
b.	X2 5 13.0, df 5 6	
e.  X2 5 5.0, df 5 3
c.	 X2 5 18.0, df 5 9
12.3	 The authors of the paper “Is It Really About Me?  
Message Content in Social Awareness Streams”  
(Computer Supported cooperative Work 2010) studied 
a random sample of 350 Twitter users. For each 
Twitter user in the sample, the “tweets” sent during a 
particular time period were analyzed and the Twitter 
user was classified into one of the following catego-
ries based on the type of messages they usually sent:
Category
Description
IS
Information sharing
OC
Opinions and complaints
RT
Random thoughts
ME
Me now (what I am doing now)
O
Other
The accompanying table gives the observed counts 
for the five categories (approximate values read from 
a graph in the paper).
Twitter Type
IS
OC
RT
ME
O
Observed count
51
61
64
101
73
Carry out a hypothesis test to determine if there is 
convincing evidence that the proportions of Twitter 
users falling into each of the five categories are not all 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 12.1   Chi-Square Tests for Univariate Data 
●  633
the same. Use a significance level of 0.05. (Hint: See 
Example 12.2.)  
12.4	
 The article “In Bronx, Hitting Home Runs Is A Breeze” 
(USA Today, June 2, 2009) included a classification of 
87 home runs hit at the new Yankee Stadium accord-
ing to the direction that the ball was hit, resulting in 
the accompanying data.
Direction
Left 
Field
Left 
Center
Center
Right 
Center
Right 
Field
Number of 
Home Runs
18
10
7
18
34
a.	 Assuming that it is reasonable to regard this sample 
of 87 home runs as representative of home runs hit 
at Yankee Stadium, carry out a hypothesis test to 
determine if there is convincing evidence that the 
proportion of home runs hit is not the same for all 
five directions. (Hint:  See Example 12.2.) 
b.	Write a few sentences describing how the ob-
served counts for the five directions differ from 
what would have been expected if the proportion 
of home runs is the same for all five directions.
12.5	
 The authors of the paper “Racial Stereotypes in Chil-
dren’s Television Commercials” (Journal of Advertising 
Research [2008]: 80–93) counted the number of times 
that characters of different ethnicities appeared in 
commercials aired on Philadelphia television stations, 
resulting in the data in the accompanying table. 
Ethnicity
African-
American
Asian
Caucasian
Hispanic
Observed 
Frequency
57
11
330
6
Based on the 2000 Census, the proportion of the 
U.S. population falling into each of these four eth-
nic groups are .177 for African-American, .032 for 
Asian, .734 for Caucasian, and .057 for Hispanic. 
Do the data provide sufficient evidence to con-
clude that the proportions appearing in commer-
cials are not the same as the census proportions? 
(Hint:  See Example 12.2.) Test the relevant hypoth-
eses using a significance level of .01.
12.6	 The paper “Sociochemosensory and Emotional Functions” 
(Psychological Science [2009]: 1118–1124) describes 
an interesting experiment to determine if college 
students can identify their roommates by smell. Forty-
four female college students participated as subjects 
in the experiment. Each subject was presented with a 
set of three t-shirts that were identical in appearance. 
Each of the three t-shirts had been slept in for at least 
7 hours by a person who had not used any scented 
products (like scented deodorant, soap, or shampoo) 
for at least 48 hours prior to sleeping in the shirt. 
One of the three shirts had been worn by the subject’s 
roommate. The subject was asked to identify the shirt 
worn by her roommate. This process was then repeated 
with another three shirts, and the number of times out 
of the two trials that the subject correctly identified the 
shirt worn by her roommate was recorded. The result-
ing data is given in the accompanying table.
Number of Correct Identifications
0
1
2
Observed Count
21
10
13
a.	 Can a person identify her roommate by smell? 
If not, the data from the experiment should be 
consistent with what we would have expected to 
see if subjects were just guessing on each trial. 
That is, we would expect that the probability of 
selecting the correct shirt would be 1/3 on each 
of the two trials.
Calculate the proportions of the time we would 
expect to see 0, 1, and 2 correct identifications if 
subjects are just guessing. (Hint: 0 correct identi-
fications occurs if the first trial is incorrect and the 
second trial is incorrect.)
b.	Use the three proportions computed in Part (a) 
to carry out a test to determine if the numbers of 
correct identifications by the students in this study 
are significantly different from what would have 
been expected by guessing. Use a 5 .05. (Note: 
One of the expected counts is just a bit less than 
5. For purposes of this exercise, assume that it is 
OK to proceed with a goodness-of-fit test.)
12.7	 How would you answer the following question: 
Next Wednesday’s meeting has been moved forward 
two days. What day is the meeting now that it has 
been rescheduled?
This question is ambiguous as “moved forward” can 
be interpreted in two different ways. Did you answer 
Monday or Friday? The authors of the paper “Even 
Abstract Motion Influences the Understanding of Time” 
(Metaphor and Symbol [2011]: 260–271) wondered if the 
answers Monday and Friday would be provided an 
equal proportion of the time. A sample of students at 
Stanford University were asked this question, and the 
responses are summarized in the following table.
Response
Frequency
Monday
11
Friday
33
The authors of the paper used a chi-squared goodness-
of-fit test to test the null hypothesis H0 : p1 5 0.50,  
p2 5 0.50, where p1 is the proportion who would 
respond Monday and p2 is the proportion who would 
respond Friday. They reported X2 5 11.00 and P-value 
, 0.001. What conclusion can be drawn from this test?   
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

634 
●  Chapter 12  The Analysis of Categorical Data and Goodness-of-Fit Tests
12.8	
 USA Today (“Hybrid Car Sales Rose 81% Last Year, ” 
April 25, 2005) reported the top five states for sales of 
hybrid cars in 2004 as California, Virginia, Washington,  
Florida, and Maryland. Suppose that each car in a 
sample of 2004 hybrid car sales is classified by state 
where the sale took place. Sales from states other 
than the top five were excluded from the sample, 
resulting in the accompanying table.
State
Observed Frequency
California
250
Virginia
  ​56
Washington
  ​34
Florida
  ​33
Maryland
  33
Total
406
(The given observed counts are artificial, but they are 
consistent with hybrid sales figures given in the article.)
The 2004 population estimates from the Census 
Bureau web site are given in the accompanying table. 
The population proportion for each state was com-
puted by dividing each state population by the total 
population for all five states. Use the X2 goodness-of-
fit test and a significance level of a 5 .01 to test the 
hypothesis that hybrid sales for these five states are 
proportional to the 2004 population for these states. 
State
2004 Population
Population Proportion
California
35,842,038
0.495
Virginia
  ​7,481,332
0.103
Washington
  ​6,207,046
0.085
Florida
17,385,430
0.240
Maryland
  ​5,561,332
0.077
Total
72,477,178
12.9	
 The report “Fatality Facts 2004: Bicycles” (Insurance 
Institute, 2004) included the following table classify-
ing 715 fatal bicycle accidents according to time of 
day the accident occurred.
Time of Day
Number of Accidents
Midnight to 3 a.m.
  ​38
3 a.m. to 6 a.m.
  ​29
6 a.m. to 9 a.m.
  ​66
9 a.m. to Noon
  ​77
Noon to 3 p.m.
  ​99
3 p.m. to 6 p.m.
127
6 p.m. to 9 p.m.
166
9 p.m. to Midnight
113
a.	 Assume it is reasonable to regard the 715 bicycle 
accidents summarized in the table as a random 
sample of fatal bicycle accidents. Do these data 
support the hypothesis that fatal bicycle accidents 
are not equally likely to occur in each of the 
3-hour time periods used to construct the table? 
Test the relevant hypotheses using a significance 
level of .05.
b.	Suppose a safety office proposes that bicycle fatali-
ties are twice as likely to occur between noon and 
midnight as during midnight to noon and suggests 
the following hypothesis: H0 : p1 5 1/3, p2 5 2/3, 
where p1 is the proportion of accidents occur-
ring between midnight and noon and p2 is the 
proportion occurring between noon and midnight. 
Do the given data provide evidence against this hy-
pothesis, or are the data consistent with it? Justify 
your answer with an appropriate test. (Hint: Use 
the data to construct a one-way table with just two 
time categories.)
12.10	
 The report referenced in the previous exercise 
­(“Fatality Facts 2004: Bicycles”) also classified fatal 
bicycle accidents according to the month in which 
the accident occurred, resulting in the accompanying 
table.
Month
Number of Accidents
January
38
February
32
March
43
April
59
May
78
June
74
July
98
August
85
September
64
October
66
November
42
December
40
a.	 Use the given data to test the null hypothesis  
H0: p1 5 1/12, p2 5 1/12, ... , p12 5 1/12, 
where p1 is the proportion of fatal bicycle acci-
dents that occur in January, p2 is the proportion 
for February, and so on. Use a significance level 
of .01.
b.	The null hypothesis in Part (a) specifies that 
fatal accidents were equally likely to occur in 
any of the 12 months. But not all months have 
the same number of days. What null and alter-
native hypotheses would you test to determine 
if some months are riskier than others if you   
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 12.2   Tests for Homogeneity and Independence in a Two-way Table 
●  635
wanted to take differing month lengths into  
account? (Hint: 2004 was a leap year, with  
366 days.)
c.	 Test the hypotheses proposed in Part (b) using a .05 
significance level.
12.11	An article about the California lottery that appeared 
in the San Luis Obispo Tribune (December 15, 1999) 
gave the following information on the age distri­
bution of adults in California: 35% are between  
18 and 34 years old, 51% are between 35 and  
64 years old, and 14% are 65 years old or older. 
The article also gave information on the age distri-
bution of those who purchase lottery tickets. The 
following table is consistent with the values given in 
the article:
Age of Purchaser
Frequency
18–34
  ​36
35–64
130
65 and over
  ​34
Suppose that the data resulted from a random sample 
of 200 lottery ticket purchasers. Based on these sample 
data, is it reasonable to conclude that one or more of 
these three age groups buys a disproportionate share 
of lottery tickets? Use a chi-square goodness-of-fit test 
with a 5 .05.
12.12	 A certain genetic characteristic of a particular plant 
can appear in one of three forms (phenotypes).  
A researcher has developed a theory, according to 
which the hypothesized proportions are p1 5 .25,  
p2 5 .50, and p3 5 .25. A random sample of 200 
plants yields X2 5 4.63.
a.	 Carry out a test of the null hypothesis that the 
theory is correct, using level of significance a 5 .05.
b.	Suppose that a random sample of 300 plants had 
resulted in the same value of X2. How would  
your analysis and conclusion differ from those in 
Part (a)?
12.13	▼ The article “Linkage Studies of the Tomato”  
(Transactions of the Royal Canadian Institute [1931]: 
1–19) reported the accompanying data on phenotypes 
resulting from crossing tall cut-leaf tomatoes with 
dwarf potato-leaf tomatoes. There are four possible 
phenotypes: (1) tall cut-leaf, (2) tall potato-leaf,  
(3) dwarf cut-leaf, and (4) dwarf potato-leaf.
Phenotype
1
2
3
4
Frequency
926
288
293
104
Mendel’s laws of inheritance imply that p1 5 9/16,  
p2 5 3/16, p3 5 3/16, and p4 5 1/16. Are the data 
from this experiment consistent with Mendel’s laws? 
Use a .01 significance level. 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
 12.2  
Tests for Homogeneity and Independence in a Two-way Table
Data resulting from observations made on two different categorical variables can also 
be summarized in a table. As an example, suppose that residents of a particular city 
can watch national news on ABC, CBS, NBC, or PBS. A researcher wishes to know 
whether there is any relationship between political philosophy (liberal, moderate, or 
conservative) and preferred news network among those residents who regularly watch 
the national news. Let x denote the variable political philosophy and y the variable pre-
ferred network. A random sample of 300 regular watchers is selected, and each individual 
is asked for his or her x and y values. The data set is bivariate and might initially be  
displayed as follows:
Observation
x Value
y Value
1
Liberal
CBS
2
Conservative
ABC
3
Conservative
PBS
o
o
o
299
Moderate
NBC
300
Liberal
PBS
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

636 
●  Chapter 12  The Analysis of Categorical Data and Goodness-of-Fit Tests
Bivariate categorical data of this sort can most easily be summarized by constructing a 
two-way frequency table, or contingency table. This is a rectangular table that consists 
of a row for each possible value of x (each category specified by this variable) and a column 
for each possible value of y. There is a cell in the table for each possible (x, y) combination. 
Once such a table has been constructed, the number of times each particular (x, y) 
combination occurs in the data set is determined, and these numbers (frequencies) are 
entered in the corresponding cells of the table. The resulting numbers are called observed 
cell counts. The table for the example relating political philosophy to preferred network 
contains 3 rows and 4 columns (because x has 3 possible values and y has 3 and 4 possible 
values). Table 12.2 is one possible table.
ABC
CBS
NBC
PBS
Row Marginal Total
Liberal
20
20
25
15
  ​80
Moderate
45
35
50
20
150
Conservative
15
40
10
  ​5
  ​70
Column Marginal Total
80
95
85
40
300
Table 12.2  An Example of a 3 3 4 Frequency Table
Marginal totals are obtained by adding the observed cell counts in each row and 
also in each column of the table. The row and column marginal totals, along with the 
total of all observed cell counts in the table—the grand total—have been included in 
Table 12.2. 
The marginal totals provide information on the distribution of observed values for each 
variable separately. In this example, the row marginal totals reveal that the sample consisted of 
80 liberals, 150 moderates, and 70 conservatives. Similarly, column marginal totals indicate 
how often each of the preferred network categories occurred: 80 preferred ABC, 95 preferred 
CBS, and so on. The grand total, 300, is the number of observations in the bivariate data set.
Two-way frequency tables are often characterized by the number of rows and columns 
in the table (specified in that order: rows first, then columns). Table 12.2 is called a 3 3 4 
table. The smallest two-way frequency table is a 2 3 2 table, which has only two rows and 
two columns, resulting in four cells.
Two-way tables arise naturally in two different types of investigations. A researcher may 
be interested in comparing two or more populations or treatments on the basis of a single 
categorical variable and so may obtain independent samples from each population or treat-
ment. For example, data could be collected at a university to compare students, faculty, and 
staff on the basis of primary mode of transportation to campus (car, bicycle, motorcycle, 
bus, or by foot). One random sample of 200 students, another of 100 faculty members, 
and a third of 150 staff members might be chosen, and the selected individuals could be 
interviewed to obtain the necessary transportation information. 
Data from such a study could be summarized in a 3 3 5 two-way frequency table with 
row categories of student, faculty, and staff and column categories corresponding to the 
five possible modes of transportation. The observed cell counts could then be used to gain 
insight into differences and similarities among the three groups with respect to mode of 
transportation. This type of bivariate categorical data set is characterized by having one set 
of marginal totals predetermined (the sample sizes for the different groups). In the 3 3 5 
situation just discussed, the row totals would be fixed at 200, 100, and 150.
A two-way table also arises when the values of two different categorical variables are 
observed for all individuals or items in a single sample. For example, a sample of 500 reg-
istered voters might be selected. Each voter could then be asked both if he or she favored 
a particular property tax initiative and if he or she was a registered Democrat, Republican, 
or Independent. This would result in a bivariate data set with x representing the variable 
political affiliation (with categories Democrat, Republican, and Independent) and y repre-
senting the variable response (favors initiative or opposes initiative). The corresponding  
3 3 2 frequency table could then be used to investigate any association between position 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 12.2   Tests for Homogeneity and Independence in a Two-way Table 
●  637
on the tax initiative and political affiliation. This type of bivariate categorical data set is 
characterized by having only the grand total predetermined (by the sample size).
Comparing Two or More Populations or Treatments:  
A Test of Homogeneity
When the value of a categorical variable is recorded for members of independent random 
samples obtained from each population or treatment under study, the question of interest 
is whether the category proportions are the same for all the populations or treatments. As 
in Section 12.1, the test procedure uses a chi-square statistic that compares the observed 
counts to those that would be expected if there were no differences.
Example 12.4 
Risky Soccer?
 The paper “No Evidence of Impaired Neurocognitive Performance in Collegiate Soccer  
Players” (American Journal of Sports Medicine [2002]:157–162) compared head injuries for col-
legiate soccer players, athletes in sports other than soccer, and a group of students who 
were not involved in collegiate sports. Table 12.3, a 3 3 4 two-way frequency table, is the 
result of classifying each student in independently selected random samples of 91 soccer 
players, 96 non-soccer athletes, and 53 non-athletes according to the number of previous 
concussions the student reported on a medical history questionnaire.
Number of Concussions
0 
Concussions
1 
Concussion
2 
Concussions
3 or More 
Concussions
Row Marginal 
Total
Soccer Players
  45
25
11
10
  91
Non-Soccer Athletes
  68
15
  8
  5
  96
Non-Athletes
  45
  5
  3
  0
  53
Column Marginal Total
158
45
22
15
240
Table 12.3  Observed Counts for Example 12.4
Estimates of expected cell counts can be thought of in the following manner: There were 
240 responses on number of concussions, of which 158 were “0 concussions.” The propor-
tion of the total responding “0 concussions” is then
158
240 5 .658
If there were no difference in response for the different groups, we would expect about 
65.8% of the soccer players to have responded “0 concussions,” 65.8% of the non-soccer 
athletes to have responded “0 concussions,” and so on. This means that the estimated  
expected cell counts for the three cells in the “0 concussions” column are
 Expected count for soccer player and 0 concussions cell 5 .658s91d 5 59.9
Expected count for non- soccer athlete and 0 concussions cell 5 .658s96d 5 63.2
 Expected count for non-athlete and 0 concussions cell 5 .658s53d 5 34.9 
Notice that the expected cell counts do not have to be whole numbers. The expected cell 
counts for the remaining cells can be computed in a similar manner. For example,
45
240 5 .188
Understand the context ❭
● Data set available online
Mike Powell/Allsport Concepts/Getty Images
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

638 
●  Chapter 12  The Analysis of Categorical Data and Goodness-of-Fit Tests
of all responses were in the “1 concussion” category, so
 Expected count for soccer player and 1 concussion cell 5 .188s91d 5 17.1
Expected count for non–soccer athlete and 1 concussion cell 5 .188s96d 5 18.0
 Expected count for non–athlete and 1 concussion cell 5 .188s53d 5 10.0
It is common practice to display the observed cell counts and the corresponding expected 
cell counts in the same table, with the expected cell counts enclosed in parentheses. Ex-
pected cell counts for the remaining cells have been computed and entered into Table 12.4. 
Except for small differences resulting from rounding, each marginal total for the expected 
cell counts is identical to the total of the corresponding observed counts.
Number of Concussions
0 
Concussions
1 
Concussion
2 
Concussions
3 or More 
Concussions
Row Marginal 
Total
Soccer Players
  45 (59.9)
25 (17.1)
11 (8.3)
10 (5.7)
  91
Non-Soccer Athletes
  68 (63.2)
15 (18.0)
  8 (8.8)
  5 (6.0)
  96
Non-Athletes
  45 (34.9)
  5 (10.0)
  3 (4.9)
  0 (3.3)
  53
Column Marginal Total
158
45
22
15
240
Table 12.4  Observed and Expected Counts for Example 12.4
A quick comparison of the observed and expected cell counts in Table 12.4 reveals 
some large discrepancies, suggesting that the proportions falling into the concussion 
categories may not be the same for all three groups. This will be explored further in  
Example 12.5.	
■
In Example 12.4, the expected count for a cell corresponding to a particular group– 
response combination was computed in two steps. First, the response marginal proportion 
was computed (for example, 158/240 for the “0 concussions” response). Then this propor-
tion was multiplied by a marginal group total (for example, 91(158/240) for the soccer 
player group). Algebraically, this is equivalent to first multiplying the row and column 
marginal totals and then dividing by the grand total:
s91ds158d
240
To compare two or more populations or treatments on the basis of a categorical 
variable, calculate an expected cell count for each cell by selecting the corre-
sponding row and column marginal totals and then computing
expected cell count 5 srow marginal totaldscolumn marginal totald
grand total
These quantities represent what would be expected when there is no difference 
between the groups under study.
The X 2 statistic, introduced in Section 12.1, can now be used to compare the observed 
cell counts to the expected cell counts. A large value of X 2 results when there are large 
discrepancies between the observed and expected counts and suggests that the hypothesis 
of no differences between the populations should be rejected. A formal test procedure is 
described in the following box.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 12.2   Tests for Homogeneity and Independence in a Two-way Table 
●  639
Null Hypothesis:  ​  ​H0:  ​The category proportions are the same for all the 
populations or treatments (homogeneity of 
populations or treatments).
Alternative Hypothesis:  ​  ​Ha:  ​The category proportions are not all the 
same for all of the populations or treatments.
Test Statistic:  ​  ​X 2 5 o
all cells
sobserved cell count 2 expected cell countd2
expected cell count
The expected cell counts are estimated from the sample data (assuming that H0 
is true) using the formula
expected cell count 5 srow marginal totaldscolumn marginal totald
grand total
P-values:  ​  ​When H0 is true and the assumptions of the X   2 test are satisfied, 
X   2 has approximately a chi-square distribution with 
df 5 (number of rows 2 1)(number of columns 2 1) 
The P-value associated with the computed test statistic value is the area to the 
right of X   2 under the chi-square curve with the appropriate df. Upper-tail 
areas for chi-square distributions are found in Appendix Table 8.
Assumptions:  ​  ​1.  ​The data are from independently chosen random samples or 
from subjects who were assigned at random to treatment groups.
	
 2.  The sample size is large: all expected counts are at least 5. If 
some expected counts are less than 5, rows or columns of 
the table may be combined to achieve a table with 
satisfactory expected counts.
X2 Test for Homogeneity
Example 12.5 
Risky Soccer Revisited
The following table of observed and expected cell counts appeared in Example 12.4:
Number of Concussions
0 
Concussions
1 
Concussion
2 
Concussions
3 or More 
Concussions
Row Marginal 
Total
Soccer Players
  45 (59.9)
25 (17.1)
11 (8.3)
10 (5.7)
  91
Non-Soccer Athletes
  68 (63.2)
15 (18.0)
  8 (8.8)
  5 (6.0)
  96
Non-Athletes
  45 (34.9)
  5 (10.0)
  3 (4.9)
  0 (3.3)
  53
Column Marginal Total
   158
    45
     22
     15
240
Hypotheses:  ​H0:  ​Proportions in each response (number of concussions) category are the 
same for all three groups.
	
       Ha:  ​The category proportions are not all the same for all three groups.
Significance level:  ​A significance level of a 5 .05 will be used.
Test statistic:  ​X2 5 o
all cells
sobserved cell count 2  expected cell countd2
expected cell count
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭ 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

640 
●  Chapter 12  The Analysis of Categorical Data and Goodness-of-Fit Tests
Assumptions:  ​The random samples were independently chosen, so use of the test is 
appropriate if the sample size is large enough. One of the expected cell counts (in the 3 
or more concussions column) is less than 5, so we will combine the last two columns of 
the table prior to carrying out the chi-square test. The table we will work with is then
Number of Concussions
0 
Concussions
1 
Concussion
2 or More 
Concussions
Row Marginal 
Total
Soccer Players
  ​45 (59.9)
25 (17.1)
  21 (14.0)
  ​91
Non-Soccer Athletes
  ​68 (63.2)
15 (18.0)
    13 (14.8)
  ​96
Non-Athletes
  ​45 (34.9)
  ​5 (10.0)
  ​3 (8.2)
  ​53
Column Marginal Total
158
45
22
240
Calculation:
X2 5 s45 2 59.9d2
59.9
1 Á 1 s3 2 8.2d2
8.2
5 20.6
P-value:  ​The two-way table for this example has 3 rows and 3 columns, so the appropriate 
number of df is (3 2 1)(3 2 1) 5 4. Since 20.6 is greater than 18.46, the largest entry in 
the 4-df column of Appendix Table 8,
P-value , .001
Conclusion:  ​P-value # a, so H0 is rejected. There is strong evidence to support the claim 
that the proportions in the number of concussions categories are not the same for the three 
groups compared. The largest differences between the observed frequencies and those that 
would be expected if there were no group differences occur in the response categories for 
soccer players and for non-athletes, with soccer players having higher than expected pro-
portions in the 1 and 2 or more concussion categories and non-athletes having a higher 
than expected proportion in the 0 concussion category.	
■
Most statistical computer packages can calculate expected cell counts, the value of the X2 
statistic, and the associated P-value. This is illustrated in the following example.
Example 12.6 
Keeping the Weight Off
 The article “Daily Weigh-ins Can Help You Keep Off Lost Pounds, Experts Say” (Associated 
Press, October 17, 2005) describes an experiment in which 291 people who had lost at least 
10% of their body weight in a medical weight loss program were assigned at random to 
one of three groups for follow-up. One group met monthly in person, one group “met” 
online monthly in a chat room, and one group received a monthly newsletter by mail. After  
18 months, participants in each group were classified according to whether or not they had 
regained more than 5 pounds, resulting in the data given in Table 12.5.
Amount of Weight Gained
Regained  
5 lb or Less
Regained More  
Than 5 lb
Row Marginal  
Total
In-Person
52 (41.0)
45 (56.0)
97
Online
44 (41.0)
53 (56.0)
97
Newsletter
27 (41.0)
70 (56.0)
97
Table 12.5  Observed and Expected Counts for Example 12.6
Do the work ❭
Intrepret the results ❭
● Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 12.2   Tests for Homogeneity and Independence in a Two-way Table 
●  641
Does there appear to be a difference in the weight regained proportions for the three 
follow-up methods? The relevant hypotheses are
H0:  ​The proportions for the two weight-regained categories are the same for the three 
follow-up methods.
Ha:  ​The weight-regained category proportions are not the same for all three follow-up 
methods.
Significance level:  ​a 5 .01.
Test statistic:  ​X 2 5 o
all cells
sobserved cell count 2  expected cell countd2
expected cell count
Assumptions:  ​Table 12.5 contains the computed expected counts, all of which are greater 
than 5. The subjects in this experiment were assigned at random to the treatment groups.
Calculation:  ​Minitab output follows. For each cell, the Minitab output includes the observed cell 
count, the expected cell count, and the value of  sobserved cell count 2  expected cell countd2
expected cell count
 
for that cell (this is the contribution to the X2 statistic for this cell). From the output, X2 5 13.773.
Chi-Square Test 
Expected counts are printed below observed counts
Chi-Square contributions are printed below expected counts
,55
.5
Total
In-person
52
45
97
41.00
56.00
2.951
2.161
Online
44
53
97
41.00
56.00
0.220
0.161
Newsletter
27
70
97
41.00
56.00
4.780
3.500
Total
123
168
291
Chi-Sq 5 13.773,  ​  ​DF 5 2,  ​  ​P-Value 5 0.001
P-value:  ​From the Minitab output, P-value 5 .001.
Conclusion:  ​Since P-value # a, H0 is rejected. The data indicate that the proportions who have 
regained more than 5 pounds are not the same for the three follow-up methods. Comparing 
the observed and expected cell counts, we can see that the observed number in the newsletter 
group who had regained more than 5 pounds was higher than would have been expected and 
the observed number in the in-person group who had regained 5 or more pounds was lower 
than would have been expected if there were no difference in the three follow-up methods.	■
Testing for Independence of Two Categorical Variables
The X2 test statistic and test procedure can also be used to investigate the possibility of an 
association between two categorical variables in a single population. For example, televi-
sion viewers in a particular city might be categorized with respect to both preferred net-
work (ABC, CBS, NBC, or PBS) and favorite type of programming (comedy, drama, or in-
formation and news). The question of interest is often whether knowledge of one variable’s 
value provides any information about the value of the other variable—that is, are the two 
variables independent?
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

642 
●  Chapter 12  The Analysis of Categorical Data and Goodness-of-Fit Tests
Continuing the example, suppose that those who favor ABC prefer the three types of pro-
gramming in proportions .4, .5, and .1 and that these proportions are also correct for indi-
viduals favoring any of the other three networks. Then, learning an individual’s preferred 
network provides no added information about that individual’s favorite type of programming. 
The categorical variables preferred network and favorite program type would be independent.
To see how expected counts are obtained in this situation, recall from Chapter 6 that if 
two outcomes A and B are independent, then
P(A and B) 5 P(A)P(B)
so the proportion of time that the two outcomes occur together in the long run is the prod-
uct of the two individual long-run relative frequencies. Similarly, two categorical variables 
are independent in a population if, for each particular category of the first variable and each 
particular category of the second variable,
 1
proportion of individuals
in a particular category
combination 2 51
proportion in
specified category
of first variable 2?1
proportion in
specified category
of second variable2
This means that if 30% of all viewers prefer ABC and the proportions of program type pref-
erences are as previously given, then, assuming that the two variables are independent, the 
proportion of individuals who both favor ABC and prefer comedy is (.3)(.4) 5 .12 (or 12%).
Multiplying the right-hand side of the expression above by the sample size gives the 
expected number of individuals in the sample who are in both specified categories of the 
two variables when the variables are independent. However, these expected counts cannot 
be calculated, because the individual population proportions are not known. The solution 
is to estimate each population proportion using the corresponding sample proportion:
1
estimated expected number
in specified categories
of the two varibales 2 5 ssample sized ?1
observed number
in category of
first variable 2
sample size
?1
observed number
in category of
second variable2
sample size
 51
observed number in
category of first variable2?1
observed number in
category of second variable2
sample size
Suppose that the observed counts are displayed in a rectangular table in which rows cor-
respond to the categories of the first variable and columns to the categories of the second 
variable. Then, the numerator in the expression for estimated expected counts is just the 
product of the row and column marginal totals. This is exactly how expected counts were 
computed in the test for homogeneity of several populations, even though the reasoning 
used to arrive at the formula is different.
Null Hypothesis:  ​  ​H0:  ​The two variables are independent.
Alternative Hypothesis:  ​  ​Ha:  ​The two variables are not independent.
Test Statistic:  ​  ​X2 5 o
all cells
sobserved cell count 2 expected cell countd2
expected cell count
The expected cell counts are estimated (assuming H0 is true) using the formula 
expected cell count 5 srow marginal totaldscolumn marginal totald
grand total
X 2 Test for Independence
continued
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 12.2   Tests for Homogeneity and Independence in a Two-way Table 
●  643
Example 12.7 
A Pained Expression
 The paper “Facial Expression of Pain in Elderly Adults with Dementia” (Journal of  
Undergraduate Research [2006]) examined the relationship between a nurse’s assessment of 
a patient’s facial expression and his or her self-reported level of pain. Data for 89 patients 
are summarized in Table 12.6.
Self-Report
Facial Expression
No Pain
Pain
No Pain
17
40
Pain
  3
29
Table 12.6  Observed Counts for Example 12.7
The authors were interested in determining if there is evidence of a relationship between 
a facial expression that reflects pain and self-reported pain because patients with dementia 
do not always give a verbal indication that they are in pain.
Using a .05 significance level, we will test
H0:  ​Facial expression and self-reported pain are independent.
Ha:  ​Facial expression and self-reported pain are not independent.
Significance level:  ​a 5 .05.
Test statistic:  ​X2 5 o
all cells
sobserved cell count 2 expected cell countd2
expected cell count
Assumptions:  ​Before we can check the assumptions we must first compute the expected 
cell counts.
Cell
Row
Column
Expected Cell Count
1
1
s57ds20d
89
5 12.81
1
2
s57ds69d
89
5 44.19
2
1
s32ds20d
89
5 7.19
2
2
 s32ds69d
89
5 24.81
● Data set available online
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Step-by-step technology  
instructions available  
online for SPSS
P-values:  ​  ​When H0 is true and the assumptions of the X 2 test are satisfied, 
X 2 has approximately a chi-square distribution with
df 5 (number of rows 2 1)(number of columns 2 1) 
The P-value associated with the computed test statistic value is the area to the 
right of X 2 under the chi-square curve with the appropriate df. Upper-tail 
areas for chi-square distributions are found in Appendix Table 8.
Assumptions:  ​  ​1.  ​The observed counts are based on data from a random 
sample.
	
2.  ​The sample size is large: All expected counts are at least 5. 
If some expected counts are less than 5, rows or columns 
of the table can be combined to achieve a table with 
satisfactory expected counts.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

644 
●  Chapter 12  The Analysis of Categorical Data and Goodness-of-Fit Tests
All expected cell counts are greater than 5. Although the participants in the study were not 
randomly selected, they were thought to be representative of the population of nursing home 
patients with dementia. The observed and expected counts are given together in Table 12.7.
Self-Report
Facial Expression
No Pain
Pain
No Pain
17 (12.81)
40 (44.19)
Pain
  3 (7.19)
29 (24.81)
Table 12.7  Observed and Expected Counts  
for Example 12.7
Calculation:  ​X2 5 s17 2 12.81d2
12.81
1 Á 1 s29 2 24.81d2
24.81
5 4.92
P-value:  ​The table has 2 rows and 2 columns, so df 5 (2 2 1)(2 2 1) 5 1. The entry 
closest to 4.92 in the 1-df column of Appendix Table 8 is 5.02, so the approximate P-value 
for this test is
P-value ø .025
Conclusion:  ​Since P-value # a, we reject H0 and conclude that there is convincing evi-
dence that a nurse’s assessment of facial expression and self-reported pain are not indepen-
dent.	
■
Example 12.8 
Stroke Mortality and Education
 Table 12.8 was constructed using data from the article “Influence of Socioeconomic Status 
on Mortality After Stroke” (Stroke [2005]: 310–314). One of the questions of interest to the 
author was whether there was an association between survival after a stroke and level of 
education. Medical records for a sample of 2333 residents of Vienna, Austria, who had suf-
fered a stroke were used to classify each individual according to two variables—survival 
(survived, died) and level of education (no basic education, secondary school graduation, 
technical training/apprenticed, higher secondary school degree, university graduate). Ex-
pected cell counts (computed under the assumption of no association between survival and 
level of education) appear in parentheses in the table.
No Basic 
Education
Secondary 
School 
Graduation
Technical 
Training/
Apprenticed
Higher 
Secondary 
School Degree
University 
Graduate
Died
13 (17.40)
  91 (77.18)
196 (182.68)
  33 (41.91)
  36 (49.82)
Survived
97 (92.60)
397 (410.82)
959 (972.32)
232 (223.09)
279 (265.18)
Table 12.8  Observed and Expected Counts for Example 12.8
The X2 test with a significance level of .01 will be used to test the relevant hypotheses:
H0:  ​Survival and level of education are independent.
Ha:  ​Survival and level of education are not independent.
Significance level:  ​a 5 .01.
Test statistic:  ​X2 5 o
all cells
sobserved cell count 2 expected cell countd2
expected cell count
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
● Data set available online
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 12.2   Tests for Homogeneity and Independence in a Two-way Table 
●  645
Assumptions:  ​All expected cell counts are at least 5. Assuming that the data can be viewed 
as representative of adults who suffer strokes, the X2 test can be used.
Calculation:  ​Minitab output is shown. From the Minitab output, X2 5 12.219.
Chi-Square Test
Expected counts are printed below observed counts 
Chi-Square contributions are printed below expected counts
1
2
3
4
5
Total
1
13
91
196
33
36
369
17.40
77.18
182.68
41.91
49.82
1.112
2.473
0.971
1.896
3.835
2
97
397
959
232
279
1964
92.60
410.82
972.32
223.09
265.18
0.209
0.465
0.182
0.356
0.720
Total
110
488
1155
265
315
2333
Chi-Sq 5 12.219,  ​  ​DF 5 4,  ​  ​P-Value 5 0.016
P-value:  ​From the Minitab output, P-value 5 .016.
Conclusion:  ​Since P-value . a, H0 is not rejected. There is not sufficient evidence to  
conclude that there is an association between level of education and survival.	
■
In some investigations, values of more than two categorical variables are recorded for 
each individual in the sample. For example, in addition to the variable survival and level of 
education, the researchers in the study referenced in Example 12.8 also collected informa-
tion on occupation. A number of interesting questions could then be explored: Are all three 
variables independent of one another? Is it possible that occupation and survival are depen-
dent but that the relationship between them does not depend on level of education? For a 
particular education level group, is there an association between survival and occupation? 
The X2 test procedure described in this section for analysis of bivariate categorical data 
can be extended for use with multivariate categorical data. Appropriate hypothesis tests 
can then be used to provide insight into the relationships between variables. However, the 
computations required to calculate expected cell counts and to compute the value of X2 
are quite tedious, so they are seldom done without the aid of a computer. Most statistical 
computer packages can perform this type of analysis. Consult the references by Agresti and 
Findlay, Everitt, or Mosteller and Rourke listed in the back of the book for further informa-
tion on the analysis of categorical data.
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
12.14	A particular state university system has six cam-
puses. On each campus, a random sample of 
students will be selected, and each student will be 
categorized with respect to political philosophy  
as liberal, moderate, or conservative. The null  
hypothesis of interest is that the proportion of  
students falling in these three categories is the 
same at all six campuses.
a.	 On how many degrees of freedom will the result-
ing X2 test be based? 
b.	How does your answer in Part (a) change if there 
are seven campuses rather than six?  ​
c.	 How does your answer in Part (a) change if there 
are four rather than three categories for political 
philosophy? 
12.15	A random sample of 1000 registered voters in a 
certain county is selected, and each voter is catego-
rized with respect to both educational level (four 
categories) and preferred candidate in an upcoming 
election for county supervisor (five possibilities). The 
hypothesis of interest is that educational level and 
preferred candidate are independent.
a.	 If X2 5 7.2, what would you conclude at signifi-
cance level .10?
EXERCISES 12.14 - 12.31
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

646 
●  Chapter 12  The Analysis of Categorical Data and Goodness-of-Fit Tests
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
b.	If there were only four candidates running for 
election, what would you conclude if X2 5 14.5 
and a 5 .05? 
12.16	 The report “Mobile Youth Around the World” (The 
Nielsen Company, December 2010) provided the fol-
lowing information on gender of smartphone users 
for representative samples of young people age 15 to 
24 in several different countries:
Country
Percent Female
Percent Male
United States
55%
45%
Spain
39%
61%
Italy
38%
62%
India
20%
80%
a.	 Suppose the sample sizes were 1000 for the 
United States and for India and 500 for Spain and 
Italy. Complete the following two-way table by 
entering the observed counts.
Country
Female
Male
United States
Spain
Italy
India
b.	Carry out a hypothesis test to determine if there is 
convincing evidence that the gender proportions 
are not the same for all four countries. Use a sig-
nificance level of 0.05. (Hint: See Example 12.7.)
12.17	  The paper  “Contemporary College Students and Body 
Piercing” (Journal of Adolescent Health [2004]: 58–61) 
described a survey of 450 undergraduate students 
at a state university in the southwestern region of 
the United States. Each student in the sample was 
classified according to class standing (freshman, 
sophomore, junior, or senior) and body art category 
(body piercings only, tattoos only, both tattoos and 
body piercings, no body art). 
	 	 Use the data in the accompanying table to determine 
if there is evidence that there is an association between 
class standing and response to the body art question. 
Assume that it is reasonable to regard the sample of 
students as representative of the students at this uni-
versity. Use a 5 .01. (Hint: See Example 12.7.)  
Body 
Piercings 
Only
Tattoos 
Only
Both Body 
Piercing and 
Tattoos
No 
Body 
Art
Freshman
61
  7
14
86
Sophomore
43
11
10
64
Junior
20
  9
  7
43
Senior
21
17
23
54
12.18	  The accompanying data on degree of spirituality 
for a sample of natural scientists and a sample of 
social scientists working at research universities 
appeared in the paper “Conflict Between Religion 
and Science among Academic Scientists” (Journal 
for the Scientific Study of Religion [2009]: 276–292). 
Assume that it is reasonable to regard these two 
samples as representative of natural and social sci-
entists at research universities. Is there evidence 
that the spirituality category proportions are not 
the same for natural and social scientists? Test the 
relevant hypotheses using a significance level  
of .01. (Hint: See Example 12.7.) 
Degree of Spirituality
Very
Moderate
Slightly
Not at All
Natural Scientists
56
162
198
211
Social Scientists
56
223
243
239
12.19	  The authors of the paper “The Relationship of Field 
of Study to Current Smoking Status Among College  
Students” (College Student Journal [2009]: 744–754)  
carried out a study to investigate if smoking rates 
were different for college students in different majors. 
Each student in a large random sample of students at 
the University of Minnesota was classified according 
to field of study and whether or not they had smoked 
in the past 30 days. The data are given in the accom-
panying table. 
Field of Study
Smoked in the 
Last 30 Days
Did Not Smoke 
in Last 30 Days
1.  Undeclared
176
489
2.  Art, design,  
performing arts
149
336
3.  Humanities
197
454
4.  Communication, lan-
guages, cultural studies
233
389
5.  Education
  56
170
6.  Health sciences
227
717
7.  Mathematics,  
engineering,  
sciences
245
924
8.  Social science,  
human services
306
593
9.  Individualized course 
of study
134
260
a.	 Is there evidence that field of study and smoking 
status are not independent? Use the Minitab out-
put on the next page to test the relevant hypoth-
eses using a 5 .01. (Hint: See Example 12.8.)   
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 12.2   Tests for Homogeneity and Independence in a Two-way Table 
●  647
Chi-Square Test: Smoked, Did Not Smoke
Expected counts are printed below observed counts
Chi-Square contributions are printed below expected counts
Smoked
Did Not Smoke
Total
1
176
489
665
189.23
425.77
0.925
0.368
2
149
336
485
138.01
346.99
0.875
0.348
3
197
454
651
185.25
465.75
0.746
0.297
4
233
389
622
177.00
445.00
17.721
7.048
5
56
170
226
64.31
161.69
1.074
0.427
6
227
717
944
268.62
675.38
6.449
2.565
7
245
924
1169
332.65
836.35
23.094
9.185
8
306
593
899
255.82
643.18
9.844
3.915
9
134
260
394
112.12
281.88
4.272
1.699
Total
1723
4332
6055
Chi-Sq 5 90.853, DF 5 8, P-Value 5 0.000
b.	Write a few sentences describing how the smoking 
status categories are related to field of study. (Hint: 
Focus on cells that have large values of 
sobserved cell count 2 expected cell countd2
expected cell count
.
12.20	
 The authors of the paper “Movie Character Smoking 
and Adolescent Smoking: Who Matters More, Good Guys 
or Bad Guys?” (Pediatrics [2009]: 135–141) classified 
characters who were depicted smoking in movies  
released between 2000 and 2005. The smoking 
characters were classified according to sex and 
whether the character type was positive, negative,  
or neutral. The resulting data is given in the accom-
panying table. 
Assume that it is reasonable to consider this sample 
of smoking movie characters as representative of smok-
ing movie characters. Do the data provide evidence 
of an association between sex and character type for 
movie characters who smoke? Use a 5.05. (Hint: See 
Example 12.7.) 
Character Type
Sex
Positive
Negative
Neutral
Male
255
106
130
Female
  85
  12
  49
12.21	
 The data in the accompanying table is from the 
paper “Gender Differences in Food Selections of Students 
at a Historically Black College and University” (College  
Student Journal [2009]: 800–806). Suppose that the data 
resulted from classifying each person in a random 
sample of 48 male students and each person in a 
random sample of 91 female students at a particular 
college according to their response to a question 
about whether they usually eat three meals a day or 
rarely eat three meals a day.
Usually Eat  
3 Meals a Day
Rarely Eat  
3 Meals a Day
Male
26
22
Female
37
54
a.	 Is there evidence that the proportions falling into 
each of the two response categories are not the same 
for males and females? Use the X2 statistic to test the 
relevant hypotheses with a significance level of .05.
b.	Are your calculations and conclusions from Part 
(a) consistent with the accompanying Minitab 
output?
Expected counts are printed below observed counts
Chi-Square contributions are printed below expected counts
Usually
Rarely
Total
Male
26
22
  48
21.76
26.24
0.828
0.686
Female
37
54
91
41.24
49.76
0.437
0.362
Total
63
76
139
Chi-Sq 5 2.314, DF 5 1, P-Value 5 0.128
c.	 Because the response variable in this exercise 
has only two categories (usually and rarely), we 
could have also answered the question posed in 
Part (a) by carrying out a two-sample z test of 
H0: p1 2 p2 5 0 versus Ha: p1 2 p2 Þ 0, where 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

648 
●  Chapter 12  The Analysis of Categorical Data and Goodness-of-Fit Tests
p1 is the proportion who usually eat three meals 
a day for males and p2 is the proportion who 
usually eat three meals a day for females. Minitab 
output from the two-sample z test is shown below. 
Using a significance level of .05, does the two-
sample z test lead to the same conclusion as in 
Part (a)?
Test for Two Proportions
Sample
  X
  N
Sample p
Male
26
 48
0.541667
Female
37
 91
0.406593
Difference 5 p (1) - p (2)
Test for difference 5 0 (vs not 5 0): Z 5 1.53  
P-Value ​5 ​0.127
d.	How do the P-values from the tests in Parts (a) 
and (c) compare? Does this surprise you? Explain?
12.22	
 In a study of high-achieving high school gradu-
ates, the authors of the report “High-Achieving Seniors 
and the College Decision” (Lipman Hearne, October 
2009) surveyed 828 high school graduates who were 
considered “academic superstars” and 433 gradu-
ates who were considered “solid performers.” One 
question on the survey asked the distance from their 
home to the college they attended. 
Assuming it is reasonable to regard these two 
samples as random samples of academic superstars 
and solid performers nationwide, use the accompa-
nying data to determine if it is reasonable to conclude 
that the distribution of responses over the distance 
from home categories is not the same for academic 
superstars and solid performers. Use a 5 .05.
Distance of College from Home (in miles)
Student Group
Less 
than 40
40 to 
99
100 to 
199
200 to 
399
400 or 
More
Academic Superstars
157
157
141
149
224
Solid Performers
104
  95
  82
  65
  87
12.23	  Does including a gift with a request for a dona-
tion affect the proportion who will make a dona-
tion? This question was investigated in a study 
described in the report “Gift-Exchange in the Field” 
(Institute for the Study of Labor, 2007). In this study, 
letters were sent to a large number of potential 
donors in Germany. The letter requested a donation 
for funding schools in Bangladesh. Those who were 
to receive the letter were assigned at random to one 
of three groups. Those in the first group received 
the letter with no gift. Those in the second group 
received a letter that included a small gift (a post-
card), and those in the third group received a letter 
with a larger gift (four postcards). The response of 
interest was whether or not a letter resulted in a 
donation.
Donation
No Donation
No Gift
397
2865
Small Gift
465
2772
Large Gift
691
2656
a.	 Carry out a hypothesis test to determine if there is 
convincing evidence that the proportions in the two 
donation categories are not the same for all three 
types of requests. Use a significance level of .01.
b.	Based on your analysis in Part (a) and a compari-
son of observed and expected cell counts, write a 
brief description of how the proportion making a 
donation varies for the three types of request.
12.24	  The paper “Credit Card Misuse, Money Attitudes, 
and Compulsive Buying Behavior: Comparison of Inter-
nal and External Locus of Control Consumers” (College 
Student Journal [2009]: 268–275) describes a study 
that surveyed a sample of college students at two 
midwestern public universities. Based on the survey 
responses, students were classified into two “locus 
of control” groups (internal and external) based on 
the extent to which they believe that they control 
what happens to them. Those in the internal locus 
of control group believe that they are usually in 
control of what happens to them, whereas those in 
the external locus of control group believe that it is 
usually factors outside their control that determines 
what happens to them. Each student was also clas-
sified according to a measure of compulsive buying. 
The resulting data are summarized in the accompa-
nying table. Can the researchers conclude that there is 
an association between locus of control and compulsive 
buying behavior? Carry out a X 2 test using a 5 01.  
Assume it is reasonable to regard the sample as rep-
resentative of college students at midwestern public 
universities.
Locus of Control
Internal
External
Compulsive 
Buyer?
Yes
  3
14
No
52
57
12.25	  Each person in a large sample of German adolescents 
was asked to indicate which of 50 popular movies they 
had seen in the past year. Based on the response, the 
amount of time (in minutes) of alcohol use contained in 
the movies the person had watched was estimated. Each 
person was then classified into one of four groups based 
on the amount of movie alcohol exposure (groups 1, 2, 
3, and 4, with 1 being the lowest exposure and 4 being 
the highest exposure). Each person was also classified   
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 12.2   Tests for Homogeneity and Independence in a Two-way Table 
●  649
according to school performance. The resulting data is 
given in the accompanying table (from “Longitudinal 
Study of Exposure to Entertainment Media and Alcohol Use 
among German Adolescents,” Pediatrics [2009]: 989–995). 
Assume it is reasonable to regard this sample as 
a random sample of German adolescents. Is there 
evidence that there is an association between school 
performance and movie exposure to alcohol? Carry 
out a hypothesis test using a 5 .05.
Alcohol Exposure Group
1
2
3
4
School  
Performance
Excellent
110
  93
  49
  65
Good
328
325
316
295
Average/
Poor
239
259
312
317
12.26	
 In a study to determine if hormone therapy increases 
risk of venous thrombosis in menopausal women, 
each person in a sample of 579 women who had been 
diagnosed with venous thrombosis was classified 
according to hormone use. Each woman in a sample 
of 2243 women who had not been diagnosed with 
venous thrombosis was also classified according to 
hormone use. Data from the study are given in the 
accompanying table (Journal of the American Medical 
Association [2004]: 1581–1587). The women in each 
of the two samples were selected at random from 
patients at a large HMO in the state of Washington.
a.	 Is there convincing evidence that the proportions 
falling into each of the hormone use categories is 
not the same for women who have been diagnosed 
with venous thrombosis and those who have not?
b.	To what populations would it be reasonable to 
generalize the conclusions of Part (a)? Explain.
Current Hormone Use
None
Esterified 
Estrogen
Conjugated Equine 
Estrogen
Venous  
Thrombosis
  ​372
  ​86
121
No Venous 
Thrombosis
1439
515
289
12.27	  The paper “Overweight Among Low-Income Pre-
school Children Associated with the Consumption of 
Sweet Drinks” (Pediatrics [2005]: 223–229) described 
a study of children who were underweight or nor-
mal weight at age 2. Children in the sample were 
classified according to the number of sweet drinks 
consumed per day and whether or not the child 
was overweight one year after the study began. Is 
there evidence of an association between whether or 
not children are overweight after one year and the 
number of sweet drinks consumed? Assume that it 
is reasonable to regard the sample of children in this 
study as representative of 2- to 3-year-old children 
and then test the appropriate hypotheses using  
a .05 significance level.  ​
Number of Sweet Drinks 
Consumed per Day
Overweight?
Yes
No
0
  ​22
  ​930
1
  ​73
2074
2
  ​56
1681
3 or More
102
3390
12.28	  The 2006 Expedia Vacation Deprivation Survey 
(Ipsos Insight, May 18, 2006) described the results of 
a poll of working adults in Canada. Each person in 
a random sample was classified according to gender 
and the number of vacation days he or she usually 
took each year. The resulting data are summarized 
in the given table. 
a.	 Is it reasonable to conclude that there is an 
association between gender and the number of 
vacation days taken? 
b.	To what population would it be reasonable to gen-
eralize this conclusion? 
Gender
Days of Vacation
Male
Female
None
  ​51
42
1–5
  ​21
25
6–10
  ​67
79
11–15
111
94
16–20
  ​71
70
21–25
  ​82
58
More than 25
118
79
12.29	  A survey was conducted in the San Francisco 
Bay area in which each participating individual was 
classified according to the type of vehicle used most 
often and city of residence. A subset of the resulting 
data are given in the accompanying table (The Rela-
tionship of Vehicle Type Choice to Personality, Lifestyle, 
Attitudinal and Demographic Variables, Technical Report 
UCD-ITS-RR02-06, DaimlerCrysler Corp., 2002).
City
Vehicle Type
  Concord
Pleasant 
Hill
North San 
Francisco
Small
68
  ​83
221
Compact
63
  ​68
106
Midsize
88
123
142
Large
24
  ​18
  ​11   
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

650 
●  Chapter 12  The Analysis of Categorical Data and Goodness-of-Fit Tests
Do the data provide convincing evidence of an as-
sociation between city of residence and vehicle type? 
Use a significance level of .05. You may assume that it is 
reasonable to regard the sample as a random sample of 
Bay area residents.
12.30	  A story describing a date rape was read by 352 
high school students. To investigate the effect of 
the victim’s clothing on subject’s judgment of the 
situation described, the story was accompanied by 
either a photograph of the victim dressed provoca-
tively, a photo of the victim dressed conservatively, 
or no picture. Each student was asked whether the 
situation described in the story was one of rape. 
Data from the article “The Influence of Victim’s Attire 
on Adolescent Judgments of Date Rape” (Adolescence 
[1995]: 319–323) are given in the accompanying table. 
Is there evidence that the proportion who believe 
that the story described a rape differs for the three 
different photo groups? Test the relevant hypotheses 
using a 5 01. 
Picture
Response
Provocative
Conservative
No Picture
Rape
80
104
92
Not Rape
47
  ​12
17
12.31	  Can people tell the difference between a female 
nose and a male nose? This important (?) research 
question was examined in the article “You Can Tell by 
the Nose: Judging Sex from an Isolated Facial Feature” 
(Perception [1995]: 969–973). Eight Caucasian males 
and eight Caucasian females posed for nose photos. 
The article states that none of the volunteers wore 
nose studs or had prominent nasal hair. Each person 
placed a black Lycra tube over his or her head in 
such a way that only the nose protruded through a 
hole in the material. Photos were then taken from 
three different angles: front view, three-quarter view, 
and profile. 
These photos were shown to a sample of under-
graduate students. Each student in the sample was 
shown one of the nose photos and asked whether it 
was a photo of a male or a female. The response  
was then classified as either correct or incorrect. The  
accompanying table was constructed using summary 
values reported in the article. 
Is there evidence that the proportion of correct 
sex identifications differs for the three different nose 
views?  ​
View
Sex ID
Front
Profile
Three-Quarter
Correct
23
26
29
Incorrect
17
14
11   
Many studies, particularly those in the social sciences, result in categorical data. The ques-
tions of interest in such studies often lead to an analysis that involves using a chi-square test.
Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses
Three different chi-square tests were introduced in this chapter—the goodness-of-fit test, 
the test for homogeneity, and the test for independence. They are used in different settings 
and to answer different questions. When summarizing the results of a chi-square test, be 
sure to indicate which chi-square test was performed. One way to do this is to be clear 
about how the data were collected and the nature of the hypotheses being tested.
It is also a good idea to include a table of observed and expected counts in addition to 
reporting the computed value of the test statistic and the P-value. And finally, make sure to 
give a conclusion in context, and make sure that the conclusion is worded appropriately for 
the type of test conducted. For example, don’t use terms such as independence and associa-
tion to describe the conclusion if the test performed was a test for homogeneity.
 12.3  
Interpreting and Communicating the Results  
of Statistical Analyses
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 12.3   Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses  
●  651
Interpreting the Results of Statistical Analyses
As with the other hypothesis tests considered, it is common to find the result of a chi-
square test summarized by giving the value of the chi-square test statistic and an associated  
P-value. Because categorical data can be summarized compactly in frequency tables, 
the data often are given in the article (unlike data for numerical variables, which are 
rarely given).
What to Look For in Published Data
Here are some questions to consider when you are reading an article that contains the 
results of a chi-square test:
●
●Are the variables of interest categorical rather than numerical?
●
●Are the data given in the article in the form of a frequency table?
●
●If a two-way frequency table is involved, is the question of interest one of homogeneity 
or one of independence?
●
●What null hypothesis is being tested? Are the results of the analysis reported in the 
correct context (homogeneity, etc.)?
●
●Is the sample size large enough to make use of a chi-square test reasonable? (Are all 
expected counts at least 5?)
●
●What is the value of the test statistic? Is the associated P-value given? Should the null 
hypothesis be rejected?
●
●Are the conclusions drawn by the authors consistent with the results of the test?
●
●How different are the observed and expected counts? Does the result have practical 
significance as well as statistical significance?
The authors of the article “Predicting Professional Sports Game Outcomes from Intermediate 
Game Scores” (Chance [1992]: 18–22) used a chi-square test to determine whether there was 
any merit to the idea that basketball games are not settled until the last quarter, whereas 
baseball games are over by the seventh inning. They also considered football and hockey. 
Data were collected for 189 basketball games, 92 baseball games, 80 hockey games, and  
93 football games. The analyzed games were sampled randomly from all games played dur-
ing the 1990 season for baseball and football and for the 1990–1991 season for basketball 
and hockey. For each game, the late-game leader was determined, and then it was noted 
whether the late-game leader actually ended up winning the game. The resulting data are 
summarized in the following table:
Sport
Late-Game Leader Wins 
Late-Game Leader Loses
Basketball
150
39
Baseball
  86
  6
Hockey
   65
 15
Football
  72
 21
The authors stated that the 
“late-game leader is defined as the team that is ahead after three quarters in basketball and 
football, two periods in hockey, and seven innings in baseball. The chi-square value (with 
three degrees of freedom) is 10.52 (P , .015).” 
They also concluded that 
“the sports of basketball, hockey, and football have remarkably similar percentages of late-
game reversals, ranging from 18.8% to 22.6%. The sport that is an anomaly is baseball. Only 
6.5% of baseball games resulted in late reversals. . . . [The chi-square test] is statistically 
significant due almost entirely to baseball.”
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

652 
●  Chapter 12  The Analysis of Categorical Data and Goodness-of-Fit Tests
In this particular analysis, the authors are comparing four populations (games from each 
of the four sports) on the basis of a categorical variable with two categories (late-game 
leader wins and late-game leader loses). The appropriate null hypothesis is then
H0:  ​The population proportion in each category (leader wins, leader loses) is the same 
for all four sports.
Based on the reported value of the chi-square statistic and the associated P-value, this null 
hypothesis is rejected, leading to the conclusion that the category proportions are not the 
same for all four sports.
The validity of the chi-square test requires that the sample sizes be large enough so that 
no expected counts are less than 5. Is this reasonable here? The following Minitab output 
shows the expected cell counts and the computation of the X2 statistic:
Chi-Square Test
Expected counts are printed below observed counts
Leader W
Leader L
Total
1
150
39
189
155.28
33.72
2
86
6
92
75.59
16.41
3
65
15
80
65.73
14.27
4
72
21
93
76.41
16.59
Total
373
81
454
Chi-Sq 5  0.180 1  0.827 1
1.435 1  6.607 1
0.008 1  0.037 1
0.254 1  1.171 5 10.518
DF 5 3,  P-Value 5 0.015
The smallest expected count is 14.27, so the sample sizes are large enough to justify the 
use of the X 2 test. Notice that the two cells in the table that correspond to baseball contrib-
ute a total of 1.435 1 6.607 5 8.042 to the value of the X 2 statistic of 10.518. This is due 
to the large discrepancies between the observed and expected counts for these two cells. 
There is reasonable agreement between the observed and the expected counts in the other 
cells. This is probably the basis for the authors’ conclusion that baseball is the anomaly and 
that the other sports were similar.
A Word to the Wise: Cautions and Limitations
Be sure to keep the following in mind when analyzing categorical data using one of the 
chi-square tests presented in this chapter:
1.	 Don’t confuse tests for homogeneity with tests for independence. The hypoth-
eses and conclusions are different for the two types of test. Tests for homogeneity 
are used when the individuals in each of two or more independent samples are 
classified according to a single categorical variable. Tests for independence are 
used when individuals in a single sample are classified according to two categori-
cal variables.
2.	 As was the case for the hypothesis tests of earlier chapters, remember that we can 
never say we have strong support for the null hypothesis. For example, if we do 
not reject the null hypothesis in a chi-square test for independence, we cannot 
conclude that there is convincing evidence that the variables are independent. We 
can only say that we were not convinced that there is an association between the 
variables.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 12.3   Interpreting and Communicating the Results of Statistical Analyses  
●  653
3.	 Be sure that the assumptions for the chi-square test are reasonable. P-values 
based on the chi-square distribution are only approximate, and if the large sample 
conditions are not met, the true P-value may be quite different from the approxi-
mate one based on the chi-square distribution. This can sometimes lead to incor-
rect conclusions. Also, for the chi-square test of homogeneity, the assumption of 
independent samples is particularly important.
4.	 Don’t jump to conclusions about causation. Just as a strong correlation between 
two numerical variables does not mean that there is a cause-and-effect relation-
ship between them, an association between two categorical variables does not 
imply a causal relationship.
12.32	 The following passage is from the paper “Gender Dif-
ferences in Food Selections of Students at a Historically 
Black College and University” (College Student Journal 
[2009]: 800–806):
Also significant was the proportion of males 
and their water consumption (8 oz. servings) 
compared to females (X 2 5 8.16, P 5 .086). 
Males came closest to meeting recommended 
daily water intake (64 oz. or more) than females 
(29.8% vs. 20.9%).
This statement was based on carrying out a X 2 test 
of independence using data in a two-way table where 
rows corresponded to gender (male, female) and col-
umns corresponded to number of servings of water 
consumed per day, with categories none, one, two to 
three, four to five, and six or more.
a.	 What hypotheses did the researchers test? What is 
the number of degrees of freedom associated with 
the report value of the X 2 statistic?
b.	The researchers based their statement that the 
proportions falling in the water consumption 
categories were not all the same for males and 
females on a test with a significance level of .10. 
Would they have reached the same conclusion if a 
significance level of .05 had been used? Explain.
c.	 The paper also included the accompanying data on 
how often students said they had consumed fried 
potatoes (fries or potato chips) in the past week.
Number of Times Consumed Fried  
Potatoes in the Past Week
0
1 to 3
4 to 6
7 to 13
14 to 20
21 or  
more
Gender
Male
  2
10
15
12
  6
  3
Female
15
15
10
20
19
12
Use the Minitab output that follows to carry out  
a X 2 test of independence. Do you agree with the 
authors’ conclusion that there was a significant 
association between gender and consumption of  
fried potatoes?
Expected counts are printed below observed counts
Chi-Square contributions are printed below expected counts
0
1-3
4-6
7-13
14-20 21 or more
Total
M
2
10
15
12
6
3
48
5.87
8.63
8.63
11.05
8.63
5.18
2.552
0.216
4.696
0.082
0.803
0.917
F
15
15
10
20
19
12
91
11.13
16.37
16.37
20.95
16.37
9.82
1.346
0.114
2.477
0.043
0.424
0.484
Total
17
25
25
32
25
15
139
Chi-Sq 5 14.153, DF 5 5, P-Value 5 0.015
12.33	The press release titled “Nap Time” (pewresearch.org, 
July 2009) described results from a nationally repre-
sentative survey of 1488 adult Americans. The survey 
asked several demographic questions (such as gen-
der, age, and income) and also included a question 
asking respondents if they had taken a nap in the 
past 24 hours. The press release stated that 38% of 
the men surveyed and 31% of the women surveyed 
reported that they had napped in the past 24 hours. 
For purposes of this exercise, suppose that men and 
women were equally represented in the sample.
a.	 Use the given information to fill in observed cell 
counts for the following table:
Napped
Did Not Nap
Row Total
Men
744
Women
744
b.	Use the data in the table from Part (a) to carry 
out a hypothesis test to determine if there is an 
association between gender and napping. 
EXERCISES 12.32 - 12.34
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

654 
●  Chapter 12  The Analysis of Categorical Data and Goodness-of-Fit Tests
c.	 The press release states that more men than 
women nap. Although this is true for the peo-
ple in the sample, based on the result of your 
test in Part (b), is it reasonable to conclude 
that this holds for adult Americans in general? 
Explain.
12.34	 Using data from a national survey, the authors of 
the paper “What Do Happy People Do?” (Social Indica-
tors Research [2008]: 565–571) concluded that there 
was convincing evidence of an association between 
amount of time spent watching television and whether 
or not a person reported that they were happy. They 
observed that unhappy people tended to watch more 
television. The authors write:
This could lead us to two possible interpretations:
1.	Television viewing is a pleasurable enough activity 
with no lasting benefit, and it pushes aside time 
spent in other activities—ones that might be less 
immediately pleasurable, but that would provide 
long-term benefits in one’s condition. In other 
words, television does cause people to be less 
happy.
2.	Television is a refuge for people who are already 
unhappy. TV is not judgmental nor difficult, so 
people with few social skills or resources for 
other activities can engage in it. Furthermore, 
chronic unhappiness can be socially and person-
ally debilitating and can interfere with work and 
most social and personal activities, but even the 
unhappiest people can click a remote and be 
passively entertained by a TV. In other words, 
the causal order is reversed for people who 
watch television; unhappiness leads to television 
viewing.
Using only data from this study, do you think it is 
possible to determine which of these two conclusions 
is correct? If so, which conclusion do you think is 
correct and why? If not, explain why it is not possible 
to decide which conclusion is correct based on the 
study data.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Background: There is evidence to suggest that human be-
ings are not very good random number generators. In this 
activity, you will investigate this phenomenon by collecting 
and analyzing a set of human-generated “random” digits.
For this activity, work in a group with four or five other 
students.
1.	 ​Each member of the group should complete this step 
individually. Ask 25 different people to pick a digit 
from 0 to 9 at random. Record the responses.
2.	 ​Combine the responses you collected with those of 
the other members of your group to form a single 
sample. Summarize the resulting data in a one-way 
frequency table.
3.	 ​If people are adept at picking digits at random, what 
would you expect for the proportion of the responses 
in the sample that were 0? that were 1?
4.	 ​State a null hypothesis and an alternative hypothesis 
that could be tested to determine whether there 
is evidence that the 10 digits from 0 to 9 are not 
selected an equal proportion of the time when people 
are asked to pick a digit at random.
5.	 ​Carry out the appropriate hypothesis test, and write 
a few sentences indicating whether or not the data 
support the theory that people are not good random 
number generators.
AC TIVIT Y 12.1 
Pick a Number, Any Number Á
AC TIVIT Y 12.2 
Color and Perceived Taste
Background: Does the color of a food or beverage affect the 
way people perceive its taste? In this activity you will conduct 
an experiment to investigate this question and analyze the 
resulting data using a chi-square test.
You will need to recruit at least 30 subjects for this experi-
ment, so it is advisable to work in a large group (perhaps even 
the entire class) to complete this activity.
Subjects for the experiment will be assigned at random 
to one of two groups. Each subject will be asked to taste a 
sample of gelatin (for example, Jell-O) and rate the taste as 
not very good, acceptable, or very good. Subjects assigned to 
the first group will be asked to taste and rate a cube of lemon-
flavored gelatin. Subjects in the second group will be asked to 
taste and rate a cube of lemon-flavored gelatin that has been 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter Review Exercises 
●  655
SUMMARY 
Key Concepts and Formulas
Term or Formula 
Comment
One-way frequency table 
A compact way of summarizing data on a categorical variable. It gives the number of 
times each of the possible categories in the data set occurs (the frequencies).
X 2 5 o
all cell
(observed cell count 2 expected cell count)2
expected cell count
A statistic used to provide a comparison between observed counts and those expected 
when a given hypothesis is true. When none of the expected counts are too small, X 2 has 
approximately a chi-square distribution.
X 2 goodness-of-fit test
A hypothesis test performed to determine whether population category proportions are 
different from those specified by a given null hypothesis.
Two-way frequency table (contingency table)
A rectangular table used to summarize a categorical data set. Two-way tables are used to 
compare several populations on the basis of a categorical variable or to determine if an 
association exists between two categorical variables.
X 2 test for homogeneity
The hypothesis test performed to determine whether category proportions are the same 
for two or more populations or treatments.
X 2 test for independence
The hypothesis test performed to determine whether an association exists between two 
categorical variables.
CHAPTER REVIEW 
Exercises 12.35 - 12.44
12.35	
 Each observation in a random sample of 100 bicycle 
accidents resulting in death was classified according to 
the day of the week on which the accident occurred. 
Data consistent with information given on the web site 
www.highwaysafety.com are given in the following table
Day of Week
Frequency
Sunday
14
Monday
13
Tuesday
12
Wednesday
15
Thursday
14
Friday
17
Saturday
15
Based on these data, is it reasonable to conclude that the 
proportion of accidents is not the same for all days of the 
week? Use a 5 .05.
12.36	
 ▼ The color vision of birds plays a role in their 
foraging behavior: Birds use color to select and avoid 
certain types of food. The authors of the article  
“Colour Avoidance in Northern Bobwhites: Effects of Age, 
Sex, and Previous Experience” (Animal Behaviour [1995]: 
519–526) studied the pecking behavior of 1-day-old 
bobwhites. In an area painted white, they inserted 
four pins with different colored heads. The color of 
the pin chosen on the bird’s first peck was noted for 
each of 33 bobwhites, resulting in the accompanying 
table. 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
colored an unappealing color by adding food coloring to the 
gelatin mix before the gelatin sets.
Note: You may choose to use something other than gela-
tin, such as lemonade. Any food or beverage whose color can 
be altered using food coloring can be used. You can experi-
ment with the food colors to obtain a color that you think is 
particularly unappealing!
1.	 As a class, develop a plan for collecting the data. How 
will subjects be recruited? How will they be assigned 
to one of the two treatment groups (unaltered color, 
altered color)? What extraneous variables will be 
directly controlled, and how will you control them?
2.	 After the class is satisfied with the data collection 
plan, assign members of the class to prepare the gela-
tin to be used in the experiment.
3.	 Carry out the experiment, and summarize the result-
ing data in a two-way table like the one shown:
Taste Rating
Treatment
Not Very 
Good
Acceptable
Very 
Good
Unaltered Color
Altered Color
4.	 ​The two-way table summarizes data from two inde-
pendent samples (as long as subjects were assigned at 
random to the two treatments, the samples are inde-
pendent). Carry out an appropriate test to determine 
whether the proportion for each of the three taste 
rating categories is the same when the color is altered 
as for when the color is not altered.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

656 
●  Chapter 12  The Analysis of Categorical Data and Goodness-of-Fit Tests
Color
First Peck Frequency
Blue
16
Green
  ​8
Yellow
  ​6
Red
  ​3
Do the data provide evidence of a color preference? 
Test using a 5 .01.
12.37	  In November 2005, an international study to assess 
public opinion on the treatment of suspected terrorists 
was conducted (“Most in U.S., Britain, S. Korea and France 
Say Torture Is OK in at Least Rare Instances,” Associated 
Press, December 7, 2005). Each individual in random 
samples of 1000 adults from each of nine different 
countries was asked the following question: “Do  
you feel the use of torture against suspected terrorists 
to obtain information about terrorism activities  
is justified?” 
	 	 Responses consistent with percentages given in the 
article for the samples from Italy, Spain, France, the 
United States, and South Korea are summarized in  
the accompanying table. Based on these data, is it 
reasonable to conclude that the response proportions 
are not the same for all five countries?  
Use a .01 significance level to test the appropriate  
hypotheses.
Response
Country
Never
Rarely
Sometimes
Often
Not 
Sure
Italy
600
140
140
  ​90
30
Spain
540
160
140
  ​70
90
France
400
250
200
120
30
United  
  States
360
230
270
110
30
South  
  Korea
100
330
470
  ​60
40
12.38	
 According to Census Bureau data, in 1998 the 
California population consisted of 50.7% whites, 
6.6% blacks, 30.6% Hispanics, 10.8% Asians, and 
1.3% other ethnic groups. Suppose that a random 
sample of 1000 students graduating from California 
colleges and universities in 1998 resulted in the 
accompanying data on ethnic group. These data are 
consistent with summary statistics contained in the 
article titled “Crumbling Public School System a  
Threat to California’s Future (Investor’s Business Daily, 
November 12, 1999).
Ethnic Group
Number in Sample
White
679
Black
  ​51
Hispanic
  ​77
Asian
190
Other
  ​  ​3
Do the data provide evidence that the proportion of 
students graduating from colleges and universities 
in California for these ethnic group categories differs 
from the respective proportions in the population for 
California? Test the appropriate hypotheses using  
a 5 .01.    ​
12.39	 Criminologists have long debated whether there is a 
relationship between weather and violent crime. The 
author of the article “Is There a Season for Homicide?” 
(Criminology [1988]: 287–296) classified 1361 homicides 
according to season, resulting in the accompanying 
data. Do these data support the theory that the homi-
cide rate is not the same over the four seasons? Test the 
relevant hypotheses using a significance level of .05.
Season
Winter
Spring
Summer
Fall
328
334
372
327
12.40	  Each boy in a sample of Mexican American males, 
age 10 to 18, was classified according to smoking 
status and response to a question asking whether he 
likes to do risky things. The following table is based 
on data given in the article “The Association Between 
Smoking and Unhealthy Behaviors Among a National 
Sample of Mexican-American Adolescents” (Journal of 
School Health [1998]: 376–379):
Smoking Status
Smoker
Nonsmoker
Likes Risky Things
45
  ​46
Doesn’t Like Risky Things
36
153
Assume that it is reasonable to regard the sample as a 
random sample of Mexican-American male adolescents.
a.	 Is there sufficient evidence to conclude that there is 
an association between smoking status and desire 
to do risky things? Test the relevant hypotheses 
using a 5 .05.
b.	Based on your conclusion in Part (a), is it reason-
able to conclude that smoking causes an increase 
in the desire to do risky things? Explain. ​     ​
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter Review Exercises 
●  657
12.41	  The article “Cooperative Hunting in Lions: The Role 
of the Individual” (Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 
[1992]: 445–454) discusses the different roles taken by 
lionesses as they attack and capture prey. The authors 
were interested in the effect of the position in line as 
stalking occurs. An individual lioness may be in the 
center of the line or on the wing (end of the line) as 
they advance toward their prey. In addition to posi-
tion, the role of the lioness was also considered. A li-
oness could initiate a chase (be the first one to charge 
the prey), or she could participate and join the chase 
after it has been initiated. Data from the article are 
summarized in the accompanying table.
Role
Position
Initiate Chase
Participate in Chase
Center
28
48
Wing
66
41
a.	 Is there evidence of an association between posi-
tion and role? Test the relevant hypotheses using  
a 5 .01.  
b.	What assumptions about how the data were col-
lected must be true for the chi-square test to be an 
appropriate way to analyze these data?
12.42	
 The authors of the article “A Survey of Parent Attitudes 
and Practices Regarding Underage Drinking” (Journal of 
Youth and Adolescence [1995]: 315–334) conducted a 
telephone survey of parents with preteen and teenage 
children. One of the questions asked was “How effec-
tive do you think you are in talking to your children 
about drinking?” Responses are summarized in the 
accompanying 3 3 2 table. Using a significance level 
of .05, carry out a test to determine whether there is 
an association between age of children and parental 
response.
Age of Children
Response
Preteen
Teen
Very Effective
126
149
Somewhat Effective
  ​44
  ​41
Not at All Effective or Don’t Know
  ​51
  ​26
12.43	  The article “Regional Differences in Attitudes Toward 
Corporal Punishment” (Journal of Marriage and Fam-
ily [1994]: 314–324) presents data resulting from a 
random sample of 978 adults. Each individual in the 
sample was asked whether he or she agreed with the 
following statement: “Sometimes it is necessary to 
discipline a child with a good, hard spanking.” Re-
spondents were also classified according to the region 
of the United States in which they lived. The resulting 
data are summarized in the accompanying table. 
Is there an association between response (agree, 
disagree) and region of residence? Use a 5 .01. 
Response
Region
Agree
Disagree
Northeast
130
59
West
146
42
Midwest
211
52
South
291
47
12.44	
 Jail inmates can be classified into one of the fol-
lowing four categories according to the type of crime 
committed: violent crime, crime against property, 
drug offenses, and public-order offenses. Suppose that 
random samples of 500 male inmates and 500 female 
inmates are selected, and each inmate is classified 
according to type of offense. The data in the accom-
panying table are based on summary values given in 
the article “Profile of Jail Inmates” (USA Today, April 25, 
1991). We would like to know whether male and 
female inmates differ with respect to type of offense.
Gender
Type of Crime
Male
Female
Violent
117
  66
Property
150
160
Drug
109
168
Public-Order
124
106
a.	 Would you use a test of homogeneity or a test of 
independence to answer this question?  
b.	Test the relevant hypotheses using a significance 
level of .05.   
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

658 
●  Chapter 12  The Analysis of Categorical Data and Goodness-of-Fit Tests
JMP
1.    Enter each category name into the first column
2.    Enter the count for each category into the second column
   
3.    Click Analyze then select Distribution
4.    Click and drag the name for the first column from the box 
under Select Columns to the box next to Y, Columns
5.    Click and drag the name for the second column from the 
box under Select Columns to the box next to Freq
6.    Click OK
7.    Click the red arrow next to the column name and select 
Test Probabilities
8.    Under Test Probabilities input the hypothesized prob-
abilities for each category
9.    Click Done
Note: The test statistic and P-value for the chi-squared test 
will appear in the row called Pearson.
Minitab
MINITAB Student Version 14 does not have the functionality 
to produce a x2 goodness-of-fit test.
SPSS
1.    Input the observed data into one column
2.    Click Analyze then click Nonparametric Tests then click 
One Sample…
3.    Click the Settings tab
4.    Select the radio button next to Customize tests
5.    Check the box next to Compare observed probabilities 
to hypothesized (Chi-Square test)
6.    Click the Options… button
7.    Select the appropriate option (to test with equal probabili-
ties for each category or to input expected probabilities 
manually) 
8.    Once you have selected the appropriate option and input 
expected probabilities if necessary, click OK
9.    Click Run
Excel
Excel does not have the functionality to produce the 
X2 goodness-of-fit test automatically. However, you can 
use Excel to find the P-value for this test once you have 
found the value of the test statistic by using the following  
steps.
1.    Click on an empty cell
2.    Click Formulas
3.    Click Insert Function
4.    Select Statistical from the drop-down box for category
5.    Select CHIDIST and press OK
6.    In the box next to X, type the value of the test statistic
7.    In the box next to Deg _freedom type the value for the 
degrees of freedom
8.    Click OK
Note: This outputs the value for P(X $ x).
TI-83/84
1.    Enter the observed cell counts into L1 and the expected  
cell counts into L2 (in order to access lists press the 
STAT key, highlight the option called Edit… then press  
ENTER)
2.    Press STAT
3.    Highlight TESTS
4.    Highlight X2GOF-Test and press ENTER
5.    Next to Observed enter L1
6.    Next to Expected enter L2
7.    Next to df enter the appropriate df (this will be the num-
ber of categories 2 1)
8.    Highlight Calculate and press ENTER
TI-Nspire
1.    Enter the observed data into a data list (In order to access 
data lists select the spreadsheet option and press enter)
Note: Be sure to title the lists by selecting the top row of 
the column and typing a title.
2.    Enter the expected data into a data list
3.    Press menu and select 4:Statistics then 4:Stat Tests then 
7: x2 GOF… and press enter
TECHNOLOGY NOTES
X2 Goodness-of-Fit Test
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.    For Observed List select the title of the list that contains 
the observed data from the drop-down menu
5.    For Expected List select the title of the list that contains 
the expected data from the drop-down menu
6.    For Deg of Freedom input the degrees of freedom for this test
7.    Press OK
X2 Tests for Independence and Homogeneity
JMP
1.    Input the data table into the JMP data table
2.    Click Analyze then select Fit Y by X
3.    Click and drag the first column name from the box under 
Select Columns to the box next to Y, Response
4.    Click and drag the second column name from the box 
under Select Columns to the box next to X, Factor 
5.    Click and drag the third column name from the box un-
der Select Columns to the box next to Freq
6.    Click OK
Minitab
1.    Input the data table into MINITAB
2.    Click Stat then Tables then Chi-Square Test (Table in 
Worksheet)
3.    Select all columns containing data (do NOT select the 
column containing the row labels)
4.    Click OK
Note: This output returns expected cell counts as well as the 
chi-square test statistic and P-value.
SPSS
1.    Enter the row variable data into one column
2.    Enter the column variable data into a second column
   3.    Click Analyze then click Descriptive Statistics then 
click Crosstabs…
   4.    Select the name of the row variable and press the arrow 
to move the variable to the box under Row(s):
   5.    Select the name of the column variable and press the ar-
row to move the variable to the box under Column(s):
   6.    Click Statistics…
    7.    Check the box next to Chi-square
   8.    Click Continue
    9.    Click Cells…
10.    Check the box next to Expected
11.    Click Continue
12.    Click OK
Note: The P-value for this test can be found in the Chi-
Square Tests table in the Pearson Chi-Square row.
Excel
   1.    Input the observed contingency table
  2.    Input the expected table
  3.    Click on an empty cell 
   4.    Click Formulas
   5.    Click Insert Function
   6.    Select Statistical from the drop-down box for category
   7.    Select CHITEST and press OK
   8.    Click in the box next to Actual_range and select the data 
values from the actual table (do NOT select column or row 
labels or totals)
   9.    Click in the box next to Expected_range and select 
the data values from the expected table (do NOT select 
column or row labels or totals)
10.    Click OK
TI-83/84
1.    Input the observed contingency table into matrix A (To 
access and edit matrices, press 2nd then x–1, then high-
light EDIT and press ENTER. Then highlight [A] and 
Technology Notes 
●  659
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

press ENTER. Type the value for the number of rows and 
press ENTER; type the value for the number of columns 
and press ENTER. Type the data values into the matrix.)
2.    Press STAT
3.    Highlight TESTS
4.    Highlight x2-Test… and press ENTER
5.    Highlight Calculate and press ENTER
Image for Head "Excel" on Page 636
660 
●  Chapter 12  The Analysis of Categorical Data and Goodness-of-Fit Tests
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

TI-Nspire
1.    Enter the Calculator Scratchpad
2.    Press the menu key then select 7:Matrix & Vector then 
select 1:Create then select 1:Matrix… and press enter
3.    Next to Number of rows enter the number of rows in 
the contingency table (do not include title rows or total 
rows)
4.    Next to Number of columns enter the number of  
columns in the contingency table (do not include title 
columns or total columns)
5.    Press OK
6.    Input the values into the matrix (pressing tab after enter-
ing each value and press enter when you are finished)
7.    Press ctrl then press var
8.    Type in amat and press enter
  9.    Press the menu key then select 6:Statistics then 7:Stat 
tests then 8: x2 2-way Test…
10.    For Observed Matrix, select amat from the drop-down list
11.    Press OK
Technology Notes 
●  661
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

662
Chapter 13:  Learning Objectives
Students will understand:
●
●that the simple linear regression model provides a basis for making inferences 
about linear relationships.
Students will be able to:
●
●interpret the parameters of the simple linear regression model in context.
●
●use scatterplots, residual plots, and normal probability plots to assess the 
credibility of the assumptions of the simple linear regression model.
●
●construct and interpret a confidence interval for the slope of the population 
regression line.
●
●test hypotheses about the slope of the population regression line and inter-
pret the results in context.
Regression and correlation were introduced in Chapter 5 as tech-
niques for describing and summarizing bivariate numerical data 
consisting of (x, y) pairs. For example, data on 
y 5 percentage of courses taught by teachers with inappropriate 
or no license 
and 
x 5 spending per pupil 
for a sample of Missouri public school districts was used to con-
struct a scatterplot. (“Is Teacher Pay Adequate?” Research Working Papers 
Series, Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, ­October 2005). 
The scatterplot showed a surprising linear pattern. The sample 
correlation coefficient was r 5 .27, and the equation of the least-
squares line had a positive slope, indicating that school districts 
with higher expenditures per student also tended to have a higher 
percentage of courses taught by teachers with an inappropriate 
­license or no license. 
Could the pattern observed in the scatterplot be plausibly explained 
by chance, or does the sample provide ­convincing evidence that there 
really is a linear relationship between these two variables for school districts in Missouri? If 
there is evidence of a meaningful relationship between these two variables, the regression 
line could be used as the basis for predicting the percentage of teachers with inappropriate 
or no license for a school district with a specified expenditure per student. 
In this chapter, we develop inferential methods for bivariate numerical data, includ-
ing a hypotheses test to determine if there is a useful linear relationship in the entire 
population of (x, y) pairs.
Simple Linear Regression and  
Correlation: Inferential Methods
Arne Hodalic/Encyclopedia/Corbis
CHAPTER 13
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 13.1   Simple Linear Regression Model 
●  663
 13.1  
Simple Linear Regression Model
A deterministic relationship is one in which the value of y is completely determined by 
the value of an independent variable x. A deterministic relationship can be described ­using 
traditional mathematical notation y 5 f(x), where f(x) is a specified function of x. For 
­example, we might have
y 5 fsxd 5 10 1 2x
or
y 5 fsxd 5 4 2 s10d2x
However, in many situations, the variables of interest are not deterministically related. For 
example, the value of y 5 first-year college grade point average is not an exact function of 
x 5 high school grade point average, and y 5 crop yield is determined partly by factors 
other than x 5 amount of fertilizer used.
A relationship between two variables x and y that are not deterministically related is 
described by a probabilistic model. The general form of an additive probabilistic model 
allows y to be larger or smaller than f(x) by a random amount e. The model equation is 
of the form
y 5 deterministic function of x 1 random deviation 5 fsxd 1 e
Thinking geometrically, if e . 0, the corresponding point will lie above the graph of 
y 5 f(x). If e , 0 the corresponding point will fall below the graph. If f(x) is a function 
used in a probabilistic model relating y to x and if observations on y are made for various 
values of x, the resulting (x, y) points will be distributed about the graph of f(x), some 
falling above it and some falling below it.
For example, consider the probabilistic model
y 5 50 2 10x 1 x2 1 e
f(x)
The graph of the function y 5 50 2 10x 1 x2 is shown as the orange curve in Figure 13.1. 
The observed point (4, 30) is also shown in the figure. Because
fs4d 5 50 2 10s4d 1 42 5 50 2 40 1 16 5 26
for the point (4, 30), we can write y 5 fsxd 1 e, where e 5 4. The point (4, 30) falls 4 
above the graph of the function y 5 50 2 10x 1 x2.
Simple Linear Regression
The simple linear regression model is a special case of the general probabilistic model in 
which the deterministic function f(x) is linear (so its graph is a straight line).
5
26
4
Observation (4, 30)
e 5 4
Graph of
y 5 50 – 10x + x2
y
x
Figure  13.1
A deviation from the deterministic 
part of a probabilistic model.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

664 
●  Chapter 13  Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods
Figure 13.2 shows two observations in relation to the population regression line.
Figure  13.2
Two observations and deviations 
from the population regression line.
Simple linear regression model: A probabilistic model in which the determin-
istic part is a line with vertical or y intercept a and slope b. This line is called the 
population regression line. 
When a value of the independent variable x is ﬁxed and an observation on the 
dependent variable y is made, 
y  a  bx  e 
Without the random deviation e, all observed (x, y) points would fall exactly on 
the population regression line. The inclusion of e in the model equation recog-
nizes that points will deviate from the line by a random amount.
DEFINITION
Observation when x 5 x1
(positive deviation)
e1
e2
Observation when x 5 x2
(negative deviation)
Population regression
line (slope b)
a 5 vertical
      intercept
x 5 x1
x 5 x2
x 
0
0
y
1.	 The distribution of e at any particular x value has mean value 0. That is,  
me  0.
2.	 The standard deviation of e (which describes the spread of its distribution) 
is the same for any particular value of x. This standard deviation is denoted 
by s.
3.	 The distribution of e at any particular x value is normal.
4.	 The random deviations e1, e2, . . . , en associated with different observations 
are indepen­dent of one another.
Basic Assumptions of the Simple Linear Regression Model
Before we make an observation on y for any particular value of x, we are uncertain about 
the value of e. It could be negative, positive, or even 0. Also, it might be quite large in mag-
nitude (a point far from the population regression line) or quite small (a point very close to 
the line). In this chapter, we make some assumptions about the distribution of e in repeated 
sampling at any particular x value.
These assumptions about the e term in the simple linear regression model also imply that 
there is variability in the y values observed at any particular value of x. Consider y when x 
has some fixed value x*, so that
y 5 a 1 bx* 1 e
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 13.1   Simple Linear Regression Model 
●  665
Because a and b are fixed numbers, a 1 bx* is also a fixed number. The sum of a fixed 
number and a normally distributed variable (e) is also a normally distributed variable 
(the bell-shaped curve is simply relocated). This means that y itself has a normal distri-
bution. Furthermore, me 5 0 implies that the mean value of y is a 1 bx*, the height of 
the population regression line above the value x*. Finally, because there is no variability 
in the fixed number a 1 bx*, the standard deviation of y is the same as the standard 
deviation of e. These properties are summarized in the following box.
At any fixed x value, y has a normal distribution, with 
1
mean y value
for fixed x 2 51
height of the population
regression line above x 2 5 a 1 bx
and 
(standard deviation of y for a fixed x) = s
The slope b of the population regression line is the average change in y associ-
ated with a 1-unit increase in x. 
The y intercept a is the height of the population line when x 5 0. 
The value of s determines the extent to which (x, y) observations deviate from 
the population line. When s is small, most observations will be quite close to the 
line, but when s is large, there are likely to be some large deviations.
The key features of the model are illustrated in Figures 13.3 and 13.4. Notice that the three 
normal curves in Figure 13.3 have identical spreads. This is a consequence of se 5 s, which 
implies that the variability in the y values at a particular x does not depend on the value of x.
a 1 bx3
a 1 bx2
a 1 bx1
Mean value a 1 bx1
Standard deviation s
Normal curve
Mean value a 1 bx2
Standard deviation s
Normal curve
Mean value a 1 bx3
Standard deviation s
Normal curve
y =
the population
regression line
(line of mean values) 
a 1 bx,
x1
x2
x3
Three different x values
y
x
Figure  13.3
Illustration of the simple linear 
regression model.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

666 
●  Chapter 13  Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods
(a)
Population regression
line
(b)
Population regression
line
Figure  13.4
Data from the simple linear regres-
sion model:  
(a) small s;  
(b) large s.
EXAMPLE 13.1 
Stand on Your Head 
to Lose Weight?
The authors of the article “On Weight Loss by Wrestlers Who 
Have Been Standing on Their Heads” (paper presented at the 
Sixth International Conference on Statistics, Combinatorics, 
and Related Areas, Forum for Interdisciplinary Mathemat-
ics, 1999, with the data also appearing in A Quick Course in 
Statistical Process Control, Mick Norton, Pearson Prentice Hall, 
2005) stated that “amateur wrestlers who are overweight 
near the end of the weight certification period, but just 
barely so, have been known to stand on their heads for a 
minute or two, get on their feet, step back on the scale, and establish that they are in the 
desired weight class. Using a headstand as the method of last resort has become a fairly 
common practice in amateur wrestling.”
Does this really work? Data were collected in an experiment in which weight loss was re-
corded for each wrestler after exercising for 15 minutes and then doing a headstand for 1 min-
ute 45 seconds. Based on these data, the authors of the article concluded that there was in fact 
a demonstrable weight loss that was greater than that for a control group that exercised for 15 
minutes but did not do the headstand. (The authors give a plausible explanation for why this 
might be the case based on the way blood and other body fluids collect in the head during the 
headstand and the effect of weighing while these fluids are draining immediately after standing.) 
The authors also concluded that a simple linear regression model was a reasonable way 
to describe the relationship between the variables
y 5 weight loss (in pounds)
and
x 5 body weight prior to exercise and headstand (in pounds)
Suppose that the actual model equation has a 5 0, b 5 0.001, and s 5 0.09 (these values are 
consistent with the findings in the article). The population regression line is shown in Figure 13.5.
Understand the context ❭
Figure 13.5
The population regression line for 
­Example 13.1.
Population
regression line
y 5 0.001x
x 5 190
x 
y 
5 0.19
Mean y when 
x 5 190
(        )
ImageState Royalty Free / Alamy 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 13.1   Simple Linear Regression Model 
●  667
If the distribution of the random errors at any fixed weight (x value) is normal, then the 
variable y 5 weight loss is normally distributed with
my 5 a 1 bx 5 0 1 0.001x
sy 5 s 5 .09
For example, when x 5 190 (corresponding to a 190-pound wrestler), weight loss has 
mean value
my5 0 1 0.001(190) 5 .19
Because the standard deviation of y is s 5 0.09, the interval 0.19 6 2(0.09) 5 (0.01, 0.37) 
includes y values that are within 2 standard deviations of the mean value for y when x 5 190. 
Roughly 95% of the weight loss observations made for 190 pound wrestlers will be in this range.
The slope b 5 0.001 is the average change in weight loss associated with each additional 
pound of body weight.	
■
More insight into model properties can be gained by thinking of the population of all 
(x, y) pairs as consisting of many smaller populations. Each one of these smaller popula-
tions contains pairs for which x has a fixed value. For example, suppose that in a large 
population of college students the relationship between the variables
x 5 grade point average in major courses
and
y 5 starting salary after graduation
can be described by the simple linear regression model. Then there is the population of all 
pairs with x 5 3.20 (corresponding to all students with a grade point average of 3.20 in 
major courses), the population of all pairs having x 5 2.75, and so on. The model assumes 
that for each such population, y is normally distributed with the same standard deviation, 
and the mean y value (rather than y itself) is a linear function of x.
In practice, the judgment of whether the simple linear regression model is appropriate 
must be based on how the data were collected and on a scatterplot of the data. The sample 
observations should be independent of one another. In addition, the scatterplot should 
show a linear rather than a curved pattern, and the vertical spread of points should be rela-
tively homogeneous throughout the range of x values. Figure 13.6 shows plots with three 
different patterns; only the first is consistent with the model assumptions.
Figure  13.6
Some commonly encountered pat-
terns in scatterplots:  
(a) consistent with the simple linear 
regression model;  
(b) suggests a nonlinear probabilistic 
model;  
(c) suggests that variability in y 
changes with x.
y
x
(a)
y
x
(b)
y
x
(c)
x
Estimating the Population Regression Line
For the remainder of this chapter, we will presume that the basic assumptions of the simple 
linear regression model are reasonable. The values of a and b (the y intercept and the slope 
of the population regression line) will almost never be known to an investigator. Instead, 
these values must first be estimated from the sample data.
We will use a and b to denote the point estimates of a and b, respectively. These es-
timates are based on the method of least squares introduced in Chapter 5. The sum of 
squared vertical deviations is smaller for the least-squares line than for any other line.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

668 
●  Chapter 13  Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods
Example 13.2 
Mother’s Age and Baby’s Birth Weight
  Medical researchers have noted that adolescent females are much more likely to deliver 
low-birth-weight babies than are adult females. Because low-birth-weight babies have 
higher mortality rates, a number of studies have examined the relationship between birth 
weight and mother’s age for babies born to young mothers.
One such study is described in the article “Body Size and Intelligence in 6-Year-Olds: Are 
Offspring of Teenage Mothers at Risk?” (Maternal and Child Health Journal [2009]: 847–856). 
The following data on
x 5 maternal age (in years)
and
y 5 birth weight of baby (in grams)
are consistent with summary values given in the referenced article and also with data pub-
lished by the National Center for Health Statistics.
Observation
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
x
  ​  ​15
  ​  ​17
  ​  ​18
  ​  ​15
  ​  ​16
  ​  ​19
  ​  ​17
  ​  ​16
  ​  ​18
  ​  ​19
y
2289
3393
3271
2648
2897
3327
2970
2535
3138
3573
A scatterplot of the data is given in Figure 13.7. The scatterplot shows a linear pattern and 
the spread in the y values appears to be similar across the range of x values. This supports 
the appropriateness of the simple linear regression model.
The summary statistics (computed from the given sample data) are
n 5 10       ox 5 170         oy 5 30,041 
 o x2 5 2910 
 o xy 5 515,600 
 o y2 5 91,785,351
 Data set available online
Understand the context ❭
Consider the data ❭
Do the work ❭
The point estimates of b, the slope, and a, the y intercept of the population 
­regression line, are the slope and y intercept, respectively, of the least-squares 
line: 
 b 5 point estimate of b 5
Sxy
Sxx
a 5 point estimate of a 5 y 2 bx
where
Sxy 5 o  xy 2 soxdsoyd
n   and  Sxx 5 o  x2 2 soxd2
n
The estimated regression line is the least-squares line 
y⁄ 5 a 1 bx
Suppose x* denotes a specified value of the predictor variable x. Then a 1 bx* 
has two different interpretations: 
1.	 ​It is a point estimate of the mean y value when x 5 x*.
2.	 ​It is a point prediction of an individual y value to be observed when x 5 x*.
Step-by-Step technology  
instructions available  
online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 13.1   Simple Linear Regression Model 
●  669
Figure  13.7
​Scatterplot of the data from  
Example 13.2.
15
16
17
18
19
2500
3000
3500
Mother’s age (yr)
Baby’s weight (g)
from which
 Sxy 5o xy 2 soxdsoyd
n
5 515,600 2 s170ds30,041d
10
5 4903.0
 Sxx 5o x2 2 soxd2
n
5 2910 2 s170d2
10
5 20.0
x 5 170
10 5 17.0  y 5 30041
10
5 3004.1
This gives
 b 5
Sxy
Sxx
5 4903.0
20.0
5 245.15
a 5 y 2 bx 5 3004.1 2 s245.1ds17.0d 5 21163.45
The equation of the estimated regression line is then
y⁄ 5 a 1 bx 5 21163.45 1 245.15x
A point estimate of the mean birth weight of babies born to 18-year-old mothers results 
from substituting x 5 18 into the estimated equation:
sestimated mean y when x 5 18d 5 a 1 bx
5 21163.45 1 245.15s18d
5 3249.25 grams
Similarly, we would predict the birth weight of a baby to be born to a particular 18-year-
old mother to be
(predicted y value when x 5 18) 5 a 1 b(18) 5 3249.25 grams
The point estimate and the point prediction are identical, because the same x value was 
used in each calculation. However, the interpretation of each is different. One represents 
our prediction of the weight of a single baby whose mother is 18, whereas the other rep-
resents our estimate of the mean weight of all babies born to 18-year-old mothers. This 
distinction will become important in Section 13.4 (online), when interval estimates and 
predictions are considered.
The least-squares line could have also been fit using a graphing calculator or a sta-
tistical software package. Minitab output for the data of this example is shown on the 
next page. Note that Minitab has rounded the values of the estimated coefficients in the 
equation of the regression line, which would result in small differences in predictions 
based on the line.
Interpret the results ❭
Interpret concept ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

670 
●  Chapter 13  Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods
Regression Analysis: Birth Weight versus Maternal Age
The regression equation is
Birth Weight 5 21163 1 245 Maternal Age
Predictor
Coef
SE Coef
T
P
Constant
21163.4
783.1
21.49
0.176
Maternal Age
245.15
45.91
5.34
0.001
S 5 205.308  ​  ​  ​  R-Sq 5 78.1%  ​  ​  ​  ​R-Sq(adj) 5 75.4%	
■
In Example 13.2, the x values in the sample ranged from 15 to 19. An estimate or predic-
tion should not be attempted for any x value much outside this range. Without sample data 
for such values, there is no evidence that the estimated linear relationship can be extrapo-
lated very far. Statisticians refer to this potential pitfall as the danger of extrapolation.
Estimating s2 and s
The value of s determines the extent to which observed points (x, y) tend to fall close to or 
far away from the population regression line. A point estimate of s is based on
SSResid 5 o  s y 2 y⁄d2
where y⁄
1 5 a 1 bx1, Á , y⁄
n 5 a 1 bxn are the fitted or predicted y values and the residuals 
are y1 2 y⁄
1, Á  , yn 2 y⁄
n. SSResid is a measure of the extent to which the sample data 
spread out about the estimated regression line.
The statistic for estimating the variance s2 is 
se2 5 SSresid
n 2 2
where 
SSresid 5 osy 2 y⁄d2 5 oy2 2 aoy 2 boxy
The subscript e in s2e reminds us that we are estimating the variance of the  
“errors” or residuals.
The estimate of s is the estimated standard deviation
se 5 Ïs2e 
The number of degrees of freedom associated with estimating s2 or s in simple 
linear regression is n 2 2.
The estimates and number of degrees of freedom here have analogs in our previous 
work involving a single sample x1, x2, . . . , xn. The sample variance s2 had a numerator of 
osx 2 xd2, a sum of squared deviations (residuals), and denominator n 2 1, the number of 
degrees of freedom associated with s2 and s. The use of x as an estimate of m in the formula 
for s2 reduces the number of degrees of freedom by 1, from n to n 2 1. In simple linear 
regression, estimation of a and b results in a loss of 2 degrees of freedom, leaving n 2 2 as 
the number of degrees of freedom for SSResid, s2e, and se.
The coefficient of determination was defined previously (see Chapter 5) as
r2 5 1 2 SSResid
SSTo
where
SSTo 5 os y 2 yd2 5 oy2 2 soyd2
n
5 Syy
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 13.1   Simple Linear Regression Model 
●  671
The value of r 2 is interpreted as the proportion of observed variability in y that can be ex-
plained by (or attributed to) the model relationship. 
The estimate se also gives another assessment of model performance. Roughly speaking, 
the value of s represents the magnitude of a typical deviation of a point (x, y) in the popu-
lation from the population regression line. Similarly, se is the approximate magnitude of a 
typical sample deviation (residual) from the least-squares line. The smaller the value of se, 
the closer the points in the sample fall to the line and the better the line does in predicting 
y from x.
Example 13.3 
Predicting Election Outcomes
 The authors of the paper “Inferences of Competence from Faces Predict Election Outcomes” 
(Science [2005]: 1623–​1626) found that they could successfully predict the outcome of a U.S. 
congressional election substantially more than half the time based on the facial appearance 
of the candidates. In the study described in the paper, participants were shown photos of 
two candidates for a U.S. Senate or House of Representatives election. Each participant was 
asked to look at the photos and then indicate which candidate he or she thought was more 
competent. 
The two candidates were labeled A and B. If a participant recognized either candidate, 
data from that participant were not used in the analysis. The proportion of participants 
who chose candidate A as the more competent was computed. After the election, the differ-
ence in votes (candidate A 2​ candidate B) expressed as a proportion of the total votes cast 
in the election was also computed. This difference falls between 11 and 21. It is 0 for an 
election where both candidates receive the same number of votes, positive for an election 
where candidate A received more votes than candidate B (with 11 indicating that candi-
date A received all of the votes), and negative for an election where candidate A received 
fewer votes than candidate B.
This process was carried out for a large number of congressional races. A subset of the 
resulting data (approximate values read from a graph that appears in the paper) is given 
in the accompanying table, which also includes the predicted values and residuals for the 
least-squares line fit to these data.
Understand the context ❭
 Data set available online
Competent  
Proportion
Difference in Vote 
Proportion
Predicted  
y Value
Residual
0.20
20.70
20.389
20.311
0.23
20.40
20.347
20.053
0.40
20.35
20.109
20.241
0.35
0.18
20.179
0.359
0.40
0.38
20.109
0.489
0.45
20.10
20.040
20.060
0.50
0.20
0.030
0.170
0.55
20.30
0.100
20.400
0.60
0.30
0.170
0.130
0.68
0.18
0.281
20.101
0.70
0.50
0.309
0.191
0.76
0.22
0.393
20.173
Consider the data ❭
The scatterplot (Figure 13.8) suggests a positive linear relationship between
x 5 proportion of participants who judged candidate A as the more competent
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

672 
●  Chapter 13  Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods
and
y 5 difference in vote proportion.
The summary statistics are
 n 5 12 
      o x 5 5.82 
    o y 5 0.11
 ox2 5 3.1804 
 oxy 5 0.5526 
 oy2 5 1.5101
from which we calculate
b 5 1.3957          a 5 20.6678
SSResid 5 .81228    SSTo 5 1.50909
r2 5 1 2 SSResid
SSTo
5 1 2 0.81228
1.50909 5 1 2 .538 5 .462
s2e 5 SSResid
n 2 2 5 0.81228
10
5 .081
se 5 Ï.081 5 .285
Do the work  ❭
Figure 13.8
Minitab scatterplot for Example 13.3.
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.25
0.50
0.00
20.25
20.50
20.75
Competent proportion
Difference in vote proportion
Approximately 46.2% of the observed variability in the difference in vote proportion y 
can be attributed to the probabilistic linear relationship with proportion of participants 
who judged the candidate to be more competent based on facial appearance alone. The 
magnitude of a typical sample deviation from the least-squares line is about .285, which 
is not too large in comparison to the y values themselves. The model may be useful for 
estimation and prediction. In Section 13.2, we show how a model utility test can be used 
to judge whether this is actually the case.	
■
A key assumption of the simple linear regression model is that the random deviation e in 
the model equation is normally distributed. In Section 13.3, we will see how the residuals 
can be used to determine whether this is plausible.
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 13.1   Simple Linear Regression Model 
●  673
a.	 What is the mean eggshell thickness for quail eggs 
that are 15 mm in length? For quail eggs that are 
17 mm in length? 
b.	What is the probability that a quail egg with a 
length of 15 mm will have a shell thickness that is 
greater than 0.18 mm? 
c.	Approximately what proportion of quail eggs 
of length 14 mm have a shell thickness of 
greater than .175? Less than .178? (Hint: The 
distribution of y at a fixed x is approximately 
­normal.) 
13.4	 A sample of small cars was selected, and the values of 
x 5 horsepower and y 5 fuel efficiency (mpg) were 
determined for each car. Fitting the simple linear 
regression model gave the estimated regression equa-
tion y⁄  5 44.0 2 .150x.  ​  ​
a.	 How would you interpret b 5 2.150?
b.	Substituting x 5 100 gives y⁄  5 29.0. Give two 
different interpretations of this number.
c.	 What happens if you predict efficiency for a car 
with a 300-horsepower engine? Why do you think 
this has occurred?
d.	Interpret r2 5 0.680 in the context of this problem.
e.	 Interpret se 5 3.0 in the context of this problem.
13.5	 Suppose that a simple linear regression model is 
appropriate for describing the relationship between 
y 5 house price (in dollars) and x 5 house size (in 
square feet) for houses in a large city. The population 
regression line is y 5 23,000 1 47x and s 5 5000.
a.	 What is the average change in price associated 
with one extra square foot of space? With an 
­additional 100 sq. ft. of space?  ​  ​
b.	What proportion of 1800 sq. ft. homes would be 
priced over $110,000? Under $100,000? 
13.6	 a.  Explain the difference between the line y 5 a 1 bx  
and the line y⁄  5 a 1 bx.
b.	​Explain the difference between b and b.
c.	 ​Let x* denote a particular value of the indepen-
dent variable. Explain the difference between a 1 
bx* and a 1 bx*.
d.	Explain the difference between s and se.
13.7	 ▼ The authors of the paper “Weight-Bearing Activ-
ity during Youth Is a More Important Factor for Peak 
Bone Mass than Calcium Intake” (Journal of Bone and 
Mineral Research [1994], 1089–1096) studied a number 
of variables they thought might be related to bone 
mineral density (BMD). The accompanying data on 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
13.1	 Let x be the size of a house (in square feet) and y be 
the amount of natural gas used (therms) during a 
specified period. Suppose that for a particular com-
munity, x and y are related according to the simple 
linear regression model with
b 5 slope of population regression line 5 .017
a 5 y intercept of population regression line 5 25.0
Houses in this community range in size from 1000 
to 3000 square feet.
a.	 What is the equation of the population regression 
line?  ​ ​
b.	Graph the population regression line by first find-
ing the point on the line corresponding to x 5 
1000 and then the point corresponding to x 5 
2000, and drawing a line through these points.
c.	 What is the mean value of gas usage for houses 
with 2100 sq. ft. of space?  ​ ​
d.	What is the average change in usage associated 
with a 1 sq. ft. increase in size?  ​ ​
e.	 What is the average change in usage associated 
with a 100 sq. ft. increase in size?  ​ ​
f.	 Would you use the model to predict mean usage 
for a 500 sq. ft. house? Why or why not? (Hint: 
See the discussion following Example 13.2.) 
13.2	 The flow rate in a device used for air quality mea-
surement depends on the pressure drop x (inches of 
water) across the device’s filter. Suppose that for x 
values between 5 and 20, these two variables are re-
lated according to the simple linear regression model 
with population regression line 
y 5 20.12 1 0.095x.
a.	 What is the mean flow rate for a pressure drop of 
10 inches? A drop of 15 inches?  ​  ​
b.	 What is the average change in flow rate associated 
with a 1 inch increase in pressure drop? Explain. 
13.3	 The paper “Predicting Yolk Height, Yolk Width, Albumen  
Length, Eggshell Weight, Egg Shape Index, Eggshell 
Thickness, Egg Surface Area of Japanese Quails Using 
Various Egg Traits as Regressors” (International Journal of 
Poultry Science [2008]: 85–88) suggests that the simple 
linear regression model is reasonable for describing 
the relationship between y ​5 ​eggshell thickness (in 
micrometers) and x 5 ​egg length (mm) for quail 
eggs. Suppose that the population regression line is 
y 5 0.135 1 0.003x and that s 5 0.005. Then, for a 
fixed x value, y has a normal distribution with mean 
0.135 1 0.003x and standard deviation 0.005.
EXERCISES 13.1 - 13.11
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

674 
●  Chapter 13  Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods
x ​ 5 ​ ​weight at age 13 and y ​5 ​bone mineral density 
at age 27 are consistent with summary quantities for 
women given in the paper.
Weight (kg)
BMD (g/cm2)
54.4
1.15
59.3
1.26
74.6
1.42
62.0
1.06
73.7
1.44
70.8
1.02
66.8
1.26
66.7
1.35
64.7
1.02
71.8
0.91
69.7
1.28
64.7
1.17
62.1
1.12
68.5
1.24
58.3
1.00
A simple linear regression model was used to de-
scribe the relationship between weight at age 13 and 
BMD at age 27. For this data:
	
a ​5 ​0.558        b ​5 ​0.009      n ​5 ​15
	
SSTo ​5 ​0.356    SSResid ​5 ​0.313
a.	 What percentage of observed variation in BMD at 
age 27 can be explained by the simple linear re-
gression model? (Hint: See Example 13.3.) 
b.	Give an estimate of s and interpret this estimate.
c.	 Give an estimate of the average change in BMD as-
sociated with a 1 kg increase in weight at age 13.
d.	Compute an estimate of the mean BMD at age 27 
for women whose age 13 weight was 60 kg. 
13.8	 ● Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is thought to 
increase the risk of breast cancer. The accompanying 
data on 
x ​5 ​percent of women using HRT
and
y ​5 ​breast cancer incidence (cases per 100,000 
women) for a region in Germany 
for 5 years appeared in the paper “Decline in Breast 
Cancer Incidence after Decrease in Utilisation of Hor-
mone Replacement Therapy” (Epidemiology [2008]: 
427–430). The authors of the paper used a simple 
linear regression model to describe the relationship 
between HRT use and breast cancer incidence.
HRT Use
Breast Cancer Incidence
46.30
103.30
40.60
105.00
HRT Use
Breast Cancer Incidence
39.50
100.00
36.60
  93.80
30.00
  83.50
a.	 What is the equation of the estimated regression line?
b.	What is the estimated average change in breast can-
cer incidence associated with a 1 percentage point 
increase in HRT use? 
c.	 What would you predict the breast cancer inci-
dence to be in a year when HRT use was 40%?
d.	Should you use this regression model to predict 
breast cancer incidence for a year when HRT use 
was 20%? Explain. 
e.	 Calculate and interpret the value of r2.
f.	 Calculate and interpret the value of se.
13.9	 The accompanying summary quantities resulted from 
a study in which x was the number of photocopy 
machines serviced during a routine service call and y 
was the total service time (minutes):
n 5 16      o(y 2 y])2 5 22,398.05
osy 2 y⁄ d2 5 2620.57
a.	 What proportion of observed variation in total 
service time can be explained by a linear relation-
ship between total service time and the number of 
machines serviced?  ​  ​
 
b.	Calculate the value of the estimated standard devia-
tion se. What is the number of degrees of freedom 
associated with this estimate?  ​ 
13.10	 A simple linear regression model was used to describe 
the relationship between y 5 hardness of molded plas-
tic and x 5 amount of time elapsed since the end of the 
molding process. Summary quantities included  
n 5 15, SSResid 5 1235.470, and SSTo 5 25,321.368.
a.	 Calculate an estimate of s. On how many degrees 
of freedom is the estimate based? ​
b.	What percentage of observed variation in hardness 
can be explained by the simple linear regression 
model relationship between hardness and elapsed 
time? 
13.11	● Consider the accompanying data on 
x 5 advertising share 
and 
y 5 market share
for a particular brand of soft drink during 10  
randomly selected years.
x .103 .072 .071 .077 .086 .047 .060 .050 .070 .052
y .135 .125 .120 .086 .079 .076 .065 .059 .051 .039
a.	 Construct a scatterplot for these data. Do you 
think the simple linear regression model would 
 
 
 
 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
continued
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 13.2   Inferences About the Slope of the Population Regression Line  
●  675
be appropriate for describing the relationship 
between x and y?
b.	Calculate the equation of the estimated regres-
sion line and use it to obtain the predicted market 
share when the advertising share is .09.
c.	 Compute r2. How would you interpret this value?
d.	Calculate a point estimate of s. On how many 
degrees of freedom is your estimate based? 
  ​
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
 13.2  
Inferences About the Slope of the Population  
Regression Line
The slope coefficient b in the simple linear regression model represents the average or 
expected change in the dependent variable y that is associated with a 1-unit increase in 
the value of the independent variable x. For example, consider x 5 the size of a house (in 
square feet) and y 5 selling price of the house. If we assume that the simple linear regres-
sion model is appropriate for the population of houses in a particular city, b would be the 
average increase in selling price associated with a 1-square foot increase in size. As another 
example, if x 5 number of hours per week a computer system is used and y 5 the annual 
maintenance expense, then b would be the expected change in expense associated with 
using the computer system one additional hour per week.
Because the value of b is almost always unknown, it must be estimated from the sample 
data. The slope b of the least-squares line gives a point estimate. As with any point estimate, 
though, it is desirable to have some indication of how accurately b estimates b. 
In some situations, the value of the statistic b may vary greatly from sample to sample, so 
b computed from a single sample may be quite different from the actual population slope 
b. In other situations, almost all possible samples yield b values that are close to b, so the 
error of estimation is almost sure to be small. 
To proceed further, we need to know about the sampling distribution of b. In particular, 
we need to know the shape of the sampling distribution curve, where the curve is centered 
relative to b, and how much the curve spreads out about its center.
When the four basic assumptions of the simple linear regression model are 
­satisfied, the following statements are true: 
1.	 ​The mean value of b is b. Because mb 5 b, the sampling distribution of 
b is always centered at the value of b. This means that b is an unbiased 
­statistic for estimating b.
2.	 The standard deviation of the statistic b is 
sb 5
s
ÏSxx
3.	 The statistic b has a normal distribution (a consequence of the model 
assumption that the random deviation e is normally distributed).
Properties of the Sampling Distribution of b
The fact that b is unbiased means only that the sampling distribution is centered at the 
right place. It gives no information about variability. If sb is large, then the sampling dis-
tribution of b will be quite spread out around b and an estimate far from b could result. 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

676 
●  Chapter 13  Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods
When the four basic assumptions of the simple linear regression model are sat-
isfied, a confidence interval for b, the slope of the population regression line, 
has the form
b ± st critical valued?sb
where the t critical value is based on df 5 n 2 2. Appendix Table 3 gives criti-
cal values corresponding to the most frequently used confidence levels.
Confidence Interval for b
For sb to be small, the numerator s should be small (little variability about the population 
line) and/or the denominator ÏSxx or, equivalently, Sxx 5 osx 2 xd2 itself should be large. 
Because osx 2 xd2 is a measure of how much the observed x values spread out, b tends 
to be more precisely estimated when the x values in the sample are spread out rather than 
when they are close together.
The normality of the sampling distribution of b implies that the standardized variable
z 5 b 2 b
sb
has a standard normal distribution. However, inferential methods cannot be based on this 
statistic, because the value of s b is not known (since the unknown s appears in the nu-
merator of s         b). One way to proceed is to estimate s with se, yielding an estimated standard 
deviation.
In the same way that t 5 x 2 m
s
Ïn
 was used in Chapter 9 to develop a confidence interval 
for m, the t variable in the preceding box can be used to obtain a confidence interval 
for b.
The interval estimate of b is centered at b and extends out from the center by an amount 
that depends on the sampling variability of b. When sb is small, the interval is narrow, im-
plying that the investigator has relatively precise knowledge of the value of b.
The estimated standard deviation of the statistic b is 
sb 5
se
ÏSxx
When the four basic assumptions of the simple linear regression model are satis-
fied, the distribution of the statistic 
t 5 b 2 b
sb
is the t distribution with df 5 (n 2 2).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 13.2   Inferences About the Slope of the Population Regression Line  
●  677
Example 13.4 
The Bison of Yellowstone Park
 The dedicated work of conservationists for over 100 years has brought the bison in Yel-
lowstone National Park from near extinction to a herd of over 3000 animals. This recovery 
is a mixed blessing. Many bison have been exposed to the bacteria that cause brucellosis, a 
disease that infects domestic cattle, and there are many domestic cattle herds near Yellow-
stone. Because of concerns that free-ranging bison can infect nearby cattle, it is important 
to monitor and manage the size of the bison population, and if possible, keep bison from 
transmitting this bacteria to ranch cattle.
The article, “Reproduction and Survival of Yellowstone Bison” (The Journal of Wildlife 
Management [2007]: 2365–2372) described a large multiyear study of the factors that 
influence bison movement and herd size. The researchers studied a number of envi-
ronmental factors to better understand the relationship between bison reproduction 
and the environment. One factor thought to influence reproduction is stress due to 
accumulated snow, making foraging more difficult for the pregnant bison. Data from 
1981 to 1997 on
y 5 spring calf ratio (SCR)
and
x 5 previous fall snow-water equivalent (SWE)
are shown in the accompanying table. The spring calf ratio is the ratio of calves to adults, 
a measure of reproductive success. The researchers were interested in estimating the mean 
change in spring calf ratio associated with each additional centimeters in snow-water 
equivalent.
SCR
SWE
0.19
1.933
0.14
4.906
0.21
3.072
0.23
2.543
0.26
3.509
0.19
3.908
0.29
2.214
0.23
2.816
0.16
4.128
0.22
3.317
0.22
3.332
0.18
3.511
0.21
3.907
0.25
2.533
0.19
4.611
0.22
6.237
0.17
7.279
The investigators collected data from 17 successive years. To proceed, we would need to 
assume that these years are representative of yearly circumstances at Yellowstone, and that 
each year’s reproduction and snowfall is independent of previous years.
A scatterplot of the data is shown here.
Understand the context ❭
 Data set available online
Consider the data ❭
Step-by-Step technology  
instructions available  
online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

678 
●  Chapter 13  Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0.300
0.275
0.250
0.225
0.200
0.175
0.150
SWE
SCR
The plot shows a linear pattern, and the vertical spread of points does not appear to be changing 
over the range of x values in the sample. If we assume that the distribution of errors at any given 
x value is approximately normal, then the simple linear regression model seems appropriate.
The slope b in this context is the average change in spring calf ratio associated with a 
1-cm increase in snow water equivalent. The scatterplot shows a negative linear relation-
ship, so the point estimate of b will be negative.
Straightforward calculation gives
 n 5 17            o x 5 63.756  o y 5 3.56  
o x2 5 270.425 o xy 5 12.923 o y2 5 0.7682
from which
b 5 20.0137         ​  ​a 5 0.261
SSResid 5 0.016847         SSTo 5 0.022694
r2 5 .258  (25.8% of the observed variability in spring calf ratio can be 
­explained by the simple linear regression model)
s2e 5 0.0011   ​  ​  ​  ​  ​  ​se 5 0.0335
sb 5
se
ÏSxx
5
0.0335
Ï31.3175 5 0.006
Calculation of the 95% confidence interval for b requires a t critical value based on df 5  
n 2 2 5 17 2 2 5 15, which (from Appendix Table 3) is 2.13. The resulting interval is then
b 6 (t critical value) . sb 5 20.0137 6 (2.13)(0.006)
5 20.0137 6 .0128
5 (20.0265, 20.0009)
We interpret this interval as follows: Based on the sample data, we are 95% confident 
that the average decrease in spring calf ratio associated with a 1-cm increase in snow-water 
equivalent is between .0009 and .0265.
■
Output from any of the standard statistical computer packages routinely includes the 
computed values of a, b, SSResid, SSTo, and sb. Figure 13.9 (on the next page) displays 
partial Minitab output for the data of Example 13.4. The format from other packages is 
similar. Rounding occasionally leads to small discrepancies between hand-calculated and 
computer-calculated values, but there are no such discrepancies in this example.
Hypothesis Tests Concerning b
Hypotheses about b can be tested using a t test similar to the t tests discussed in Chapters 10 
and 11. The null hypothesis states that b has a specified hypothesized value. The t statistic 
results from standardizing b, the point estimate of b, under the assumption that H0 is true. 
When H0 is true, the sampling distribution of this statistic is the t distribution with df 5 n 2 2.
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 13.2   Inferences About the Slope of the Population Regression Line  
●  679
Null hypothesis:  ​  ​H0:  ​b 5 hypothesized value
Test statistic:  ​  ​t 5 b 2 hypothesized value
sb
The test is based on df 5 n 2 2.
Alternative hypothesis:	
P-value: 
Ha:  ​b . hypothesized value	 Area to the right of the computed t under the 
appropriate t curve
Ha:  ​b , hypothesized value	 Area to the left of the computed t under the 
appropriate t curve 
Ha:  ​b Þ hypothesized value	 (1) 2(area to the right of t) if t is positive  
or  
(2) 2(area to the left of the t) if t is negative
Assumptions:  ​  ​For this test to be appropriate, the four basic assumptions of 
the simple linear regression model must be met: 
1.	 ​The distribution of e at any particular x value has mean 
value 0 (that is me 5 0).
2.	 ​The standard deviation of e is s, which does not depend on x.
3.	 ​The distribution of e at any particular x value is normal.
4.	 ​The random deviations e1, e2, . . . , en associated with 
­different observations are independent of one another.
Summary of Hypothesis Tests Concerning b
Frequently, the null hypothesis of interest is b 5 0. When this is the case, the population 
regression line is a horizontal line, and the value of y in the simple linear regression model 
does not depend on x. That is,
y 5 a 1 0 ? x 1 e
or equivalently,
y 5 a 1 e
In this situation, knowledge of x is of no use in predicting y. On the other hand, if b Þ 0,  
there is a useful linear relationship between x and y, and knowledge of x is useful for pre-
dicting y. This is illustrated by the scatterplots in Figure 13.10.
Figure  13.9
Partial Minitab output for the data of 
Example 13.4.
Regression Analysis
Predictor                         Coef                SE Coef                    
Constant                -    0.26066              0.02388                 10.91                0.000
x                  
20.013664           0.005989              22.28                0.038
S 5 0.0335133       R-Sq 5 25.8%       R-Sq (adj) 5 20.8%
Analysis of Variance
Source                       DF                        SS                         MS                       F                       P
Regression                   1                0.005847                    
0.005847                5.21                0.038
Residual Error              15                 
0.016847                     
0.001123
Total                          16               0.022694
The regression equation is
y 5 0.261 2 0.0137 x
Estimated y intercept a
Estimated slope b
se
s   5 estimated standard
       deviation of b
b
n 2 2 5 residual df
SSResid
SSTo
100r 2
se2
T
P
Equation of the estimated 
regression line y 5 a 1 bx
ˆ
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

680 
●  Chapter 13  Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods
The test of H0: b 5 0 versus Ha: b Þ 0 is called the model utility test for simple linear 
regression.
x
x
slope = 0
y
nonzero slope
y
(a)
(b)
Figure  13.10
(a) b 5 0;  
(b) b Þ 0.
If a scatterplot and the r2 value do not provide convincing evidence for a useful linear 
relationship, we recommend that the model utility test be carried out before using the re-
gression line to make predictions.
Example 13.5 
University Graduation Rates
● The accompanying data on 6-year graduation rate (%), student-related expenditure per 
full-time student, and median SAT score for a random sample of the primarily undergradu-
ate public universities and colleges in the United States with enrollments between 10,000 
and 20,000 were taken from College Results Online, The Education Trust.
 Data set available online
Median SAT
Expenditure
Graduation Rate
1065
7970
49
  ​950
6401
33
1045
6285
37
  ​990
6792
49
  ​950
4541
22
  ​970
7186
38
  ​980
7736
39
1080
6382
52
1035
7323
53
continued
The Model Utility Test for Simple Linear Regression
The model utility test for simple linear regression is the test of 
H0:  ​b 5 0
versus 
Ha:  ​b ± 0
The null hypothesis specifies that there is no useful linear relationship between 
x and y, whereas the alternative hypothesis specifies that there is a useful linear 
relationship between x and y. If H0 is rejected, we conclude that the simple 
linear regression model is useful for predicting y. The test procedure in the pre-
vious box (with hypothesized value 5 0) is used to carry out the model utility 
test. The test statistic is t 5 b/sb.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 13.2   Inferences About the Slope of the Population Regression Line  
●  681
Median SAT
Expenditure
Graduation Rate
1010
6531
41
1010
6216
38
  ​930
7375
37
1005
7874
45
1090
6355
57
1085
6261
48
Let’s first investigate the relationship between graduation rate and median SAT score. 
With y 5 graduation rate and x 5 median SAT score, the summary statistics necessary for 
a simple linear regression analysis are as follows:
 n 5 15 
 
                 o x 5 15,195 
 
    o y 5 638  
 o x2 5 15,430,725 
 
 o xy 5 651,340 
 
 o y2 5 28,294
from which
b 5 0.132	
a 5 291.31	
SSResid 5 491.01
se 5 6.146	
r2 5 .576	
Sxx 5 38190
Because r2 5 .576, about 57.6% of observed variation in graduation rates can be explained 
by the simple linear regression model. It appears from this that there is a useful linear rela-
tion between the two variables, but confirmation requires a formal model utility test. We 
will use a significance level of .05 to carry out this test.
1.	 b 5 the average change in graduation rate associated with an increase of 1 in 
median SAT score
2.	 H0: b 5 0
3.	 Ha: b Þ 0
4.	 a 5 .05
5.	 Test statistic:  ​t 5 b 2 hypothesized value
sb
5 b 2 0
sb
5 b
sb
6.	 Assumptions:  ​The data are from a random sample, so the observations are inde-
pendent. The accompanying scatterplot of the data shows a linear pattern and the 
variability of points does not appear to be changing with x:
950
1000
1050
1100
30
40
50
60
20
Median SAT
Graduation rate
Assuming that the distribution of errors at any given x value is approximately normal, 
the assumptions of the simple linear regression model are appropriate.
Understand the context ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

682 
●  Chapter 13  Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods
7.	 Calculation:  ​The calculation of t requires
sb 5
se
ÏSxx
5
6.146
195.423 5 .031
yielding
t 5 0.132 2 0
.031
5 4.26
8.	 P-value:  ​Appendix Table 4 shows that for a t test based on 13 df, P(t . 4.26)  
, .001. The inequality in Ha requires a two-tailed test, so
P-value , 2(.001) 5 .002.
9.	 Conclusion:  ​Since P-value , .002 is smaller than the significance level .05, H0 is 
rejected. We conclude that there is a useful linear relationship between graduation 
rate and median SAT score.
Figure 13.11 shows partial Minitab output from a simple linear regression analysis. The 
Coef column gives b 5 0.13213; sb 5 0.03145 is in the SE Coef column; the T column 
(for t ratio) contains the value of the test statistic for testing H0: b 5 0; and the P-value for 
the model utility test is given in the last column as 0.001 (slightly different from the ones 
given in Step 8 because of rounding and because the use of the table that produces only 
approximate P-values). Other commonly used statistical packages also include this infor-
mation in their output.
Let’s next consider the relationship between graduation rate and expenditure per full-
time student. Figure 13.12 shows partial Minitab output from a simple linear regression 
with expenditure as the predictor variable.
The value of the test statistic for the model utility test in this case is t 5 1.82 and the 
associated P-value is .092. For a .05 level of significance, we would not reject the null hy-
pothesis of H0: b 5 0. There is not convincing evidence of a linear relationship between 
graduation rate and expenditure per full-time student.
■
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
The regression equation is
Graduation Rate = -91.3 + 0.132 Median SAT
S = 6.14574        R-Sq = 57.6%       R-Sq(adj) = 54.3%
Analysis of Variance
Predictor
Constant
Median SAT
Coef
Source
DF
Regression
1
Residual Error
13
Total
14
SS
666.72
491.01
1157.73
MS
666.72
37.77
F
17.65
P
0.001
-91.31
0.13213
T
-2.86
4.20
P
0.013
0.001
SE Coef
31.90
0.03145
Regression Analysis: Graduation Rate versus Median SAT
Figure  13.11
​Minitab output for the data of  
Example 13.5.
Figure  13.12
​Minitab output using expenditure  
as the predictor.
The regression equation is
Graduation Rate = 10.9 + 0.00468 Expenditure
S = 8.42608       R-Sq = 20.3%       R-Sq(adj) = 14.1%
Predictor
Constant
Expenditure
Coef
10.95
0.004680
T
0.63
1.82
P
0.543
0.092
SE Coef
17.51
0.002574
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 13.2   Inferences About the Slope of the Population Regression Line  
●  683
When H0: b 5 0 cannot be rejected by the model utility test at a reasonably small sig-
nificance level, the search for a useful model must continue. One possibility is to relate y 
to x using a nonlinear model—an appropriate strategy if the scatterplot shows curvature. 
Alternatively, a multiple regression model using more than one predictor variable can be 
employed. Multiple regression models are introduced in Chapter 14.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
13.15	Exercise 13.10 summarized data on y 5 hardness of 
molded plastic and x 5 time elapsed since the mold-
ing was completed.
Summary quantities included
n 5 15  b 5 2.50  SSResid 5 1235.470
o sx 2 xd2 5 4024.20
a.	 Calculate the estimated standard deviation of the 
statistic b.  ​  ​
b.	Obtain a 95% confidence interval for b, the slope 
of the population regression line. (Hint: See 
­Example 13.4.)  ​  ​
c.	 Does the interval in Part (b) suggest that b has 
been precisely estimated? Explain.  ​
13.16	 A simple linear regression model was used to describe 
the relationship between sales revenue y (in thou-
sands of dollars) and advertising expenditure x (also 
in thousands of dollars) for fast-food outlets during 
a 3-month period. A random sample of 15 outlets 
yielded the accompanying summary quantities.
o x 5 14.10  o y 5 1438.50  o x2 5 13.92
o y2 5 140,354 o xy 5 1387.20
o sy 2 yd2 5 2401.85  o sy 2 y⁄d2 5 561.46
a.	 What proportion of observed variation in  
sales revenue can be attributed to the linear 
relationship between revenue and advertising 
expenditure?  ​  ​
b.	Calculate se and sb.  ​ ​
c.	 Obtain a 90% confidence interval for b, the 
average change in revenue associated with a $1000 
(that is, 1-unit) increase in advertising expenditure.
13.17	▼ An experiment to study the relationship between 
x 5 time spent exercising (minutes) and y 5 amount 
of oxygen consumed during the exercise period 
resulted in the following summary statistics.
n 5 20  o
 x 5 50  oy 5 16,705  o x2 5 150
 o y2 5 14,194,231  o xy 5 44,194
a.	 Estimate the slope and y intercept of the popula-
tion regression line.  ​  ​
13.12	 What is the difference between s and sb? What is the 
difference between sb and sb?
13.13	The largest commercial fishing enterprise in the 
southeastern United States is the harvest of shrimp. 
In a study described in the paper “Long-term Trawl 
Monitoring of White Shrimp, Litopenaeus setiferus 
­(Linnaeus), Stocks within the ACE Basin National Estuari-
ene Research Reserve, South Carolina” (Journal of Coastal 
Research [2008]: 193–199), researchers monitored 
variables thought to be related to the abundance  
of white shrimp.
One variable the researchers thought might be 
related to abundance is the amount of oxygen in the 
water. The relationship between mean catch per tow 
of white shrimp and oxygen concentration was de-
scribed by fitting a regression line using data from 10 
randomly selected offshore sites. (The “catch per tow” 
is the number of shrimp caught in a single outing.) 
Computer output is shown below.
The regression equation is
Mean catch per tow = 2 5859 1 97.2 O2 Saturation
Predictor
Coef
SE Coef
T
P
Constant
25859
2394
22.45
0.040
O2 Saturation
97.22
34.63
   2.81
0.023
S 5 481.632
R-Sq 5 49.6%
R2Sq(adj) 5 43.3%
a.	 Is there convincing evidence of a useful linear re-
lationship between the shrimp catch per tow and 
oxygen concentration density? Explain. (Hint: See 
Example 13.5.)  ​ ​
b.	Would you describe the relationship as strong? 
Why or why not? 
c.	 Construct a 95% confidence interval for b and 
interpret it in context. (Hint: See Example 13.4.)
13.14	 Refer back to Example 13.3 in which the simple 
linear regression model was fit to data on x 5 pro-
portion who judged candidate A as more competent 
and y 5 vote difference proportion. For the purpose 
of estimating b as accurately as possible, would it 
have been preferable to have observations with x 
values .05, .1, .2, .3, .4, .5, .6, .7, .8, .9, .95 and .98? 
Explain your reasoning.
EXERCISES 13.12 - 13.26
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

684 
●  Chapter 13  Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods
b.	One sample observation on oxygen usage was 757 
for a 2-minute exercise period. What amount of 
oxygen consumption would you predict for this 
exercise period, and what is the corresponding 
residual? 
c.	 Compute a 99% confidence interval for the 
average change in oxygen consumption  
associated with a 1-minute increase in exercise 
time. 
​
13.18	 The paper “The Effects of Split Keyboard Geometry 
on Upper Body Postures” (Ergonomics [2009]: 104–111) 
describes a study to determine the effects of several 
keyboard characteristics on typing speed. One of the 
variables considered was the front-to-back surface 
angle of the keyboard. Minitab output resulting from 
fitting the simple linear regression model with x ​5 ​
surface angle (degrees) and y 5 ​typing speed (words 
per minute) is given below.
Regression Analysis: Typing Speed versus  
Surface Angle
The regression equation is
Typing Speed ​5 ​60.0 ​1 ​0.0036 Surface Angle
Predictor
Coef
SE Coef
T
P
Constant
60.0286
0.2466
243.45
0.000
Surface Angle
0.00357
0.03823
0.09
0.931
S ​ 5 ​ ​0.511766    R-Sq ​5 ​0.3%        R-Sq(adj) ​5 ​0.0%
Analysis of Variance
Source
DF
SS
MS
F
P
Regression
1
0.0023
0.0023
0.01
0.931
Residual 
Error
3
0.7857
0.2619
Total
4
0.7880
a.	 Assuming that the basic assumptions of the simple 
linear regression model are reasonably met, carry 
out a hypothesis test to decide if there is a useful 
linear relationship between x and y. (Hint: See 
Example 13.5.) 
b.	Are the values of se and r2 consistent with the 
conclusion from Part (a)? Explain.
13.19	The authors of the paper “Decreased Brain Volume in 
Adults with Childhood Lead Exposure” (Public Library 
of Science Medicine [May 27, 2008]: e112) studied the 
relationship between childhood environmental lead 
exposure and a measure of brain volume change in a 
particular region of the brain. Data were given for  
x ​5 ​mean childhood blood lead level (mg/dL) and  
y ​5 ​brain volume change (BVC, in percent). A subset 
of data read from a graph that appeared in the paper 
was used to produce the accompanying Minitab 
output.
Regression Analysis: BVC versus Mean Blood 
Lead Level
The regression equation is
BVC ​5 ​20.00179 2 0.00210 Mean Blood Lead Level
Predictor
Coef
SE Coef
T
P
Constant
20.001790
0.008303
20.22 0.830
Mean Blood Lead Level 20.0021007
0.0005743
23.66 0.000
Carry out a hypothesis test to decide if there is 
convincing evidence of a useful linear relationship 
between x and y. Assume that the basic assumptions 
of the simple linear regression model are reasonably 
met.
13.20	 Do taller adults make more money? The authors of the 
paper “Stature and Status: Height, Ability, and Labor Mar-
ket Outcomes” (Journal of Political Economics [2008]: 499–
532) investigated the association between height and 
earnings. They used the simple linear regression model 
to describe the relationship between x ​5 ​height (in 
inches) and y ​5 ​log(weekly gross earnings in dollars) 
in a very large sample of men. The logarithm of weekly 
gross earnings was used because this transformation 
resulted in a relationship that was approximately linear. 
The paper reported that the slope of the estimated 
regression line was b ​5 ​0.023 and the standard 
deviation of b was sb 5 0.004. Carry out a hypoth-
esis test to decide if there is convincing evidence of 
a useful linear relationship between height and the 
logarithm of weekly earnings. Assume that the basic 
assumptions of the simple linear regression model are 
reasonably met.
13.21	●Researchers studying pleasant touch sensations 
measured the firing frequency (impulses per second) 
of nerves that were stimulated by a light brushing 
stroke on the forearm and also recorded the subject’s 
numerical rating of how pleasant the sensation was. 
The accompanying data was read from a graph in the 
paper “Coding of Pleasant Touch by Unmyelinated Affer-
ents in Humans” (Nature Neuroscience, April 12, 2009). 
Firing Frequency
Pleasantness Rating
23
0.2
24
1.0
22
1.2
25
1.2
27
1.0
28
2.0
34
2.3
33
2.2
36
2.4
34
2.8
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 13.2   Inferences About the Slope of the Population Regression Line  
●  685
Summary quantities given there yield
n 5 15  ​  ​  ​  ​b 5 52.27    ​  ​  ​sb 5 8.05
a.	 Test the hypothesis H0: b 5 0 versus Ha: b Þ 0 
using a significance level of .05. What does your 
conclusion say about the nature of the relationship 
between x and y?
b.	Consider the hypothesis H0: b 5 40 versus Ha:  
b . 40. The null hypothesis states that the average 
change in sales revenue associated with a 1-unit 
increase in advertising expenditure is (at most) 
$40,000. Carry out a test using significance  
level .01. 
13.24	 ● Consider the accompanying data on x 5 research and 
development expenditure (thousands of dollars) and y 
5 growth rate (% per year) for eight different industries.
x 2024 5038
905 3572 1157
327
378
191
y
1.90
3.96
2.44
0.88
0.37 20.90
0.49
1.01
a.	 Would a simple linear regression model provide 
useful information for predicting growth rate from 
research and development expenditure? Use a .05 
level of significance.
b.	Use a 90% confidence interval to estimate the average 
change in growth rate associated with a $1000 in-
crease in expenditure. Interpret the resulting interval.
13.25	Suppose that a single y observation is made at each of 
the x values 5, 10, 15, 20, and 25.
a.	 If s 5 4, what is the standard deviation of the 
statistic b?  ​  ​  
b.	Now suppose that a second observation is made 
at every x value listed in Part (a) (for a total of 10 
observations). Is the resulting value of sb half of 
what it was in Part (a)?  ​  ​   
c.	 How many observations at each x value in Part (a) 
are required to yield a sb value that is half the value 
calculated in Part (a)? Verify your conjecture.  ​
13.26	 ● In anthropological studies, an important charac-
teristic of fossils is cranial capacity. Frequently skulls 
are at least partially decomposed, so it is necessary to 
use other characteristics to obtain information about 
capacity. One such measure that has been used is the 
length of the lambda-opisthion chord. The article 
“Vertesszollos and the Presapiens Theory” (American 
Journal of Physical Anthropology [1971]) reported the 
­accompanying data for n 5 7 Homo erectus fossils.
x (chord length in mm)
78
75 78
81
84
86
87
y (capacity in cm3)
850 775 750 975 915 1015 1030
Suppose that from previous evidence, anthropologists 
had believed that for each 1-mm increase in chord 
length, cranial capacity would be expected to increase 
by 20 cm 3. Do these new experimental data strongly 
contradict prior belief?
​
​
a.	 Estimate the mean change in pleasantness rating 
associated with an increase of 1 impulse per second 
in firing frequency using a 95% confidence inter-
val. Interpret the resulting interval. 
b.	Carry out a hypothesis test to decide if there is 
convincing evidence of a useful linear relationship 
between firing frequency and pleasantness rating.
13.22	 ● The accompanying data were read from a plot (and 
are a subset of the complete data set) given in the 
article “Cognitive Slowing in Closed-Head Injury” (Brain 
and Cognition [1996]: 429–​440). The data represent 
the mean response times for a group of individuals 
with closed-head injury (CHI) and a matched control 
group without head injury on 10 different tasks. 
Each observation was based on a different study, and 
used different subjects, so it is reasonable to assume 
that the observations are independent.
Mean Response Time
Study
Control
CHI
  1
  250
  ​303
  2
  360
  ​491
  3
  475
  ​659
  4
  525
  ​683
  5
  610
  ​922
  6
  740
1044
  7
​880
1421
  8
  ​920
1329
  9
1010
1481
10
1200
1815
a.	 Fit a linear regression model that would allow you to 
predict the mean response time for those suffering a 
closed-head injury from the mean response time on 
the same task for individuals with no head injury.
b.	Do the sample data support the hypothesis that there 
is a useful linear relationship between the mean re-
sponse time for individuals with no head injury and 
the mean response time for individuals with CHI? 
Test the appropriate hypotheses using a 5 .05.
c.	 It is also possible to test hypotheses about the y 
intercept in a linear regression model. For these 
data, the null hypothesis H0: a 5 0 cannot be 
rejected at the .05 significance level, suggesting 
that a model with a y intercept of 0 might be an 
appropriate model. Fitting such a model results  
in an estimated regression equation of
CHI 5 1.48(Control)
Interpret the estimated slope of 1.48.
13.23	 Exercise 13.16 described a regression analysis in which 
y 5 sales revenue and x 5 advertising expenditure.  
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

686 
●  Chapter 13  Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods
The simple linear regression model equation is
y 5 a 1 bx 1 e
where e represents the random deviation of an observed y value from the population re-
gression line a 1 bx. The inferential methods presented in Section 13.2 required some 
assumptions about e, including these:
1.	 At any particular x value, the distribution of e is a normal distribution.
2.	 At any particular x value, the standard deviation of e is s, which is the same for all 
values of x (that is s does not depend on x).
Inferences based on the simple linear regression model continue to be reliable when 
model assumptions are slightly violated (for example, mild nonnormality of the random 
deviation distribution). However, using an estimated model in the face of grossly violated 
assumptions can result in misleading conclusions. In this section, we consider methods for 
identifying such serious violations.
Residual Analysis
If the deviations e1, e2, . . . , en from the population line were available, they could be exam-
ined for any inconsistencies with model assumptions. For example, a normal probability 
plot would suggest whether or not normality was reasonable. But, because
e1 5 y1 2 sa 1 bx1d
o
en 5 yn 2 sa 1 bxnd
these deviations can be calculated only if the equation of the population line is known. In 
practice, this will never be the case. Instead, diagnostic checks must be based on the residuals
y1 2 y⁄
1 5 y1 2 sa 1 bx1d
o
yn 2 y⁄
n 5 yn 2 sa 1 bxnd
which are the deviations from the estimated line.
When all model assumptions are met, the mean value of the residuals at any particular 
x value is 0. Any observation that gives a large positive or negative residual should be ex-
amined carefully for any unusual circumstances, such as a recording error or exceptional 
experimental conditions. Identifying residuals with unusually large magnitudes is made 
easier by inspecting standardized residuals.
Recall that a quantity is standardized by subtracting its mean value (0 in this case) and divid-
ing by its estimated standard deviation. So, to obtain standardized residuals, we compute
standardized residual 5
residual
estimated standard deviation of residual
The value of a standardized residual tells how many standard deviations the corresponding 
residual is from its expected value, 0.
Because residuals at different x values have different standard deviations* (depending on the 
value of x for that observation), computing the standardized residuals can be tedious. Fortu-
nately, many computer regression programs provide standardized residuals as part of the output.
In Chapter 7, the normal probability plot was introduced as a technique for deciding 
whether the n observations in a random sample could plausibly have come from a normal 
population distribution. To assess whether the assumption that e1, e2, . . . en all come from 
the same normal distribution is reasonable, we construct a normal probability plot of the 
standardized residuals. This is illustrated in the following example.
 13.3  
Checking Model Adequacy
*The estimated standard deviation of the ith residual, yi 2 y⁄
i is se Î1 2 1
n 2 sxi 2 xd2
Sxx
.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 13.3   Checking Model Adequacy 
●  687
Example 13.6 
Political Faces
Example 13.3 introduced data on
x 5 proportion who judged candidate A as the more competent of two candidates based 
on facial appearance
and
y 5 vote difference (candidate A 2 candidate B) expressed as a proportion of the total 
number of votes cast
for a sample of 12 congressional elections. (See Example 13.3 for a more detailed descrip-
tion of the study.)
The scatterplot in Figure 13.13 is consistent with the assumptions of the simple linear 
regression model.
The residuals, their standard deviations, and the standardized residuals (computed us-
ing Minitab) are given in Table 13.1. For the residual with the largest magnitude, 0.49, the 
standardized residual is 1.81. That is, this residual is approximately 1.8 standard deviations 
above its expected value of 0, which is not particularly unusual in a sample of this size. On 
the standardized scale, no residual here is surprisingly large.
Understand the context ❭
Figure  13.13
​Minitab output for the data of  
Example 13.6.
0.2
Difference in vote proportion
0.50
0.00
0.25
20.25
20.50
20.75
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
S
R-Sq
R-Sq(adj)
0.285005
46.2%
40.8%
Competent proportion
Difference in vote proportion 5 20.6678 1 1.396 competent proportion
Step-by-Step technology  
instructions available  
online
Observation
Competent 
Proportion x
Difference  
in Vote  
Proportion y
y⁄
Residual
Estimated Standard 
Deviation  
of Residual
Standardized 
Residual
  1
0.20
0.70
0.39
0.31
0.24
1.32
  2
0.23
0.40
0.35
0.05
0.24
0.22
  3
0.40
0.35
0.11
0.24
0.27
0.89
  4
0.35
  0.18
0.18
  0.36
0.27
  1.35
  5
0.40
  0.38
0.11
  0.49
0.27
  1.81
  6
0.45
0.10
0.04
0.06
0.27
0.22
  7
0.50
  0.20
  0.03
  0.17
0.27
  0.62
  8
0.55
0.30
  0.10
0.40
0.27
1.48
  9
0.60
  0.30
  0.17
  0.13
0.27
  0.49
10
0.68
  0.18
  0.28
0.10
0.26
0.39
11
0.70
  0.50
  0.31
  0.19
0.25
  0.75
12
0.76
  0.22
  0.39
0.17
0.24
0.72
Table 13.1  Data, Residuals, and Standardized Residuals for Example 13.6
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

688 
●  Chapter 13  Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods
Figure 13.14 displays a normal probability plot of the standardized residuals and also 
one of the residuals. Notice that in this case the plots are nearly identical. It is usually the 
case that the two plots are similar. Although it is preferable to work with the standardized 
residuals, if you do not have access to a computer package or calculator that will produce 
standardized residuals, a plot of the unstandardized residuals should suffice. Both of the 
normal probability plots in Figure 13.14 are approximately linear. The plots would not 
cause us to question the assumption of normality.
■
Plotting the Residuals
A plot of the (x, residual) pairs is called a residual plot, and a plot of the (x, standardized 
residual) pairs is a standardized residual plot. Residual and standardized residual plots 
typically exhibit the same general shapes. If you are using a computer package or graphing 
calculator that calculates standardized residuals, we recommend using the standardized re-
sidual plot. If not, it is acceptable to use the residual plot instead.
A standardized residual plot or a residual plot is often helpful in identifying unusual or 
highly influential observations and in checking for violations of model assumptions. A de-
sirable plot is one that exhibits no particular pattern (such as curvature or a much greater 
spread in one part of the plot than in another) and that has no point that is far removed 
from all the others. 
A point falling far above or far below the horizontal line residual 5 0 corresponds to a 
large standardized residual, which can indicate some kind of unusual behavior, such as a 
recording error, a nonstandard experimental condition, or an atypical experimental sub-
ject. A point that has an x value that differs greatly from others in the data set could have 
exerted excessive influence in determining the fitted line.
A standardized residual plot, such as the one pictured in Figure 13.15(a) is desirable, 
because no point lies much outside the horizontal band between 22 and 2 (so there 
is no unusually large standardized residual corresponding to an outlying observation). 
There is also no point far to the left or right of the others (which could indicate an 
observation that might greatly influence the fit). Finally there is no pattern to indicate 
that the model should somehow be modified. When the plot has the appearance of 
Figure 13.15(b), the fitted model should be changed to incorporate curvature (a non-
linear model).
The increasing spread from left to right in Figure 13.15(c) suggests that the variance of y 
is not the same at each x value but rather increases with x. A straight-line model may still be 
22
21
0
1
2
0.5
1.5
1.0
2.0
0.0
20.5
21.0
21.5
Normal score
Standardized residual
(a)
22
21
0
1
2
0.25
0.50
0.00
20.25
20.50
Normal score
Residual
(b)
Figure  13.14
Normal probability plots for Example 
13.6 (from Minitab):  
(a) standardized residuals;  
(b) residuals.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 13.3   Checking Model Adequacy 
●  689
appropriate, but the best-fit line should be obtained by using weighted least squares rather 
than ordinary least squares. This involves giving more weight to observations in the region 
exhibiting low variability and less weight to observations in the region exhibiting high vari-
ability. A specialized regression analysis textbook or a statistician should be consulted for 
more information on using weighted least squares.
The standardized residual plots of Figures 13.15(d) and 13.15(e) show an outlier (a 
point with a large standardized residual) and a potentially influential observation, re-
spectively. Consider deleting the potentially influential observation from the data set and 
refitting the same model. Substantial changes in estimates and various other quantities 
warn of instability in the data. The investigator should certainly carry out a more careful 
analysis and perhaps collect more data before drawing any firm conclusions.
Standardized
residual
–1
1
0
–2
2
(a)
x
Standardized
residual
–1
1
0
–2
2
(d)
x
Standardized
residual
–1
1
0
–2
2
(e)
x
Standardized
residual
–1
1
0
–2
2
(c)
x
Standardized
residual
–1
1
0
–2
2
(b)
x
Potentially
inﬂuential
observation
Large
residual
Example 13.7 
A New Pediatric Tracheal Tube
The article “Appropriate Placement of Intubation Depth Marks in a New Cuffed, Paediatric 
Tracheal Tube” (British Journal of Anaesthesia [2004]: 80–87) describes a study of the use of 
tracheal tubes in newborns and infants. Newborns and infants have small trachea, and 
Understand the context ❭
Figure  13.15
Examples of residual plots:  
(a) satisfactory plot;  
(b) plot suggesting that a curvilinear 
regression model is needed;  
(c) plot indicating nonconstant 
variance;  
(d) plot showing a large residual;  
(e) plot showing a potentially 
influential observation.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

690 
●  Chapter 13  Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods
Figure  13.16
(a) Scatterplot for insertion depth vs. 
height data of Example 16.9;  
(b) standardized residual plot.
Figure  13.17
(a) Scatterplot for insertion depth vs. 
weight data of Example 16.9;  
(b) standardized residual plot.
there is little margin for error when inserting tracheal tubes. Using X-rays of a large 
number of children aged 2 months to 14 years, the researchers examined the relation-
ships between appropriate trachea tube insertion depth and other variables such as 
height, weight, and age. A scatterplot and a standardized residual plot constructed us-
ing data on the insertion depth and height of the children (both measured in cm) are 
shown in Figure 13.16.
24
3
2
1
0
–1
–1
–2
–3
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
Weight
(a)
Weight
(b)
Standardized residual
60
70
80
90
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Insertion depth
20
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
18
16
14
12
10
50
75
100
125
Height
(a)
(b)
Height
Standardized residual
Insertion depth
150
175
200
Residual plots like the ones pictured in Figure 13.16(b) are desirable. No point lies 
outside the horizontal band between 23 and 3, and most are between 22 and 2 (so there 
are no unusually large residuals corresponding to outliers). There is no point far to the left 
or right of the others (no observation that might be influential), and there is no pattern 
of curvature or differences in the variability of the residuals for different height values to 
indicate that the model assumptions are not reasonable.
But consider what happens when the relationship between insertion depth and weight 
is examined. A scatterplot of insertion depth and weight (kg) is shown in Figure 13.17(a), 
and a standardized residual plot in Figure 13.17(b). While some curvature is evident in 
the original scatterplot, it is even more clearly visible in the standardized residual plot. A 
careful inspection of these plots suggests that along with curvature, the residuals may be 
more variable at larger weights. When plots have this curved appearance and increasing 
variability in the residuals, the linear regression model is not appropriate. 

■
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 13.3   Checking Model Adequacy 
●  691
Example 13.8 
Looking for Love in All the Right... Trees?
Treefrogs’ search for mating partners was the examined in the article, “The Cause of Correla-
tions Between Nightly Numbers of Male and Female Barking Treefrogs (Hyla gratiosa) Attending 
Choruses” (Behavioral Ecology [2002: 274–281). A lek, in the world of animal behavior, is a 
cluster of males gathered in a relatively small area to exhibit courtship displays. The “female 
preference” hypothesis asserts that females will prefer larger leks over smaller leks, presum-
ably because there are more males to choose from. The scatterplot and residual plot in Figure 
13.18 show the relationship between the number of females and the number of males in ob-
served leks of barking treefrogs. You can see that the unequal variance, which is noticeable in 
the scatterplot, is even more evident in the residual plot. This indicates that the assumptions 
of the linear regression model are not reasonable in this situation.
Understand the context ❭
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0
10
20
30
40
Number of males
(a)
Number of males
(b)
Number of females
Residuals
50
60
70
80
90
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
15
10
5
0
–5
–10

■
Example 13.9 
Snow Cover and Temperature
 The article “Snow Cover and Temperature Relationships in North America and Eurasia” (Jour-
nal of Climate and Applied Meteorology [1983]: 460–469) explored the relationship between 
October–​November continental snow cover (x, in millions of square kilometers) and  
December–​February temperature (y, in 8C). The following data are for Eurasia during the 
n 5 13 time periods (1969–​1970, 1970–​1971, . . . , 1981–​1982):
Figure  13.18
(a) Scatterplot for treefrog data of 
Example 16.20;  
(b) residual plot 
x
y
Standardized 
Residual
13.00
213.5
20.11
12.75
215.7
22.19
16.70
215.5
20.36
18.85
214.7
1.23
16.60
216.1
20.91
15.35
214.6
20.12
13.90
213.4
0.34
A simple linear regression analysis done by the authors yielded r2 5 .52 and r 5 .72, 
suggesting a significant linear relationship. This is confirmed by a model utility test. The 
scatterplot and standardized residual plot are displayed in Figure 13.19. There are no un-
usual patterns, although one standardized residual, 22.19, is a bit on the large side. The 
most interesting feature is the observation (22.40, 218.9), corresponding to a point far to 
the right of the others in these plots. This observation may have had a substantial influ-
ence on all aspects of the fit. The estimated slope when all 13 observations are included is  
 Data set available online
x
y
Standardized 
Residual
22.40
218.9
21.54
16.20
214.8
0.04
16.70
213.6
1.25
13.65
214.0
20.28
13.90
212.0
21.54
14.75
213.5
0.58
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

692 
●  Chapter 13  Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods
b 5 20.459, and sb 5 0.133. When the potentially influential observation is deleted, the 
estimate of b based on the remaining 12 observations is b 5 20.228. Then
change in slope 5 original b 2 new b
5 2.459 2 (2.288)
5 2.231
The change expressed in standard deviations is 2.231/.133 5 21.74. Because b has 
changed by more than 1.5 standard deviations, the observation under consideration 
­appears to be highly influential.
In addition, r2 based just on the 12 observations is only .13, and the t ratio for testing  
b 5 0 is not significant. Evidence for a linear relationship is much less conclusive in light 
of this analysis. 
■
Occasionally, you will see a residual plot or a standardized residual plot with y⁄  plotted 
on the horizontal axis rather than x. Because y⁄  is just a linear function of x, using y⁄  rather 
than x changes the scale of the horizontal axis but does not change the pattern of the points 
in the plot. As a consequence, residual plots that use y⁄  on the horizontal axis can be inter-
preted in the same manner as residual plots that use x.
When the distribution of the random deviation e has heavier tails than does the normal 
distribution, observations with large standardized residuals are not that unusual. Such 
+----+----+----+
-14.5
-16.0
-17.5
-19.0
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
15.0
17.5
20.0
22.5
25.0
12.5
SNOW
*
+----+----
-11.5
-13.0
*
*
*
*
*
*
* *
*
*
TEMP
(a)
*
+----+----+----+
0.0
-1.0
-2.0
-3.0
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
15.0
17.5
20.0
22.5
25.0
12.5
SNOW
*
+----+----
2.0
1.0
STRESID
(b)
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Potentially inﬂuential
observation
*
Figure  13.19
Plots for the data of Example 13.8 
(from Minitab):  
(a) scatterplot;  
(b) standardized residual plot.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 13.3   Checking Model Adequacy 
●  693
observations can have great effects on the estimated regression line when the least-squares 
approach is used. Recently, statisticians have proposed a number of alternative methods—
called robust, or resistant, methods—for fitting a line. Such methods give less weight to 
outlying observations than does the least-squares method without deleting the outliers 
from the data set. The most widely used robust procedures require a substantial amount of 
computation, so a good computer program is necessary. 
13.28	 ● Exercise 13.21 gave data on x 5 ​nerve firing 
frequency and y ​5 ​pleasantness rating when nerves 
were stimulated by a light brushing stroke on the 
forearm. The x values and the corresponding residu-
als from a simple linear regression are as follows:
Firing Frequency, x
Standardized Residual
23
21.83
24
0.04
22
1.45
25
0.20
27
21.07
28
1.19
34
20.24
33
20.13
36
20.81
34
1.17
a.	 Construct a standardized residual plot. Does the 
plot exhibit any unusual features?
b.	A normal probability plot of the standardized re-
siduals follows. Based on this plot, do you think it 
is reasonable to assume that the error distribution 
is approximately normal? Explain.
13.29	  Sea bream are one type of fish that are often raised 
in large fish farming enterprises. These fish are usu-
ally fed a diet consisting primarily of fish meal. The 
13.27	 The graphs below are based on data from an experiment 
to assess the effects of logging on a squirrel popula-
tion in British Columbia (“Effects of Logging Pattern and 
Intensity on Squirrel Demography,” The Journal of Wildlife 
Management [2007]: 2655-2663). Plots of land, each 9 
hectares in area, were subjected to different percentages 
of logging, and the squirrel population density for each 
plot was measured after 3 years. The scatterplot, residual 
plot, and a boxplot of the residuals are shown below.
Does it appear that the assumptions of the simple 
linear regression model are plausible? Explain your 
reasoning in a few sentences.
17.5
15.0
12.5
10.0
7.5
5.0
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
0
0
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
10
20
30
%Logged
%Logged
Residual
Squirrels per plot
Residual
40
50
60
70
EXERCISES 13.27 - 13.32
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
22.0
0
1
2
21
22
21.0
21.5
20.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Standardized residual
Normal score
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

694 
●  Chapter 13  Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods
authors of the paper “Growth and Economic Profit of 
Gilthead Sea Bream (Sparus aurata, L.) Fed Sunflower 
Meal” (Aquaculture [2007]: 528–534) describe a study 
to investigate whether it would be more profitable 
to substitute plant protein in the form of sunflower 
meal for some of the fish meal in the sea bream’s diet. 
The accompanying data are consistent with summary 
quantities given in the paper for x ​ 5 ​percentage of 
sunflower meal in the diet and y ​ 5 ​average weight 
(in grams) of fish after 248 days.
Sunflower Meal (%)
Average Fish Weight
  0
432
  6
450
12
455
18
445
24
427
30
422
36
421
The estimated regression line for these data is 
y⁄ 5 448.536 2 0.696x and the standardized  
residuals are as given.
Sunflower Meal (%), x
Standardized Residual
  0
21.96
  6
0.58
12
1.42
18
0.84
24
20.46
30
20.58
36
20.29
Construct a standardized residual plot. What does 
the plot suggest about the adequacy of the simple 
linear regression model?
13.30	 ● The article “Vital Dimensions in Volume Perception: 
Can the Eye Fool the Stomach?” (Journal of Marketing 
Research [1999]: 313–​326) gave the accompanying  
data on the dimensions of 27 representative food 
products (Gerber baby food, Cheez Whiz, Skippy 
Peanut Butter, and Ahmed’s tandoori paste, to name 
a few).
Product
Maximum Width (cm)
Minimum Width (cm)
1 
2.50 
1.80
2
2.90 
2.70
3
2.15 
2.00
4
2.90 
2.60
5
3.20 
3.15
Product
Maximum Width (cm)
Minimum Width (cm)
  ​6
2.00 
1.80
  ​7 
1.60 
1.50
  ​8 
4.80 
3.80
  ​9 
5.90 
5.00
10
5.80 
4.75
11
2.90 
2.80
12 
2.45 
2.10
13 
2.60 
2.20
14 
2.60 
2.60
15 
2.70 
2.60
16 
3.10 
2.90
17 
5.10 
5.10
18 
10.20 
10.20
19 
3.50 
3.50
20 
2.70 
1.20
21 
3.00 
1.70
22 
2.70 
1.75
23 
2.50 
1.70
24 
2.40 
1.20
25 
4.40 
1.20
26 
7.50 
7.50
27 
4.25 
4.25
a.	 Fit the simple linear regression model that would 
allow prediction of the maximum width of a food 
container based on its minimum width.​
b.	Calculate the standardized residuals (or just the 
residuals if you don’t have access to a computer 
program that gives standardized residuals) and 
make a residual plot to determine whether there 
are any outliers.
c.	 The data point with the largest residual is for a 
1-liter Coke bottle. Delete this data point and refit 
the regression. Did deletion of this point result 
in a large change in the equation of the estimated 
regression line?
d.	For the regression line of Part (c), interpret  
the estimated slope and, if appropriate, the  
intercept.
e.	 For the data set with the Coke bottle deleted,  
do you think that the assumptions of the simple 
linear regression model are reasonable? Give  
statistical evidence for your answer.
13.31	Investigators in northern Alaska periodically  
monitored radio-collared wolves in 25 wolf packs 
over 4 years, keeping track of the packs’ home  
ranges (“Population Dynamics and Harvest Character-
istics of Wolves in the Central Brooks Range, Alaska,” 
Wildlife Monographs, [2008]: 1–25). The home range of 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Technology Notes 
●  695
a pack is the area typically covered by its members in 
a specified amount of time. The investigators noticed 
that wolf packs with larger home ranges tended to 
be located more often by monitoring equipment. 
The investigators decided to explore the relationship 
between home range and the number of locations per 
pack. A scatterplot and standardized residual plot of 
the data are shown below, as well as a histogram of 
the standardized residuals.
Does it appear that the assumptions of the simple 
linear regression model are plausible? Explain your 
reasoning in a few sentences. 
 
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0
20
20
80
80
40
40
60
60
100
100
Home Range
Locations/Pack
Locations/Pack
3
1
–1
2
–2
0
Standardized Residual
7
6
5
4
3
2
2
0
1
1
–1
0
Frequency
Standardized Residual
13.32	
 An investigation of the relationship between  
x 5 traffic flow (thousands of cars per 24 hours) and 
y 5 lead content of bark on trees near the highway 
(mg/g dry weight) yielded the accompanying  
data. A simple linear regression model was fit,  
and the resulting estimated regression line was  
y⁄ 5 28.7 1 33.3x. Both residuals and standardized 
residuals are also given.
x
8.3
8.3
12.1
12.1
17.0
y
227
312
362
521
640
Residual 278.1
6.9
269.6
89.4
45.3
St. resid. 20.99
0.09
20.81
1.04
0.51
x
17.0
17.0
24.3
24.3
24.3
y
539
728
945
738
759
Residual 255.7
133.3
107.2
299.8
278.8
St. resid. 20.63
1.51
1.35
21.25
20.99
a.	 Plot the (x, residual) pairs. Does the resulting plot 
suggest that a simple linear regression model is an 
appropriate choice? Explain your reasoning.
b.	Construct a standardized residual plot. Does the 
plot differ significantly in general appearance from 
the plot in Part (a)?
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Technology Notes
Test for Slope of Regression Line
TI-83/84
1.  Enter the data for the independent variable into L1  
(In order to access lists press the STAT key, highlight the 
option called Edit… then press ENTER)
2.  Enter the data for the dependent variable into L2
3.  Press STAT
4.  Highlight TESTS
5.  Highlight LinRegTTest… and press ENTER
6.  Next to b & r select the appropriate alternative hypoth-
esis
7.  Highlight Calculate
TI-Nspire
1.  Enter the data into two separate data lists (In order to 
access data lists select the spreadsheet option and press 
enter) Note: Be sure to title the lists by selecting the top 
row of the column and typing a title.
2.  Press the menu key and select 4:Stat Tests then 4:Stats 
Tests then A:Linear Reg t Test… and press enter
3.  In the box next to X List choose the list title where you 
stored your independent data from the drop-down menu
4.  In the box next to Y List choose the list title where you 
stored your dependent data from the drop-down menu
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

696 
●  Chapter 13  Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods
5.  In the box next to Alternate Hyp choose the appropriate 
alternative hypothesis from the drop-down menu
6.  Press OK
JMP
1.  Input the data for the dependent variable into the first 
column
2.  Input the data for the independent variable into the sec-
ond column
3.  Click Analyze and select Fit Y by X
4.  Select the dependent variable (Y) from the box under 
Select Columns and click on Y, Response
5.  Select the independent variable (X) from the box under 
Select Columns and click on X, Factor
6.  Click the red arrow next to Bivariate Fit of… and select 
Fit Line
MINITAB
1.  Input the data for the dependent variable into the first 
column
2.  Input the data for the independent variable into the sec-
ond column
3.  Select Stat then Regression then Regression…
4.  Highlight the name of the column containing the depen-
dent variable and click Select
5.  Highlight the name of the column containing the inde-
pendent variable and click Select
6.  Click OK
Note: You may need to scroll up in the Session window to 
view the t-test results for the regression analysis.
SPSS
1.  Input the data for the dependent variable into one column
2.  Input the data for the independent variable into a second 
column
3.  Click Analyze then click Regression then click  
Linear…
4.  Select the name of the dependent variable and click 
the arrow to move the variable to the box under  
Dependent:
5.  Select the name of the independent variable and 
click the arrow to move the variable to the box under 
Independent(s):
6.  Click OK
Note: The p-value for the regression test can be found in the 
Coefficients table in the row with the independent variable 
name.
Excel
1.  Input the data for the dependent variable into the first 
column
2.  Input the data for the independent variable into the  
second column
3.  Select Analyze then choose Regression then choose 
Linear…
4.  Highlight the name of the column containing the depen-
dent variable
5.  Click the arrow button next to the Dependent box to 
move the variable to this box
6.  Highlight the name of the column containing the inde-
pendent variable
7.  Click the arrow button next to the Independent box to 
move the variable to this box
8.  Click OK
Note: The test statistic and p-value for the regression test for 
the slope can be found in the third table of output. These val-
ues are listed in the row titled with the independent variable 
name and the columns entitled t Stat and P-value.
AC TIVIT Y 13.1 
Are Tall Women from “Big” Families?
In this activity, you should work with a partner (or in a small 
group).
Consider the following data on height (in inches) and 
number of siblings for a random sample of 10 female stu-
dents at a large university.
1.	 Construct a scatterplot of the given data. Does there 
appear to be a linear relationship between y 5 height 
and x 5 number of siblings?
Height  
(y)
Number of  
Siblings (x)
Height  
(y)
Number of  
Siblings (x)
64.2
2
65.5
1
65.4
0
67.2
2
64.6
2
66.4
2
66.1
6
63.3
0
65.1
3
61.7
1
2.	 Compute the value of the correlation coefficient. Is 
the value of the correlation coefficient consistent with 
your answer from Step 1? Explain.
3.	 What is the equation of the least-squares line for 
these data?
4.	 Is the slope of the least-squares regression line from 
Step 3 equal to 0? Does this necessarily mean that 
there is a meaningful relationship between height and 
number of siblings in the population of female stu-
dents at this university? Discuss this with your part-
ner, and then write a few sentences of explanation.
5.	 For the population of all female students at the univer-
sity, do you think it is reasonable to assume that the 
distribution of heights at each particular x value is ap-
proximately normal and that the standard deviation of 
the height distribution at each particular x value is the 
same? That is, do you think it is ­reasonable to assume 
696 
●  Chapter 13  Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Cumulative Review Exercises 
●  697
SUMMARY 
Key Concepts and Formulas
Term or Formula
Comment
Simple linear regression 
model,  
y 5 a 1 bx 1 e 
This model assumes that there is a line 
with slope b and y intercept a, called 
the population regression line, such 
that an observation deviates from 
the line by a random amount e. The 
random deviation is assumed to have 
a normal distribution with mean zero 
and standard deviation s, and random 
deviations for different observations 
are assumed to be independent of 
one another.
Estimated regression line, 
y⁄ 5 a 1 bx
The least-squares line introduced in 
Chapter 5.
se 5Î
SSResid
n 2 2
The point estimate of the standard 
deviation s, with associated degrees 
of freedom n 2 2.
sb 5
se
ÏSxx
The estimated standard deviation of 
the statistic b.
b 6 (t critical value)sb 
A confidence interval for the slope 
b of the population regression line, 
where the t critical value is based on  
n 2 2 degrees of freedom.
Term or Formula
Comment
t 5
b 2 hypothesized value
sb
The test statistic for testing hypoth-
eses about b. The test is based on  
n 2 2 degrees of freedom.
Model utility test, with test 
statistic t 5 b
sb
A test of H0: b 5 0, which asserts that 
there is no useful linear relationship 
between x and y, versus Ha: b Þ 0, 
the claim that there is a useful linear 
relationship.
Residual analysis
Methods based on the residuals or 
standardized residuals for check-
ing the assumptions of a regression 
model.
Standardized residual
A residual divided by its standard 
deviation.
Standardized residual plot
A plot of the (x, standardized residual) 
pairs. A pattern in this plot suggests 
that the simple linear regression 
model may not be appropriate.
CR13.1  The article “You Will Be Tested on This” (The Chron-
icle of Higher Education, June 8, 2007) describes an experiment 
to investigate the effect of quizzes on student learning. The 
goal of the experiment was to determine if students who 
take daily quizzes have better end-of-semester retention 
than students who attend the same lectures and complete 
the same homework assignments but who do not take the 
daily quizzes. 
Describe how you would design such an experiment us-
ing the 400 students enrolled in an introductory psychology 
course as subjects.
CR13.2  The paper “Pistachio Nut Consumption and 
Serum Lipid Levels” (Journal of the American College of Nutri-
tion [2007]: 141–148) describes a study to determine if eat-
ing pistachio nuts can have an effect on blood cholesterol 
levels in people with high cholesterol. Fifteen subjects fol-
lowed their regular diet for 4 weeks and then followed a 
diet in which 15% of the daily caloric intake was from 
pistachio nuts for 4 weeks. Total blood cholesterol was 
measured for each subject at the end of each of the two 
4-week periods, resulting in two samples (one for the reg-
ular diet and one for the pistachio diet).
a.  Are the two samples independent or paired? ­Explain.
b.  The mean difference in total cholesterol (regular diet—
pistachio diet) was 11 mg/dL. The standard deviation 
of the differences was 24 mg/dL. Assume that it is rea-
sonable to regard the 15 study participants as repre-
sentative of adults with high cholesterol and that total 
cholesterol differences are approximately normally 
distributed. 
CUMULATIVE REVIEW Exercises 
CR13.1–CR13.18
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
that the distribution of heights for female students 
with zero siblings is approximately normal and that 
the distribution of heights for female students with one 
sibling is approximately normal with the same standard 
deviation as for female students with no siblings, and so 
on? Discuss this with your partner, and then write a few 
sentences of explanation.
6.	 Carry out the model utility test (H0: b 5 0). Explain 
why the conclusion from this test is consistent with 
your explanation in Step 4.
7.	 Would you recommend using the least-squares 
regression line as a way of predicting heights for 
women at this university? Explain.
8.	 After consulting with your partner, write a para-
graph explaining why it is a good idea to include a 
model utility test (H0: b 5 0) as part of a regression 
analysis.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Do the data support the claim that eating the pistachio 
diet for 4 weeks is effective in reducing total cholesterol 
level? Test the relevant hypotheses using a ​5 ​.01.
CR13.3 
 The article “Fines Show Airline Problems” (USA 
Today, February 2, 2010) gave the accompanying data on the 
number of fines for violating FAA maintenance regulations 
assessed against each of the 25 U.S. airlines from 2004 to 
2009.
1
12
3
7
23
36
6
14
1
3
4
10
6
2
2
2
2
2
3
1
2
2
1
0
0
a.  Construct a boxplot of these data. Are any of the observa-
tions in the data set outliers? If so, which ones?
b.  Explain why it may not be reasonable to assume that the 
two airlines with the highest number of fines assessed 
are the worst airlines in terms of maintenance violations.
CR13.4  The article “Odds Are, It’s Wrong” (Science News, 
March 27, 2010) poses the following scenario:
Suppose that a test for steroid use among baseball 
players is 95% accurate—that is, it correctly identifies 
actual steroid users 95% of the time, and misidentifies 
non-users as users 5 percent of the time. . . . Now 
suppose, based on previous testing, that experts have 
established that about 5 percent of professional base-
ball players use steroids.
Answer the following questions for this scenario.
a.  If 400 professional baseball players are selected at ran-
dom, how many would you expect to be steroid users 
and how many would you expect to be non-users? 
b.  How many of the steroid users would you expect to test 
positive for steroid use? 
c.  How many of the players who do not use steroids would 
you expect to test positive for steroid use (a false posi-
tive)? 
d.  Use your answers to Parts (b) and (c) to estimate the 
proportion of those who test positive for steroid use 
who actually do use steroids. 
e.  Write a few sentences explaining why, in this scenario, 
the proportion of those who test positive for steroid use 
who actually use steroids is not .95.
CR13.5  The press release “Luxury or Necessity? The Pub-
lic Makes a U-Turn” (Pew Research Center, April 23, 2009) sum-
marizes results from a survey of a nationally representative 
sample of n ​5 ​1003 adult Americans.
a.  One question in the survey asked participants if they think 
of a landline phone as a necessity or as a luxury that they 
could do without. Sixty-eight percent said they thought 
a landline phone was a necessity. Estimate the proportion 
of adult Americans who view a landline phone as a neces-
sity using a 95% confidence ­interval. 
b.  In the same survey, 52% said they viewed a television 
set as a necessity. Is there convincing evidence that a 
majority of adult Americans view a television set as a 
necessity? Test the relevant hypotheses using a ​ 5 ​.05.
c.  The press release also described a survey conducted 
in 2003. When asked about a microwave oven, 68% 
of the 2003 sample regarded a microwave oven as a 
necessity, whereas only 47% of the 2009 sample said 
they thought a microwave oven was a necessity. As-
sume that the sample size for the 2003 survey was also 
1003. Is there convincing evidence that the propor-
tion of adult Americans who regard a microwave oven 
as a necessity decreased between 2003 and 2009? Test 
the appropriate hypotheses using a ​ 5 ​.01.
CR13.6  The accompanying graphical display appeared in 
USA Today (February 19, 2010). It is meant to be a pie chart, 
but an oval rather than a circle is used to represent the whole 
pie. Do you think this graph does a good job of conveying 
the proportion falling into each of the three response catego-
ries? Explain why or why not.
Source: AMN
Healthcare’s 
2010 Survey of
Registered Nurses
What nurses say about 
nursing care today
Improved
Remained 
the same
Since they entered 
the profession, 
care has:
26%
19%
Declined
55%
CR13.7  The following quote describing 18- to 29-year-
olds is from the article “Study: Millennial Generation More 
Educated, Less Employed” (USA Today, February 23, 2010): “38% 
have a tattoo (and half of those with tattoos have two to 
five; 18% have six or more).” These percentages were based 
on a representative sample of 830 Americans age 18 to 29, 
but for purposes of this exercise, suppose that they hold for 
the population of all Americans in this age group. Define 
the random variable x ​5 ​number of tattoos for a randomly 
selected American age 18 to 29. Find the following prob-
abilities:
a.  Psx 5 0d 
b.  Psx 5 1d 
c.  Ps2 # x # 5d 
d.  Psx . 5d 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
698 
●  Chapter 13  Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CR13.8  To raise revenues, many airlines now charge fees 
to check luggage. Suppose that the number of checked bags 
was recorded for each person in a random sample of 100 
airline passengers selected before fees were imposed and also 
for each person in a random sample of 100 airline passengers 
selected after fees were imposed, resulting in the accompa-
nying data. Do the data provide convincing evidence that the 
proportions in each of the number of checked bags catego-
ries is not the same before and after fees were imposed? Test 
the appropriate hypotheses using a significance level of .05.  
  
 
 
 
Number of Checked Bags
0
1
2 or more
Before fees
  7
70
23
After Fees
22
64
14
CR13.9 
 Consider the following data on y ​5 ​number of 
songs stored on an MP3 player and x ​5 ​number of months 
the user has owned the MP3 player for a sample of 15 own-
ers of MP3 players.
x
y
23
486
35
747
  2
  81
28
581
  5
117
32
728
23
445
10
128
  4
  61
26
476
  1
  35
  8
121
13
266
  9
126
  5
141
a.  Construct a scatterplot of the data. Does the relationship 
between x and y look approximately linear?
b.  What is the equation of the estimated regression line?
c.  Do you think that the assumptions of the simple linear 
regression model are reasonable? Justify your answer us-
ing appropriate graphs.
d.  Is the simple linear regression model useful for describ-
ing the relationship between x and y? Test the relevant 
hypotheses using a significance level of .05.
CR13.10  ​Many people take ginkgo supplements adver-
tised to improve memory. Are these over-the-counter sup-
plements effective? In a study reported in the paper “Ginkgo 
for Memory Enhancement” (Journal of the American Medical 
Association [2002]: 835–​840), elderly adults were assigned at 
random to either a treatment group or a control group. The 
104 participants who were assigned to the treatment group 
took 40 mg of ginkgo three times a day for 6 weeks. The 115 
participants assigned to the control group took a placebo 
pill three times a day for 6 weeks. At the end of 6 weeks, the 
Wechsler Memory Scale (a test of short-term memory) was 
administered. Higher scores indicate better memory func-
tion. Summary values are given in the following table.
n
x
s
Ginkgo
104
5.6
.6
Placebo
115
5.5
.6
Based on these results, is there evidence that taking 40 mg 
of ginkgo three times a day is effective in increasing mean 
performance on the Wechsler Memory Scale? Test the rel-
evant hypotheses using a 5 .05.  ​
CR13.11 
 The Harvard University Institute of Politics 
surveys undergraduates across the United States annually. 
Responses to the question “When it comes to voting, do 
you consider yourself to be affiliated with the Democratic 
Party, the Republican Party, or are you Independent or unaf-
filiated with a major party?” for the surveys conducted in 
2003, 2004, and 2005 are summarized in the given table. 
The samples for each year were independently selected and 
are considered to be representative of the population of un-
dergraduate students in the year the survey was conducted. 
Is there evidence that the distribution of political affili-
ation is not the same for all three years for which data are 
given? 
Year
Political Affiliation
2005
2004
2003
Democrat
397
409
325
Republican
301
349
373
Independent/unaffiliated
458
397
457
Other
  ​60
  ​48
  ​48
CR13.12 
 The survey described in the previous exercise 
also asked the following question: “Please tell me whether 
you trust the President to do the right thing all of the time, 
most of the time, some of the time, or never. Use the data in 
the table on the next page and an appropriate hypothesis test 
to determine if there is evidence that trust in the President 
was not the same in 2005 as it was in 2002.  ​
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Cumulative Review Exercises 
●  699
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Year
Response
2005
2002
All of the time
132
180
Most of the time
337
528
Some of the time
554
396
Never
169
  ​96
CR13.13 
 The report “Undergraduate Students and 
Credit Cards in 2004” (Nellie Mae, May 2005) included infor-
mation collected from individuals in a random sample of 
undergraduate students in the United States. Students were 
classified according to region of residence and whether or 
not they have one or more credit cards, resulting in the ac-
companying two-way table. 
Carry out a test to determine if there is evidence that re-
gion of residence and having a credit card are not indepen-
dent. Use a 5 .05.
Credit Card?
Region
At Least One 
Credit Card
No Credit Cards
Northeast
401
164
Midwest
162
  ​36
South
408
115
West
104
  ​23
CR13.14 
 The report described in the previous exercise 
also classified students according to region of residence and 
whether or not they had a credit card with a balance of more 
than $7000. Do these data support the conclusion that there 
is an association between region of residence and whether 
or not the student has a balance exceeding $7000? Test the 
relevant hypotheses using a .01 significance level.  ​ ​
 
 
 
 
Balance Over $7000?
Region
No
Yes
Northeast
  ​28
537
Midwest
162
182
South
  ​42
481
West
  ​  ​9
118
CR13.15  ​The discharge of industrial wastewater into 
rivers affects water quality. To assess the effect of a particu-
lar power plant on water quality, 24 water specimens were 
taken 16 km upstream and 4 km downstream of the plant. 
Alkalinity (mg/L) was determined for each specimen, result-
ing in the summary quantities in the accompanying table. 
 
 
Do the data suggest that the true mean alkalinity is higher 
downstream than upstream by more than 50 mg/L? Use a 
.05 significance level.  ​
Location
n
Mean
Standard 
Deviation
Upstream
24
  ​75.9
  ​  ​ 1.83
Downstream
24
183.6
  ​  ​ 1.70
CR13.16 
 The report of a European commission on ra-
diation protection titled “Cosmic Radiation Exposure of Aircraft 
Crew” (2004) measured the exposure to radiation on eight in-
ternational flights from Madrid using several different meth-
ods for measuring radiation. Data for two of the methods 
are given in the accompanying table. Use these data to test 
the hypothesis that there is no significant difference in mean 
radiation measurement for the two methods.  ​
Flight
Method 1
Method 2
1
27.5
34.4
2
41.3
38.6
3
  ​3.5
  3.5
4
24.3
21.9
5
27.0
24.4
6
17.7
21.4
7
12.0
11.8
8
20.9
24.1
CR13.17 
 It is hypothesized that when homing pigeons 
are disoriented in a certain manner, they will exhibit no pref-
erence for any direction of flight after takeoff. To test this, 
120 pigeons are disoriented and released, and the direction 
of flight of each is recorded. The resulting data are given in 
the accompanying table.
Direction
Frequency
  ​  ​08 to , 458
12
  ​458 to , 908
16
  ​908 to , 1358
17
1358 to , 1808
15
1808 to , 2258
13
2258 to , 2708
20
2708 to , 3158
17
3158 to , 3608
10
Use the goodness-of-fit test with significance level .10 to de-
termine whether the data are consistent with this hypothesis. ​ ​
 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
700 
●  Chapter 13  Simple Linear Regression and Correlation: Inferential Methods
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CR13.18  ​The authors of the paper “Inadequate Physician 
Knowledge of the Effects of Diet on Blood Lipids and Lipopro-
teins” (Nutrition Journal [2003]: 19–​26) summarize the responses 
to a questionnaire on basic knowledge of nutrition that was 
mailed to 6000 physicians selected at random from a list 
of physicians licensed in the United States. Sixteen percent  
of those who received the questionnaire completed and 
returned it. The authors report that 26 of 120 cardiologists 
and 222 of 419 internists did not know that carbohydrate 
was the diet component most likely to raise triglycerides.
a.  Estimate the difference between the proportion of car-
diologists and the proportion of internists who did not 
know that carbohydrate was the diet component most 
likely to raise triglycerides using a 95% confidence in-
terval. 
b.  What potential source of bias might limit your ability to 
generalize the estimate from Part (a) to the populations 
of all cardiologists and all internists?  ​ 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Cumulative Review Exercises 
●  701
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

702
The general objective of regression analysis is to 
model the relationship between a dependent vari-
able y and one or more independent variables (also 
sometimes called predictor or explanatory vari-
ables). The simple linear regression model y 5 a 1 
bx 1 e, discussed in Chapter 13, has been used suc-
cessfully by many investigators in a wide variety of 
disciplines to relate y to a single independent vari-
able x. In many situations, the relationship between 
y and any single independent variable is not strong, 
but knowing the values of several independent vari-
ables may considerably reduce uncertainty about 
the associated y value. 
For example, some variation in house prices in a 
large city can certainly be attributed to house size, but 
knowledge of size by itself would not usually enable 
a bank appraiser to accurately predict a home’s value. 
Price is also determined to some extent by other vari-
ables, such as age, lot size, number of bedrooms and 
bathrooms, and distance from schools.
In this chapter, we extend the regression methodol-
Multiple Regression Analysis
David Zimmerman/Getty Images 
CHAPTER 14
ogy developed in the previous chapter to multiple regression models, which include at 
least two independent variables. Fortunately, many of the concepts developed in the 
context of simple linear regression carry over to multiple regression with little or no 
modification. However, the calculations required to fit a multiple regression model and 
make further inferences are much more tedious than those for simple linear regression, 
so a computer is an indispensable tool. 
Computer use has led to the development of new methods for analyzing large data 
sets with many independent variables. These include techniques for fitting numer-
ous alternative models and choosing between them, tools for identifying influential 
observations, and both algebraic and graphical diagnostics designed to reveal poten-
tial violations of model assumptions. 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 14.1   Multiple Regression Models     703
The relationship between a dependent or response variable y and two or more independent 
or predictor variables is deterministic if the value of y is completely determined, with no 
uncertainty, once values of the independent variables have been specified. For example, 
consider a school district in which teachers with no prior teaching experience and no col-
lege credits beyond a bachelor’s degree start at an annual salary of $48,000. Suppose that 
for each year of teaching experience up to 20 years, a teacher receives an additional $800 
per year and that each unit of postcollege coursework up to 75 units results in an extra $60 
per year. Consider the following three variables:
y 5 salary of a teacher who has at most 20 years of teaching experience and at most 
75 postcollege units
x1 5 number of years of teaching experience
x2 5 number of postcollege units
Previously, x1 and x2 denoted the first two observations on the single variable x. In the usual 
notation for multiple regression, however, x1 and x2 represent two different variables.
For these variables, the value of y is entirely determined by values of x1 and x2 through 
the equation
y 5 48,000 1 800x1 1 60x2
If x1 5 10 and x2 5 30 then
y 5 48,000 1 800s10d 1 60s30d
 5 48,000 1 8000 1 1800
 5 57,800
If two different teachers both have the same x1 values and the same x2 values, they will also 
have identical y values.
In practice, y is rarely deterministically related to predictors x1, Á , xk. A probabilistic 
model is more realistic in most situations. A probabilistic model results from adding a ran-
dom deviation e to a deterministic function of the xi’s.
 14.1  
Multiple Regression Models
General additive multiple regression model: A model that relates a depen-
dent variable y to k independent variables x1, x2, Á , xk. 
The model is specified by the model equation
y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 Á 1 bkxk 1 e
DEFINITION
Chapter 14: Learning Objectives
Students will understand:
●
●how a multiple regression model can be used to model the relationship be-
tween a dependent variable and multiple independent variables.
●
●how numerical and categorical independent variables can be incorporated 
into a multiple regression model.
●
●the concept of interaction in a multiple regression setting.
Students will be able to:
●
●interpret the parameters of the multiple linear regression model in context.
●
●use both numerical and categorical variables in a multiple regression model.
●
●estimate the parameters in a multiple regression model and assess the useful-
ness of the model.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

704  
  Chapter 14  Multiple Regression Analysis
Model assumptions for the multiple regression model are given in the following box:
The bi’s in the multiple regression model are called population regression coefficients. 
Each bi can be interpreted as the mean change in y when the predictor xi increases by 
1 unit and the values of all the other predictors remain fixed.
a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 Á 1 bkxk is called the population regression function.
The random deviation e is assumed to be normally distributed with mean 
value 0 and standard deviation s for any particular values of x1, Á xk. 
This implies that for fixed x1, x2, Á , xk values, y has a normal distribution with 
standard deviation s and 
1
mean y value for fixed
x1, Á , xk values 2 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 Á 1 bkxk
As in simple linear regression, if s (the standard deviation of the random error distribu-
tion) is quite close to 0, any particular observed y will tend to be quite near its mean value. 
When s is large, y observations may deviate substantially from their mean y values.
Example 14.1 
Sophomore Success
What factors contribute to the academic success of college sophomores? Data collected in a 
survey of approximately 1000 second-year college students suggest that GPA at the end of the 
second year is related to the student’s level of interaction with faculty and staff and to the stu-
dent’s commitment to his or her major (“An Exploration of the Factors That Affect the Academic 
Success of College Sophomores,” College Student Journal [2005] 367–376). Consider the variables
 y 5 GPA at the end of the sophomore year
x1 5 level of faculty and staff interaction smeasured on a scale from 1 to 5d
 x2 5 level of commitment to major smeasured on a scale from 1 to 5d
One possible population model might be
y 5 1.4 1 .33x1 1 .16x2 1 e
with
s 5 0.15
The population regression function is
smean y value for fixed x1, x2d 5 1.4 1 .33x1 1 .16x2
For sophomore students whose level of interaction with faculty and staff is rated at 4.2 and 
whose level of commitment to their major is rated as 2.1,
smean value of GPAd 5 1.4 1 .33s4.2d 1 .16s2.1d 5 3.12
With 2s 5 2(.15) 5 .30, it is likely that an actual y value will be within .30 of the mean 
value. This means that an individual student with x1 5 4.2 and x2 5 2.1) would be pre-
dicted to have a GPA between 2.82 and 3.42.	
■
A Special Case: Polynomial Regression
Consider again the case of a single independent variable x, and suppose that a scatterplot 
of the n sample (x, y) pairs has the appearance of Figure 14.1. The simple linear regression 
Understand the context ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 14.1   Multiple Regression Models     705
model is clearly not appropriate, but it does look as though a parabola (quadratic function) 
with equation y 5 a 1 b1x 1 b2x2 would provide a very good fit to the data for appropri-
ately chosen values of a, b1, and b2. 
Just as the inclusion of the random deviation e in simple linear regression allowed an 
observation to deviate from the population regression line by a random amount, adding e 
to this quadratic function yields a probabilistic model in which an observation is allowed 
to fall above or below the parabola. The quadratic regression model equation is
y 5 a 1 b1x 1 b2x 2 1 e
We can rewrite the model equation by using x1 to denote x and x2 to denote x2. The 
model equation then becomes
y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 e
This is a special case of the general multiple regression model with k 5 2. You may won-
der about the legitimacy of allowing one predictor variable to be a mathematical function 
of another predictor—here, x2 5 (x1)2. However, there is nothing in the general multiple 
regression model that prevents this. In the model y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1Á1 bkxk 1 e it is 
permissible to have predictors that are mathematical functions of other predictors. 
For example, starting with the two independent variables x1 and x2, we could create a model 
with k 5 4 predictors in which x1 and x2 themselves are the first two predictor variables and 
x3 5 (x1)2, x4 5 x1x2. (We will soon discuss the consequences of using a predictor such as x4.) 
In particular, the general polynomial regression model begins with a single independent vari-
able x and creates predictors x1 5 x, x2 5 x2, x3 5 x3, Á , xk 5 xk for some specified value of k.
Figure  14.1
A scatterplot that suggests the appro-
priateness of a quadratic probabilistic 
model.
y
x
The kth-degree polynomial regression model
y 5 a 1 b1x 1 b2x 2 1 Á 1 bkx k 1 e
is a special case of the general multiple regression model with
x1 5 x   x2 5 x 2   x3 5 x 3 
Á   xk 5 x k
The population regression function (mean value of y for fixed values of the 
predictors) is 
a 1 b1x 1 b2x 2 1 Á 1 bkx k
The most important special case other than simple linear regression (k 5 1) is 
the quadratic regression model
y 5 a 1 b1x 1 b2x 2 1 e
This model replaces the line of mean values a 1 bx in simple linear regression 
with a parabolic curve of mean values a 1 b1x 1 b2x 2. If b2 . 0, the curve 
opens upward, whereas if b2 , 0, the curve opens downward.
A less frequently encountered special case is that of cubic regression, in which 
k 5 3. (See Figure 14.2.)­ 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

706  
  Chapter 14  Multiple Regression Analysis
Example 14.2 
Increased Risk of Heart Attack
Many researchers have examined factors that are believed to contribute to the risk of heart 
attack. The authors of the paper “Obesity and the Risk of Myocardial Infarction in 27,000 Par-
ticipants from 53 Countries: A Case-Control Study” (The Lancet [2005]: 1640–1649) found that 
hip-to-waist ratio was a better predictor of heart attacks than was body-mass index. 
A plot that appeared in the paper of a measure of heart-attack risk (y) versus hip-to-waist 
ratio (x) exhibited a curved relationship. Larger values of y indicate a higher risk of heart 
attack. A model consistent with summary values given in the paper is
y 5 1.023 1 0.024x 1 0.060x2 1 e
Then the population regression function is
1
mean value of
heart{attack risk measure2 5 1.023 1 0.024x 1 0.060x2
For example, if x 5 1.3
1
mean value of
heart{attack risk measure2 5 1.023 1 0.024s1.3d 1 0.060s1.3d2 5 1.16
If s 5 .25, then it is quite likely that the heart-attack-risk measure for a person with a hip-
to-waist ratio of 1.3 would be between .66 and 1.66.	
■
The interpretation of bi previously given for the general multiple regression model can-
not be applied in polynomial regression. This is because all predictors are functions of the 
single variable x, so xi 5 xi cannot be increased by 1 unit without changing the values of 
all the other predictor variables as well. In general, the interpretation of regression coefficients 
requires extra care when some predictor variables are mathematical functions of other variables.
Interaction Between Variables
Suppose that an industrial chemist is interested in the relationship between 
y 5 product yield from a certain chemical reaction
and two independent variables, 
x1 5 reaction temperature
and
x2 5 pressure at which the reaction is carried out. 
The chemist initially suggests that for temperature values between 80 and 110 in combina-
tion with pressure values ranging from 50 to 70, the relationship can be well described by 
the probabilistic model
y 5 1200 1 15x1 2 35x2 1 e
Understand the context ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Figure  14.2
Polynomial regression:  
(a) quadratic regression model with 
b2 , 0; 
(b) quadratic regression model with  
b2 . 0;  
(c) cubic regression model with b3 . 0.
y
(a)
x
y
(b)
x
y
(c)
x
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 14.1   Multiple Regression Models     707
Because chemical theory suggests that the decline in average yield when pressure x2 
increases should be more rapid for a high temperature than for a low temperature, the 
chemist now has reason to doubt the appropriateness of the proposed model. Rather than 
the lines being parallel, the line for a temperature of 100 should be steeper than the line for 
a temperature of 95, and that line should be steeper than the one for x1 5 90.
A model that has this property includes a third independent variable, x3 5 x1x2, in addi-
tion to x1 and x2 separately. One such model is
y 5 24500 1 75x1 1 60x2 2 x1x2 1 e
which has regression function 24500 1 75x1 1 60x2 2 x1x2. Then
 smean y when x1 5 100d 5 24500 1 75s100d 1 60x2 2 100x2
 5 3000 2 40x2
whereas
smean y when x1 5 95d 5 2625 2 35x2
smean y when x1 5 90d 5 2250 2 30x2
These functions are graphed in Figure 14.3(b), where it is clear that the three slopes are 
different. In fact, each different value of x1 yields a different slope, so the average change in 
yield associated with a 1-unit increase in x2 depends on the value of x1. When this is the 
case, the two variables are said to interact.
The regression function, which gives the mean y value for any specified values of x1 and 
x2 is then 1200 1 15x1 2 35x2. Consider this mean y value for three different particular 
temperature values:
x1 5 90:	
mean y value 5 1200 1 15s90d 2 35x2 5 2550 2 35x2
x1 5 95:	
mean y value 5 2625 2 35x2
x1 5 100:	
mean y value 5 2700 2 35x2
Graphs of these three mean value functions (each a function only of pressure x2, because a 
particular temperature value has been specified) are shown in Figure 14.3(a). Each graph 
is a straight line, and the three lines are parallel, each one having slope 235. Because of 
this, the average change in yield when pressure x2 is increased by 1 unit is 235, regardless 
of the fixed temperature value.
Figure  14.3
Graphs of mean y value for two 
different models:  
(a) 1200 1 15x1 2 35x2;  
(b) 24500 1 75x1 1 60x2 2 x1x2.
Mean y value
Mean y value
x2
x2
(a)
(b)
2700 2 35x2  (x1 5 100)
2625 2 35x2  (x1 5 95)
2550 2 35x2  (x1 5 90)
3000 2 40x2  (x1 5 100)
2625 2 35x2  (x1 5 95)
2250 2 30x2  (x1 5 90)
Interaction: If the change in the mean y value associated with a 1-unit increase 
in one independent variable depends on the value of a second independent 
variable, there is interaction between these two variables. 
When the variables are denoted by x1 and x2, such interaction can be modeled 
by including x1x2, the product of the variables that interact, as an independent 
variable in the model.
DEFINITION
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

708  
  Chapter 14  Multiple Regression Analysis
The general equation for a multiple regression model based on two independent vari-
ables x1 and x2 that also includes an interaction term is
y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 b3x1x2 1 e
When x1 and x2 do interact, this model usually gives a much better fit to the resulting sam-
ple data—and thus explains more variation in y—than does the no interaction model. Fail-
ure to consider a model with interaction often leads an investigator to conclude incorrectly 
that there is no strong relationship between y and a set of independent variables.
More than one interaction term can be included in the model when there are more than 
two independent variables. If, for example, there are three independent variables x1, x2, 
and x3, one possible model is
y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 b3x3 1 b4x4 1 b5x5 1 b6x6 1 e
where
x4 5 x1x2  ​  ​  ​  ​x5 5 x1x3  ​  ​  ​  ​x6 5 x2x3
We could even include a three-way interaction variable x7 5 x1x2x3 (the product of all three 
independent variables), although in practice this is rarely done.
In applied work, quadratic terms, such as x21 and x22 are often included to model a curved 
relationship between y and several independent variables. A frequently used model involv-
ing just two independent variables x1 and x2 but k 5 5 predictors is the full quadratic or 
complete second-order model
y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 b3x1x2 1 b4x21 1 b5x22 1 e
This model replaces the straight lines of Figure 14.3 with parabolas (each one is the graph 
of the regression function for different values of x2 when x1 has a fixed value).
With four independent variables, one could examine a model containing four quadratic 
terms and six two-way interaction terms. Clearly, with just a few independent variables, 
one could examine a great many different multiple regression models. In Section 14.5 
(online), we briefly discuss methods for selecting one model from a number of competing 
models.
When developing a multiple regression model, scatterplots of y with each potential pre-
dictor can be informative. This is illustrated in Example 14.3, which describes a model that 
includes a term that is a function of one of the independent variables and also an interac-
tion term.
Example 14.3 
Wind Chill Factor
● The wind chill index, often included in winter weather reports, combines information on 
air temperature and wind speed to describe how cold it really feels. In 2001, the National 
Weather Service announced that it would begin using a new wind chill formula beginning 
in the fall of that year (USA Today, August 13, 2001). The following table gives the wind chill 
index for various combinations of air temperature and wind speed.
Understand the context ❭
 Data set available online
Temperature (°F)
Wind 
(mph)
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
25
210
215
220
225
230
235
  ​5
31
25
19
13
7
1
25
211
216
222
228
234
240
246
252
10
27
21
15
9
3
24
210
216
222
228
235
241
247
253
259
15
25
19
13
6
0
27
213
219
226
232
239
245
251
258
264
20
24
17
11
4
22
29
215
222
229
235
242
248
255
261
268
25
23
16
  ​9
3
24
211
217
224
231
237
244
251
258
264
271
30
22
15
  ​8
1
25
212
219
226
233
239
246
253
260
267
273
35
21
14
  ​7
0
27
214
221
227
234
241
248
255
262
269
276
40
20
13
  ​6
21
28
215
222
229
236
243
250
257
264
271
278
45
19
12
  ​5
22
29
216
223
230
237
244
251
258
265
272
279
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 14.1   Multiple Regression Models     709
Figure 14.4(a) shows a scatterplot of wind chill index versus air temperature with different 
wind speeds denoted by different colors in the plot. It appears that the wind chill index 
increases linearly with air temperature at each of the wind speeds, but the linear patterns 
for the different wind speeds are not quite parallel. This suggests that to model the relation-
ship between
y 5 wind chill index
and the two variables
x1 5 air temperature
and
x2 5 wind speed, 
we should include both x1 and an interaction term that involves x2. 
Figure 14.4(b) shows a scatterplot of wind chill index versus wind speed with different tem-
peratures denoted by different colors. This plot reveals that the relationship between wind chill 
index and wind speed is nonlinear at each of the different temperatures, and because the pat-
tern is more markedly curved at some temperatures than at others, an interaction is suggested.
Figure  14.4
Scatterplots of wind chill index data 
of Example 14.3: 
(a) wind chill index versus air 
temperature; 
(b) wind chill index versus wind speed.
(a)
240
280
240
230
220
210
0
Wind chill index
40
30
20
10
0
Air temperature
Wind speed
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
(b)
240
280
0
5
10
15
0
Wind chill index
40
35
30
25
20
Wind speed
Air temperature
   35
   30
   25
   20
   15
 10
 5
 0
25
210
215
220
225
230
235
45
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

710  
  Chapter 14  Multiple Regression Analysis
These observations are consistent with the new model used by the National Weather 
Service for relating wind chill index to air temperature and wind speed. The model 
used is
mean y 5 35.74 1 0.621x1 2 35.75sx92d 1 0.4275x1x92
where
x92 5 x0.16
2
which incorporates a transformed x2 (to model the nonlinear relationship between wind 
chill index and wind speed) and an interaction term.	
■
Qualitative Predictor Variables
Up to this point, we have only considered quantitative (numerical) predictor variables in a 
multiple regression model. Using a simple numerical coding, qualitative (categorical) vari-
ables can also be incorporated into a model. Let’s focus first on a dichotomous variable, one 
with just two possible categories: male or female, U.S. or foreign manufacture, a house with 
or without a view, and so on. With any such variable, we associate a numerical variable x 
whose possible values are 0 and 1, where 0 is identified with one category (for example, 
married) and 1 is identified with the other possible category (for example, not married). 
This 0-​1 variable is often called an indicator variable or a dummy variable.
Example 14.4 
Predictors of Writing Competence
The article “Grade Level and Gender Differences in Writing Self-Beliefs of Middle School Stu-
dents” (Contemporary Educational Psychology [1999]: 390–405) considered relating writing 
competence score to a number of predictor variables, including perceived value of writing 
and gender. Both writing competence and perceived value of writing were represented by 
a numerically scaled variable, but gender was a qualitative predictor.
Consider the following variables:
 y 5 writing competence score
 x1 55
0 if male
1 if female
x2 5 perceived value of writing
One possible multiple regression model is
y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 e
Considering the mean y value first when x1 5 0 and then when x1 5 1 yields
 average score 5 a 1 b2x2  
 when x1 5 0 smaled
 average score 5 a 1 b1 1 bx2   when x1 5 1 sfemaled
The coefficient b1 is the difference in mean writing competence score between males and 
females when perceived value of writing is held fixed.
A second possibility is a model with an interaction term:
y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 b3x1x2 1 e
The regression function for this model is a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 b3x3 where x3 5 x1x2. Now 
the two cases x1 5 0 and x1 5 1 give
average score 5 a 1 b2x2	
when x1 5 0 smalesd
average score 5 a 1 b1 1 sb21 b3dx2	
when x1 5 1 sfemalesd
For each model, the graph of the average writing competence score, when regarded as 
a function of perceived value of writing, is a line for either gender (Figure 14.5).
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 14.1   Multiple Regression Models     711
In the no-interaction model, the coefficient of x2 is b2 both when x1 5 0 and when x1 5 1, 
so the two lines are parallel, although their intercepts are different (unless b1 5 0). With 
interaction, the lines not only have different intercepts but also have different slopes (unless 
b3 5 0). For this model, the change in average writing competence score when perceived 
value of writing increases by 1 unit depends on gender—the two variables perceived value 
and gender interact.	
■
You might think that the way to handle a three-category situation is to define a single nu-
merical variable with coded values such as 0, 1, and 2 corresponding to the three categories. 
This is incorrect because it imposes an ordering on the categories that is not necessarily 
implied by the problem. The correct approach to modeling a categorical variable with three 
categories is to define two different indicator variables, as illustrated in Example 14.5.
Example 14.5 
Location, Location, Location
One of the factors that has an effect on the price of a house is location. We might want 
to incorporate location, as well as numerical predictors such as size and age, into a mul-
tiple regression model for predicting house price. 
Suppose that in a California beach community houses can be classified by location into 
three categories—ocean-view and beachfront, ocean-view but not beachfront, and no 
ocean view. Let
x1 55
1 if the house is ocean{view and beachfront
0 otherwise
x2 55
1 if the house has an ocean{view but is not beachfront
0 otherwise
x3 5 house size
x4 5 house age
This means that x1 5 1, x2 5 0 indicates a beachfront ocean-view house; x1 5 0, x2 5 1 
indicates a house with an ocean view but not beachfront; and x1 5 x2 5 0 indicates a house 
that does not have an ocean view. (x1 5 x2 5 1 is not possible.) We could then consider a 
multiple regression model of the form
y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 b3x3 1 b4x4 1 e
This model allows individual adjustments to the predicted price for a house with no ocean 
view for the other two location categories. For example, b1 is the amount that would be 
added to the predicted price for a home with no ocean view to adjust for an oceanfront 
location (assuming that age and size were the same).	
■
Understand the context ❭
Rich Reid/National Geographic/Getty Images 
Figure  14.5
​Regression functions for models with 
one qualitative variable (x1) and one 
quantitative variable (x2):  
(a) no interaction; 
(b) interaction.
Mean y 
x2
(a)
Mean y 
x2
(b)
     a 1 b2x2   (x1 5 0) 
     a 1 b1 1 b2x2   (x1 5 1) 
     a 1 b2x2   (x1 5 0) 
     a + b1 1 (b2 + b3)x2   (x1 5 1) 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

712  
  Chapter 14  Multiple Regression Analysis
In general, incorporating a categorical variable with c possible categories into a regres-
sion model requires the use of c 2 1 indicator variables. Even one such categorical variable 
can add many predictors to a model.
a.	 What is the population regression function?
b.	What are the values of the population regression 
coefficients? ​ ​
c.	 Interpret the value of b1.
d.	Interpret the value of b3.
e.	 What is the mean rating of acceptable load when 
extent of left lateral bending is 25 cm, dynamic 
hand grip endurance is 200 seconds, and trunk 
extension ratio is 10 N/kg? ​ ​
f.	 If repeated observations on rating are made on dif-
ferent individuals, all of whom have the values of 
x1, x2, and x3 specified in Part (e), in the long run 
approximately what percentage of ratings will be 
between 13.5 kg and 33.5 kg?  ​  ​
14.4	 The following statement appeared in the article 
“Dimensions of Adjustment Among College Women” 
(Journal of College Student Development [1998]: 364):
Regression analyses indicated that academic adjustment 
and race made independent contributions to academic 
achievement, as measured by current GPA.
Suppose
 y 5 current GPA
x1 5 academic adjustment score
x2 5 race swith white 5 0, other 5 1d
What multiple regression model is suggested by the 
statement? Did you include an interaction term in the 
model? Why or why not?
14.5	 The authors of the paper “Predicting Yolk Height, Yolk 
Width, Albumen Length, Eggshell Weight, Egg Shape 
Index, Eggshell Thickness, Egg Surface Area of Japanese 
Quails Using Various Egg Traits as Regressors” (Interna-
tional Journal of Poultry Science [2008]: 85–88) used 
a multiple regression model with two independent 
variables where
 y 5 quail egg weight sgd
x1 5 egg width smmd
x2 5 egg length smmd
The regression function suggested in the paper is 
221.658 1 0.828x1 1 0.373x2.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
14.1	 a.	 Explain the difference between a deterministic and 
a probabilistic model. 
b.	Give an example of a dependent variable y and 
two or more independent variables that might be 
related to y deterministically. 
c.	 Give an example of a dependent variable y and 
two or more independent variables that might be 
related to y in a probabilistic fashion.
14.2	 The authors of the paper “Weight-Bearing Activity 
during Youth Is a More Important Factor for Peak Bone 
Mass than Calcium Intake” (Journal of Bone and Mineral 
Density [1994]: 1089–1096) used a multiple regression 
model to describe the relationship between
 y 5 bone mineral density sgycm3d
x1 5 body weight skgd
x2 5 a measure of weight-bearing activity, with 
        higher values indicating greater activity
a.	 The authors concluded that both body weight and 
weight-bearing activity were important predictors 
of bone mineral density and that there was no 
significant interaction between body weight and 
weight-bearing activity. What multiple regression 
function is consistent with this description?
b.	The value of the coefficient of body weight in the 
multiple regression function given in the paper is 
0.587. Interpret this value.
14.3	 A number of investigations have focused on the prob-
lem of assessing loads that can be manually handled 
in a safe manner. The article “Anthropometric, Muscle 
Strength, and Spinal Mobility Characteristics as Predic-
tors in the Rating of Acceptable Loads in Parcel Sorting” 
(Ergonomics [1992]: 1033–1044) proposed using a 
regression model to relate the dependent variable
y 5 individual’s rating of acceptable load skgd
to k 5 3 independent spredictord variables:
x1 5 extent of left lateral bending scmd
x2 5 dynamic hand grip endurance ssecondsd
x3 5 trunk extension ratio sN/kgd
Suppose that the model equation is
y 5 30 1 .90x1 1 .08x2 2 4.50x3 1 e
and that s 5 5.
exercises 14.1 - 14.15
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 14.1   Multiple Regression Models     713
a.	 What is the mean egg weight for quail eggs 
that have a width of 20 mm and a length of 
50 mm? 
b.	Interpret the values of b1 and b2.
14.6	 According to the paper “Assessing the Validity of the 
Post-Materialism Index” (American Political Science 
Review [1999]: 649–664), it is possible to predict an 
individual’s level of support for ecology based on 
demographic and ideological characteristics. The 
multiple regression model proposed by the authors 
was
y 5 3.60 2 .01x1 1 .01x2 2 .07x3 1 .12x4 1 .02x5
 2 .04x6 2 .01x7 2 .04x8 2 .02x9 1 e
where the variables are defined as follows:
y 5 ecology score shigher values indicate a greater 
concern for ecologyd
x1 5 age times 10
x2 5 income sin thousands of dollarsd
x3 5 gender s1 5 male, 0 5 femaled
x4 5 race s1 5 white, 0 5 nonwhited
x5 5 education (in years)
x6 5 ideology s4 5 conservative, 3 5 right of cen-
ter, 2 5 middle of the road, 1 5 left of center, 
and 0 5 liberald
x7 5 social class s4 5 upper, 3 5 upper middle,  
2 5 middle, 1 5 lower middle, and  
0 5 lowerd
x8 5 postmaterialist s1 if postmaterialist, 0 
otherwised
x9 5 materialist s1 if materialist, 0 otherwised
a.	 Suppose you knew a person with the following 
characteristics: a 25-year-old, white female with 
a college degree (16 years of education), who has 
a $32,000-per-year job, is from the upper middle 
class, and considers herself left of center, but who 
is neither a materialist nor a postmaterialist. Pre-
dict her ecology score. ​ ​
b.	If the woman described in Part (a) were Hispanic 
rather than white, how would the prediction 
change? (Hint: See Example 14.5.)
c.	 Given that the other variables are the same, what 
is the estimated mean difference in ecology score 
for men and women? ​ ​
d.	How would you interpret the coefficient of x2?
e.	 Comment on the numerical coding of the ideology 
and social class variables. Can you suggest a better 
way of incorporating these two variables into the 
model? (Hint: See Example 14.5.)
14.7	 ▼ The article “The Influence of Temperature and Sun-
shine on the Alpha-Acid Contents of Hops” (Agricultural 
Meteorology [1974]: 375–382) used a multiple regres-
sion model to relate y 5 yield of hops to x1 5 aver-
age temperature (8C) between date of coming into 
hop and date of picking and x2 5 average percent-
age of sunshine during the same period. The model 
equation proposed is
y 5 415.11 2 6.60x1 2 4.50x2 1 e
a.	 Suppose that this equation describes the actual 
relationship. What mean yield corresponds to an 
average temperature of 20 and an average sun-
shine percentage of 40? ​ ​
b.	What is the mean yield when the average temper-
ature and average percentage of sunshine are 18.9 
and 43, respectively? 
c.	 Interpret the values of the regression coefficients.
14.8	 The article “Readability of Liquid Crystal Displays: A 
Response Surface” (Human Factors [1983]: 185–190) 
used a multiple regression model with four indepen-
dent variables, where
y 5 error percentage for subjects reading a four-
digit liquid crystal display
x1 5 level of backlight sfrom 0 to 122 cd/md
x2 5 character subtense sfrom .025° to 1.34°d
x3 5 viewing angle sfrom 0° to 60°d
x4 5 level of ambient light sfrom 20 to 1500 lxd
The model equation suggested in the article is
y 5 1.52 1 .02x1 2 1.40x2 1 .02x3 2 .0006x4 1 e
a.	 Assume that this is the correct equation. What is 
the mean value of y when x1 5 10, x2 5 .5, x3 5 
50, and x4 5 100? ​ ​
b.	 What mean error percentage is associated with a 
backlight level of 20, character subtense of .5, view-
ing angle of 10, and ambient light level of 30? ​ ​
c.	 Interpret the values of b2 and b3.
14.9	 The article “Pulp Brightness Reversion: Influence of 
Residual Lignin on the Brightness Reversion of Bleached 
Sulfite and Kraft Pulps” (TAPPI [1964]: 653–662) pro-
posed a quadratic regression model to describe the 
relationship between x 5 degree of delignification 
during the processing of wood pulp for paper and  
y 5 total chlorine content. Suppose that the popula-
tion regression  model is
y 5 220 1 75x 2 4x2 1 e
a.	 Graph the regression function 220 1 75x 2 4x2 
over x values between 2 and 12. (Hint: Substitute 
x 5 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12 to find points on the 
graph, and connect them with a smooth curve.)
b.	Would mean chlorine content be higher for a 
degree of delignification value of 8 or 10? 
c.	 What is the change in mean chlorine content 
when the degree of delignification increases from 
8 to 9? From 9 to 10? 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online  ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

714  
  Chapter 14  Multiple Regression Analysis
b.	What additional predictors would be needed to 
incorporate interaction between temperature and 
intake setting? 
14.13	Consider a regression analysis with three indepen-
dent variables x1, x2, and x3. Give the equation for 
the following regression models:
a.	 The model that includes as predictors all inde-
pendent variables but no quadratic or interaction 
terms.
b.	The model that includes as predictors all indepen-
dent variables and all quadratic terms.
c.	 All models that include as predictors all indepen-
dent variables, no quadratic terms, and exactly 
one interaction term.
d.	The model that includes as predictors all indepen-
dent variables, all quadratic terms, and all interac-
tion terms (the full quadratic model).
14.14	The article “The Value and the Limitations of High-
Speed Turbo-Exhausters for the Removal of Tar-Fog 
from Carburetted Water-Gas” (Society of Chemical 
Industry Journal [1946]: 166–168) presented data  
on y 5 tar content (grains/100 ft 3) of a gas stream 
as a function of x1 5 rotor speed (rev/minute)  
and x2 5 gas inlet temperature (8F). The following 
regression model using x1, x2, x3 5 x22 and x4 5 x1x2 
was suggested:
mean y value 5 86.8 2 .123x1 1 5.09x2  
2 .0709x3 1 .001x4
a.	 According to this model, what is the mean y value 
if x1 5 3200 and x2 5 57? 
b.	For this particular model, does it make sense to 
interpret the value of a b2 as the average change 
in tar content associated with a 1-degree increase 
in gas inlet temperature when rotor speed is held 
constant? Explain. 
14.15	▼ Consider the dependent variable y 5 fuel efficiency 
of a car (mpg).
a.	 Suppose that you want to incorporate type of 
car, with four categories (subcompact, compact, 
midsize, and large), into a regression model that 
also includes x1 5 age of car and x2 5 engine size. 
Define the necessary indicator variables, and write 
out the complete model equation.
b.	Suppose that you want to incorporate interaction 
between age and type of car. What additional 
predictors would be needed to accomplish this?
14.10	 The relationship between yield of maize, date of 
planting, and planting density was investigated in 
the article “Development of a Model for Use in Maize 
Replant Decisions” (Agronomy Journal [1980]: 459–464). 
Let
 y 5 percent maize yield
x1 5 planting date sdays after April 20d
x2 5 planting density s10,000 plantsyhad
The regression model with both quadratic terms 
(y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 b3x3 1 b4x4 1 e where 
x3 5 x21 and x4 5 x22d provides a good description 
of the relationship between y and the independent 
variables.
a.	 If a 5 21.09, b1 5 .653, b2 5 .0022, b3 5 
2.0206, and b4 5 0.4, what is the population 
regression function?
b.	Use the regression function in Part (a) to deter-
mine the mean yield for a plot planted on May 6 
with a density of 41,180 plants/ha.
c.	 Would the mean yield be higher for a planting date 
of May 6 or May 22 (for the same density)? 
d.	Is it appropriate to interpret b1 5 .653 as the av-
erage change in yield when planting date increases 
by one day and the values of the other three pre-
dictors are held fixed? Why or why not? ​
14.11	Suppose that the variables y, x1, and x2 are related by 
the regression model
y 5 1.8 1 .1x1 1 .8x2 1 e
a.	 Construct a graph (similar to that of Figure 14.5) 
showing the relationship between mean y and x2 
for fixed values 10, 20, and 30 of x1.
b.	Construct a graph depicting the relationship be-
tween mean y and x1 for fixed values 50, 55, and 
60 of x2.
c.	 What aspect of the graphs in Parts (a) and (b) can 
be attributed to the lack of an interaction between 
x1 and x2?
d.	Suppose the interaction term .03x3 where x3 5 x1x2 
is added to the regression model equation. Using 
this new model, construct the graphs described in 
Parts (a) and (b). How do they differ from those of 
Parts (a) and (b)?
14.12	 A manufacturer of wood stoves collected data on  
y 5 particulate matter concentration and x1 5 flue 
temperature for three different air intake settings 
(low, medium, and high).
a.	 Write a model equation that includes indicator 
variables to incorporate intake setting, and inter-
pret each of the b coefficients.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online  ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 14.2  Fitting a Model and Assessing Its Utility     715
College
y
x1
x2
x3
Cornerstone University
0.391
1,065
  ​9,482
0
Barry University
0.389
  ​950
13,149
0
Wilkes University
0.532
1,090
  ​9,418
0
Colgate University
0.893
1,350
26,969
0
Lourdes College
0.313
  ​930
  ​8,489
0
Concordia University at Austin
0.315
  ​985
  ​8,329
0
Carleton College
0.896
1,390
29,605
0
Letourneau University
0.545
1,170
13,154
0
Ohio Valley College
0.288
  ​950
10,887
0
Chadron State College
0.469
  ​990
  ​6,046
0
Meredith College
0.679
1,035
14,889
1
Tougaloo College
0.495
  ​845
11,694
0
Hawaii Pacific University
0.410
1,000
  ​9,911
0
University Of Michigan-Dearborn
0.497
1,065
  ​9,371
0
Whittier College
0.553
1,065
14,051
0
Wheaton College
0.845
1,325
18,420
0
 14.2 
Fitting a Model and Assessing Its Utility
In Section 14.1, multiple regression models containing several different types of predictors 
were introduced. Now suppose that a particular set of k predictor variables x1, x2, Á , xk 
has been selected for inclusion in the model
y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 Á 1 bkxk 1 e
The next steps are to estimate the model coefficients a, b1, Á , bk and the regression func-
tion a 1 b1x1 1 Á 1 bkxk (the mean y value for specified values of the predictors), assess 
the model’s usefulness, and if appropriate, use the estimated model to make predictions. 
All this, of course, requires sample data. As before, n denotes the number of observations 
in the sample. With just one independent variable, the sample consisted of n (x, y) pairs. 
Now, each observation consists of k 1 1 numbers: a value of x1, a value of x2, Á , a value 
of xk, and the associated value of y. The n observations are assumed to have been selected 
independently of one another.
Example 14.6 
Graduation Rates at Small Colleges
● ​One way colleges measure success is by graduation rates. The Education Trust publishes 
6-year graduation rates along with other college characteristics on its web site (www 
.collegeresults.org). We will consider the following variables:
 y 5 6{year graduation rate
x1 5 median SAT score of students accepted to the college
x2 5 student{related expense per full{time student sin dollarsd
x3 55
1 if college has only female students or only male students
0 if college has both male and female students
The following data represent a random sample of 22 colleges selected from the 1037 colleges 
in the United States with enrollments under 5000 students. The data consist of 22 observa-
tions on each of these four variables.
Understand the context ❭
 Data set available online
continued
Step-by-step technology  
instructions available  
online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

716  
  Chapter 14  Multiple Regression Analysis
One possible model that could be considered to describe the relationship between y and 
these three independent variables is
y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 b3x3 1 e
We will return to this example after we see how sample data are used to estimate model 
coefficients.	
■
As in simple linear regression, the principle of least squares is used to estimate the coef-
ficients a, b1, Á , bk. For specified estimates a, b1, Á , bk
y 2 sa 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 Á 1 bkxkd
is the deviation between the observed y value for a particular observation and the predicted 
value using the estimated regression function a 1 b1x1 1 Á 1 bkxk. For example, the first 
observation in the data set of Example 14.6 is
sx1, x2, x3, yd 5 s1065, 9482, 0, 0.391d
The resulting deviation between observed and predicted y values is
0.391 2 [a 1 b1s1065d 1 b2s9482d 1 b3s0d]
Deviations corresponding to other observations are expressed in a similar manner. Using 
the principle of least squares, estimates of a, b1, b2, and b3 are the values of a, b1, b2, and 
b3 that minimize the sum of these squared deviations.
College
y
x1
x2
x3
Southampton College Of Long Island
0.465
1,035
13,302
0
Keene State College
0.541
1,005
  ​8,098
0
Mount St Mary’s College
0.579
  ​918
12,999
1
Wellesley College
0.912
1,370
35,393
1
Fort Lewis College
0.298
  ​970
  ​5,518
0
Bowdoin College
0.891
1,375
35,669
0
According to the principle of least squares, the fit of a particular estimated re-
gression function a 1 b1x1 1Á1 bkxk to the observed data is measured by 
the sum of squared deviations between the observed y values and the y values 
predicted by the estimated regression function: 
ofy 2 sa 1 b1x1 1 Á 1 bkxkdg2
The least-squares estimates of a, b1, Á , bk are those values of a, b1, Á , bk 
that make this sum of squared deviations as small as possible.
The least-squares estimates for a given data set are obtained by solving a system of k 1 1 
equations in the k 1 1 unknowns a, b1, Á , bk (called the normal equations). In the case 
k 5 1 (simple linear regression), there are only two equations, and we gave their general 
solution—the expressions for b and a—in Chapter 5. For k $ 2, it is not as easy to write 
general expressions for the estimates without using advanced mathematical notation. For-
tunately all the commonly used statistical software packages can calculate these estimates 
using sample data.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 14.2  Fitting a Model and Assessing Its Utility     717
Example 14.7 
More on Graduation Rates at Small Colleges
Figure 14.6 displays Minitab output from a regression command requesting that the model 
y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 b3x3 1 e be fit to the small college data of Example 14.6. Focus 
on the column labeled Coef (for coefficient) in the table near the top of the figure. The four 
numbers in this column are the estimated model coefficients:
 a 5 20.3906 sthe estimate of the constant term ad
b1 5 0.0007602 sthe estimate of the coefficient b1d
b2 5 0.00000697 sthe estimate of the coefficient b2d
b3 5 0.12495 sthe estimate of the coefficient b3d
Understand the context ❭
We estimate that the average change in 6-year graduation rate associated with a $1 increase 
in expenditure per full-time student while type of institution (same sex or coed) and me-
dian SAT score remains fixed is 0.00000697. A similar interpretation applies to b1.
The variable x3 is an indicator variable that takes on a value of 1 for colleges that have 
either all female students or all male students. We would interpret the estimated value of 
b3 5 0.125 as the “correction” that we would make to the predicted 6-year graduation rate 
of a coed college with the same median SAT and expenditure per full-time student to incor-
porate the difference associated with having only female or only male students. 
The estimated regression function is
 1
estimated mean value of y
for specified x1, x2, and x3 values2 5 20.3906 1 0.0007602x1
 1 0.00000697x2 1 0.12495x3
Substituting x1 5 1000, x2 5 11,000, and x3 5 0 gives
20.3906 1 0.0007602s1000d 1 0.00000697s11,000d 1 0.12495s0d 5 .4462
which can be interpreted either as an estimate for the mean 6-year graduation rate of coed 
colleges with a median SAT of 1000 and an expenditure per full-time student of $11,000 or 
as a prediction for a single college with these same characteristics.	
■
Interpret the results ❭
Figure  14.6
​Minitab output for the regression 
analysis of Example 14.7.
The regression equation is
y = -0.391 + 0.000760 x1 + 0.000007 x2 + 0.125 x3
S = 0.0844346       R-Sq = 86.1%      R-Sq(adj) = 83.8%
Analysis of Variance
Predictor
Constant
x1
Coef
Source
DF
Regression
3
Residual Error
18
Total
21
SS
0.79486
0.12833
0.92318
MS
0.26495
0.00713
F
37.16
P
0.000
-0.3906
0.0007602
T
-1.98
3.30
P
0.064
0.004
SE Coef
0.1976
0.0002300
x2
0.00000697
1.55
0.139
0.00000451
x3
0.12495
2.10
0.050
0.05943
Regression Analysis: y versus x1, x2, x3
a
b1
b2
b3
Coefﬁcient
of multiple
determination = .861
P-value for
model utility test
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

718  
  Chapter 14  Multiple Regression Analysis
Is the Model Useful?
The utility of an estimated model can be assessed by examining the extent to which pre-
dicted y values based on the estimated regression function are close to the y values actually 
observed.
The ﬁrst predicted value y⁄
1 is obtained by taking the values of the indepen-
dent variables x 1, x2, Á , x k for the ﬁrst sample observation and substituting 
these values into the estimated regression function. 
Doing this successively for the remaining observations yields the predicted 
values y⁄
2, Á , y⁄
n. 
The residuals are then the differences between the observed and predicted y 
values y1 2 y⁄
1, y2 2 y⁄
2, Á , yn 2 y⁄
n.
The residual (or error) sum of squares, SSResid, and total sum of squares, 
SSTo, are given by 
SSResid 5 os y 2 y⁄d2  SSTo 5 os y 2 yd2
where y is the mean of the y observations in the sample.
The number of degrees of freedom associated with SSResid is n 2 (k 1 1), be-
cause k 1 1 df are lost in estimating the k 1 1 coefficients a, b1, Á , bk. 
An estimate of the random error variance s 2 is given by 
s2e 5
SSResid
n 2 sk 1 1d
and se 5 Ïs2e is an estimate of s.
The coefficient of multiple determination, R2, interpreted as the proportion 
of variation in observed y values that is explained by the fitted model, is
R2 5 1 2 SSResid
SSTo
The predicted values and residuals are de­ﬁned here exactly as they were in simple linear 
regression, but computation of the values is more tedious because there is more than one 
predictor. Fortunately, the y⁄’s and s y 2 y⁄d’s are automatically computed and displayed in 
the output of all good statistical software packages. 
Consider again the college data discussed in Examples 14.6 and 14.7. Because the ﬁrst 
y observation, y1 5 0.391, was made with x1 5 1065, x2 5 9482, and x3 5 0, the ﬁrst 
predicted value is
y⁄ 5 20.3906 1 0.0007602s1065d 1 0.00000697s9482d 1 0.12495s0d 5 0.485
The first residual is then
y1 2 y⁄
1 5 0.391 2 0.485 5 20.094
The other predicted values and residuals are computed in a similar fashion. The sum of 
residuals from a least-squares fit should, except for rounding effects, be 0.
As in simple linear regression, the sum of squared residuals is the basis for several impor-
tant summary quantities that tell us about a model’s utility.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 14.2  Fitting a Model and Assessing Its Utility     719
Example 14.8 
Small Colleges Revisited
Looking again at Figure 14.6, which contains Minitab output for the college data fit by a 
three-predictor model, the residual sum of squares is found in the Residual Error row and 
SS column of the table headed Analysis of Variance: SSResid 5 0.12833. The associated 
number of degrees of freedom is n 2 (k 1 1) 5 22 2 (3 1 1) 5 18, which appears in the 
DF column just to the left of SSResid. 
The sample mean y value is y 5 .5544, and SSTo 5 os y 2 .5544d2 5 0.92318 appears 
in the Total row and SS column of the Analysis of Variance table just under the value of 
SSResid. The values of se, s2e, and R2 are then
s2e 5
SSResid
n 2 sk 1 1d 5 0.12833
18
5 0.007
(also found in the MS column of the Minitab output)
se 5 Ïs2e 5 Ï.007 5 0.084
(which appears in the Minitab output just above the Analysis of Variance table)
R2 5 1 2 SSResid
SSTo
5 1 2 0.12833
0.92318 5 1 2 .139 5 .861
This means that the percentage of variation explained is 100R 2 5 86.1%, which appears 
on the Minitab output as R-Sq 5 86.1%. 
Because the value of R2 is large and the value of se is not too large, the values of R2 and se 
suggest that the chosen model has been very successful in relating y to the predictors.	
■
In general, a useful model is one that results in both a large R2 value and a small se value. 
However, there is a catch. These two conditions can be achieved by fitting a model that 
contains a large number of predictors. Such a model might be successful in explaining  
y variation in the data in our sample, but it almost always specifies a relationship that can-
not be generalized to the population and that may be unrealistic and difficult to interpret. 
What we really want is a model that has relatively few predictors whose roles are easily 
interpreted and that also explains much of the variation in y.
All statistical software packages include R2 and se in their output, and most also give 
SSResid. In addition, some packages compute the quantity called the adjusted R2:
adjusted R2 5 1 23
n 2 1
n 2 sk 1 1d41
SSResid
SSTo 2
Because the quantity in square brackets exceeds 1, the number subtracted from 1 is larger 
than SSResid/SSTo, so the adjusted R2 is smaller than R2. The value of R2 must be between 
0 and 1, but the adjusted R2 can, on rare occasions, be negative. 
If a large R2 has been achieved by using just a few independent variables, the adjusted R2 and 
R2 values will not differ greatly. However, the adjustment can be substantial when a large num-
ber of predictors (relative to the number of observations) have been used or when R2 itself is 
small to moderate (which could happen even when there is no relationship between y and the 
independent variables). In Example 14.7, the adjusted R2 5 .838, which is not much less than 
R2 because the model included only two independent variables and the sample size was 22.
F Distributions
The model utility test in simple linear regression was based on a test statistic that has a 
t distribution when H0: b 5 0 is true. The model utility test for multiple regression is based 
on a test statistic that has a probability distribution called an F distribution. 
An F distribution always arises in connection with a ratio in which the numerator involves 
one sum of squares and the denominator involves a second sum of squares. Each sum of 
squares has associated with it a specified number of degrees of freedom, so a particular  
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

720  
  Chapter 14  Multiple Regression Analysis
F distribution is determined by specifying values of df1 5 numerator degrees of freedom 
and df2 5 denominator degrees of freedom. There is a different F distribution for each 
different df1 and df2 combination. 
For example, there is an F distribution based on 4 numerator degrees of freedom and 
12 denominator degrees of freedom, another F distribution based on 3 numerator degrees 
of freedom and 20 denominator degrees of freedom, and so on. A typical F curve for speci-
fied numerator and denominator degrees of freedom appears in Figure 14.7. 
All F tests presented in this book are upper-tailed. The P-value for an upper-tailed F test 
is the area under the associated F curve to the right of the calculated F. Figure 14.7 illus-
trates this for a test based on df1 5 4 and df2 5 6.
Figure  14.7
A P-value for an upper-tailed F test.
F curve for
df1 = 4, df2 = 6
Shaded area = P-value
                     
Calculated F
Unfortunately, tables of these upper-tail areas are more complicated than are tables for  
t distributions, because here two df are involved. For each of a number of different F dis-
tributions, the F table (Appendix Table 6) gives only four numbers: the values that capture 
tail areas .10, .05, .01, and .001. Different columns correspond to different values of df1, 
and each different group of rows is for a different value of df2. Figure 14.8 shows how this 
table is used to obtain P-value information.
Figure  14.8
Obtaining P-value information from 
the F table.
df2
df1
Area
1  .  .  .
4              .  .  .
.10
.05
.01
.001
6
3.18
4.53
9.15
21.92
0
P-value > .10 .01 < P-value < .05 .001 < P-value < .01
P-value < .001
.05 < P-value < .10
For example, for a test with df1 5 4 and df2 5 6,
calculated F 5 5.70 → .01 , P-value , .05
calculated F 5 2.16 → P-value . .10
calculated F 5 25.03 → P-value , .001
Only if calculated F equals a tabulated value do we obtain an exact P-value (for example, if 
calculated F 5 4.53, then P-value 5 .05). If .01 , P-value , .05, we should reject the null 
hypothesis at a significance level of .05 but not at a level of .01. When P-value , .001, H0 
would be rejected at any reasonable significance level. Statistical computer packages, such as 
Minitab, and some graphing calculators can also be used to fnd P-values for F distributions.
The F Test for Model Utility
In the simple linear model with regression function a 1 bx, if b 5 0, there is no use-
ful linear relationship between y and the single independent variable x. Similarly, if all k 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 14.2  Fitting a Model and Assessing Its Utility     721
­coefficients b1, b2, Á , bk are 0 in the general k-predictor multiple regression model, there 
is no useful linear relationship between y and any of the independent variables x1, x2, Á , xk 
included in the model. Before using an estimated multiple regression model to make fur-
ther inferences (for example, predictions or estimates of mean values), you should confirm 
the model’s utility through a formal test procedure.
Recall that SSTo is a measure of total variation in the observed y values and that SSResid 
measures the amount of total variation that has not been explained by the fitted model. 
The difference between total and error sums of squares is itself a sum of squares, called the 
regression sum of squares, which is denoted by SSRegr:
SSRegr 5 SSTo 2 SSResid
SSRegr is interpreted as the amount of total variation that has been explained by the 
model. Intuitively, the model should be judged useful if SSRegr is large relative to SSResid 
and the model uses a small number of predictors relative to the sample size. The number 
of degrees of freedom associated with SSRegr is k, the number of model predictors, and the 
number of degrees of freedom for SSResid is n 2 (k 1 1). 
The model utility F test is based on the following result:
When all k bi’s are 0 in the model y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 Á 1 bkxk 1 e and 
when the distribution of e is normal with mean 0 and variance s2 for any particu-
lar values of x1, x2, Á , xk, the statistic 
F 5
SSRegryk
SSResidysn 2 sk 1 1dd
has an F probability distribution based on numerator df 5 k and denominator 
df 5 n 2 (k 1 1).
The value of F tends to be larger when at least one bi is not 0 than when all the bi’s are 
0, because more variation is typically explained by the model. An F statistic value far out 
in the upper tail of the associated F distribution can be more plausibly attributed to at 
least one nonzero bi than to something extremely unusual having occurred when all the 
bi’s are 0. This is why the F test for model utility is upper-tailed.
Null hypothesis:  H0:  ​b1 5 b2 5 Á 5 bk 5 0 
(There is no useful linear relationship between y and 
any of the predictors.)
Alternative hypothesis:  ​Ha:  ​At least one among b1, Á , bk is not 
zero. (There is a useful linear relationship 
between y and at least one of the predictors.)
Test statistic:  F 5
SSRegryk
SSResidysn 2 sk 1 1dd
	
where SSRegr 5 SSTo 2 SSResid.
	
An equivalent formula is
	
F 5
R2yk
s1 2 R2dysn 2 sk 1 1dd
The Model Utility F Test for Multiple Regression
continued
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

722  
  Chapter 14  Multiple Regression Analysis
For the model utility test, the null hypothesis is the claim that the model is not useful. Un-
less H0 can be rejected at a small level of significance, the model has not demonstrated that it is 
useful. In this case the investigator must search further for a model that can be judged useful. 
Example 14.9 
Small Colleges One Last Time
The model fit to the college data introduced in Example 14.6 involved k 5 3 predictors. The 
Minitab output in Figure 14.6 contains the relevant information for carrying out the model 
utility test.
1.	 The model is y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 b3x3 1 e where y 5 6-year graduation 
rate, x1 5 median SAT score, x2 5 expenditure per full-time student, and x3 is an 
indicator variable that is equal to 1 for a college that has only female or only male 
students and is equal to 0 if the college is coed.
2.	 H0:  ​b1 5 b2 5 b3 5 0
3.	 Ha:  ​At least one of the three bi’s is not zero.
4.	 Significance level:  ​a 5 .05
5.	 Test statistic:  ​F 5
SSRegryk
SSResidyfn 2 sk 1 1dg
6.	 Assumptions:  ​The accompanying table gives the residuals and standardized 
residuals (from Minitab) for the model under consideration.
Obs.
y
x1
x2
x3
Residual
Standardized 
Residual
1
0.391
1065
9482
0
20.094
21.166
2
0.389
950
13149
0
20.034
20.442
3
0.532
1090
9418
0
0.028
0.358
4
0.893
1350
26969
0
0.069
0.908
5
0.313
930
8489
0
20.062
20.779
6
0.315
985
8329
0
20.101
21.244
7
0.896
1390
29605
0
0.024
0.319
8
0.545
1170
13154
0
20.045
20.575
9
0.288
950
10887
0
20.119
21.497
10
0.469
990
6046
0
0.065
0.812
11
0.679
1035
14889
1
0.054
0.806
12
0.495
845
11694
0
0.162
2.388
13
0.410
1000
9911
0
20.029
20.350
14
0.497
1065
9371
0
0.013
0.158
15
0.553
1065
14051
0
0.036
0.441
16
0.845
1325
18420
0
0.100
1.381
17
0.465
1035
13302
0
20.024
20.292
18
0.541
1005
8098
0
0.111
1.371
19
0.579
918
12999
1
0.056
0.857
20
0.912
1370
35393
1
20.110
21.793
21
0.298
970
5518
0
20.087
21.091
22
0.891
1375
35669
0
20.012
20.189
Understand the context ❭
The test is upper-tailed, and the information in Appendix Table 6 can be used 
to obtain a bound or bounds on the P-value using numerator df1 5 k and 
denominator df2 5 n 2 (k 1 1).
Assumptions:  For any particular combination of predictor variable values, 
the distribution of e, the random deviation, is normal with 
mean 0 and constant variance, s2.
Formulate a plan ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 14.2  Fitting a Model and Assessing Its Utility     723
	
	 A normal probability plot of the standardized residuals is shown here; the plot is 
quite straight, indicating that the assumption of normality of the random devia-
tion distribution is reasonable:
21
0
1
2
1
3
2
0
21
22
22
Normal score
Standardized residual
7.	 Directly from the Analysis of Variance table in Figure 14.6, the SS column gives 
SSRegr 5 0.79486 and SSResid 5 0.12833. Thus,
F 5 0.79486y3
0.12833y18 5 0.26495
0.00713 5 37.16 1
also found in the column labeled F
in Figure 14.6
2
8.	 Appendix Table 6 shows that for a test based on df1 5 k 5 3 and df2 5 n 2  
(k 1 1) 5 22 2 (3 1 1) 5 18, the value 8.49 captures upper-tail F curve area 
.001. Since calculated F 5 37.16 . 8.49, it follows that P-value , .001. 
9.	 Because P-value , .001, which is less than the significance level of .05, H0 should be 
rejected. The conclusion would be the same using a 5 .01 or a 5 .001. The useful-
ness of the multiple regression model is confirmed. The P-value for the model utility 
test can also be found in the Minitab output to the right of the value of the F test 
statistic in the column labeled P.	
■
Example 14.10 
School Board Politics
A multiple regression analysis presented in the article “The Politics of Bureaucratic Discretion: 
Educational Access as an Urban Service” (American Journal of Political Science [1991]: 155–177) 
considered a model in which the dependent variable was
y 5 percentage of school board members in a school district who are black
and the predictors were
x1 5 black-to-white income ratio in the district
x2 5 percentage of whites in the district below the poverty line
x3 5 indicator variable for whether district was in the South
x4 5 percentage of blacks in the district with a high-school education
x5 5 black population percentage in the district
Summary quantities included n 5 140 and R2 5 .749. Does this model specify a useful 
relationship between y and the five predictors? To answer this question, we carry out a 
model utility test:
1.	 The fitted model was y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 Á 1 b5x5 1 e
2.	 H0:  ​b1 5 b2 5 b3 5 b4 5 b5 5 0
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

724  
  Chapter 14  Multiple Regression Analysis
3.	 Ha:  ​at least one of the bi’s is not zero
4.	 Significance level:  ​a 5 .01
5.	 Test statistic:  ​F 5
R2yk
s1 2 R2dysn 2 sk 1 1dd
6.	 Assumptions:  ​The raw data were not given in this article, so we are unable to com-
pute standardized residuals or construct a normal probability plot. For this test to be 
valid, we must be willing to assume that the random deviation distribution is normal.
7.	 F 5
.749y5
.251ys140 2 s5 1 1dd 5
.1498
.001873 5 80.0
8.	 The test is based on df1 5 k 5 5 and df2 5 n 2 (k 1 1) 5 134. This latter df is 
not included in the F table. However, the .001 cutoff value for df2 5 120 is 4.42, 
and for df2 5 240 it is 4.25; so for df2 5 134, the cutoff value is roughly 4.4. 
Clearly, 80.0 greatly exceeds this value, implying that P-value , .001.
9.	 Since P-value , .001 which is less than the significance level of .01, H0 is rejected at 
significance level .01. There appears to be a useful linear relationship between y and 
at least one of the five predictors.	
■
	
In Section 14.3 (online), you will see how a model that has been judged to be useful can 
be used to draw further conclusions. However, you should realize that in many applica-
tions, more than one model’s utility could be confirmed by the F test. Also, just because 
the model utility test indicates that the multiple regression model is useful does not neces-
sarily mean that all the predictors included in the model contribute to the usefulness of 
the model. This is illustrated in Example 14.11, and strategies for selecting a model are 
considered later in Section 14.4 (online).
Example 14.11 
The Cost of Energy Bars
●  What factors contribute to the price of energy bars promoted to provide endurance and 
increase muscle power? The article “Energy Bars, Unwrapped” (Consumer Reports [June 2003] 
19–21) included the following data on price, calorie content, protein content (in grams), 
and fat content (in grams) for a sample of 19 energy bars.
Formulate a plan ❭
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Understand the context ❭
Price
Calories
Protein
Fat
1.40
180
12
3.0
1.28
200
14
6.0
1.31
210
16
7.0
1.10
220
13
6.0
2.29
220
17
11.0
1.15
230
14
4.5
2.24
240
24
10.0
1.99
270
24
5.0
2.57
320
31
9.0
0.94
110
  ​5
30.0
1.40
180
10
4.5
0.53
200
  ​7
6.0
1.02
220
  ​8
5.0
1.13
230
  ​9
6.0
1.29
230
10
2.0
1.28
240
10
4.0
1.44
260
  ​6
5.0
1.27
260
  ​7
5.0
1.47
290
13
6.0
● Data set available online 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 14.2  Fitting a Model and Assessing Its Utility     725
Figure 14.9 displays Minitab output from a regression for the model
y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 b3x3 1 e
where
y 5 price    x1 5 calorie content    x2 5 protein content    x3 5 fat content
The regression equation is 
Price = 0.252 + 0.00125 Calories + 0.0485 Protein + 0.0444 Fat
Predictor
Coef
SE Coef
T
P
Constant
0.2511
0.3524
0.71
0.487
Calories
0.001254
0.001724
0.73
0.478
Protein
0.04849
0.01353
3.58
0.003
Fat
0.04445
0.03648
1.22
0.242
S = 0.2789    ​  ​  ​R-Sq = 74.7%  ​  ​  ​  ​R-Sq(adj) = 69.6%
Analysis of Variance
Source
DF
SS
MS
F
P
Regression
3
3.4453
1.1484
14.76
0.000
Residual Error
15
1.1670
0.0778
Total
18
4.6122
From the Minitab output, F 5 14.76, with an associated P-value of 0.000, indicating that 
the null hypothesis in the model utility test, H0: b1 5 b2 5 b3 5 0, should be rejected. We 
would conclude that there is a useful linear relationship between y and at least one of x1, 
x2, and x3. However, consider the Minitab output shown in Figure 14.10, which resulted 
from fitting a model that uses only x2 5 protein content as a predictor. Notice that the  
F test would also confirm the usefulness of this model and also that the R2 and adjusted  
R2 values of 71.1% and 69.4% are quite similar to those of the model that included all 
three predictors (74.7% and 69.6% from the Minitab output of Figure 14.9). This suggests 
that protein content alone explains about the same amount of the variability in price as  
all three variables together, and so the simpler model with just one predictor may be pre-
ferred over the more complicated model with three independent variables.
The regression equation is 
Price = 0.607 + 0.0623 Protein
Predictor
Coef
SE Coef
T
P
Constant
0.6072
0.1419
4.28
0.001
Protein
0.062256
0.009618
6.47
0.000
S = 0.279843​  ​  ​R-Sq = 71.1%  ​  ​  ​  ​R-Sq(adj) = 69.4%
Analysis of Variance
Source
DF
SS
MS
F
P
Regression
1
3.2809
3.2809
41.90
0.000
Residual Error
17
1.3313
0.0763
Total
18
4.6122
	
■
Figure  14.9
Minitab output for the energy bar 
data of Example 14.11.
Interpret the results ❭
Figure  14.10
Minitab output for the energy bar 
data of Example 14.11 when only 
x 2 5 protein content is included as a 
predictor.
exercises 14.16 - 14.35
14.16	 ▼ When coastal power stations take in large quanti-
ties of cooling water, it is inevitable that a number 
of fish are drawn in with the water. Various methods 
have been designed to screen out the fish. The article 
“Multiple Regression Analysis for Forecasting Critical Fish 
Influxes at Power Station Intakes” (Journal of Applied 
Ecology [1983]: 33–42) examined intake fish catch at 
an English power plant and several other variables 
thought to affect fish intake:
y 5 fish intake snumber of fishd
x1 5 water temperature s8Cd
x2 5 number of pumps running
x3 5 sea state svalues 0, 1, 2, or 3d
x4 5 speed sknotsd
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online  ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

726  
  Chapter 14  Multiple Regression Analysis
Part of the data given in the article were used to 
obtain the estimated regression equation
y⁄ 5 92 2 2.18x1 2 19.20x2 2 9.38x3 1 2.32x4
(based on n 5 26). SSRegr 5 1486.9 and SSResid 5 
2230.2 were also calculated.
a.	 Interpret the values of b1 and b4.
b.	 What proportion of observed variation in fish intake 
can be explained by the model relationship? 
c.	 Estimate the value of s. ​ ​
d.	Calculate adjusted R2. How does it compare to R2 
itself? ​
14.17	Obtain as much information as you can about the 
P-value for an upper-tailed F test in each of the fol-
lowing situations. (Hint: See the section of F distribu-
tions.)
a.	 df1 5 3, df2 5 15, calculated F 5 4.23
b.	df1 5 4, df2 5 18, calculated F 5 1.95
c.	 df1 5 5, df2 5 20, calculated F 5 4.10
d.	df1 5 4, df2 5 35, calculated F 5 4.58
14.18	 Obtain as much information as you can about the 
P-value for the F test for model utility in each of the 
following situations:
a.	 k 5 2, n 5 21, calculated F 5 2.47 ​ ​
b.	k 5 8, n 5 25, calculated F 5 5.98
c.	 k 5 5, n 5 26, calculated F 5 3.00
d.	The full quadratic model based on x1 and x2 is fit,  
n 5 20, and calculated F 5 8.25. ​ ​
e.	 k 5 5, n 5 100, calculated F 5 2.33 
14.19	Data from a sample of n 5 ​150 quail eggs were used 
to fit a multiple regression model relating
y ​5 ​eggshell surface area (mm2)
x1 5 ​egg weight (g)
x2 ​5 ​egg width (mm)
x3 5 egg length (mm)
(“Predicting Yolk Height, Yolk Width, Albumen Length, 
Eggshell Weight, Egg Shape Index, Eggshell Thickness, 
Egg Surface Area of Japanese Quails Using Various Egg 
Traits as Regressors,” International Journal of Poultry Sci-
ence [2008]: 85–88).
The resulting estimated regression function was
10.561 1 1.535x1 2 0.178x2 2 0.045x3
and R2 5 .996.
a.	 Carry out a model utility test to determine if this 
multiple regression model is useful. (Hint: See 
Example 14.10.)
b.	A simple linear regression model was also used 
to describe the relationship between y and x1,     
resulting in the estimated regression function 
6.254 1 1.387x1. The P-value for the associated 
model utility test was reported to be less than .01, 
and r2 5 .994. Is the linear model useful? Explain. 
(Hint: See Example 14.11.)
c.	 Based on your answers to Parts (a) and (b), which 
of the two models would you recommend for pre-
dicting eggshell surface area? Explain the rationale 
for your choice.
14.20	 ●  This exercise requires the use of a computer pack-
age. The paper “Habitat Selection by Black Bears in an 
Intensively Logged Boreal Forrest” (Canadian Journal of 
Zoology [2008]: 1307–1316) gave the accompanying 
data on n ​5 ​11 female black bears.
a.	 Fit a multiple regression model to describe the 
relationship between y ​5 ​home-range size and the 
predictors x1 5 ​age and x2 ​5 ​weight.
b.	Construct a normal probability plot of the 11 
standardized residuals. Based on the plot, does it 
seem reasonable to regard the random deviation 
distribution as approximately normal? Explain. 
(Hint: See Example 14.9.)
c.	 If appropriate, carry out a model utility test with a 
significance level of .05 to determine if the predic-
tors age and weight are useful for predicting home-
range size.
14.21	The ability of ecologists to identify regions of greatest 
species richness could have an impact on the pres-
ervation of genetic diversity, a major objective of the 
World Conservation Strategy. The article “Prediction 
of Rarities from Habitat Variables: Coastal Plain Plants on 
Nova Scotian Lakeshores” (Ecology [1992]: 1852–1859) 
used a sample of n 5 37 lakes to obtain the estimated 
regression equation
y⁄ 5 3.89 1 .033x1 1 .024x2 1 .023x3
 1 .008x4 2 .13x5 2 .72x6
Age  
(years)
Weight 
(kg)
Home-Range 
Size (km2)
10.5
54
43.1
  6.5
40
46.6
28.5
62
57.4
  6.5
55
35.6
  7.5
56
62.1
  6.5
62
33.9
  5.5
42
39.6
  7.5
40
32.2
11.5
59
57.2
  9.5
51
24.4
  5.5
50
68.7
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 14.2  Fitting a Model and Assessing Its Utility     727
where y 5 species richness, x1 5 watershed area, x2 5 
shore width, x3 5 drainage (%), x4 5 water color (total 
color units), x5 5 sand (%), and x6 5 alkalinity. The 
coefficient of multiple determination was reported 
as R2 5 .83. Use a test with significance level .01 to 
decide whether the chosen model is useful.
14.22	 The article “Impacts of On-Campus and Off-Campus 
Work on First-Year Cognitive Outcomes” (Journal of Col-
lege Student Development [1994]: 364–370) reported 
on a study in which y 5 spring math comprehension 
score was regressed against x1 5 previous fall test 
score, x2 5 previous fall academic motivation,  
x3 5 age, x4 5 number of credit hours, x5 5 resi-
dence (1 if on campus, 0 otherwise), x6 5 hours 
worked on campus, and x7 5 hours worked off 
campus. 
The sample size was n 5 210, and R2 5 .543. 
Test to see whether there is a useful linear re-
lationship between y and at least one of the 
predictors.
14.23	Is the model fit in Exercise 14.16 useful? Carry out a 
test using a significance level of .10.
14.24	 The accompanying Minitab output results from fitting 
the model described in Exercise 14.14 to data.
Predictor
Coef
Stdev
t-ratio
Constant
86.85
85.39
1.02
X1
-0.12297
0.03276
-3.75
X2
5.090
1.969
2.58
X3
-0.07092
0.01799
-3.94
X4
0.0015380
0.0005560
2.77
S = 4.784         ​R-sq = 90.8%      ​R-sq(adj) = 89.4%
Analysis of Variance
DF
SS
MS
Regression
4
5896.6
1474.2
Error
26
595.1
22.9
Total
30
6491.7
a.	 What is the estimated regression equation?
b.	Using a .01 significance level, perform the model 
utility test. (Hint: See Example 14.9.)
c.	 Interpret the values of R2 and se given in the output.
14.25	 For the multiple regression model in Exercise 14.6, 
the value of R2 was .06 and the adjusted R2 was .06. 
The model was based on a data set with 1136 observa-
tions. Perform a model utility test for this regression.  ​
14.26	 ● This exercise requires the use of a computer pack-
age. The article “Movement and Habitat Use by Lake 
Whitefish During Spawning in a Boreal Lake: Integrat-
ing Acoustic Telemetry and Geographic Information 
Systems” (Transactions of the American Fisheries Society 
[1999]: 939–952) included the accompanying data on 
17 fish caught in 2 consecutive years.
Year
Fish  
Number
Weight 
(g)
Length  
(mm)
Age 
(years)
Year 1
  ​1
  ​776
410
  ​9
  ​2
  ​580
368
11
  ​3
  ​539
357
15
  ​4
  ​648
373
12
  ​5
  ​538
361
  ​9
  ​6
  ​891
385
  ​9
  ​7
  ​673
380
10
  ​8
  ​783
400
12
Year 2
  ​9
  ​571
407
12
10
  ​627
410
13
11
  ​727
421
12
12
  ​867
446
19
13
1042
478
19
14
  ​804
441
18
15
  ​832
454
12
16
  ​764
440
12
17
  ​727
427
12
a.	 Fit a multiple regression model to describe the rela-
tionship between weight and the predictors length 
and age. 
b.	Carry out the model utility test to determine 
whether at least one of the predictors length and 
age are useful for predicting weight.
14.27	● This exercise requires the use of a computer package. 
The authors of the article “Absolute Versus per Unit 
Body Length Speed of Prey as an Estimator of Vulner-
ability to Predation” (Animal Behaviour [1999]: 347–352) 
found that the speed of a prey (twips/s) and the 
length of a prey (twips 3 100) are good predictors 
of the time (s) required to catch the prey. (A twip is a 
measure of distance used by programmers.) Data were 
collected in an experiment in which subjects were 
asked to “catch” an animal of prey moving across his 
or her computer screen by clicking on it with the 
mouse. The investigators varied the length of the prey 
and the speed with which the prey moved across the 
screen. 
The following data are consistent with summary 
values and a graph given in the article. Each value 
represents the average catch time over all subjects. 
The order of the various speed-​length combinations 
was randomized for each subject.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

728  
  Chapter 14  Multiple Regression Analysis
Prey Length
Prey Speed
Catch Time
7
  ​20
1.10
6
  ​20
1.20
5
  ​20
1.23
4
  ​20
1.40
3
  ​20
1.50
3
  ​40
1.40
4
  ​40
1.36
6
  ​40
1.30
7
  ​40
1.28
7
  ​80
1.40
6
  ​60
1.38
5
  ​80
1.40
7
100
1.43
6
100
1.43
7
120
1.70
5
  ​80
1.50
3
  ​80
1.40
6
100
1.50
3
120
1.90
a.	 Fit a multiple regression model for predicting catch 
time using prey length and speed as predictors.
b.	Predict the catch time for an animal of prey whose 
length is 6 and whose speed is 50. ​ ​
c.	 Is the multiple regression model useful for pre-
dicting catch time? Test the relevant hypotheses 
using a 5 .05.
d.	The authors of the article suggest that a simple 
linear regression model with the single predictor
x 5 length
speed
might be a better model for predicting catch time. 
Calculate the x values and use them to fit this 
linear regression model.
e.	 Which of the two models considered (the multiple 
regression model from Part (a) or the simple linear 
regression model from Part (d)) would you recom-
mend for predicting catch time? Justify your choice.
14.28	 ● This exercise requires the use of a computer package. 
The article “Vital Dimensions in Volume Perception: 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Product
Material
Height
Maximum  
Width
Minimum  
Width
Elongation
Volume
 1
glass
7.7
2.50
1.80
1.50
125
2
glass
6.2
2.90
2.70
1.07
135
3
glass
8.5
2.15
2.00
1.98
175
4
glass
10.4
2.90
2.60
1.79
285
5
plastic
8.0
3.20
3.15
1.25
330
6
glass
8.7
2.00
1.80
2.17
90
7
glass
10.2
1.60
1.50
3.19
120
8
plastic
10.5
4.80
3.80
1.09
520
9
plastic
3.4
5.90
5.00
0.29
330
10
plastic
6.9
5.80
4.75
0.59
570
11
tin
10.9
2.90
2.80
1.88
340
12
plastic
9.7
2.45
2.10
1.98
175
13
glass
10.1
2.60
2.20
1.94
240
14
glass
13.0
2.60
2.60
2.50
240
15
glass
13.0
2.70
2.60
2.41
360
16
glass
11.0
3.10
2.90
1.77
310
17
cardboard
8.7
5.10
5.10
0.85
635
18
cardboard
17.1
10.20
10.20
0.84
1250
19
glass
16.5
3.50
3.50
2.36
650
20
glass
16.5
2.70
1.20
3.06
305
21
glass
9.7
3.00
1.70
1.62
315
22
glass
17.8
2.70
1.75
3.30
305
23
glass
14.0
2.50
1.70
2.80
245
24
glass
13.6
2.40
1.20
2.83
200
25
plastic
27.9
4.40
1.20
3.17
1205
26
tin
19.5
7.50
7.50
1.30
2330
27
tin
13.8
4.25
4.25
1.62
730
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 14.2  Fitting a Model and Assessing Its Utility     729
the relationship between y 5 error percentage for  
subjects reading a four-digit liquid crystal display and 
the independent variables x1 5 level of backlight,  
x2 5 character subtense, x3 5 viewing angle, and  
x4 5 level of ambient light. From a table given in the 
article, SSRegr 5 19.2, SSResid 5 20.0, and n 5 30.
a.	 Does the estimated regression equation specify a 
useful relationship between y and the indepen-
dent variables? Use the model utility test with a 
.05 significance level.
b.	Calculate R2 and se for this model. Interpret these 
values.
c.	 Do you think that the estimated regression equa-
tion would provide reasonably accurate predic-
tions of error percentage? Explain.
14.31	The article “Effect of Manual Defoliation on Pole Bean 
Yield” (Journal of Economic Entomology [1984]:  
1019–1023) used a quadratic regression model to 
describe the relationship between y 5 yield (kg/plot) 
and x 5 defoliation level (a proportion between 0 
and 1). The estimated regression equation based on n 
5 24 was  y⁄ 5 12.39 1 6.67x1 2 15.25x2 where x1 
5 x and x2 5 x2. The article also reported that R2 for 
this model was .902. 
Does the quadratic model specify a useful relation-
ship between y and x? Carry out the appropriate test 
using a .01 level of significance.
14.32	 Suppose that a multiple regression data set consists 
of n 5 15 observations. For what values of k, the 
number of model predictors, would the correspond-
ing model with R2 5 .90 be judged useful at signifi-
cance level .05? Does such a large R2 value necessar-
ily imply a useful model? Explain.
14.33	 This exercise requires the use of a computer package. Use 
the data given in Exercise 14.29 to verify that the 
regression function
mean y value 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 b3x3 1 b4x4  
                         1 b5x5
is estimated by
y⁄ 5 2151.36 2 16.22x1 1 13.48x2 1 .094x3
2 .253x4 1 .492x5
14.34	 ●  This exercise requires the use of a computer package. 
The accompanying data resulted from a study of the 
relationship between y 5 brightness of finished paper 
and the independent variables x1 5 hydrogen per-
oxide (% by weight), x2 5 sodium hydroxide (% by 
weight), x3 5 silicate (% by weight), and x4 5 process 
temperature (“Advantages of CE-HDP Bleaching for High 
Brightness Kraft Pulp Production,” TAPPI [1964]: 107A–
173A).
Can the Eye Fool the Stomach?” (Journal of Marketing 
Research [1999]: 313–326) gave the data, shown in the 
table on page 728, on dimensions of 27 representa-
tive food products.
a.	 Fit a multiple regression model for predicting the 
volume (in ml) of a package based on its mini-
mum width, maximum width, and elongation 
score.
b.	Why should we consider adjusted R2 instead of R2 
when attempting to determine the quality of fit of 
the data to our model?
c.	 Perform a model utility test.
14.29	● ▼ The article “The Undrained Strength of Some 
Thawed Permafrost Soils” (Canadian Geotechnical Jour-
nal [1979]: 420–427) contained the accompanying data 
on y 5 shear strength of sandy soil (kPa), x1 5 depth 
(m), and x2 5 water content (%). The predicted val-
ues and residuals were computed using the estimated 
regression equation
y⁄ 5 2151.36 2 16.22x1 1 13.48x2
1 .094x3 2 .253x4 1 .492x5
where x3 5 x 21, x4 5 x 22, and x5 5 x1x2.
y
x1
x2
Predicted y
Residual
14.7
​8.9
31.5
23.35
28.65
48.0
36.6
27.0
46.38
1.62
25.6
36.8
25.9
27.13
21.53
10.0
​6.1
39.1
10.99
20.99
16.0
​6.9
39.2
14.10
1.90
16.8
​6.9
38.3
16.54
0.26
20.7
​7.3
33.9
23.34
22.64
38.8
​8.4
33.8
25.43
13.37
16.9
​6.5
27.9
15.63
1.27
27.0
​8.0
33.1
24.29
2.71
16.0
​4.5
26.3
15.36
0.64
24.9
​9.9
37.8
29.61
24.71
​7.3
​2.9
34.6
15.38
28.08
12.8
​2.0
36.4
​7.96
4.84
a.	 Use the given information to compute SSResid, 
SSTo, and SSRegr.
b.	Calculate R2 for this regression model. How would 
you interpret this value?
c.	 Use the value of R2 from Part (b) and a .05 level of 
significance to conduct the appropriate model utility 
test.
14.30	 The article “Readability of Liquid Crystal Displays: A 
Response Surface” (Human Factors [1983]: 185–190)  
used an estimated regression equation to describe  
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

730  
  Chapter 14  Multiple Regression Analysis
b.	Using a .05 significance level, perform the model 
utility test.
c.	 Interpret the values of the following quantities:  
SSResid, R2, and se.
14.35	●  This exercise requires the use of a computer package. 
The cotton aphid poses a threat to cotton crops. The 
accompanying data on
 y 5 infestation rate saphids/100 leavesd
x1 5 mean temperature s8Cd
x2 5 mean relative humidity
appeared in the article “Estimation of the Economic 
Threshold of Infestation for Cotton Aphid” (Mesopotamia 
Journal of Agriculture [1982]: 71–75). Use the data to 
find the estimated regression equation and assess the 
utility of the multiple regression model
y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 e
y
x1
x2
y
x1
x2
61
21.0
57.0
​77
24.8
48.0
87
28.3
41.5
​93
26.0
56.0
98
27.5
58.0
100
27.1
31.0
104
26.8
36.5
118
29.0
41.0
102
28.3
40.0
​74
34.0
25.0
63
30.5
34.0
​43
28.3
13.0
​27
30.8
37.0
​19
31.0
19.0
​14
33.6
20.0
​23
31.8
17.0
​30
31.3
21.0
​25
33.5
18.5
​67
33.0
24.5
​40
34.5
16.0
​6
34.3
​6.0
​21
34.3
26.0
​18
33.0
21.0
​23
26.5
26.0
​42
32.0
28.0
​56
27.3
24.5
​60
27.8
39.0
​59
25.8
29.0
​82
25.0
41.0
​89
18.5
53.5
​77
26.0
51.0
102
19.0
48.0
108
18.0
70.0
​97
16.3
79.5
x1
x2
x3
x4
y
.2
.2
1.5
145
83.9
.4
.2
1.5
145
84.9
.2
.4
1.5
145
83.4
.4
.4
1.5
145
84.2
.2
.2
3.5
145
83.8
.4
.2
3.5
145
84.7
.2
.4
3.5
145
84.0
.4
.4
3.5
145
84.8
.2
.2
1.5
175
84.5
.4
.2
1.5
175
86.0
.2
.4
1.5
175
82.6
.4
.4
1.5
175
85.1
.2
.2
3.5
175
84.5
.4
.2
3.5
175
86.0
.2
.4
3.5
175
84.0
.4
.4
3.5
175
85.4
.1
.3
2.5
160
82.9
.5
.3
2.5
160
85.5
.3
.1
2.5
160
85.2
.3
.5
2.5
160
84.5
.3
.3
0.5
160
84.7
.3
.3
4.5
160
85.0
.3
.3
2.5
130
84.9
.3
.3
2.5
190
84.0
.3
.3
2.5
160
84.5
.3
.3
2.5
160
84.7
.3
.3
2.5
160
84.6
.3
.3
2.5
160
84.9
.3
.3
2.5
160
84.9
.3
.3
2.5
160
84.5
.3
.3
2.5
160
84.6
a.	 Find the estimated regression equation for the 
model that includes all independent variables, all 
quadratic terms, and all interaction terms.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
AC TIVIT Y 14.1 
Exploring the Relationship Between Number of Predictors  
and Sample Size
This activity requires the use of a statistical computer package 
capable of fitting multiple regression models.
Background: The given data on y, x1, x2, x3, and x4 were 
generated using a computer package capable of producing 
random observations from any specified normal distribution. 
Because the data were generated at random, there is no rea-
son to believe that y is related to any of the proposed predic-
tor variables x1, x2, x3, and x4.
y
x1
x2
x3
x4
20.5
18.6
22.0
17.1
18.5
20.1
23.9
19.1
21.1
21.3
20.0
20.9
20.7
19.4
20.6
21.7
18.7
18.1
20.9
18.1
20.7
21.1
21.7
23.7
17.0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Summary     731
3.	 Make a table that gives the R2, the adjusted R2, and 
se values for each of the models fit in Step 2. Write 
a few sentences describing what happens to each 
of these three quantities as additional variables are 
added to the multiple regression model.
4.	 ​Given the manner in which these data were gener-
ated, what is the implication of what you observed in 
Step 3? What does this suggest about the relationship 
between number of predictors and sample size?
1.	 Construct four scatterplots—one of y versus each of  
x1, x2, x3, and x4. Do the scatterplots look the way 
you expected based on the way the data were gener-
ated? Explain.
2.	 Fit each of the following regression models:
  ​i.	​y with x1
​ ii.	​y with x1 and x2
​iii.	​y with x1 and x2 and x3
 ​ iv.	​y with x1 and x2 and x3 and x4
SUMMARY 
Key Concepts and Formulas
Term or Formula
Comment
Additive multiple  
regression model,  
y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 Á 1 
bkxk 1 e
This equation specifies a general 
probabilistic relationship between y 
and k independent variables x1, x2, Á , 
xk, where a, b1, Á , bk are population 
regression coefficients and a 1 b1x1 
1 b2x2 1 Á 1 bkxk is the population 
regression function (the mean value of y 
for fixed values of x1, x2, Á , xk).
Estimated regression func-
tion, y⁄ 5 a 1 b1x1 1
b2x2 1 Á 1 bkxk
The estimates a, b1, Á , bk of a, b1, Á , 
bk result from applying the principle of 
least squares.
Coefficient of multiple 
determination,
 R2 5 1 2 SSResid
SSTo
The proportion of observed y variation 
that can be explained by the model 
relationship, where SSResid is defined 
as it is in simple linear regression but is 
now based on n 2 (k 1 1) degrees of 
freedom.
Term or Formula
Comment
Adjusted R2
A downward adjustment of R2 that 
depends on the number of predictors k 
and the sample size n.
F distribution
A probability distribution used in 
the multiple regression model utility 
test. An F distribution is specified by a 
numerator df and a denominator df.
F 5
SSRegryk
SSResidysn 2 sk 1 1dd
or 
F 5
R2yk
s1 2 R2dysn 2 sk 1 1dd
The test statistic for testing H0: b1 5  
b2 5 Á 5 bk 5 0, which states that 
there is no useful linear relationship 
between y and any of the model predic-
tors. The F test is upper-tailed and is 
based on numerator df 5 k and denom-
inator df 5 n 2 (k 1 1).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

732
In Chapter 11 methods for testing H0: m1 2 m2 5 0 (that 
is, m1 5 m2), where m1 and m2 are the means of two differ-
ent populations or the mean responses when two different 
treatments are applied were introduced. Many investiga-
tions involve a comparison of more than two population or 
treatment means. 
For example, an investigation was carried out to study 
possible consequences of the high incidence of head inju-
ries among soccer players (“No Evidence of Impaired Neuro-
cognitive Performance in Collegiate Soccer Players,” The American 
Journal of Sports Medicine [2002]: 157–162). Three groups of 
college students (soccer athletes, nonsoccer athletes, and 
a control group consisting of students who did not partici-
pate in intercollegiate sports) were considered in the study, 
and the information on the next page on scores from the 
Hopkins Verbal Learning Test (which measures immediate 
memory recall) was given in the paper:
CHAPTER 15
Analysis of Variance
Chapter 15: Learning Objectives
Students will understand:
●
●how analysis of variance is used to judge whether more than two population 
or treatment means are significantly different.
Students will be able to:
●
●carry out a hypothesis test to determine whether two or more population or 
treatment means are significantly different and interpret the results in context.
●
●use a multiple comparison procedure to identify differences in population or 
treatment means.
James Woodson/Digital Vision/Getty Images 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Let m1, m2, and m3 denote the population mean scores on the Hopkins test for soccer 
athletes, nonsoccer athletes, and students who do not participate in collegiate athletics, re-
spectively. Do the data support the claim that m1 5 m2 5 m3, or does it appear that at least 
two of the m’s are different from one another? This is an example of a single-factor analysis 
of variance (ANOVA) problem, in which the objective is to decide whether the means for 
more than two populations or treatments are equal.
The first two sections of this chapter discuss various aspects of single-factor ANOVA. In 
Sections 15.3 and 15.4 (which can be found online), we consider more complex ANOVA 
situations and methods.
 15.1  
Single-Factor ANOVA and the F Test
Soccer 
Athletes
Nonsoccer 
Athletes
Control
Sample Size
86
95
53
Sample Mean Score
29.90
30.94
29.32
Sample Standard Deviation
3.73
5.14
3.78
When two or more populations or treatments are being compared, the characteristic that 
distinguishes the populations or treatments from one another is called the factor under 
investigation. For example, an experiment might be carried out to compare three differ-
ent methods for teaching reading (three different treatments), in which case the factor of 
interest would be teaching method, a qualitative factor. If the growth of fish raised in waters 
having different salinity levels—0%, 10%, 20%, and 30%—is of interest, the factor salinity 
level is quantitative.
A single-factor analysis of variance (ANOVA) problem involves a comparison of  
k population or treatment means m1, m2, Á , mk. The objective is to test
 H0: m1 5 m2 5 Á 5 mk
against
Ha:  ​At least two of the m’s are different
When comparing populations, the analysis is based on independently selected random 
samples, one from each population. When comparing treatment means, the data typically 
result from an experiment and the analysis assumes random assignment of the experi-
mental units (subjects or objects) to treatments. If, in addition, the experimental units are 
chosen at random from a population of interest, it is also possible to generalize the results 
of the analysis to this population. (See Chapter 2 for a more detailed discussion of conclu-
sions that can reasonably be drawn based on data from an experiment.)
Whether the null hypothesis of a single-factor ANOVA should be rejected depends 
on how substantially the samples from the different populations or treatments differ 
from one another. Figure 15.1 displays observations that might result when random 
samples are selected from each of three populations. Each dotplot displays five obser-
vations from the first population, four observations from the second population, and 
six observations from the third population. For both displays, the three sample means 
are located by arrows. The means of the two samples from Population 1 are identical, 
and a similar statement holds for the two samples from Population 2 and those from 
Population 3.
After looking at the data in Figure 15.1(a), almost anyone would readily agree that the 
claim m1 5 m2 5 m3 appears to be false. Not only are the three sample means different, but 
 15.1   Single-Factor ANOVA and the F Test 
●  733
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

734 
●  Chapter 15  Analysis of Variance
the three samples are also clearly separated. In other words, differences between the three 
sample means are quite large relative to the variability within each sample.
The situation pictured in Figure 15.1(b) is much less clear-cut. The sample means are 
as different as they were in the first data set, but now there is considerable overlap among 
the three samples. The separation between sample means here can plausibly be attributed 
to substantial variability in the populations (and therefore the samples) rather than to 
differences between m1, m2, and m3.
The phrase analysis of variance comes from the idea of analyzing variability in the data to 
see how much can be attributed to differences in the m’s and how much is due to variability 
in the individual populations. In Figure 15.1(a), the within-sample variability is small 
relative to the between-sample variability, whereas in Figure 15.1(b), a great deal more 
of the total variability is due to variability within each sample. If differences between the 
sample means can be explained by within-sample variability, there is no compelling reason 
to reject H0.
Notation and Assumptions
Notation in single-factor ANOVA is a natural extension of the notation used in Chapter 11 
for comparing two population or treatment means.
Figure  15.1
Two possible ANOVA data sets when 
three populations are under 
investigation:  
green circle 5 observation from 
Population 1;  
orange circle 5 observation from 
Population 2;  
blue circle 5 observation from 
Population 3.
Mean of
Sample 1
Mean of
Sample 2
Mean of
Sample 3
(a)
(b)
Mean of
Sample 1
Mean of
Sample 2
Mean of
Sample 3
k 5 number of populations or treatments being compared
ANOVA Notation
Population or treatment
1
2
Á
k
Population or treatment mean
m1 
m2
Á
mk
Population or treatment variance
s12
s22
Á
sk2
Sample size
n1
n2
Á
nk
Sample mean
x1
x2
Á
xk
Sample variance
s 12
s 22
Á
s k2
N 5 n1 1 n2 1 Á 1 nk (the total number of observations in the data set)
T 5 grand total 5 sum of all N observations in the data set  
	 	 5 n1x1 1 n2x2 1 Á 1 nkxk
 x 5 grand mean 5 T
N
A decision between H0 and Ha is based on examining the x values to see whether observed 
differences are small enough to be attributable simply to sampling variability or whether an 
alternative explanation for the differences is more plausible.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Example 15.1 
An Indicator of Heart Attack Risk
The article “Could Mean Platelet Volume Be a Predictive Marker for Acute Myocardial Infarction?” 
(Medical Science Monitor [2005]: 387–392) described an experiment in which four groups of 
patients seeking treatment for chest pain were compared with respect to mean platelet 
volume (MPV, measured in fL). The four groups considered were based on the clinical di-
agnosis and were (1) noncardiac chest pain, (2) stable angina pectoris, (3) unstable angina 
pectoris, and (4) myocardial infarction (heart attack). The purpose of the study was to 
determine if the mean MPV differed for the patients in the four groups, and in particular 
if the mean MPV was different for the heart attack group. If this is the case, MPV could be 
used as an indicator of heart attack risk and an antiplatelet treatment could be administered 
in a timely fashion, potentially reducing the risk of heart attack.
To carry out this study, patients seen for chest pain were divided into groups according to 
diagnosis. The researchers then selected a random sample of 35 from each of the resulting 
k 5 4 groups. The researchers believed that this sampling process would result in samples 
that were representative of the four populations of interest and that could be regarded as 
if they were random samples from these four populations. Table 15.1 presents summary 
values given in the paper.
Group 
Number
Group Description
Sample Size
Sample Mean
Sample Standard 
Deviation
1
Noncardiac chest pain
35
10.89
0.69
2
Stable angina pectoris
35
11.25
0.74
3
Unstable angina pectoris
35
11.37
0.91
4
Myocardial infarction (heart attack)
35
11.75
1.07
Table 15.1  ​Summary Values for MPV Data of Example 15.1
Understand the context ❭
Activated platelet
SCIEPRO/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY/Alamy 
With mi denoting the true mean MPV for group i (i 5 1, 2, 3, 4), let’s consider the null 
hypothesis H0: m1 5 m2 5 m3 5 m4. Figure 15.2 shows a comparative boxplot for the four 
samples (based on data consistent with summary values given in the paper). The mean MPV 
for the heart attack sample is larger than for the other three samples, and the boxplot for the 
heart attack sample appears to be shifted a bit higher than the boxplots for the other three 
samples. However, because the four boxplots show substantial overlap, it is not obvious 
whether H0 is true or false. In situations like this, we need a formal test procedure.

■
Figure  15.2
Boxplots for Example 15.1.
13
12
11
9
10
Noncardiac
Stable angina
Unstable angina
Myocardial infarction
MPV
 15.1   Single-Factor ANOVA and the F Test 
●  735
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

736 
●  Chapter 15  Analysis of Variance
As with the inferential methods of previous chapters, the validity of the ANOVA test for 
H0: m1 5 m2 5 Á 5 mk requires some assumptions.
1.	 Each of the k population or treatment response distributions is normal.
2.	 1 5 2 5 Á 5 k (The k normal distributions have identical standard 
deviations.)
3.	 The observations in the sample from any particular one of the k 
populations or treatments are independent of one another.
4.	 When comparing population means, the k random samples are selected 
independently of one another. When comparing treatment means, 
treatments are assigned at random to subjects or objects (or subjects are 
assigned at random to treatments).
Assumptions for ANOVA
In practice, the test based on these assumptions works well as long as the assumptions 
are not too badly violated. If the sample sizes are reasonably large, normal probability 
plots or boxplots of the data in each sample are helpful in checking the assumption of 
normality. 
Often, however, sample sizes are so small that a separate normal probability plot or 
boxplot for each sample is of little value in checking normality. In this case, a single 
combined plot can be constructed by first subtracting x1 from each observation in the 
first sample, x2 from each value in the second sample, and so on and then constructing 
a normal probability or boxplot of all N deviations from their respective means. The plot 
should be reasonably straight. Figure 15.3 shows such a normal probability plot for the 
data of Example 15.1.
Figure  15.3
A normal probability plot using the 
combined data of Example 15.1.
23
22
21
0
1
2
3
12
13
11
10
9
Normal score
Residual
There is a formal procedure for testing the equality of population standard deviations. 
Unfortunately, it is quite sensitive to even a small departure from the normality 
assumption, so we do not recommend its use. Instead, we suggest that the ANOVA  
F test (to be described later in this section) can safely be used if the largest of the sample 
standard deviations is at most twice the smallest one. The largest standard deviation in 
Example 15.1 is s4 5 1.07, which is only about 1.5 times the smallest standard deviation 
(s1 5 0.69). 
The book Beyond ANOVA: The Basics of Applied Statistics by Rupert (see the references in 
the back of the book) is a good source for alternative methods of analysis if there appears 
to be a violation of assumptions.
The analysis of variance test procedure is based on the following measures of variation 
in the data.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 15.1   Single-Factor ANOVA and the F Test 
●  737
A measure of differences among the sample means is the treatment sum of 
squares, denoted by SSTr and given by 
SSTr 5 n1sx1 2 xd2 1 n2sx2 2 xd2 1 Á 1 nksxk 2 xd2
A measure of variation within the k samples, called error sum of squares and 
denoted by SSE, is
SSe 5 sn1 2 1ds21 1 sn2 2 1ds22 1 Á 1 snk 2 1ds2k
Each sum of squares has an associated df: 
treatment df 5 k 2 1              error df 5 N 2 k
A mean square is a sum of squares divided by its df. In particular,
mean square for treatments 5 MSTr 5 SSTr
k 2 1
mean square for error 5 MSE 5
SSE
N 2 k
The number of error degrees of freedom comes from adding the number of degrees of 
freedom associated with each of the sample variances:
sn1 2 1d 1 sn2 2 1d 1 Á 1 snk 2 1d 5 n1 1 n2 1 Á 1 nk 2 1 2 1 2 Á 2 1
 5 N 2 k
Example 15.2 
Heart Attack Calculations
Let’s return to the mean platelet volume (MPV) data of Example 15.1. The grand mean x 
was computed to be 11.315. Notice that because the sample sizes are all equal, the grand 
mean is just the average of the four sample means (this will not usually be the case when 
the sample sizes are unequal). 
With x1 510.89, x2 511.25, x3 5 11.37, x4 5 11.75, and n1 5 n2 5 n3 5 n4 5 35,
SSTr 5 n1sx1 2 xd2 1 n2sx2 2 xd2 1 Á 1 nksxk 2 xd2
	
5 35s10.89 2 11.315d2 1 35s11.25 2 11.315d2 1 35s11.37 2 11.315d2
1 35s11.75 2 11.315d2
	
5 6.322 1 0.148 1 0.106 1 6.623
	
5 13.199
Because s1 5 0.69, s2 5 0.74, s3 5 0.91, and s4 5 1.07
	
SSE 5 n1 2 1ds21 1 sn2 2 1ds22 1 Á 1 snk 2 1ds2k
	
5 s35 2 1ds0.69d2 1 s35 2 1ds0.74d2 1 s35 2 1ds0.91d2 1 s35 2 1ds1.07d2
	
5 101.888
The numbers of degrees of freedom are
treatment df 5 k 2 1 5 3  ​  ​  ​  ​error df 5 N 2 k 5 35 1 35 1 35 1 35 2 4 5 136
from which
 MSTr 5 SSTr
k 2 1 5 13.199
3
5 4.400
 MSE 5 SSE
N 2 k 5 101.888
136
5 0.749
■
Both MSTr and MSE are statistics whose values can be calculated once sample data are 
available. Each of these statistics varies in value from data set to data set. Both statistics 
MSTr and MSE have sampling distributions, and these sampling distributions have mean 
values. The following box describes the key relationship between MSTr and MSE and the 
mean values of these two statistics.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

738 
●  Chapter 15  Analysis of Variance
When H0 is true sm1 5 m2 5 Á 5 mkd,
	
mMSTr 5 mMSE 
However, when H0 is false,
	
mMSTr . mMSE
and the greater the differences among the m’s, the larger mMSTr will be relative 
to mMSE.
According to this result, when H0 is true, we expect the two mean squares to be close to 
one another, whereas we expect MSTr to substantially exceed MSE when some m’s differ 
greatly from others. This means that a calculated MSTr that is much larger than MSE casts 
doubt on H0.
In Example 15.2, MSTr 5 4.400 and MSE 5 0.749, so MSTr is about 6 times as large as 
MSE. Can this difference be attributed solely to sampling variability, or is the ratio MSTr/
MSE large enough to suggest that H0 is false? Before we can describe a formal test procedure, 
it is necessary to revisit F distributions, first introduced in Chapter 14.
Many ANOVA test procedures are based on a family of probability distributions called 
F distributions. An F distribution always arises in connection with a ratio. A particular 
F distribution is obtained by specifying both numerator degrees of freedom (df1) and 
denominator degrees of freedom (df2).
Figure 15.4 shows an F curve for a particular choice of df1 and df2. All F tests in this 
book are upper-tailed, so P-values are areas under the F curve to the right of the calculated 
values of F.
Tabulation of these upper-tail areas is cumbersome, because there are two degrees of 
freedom rather than just one (as in the case of t distributions). For selected (df1, df2) pairs, 
the F table (Appendix Table 6) gives only the four numbers that capture tail areas .10, .05, 
.01, and .001, respectively. Here are the four numbers for df1 5 4, df2 5 10 along with the 
statements that can be made about the P-value:
Tail area
.10
.05
.01
.001
Value
2.61
3.48
5.99
11.28
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
a
b
c
d
e
a.	 F , 2.61 → tail area 5 P-value . .10
b.	2.61 , F , 3.48 → .05 , P-value , .10
c.	 3.48 , F , 5.99 → .01 , P-value , .05
d.	5.99 , F , 11.28 → .001 , P-value , .01
e.	 F . 11.28 → P-value , .001
If F 5 7.12, then .001 5 P-value , .01. If a test with a , .05 is used, H0 should be re-
jected, because P-value # a. 
The most frequently used statistical computer packages can provide exact P-values for 
F tests.
Figure  15.4
​An F curve and P-value for an 
upper-tailed test.
F curve for particular df1, df2
Shaded area 5 P-value for upper-tailed F test
Calculated F 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Null hypothesis:  ­H0: 1 5 2 5 Á 5 k
Test statistic:  F 5 MSTr
MSE
When H0 is true and the ANOVA assumptions are reasonable, F has an  
F distribution with df1 5 k 2 1 and df2 5 N 2 k.
Values of F more inconsistent with H0 than what was observed in the data are 
values even farther out in the upper tail, so the P-value is the area captured in the 
upper tail of the corresponding F curve. Appendix Table 6, a statistical software 
package, or a graphing calculator can be used to determine P-values for F tests.
The Single-Factor ANOVA F Test
Example 15.3 
Heart Attacks Revisited
The two mean squares for the MPV data given in Example 15.1 were calculated in 
Example 15.2 as
MSTr 5 4.400    ​  ​  ​MSE 5 0.749
The value of the F statistic is then
F 5 MSTr
MSE 5 4.400
0.749 5 5.87
with df1 5 k 2 1 5 3 and df2 5 N 2 k 5 140 2 4 5 136. 
Using df1 5 3 and df2 5 120 (the closest value to 136 that appears in the table), Appendix 
Table 6 shows that 5.78 captures tail area .001. Since 5.87 . 5.78, it follows that P-value 5 
captured tail area , .001. 
The P-value is smaller than any reasonable a, so there is convincing evidence for reject-
ing H0: m1 5 m2 5 Á 5 m4. We can conclude that the mean MPV is not the same for all 
four patient populations. Techniques for determining which means differ are introduced in 
Section 15.2.
■
Example 15.4 
Hormones and Body Fat
 The article “Growth Hormone and Sex Steroid Administration in Healthy Aged Women and 
Men” (Journal of the American Medical Association [2002]: 2282–2292) described an experiment 
to investigate the effect of four treatments on various body characteristics. In this double-
blind experiment, each of 57 female subjects age 65 or older was assigned at random to one 
of the following four treatments: 
1.	 placebo “growth hormone” and placebo “steroid” (denoted by P 1 P); 
2.	 placebo “growth hormone” and the steroid estradiol (denoted by P 1 S);
3.	 growth hormone and placebo “steroid” (denoted by G 1 P); and 
4.	 growth hormone and the steroid estradiol (denoted by G 1 S).
The table on the next page lists data on change in body fat mass over the 26-week 
period following the treatments that are consistent with summary quantities given in 
the article.
Also, N 5 57, grand total 5 265.4, and x 5 265.4
57
5 21.15.
Let’s carry out an F test to see whether actual mean change in body fat mass differs for 
the four treatments.
Interpret the results ❭
Step-by-step technology  
instructions available  
online
 Data set available online
Understand the context ❭
 15.1   Single-Factor ANOVA and the F Test 
●  739
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

740 
●  Chapter 15  Analysis of Variance
Change in Body Fat Mass (kg)
Treatment
P 1 P
P 1 S
G 1 P
G 1 S
0.1
20.1
21.6
23.1
0.6
0.2
20.4
23.2
2.2
0.0
0.4
22.0
0.7
20.4
22.0
22.0
22.0
20.9
23.4
23.3
0.7
21.1
22.8
20.5
0.0
1.2
22.2
24.5
22.6
0.1
21.8
20.7
21.4
0.7
23.3
21.8
1.5
22.0
22.1
22.3
2.8
20.9
23.6
21.3
0.3
23.0
20.4
21.0
21.0
1.0
23.1
25.6
21.0
1.2
22.9
21.6
20.2
n
0.014
0.014
0.013
0.016
x
0.064
20.286
22.023
22.250
s
1.545
1.218
1.264
1.468
s2
2.387
1.484
1.598
2.155
1.	 Let m1, m2, m3, and m4 denote the true mean change in body fat for treatments  
P 1 P, P 1 S, G 1 P, and G 1 S, respectively.
2.	 H0:  ​m1 5 m2 5 m3 5 m4
3.	 Ha:  ​At least two among m1, m2, m3, and m4 are different.
4.	 Significance level:  ​a 5 .01
5.	 Test statistic:  ​F 5 MSTr
MSE
6.	 Assumptions:  ​Figure 15.5 shows boxplots of the data from each of the four 
samples. The boxplots are roughly symmetric, and there are no outliers. The 
largest standard deviation (s1 5 1.545) is not more than twice as big as the 
smallest (s2 5 1.264). The subjects were randomly assigned to treatments. The 
assumptions of ANOVA are reasonable.
7.	 Computation:
SSTr 5 n1sx1 2 xd2 1 n2sx2 2 xd2 1 Á 1 nksxk 2 xd2
5 14s0.064 2 s21.15dd2 1 14s20.286 2 s21.15dd2
1 13s22.023 2 s21.15dd2 1 16s22.250 2 s21.15dd2
5 60.37
    treatment df 5 k 2 1 5 3
 Data set available online
Do the work ❭
Formulate a plan ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SSE 5 sn1 2 1ds21 1 sn2 2 1ds22 1 Á 1 snk 2 1ds2k
5 13s2.387d 1 13s1.484d 1 12s1.598d 1 15s2.155d
5 101.81
     error df 5 N 2 k 5 57 2 4 5 53
  Thus,
  F 5 MSTr
MSE 5 SSTrytreatment df
SSEyerror df
5
60.37y3
101.81y53 5 20.12
1.92 5 10.48
	 8.	 P-value:  ​Appendix Table 6 shows that for df1 5 3 and df2 5 60 (the closest 
tabled df to df 5 53), the value 6.17 captures upper-tail area .001. Because F 5 
10.48 . 6.17, it follows P-value , .001.
	 9.	 Conclusion:  ​Since P-value # a, we reject H0. There is convincing evidence that 
mean change in body fat mass is not the same for all four treatments.	
■
Summarizing an ANOVA
ANOVA calculations are often summarized in a tabular format called an ANOVA table. To 
understand such a table, we must define one more sum of squares.
Total sum of squares, denoted by SSTo, is given by 
SSTo 5 o
all N obs.
sx 2 xd2
with associated df 5 N 2 1.
The relationship between the three sums of squares SSTo, SSTr, and SSE is 
SSTo 5 SSTr 1 SSE 
which is called the fundamental identity for single-factor ANOVA.
The quantity SSTo, the sum of squared deviations about the grand mean, is a measure 
of total variability in the data set consisting of all k samples. The quantity SSE results from 
measuring variability separately within each sample and then combining as indicated in 
the formula for SSE. Such within-sample variability is present regardless of whether or not 
H0 is true. The magnitude of SSTr, on the other hand, does depend on whether the null 
hypothesis is true or false. The more the m’s differ from one another, the larger SSTr will 
tend to be. This means that SSTr represents variability that can (at least to some extent) be 
explained by any differences between means. An informal paraphrase of the fundamental 
identity for single-factor ANOVA is
Interpret the results ❭
Figure  15.5
Boxplots for the data of Example 15.4.
3
2
1
0
26
25
24
23
22
21
P 1 P
P 1 S
G 1 P
G 1 S
Change in body fat mass
 15.1   Single-Factor ANOVA and the F Test 
●  741
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

742 
●  Chapter 15  Analysis of Variance
total variation 5 explained variation 1 unexplained variation
Once any two of the sums of squares have been calculated, the remaining one is eas-
ily obtained from the fundamental identity. Often SSTo and SSTr are calculated first 
(using computational formulas given in the online appendix to this chapter), and then 
SSE is obtained by subtraction: SSE 5 SSTo 2 SSTr. All the degrees of freedom, sums of 
squares, and mean squares are entered in an ANOVA table, as displayed in Table 15.2. 
The P-value usually appears to the right of F when the analysis is done by a statistical 
software package.
Source of Variation
df
Sum of Squares
Mean Square
F
Treatments
k 2 1
SSTr
MSTr 5 SSTr
k 2 1
F 5 MSTr
MSe
Error
N 2 k
SSE
MSe 5 SSe
N 2 k
Total
N 2 1
SSTo
Table 15.2  General Format for a Single-Factor ANOVA Table
An ANOVA table from Minitab for the change in body fat mass data of Example 15.4 is 
shown in Table 15.3. The reported P-value is .000, consistent with our previous conclusion 
that P-value , .001.
Source
DF
SS
MS
F
P
Factor
3
60.37
20.12
10.48
0.000
Error
53
101.81
1.92
Total
56
162.18
Table 15.3  An ANOVA Table from Minitab for the Data of Example 15.4
EXERCISES 15.1 - 15.13
15.1	 Give as much information as you can about the  
P-value for an upper-tailed F test in each of the 
following situations:
a.	 df1 5 4, df2 5 15, F 5 5.37  ​
b.	df1 5 4, df2 5 15, F 5 1.90  ​
c.	 df1 5 4, df2 5 15, F 5 4.89  ​
d.	df1 5 3, df2 5 20, F 5 14.48  ​
e.	 df1 5 3, df2 5 20, F 5 2.69 
f.	 df1 5 4, df2 5 50, F 5 3.24
15.2	 Give as much information as you can about the  
P-value of the single-factor ANOVA F test in each of  
the following situations:
a.	 k 5 5, n1 5 n2 5 n3 5 n4 5 n5 5 4, F 5 5.37
b.	k 5 5, n1 5 n2 5 n3 5 5, n4 5 n5 5 4, F 5 2.83 
c.	 k 5 3, n1 5 4, n2 5 5, n3 5 6, F 5 5.02 
d.	k 5 3, n1 5 n2 5 4, n3 5 6, F 5 15.90 
e.	 k 5 4, n1 5 n2 5 15, n3 5 12, n4 5 10, F 5 1.75
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	15.3	 Employees of a certain state university system can 
choose from among four different health plans. 
Each plan differs somewhat from the others in 
terms of hospitalization coverage. Four random 
samples of recently hospitalized individuals were 
selected, each sample consisting of people covered 
by a different health plan. The length of the hospi-
tal stay (number of days) was determined for each 
individual selected.
a.	 What hypotheses would you test to decide whether 
mean length of stay was related to health plan? 
(Note: Carefully define the population characteris-
tics of interest.)
b.	If each sample consisted of eight individuals and 
the value of the ANOVA F statistic was F 5 4.37, 
what conclusion would be appropriate for a test with 
a 5 .01? (Hint: See Example 15.4.) 
c.	 Answer the question posed in Part (b) if the F value 
given there resulted from sample sizes n1 5 9, n2 5 8, 
n3 5 7, and n4 5 8.  ​  ​
	15.4	 The accompanying summary statistics for a measure 
of social marginality for samples of youths, young 
adults, adults, and seniors appeared in the paper 
“Perceived Causes of Loneliness in Adulthood” (Journal of 
Social Behavior and Personality [2000]: 67–84). The social 
marginality score measured actual and perceived 
social rejection, with higher scores indicating greater 
social rejection. 
For purposes of this exercise, assume that it is rea-
sonable to regard the four samples as representative of 
the U.S. population in the corresponding age groups 
and that the distributions of social marginality scores 
for these four groups are approximately normal with 
the same standard deviation. 
Is there evidence that the mean social marginality 
scores are not the same for all four age groups? Test 
the relevant hypotheses using a 5 .01. (Hint: See 
Example 15.4.) 
Age Group
Youths
Young 
Adults
Adults
Seniors
Sample Size
106
255
314
36
x
2.00
3.40
3.07
2.84
s
1.56
1.68
1.66
1.89
	15.5	
 The authors of the paper “Age and Violent Content 
Labels Make Video Games Forbidden Fruits for Youth” 
(Pediatrics [2009]: 870–876) carried out an experiment to  
determine if restrictive labels on video games actu-
ally increased the attractiveness of the game for young 
game players. Participants read a description of a new 
video game and were asked how much they wanted to 
play the game. The description also included an age 
rating. Some participants read the description with an 
age restrictive label of 71, indicating that the game 
was not appropriate for children under the age of 7. 
Others read the same description, but with an age 
restrictive label of 121, 161, or 181. 
The data below for 12- to 13-year-old boys are 
fictitious, but are consistent with summary statistics 
given in the paper. (The sample sizes in the actual 
experiment were larger.) For purposes of this exer-
cise, you can assume that the boys were assigned at 
random to one of the four age label treatments (71, 
121, 161, and 181). Data shown are the boys’ 
ratings of how much they wanted to play the game 
on a scale of 1 to 10. 
Do the data provide convincing evidence that the 
mean rating associated with the game description by 
12- to 13-year-old boys is not the same for all four 
restrictive rating labels? Test the appropriate hy-
potheses using a significance level of .05. (Hint: See 
Example 15.4.) 
71 label
121 label
161 label
181 label
6
8
7
10
6
7
9
  9
6
8
8
  6
5
5
6
  8
4
7
7
  7
8
9
4
  6
6
5
8
  8
1
8
9
  9
2
4
6
10
4
7
7
  8
	15.6	
 The paper referenced in the previous exercise also 
gave data for 12- to 13-year-old girls. Data consistent 
with summary values in the paper are shown below. 
Do the data provide convincing evidence that the mean 
rating associated with the game description for 12- to 
13-year-old girls is not the same for all four age restric-
tive rating labels? Test the appropriate hypotheses 
using a 5 .05.
71 label
121 label
161 label
181 label
  4
4
  6
  8
  7
5
  4
  6
  6
4
  8
  6
  5
6
  6
  5
  3
3
10
  7
  6
5
  8
  4
  4
3
  6
10
  5
8
  6
  6
10
5
  8
  8
  5
9
  5
  7
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
 15.1   Single-Factor ANOVA and the F Test 
●  743
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

744 
●  Chapter 15  Analysis of Variance
	15.7	
 The paper “Women’s and Men’s Eating Behavior 
Following Exposure to Ideal-Body Images and Text” 
(Communication Research [2006]: 507–529) describes an 
experiment in which 74 men were assigned at random 
to one of four treatments:
1.  Viewed slides of fit, muscular men
2.  Viewed slides of fit, muscular men accompanied 
by diet and fitness-related text
3.  Viewed slides of fit, muscular men accompanied 
by text not related to diet and fitness
4.  Did not view any slides
The participants then went to a room to complete 
a questionnaire. In this room, bowls of pretzels were 
set out on the tables. A research assistant noted how 
many pretzels were consumed by each participant 
while completing the questionnaire. Data consistent 
with summary quantities given in the paper are given 
in the accompanying table. 
Do these data provide convincing evidence that the 
mean number of pretzels consumed is not the same for 
all four treatments? Test the relevant hypotheses using a 
significance level of .05.
Treatment 1
Treatment 2
Treatment 3
Treatment 4
  8
  6
1
5
  7
  8
5
2
  4
  0
2
5
13
  4
0
7
  2
  9
3
5
  1
  8
0
2
  5
  6
3
0
  8
  2
4
0
11
  7
4
3
  5
  8
5
4
  1
  8
5
2
  0
  5
7
4
  6
14
8
1
  4
  9
4
1
10
  0
0
  7
  6
6
  0
  3
3
12
12
  5
  6
10
  8
Treatment 1
Treatment 2
Treatment 3
Treatment 4
  6
  2
10
	15.8	 Can use of an online plagiarism-detection system reduce 
plagiarism in student research papers? The paper “Pla-
giarism and Technology: A Tool for Coping with Plagiarism” 
(Journal of Education for Business [2005]: 149–152) ­describes 
a study in which randomly selected research papers 
submitted by students during five semesters were 
analyzed for plagiarism. For each paper, the percentage 
of plagiarized words in the paper was determined by an 
online analysis. In each of the five semesters, students 
were told during the first two class meetings that they 
would have to submit an electronic version of their 
research papers and that the papers would be reviewed 
for plagiarism. Suppose that the number of papers 
sampled in each of the five semesters and the means 
and standard deviations for percentage of plagiarized 
words are as given in the accompanying table. 
For purposes of this exercise, assume that the 
conditions necessary for the ANOVA F test are 
reasonable. Do these data provide evidence to support 
the claim that mean percentage of plagiarized words is 
not the same for all five semesters? Test the appropriate 
hypotheses using a 5 .05.
Semester
n
Mean
Standard deviation
1
39
6.31
3.75
2
42
3.31
3.06
3
32
1.79
3.25
4
32
1.83
3.13
5
34
1.50
2.37
	15.9	
 The experiment described in Example 15.4 also gave 
data on change in body fat mass for men (“Growth 
Hormone and Sex Steroid Administration in Healthy 
Aged Women and Men,” Journal of the American Medical 
Association [2002]: 2282–2292). Each of 74 male subjects 
who were over age 65 was assigned at random to one 
of the following four treatments: 
1.  placebo “growth hormone” and placebo “steroid” 
(denoted by P 1 P); 
2.  placebo “growth hormone” and the steroid testos-
terone (denoted by P 1 S); 
3.  growth hormone and placebo “steroid” (denoted 
by G 1 P); and 
4.  growth hormone and the steroid testosterone (de-
noted by G 1 S). 
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
continued
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The accompanying table lists data on change in body fat mass 
over the 26-week period following the treatment that are con-
sistent with summary quantities given in the article.
Change in Body Fat Mass (kg)
Treatment
P 1 P
P 1 S
G 1 P
G 1 S
0.3
23.7
23.8
25.0
0.4
21.0
23.2
25.0
21.7
0.2
24.9
23.0
20.5
22.3
25.2
22.6
22.1
1.5
22.2
26.2
1.3
21.4
23.5
27.0
0.8
1.2
24.4
24.5
1.5
22.5
20.8
24.2
21.2
23.3
21.8
25.2
20.2
0.2
24.0
26.2
1.7
0.6
21.9
24.0
1.2
20.7
23.0
23.9
0.6
20.1
21.8
23.3
0.4
23.1
22.9
25.7
21.3
0.3
22.9
24.5
20.2
20.5
22.9
24.3
0.7
20.8
23.7
24.0
20.7
24.2
20.9
24.7
22.0
20.6
n
0.117
0.121
0.117
0.119
x
0.100
20.933
23.112
24.605
s
1.139
1.443
1.178
1.122
s2
1.297
2.082
1.388
1.259
Also, N 5 74, grand total 5 2158.3, and 
x 5 2158.3
74
5  22.139. 
Carry out an F test to determine if mean change in 
body fat mass differs for the four treatments.
	15.10	
 The article “Compression of Single-Wall Corrugated Ship-
ping Containers Using Fixed and Floating Text Platens” (Jour-
nal of Testing and Evaluation [1992]: 318–320) described 
an experiment in which several different types of boxes 
were compared with respect to compression strength  
(in pounds). The data at the top of page 746 resulted 
from a single-factor experiment involving k 5 4 types of 
boxes (the sample means and the standard deviations are 
in close agreement with values given in the paper). 
Do these data provide evidence to support the claim 
that the mean compression strength is not the same 
for all four box types? Test the relevant hypothesis us-
ing a significance level of .01.
	15.11	​In the introduction to this chapter, we considered 
a study comparing three groups of college students 
(soccer athletes, nonsoccer athletes, and a control 
group consisting of students who did not participate 
in intercollegiate sports). The following table gives 
information on scores from the Hopkins Verbal Learn-
ing Test (which measures immediate memory recall).
Soccer 
Athletes
Nonsoccer 
Athletes
Control
Sample size
86
95
53
Sample mean score
29.90
30.94
29.32
Sample standard  
  deviation
  ​3.73
  ​5.14
  ​3.78
In addition, x 5 30.19. Suppose that it is reasonable 
to regard these three samples as random samples from 
the three student populations of interest. 
Is there sufficient evidence to conclude that the 
mean Hopkins score is not the same for the three 
student populations? Use a 5 .05.
	15.12	
 The accompanying data on calcium content of 
wheat are consistent with summary quantities that ap-
peared in the article “Mineral Contents of Cereal Grains 
as Affected by Storage and Insect Infestation” (Journal of 
Stored Products Research [1992]: 147–151). Four different 
storage times were considered. Partial output from the 
SAS computer package is also shown.
Storage 
Period
Observations
0 months
58.75
57.94
58.91
56.85
55.21
57.30
1 month
58.87
56.43
56.51
57.67
59.75
58.48
2 months
59.13
60.38
58.01
59.95
59.51
60.34
4 months
62.32
58.76
60.03
59.36
59.61
61.95
Dependent Variable: CALCIUM
Sum of
Mean
Source
DF
Squares
Square
F Value
Pr>F
Model
3
32.13815000
10.71271667
6.51
0.0030
Error
20
32.90103333
1.64505167
Corrected Total 23
65.03918333
R-Square
C.V.
Root MSE
CALCIUM Mean
0.494135
2.180018
1.282596
58.8341667
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
 15.1   Single-Factor ANOVA and the F Test 
●  745
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

746 
●  Chapter 15  Analysis of Variance
a.	 Verify that the sums of squares and df’s are as given 
in the ANOVA table.
b.	Is there sufficient evidence to conclude that the 
mean calcium content is not the same for the four 
different storage times? Use the value of F from the 
ANOVA table to test the appropriate hypotheses at 
significance level .05.
	15.13	​In an experiment to investigate the performance of 
four different brands of spark plugs intended for use 
on a 125-cc motorcycle, five plugs of each brand were 
tested, and the number of miles (at a constant speed) 
until failure was observed. A partially completed 
ANOVA table is given. Fill in the missing entries, 
and test the relevant hypotheses using a .05 level of 
significance. (Hint: See Table 15.2.)
Source of 
Variation
df
Sum of 
Squares
Mean 
Square
F
Treatments
Error
235,419.04
Total
310,500.76
​
Table for Exercise 15.10
Type of Box
Compression Strength (lb)
Sample 
Mean
Sample SD
1
655.5
788.3
734.3
721.4
679.1
699.4
713.00
46.55
2
789.2
772.5
786.9
686.1
732.1
774.8
756.93
40.34
3
737.1
639.0
696.3
671.7
717.2
727.1
698.07
37.20
4
535.1
628.7
542.4
559.0
586.9
520.0
562.02
39.87
x 5 682.50
 15.2  
Multiple Comparisons
When Ho: m1 5 m2 5 Á 5 mk is rejected by the F test, we believe that there are differences 
among the k population or treatment means. A natural question to ask then is, Which 
means differ? For example, with k 5 4, it might be the case that m1 5 m2 5 m4, with m3 
different from the other three means. Another possibility is that m1 5 m4 and m2 5 m3. Still 
another possibility is that all four means are different from one another. 
A multiple comparisons procedure is a method for identifying differences among the 
m’s once the hypothesis of overall equality has been rejected. We present one such method, 
the Tukey-Kramer (T-K) multiple comparisons procedure.
The T-K procedure is based on computing confidence intervals for the difference between each 
possible pair of m’s. For example, for k 5 3, there are three differences to consider:
m1 2 m2  ​  ​  ​  ​m1 2 m3  ​  ​  ​  ​m2 2 m3
(The difference m2 2 m1 is not considered, because the interval for m1 2 m2 provides the 
same information. Similarly, intervals for m3 2 m1 and m3 2 m2 are not necessary.) 
Once all confidence intervals have been computed, each is examined to determine 
whether the interval includes 0. If a particular interval does not include 0, the two means 
are declared “significantly different” from one another. An interval that does include 0 sup-
ports the conclusion that there is no significant difference between the means involved.
Suppose, for example, that k 5 3 and that the three confidence intervals are
Difference
T-K Confidence Interval
m1 2 m2
(2.9, 3.5)
m1 2 m3
(2.6, 7.0)
m2 2 m3
(1.2, 5.7)
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 15.2   Multiple Comparisons 
●  747
Because the interval for m1 2 m2 includes 0, we judge that m1 and m2 do not differ 
significantly. The other two intervals do not include 0, so we conclude that m1 ? m3 and 
m2 ? m3.
The T-K intervals are based on critical values for a probability distribution called the 
Studentized range distribution. These critical values appear in Appendix Table 7. To find a 
critical value, enter the table at the column corresponding to the number of populations 
or treatments being compared, move down to the rows corresponding to the number of 
error degrees of freedom, and select either the value for a 95% confidence level or the one 
for a 99% level.
When there are k populations or treatments being compared, k sk 1d
2
 
conﬁdence intervals must be computed. 
Denoting the relevant Studentized range critical value (from Appendix Table 7) 
by q, the intervals are as follows: 
For mi  mj:    sxi xjd 6 qÎ
MSE
2  1
1
ni 1 1
nj2
Two means are judged to differ signiﬁcantly if the corresponding interval does 
not include zero.
The Tukey-Kramer (T-K) Multiple Comparison Procedure
If the sample sizes are all the same, we can use n to denote the common value of  
n1, Á , nk. In this case, the 6 term for each interval is the same quantity 
qÎ
MSE
n
Example 15.5 
Hormones and Body Fat Revisited
 Example 15.4 introduced the accompanying data on change in body fat mass resulting 
from a double-blind experiment designed to compare the following four treatments: 
1.	 placebo “growth hormone” and placebo “steroid” (denoted by P 1 P); 
2.	 placebo “growth hormone” and the steroid estradiol (denoted by P 1 S); 
3.	 growth hormone and placebo “steroid” (denoted by G 1 P); and 
4.	 growth hormone and the steroid estradiol (denoted by G 1 S).
From Example 15.4, MSTr 5 20.12, MSE 5 1.92, and F 5 10.48 with an associated 
P-value , .001. We concluded that the mean change in body fat mass is not the same for 
all four treatments.
Appendix Table 7 gives the 95% Studentized range critical value q 5 3.74 (using 
k 5 4 and error df 5 60, the closest tabled value to df 5 N 2 k 5 53). The first two T-K 
intervals are
m1 2 m2: s0.064 2 s20.286dd 6 3.74 Î1
1.92
2 21
1
14 1 1
142
	
5 0.35 6 1.39
	
5 s21.04, 1.74d
Understand the context ❭
Do the work ❭
← Includes 0
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

748 
●  Chapter 15  Analysis of Variance
Change in Body Fat Mass (kg)
Treatment
P 1 P
P 1 S
G 1 P
G 1 S
0.1
20.1
21.6
23.1
0.6
0.2
20.4
23.2
2.2
0.0
0.4
22.0
0.7
20.4
22.0
22.0
22.0
20.9
23.4
23.3
0.7
21.1
22.8
20.5
0.0
1.2
22.2
24.5
22.6
0.1
21.8
20.7
21.4
0.7
23.3
21.8
1.5
22.0
22.1
22.3
2.8
20.9
23.6
21.3
0.3
23.0
20.4
21.0
21.0
1.0
23.1
25.6
21.0
1.2
22.9
21.6
20.2
n
0.014
0.014
0.013
0.016
x
0.064
20.286
22.023
22.250
s
1.545
1.218
1.264
1.468
s2
2.387
1.484
1.598
2.155
m1 2 m3: s0.064 2 s22.023dd 6 3.74 Î1
1.92
2 21
1
14 1 1
132
	
5 2.09 6 1.41
	
5 s0.68, 3.50d
The remaining intervals are
m1 2 m4	
(0.97, 3.66)	
← Does not include 0
m2 2 m3	
(0.32, 3.15)	
← Does not include 0
m2 2 m4	
(0.62, 3.31)	
← Does not include 0
m3 2 m4	
(21.145, 1.60)	 ← Includes 0
We would conclude that m1 is not significantly different from m2 and that m3 is not signif-
icantly different from m4. We would also conclude that m1 and m2 are significantly different 
from both m3 and m4. Notice that Treatments 1 and 2 were treatments that administered 
a placebo in place of the growth hormone and Treatments 3 and 4 were treatments that 
included the growth hormone. This analysis was the basis of the researchers’ conclusion 
that growth hormone, with or without sex steroids, decreased body fat mass.
■
Minitab can be used to construct T-K intervals if raw data are available. Typical output 
(based on Example 15.5) is shown in Figure 15.6. From the output, we see that the 
confidence interval for m1 (P 1 P) 2 m2 (P 1 S) is (21.039, 1.739), that for m2 (P 1 S) 2 
m4 (G 1 S) is (0.619, 3.309), and so on.
← Does not include 0
Interpret the results ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 15.2   Multiple Comparisons 
●  749
Figure  15.6
​The T-K intervals for Example 15.5 
(from Minitab).
Tukey 95% Simultaneous Conﬁdence Intervals
All Pairwise Comparisons
Individual conﬁdence level = 98.95%
G + S subtracted from:
G + P
G + P subtracted from:
-1.145
0.227
1.599
P + S
0.619
1.964
3.309
P + P
0.969
2.314
3.659
Lower
Center
Upper
P + S
0.322
1.737
3.153
P + P
0.672
2.087
3.503
Lower
Center
Upper
P + S subtracted from:
P + P
-1.039
0.350
-2.0
--------+---------+---------+---------+-
--------+---------+---------+---------+-
(------*------)
0.0
2.0
4.0
-2.0
--------+---------+---------+---------+-
--------+---------+---------+---------+-
(------*-------)
(------*-----)
(------*------)
(------*------)
(------*------)
0.0
2.0
4.0
-2.0
--------+---------+---------+---------+-
--------+---------+---------+---------+-
0.0
2.0
4.0
1.739
Lower
Center
Upper
Why calculate the T-K intervals rather than use the t confidence interval for a 
difference between m’s from Chapter 11? The answer is that the T-K intervals control 
the simultaneous confidence level at approximately 95% (or 99%). That is, if the 
procedure is used repeatedly on many different data sets, in the long run only about 
5% (or 1%) of the time would at least one of the intervals not include the value of what 
the interval is estimating. 
Consider using separate 95% t intervals, each one having a 5% error rate. In those 
instances, the chance that at least one interval would make an incorrect statement 
about a difference in m’s increases dramatically with the number of intervals calcu-
lated. The Minitab output in Figure 15.6 shows that to achieve a simultaneous confi-
dence level of about 95% (experimentwise or “family” error rate of 5%) when k 5 4 
and error df 5 76, the individual confidence level must be 98.95% (individual error 
rate 1.05%).
An effective display for summarizing the results of any multiple comparisons proce-
dure involves listing the x’s and underscoring pairs judged to be not significantly dif-
ferent. The process for constructing such a display is described in the box at the top of 
page 750.
To illustrate this summary procedure, suppose that four samples with x1 5 19, x2 5 27, 
x3 5 24, and x4 5 10 are used to test H0: m1 5 m2 5 m3 5 m4 and that this hypothesis 
is rejected. Suppose the T-K confidence intervals indicate that m2 is significantly different 
from both m1 and m4, and that there are no other significant differences. The resulting sum-
mary display would then be
Population
  ​4
  ​1
  ​3
  ​2
Sample mean
10
19
24
27
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

750 
●  Chapter 15  Analysis of Variance
1.	 List the sample means in increasing order, identifying the corresponding 
population just above the value of each x.
2.	 Use the T-K intervals to determine the group of means that do not differ 
signiﬁcantly from the ﬁrst in the list. Draw a horizontal line extending 
from the smallest mean to the last mean in the group identiﬁed. For 
example, if there are ﬁve means, arranged in order,
Population
3
2
1
4
5
Sample mean
x3
x2
x1
x4
x5
and m3 is judged to be not signiﬁcantly different from m2 or m1, 
but is judged to be sig­niﬁ­cantly different from m4 and m5, draw the 
following line:
Population
3
2
1
4
5
Sample mean
x3
x2
x1
x4
x5
3.	 Use the T-K intervals to determine the group of means that are not 
signiﬁcantly different from the second smallest mean. (You need consider 
only means that appear to the right of the mean under consideration.) If 
there is already a line connecting the second smallest mean with all means 
in the new group identiﬁed, no new line need be drawn. If this entire 
group of means is not underscored with a single line, draw a line extend-
ing from the second smallest mean to the last mean in the new group. 
Continuing with our example, if m2 is not signiﬁcantly different from m1 
but is signiﬁcantly different from m4 and m5, no new line need be drawn. 
However, if m2 is not signiﬁcantly different from either m1 or m4 but is 
judged to be different from m5, a second line is drawn as shown:
Population
3
2
1
4
5
Sample mean
x3
x2
x1
x4
x5
4.	 Continue considering the means in the order listed, adding new lines as needed.
Summarizing the Results of the Tukey-Kramer Procedure
Example 15.6 
Sleep Time
 A biologist wished to study the effects of ethanol on sleep time. A sample of 20 rats of 
the same age was selected, and each rat was given an oral injection having a particular con-
centration of ethanol per body weight. The rapid eye movement (REM) sleep time for each 
rat was then recorded for a 24-hour period, with the results shown in the following table:
Understand the context ❭
Step-by-step technology  
instructions available  
online
Treatment
Observations
x
1.  ​0 (control)
88.6
73.2
91.4
68.0
75.2
79.28
2.  ​1 g/kg
63.0
53.9
69.2
50.1
71.5
61.54
3.  ​2 g/kg
44.9
59.5
40.2
56.3
38.7
47.92
4.  ​4 g/kg
31.0
39.6
45.3
25.2
22.7
32.76
Table 15.4 (an ANOVA table from SAS) leads to the conclusion that actual mean REM 
sleep time is not the same for all four treatments; the P-value for the F test is .0001.
 Data set available online
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 15.2   Multiple Comparisons 
●  751
The T-K intervals are
Difference
Interval
Includes 0?
m1 2 m2
17.74 6 17.446
no
m1 2 m3
31.36 6 17.446
no
m1 2 m4
46.24 6 17.446
no
m2 2 m3
13.08 6 17.446
yes
m2 2 m4
28.78 6 17.446
no
m3 2 m4
15.16 6 17.446
yes
The only T-K intervals that include zero are those for m2 2 m3 and m3 2 m4. 
The corresponding underscoring pattern is
x4
x3
x2
x1
32.76
47.92
61.54
79.28
Figure 15.7 displays the SAS output that agrees with our underscoring; letters are used 
to indicate groupings in place of the underscoring.

■
Do the work ❭
Interpret the results ❭
Analysis of Variance Procedure
Dependent Variable: TIME
Sum of
Mean
Source
DF
Squares
Square
F Value
Pr > F
Model
3
5882.35750
1960.78583
21.09
0.0001
Error
16
1487.40000
92.96250
Total
19
7369.75750
Table 15.4  SAS ANOVA Table for Example 15.6
Figure  15.7
SAS output for Example 15.6.
Alpha 5 0.05 df 5 16 MSE 5 92.9625
Critical Value of Studentized Range 5 4.046
Minimum Signiﬁcant Difference 5 17.446
Means with the same letter are not signiﬁcantly different.
Tukey Grouping
Mean
N
Treatment
A
79.280
5
0 (control)
B
61.540
5
1 g/kg
C
B
47.920
5
2 g/kg
C
32.760
5
4 g/kg
Example 15.7 
Roommate Satisfaction
How satisfied are college students with dormitory roommates? The article “Roommate 
Satisfaction and Ethnic Identity in Mixed-Race and White University Roommate Dyads” (Journal 
of College Student Development [1998]: 194–199) investigated differences among randomly 
assigned African American/white, Asian/white, Hispanic/white, and white/white 
roommate pairs. The researchers used a one-way ANOVA to analyze scores on the Room-
mate Relationship Inventory to see whether a difference in mean score existed for the 
four types of roommate pairs. They reported “significant differences among the means 
(P , .01). Follow-up Tukey [intervals] Á indicated differences between White dyads  
(M 5 77.49) and African American/White dyads (M 5 71.27). Á No other significant 
differences were found.”
Understand the context ❭
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

752 
●  Chapter 15  Analysis of Variance
Although the mean satisfaction score for the Asian/white and Hispanic/white groups were 
not given, they must have been between 77.49 (the mean for the white/white pairs) and 
71.27 (the mean for the African American/white pairs). (If they had been larger than 77.49, 
they would have been significantly different from the African American/white pairs mean, 
and if they had been smaller than 71.27, they would have been significantly different from 
the white/white pairs mean.) An underscoring consistent with the reported information is
White/White
Hispanic/
White and 
Asian/White
African-American/
White

■
	15.14	 ​Leaf surface area is an important variable in plant 
gas-exchange rates. Dry matter per unit surface area 
(mg/cm 3) was measured for trees raised under three 
different growing conditions. Let m1, m2, and m3 rep-
resent the mean dry matter per unit surface area for 
the growing conditions 1, 2, and 3, respectively. The 
given 95% simultaneous confidence intervals are
Difference
Interval
m1 2 m2:
(23.11, 21.11)
m1 2 m3:
(24.06, 22.06)
m2 2 m3:
(21.95, 0.05)
Which of the following four statements do you think 
describes the relationship between m1, m2, and m3? 
Explain your choice. (Hint: See Example 15.5.)
a.	 m1 5 m2, and m3 differs from m1 and m2.
b.	m1 5 m3, and m2 differs from m1 and m3.
c.	 m2 5 m3, and m1 differs from m2 and m3.
d.	All three m’s are different from one another.
	15.15	The paper “Trends in Blood Lead Levels and Blood Lead 
Testing among U.S. Children Aged 1 to 5 Years” (Pediatrics 
[2009]: e376–e385) gave data on blood lead levels (in 
mg/dL) for samples of children living in homes that 
had been classified either at low, medium, or high 
risk of lead exposure based on when the home was 
constructed. After using a multiple comparison proce-
dure, the authors reported the following:
1.  The difference in mean blood lead level between low-
risk housing and medium-risk housing was significant.
2.  The difference in mean blood lead level between low-
risk housing and high-risk housing was significant.
3.  The difference in mean blood lead level between 
medium-risk housing and high-risk housing was 
significant.
Which of the following sets of T-K intervals (Set 1, 2, or 3) 
is consistent with the authors’ conclusions? Explain your 
choice. (Hint: See Example 15.5.)
mL 5 mean blood lead level for children living in low-
risk housing
mM 5 mean blood lead level for children living in 
medium-risk housing
mH 5 mean blood lead level for children living in 
high-risk housing
Difference
Set 1
Set 2
Set 3
mL 2 mM
(20.6, 0.1)
(20.6, 20.1)
(20.6, 20.1)
mL 2 mH
(21.5, 20.6)
(21.5, 20.6)
(21.5, 20.6)
mM 2 mH
(20.9, 20.3)
(20.9, 0.3)
(20.9, 20.3)
	15.16	 The accompanying underscoring pattern appears in 
the article “Women’s and Men’s Eating Behavior Following 
Exposure to Ideal-Body Images and Text” (Communica-
tions Research [2006]: 507–529). Women either viewed 
slides depicting images of thin female models with no 
text (treatment 1), viewed the same slides accompa-
nied by diet and exercise-related text (treatment 2), or 
viewed the same slides accompanied by text that was 
unrelated to diet and exercise (treatment 3). A fourth 
group of women did not view any slides (treatment 4).  
Participants were assigned at random to the four 
treatments. Participants were then asked to complete 
a questionnaire in a room where pretzels were set out 
on the tables. An observer recorded how many pretzels 
participants ate while completing the questionnaire.
Write a few sentences interpreting this underscoring 
pattern. (Hint: See Example 15.7.)
Treatment:
2
1
4
3
Mean number of  
pretzels consumed:
0.97
1.03
2.20
2.65
	15.17	The paper referenced in the previous exercise also 
gave the following underscoring pattern for men:
Treatment:
2
1
3
4
Mean number of  
pretzels consumed:
6.61
5.96
3.38
2.70
EXERCISES 15.14 - 15.22
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 15.2   Multiple Comparisons 
●  753
a.	 Write a few sentences interpreting this underscor-
ing pattern.
b.	Using your answers from Part (a) and from the pre-
vious exercise, write a few sentences describing the 
differences between how men and women respond 
to the treatments.
	15.18	
 The paper referenced in Exercise 15.5 described 
an experiment to determine if restrictive age labeling 
on video games increased the attractiveness of the 
game for boys age 12 to 13. In that exercise, the null 
hypothesis H0: m1 5 m2 5 m3 5 m4, where m1 is the 
population mean attractiveness rating for the game 
with the 71 age label, and m2, m3, and m4 are the 
population mean attractiveness scores for the 121, 
161, and 181 age labels, respectively, was rejected. 
The sample data is given in the accompanying table.
7 1 label
12 1 label
16 1 label
18 1 label
6
8
7
10
6
7
9
  9
6
8
8
  6
5
5
6
  8
4
7
7
  7
8
9
4
  6
6
5
8
  8
1
8
9
  9
2
4
6
10
4
7
7
  8
a.	 Compute the 95% T-K intervals and then use the 
underscoring procedure described in this section 
to identify significant differences among the age 
labels.
b.	Based on your answer to Part (a), write a few 
sentences commenting on the theory that the more 
restrictive the age label on a video game, the more 
attractive the game is to 12- to 13-year-old boys.
	15.19	The authors of the paper “Beyond the Shooter Game: 
Examining Presence and Hostile Outcomes among Male 
Game Players” (Communication Research [2006]: 448–466) 
studied how video-game content might influence atti-
tudes and behavior. Male students at a large Midwest-
ern university were assigned at random to play one of 
three action-oriented video games. Two of the games 
involved some violence—one was a shooting game 
and one was a fighting game. The third game was a 
nonviolent race car driving game. 
After playing a game for 20 minutes, participants 
answered a set of questions. The responses were used 
to determine values of three measures of aggression: 
(1) a measure of aggressive behavior; (2) a measure of 
aggressive thoughts; and (3) a measure of aggressive 
feelings. 
The authors hypothesized that the means for the three 
measures of aggression would be greatest for the fight-
ing game and lowest for the driving game.
a.	 For the measure of aggressive behavior, the paper 
reports that the mean score for the fighting game 
was significantly higher than the mean scores for 
the shooting and driving game, but that the mean 
scores for the shooting and driving games were not 
significantly different. The three sample means were:
Driving
Shooting
Fighting
Sample mean
3.42
4.00
5.30
Use the underscoring procedure of this section 
to construct a display that shows any significant 
differences in mean aggressive behavior score 
among the three games. (Hint: See Example 15.7.)
b.	For the measure of aggressive thoughts, the three 
sample means were
Driving
Shooting
Fighting
Sample mean
2.81
3.44
4.01
The paper states that the mean score for the fighting 
game only significantly differed from the mean score 
for the driving game and that the mean score for the 
shooting game did not significantly differ from either 
the fighting or driving games. Use the underscoring 
procedure of this section to construct a display that 
shows any significant differences in mean aggressive 
thoughts score among the three games.
	15.20	
 The accompanying data resulted from a flammabil-
ity study in which specimens of five different fabrics 
were tested to determine burn times.
1
17.8
16.2
15.9
15.5
2
13.2
10.4
11.3
Fabric 3
11.8
11.0
  ​9.2
10.0
4
16.5
15.3
14.1
15.0
13.9
5
13.9
10.8
12.8
11.7
  ​ MSTr 5 23.67
  ​  ​MSE 5 1.39
  ​  ​  ​  ​  ​F 5 17.08
P-value 5 .000
The accompanying output gives the T-K intervals as 
calculated by Minitab. Identify significant differences 
and give the underscoring pattern.
Individual error rate = 0.00750
Critical value = 4.37
Intervals for (column level mean) - (row level mean)
1
2
3
4
1.938
2
7.495
3.278
-1.645
3
8.422
3.912
-1.050
-5.983
-6.900
4
3.830
-0.670
-2.020
1.478
-3.445
-4.372
0.220
5
6.622
2.112
0.772
5.100
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

754 
●  Chapter 15  Analysis of Variance
	15.21	 Do lizards play a role in spreading plant seeds? Some 
research carried out in South Africa would suggest so  
(“Dispersal of Namaqua Fig [Ficus cordata cordata] Seeds 
by the Augrabies Flat Lizard [Platysaurus broadleyi],” 
Journal of Herpetology [1999]: 328–330). The research-
ers collected 400 seeds of this particular type of fig, 
100 of which were from each treatment: lizard dung, 
bird dung, rock hyrax dung, and uneaten figs. They 
planted these seeds in batches of 5, and for each group 
of 5 they recorded how many of the seeds germinated. 
This resulted in 20 observations for each treatment. The 
treatment means and standard deviations are given in 
the accompanying table.
Treatment
n
x
s
Uneaten figs
20
2.40
.30
Lizard dung
20
2.35
.33
Bird dung
20
1.70
.34
Hyrax dung
20
1.45
.28
a.	 Construct the appropriate ANOVA table, and test 
the hypothesis that there is no difference between 
mean number of seeds germinating for the four 
treatments.
b.	Is there evidence that seeds eaten and then excreted 
by lizards germinate at a higher rate than those eaten 
and then excreted by birds? Give statistical evidence 
to support your answer. 
	15.22	
 Samples of six different brands of diet or imita-
tion margarine were analyzed to determine the level 
of physiologically active polyunsaturated fatty acids 
(PAPUFA, in percent), resulting in the data shown 
in the accompanying table. (The data are fictitious, 
but the sample means agree with data reported in 
Consumer Reports.)
Imperial
14.1
13.6
14.4
14.3
Parkay
12.8
12.5
13.4
13.0
12.3
Blue Bonnet
13.5
13.4
14.1
14.3
Chiffon
13.2
12.7
12.6
13.9
Mazola
16.8
17.2
16.4
17.3
18.0
Fleischmann’s 18.1
17.2
18.7
18.4
a.	 Test for differences among the true average PAPUFA 
percentages for the different brands. Use a 5 .05.
b.	 Use the T-K procedure to compute 95% simultaneous 
confidence intervals for all differences between means 
and give the corresponding underscoring pattern.
Bold exercises answered in back  ● Data set available online   ▼ Video Solution available
AC TIVIT Y 15.1 
Exploring Single-Factor ANOVA
Working with a partner, consider the following:
1.	 Each of the four accompanying graphs shows a dot-
plot of data from three separate random samples. For 
each of the four graphs, indicate whether you think 
that the basic assumptions for single-factor ANOVA 
are plausible. Write a sentence or two justifying 
your answer.
85
95
105
115
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
Graph 1
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
103
102
101
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
Graph 2
70
80
90
100
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
Graph 3
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5
10
15
20
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
Graph 4
2.	 Each of the three accompanying graphs shows 
a dotplot of data from three separate random 
samples. For each of the three graphs, indicate 
whether you think that the three population means 
are probably not all the same, you think that the 
three population means might be the same, or you 
are unsure whether the population means could be 
the same. Write a sentence or two explaining your 
reasoning.
3.	 Sample data for each of the three graphs in Step 2 are 
shown in the table at the bottom of the page. For each 
of the three graphs, carry out a single-factor ANOVA. 
Are the results of the F tests consistent with your 
answers in Step 2? Explain.
70
80
90
100
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
Graph A
70
90
80
110
100
120
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
Graph B
90
80
100
110
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
Graph C
GRAPH A
GRAPH B
GRAPH C
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
 99.7
91.3
69.3
104.2
   81.9
71.7
 82.3
 82.4
94.2
 98.0
82.0
72.1
107.0
 105.4
79.7
 97.4
 87.5
109.8
101.4
83.6
71.7
 88.6
   98.4
70.9
 83.7
 97.3
94.9
 99.2
84.8
69.9
 99.6
 108.4
76.6
103.6
102.6
85.8
101.0
86.5
68.8
124.3
 102.1
85.3
 78.6
 94.8
97.4
101.8
91.5
70.7
100.7
   68.9
90.3
 90.1
 81.3
101.0
 99.5
81.8
72.7
108.3
   85.8
84.2
 92.8
 85.2
93.0
 97.0
85.5
72.2
116.5
   97.5
74.6
 95.5
107.8
107.1
Activity 
●  755
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

756 
●  Chapter 15  Analysis of Variance
SUMMARY 
Key Concepts and Formulas
Term or Formula
Comment
Single-factor analysis of variance (ANOVA)
A test procedure for determining whether there are significant differ-
ences among k population or treatment means. The hypotheses tested 
are H0: m1 5 m2 5 Á 5 mk versus Ha: at least two m’s differ.
Treatment sum of squares:  
SSTr 5 n1( x1 2 x )2 1 Á 1 nk( xk 2 x ) 2
A measure of how different the k sample means x1,  
x2, Á , xk are from one another; associated df 5 k 2 1.
Error sum of squares:  
SSE 5 (n1 2 1)s21 1 Á 1 (nk 2 1)s2k
A measure of the amount of variability within the individual samples; 
associated df 5 N 2 k, where N 5 n1 1 Á 1 nk.
Mean square
A sum of squares divided by its df. For single-factor ANOVA,  
MSTr 5 SSTr/(k 2 1) and MSE 5 SSE/(N 2 k).
F =MSTr
MSE
The test statistic for testing H0: m1 5 m2 5 Á 5 mk in a single-factor 
ANOVA. When H0 is true, F has an F distribution with numerator 
df 5 k 2 1 and denominator df 5 N 2 k.
SSTo 5 SSTr 1 SSE
The fundamental identity in single-factor ANOVA, where SSTo 5 total 
sum of squares 5 osx 2 xd2.
Tukey-Kramer multiple comparison procedure
A procedure for identifying significant differences among the m’s once 
the hypothesis H0: m1 5 m2 5 Á 5 mk has been rejected by the ANOVA 
F test.
TECHNOLOGY NOTES
ANOVA
JMP
1.    Input the raw data into the first column
2.    Input the group information into the second column
3.    Click Analyze then select Fit Y by X
4.    Click and drag the first column name from the box under 
Select Columns to the box next to Y, Response
5.    Click and drag the second column name from the box 
under Select Columns to the box next to X, Factor
6.   Click OK
7.    Click the red arrow next to Oneway Analysis of… and 
select Means/ANOVA
MINITAB
Data stored in separate columns
1.    Input each group’s data in a separate column
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 15.2   Multiple Comparisons 
●  757
2.    Click Stat then ANOVA then One-Way (Unstacked)… 
3.    Click in the box under Responses (in separate columns):
4.    Double-click the column name containing each group’s 
data
5.    Click OK
Data stored in one column
1.    Input the data into one column
2.    Input the group information into a second column
3.    Click Stat then ANOVA then One-Way…
4.    Click in the box next to Response: and double-click the 
column name containing the raw data values
5.    Click in the box next to Factor: and double-click the col-
umn name containing the group information
6.    Click OK
SPSS
1.    Input the raw data for all groups into one column
2.    Input the group information into a second column (use 
group numbers)
3.    Click Analyze then click Compare Means then click 
One-Way ANOVA…
4.    Click the name of the column containing the raw data and 
click the arrow to move it to the box under Dependent 
List:
5.    Click the name of the column containing the group data 
and click the arrow to move it to the box under Factor:
6.    Click OK
Excel
1.    Input the raw data for each group into a separate column
2.    Click the Data ribbon
3.    Click Data Analysis in the Analysis group
Note: If you do not see Data Analysis listed on the Ribbon, 
see the Technology Notes for Chapter 2 for instructions on 
installing this add-on.
4.    Select Anova: Single Factor and click OK
5.    Click on the box next to Input Range and select ALL 
columns of data (if you typed and selected column titles, 
click the box next to Labels in First Row)
6.    Click in the box next to Alpha and type the significance 
level
7.    Click OK
Note: The test statistic and p-value can be found in the first 
row of the table under F and P-value, respectively.
TI-83/84
1.    Enter the data for each group into a separate list starting 
with L1 (In order to access lists press the STAT key, high-
light the option called Edit… then press ENTER)
2.    Press STAT
3.    Highlight TESTS
4.    Highlight ANOVA and press ENTER
5.    Press 2nd then 1
Technology Notes 
●  757
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

758 
●  Chapter 15  Analysis of Variance
  6.    Press,
  7.    Press 2nd then 2
  8.    Press,
  9.    Continue to input lists where data is stored separated by 
commas until you input the final list
10.    When you are finished entering all lists, press )
11.    Press ENTER
TI-Nspire
Summarized Data
1.    Enter the summary information for the first group in a 
list in the following order: the value for n followed by a 
comma then the value of x followed by a comma then the 
value of s (In order to access data lists select the spread-
sheet option and press enter)
Note: Be sure to title the lists by selecting the top row of the 
column and typing a title.
2.    Enter the summary information for the first group in a 
list in the following order: the value for n followed by a 
comma then the value of x followed by a comma then the 
value of s
3.    Continue to enter summary information for each group 
in this manner
4.    When you are finished entering data for each group, 
press menu then 4:Statistics then 4:Stat Tests then 
C:ANOVA… then press enter
5.    For Data Input Method choose Stats from the drop-down 
menu
  6.    For Number of Groups enter the number of groups, k
  7.    In the box next to Group 1 Stats select the list contain-
ing group one’s summary statistics
  8.    In the box next to Group 2 Stats select the list contain-
ing group one’s summary statistics
  9.    Continue entering summary statistics in this manner for 
all groups
10.    Press OK
Raw data
1.    Enter each group’s data into separate data lists (In order 
to access data lists, select the spreadsheet option and 
press enter)
Note: Be sure to title the lists by selecting the top row of the 
column and typing a title.
2.    Press the menu key and select 4:Statistics then 4:Stat 
Tests then C:ANOVA… and press enter
3.    For Data Input Method choose Data from the drop-
down menu
4.    For Number of Groups input the number of groups, k
5.    Press OK
6.    For List 1 select the list title that contains group one’s data 
from the drop-down menu
7.    For List 2 select the list title that contains group two’s data 
from the drop-down menu
8.    Continue to select the appropriate lists for all groups
9.    When you are finished inputting lists press OK
758 
●  Chapter 15  Analysis of Variance
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Statistical Tables 760
Table 1 Random Numbers 760
Table 2 Standard Normal Probabilities (Cumulative z Curve Areas) 762
Table 3 t Critical Values 764
Table 4 Tail Areas for t Curves 765
Table 5 Curves of b  P(Type II Error) for t Tests 768
Table 6 Values That Capture Specified Upper-Tail F Curve Areas 769
Table 7 Critical Values of q for the Studentized Range Distribution 773
Table 8 Upper-Tail Areas for Chi-Square Distributions 774
Table 9 Binomial Probabilities 776
a p p e n d i x  A 
759
Appendix A
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

760 
●  Appendix A  Statistical Tables
Appendix A: Statistical Tables
Row
4
5
1
8
5
0
3
3
7
1
2
8
4
5
1
1
0
9
5
7
4
2
5
5
8
0
4
5
7
0
7
0
3
6
6
1
3
1
3
1
8
9
9
3
4
3
5
0
6
3
9
1
1
8
2
6
9
2
0
9
8
9
0
7
2
9
9
0
4
7
6
7
4
7
1
3
4
3
5
3
5
7
3
1
0
3
7
4
7
8
5
2
0
1
3
7
7
6
3
6
0
9
3
8
7
6
7
9
9
5
6
2
5
6
5
8
4
2
6
4
4
1
0
1
0
2
2
0
4
7
5
1
1
9
4
7
9
7
5
1
6
4
7
3
6
3
4
5
1
2
3
1
1
8
0
0
4
8
2
0
8
0
2
8
7
9
3
8
4
0
4
2
0
8
9
1
2
3
3
2
9
4
6
0
6
9
7
8
8
2
5
2
9
6
0
1
4
6
0
5
6
6
9
5
7
4
4
6
3
2
0
6
0
8
9
1
3
6
1
8
0
7
1
7
7
7
2
9
7
8
7
5
8
8
6
9
8
4
1
0
6
1
3
0
9
7
3
3
6
6
0
4
1
8
3
2
6
7
6
8
2
2
3
6
2
1
3
0
2
2
6
6
9
7
0
2
1
2
5
8
0
7
1
7
4
2
0
0
0
1
3
1
2
0
4
7
8
4
1
0
6
6
5
1
6
1
8
1
5
5
2
6
2
0
1
1
5
2
3
6
9
9
6
2
5
3
5
9
8
3
7
5
0
1
3
9
3
8
0
8
9
9
9
6
1
2
9
3
4
6
5
6
4
6
5
8
2
7
4
0
2
5
6
3
1
9
8
1
1
0
3
5
6
7
9
1
4
5
2
0
5
1
1
9
8
1
2
1
1
6
9
8
1
8
1
9
9
1
2
0
1
9
8
0
7
4
6
8
4
0
3
0
8
1
1
0
6
2
3
2
9
7
0
9
6
3
8
9
9
7
0
6
5
4
3
6
5
0
3
2
1
7
6
4
8
2
0
3
9
6
3
6
2
1
0
7
7
3
1
7
6
2
5
8
2
0
7
8
6
4
6
6
8
9
2
0
6
9
0
4
1
5
7
1
1
1
9
5
1
4
5
2
8
3
4
3
0
7
3
5
1
4
6
6
5
6
0
1
9
4
0
5
2
7
6
4
3
6
8
8
1
8
5
0
2
1
6
8
0
7
7
2
6
2
6
7
5
4
8
7
7
8
7
4
6
5
4
3
7
9
3
9
2
7
9
5
4
2
3
1
1
6
3
2
8
3
7
3
0
7
2
4
8
0
9
9
9
4
7
0
2
8
9
0
8
1
6
8
1
7
3
1
3
0
9
7
2
5
7
9
0
7
8
8
6
5
7
5
5
4
0
0
3
4
1
2
7
3
7
9
8
4
0
1
4
5
1
9
1
1
2
1
5
3
2
8
5
5
7
5
7
3
5
9
7
0
4
9
1
2
1
3
2
5
1
9
3
3
8
3
4
7
2
6
7
6
9
9
2
7
8
7
5
5
5
2
4
4
3
4
9
3
3
7
0
7
0
5
7
5
6
9
5
4
3
1
4
6
6
8
0
2
4
9
7
8
1
6
3
8
7
8
0
5
6
7
2
7
5
0
7
1
0
1
8
4
7
1
2
9
3
8
0
0
8
7
9
2
8
6
9
7
9
4
4
5
3
1
9
3
4
5
0
6
3
5
9
6
9
8
0
4
2
5
0
0
9
9
6
4
0
6
9
0
3
8
3
5
7
2
0
7
1
2
3
6
1
7
9
3
9
5
4
6
8
4
8
8
0
6
3
5
6
6
2
4
4
5
6
3
7
8
7
6
5
2
0
4
3
2
6
6
8
5
5
2
9
7
9
3
3
1
6
9
5
9
7
1
1
2
9
5
0
4
3
1
1
7
3
9
2
7
7
4
7
0
3
1
2
8
5
1
7
8
9
4
7
2
9
2
8
9
9
8
0
6
3
7
2
1
1
6
3
9
4
1
3
2
1
1
8
5
6
3
4
1
9
3
1
7
4
4
8
6
4
0
3
8
3
8
3
5
9
5
9
4
8
3
9
4
7
7
6
6
4
5
4
4
8
4
4
0
3
9
8
5
2
0
2
3
2
5
6
6
3
7
0
6
5
6
9
0
1
9
5
2
6
9
1
2
Table 1	
Random Numbers
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
Appendix A  Statistical Tables 
●  761
Row
9
4
0
4
7
5
3
2
8
7
2
7
4
9
3
9
6
5
5
6
7
3
1
5
6
6
5
0
3
5
3
7
2
8
6
2
4
1
8
7
7
5
8
2
8
8
8
7
6
4
1
1
0
2
3
1
9
3
6
0
3
3
6
0
9
1
1
0
3
2
7
8
2
0
5
3
4
8
9
8
0
2
9
6
9
8
9
3
8
1
5
3
9
9
7
0
7
7
1
6
8
5
9
6
2
9
6
8
2
1
2
4
7
0
6
8
3
4
6
1
5
4
7
6
1
0
0
1
0
4
6
1
4
1
5
0
9
6
5
5
5
0
3
6
4
1
9
8
4
4
1
2
0
2
5
1
8
1
2
1
0
2
6
3
7
5
1
1
6
6
0
5
8
1
2
3
3
6
1
3
3
8
1
6
3
8
1
4
5
2
9
4
2
5
7
3
2
3
1
8
9
1
5
6
0
6
5
6
6
3
6
2
3
0
0
0
1
8
5
9
5
3
5
6
3
9
5
4
7
3
6
6
7
5
0
1
5
6
7
3
9
6
6
4
5
7
7
6
1
5
4
4
8
0
6
5
7
6
3
0
6
3
0
6
7
9
5
5
4
6
2
2
8
4
4
0
0
9
9
8
8
5
8
3
5
2
0
6
6
0
0
6
0
6
3
0
1
7
0
5
3
8
2
4
9
0
9
2
6
2
9
5
1
9
1
9
0
8
3
3
1
4
4
1
1
7
4
6
3
6
5
6
5
5
7
7
0
3
5
8
5
9
9
5
3
7
2
5
1
7
1
1
0
7
1
0
9
2
8
8
8
7
1
7
5
2
5
6
8
7
9
9
1
3
9
6
4
9
3
0
6
7
2
3
1
4
9
2
1
7
0
8
6
7
8
9
9
4
7
4
2
3
2
8
7
0
9
7
1
1
1
2
8
2
9
1
0
6
7
7
2
9
5
7
8
4
7
9
0
3
6
9
2
0
6
0
6
2
6
8
4
8
9
8
3
2
7
6
9
1
9
8
6
9
5
2
4
9
9
9
1
5
6
5
7
7
5
4
3
4
3
8
1
8
9
9
4
4
1
1
1
8
1
1
7
2
8
5
5
8
9
9
9
6
2
0
1
6
6
7
5
7
7
0
9
5
5
6
8
6
8
2
2
6
0
5
5
1
8
7
1
8
6
0
5
4
8
3
4
5
3
5
8
7
7
7
8
5
7
0
2
6
6
7
9
4
2
2
8
7
4
3
4
9
6
1
9
4
3
9
3
6
6
4
5
7
8
3
0
2
8
4
6
7
2
1
4
5
2
3
0
7
8
0
1
2
1
1
3
4
2
1
6
9
3
3
5
4
0
4
8
3
6
0
5
7
7
9
1
5
8
8
4
9
5
7
2
2
7
6
5
3
6
9
0
6
3
8
7
5
9
5
9
7
4
2
5
6
2
9
0
9
3
7
7
2
8
6
4
3
2
9
4
8
2
9
9
6
9
9
9
4
7
4
0
0
0
3
5
4
6
6
2
6
2
3
6
1
1
4
5
5
4
1
7
8
6
4
2
3
2
9
8
4
6
3
8
3
0
5
5
3
0
0
5
4
8
0
7
4
7
6
2
1
1
2
1
2
6
9
3
3
0
9
3
2
9
4
0
5
5
4
8
7
5
7
5
3
8
8
3
0
5
7
1
9
5
8
0
0
4
5
3
0
3
0
2
7
6
7
5
0
8
6
0
8
1
6
2
0
8
6
5
4
0
7
2
9
1
0
3
6
4
7
8
2
3
5
7
9
8
5
2
7
6
9
0
2
4
9
9
0
4
4
9
1
6
8
5
2
8
9
0
7
5
7
2
5
1
8
9
5
2
6
9
3
9
6
5
1
8
8
7
8
2
0
4
4
7
9
9
4
5
7
0
3
4
6
4
2
5
4
8
6
1
1
9
1
8
8
8
1
1
8
0
5
4
2
8
5
3
3
3
0
1
1
4
4
8
3
6
9
4
7
8
3
3
9
1
2
5
0
1
2
3
0
1
1
2
5
0
0
6
8
8
7
2
4
4
7
6
6
0
3
4
7
5
6
8
2
5
3
3
9
3
8
4
9
1
9
1
7
8
4
5
2
2
5
4
4
2
5
6
2
7
6
0
3
8
1
4
4
2
6
8
3
6
3
2
8
7
4
3
7
9
6
8
6
2
8
3
8
4
2
2
0
7
0
5
3
1
9
0
8
8
0
1
2
2
2
7
5
6
5
5
7
8
7
2
6
2
4
8
0
2
5
2
7
0
5
9
6
6
1
5
8
7
9
7
5
4
1
7
8
6
7
1
1
5
8
9
4
8
9
8
3
0
9
0
7
Table 1	
Random Numbers (Continued )
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

762 
●  Appendix A  Statistical Tables
z*
.00
.01
.02
.03
.04
.05
.06
.07
.08
.09
23.8
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0000
23.7
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
23.6
.0002
.0002
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
.0001
23.5
.0002
.0002
.0002
.0002
.0002
.0002
.0002
.0002
.0002
.0002
23.4
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0002
23.3
.0005
.0005
.0005
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0003
23.2
.0007
.0007
.0006
.0006
.0006
.0006
.0006
.0005
.0005
.0005
23.1
.0010
.0009
.0009
.0009
.0008
.0008
.0008
.0008
.0007
.0007
23.0
.0013
.0013
.0013
.0012
.0012
.0011
.0011
.0011
.0010
.0010
22.9
.0019
.0018
.0018
.0017
.0016
.0016
.0015
.0015
.0014
.0014
22.8
.0026
.0025
.0024
.0023
.0023
.0022
.0021
.0021
.0020
.0019
22.7
.0035
.0034
.0033
.0032
.0031
.0030
.0029
.0028
.0027
.0026
22.6
.0047
.0045
.0044
.0043
.0041
.0040
.0039
.0038
.0037
.0036
22.5
.0062
.0060
.0059
.0057
.0055
.0054
.0052
.0051
.0049
.0048
22.4
.0082
.0080
.0078
.0075
.0073
.0071
.0069
.0068
.0066
.0064
22.3
.0107
.0104
.0102
.0099
.0096
.0094
.0091
.0089
.0087
.0084
22.2
.0139
.0136
.0132
.0129
.0125
.0122
.0119
.0116
.0113
.0110
22.1
.0179
.0174
.0170
.0166
.0162
.0158
.0154
.0150
.0146
.0143
22.0
.0228
.0222
.0217
.0212
.0207
.0202
.0197
.0192
.0188
.0183
21.9
.0287
.0281
.0274
.0268
.0262
.0256
.0250
.0244
.0239
.0233
21.8
.0359
.0351
.0344
.0336
.0329
.0322
.0314
.0307
.0301
.0294
21.7
.0446
.0436
.0427
.0418
.0409
.0401
.0392
.0384
.0375
.0367
21.6
.0548
.0537
.0526
.0516
.0505
.0495
.0485
.0475
.0465
.0455
21.5
.0668
.0655
.0643
.0630
.0618
.0606
.0594
.0582
.0571
.0559
21.4
.0808
.0793
.0778
.0764
.0749
.0735
.0721
.0708
.0694
.0681
21.3
.0968
.0951
.0934
.0918
.0901
.0885
.0869
.0853
.0838
.0823
21.2
.1151
.1131
.1112
.1093
.1075
.1056
.1038
.1020
.1003
.0985
21.1
.1357
.1335
.1314
.1292
.1271
.1251
.1230
.1210
.1190
.1170
21.0
.1587
.1562
.1539
.1515
.1492
.1469
.1446
.1423
.1401
.1379
20.9
.1841
.1814
.1788
.1762
.1736
.1711
.1685
.1660
.1635
.1611
20.8
.2119
.2090
.2061
.2033
.2005
.1977
.1949
.1922
.1894
.1867
20.7
.2420
.2389
.2358
.2327
.2296
.2266
.2236
.2206
.2177
.2148
20.6
.2743
.2709
.2676
.2643
.2611
.2578
.2546
.2514
.2483
.2451
20.5
.3085
.3050
.3015
.2981
.2946
.2912
.2877
.2843
.2810
.2776
20.4
.3446
.3409
.3372
.3336
.3300
.3264
.3228
.3192
.3156
.3121
20.3
.3821
.3783
.3745
.3707
.3669
.3632
.3594
.3557
.3520
.3483
20.2
.4207
.4168
.4129
.4090
.4052
.4013
.3974
.3936
.3897
.3859
20.1
.4602
.4562
.4522
.4483
.4443
.4404
.4364
.4325
.4286
.4247
20.0
.5000
.4960
.4920
.4880
.4840
.4801
.4761
.4721
.4681
.4641
0.0
.5000
.5040
.5080
.5120
.5160
.5199
.5239
.5279
.5319
  .5359
0.1
.5398
.5438
.5478
.5517
.5557
.5596
.5636
.5675
.5714
  .5753
0.2
.5793
.5832
.5871
.5910
.5948
.5987
.6026
.6064
.6103
  .6141
0.3
.6179
.6217
.6255
.6293
.6331
.6368
.6406
.6443
.6480
  .6517
0.4
.6554
.6591
.6628
.6664
.6700
.6736
.6772
.6808
.6844
  .6879
Table 2	
Standard Normal Probabilities (Cumulative z Curve Areas)
0
z*
Tabulated area = probability
Standard normal (z) curve
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
Appendix A  Statistical Tables 
●  763
z*
.00
.01
.02
.03
.04
.05
.06
.07
.08
.09
0.5
.6915
.6950
.6985
.7019
.7054
.7088
.7123
.7157
.7190
  .7224
0.6
.7257
.7291
.7324
.7357
.7389
.7422
.7454
.7486
.7517
  .7549
0.7
.7580
.7611
.7642
.7673
.7704
.7734
.7764
.7794
.7823
  .7852
0.8
.7881
.7910
.7939
.7967
.7995
.8023
.8051
.8078
.8106
  .8133
0.9
.8159
.8186
.8212
.8238
.8264
.8289
.8315
.8340
.8365
  .8389
1.0
.8413
.8438
.8461
.8485
.8508
.8531
.8554
.8577
.8599
  .8621
1.1
.8643
.8665
.8686
.8708
.8729
.8749
.8770
.8790
.8810
  .8830
1.2
.8849
.8869
.8888
.8907
.8925
.8944
.8962
.8980
.8997
  .9015
1.3
.9032
.9049
.9066
.9082
.9099
.9115
.9131
.9147
.9162
  .9177
1.4
.9192
.9207
.9222
.9236
.9251
.9265
.9279
.9292
.9306
  .9319
1.5
.9332
.9345
.9357
.9370
.9382
.9394
.9406
.9418
.9429
  .9441
1.6
.9452
.9463
.9474
.9484
.9495
.9505
.9515
.9525
.9535
  .9545
1.7
.9554
.9564
.9573
.9582
.9591
.9599
.9608
.9616
.9625
  .9633
1.8
.9641
.9649
.9656
.9664
.9671
.9678
.9686
.9693
.9699
  .9706
1.9
.9713
.9719
.9726
.9732
.9738
.9744
.9750
.9756
.9761
  .9767
2.0
.9772
.9778
.9783
.9788
.9793
.9798
.9803
.9808
.9812
  .9817
2.1
.9821
.9826
.9830
.9834
.9838
.9842
.9846
.9850
.9854
  .9857
2.2
.9861
.9864
.9868
.9871
.9875
.9878
.9881
.9884
.9887
  .9890
2.3
.9893
.9896
.9898
.9901
.9904
.9906
.9909
.9911
.9913
  .9916
2.4
.9918
.9920
.9922
.9925
.9927
.9929
.9931
.9932
.9934
  .9936
2.5
.9938
.9940
.9941
.9943
.9945
.9946
.9948
.9949
.9951
  .9952
2.6
.9953
.9955
.9956
.9957
.9959
.9960
.9961
.9962
.9963
  .9964
2.7
.9965
.9966
.9967
.9968
.9969
.9970
.9971
.9972
.9973
  .9974
2.8
.9974
.9975
.9976
.9977
.9977
.9978
.9979
.9979
.9980
  .9981
2.9
.9981
.9982
.9982
.9983
.9984
.9984
.9985
.9985
.9986
  .9986
3.0
.9987
.9987
.9987
.9988
.9988
.9989
.9989
.9989
.9990
  .9990
3.1
.9990
.9991
.9991
.9991
.9992
.9992
.9992
.9992
.9993
  .9993
3.2
.9993
.9993
.9994
.9994
.9994
.9994
.9994
.9995
.9995
  .9995
3.3
.9995
.9995
.9995
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9996
  .9997
3.4
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
  .9998
3.5
.9998
.9998
.9998
.9998
.9998
.9998
.9998
.9998
.9998
  .9998
3.6
.9998
.9998
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
  .9999
3.7
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
  .9999
3.8
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
1.0000
Table 2	
Standard Normal Probabilities (Cumulative z Curve Areas) (Continued )
0
z*
Tabulated area = probability
Standard normal (z) curve
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

764 
●  Appendix A  Statistical Tables
Central area captured:
Conﬁdence level:
.80
80%
.90
90%
.95
95%
.98
98%
.99
99%
.998
99.8%
.999
99.9%
    1
3.08
6.31
12.71
31.82
63.66
318.31
636.62
    2
1.89
2.92
  4.30
  6.97
  9.93
  23.33
  31.60
    3
1.64
2.35
  3.18
  4.54
  5.84
  10.21
  12.92
    4
1.53
2.13
  2.78
  3.75
  4.60
    7.17
    8.61
    5
1.48
2.02
  2.57
  3.37
  4.03
    5.89
    6.86
    6
1.44
1.94
  2.45
  3.14
  3.71
    5.21
    5.96
    7
1.42
1.90
  2.37
  3.00
  3.50
    4.79
    5.41
    8
1.40
1.86
  2.31
  2.90
  3.36
    4.50
    5.04
    9
1.38
1.83
  2.26
  2.82
  3.25
    4.30
    4.78
  10
1.37
1.81
  2.23
  2.76
  3.17
    4.14
    4.59
11
1.36
1.80
  2.20
  2.72
  3.11
    4.03
    4.44
  12
1.36
1.78
  2.18
  2.68
  3.06
    3.93
    4.32
  13
1.35
1.77
  2.16
  2.65
  3.01
    3.85
    4.22
  14
1.35
1.76
  2.15
  2.62
  2.98
    3.79
    4.14
  15
1.34
1.75
  2.13
  2.60
  2.95
    3.73
    4.07
  16
1.34
1.75
  2.12
  2.58
  2.92
    3.69
    4.02
Degrees of
  17
1.33
1.74
  2.11
  2.57
  2.90
    3.65
    3.97
freedom
  18
1.33
1.73
  2.10
  2.55
  2.88
    3.61
    3.92
  19
1.33
1.73
  2.09
  2.54
  2.86
    3.58
    3.88
  20
1.33
1.73
  2.09
  2.53
  2.85
    3.55
    3.85
  21
1.32
1.72
  2.08
  2.52
  2.83
    3.53
    3.82
  22
1.32
1.72
  2.07
  2.51
  2.82
    3.51
    3.79
  23
1.32
1.71
  2.07
  2.50
  2.81
    3.49
    3.77
  24
1.32
1.71
  2.06
  2.49
  2.80
    3.47
    3.75
  25
1.32
1.71
  2.06
  2.49
  2.79
    3.45
    3.73
  26
1.32
1.71
  2.06
  2.48
  2.78
    3.44
    3.71
  27
1.31
1.70
  2.05
  2.47
  2.77
    3.42
    3.69
  28
1.31
1.70
  2.05
  2.47
  2.76
    3.41
    3.67
  29
1.31
1.70
  2.05
  2.46
  2.76
    3.40
    3.66
  30
1.31
1.70
  2.04
  2.46
  2.75
    3.39
    3.65
  40
1.30
1.68
  2.02
  2.42
  2.70
    3.31
    3.55
  60
1.30
1.67
  2.00
  2.39
  2.66
    3.23
    3.46
120
1.29
1.66
  1.98
  2.36
  2.62
    3.16
    3.37
z critical values        
1.28
1.645
  1.96
  2.33
  2.58
    3.09
    3.29
Table 3	
t Critical Values
2 t critical value
 t critical value
0
Central area
t curve
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
Appendix A  Statistical Tables 
●  765
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0.0
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
0.1
.468
.465
.463
.463
.462
.462
.462
.461
.461
.461
.461
.461
0.2
.437
.430
.427
.426
.425
.424
.424
.423
.423
.423
.423
.422
0.3
.407
.396
.392
.390
.388
.387
.386
.386
.386
.385
.385
.385
0.4
.379
.364
.358
.355
.353
.352
.351
.350
.349
.349
.348
.348
0.5
.352
.333
.326
.322
.319
.317
.316
.315
.315
.314
.313
.313
0.6
.328
.305
.295
.290
.287
.285
.284
.283
.282
.281
.280
.280
0.7
.306
.278
.267
.261
.258
.255
.253
.252
.251
.250
.249
.249
0.8
.285
.254
.241
.234
.230
.227
.225
.223
.222
.221
.220
.220
0.9
.267
.232
.217
.210
.205
.201
.199
.197
.196
.195
.194
.193
1.0
.250
.211
.196
.187
.182
.178
.175
.173
.172
.170
.169
.169
1.1
.235
.193
.176
.167
.162
.157
.154
.152
.150
.149
.147
.146
1.2
.221
.177
.158
.148
.142
.138
.135
.132
.130
.129
.128
.127
1.3
.209
.162
.142
.132
.125
.121
.117
.115
.113
.111
.110
.109
1.4
.197
.148
.128
.117
.110
.106
.102
.100
.098
.096
.095
.093
1.5
.187
.136
.115
.104
.097
.092
.089
.086
.084
.082
.081
.080
1.6
.178
.125
.104
.092
.085
.080
.077
.074
.072
.070
.069
.068
1.7
.169
.116
.094
.082
.075
.070
.066
.064
.062
.060
.059
.057
1.8
.161
.107
.085
.073
.066
.061
.057
.055
.053
.051
.050
.049
1.9
.154
.099
.077
.065
.058
.053
.050
.047
.045
.043
.042
.041
2.0
.148
.092
.070
.058
.051
.046
.043
.040
.038
.037
.035
.034
2.1
.141
.085
.063
.052
.045
.040
.037
.034
.033
.031
.030
.029
2.2
.136
.079
.058
.046
.040
.035
.032
.029
.028
.026
.025
.024
2.3
.131
.074
.052
.041
.035
.031
.027
.025
.023
.022
.021
.020
2.4
.126
.069
.048
.037
.031
.027
.024
.022
.020
.019
.018
.017
2.5
.121
.065
.044
.033
.027
.023
.020
.018
.017
.016
.015
.014
2.6
.117
.061
.040
.030
.024
.020
.018
.016
.014
.013
.012
.012
2.7
.113
.057
.037
.027
.021
.018
.015
.014
.012
.011
.010
.010
2.8
.109
.054
.034
.024
.019
.016
.013
.012
.010
.009
.009
.008
2.9
.106
.051
.031
.022
.017
.014
.011
.010
.009
.008
.007
.007
3.0
.102
.048
.029
.020
.015
.012
.010
.009
.007
.007
.006
.006
3.1
.099
.045
.027
.018
.013
.011
.009
.007
.006
.006
.005
.005
3.2
.096
.043
.025
.016
.012
.009
.008
.006
.005
.005
.004
.004
3.3
.094
.040
.023
.015
.011
.008
.007
.005
.005
.004
.004
.003
3.4
.091
.038
.021
.014
.010
.007
.006
.005
.004
.003
.003
.003
3.5
.089
.036
.020
.012
.009
.006
.005
.004
.003
.003
.002
.002
3.6
.086
.035
.018
.011
.008
.006
.004
.004
.003
.002
.002
.002
3.7
.084
.033
.017
.010
.007
.005
.004
.003
.002
.002
.002
.002
3.8
.082
.031
.016
.010
.006
.004
.003
.003
.002
.002
.001
.001
3.9
.080
.030
.015
.009
.006
.004
.003
.002
.002
.001
.001
.001
4.0
.078
.029
.014
.008
.005
.004
.003
.002
.002
.001
.001
.001
Table 4	
Tail Areas for t Curves
t
df
 t
0
t curve
Area to the
right of t 
(continued)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

766 
●  Appendix A  Statistical Tables
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
0.0
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
0.1
.461
.461
.461
.461
.461
.461
.461
.461
.461
.461
.461
.461
0.2
.422
.422
.422
.422
.422
.422
.422
.422
.422
.422
.422
.422
0.3
.384
.384
.384
.384
.384
.384
.384
.384
.384
.383
.383
.383
0.4
.348
.347
.347
.347
.347
.347
.347
.347
.347
.347
.346
.346
0.5
.313
.312
.312
.312
.312
.312
.311
.311
.311
.311
.311
.311
0.6
.279
.279
.279
.278
.278
.278
.278
.278
.278
.277
.277
.277
0.7
.248
.247
.247
.247
.247
.246
.246
.246
.246
.246
.245
.245
0.8
.219
.218
.218
.218
.217
.217
.217
.217
.216
.216
.216
.216
0.9
.192
.191
.191
.191
.190
.190
.190
.189
.189
.189
.189
.189
1.0
.168
.167
.167
.166
.166
.165
.165
.165
.164
.164
.164
.164
1.1
.146
.144
.144
.144
.143
.143
.143
.142
.142
.142
.141
.141
1.2
.126
.124
.124
.124
.123
.123
.122
.122
.122
.121
.121
.121
1.3
.108
.107
.107
.106
.105
.105
.105
.104
.104
.104
.103
.103
1.4
.092
.091
.091
.090
.090
.089
.089
.089
.088
.088
.087
.087
1.5
.079
.077
.077
.077
.076
.075
.075
.075
.074
.074
.074
.073
1.6
.067
.065
.065
.065
.064
.064
.063
.063
.062
.062
.062
.061
1.7
.056
.055
.055
.054
.054
.053
.053
.052
.052
.052
.051
.051
1.8
.048
.046
.046
.045
.045
.044
.044
.043
.043
.043
.042
.042
1.9
.040
.038
.038
.038
.037
.037
.036
.036
.036
.035
.035
.035
2.0
.033
.032
.032
.031
.031
.030
.030
.030
.029
.029
.029
.028
2.1
.028
.027
.027
.026
.025
.025
.025
.024
.024
.024
.023
.023
2.2
.023
.022
.022
.021
.021
.021
.020
.020
.020
.019
.019
.019
2.3
.019
.018
.018
.018
.017
.017
.016
.016
.016
.016
.015
.015
2.4
.016
.015
.015
.014
.014
.014
.013
.013
.013
.013
.012
.012
2.5
.013
.012
.012
.012
.011
.011
.011
.011
.010
.010
.010
.010
2.6
.011
.010
.010
.010
.009
.009
.009
.009
.008
.008
.008
.008
2.7
.009
.008
.008
.008
.008
.007
.007
.007
.007
.007
.006
.006
2.8
.008
.007
.007
.006
.006
.006
.006
.006
.005
.005
.005
.005
2.9
.006
.005
.005
.005
.005
.005
.005
.004
.004
.004
.004
.004
3.0
.005
.004
.004
.004
.004
.004
.004
.004
.003
.003
.003
.003
3.1
.004
.004
.004
.003
.003
.003
.003
.003
.003
.003
.003
.002
3.2
.003
.003
.003
.003
.003
.002
.002
.002
.002
.002
.002
.002
3.3
.003
.002
.002
.002
.002
.002
.002
.002
.002
.002
.002
.001
3.4
.002
.002
.002
.002
.002
.002
.002
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
3.5
.002
.002
.002
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
3.6
.002
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
3.7
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
3.8
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.000
.000
.000
3.9
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
4.0
.001
.001
.001
.001
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
 t
0
t curve
Area to the
right of t 
Table 4	
Tail Areas for t Curves (Continued )
t
df
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
Appendix A  Statistical Tables 
●  767
25
26
27
28
29
30
35
40
60
120
(z)
0.0
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
.500
0.1
.461
.461
.461
.461
.461
.461
.460
.460
.460
.460
.460
0.2
.422
.422
.421
.421
.421
.421
.421
.421
.421
.421
.421
0.3
.383
.383
.383
.383
.383
.383
.383
.383
.383
.382
.382
0.4
.346
.346
.346
.346
.346
.346
.346
.346
.345
.345
.345
0.5
.311
.311
.311
.310
.310
.310
.310
.310
.309
.309
.309
0.6
.277
.277
.277
.277
.277
.277
.276
.276
.275
.275
.274
0.7
.245
.245
.245
.245
.245
.245
.244
.244
.243
.243
.242
0.8
.216
.215
.215
.215
.215
.215
.215
.214
.213
.213
.212
0.9
.188
.188
.188
.188
.188
.188
.187
.187
.186
.185
.184
1.0
.163
.163
.163
.163
.163
.163
.162
.162
.161
.160
.159
1.1
.141
.141
.141
.140
.140
.140
.139
.139
.138
.137
.136
1.2
.121
.120
.120
.120
.120
.120
.119
.119
.117
.116
.115
1.3
.103
.103
.102
.102
.102
.102
.101
.101
.099
.098
.097
1.4
.087
.087
.086
.086
.086
.086
.085
.085
.083
.082
.081
1.5
.073
.073
.073
.072
.072
.072
.071
.071
.069
.068
.067
1.6
.061
.061
.061
.060
.060
.060
.059
.059
.057
.056
.055
1.7
.051
.051
.050
.050
.050
.050
.049
.048
.047
.046
.045
1.8
.042
.042
.042
.041
.041
.041
.040
.040
.038
.037
.036
1.9
.035
.034
.034
.034
.034
.034
.033
.032
.031
.030
.029
2.0
.028
.028
.028
.028
.027
.027
.027
.026
.025
.024
.023
2.1
.023
.023
.023
.022
.022
.022
.022
.021
.020
.019
.018
2.2
.019
.018
.018
.018
.018
.018
.017
.017
.016
.015
.014
2.3
.015
.015
.015
.015
.014
.014
.014
.013
.012
.012
.011
2.4
.012
.012
.012
.012
.012
.011
.011
.011
.010
.009
.008
2.5
.010
.010
.009
.009
.009
.009
.009
.008
.008
.007
.006
2.6
.008
.008
.007
.007
.007
.007
.007
.007
.006
.005
.005
2.7
.006
.006
.006
.006
.006
.006
.005
.005
.004
.004
.003
2.8
.005
.005
.005
.005
.005
.004
.004
.004
.003
.003
.003
2.9
.004
.004
.004
.004
.004
.003
.003
.003
.003
.002
.002
3.0
.003
.003
.003
.003
.003
.003
.002
.002
.002
.002
.001
3.1
.002
.002
.002
.002
.002
.002
.002
.002
.001
.001
.001
3.2
.002
.002
.002
.002
.002
.002
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
3.3
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.000
3.4
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.000
.000
3.5
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.000
.000
.000
3.6
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.001
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
3.7
.001
.001
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
3.8
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
3.9
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
4.0
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
 t
0
t curve
Area to the
right of t 
Table 4	
Tail Areas for t Curves (Continued )
t
df
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

768 
●  Appendix A  Statistical Tables
Table 5	
Curves of b  P(Type II Error) for t Tests
b
d
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1.0
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0
2.4
2.8
3.2
a 5 .05, one-tailed
b
d
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1.0
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0
2.4
2.8
3.2
a 5 .01, one-tailed
b
d
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1.0
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0
2.4
2.8
3.2
a 5 .01, two-tailed
b
d
0
.2
.4
.6
.8
1.0
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0
2.4
2.8
a 5 .05, two-tailed
99 74
4939
29
df 5 2
19 14
9 6
4
3
74
49
39
df 5 2
19
14
9
6
4
3
29
99
df 5 1
74
39
29
49
2
df 5 2
19
14
9
6
4
3
29
39
49
99
19
14 9
6
4
3
99
74
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
Appendix A  Statistical Tables 
●  769
df1
df2
Area
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
.10
39.86
49.50
53.59
55.83
57.24
58.20
58.91
59.44
59.86
60.19
.05
161.40
199.50
215.70
224.60
230.20
234.00
236.80
238.90
240.50
241.90
.01
4052.00
5000.00
5403.00
5625.00
5764.00
5859.00
5928.00
5981.00
6022.00
6056.00
2
.10
8.53
9.00
9.16
9.24
9.29
9.33
9.35
9.37
9.38
9.39
.05
18.51
19.00
19.16
19.25
19.30
19.33
19.35
19.37
19.38
19.40
.01
98.50
99.00
99.17
99.25
99.30
99.33
99.36
99.37
99.39
99.40
.001
998.50
999.00
999.20
999.20
999.30
999.30
999.40
999.40
999.40
999.40
3
.10
5.54
5.46
5.39
5.34
5.31
5.28
5.27
5.25
5.24
5.23
.05
10.13
9.55
9.28
9.12
9.01
8.94
8.89
8.85
8.81
8.79
.01
34.12
30.82
29.46
28.71
28.24
27.91
27.67
27.49
27.35
27.23
.001
167.00
148.50
141.10
137.10
134.60
132.80
131.60
130.60
129.90
129.20
4
.10
4.54
4.32
4.19
4.11
4.05
4.01
3.98
3.95
3.94
3.92
.05
7.71
6.94
6.59
6.39
6.26
6.16
6.09
6.04
6.00
5.96
.01
21.20
18.00
16.69
15.98
15.52
15.21
14.98
14.80
14.66
14.55
.001
74.14
61.25
56.18
53.44
51.71
50.53
49.66
49.00
48.47
48.05
5
.10
4.06
3.78
3.62
3.52
3.45
3.40
3.37
3.34
3.32
3.30
.05
6.61
5.79
5.41
5.19
5.05
4.95
4.88
4.82
4.77
4.74
.01
16.26
13.27
12.06
11.39
10.97
10.67
10.46
10.29
10.16
10.05
.001
47.18
37.12
33.20
31.09
29.75
28.83
28.16
27.65
27.24
26.92
6
.10
3.78
3.46
3.29
3.18
3.11
3.05
3.01
2.98
2.96
2.94
.05
5.99
5.14
4.76
4.53
4.39
4.28
4.21
4.15
4.10
4.06
.01
13.75
10.92
9.78
9.15
8.75
8.47
8.26
8.10
7.98
7.87
.001
35.51
27.00
23.70
21.92
20.80
20.03
19.46
19.03
18.69
18.41
7
.10
3.59
3.26
3.07
2.96
2.88
2.83
2.78
2.75
2.72
2.70
.05
5.59
4.74
4.35
4.12
3.97
3.87
3.79
3.73
3.68
3.64
.01
12.25
9.55
8.45
7.85
7.46
7.19
6.99
6.84
6.72
6.62
.001
29.25
21.69
18.77
17.20
16.21
15.52
15.02
14.63
14.33
14.08
8
.10
3.46
3.11
2.92
2.81
2.73
2.67
2.62
2.59
2.56
2.54
.05
5.32
4.46
4.07
3.84
3.69
3.58
3.50
3.44
3.39
3.35
.01
11.26
8.65
7.59
7.01
6.63
6.37
6.18
6.03
5.91
5.81
.001
25.41
18.49
15.83
14.39
13.48
12.86
12.40
12.05
11.77
11.54
9
.10
3.36
3.01
2.81
2.69
2.61
2.55
2.51
2.47
2.44
2.42
.05
5.12
4.26
3.86
3.63
3.48
3.37
3.29
3.23
3.18
3.14
.01
10.56
8.02
6.99
6.42
6.06
5.80
5.61
5.47
5.35
5.26
.001
22.86
16.39
13.90
12.56
11.71
11.13
10.70
10.37
10.11
9.89
Table 6	
Values That Capture Speciﬁed Upper-Tail F Curve Areas
 Value
Area
F curve
(continued)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

770 
●  Appendix A  Statistical Tables
df1
df2
Area
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
10
.10
3.29
2.92
2.73
2.61
2.52
2.46
2.41
2.38
2.35
2.32
.05
4.96
4.10
3.71
3.48
3.33
3.22
3.14
3.07
3.02
2.98
.01
10.04
7.56
6.55
5.99
5.64
5.39
5.20
5.06
4.94
4.85
.001
21.04
14.91
12.55
11.28
10.48
9.93
9.52
9.20
8.96
8.75
11
.10
3.23
2.86
2.66
2.54
2.45
2.39
2.34
2.30
2.27
2.25
.05
4.84
3.98
3.59
3.36
3.20
3.09
3.01
2.95
2.90
2.85
.01
9.65
7.21
6.22
5.67
5.32
5.07
4.89
4.74
4.63
4.54
.001
19.69
13.81
11.56
10.35
9.58
9.05
8.66
8.35
8.12
7.92
12
.10
3.18
2.81
2.61
2.48
2.39
2.33
2.28
2.24
2.21
2.19
.05
4.75
3.89
3.49
3.26
3.11
3.00
2.91
2.85
2.80
2.75
.01
9.33
6.93
5.95
5.41
5.06
4.82
4.64
4.50
4.39
4.30
.001
18.64
12.97
10.80
9.63
8.89
8.38
8.00
7.71
7.48
7.29
13
.10
3.14
2.76
2.56
2.43
2.35
2.28
2.23
2.20
2.16
2.14
.05
4.67
3.81
3.41
3.18
3.03
2.92
2.83
2.77
2.71
2.67
.01
9.07
6.70
5.74
5.21
4.86
4.62
4.44
4.30
4.19
4.10
.001
17.82
12.31
10.21
9.07
8.35
7.86
7.49
7.21
6.98
6.80
14
.10
3.10
2.73
2.52
2.39
2.31
2.24
2.19
2.15
2.12
2.10
.05
4.60
3.74
3.34
3.11
2.96
2.85
2.76
2.70
2.65
2.60
.01
8.86
6.51
5.56
5.04
4.69
4.46
4.28
4.14
4.03
3.94
.001
17.14
11.78
9.73
8.62
7.92
7.44
7.08
6.80
6.58
6.40
15
.10
3.07
2.70
2.49
2.36
2.27
2.21
2.16
2.12
2.09
2.06
.05
4.54
3.68
3.29
3.06
2.90
2.79
2.71
2.64
2.59
2.54
.01
8.68
6.36
5.42
4.89
4.56
4.32
4.14
4.00
3.89
3.80
.001
16.59
11.34
9.34
8.25
7.57
7.09
6.74
6.47
6.26
6.08
16
.10
3.05
2.67
2.46
2.33
2.24
2.18
2.13
2.09
2.06
2.03
.05
4.49
3.63
3.24
3.01
2.85
2.74
2.66
2.59
2.54
2.49
.01
8.53
6.23
5.29
4.77
4.44
4.20
4.03
3.89
3.78
3.69
.001
16.12
10.97
9.01
7.94
7.27
6.80
6.46
6.19
5.98
5.81
17
.10
3.03
2.64
2.44
2.31
2.22
2.15
2.10
2.06
2.03
2.00
.05
4.45
3.59
3.20
2.96
2.81
2.70
2.61
2.55
2.49
2.45
.01
8.40
6.11
5.18
4.67
4.34
4.10
3.93
3.79
3.68
3.59
.001
15.72
10.66
8.73
7.68
7.02
6.56
6.22
5.96
5.75
5.58
18
.10
3.01
2.62
2.42
2.29
2.20
2.13
2.08
2.04
2.00
1.98
.05
4.41
3.55
3.16
2.93
2.77
2.66
2.58
2.51
2.46
2.41
.01
8.29
6.01
5.09
4.58
4.25
4.01
3.84
3.71
3.60
3.51
.001
15.38
10.39
8.49
7.46
6.81
6.35
6.02
5.76
5.56
5.39
19
.10
2.99
2.61
2.40
2.27
2.18
2.11
2.06
2.02
1.98
1.96
.05
4.38
3.52
3.13
2.90
2.74
2.63
2.54
2.48
2.42
2.38
.01
8.18
5.93
5.01
4.50
4.17
3.94
3.77
3.63
3.52
3.43
.001
15.08
10.16
8.28
7.27
6.62
6.18
5.85
5.59
5.39
5.22
Table 6	
Values That Capture Speciﬁed Upper-Tail F Curve Areas (Continued )
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
Appendix A  Statistical Tables 
●  771
df1
df2
Area
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
20
.10
2.97
2.59
2.38
2.25
2.16
2.09
2.04
2.00
1.96
1.94
.05
4.35
3.49
3.10
2.87
2.71
2.60
2.51
2.45
2.39
2.35
.01
8.10
5.85
4.94
4.43
4.10
3.87
3.70
3.56
3.46
3.37
.001
14.82
9.95
8.10
7.10
6.46
6.02
5.69
5.44
5.24
5.08
21
.10
2.96
2.57
2.36
2.23
2.14
2.08
2.02
1.98
1.95
1.92
.05
4.32
3.47
3.07
2.84
2.68
2.57
2.49
2.42
2.37
2.32
.01
8.02
5.78
4.87
4.37
4.04
3.81
3.64
3.51
3.40
3.31
.001
14.59
9.77
7.94
6.95
6.32
5.88
5.56
5.31
5.11
4.95
22
.10
2.95
2.56
2.35
2.22
2.13
2.06
2.01
1.97
1.93
1.90
.05
4.30
3.44
3.05
2.82
2.66
2.55
2.46
2.40
2.34
2.30
.01
7.95
5.72
4.82
4.31
3.99
3.76
3.59
3.45
3.35
3.26
.001
14.38
9.61
7.80
6.81
6.19
5.76
5.44
5.19
4.99
4.83
23
.10
2.94
2.55
2.34
2.21
2.11
2.05
1.99
1.95
1.92
1.89
.05
4.28
3.42
3.03
2.80
2.64
2.53
2.44
2.37
2.32
2.27
.01
7.88
5.66
4.76
4.26
3.94
3.71
3.54
3.41
3.30
3.21
.001
14.20
9.47
7.67
6.70
6.08
5.65
5.33
5.09
4.89
4.73
24
.10
2.93
2.54
2.33
2.19
2.10
2.04
1.98
1.94
1.91
1.88
.05
4.26
3.40
3.01
2.78
2.62
2.51
2.42
2.36
2.30
2.25
.01
7.82
5.61
4.72
4.22
3.90
3.67
3.50
3.36
3.26
3.17
.001
14.03
9.34
7.55
6.59
5.98
5.55
5.23
4.99
4.80
4.64
25
.10
2.92
2.53
2.32
2.18
2.09
2.02
1.97
1.93
1.89
1.87
.05
4.24
3.39
2.99
2.76
2.60
2.49
2.40
2.34
2.28
2.24
.01
7.77
5.57
4.68
4.18
3.85
3.63
3.46
3.32
3.22
3.13
.001
13.88
9.22
7.45
6.49
5.89
5.46
5.15
4.91
4.71
4.56
26
.10
2.91
2.52
2.31
2.17
2.08
2.01
1.96
1.92
1.88
1.86
.05
4.23
3.37
2.98
2.74
2.59
2.47
2.39
2.32
2.27
2.22
.01
7.72
5.53
4.64
4.14
3.82
3.59
3.42
3.29
3.18
3.09
.001
13.74
9.12
7.36
6.41
5.80
5.38
5.07
4.83
4.64
4.48
27
.10
2.90
2.51
2.30
2.17
2.07
2.00
1.95
1.91
1.87
1.85
.05
4.21
3.35
2.96
2.73
2.57
2.46
2.37
2.31
2.25
2.20
.01
7.68
5.49
4.60
4.11
3.78
3.56
3.39
3.26
3.15
3.06
.001
13.61
9.02
7.27
6.33
5.73
5.31
5.00
4.76
4.57
4.41
28
.10
2.89
2.50
2.29
2.16
2.06
2.00
1.94
1.90
1.87
1.84
.05
4.20
3.34
2.95
2.71
2.56
2.45
2.36
2.29
2.24
2.19
.01
7.64
5.45
4.57
4.07
3.75
3.53
3.36
3.23
3.12
3.03
.001
13.50
8.93
7.19
6.25
5.66
5.24
4.93
4.69
4.50
4.35
29
.10
2.89
2.50
2.28
2.15
2.06
1.99
1.93
1.89
1.86
1.83
.05
4.18
3.33
2.93
2.70
2.55
2.43
2.35
2.28
2.22
2.18
.01
7.60
5.42
4.54
4.04
3.73
3.50
3.33
3.20
3.09
3.00
.001
13.39
8.85
7.12
6.19
5.59
5.18
4.87
4.64
4.45
4.29
Table 6	
Values That Capture Speciﬁed Upper-Tail F Curve Areas (Continued )
(continued)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

772 
●  Appendix A  Statistical Tables
df1
df2
Area
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
  30
.10
2.88
2.49
2.28
2.14
2.05
1.98
1.93
1.88
1.85
1.82
.05
4.17
3.32
2.92
2.69
2.53
2.42
2.33
2.27
2.21
2.16
.01
7.56
5.39
4.51
4.02
3.70
3.47
3.30
3.17
3.07
2.98
.001
13.29
8.77
7.05
6.12
5.53
5.12
4.82
4.58
4.39
4.24
  40
.10
2.84
2.44
2.23
2.09
2.00
1.93
1.87
1.83
1.79
1.76
.05
4.08
3.23
2.84
2.61
2.45
2.34
2.25
2.18
2.12
2.08
.01
7.31
5.18
4.31
3.83
3.51
3.29
3.12
2.99
2.89
2.80
.001
12.61
8.25
6.59
5.70
5.13
4.73
4.44
4.21
4.02
3.87
  60
.10
2.79
2.39
2.18
2.04
1.95
1.87
1.82
1.77
1.74
1.71
.05
4.00
3.15
2.76
2.53
2.37
2.25
2.17
2.10
2.04
1.99
.01
7.08
4.98
4.13
3.65
3.34
3.12
2.95
2.82
2.72
2.63
.001
11.97
7.77
6.17
5.31
4.76
4.37
4.09
3.86
3.69
3.54
  90
.10
2.76
2.36
2.15
2.01
1.91
1.84
1.78
1.74
1.70
1.67
.05
3.95
3.10
2.71
2.47
2.32
2.20
2.11
2.04
1.99
1.94
.01
6.93
4.85
4.01
3.53
3.23
3.01
2.84
2.72
2.61
2.52
.001
11.57
7.47
5.91
5.06
4.53
4.15
3.87
3.65
3.48
3.34
120
.10
2.75
2.35
2.13
1.99
1.90
1.82
1.77
1.72
1.68
1.65
.05
3.92
3.07
2.68
2.45
2.29
2.18
2.09
2.02
1.96
1.91
.01
6.85
4.79
3.95
3.48
3.17
2.96
2.79
2.66
2.56
2.47
.001
11.38
7.32
5.78
4.95
4.42
4.04
3.77
3.55
3.38
3.24
240
.10
2.73
2.32
2.10
1.97
1.87
1.80
1.74
1.70
1.65
1.63
.05
3.88
3.03
2.64
2.41
2.25
2.14
2.04
1.98
1.92
1.87
.01
6.74
4.69
3.86
3.40
3.09
2.88
2.71
2.59
2.48
2.40
.001
11.10
7.11
5.60
4.78
4.25
3.89
3.62
3.41
3.24
3.09

.10
2.71
2.30
2.08
1.94
1.85
1.77
1.72
1.67
1.63
1.60
.05
3.84
3.00
2.60
2.37
2.21
2.10
2.01
1.94
1.88
1.83
.01
6.63
4.61
3.78
3.32
3.02
2.80
2.64
2.51
2.41
2.32
.001
10.83
6.91
5.42
4.62
4.10
3.74
3.47
3.27
3.10
2.96
Table 6	
Values That Capture Speciﬁed Upper-Tail F Curve Areas (Continued )
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
Appendix A  Statistical Tables 
●  773
Error 
df
Confi-
dence 
level
Number of populations, treatments, or levels being compared
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
    5
95%
4.60
5.22
5.67
6.03
6.33
6.58
6.80
  6.99
     
99%
6.98
7.80
8.42
8.91
9.32
9.67
9.97
10.24
    6
95%
4.34
4.90
5.30
5.63
5.90
6.12
6.32
  6.49
     
99%
6.33
7.03
7.56
7.97
8.32
8.61
8.87
  9.10
    7
95%
4.16
4.68
5.06
5.36
5.61
5.82
6.00
  6.16
   
99%
5.92
6.54
7.01
7.37
7.68
7.94
8.17
  8.37
    8
95%
4.04
4.53
4.89
5.17
5.40
5.60
5.77
  5.92
     
99%
5.64
6.20
6.62
6.96
7.24
7.47
7.68
  7.86
    9
95%
3.95
4.41
4.76
5.02
5.24
5.43
5.59
  5.74
     
99%
5.43
5.96
6.35
6.66
6.91
7.13
7.33
  7.49
  10
95%
3.88
4.33
4.65
4.91
5.12
5.30
5.46
  5.60
     
99%
5.27
5.77
6.14
6.43
6.67
6.87
7.05
  7.21
  11
95%
3.82
4.26
4.57
4.82
5.03
5.20
5.35
  5.49
     
99%
5.15
5.62
5.97
6.25
6.48
6.67
6.84
  6.99
  12
95%
3.77
4.20
4.51
4.75
4.95
5.12
5.27
  5.39
     
99%
5.05
5.50
5.84
6.10
6.32
6.51
6.67
  6.81
  13
95%
3.73
4.15
4.45
4.69
4.88
5.05
5.19
  5.32
     
99%
4.96
5.40
5.73
5.98
6.19
6.37
6.53
  6.67
  14
95%
3.70
4.11
4.41
4.64
4.83
4.99
5.13
  5.25
     
99%
4.89
5.32
5.63
5.88
6.08
6.26
6.41
  6.54
  15
95%
3.67
4.08
4.37
4.59
4.78
4.94
5.08
  5.20
     
99%
4.84
5.25
5.56
5.80
5.99
6.16
6.31
  6.44
  16
95%
3.65
4.05
4.33
4.56
4.74
4.90
5.03
  5.15
     
99%
4.79
5.19
5.49
5.72
5.92
6.08
6.22
  6.35
  17
95%
3.63
4.02
4.30
4.52
4.70
4.86
4.99
  5.11
     
99%
4.74
5.14
5.43
5.66
5.85
6.01
6.15
  6.27
  18
95%
3.61
4.00
4.28
4.49
4.67
4.82
4.96
  5.07
     
99%
4.70
5.09
5.38
5.60
5.79
5.94
6.08
  6.20
  19
95%
3.59
3.98
4.25
4.47
4.65
4.79
4.92
  5.04
     
99%
4.67
5.05
5.33
5.55
5.73
5.89
6.02
  6.14
  20
95%
3.58
3.96
4.23
4.45
4.62
4.77
4.90
  5.01
     
99%
4.64
5.02
5.29
5.51
5.69
5.84
5.97
  6.09
  24
95%
3.53
3.90
4.17
4.37
4.54
4.68
4.81
  4.92
     
99%
4.55
4.91
5.17
5.37
5.54
5.69
5.81
  5.92
  30
95%
3.49
3.85
4.10
4.30
4.46
4.60
4.72
  4.82
     
99%
4.45
4.80
5.05
5.24
5.40
5.54
5.65
  5.76
  40
95%
3.44
3.79
4.04
4.23
4.39
4.52
4.63
  4.73
     
99%
4.37
4.70
4.93
5.11
5.26
5.39
5.50
  5.60
  60
95%
3.40
3.74
3.98
4.16
4.31
4.44
4.55
  4.65
     
99%
4.28
4.59
4.82
4.99
5.13
5.25
5.36
  5.45
120
95%
3.36
3.68
3.92
4.10
4.24
4.36
4.47
  4.56
     
99%
4.20
4.50
4.71
4.87
5.01
5.12
5.21
  5.30
  
95%
3.31
3.63
3.86
4.03
4.17
4.29
4.39
  4.47
     
99%
4.12
4.40
4.60
4.76
4.88
4.99
5.08
  5.16
Table 7	
Critical Values of q for the Studentized Range Distribution
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

774 
●  Appendix A  Statistical Tables
Right-tail area
df  1
df  2
df  3
df  4
df  5
.0.100
2.70
4.60
6.25
7.77
9.23
0.100
2.70
4.60
6.25
7.77
9.23
0.095
2.78
4.70
6.36
7.90
9.37
0.090
2.87
4.81
6.49
8.04
9.52
0.085
2.96
4.93
6.62
8.18
9.67
0.080
3.06
5.05
6.75
8.33
9.83
0.075
3.17
5.18
6.90
8.49
10.00
0.070
3.28
5.31
7.06
8.66
10.19
0.065
3.40
5.46
7.22
8.84
10.38
0.060
3.53
5.62
7.40
9.04
10.59
0.055
3.68
5.80
7.60
9.25
10.82
0.050
3.84
5.99
7.81
9.48
11.07
0.045
4.01
6.20
8.04
9.74
11.34
0.040
4.21
6.43
8.31
10.02
11.64
0.035
4.44
6.70
8.60
10.34
11.98
0.030
4.70
7.01
8.94
10.71
12.37
0.025
5.02
7.37
9.34
11.14
12.83
0.020
5.41
7.82
9.83
11.66
13.38
0.015
5.91
8.39
10.46
12.33
14.09
0.010
6.63
9.21
11.34
13.27
15.08
0.005
7.87
10.59
12.83
14.86
16.74
0.001
10.82
13.81
16.26
18.46
20.51
,0.001
10.82
13.81
16.26
18.46
20.51
Right-tail area
df  6
df  7
df  8
df  9
df  10
.0.100
10.64
12.01
13.36
14.68
15.98
0.100
10.64
12.01
13.36
14.68
15.98
0.095
10.79
12.17
13.52
14.85
16.16
0.090
10.94
12.33
13.69
15.03
16.35
0.085
11.11
12.50
13.87
15.22
16.54
0.080
11.28
12.69
14.06
15.42
16.75
0.075
11.46
12.88
14.26
15.63
16.97
0.070
11.65
13.08
14.48
15.85
17.20
0.065
11.86
13.30
14.71
16.09
17.44
0.060
12.08
13.53
14.95
16.34
17.71
0.055
12.33
13.79
15.22
16.62
17.99
0.050
12.59
14.06
15.50
16.91
18.30
0.045
12.87
14.36
15.82
17.24
18.64
0.040
13.19
14.70
16.17
17.60
19.02
0.035
13.55
15.07
16.56
18.01
19.44
0.030
13.96
15.50
17.01
18.47
19.92
0.025
14.44
16.01
17.53
19.02
20.48
0.020
15.03
16.62
18.16
19.67
21.16
0.015
15.77
17.39
18.97
20.51
22.02
0.010
16.81
18.47
20.09
21.66
23.20
0.005
18.54
20.27
21.95
23.58
25.18
0.001
22.45
24.32
26.12
27.87
29.58
,0.001
.22.45
.24.32
.26.12
.27.87
.29.58
Table 8	
Upper-Tail Areas for Chi-Square Distributions
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
Appendix A  Statistical Tables 
●  775
Right-tail area
df  11
df  12
df  13
df  14
df  15
.0.100
17.27
18.54
19.81
21.06
22.30
0.100
17.27
18.54
19.81
21.06
22.30
0.095
17.45
18.74
20.00
21.26
22.51
0.090
17.65
18.93
20.21
21.47
22.73
0.085
17.85
19.14
20.42
21.69
22.95
0.080
18.06
19.36
20.65
21.93
23.19
0.075
18.29
19.60
20.89
22.17
23.45
0.070
18.53
19.84
21.15
22.44
23.72
0.065
18.78
20.11
21.42
22.71
24.00
0.060
19.06
20.39
21.71
23.01
24.31
0.055
19.35
20.69
22.02
23.33
24.63
0.050
19.67
21.02
22.36
23.68
24.99
0.045
20.02
21.38
22.73
24.06
25.38
0.040
20.41
21.78
23.14
24.48
25.81
0.035
20.84
22.23
23.60
24.95
26.29
0.030
21.34
22.74
24.12
25.49
26.84
0.025
21.92
23.33
24.73
26.11
27.48
0.020
22.61
24.05
25.47
26.87
28.25
0.015
23.50
24.96
26.40
27.82
29.23
0.010
24.72
26.21
27.68
29.14
30.57
0.005
26.75
28.29
29.81
31.31
32.80
0.001
31.26
32.90
34.52
36.12
37.69
0.001
.31.26
.32.90
.34.52
.36.12
.37.69
Right-tail area
df  16
df  17
df  18
df  19
df  20
.0.100
23.54
24.77
25.98
27.20
28.41
0.100
23.54
24.76
25.98
27.20
28.41
0.095
23.75
24.98
26.21
27.43
28.64
0.090
23.97
25.21
26.44
27.66
28.88
0.085
24.21
25.45
26.68
27.91
29.14
0.080
24.45
25.70
26.94
28.18
29.40
0.075
24.71
25.97
27.21
28.45
29.69
0.070
24.99
26.25
27.50
28.75
29.99
0.065
25.28
26.55
27.81
29.06
30.30
0.060
25.59
26.87
28.13
29.39
30.64
0.055
25.93
27.21
28.48
29.75
31.01
0.050
26.29
27.58
28.86
30.14
31.41
0.045
26.69
27.99
29.28
30.56
31.84
0.040
27.13
28.44
29.74
31.03
32.32
0.035
27.62
28.94
30.25
31.56
32.85
0.030
28.19
29.52
30.84
32.15
33.46
0.025
28.84
30.19
31.52
32.85
34.16
0.020
29.63
30.99
32.34
33.68
35.01
0.015
30.62
32.01
33.38
34.74
36.09
0.010
32.00
33.40
34.80
36.19
37.56
0.005
34.26
35.71
37.15
38.58
39.99
0.001
39.25
40.78
42.31
43.81
45.31
,0.001
39.25
40.78
42.31
43.81
45.31
Table 8	
Upper-Tail Areas for Chi-Square Distributions (Continued )
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

776 
●  Appendix A  Statistical Tables
n  5
p
x
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.9
0.95
  0
.774
.590
.328
.237
.168
.078
.031
.010
.002
.001
.000
.000
.000
  1
.204
.328
.410
.396
.360
.259
.156
.077
.028
.015
.006
.000
.000
  2
.021
.073
.205
.264
.309
.346
.313
.230
.132
.088
.051
.008
.001
  3
.001
.008
.051
.088
.132
.230
.313
.346
.309
.264
.205
.073
.021
  4
.000
.000
.006
.015
.028
.077
.156
.259
.360
.396
.410
.328
.204
  5
.000
.000
.000
.001
.002
.010
.031
.078
.168
.237
.328
.590
.774
n  10
p
x
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.9
0.95
  0
.599
.349
.107
.056
.028
.006
.001
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  1
.315
.387
.268
.188
.121
.040
.010
.002
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  2
.075
.194
.302
.282
.233
.121
.044
.011
.001
.000
.000
.000
.000
  3
.010
.057
.201
.250
.267
.215
.117
.042
.009
.003
.001
.000
.000
  4
.001
.011
.088
.146
.200
.251
.205
.111
.037
.016
.006
.000
.000
  5
.000
.001
.026
.058
.103
.201
.246
.201
.103
.058
.026
.001
.000
  6
.000
.000
.006
.016
.037
.111
.205
.251
.200
.146
.088
.011
.001
  7
.000
.000
.001
.003
.009
.042
.117
.215
.267
.250
.201
.057
.010
  8
.000
.000
.000
.000
.001
.011
.044
.121
.233
.282
.302
.194
.075
  9
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.002
.010
.040
.121
.188
.268
.387
.315
10
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.001
.006
.028
.056
.107
.349
.599
Table 9	
Binomial Probabilities
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
Appendix A  Statistical Tables 
●  777
n  15
p
x
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.9
0.95
  0
.463
.206
.035
.013
.005
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  1
.366
.343
.132
.067
.031
.005
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  2
.135
.267
.231
.156
.092
.022
.003
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  3
.031
.129
.250
.225
.170
.063
.014
.002
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  4
.005
.043
.188
.225
.219
.127
.042
.007
.001
.000
.000
.000
.000
  5
.001
.010
.103
.165
.206
.186
.092
.024
.003
.001
.000
.000
.000
  6
.000
.002
.043
.092
.147
.207
.153
.061
.012
.003
.001
.000
.000
  7
.000
.000
.014
.039
.081
.177
.196
.118
.035
.013
.003
.000
.000
  8
.000
.000
.003
.013
.035
.118
.196
.177
.081
.039
.014
.000
.000
  9
.000
.000
.001
.003
.012
.061
.153
.207
.147
.092
.043
.002
.000
10
.000
.000
.000
.001
.003
.024
.092
.186
.206
.165
.103
.010
.001
11
.000
.000
.000
.000
.001
.007
.042
.127
.219
.225
.188
.043
.005
12
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.002
.014
.063
.170
.225
.250
.129
.031
13
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.003
.022
.092
.156
.231
.267
.135
14
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.005
.031
.067
.132
.343
.366
15
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.005
.013
.035
.206
.463
n  20
p
x
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.9
0.95
  0
.358
.122
.012
.003
.001
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  1
.377
.270
.058
.021
.007
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  2
.189
.285
.137
.067
.028
.003
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  3
.060
.190
.205
.134
.072
.012
.001
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  4
.013
.090
.218
.190
.130
.035
.005
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  5
.002
.032
.175
.202
.179
.075
.015
.001
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  6
.000
.009
.109
.169
.192
.124
.037
.005
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  7
.000
.002
.055
.112
.164
.166
.074
.015
.001
.000
.000
.000
.000
  8
.000
.000
.022
.061
.114
.180
.120
.035
.004
.001
.000
.000
.000
  9
.000
.000
.007
.027
.065
.160
.160
.071
.012
.003
.000
.000
.000
10
.000
.000
.002
.010
.031
.117
.176
.117
.031
.010
.002
.000
.000
11
.000
.000
.000
.003
.012
.071
.160
.160
.065
.027
.007
.000
.000
12
.000
.000
.000
.001
.004
.035
.120
.180
.114
.061
.022
.000
.000
13
.000
.000
.000
.000
.001
.015
.074
.166
.164
.112
.055
.002
.000
14
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.005
.037
.124
.192
.169
.109
.009
.000
15
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.001
.015
.075
.179
.202
.175
.032
.002
16
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.005
.035
.130
.190
.218
.090
.013
17
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.001
.012
.072
.134
.205
.190
.060
18
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.003
.028
.067
.137
.285
.189
19
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.007
.021
.058
.270
.377
20
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.001
.003
.012
.122
.358
Table 9	
Binomial Probabilities (Continued )
(continued)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

778 
●  Appendix A  Statistical Tables
n  25
p
x
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.9
0.95
  0
.277
.072
.004
.001
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  1
.365
.199
.024
.006
.001
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  2
.231
.266
.071
.025
.007
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  3
.093
.226
.136
.064
.024
.002
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  4
.027
.138
.187
.118
.057
.007
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  5
.006
.065
.196
.165
.103
.020
.002
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  6
.001
.024
.163
.183
.147
.044
.005
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  7
.000
.007
.111
.165
.171
.080
.014
.001
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  8
.000
.002
.062
.124
.165
.120
.032
.003
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
  9
.000
.000
.029
.078
.134
.151
.061
.009
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
10
.000
.000
.012
.042
.092
.161
.097
.021
.001
.000
.000
.000
.000
11
.000
.000
.004
.019
.054
.147
.133
.043
.004
.001
.000
.000
.000
12
.000
.000
.001
.007
.027
.114
.155
.076
.011
.002
.000
.000
.000
13
.000
.000
.000
.002
.011
.076
.155
.114
.027
.007
.001
.000
.000
14
.000
.000
.000
.001
.004
.043
.133
.147
.054
.019
.004
.000
.000
15
.000
.000
.000
.000
.001
.021
.097
.161
.092
.042
.012
.000
.000
16
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.009
.061
.151
.134
.078
.029
.000
.000
17
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.003
.032
.120
.165
.124
.062
.002
.000
18
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.001
.014
.080
.171
.165
.111
.007
.000
19
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.005
.044
.147
.183
.163
.024
.001
20
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.002
.020
.103
.165
.196
.065
.006
21
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.007
.057
.118
.187
.138
.027
22
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.002
.024
.064
.136
.226
.093
23
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.007
.025
.071
.266
.231
24
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.002
.006
.024
.199
.365
25
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.001
.004
.072
.277
Table 9	
Binomial Probabilities (Continued )
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 1
Hock, Roger R. Forty Studies That Changed Psychology: 
Exploration into the History of Psychological Research. 
Prentice Hall, 1995.
Moore, David, and William Notz. Statistics: Concepts 
and Controversies, 8th ed. W. H. Freeman, 2012. 
(A nice, informal survey of statistical concepts and 
reasoning.)
Peck, Roxy, ed. Statistics: A Guide to the Unknown, 
4th ed. Cengage Learning, 2006. (Short, nontech-
nical articles by a number of well-known statisti-
cians and users of statistics on the application of 
statistics in various disciplines and subject areas.)
Utts, Jessica. Seeing Through Statistics, 4th ed. Cengage 
Learning, 2014. (A nice introduction to the funda-
mental ideas of statistical reasoning.)
Chapter 2
Cobb, George. Introduction to the Design and Analysis of 
Ex­periments. Wiley, 2008. (An interesting and thor-
ough introduction to the design of ­experiments.)
Freedman, David, Robert Pisani, and Roger Purves. 
Statistics, 4th ed. W. W. Norton, 2007. (The ﬁrst 
two chapters contain some interesting examples of 
both well-designed and poorly designed experimen-
tal studies.)
Lohr, Sharon. Sampling Design and Analysis, 2nd ed. 
Cengage Learning, 2010. (A nice discussion of 
sampling and sources of bias at an accessible level.)
Moore, David, and William Notz. Statistics: Concepts 
and Controversies, 8th ed. W. H. Freeman, 2012. 
(Contains an excellent chapter on the advantages 
and pitfalls of experimentation and another chapter 
in a similar vein on sample surveys and polls.)
Scheaffer, Richard L., William Mendenhall, and Lyman 
Ott. ­Elementary Survey Sampling, 7th ed. Cengage 
Learning, 2011. (An accessible yet thorough treat-
ment of the ­subject.)
Sudman, Seymour, and Norman Bradburn. Asking 
Questions: A Practical Guide to Questionnaire De-
sign. Jossey-Bass, 1982. (A good discussion of the 
art of questionnaire design.)
Appendix B References
779
Chapter 3
Chambers, John, William Cleveland, Beat Kleiner, and 
Paul Tukey. Graphical Methods for Data Analysis. 
Wadsworth, 1983. (This is an excellent survey of 
methods, ­illustrated with numerous interesting 
examples.)
Cleveland, William. The Elements of Graphing Data, 
2nd ed. Hobart Press, 1994. (An informal and 
­informative introduction to various aspects of 
graphical analysis.)
Freedman, David, Robert Pisani, and Roger Purves. 
Statistics, 4th ed. W. W. Norton, 2007. (An excel-
lent, informal introduction to concepts, with some 
insightful cautionary examples concerning misuses 
of statistical methods.)
Moore, David, and William Notz. Statistics: Concepts and 
Controversies, 8th ed. W. H. Freeman, 2012. (A 
nonmathematical yet highly entertaining introduc-
tion to our discipline. Two thumbs up!)
Chapter 4
Chambers, John, William Cleveland, Beat Kleiner, and 
Paul Tukey. Graphical Methods for Data Analysis. 
Wadsworth, 1983. (This is an excellent survey of 
methods, illustrated with numerous interesting 
examples.)
Cleveland, William. The Elements of Graphing Data, 
2nd ed. Hobart Press, 1994. (An informal and 
­informative introduction to various aspects of 
graphical analysis.)
Freedman, David, Robert Pisani, and Roger Purves. 
Statistics, 4th ed. W. W. Norton, 2007. (An excel-
lent, informal introduction to concepts, with some 
insightful cautionary examples concerning misuses 
of statistical methods.)
Moore, David, and William Notz. Statistics: Concepts and 
Controversies, 8th ed. W. H. Freeman, 2012. (A 
nonmathematical yet highly entertaining introduc-
tion to our discipline. Two thumbs up!)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

780 
●  Appendix B 
References
Chapter 5
Neter, John, William Wasserman, and Michael Kutner. 
Applied Linear Statistical Models, 5th ed. McGraw-
Hill, 2005. (The ﬁrst half of this book gives a com-
prehensive treatment of regression analysis without 
overindulging in mathematical development; a 
highly recommended reference.)
Chapter 6
Devore, Jay L. Probability and Statistics for Engineering 
and the Sciences, 8th ed. Cengage Learning, 2011. 
(The treatment of probability in this source is more 
comprehensive and at a somewhat higher mathe-
matical level than ours is in this textbook.)
Mosteller, Frederick, Robert Rourke, and George Thomas. 
Probability with Statistical Applications. Addison-­
Wesley, 1970. (A good introduction to probability at 
a modest mathematical level.)
Chapter 8
Freedman, David, Robert Pisani, and Roger Purves. 
Statistics, 4th ed. W. W. Norton, 2007. (This book 
gives an excellent informal discussion of sampling 
distributions.)
Chapter 9
Devore, Jay L. Probability and Statistics for Engineering 
and the Sciences, 8th ed. Cengage Learning, 2011. 
(This book gives a somewhat general introduction 
to con­ﬁ­dence intervals.)
Freedman, David, Robert Pisani, and Roger Purves, 
Statistics, 4th ed. W. W. Norton, 2007. (This book 
contains an informal discussion of con­ﬁdence 
intervals.)
Chapter 10
The books by Freedman et al. and Moore listed in pre-
vious chapter references are excellent sources. Their 
orientation is primarily conceptual, with a mini-
mum of mathematical de­velopment, and both 
sources offer many valuable insights.
Chapter 11
Devore, Jay. Probability and Statistics for Engineering 
and the Sciences, 8th ed. Cengage Learning, 2011. 
(Contains a somewhat more comprehensive treat-
ment of the inferential material presented in this 
and the two previous chapters, although the nota-
tion is a bit more mathematical than that of the 
present textbook.)
Chapter 12
Agresti, Alan, and B. Finlay. Statistical Methods for the 
Social Sciences, 4th ed. Prentice Hall, 2009. (This 
book includes a good discussion of measures of 
­association for two-way frequency tables.)
Everitt, B. S. The Analysis of Contingency Tables. 
­Halsted Press, 1977. (A compact but informative 
survey of methods for analyzing categorical data.)
Mosteller, Frederick, and Robert Rourke. Sturdy Statis-
tics. Addison-Wesley, 1973. (Contains several read-
able chapters on the varied uses of the chi-square 
statistic.)
Chapter 13
Neter, John, William Wasserman, and Michael Kutner. 
Applied Linear Statistical Models, 5th ed. 
­McGraw-Hill, 2005. (The ﬁrst half of this book 
gives a comprehensive treatment of regression anal-
ysis without overindulging in mathematical devel-
opment; a highly recommended reference.)
Chapter 14
Kerlinger, Fred N., and Elazar J. Pedhazur, Multiple 
Regression in Behavioral Research, 3rd ed. Holt, 
Rinehart & Winston, 1997. (A readable introduc-
tion to multiple regression.)
Neter, John, William Wasserman, and Michael Kutner. 
Applied Linear Statistical Models, 4th ed. McGraw-
Hill, 1996. (The first half of this book gives a com-
prehensive treatment of regression analysis without 
overindulging in mathematical development; a 
highly recommended reference.)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
Appendix B  References 
●  781
Chapter 15
Miller, Rupert. Beyond ANOVA: The Basics of Applied 
Statistics. Wiley, 1986. (This book contains a 
wealth of information concerning violations of 
­basic assumptions and alternative methods of 
analysis.)
Winer, G. J., D. R. Brown, and K. M. Michels, Statistical 
Prin­ciples in Experimental Design, 3rd ed. McGraw-
Hill, 1991. (This book contains extended discus-
sion of ANOVA with many examples worked out 
in great detail.)
Chapter 16
Conover, W. J. Practical Nonparametric Statistics, 
3rd ed. Wiley, 1999. (An accessible presentation of 
distribution­-free methods.)
Daniel, Wayne. Applied Nonparametric Statistics, 
2nd ed. PWS-Kent, 1990. (An elementary pre-
sentation of distribution­-free methods, including 
the rank-sum test discussed in Section 16.1.)
Mosteller, Frederick, and Richard Rourke. Sturdy Sta-
tistics. Addison-Wesley, 1973. (A readable, intuitive 
development of distribution-free methods, includ-
ing those based on ranks.)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 1
1.1	 Descriptive statistics is the branch of statistics that involves 
the organization and summary of the values in a data set. Inferen-
tial statistics is the branch of statistics concerned with reaching 
conclusions about a population based on the information pro-
vided by a sample.
1.3	 Sample
1.5	 a. The population of interest is the set of all 15,000 stu-
dents at the university. b. The sample is the 200 students who 
are interviewed.
1.7	 The population is the set of all 7000 property owners. The 
sample is the group of 500 owners included in the survey.
1.9	 The population is the set of 5000 used bricks. The sample 
is the set of 100 bricks she checks.
1.11	a. The researchers wanted to know if taking a garlic supple-
ment reduces the risk of getting a cold. b. We would want to 
know how many people participated in the study and how the 
people were assigned to the two groups.  
1.13	a. Categorical b. Categorical c. Numerical  
(discrete) d. Numerical (continuous) e. Categorical  
f. Numerical (continuous)
1.15	a. Continuous b. Continuous c. Continuous  
d. Discrete
1.17	a. Gender of purchaser, brand of motorcycle, telephone 
area code b. Number of previous motorcycles  
c. Bar chart d. Dotplot
1.19	b. Meat and poultry items appear to be relatively low cost 
sources of protein.
1.21	b. The most common reason was financial, accounting for 
30.2% of students who left for non-academic reasons. The next 
two most common reasons were health and other personal rea-
sons, accounting for 19.0% and 15.9%, respectively, of the 
students who left for non-academic reasons.
1.23	a. There were two sites that received far greater numbers of 
visits than the remaining 23 sites. Also, the distribution of the 
number of visits has the greatest density of points for the smaller 
numbers of visits, with the density decreasing as the number of 
visits increases. b. There were two sites that were used by far 
greater numbers of individuals (unique visitors) than the 
remaining 23 sites. However, these two sites are less far above the 
others in terms of the number of unique visitors than they are in 
terms of the total number of visits. c. The statistic “visits per 
unique visitor” tells us how heavily the individuals are using the 
sites.
1.25	b. Eastern states have, on average, lower wireless percents 
than states in the other two regions. The West and Middle states 
regions have, on average, roughly equal wireless percents.
1.27	a. Rate per 10,000 flights
1.29	b. By far the largest number of students purchased books at 
the campus bookstore. Many also used an online bookstore or an 
off-campus bookstore. Relatively few students fell into the other 
response categories.
1.31
Type of Household
Relative Frequency
Nonfamily
0.29
Married with children
0.27
Married without children
0.29
Single parent
0.15
1.33	a. Categorical c. No
1.35	b. The most frequently occurring violation categories were 
security (43%) and maintenance (39%). The least frequently 
occurring violation categories were flight operations (6%) and 
hazardous materials (3%).
Chapter 2
2.1	 Observational study, because the researchers did not assign 
participants to the length of stay groups.
2.3	 Experiment, because the professor determined which stu-
dents were in each of the two experimental groups.
2.5	 a. Experiment, because researchers decided which partici-
pants would receive which treatments. b. Yes, because the partici-
pants were randomly assigned to the treatments.
2.7	 a. Experiment. b. Yes, because the participants were ran-
domly assigned to the treatments.
2.9	 We are told that moderate drinkers, as a group, tended to 
be better educated, wealthier, and more active than nondrinkers. 
It is possible the observed reduction in the risk of heart disease 
among moderate drinkers is caused by one of these attributes and 
not by the moderate drinking.
2.11	a. The data would need to be collected from a simple 
random sample of affluent Americans. b. No
2.13	Number the names on the list from 1 to n, where n is the 
number of students at the college. Then use a random number 
generator to select 100 different numbers between 1 and n. Stu-
dents corresponding to these 100 numbers would be included in 
the sample.
2.15	Number names on list, use random number generator to 
select 30 numbers between 1 and 500. Signatures corresponding 
to the 30 selected numbers constitute the random sample.
2.17	a. all American women b. No, only women for three states 
were included in the sample. c. no d. The description does not 
Answers to Selected  
Odd-Numbered Exercises
783
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

784 
●  Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises
say how the women were selected, so it is difficult to tell. How-
ever, selection bias is present because women from most states 
had no chance of being included in the sample.
2.19	a. Using the list, first number the part-time students 
1–3000. Use a random number generator on a calculator or 
computer to randomly select a whole number between 1 and 
3000. The number selected represents the first part-time student 
to be included in the sample. Repeat the number selection, ignor-
ing repeated numbers, until 10 part-time students have been 
selected. Then number the full-time students 1–3500 and select 
10 full-time students using the same procedure. b. No
2.21	a. The pages of the book have already been numbered 
between 1 and the highest page number in the book. Use a 
random number generator on a calculator or computer to ran-
domly select a whole number between 1 and the highest page 
number in the book. The number selected will be the first page 
to be included in the sample. Repeat the number selection, ignor-
ing repeated numbers, until the required number of pages has 
been selected. b. Pages that include exercises tend to contain 
more words than pages that do not include exercises. Therefore, 
it would be sensible to stratify according to this criterion. Assum-
ing that 20 nonexercise pages and 20 exercise pages will be 
included in the sample, the sample should be selected as follows: 
Use a random number generator to randomly select a whole 
number between 1 and the highest page number in the book; the 
number selected will be the first page to be included in the 
sample; repeat the number selection, ignoring repeated numbers 
and keeping track of the number of pages of each type selected, 
until 20 pages of one type have been selected; then continue in 
the same way, but ignore numbers corresponding to pages of that 
type; when 20 pages of the other type have been selected, stop 
the process. c. Randomly select one page from the first 20 pages 
in the book. Include in your sample that page and every 20th 
page from that page onward. d. Roughly speaking, in terms of the 
numbers of words per page, each chapter is representative of the 
book as a whole. It is therefore sensible for the chapters to be 
used as clusters. Using a random number generator, randomly 
choose three chapters. Then count the number of words on each 
page in those three chapters. e. Answers will vary. f. Answers 
will vary.
2.23	The researchers should be concerned about nonresponse bias.
2.25	It is not reasonable to consider the participants to be repre-
sentative of all students with regard to their truthfulness in the 
various forms of communication. Also, the students knew they 
were surveying themselves as to the truthfulness of their interac-
tions. This could easily have changed their behavior in particular 
social contexts and, therefore, could have distorted the results of 
the study.
2.27	It is quite possible that people who read that newspaper or 
access this web site differ from the population in some relevant 
way, particularly considering that they are both New York City-
based publications.
2.29	a. Yes. It is possible that students of a given class-standing 
tend to be similar in the amounts of money they spend on text-
books. b. Yes. It is possible that students who pursue a certain 
field of study tend to be similar in the amounts of money they 
spend on textbooks. c. No. It is unlikely that stratifying in this 
way will produce groups that are homogeneous in terms of the 
students’ spending on textbooks.
2.31	No, because the people who sent their hair for testing did 
so voluntarily. It is quite possible that people who would choose 
to participate in a study of this sort differ in their mercury levels 
from the population as a whole.
2.33	a. Binding strength b. Type of glue c. The extraneous vari-
ables mentioned are the number of pages in the book and 
whether the book is bound as a hardback or a paperback. Further 
extraneous variables that might be considered include the weight 
of the material used for the cover and the type of paper used.
2.35	Answers will vary. One possible answer: Write the names of 
the 30 subjects on slips of paper. Mix the slips and then select 
10. Assign these 10 subjects to hand-drying method 1. Mix the 
remaining slips and then select 10. Assign these 10 subjects to 
hand-drying method 2. Assign the remaining 10 subjects to 
method 3.
2.39	The figure shows that comparable groups in terms of age 
have been formed.
2.41	We rely on random assignment to produce comparable 
experimental groups.
2.45	a. Experiment b. no c. yes d. Yes, because the experiment 
used random assignment of subjects to treatments. e. No, because 
the subjects were not randomly selected.
2.47	a. Red wine, yellow onions, black tea b. Absorption of 
flavonol into the blood c. Gender, amount of flavonols consumed 
apart from experimental treatment, tolerance of alcohol in wine
2.49	“Blinding” is ensuring that the experimental subjects do not 
know which treatment they were given and/or ensuring that the 
people who measure the response variable do not know who was 
given which treatment.
2.51	a. In order to know that the results of this experiment are 
valid, it is necessary to know that the assignment of the women 
to the groups was done randomly. If the women were allowed to 
choose which groups they went into, it would be impossible to 
tell whether the stated results were caused by the discussions of 
art or by the greater social nature of the women in the art discus-
sion group. b. Suppose that all the women took part in weekly 
discussions of art, and that, generally, an improvement in the 
medical conditions mentioned was observed among the subjects. 
Then it would be impossible to tell whether these health im-
provements had been caused by the discussions of art or by some 
factor that was affecting all the subjects, such as an improvement 
in the weather over the 4 months. By including a control group, 
and by observing that the improvements did not take place (gen-
erally speaking) for those in the control group, factors such as 
this can be discounted, and the discussions of art are established 
as the cause of the improvements.
2.55	Answers will vary. One possible answer: Number the girls 
from 1 to 700 and then use a random number generator to select 
350 of these girls for the book group. Assign the remaining girls 
to the other group. Then number the boys from 1 to 600 and use 
a random number generator to select 300 of the boys for the 
book group Assign the remaining boys to the other group.
2.57	a. If the judges had known which chowder came from 
which restaurant, then it is unlikely that Denny’s chowder would 
have won the contest, since the judges would probably be condi-
tioned by this knowledge to choose chowders from more expen-
sive restaurants. b. In experiments, if the people measuring the 
response are not blinded, they will often be conditioned to see 
different responses to some treatments over other treatments, in 
the same way as the judges would have been conditioned to 
favor the expensive restaurant chowders. Therefore, it is neces-
sary that the people measuring the response should not know 
which subject received which treatment, so that the treatments 
can be compared on their own merits.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises 
● 
785
2.59	a. A placebo group would be necessary if the mere thought 
of having amalgam fillings could produce kidney disorders. How-
ever, since the experimental subjects were sheep, the researchers 
do not need to be concerned that this would happen. b. A resin 
filling treatment group would be necessary in order to provide 
evidence that it is the material in the amalgam fillings, rather than 
the process of filling the teeth, or just the presence of foreign 
bodies in the teeth, that is the cause of the kidney disorders. 
If the amalgam filling group developed the kidney disorders and 
the resin filling group did not, then this would provide evidence 
that it is some ingredient in the amalgam fillings that is causing 
the kidney problems. c. Since there is concern about the effect of 
amalgam fillings, it would be considered unethical to use humans 
in the experiment.
2.61	a. This is an observational study. b. In order to evaluate the 
study, we need to know whether the sample was a random sam-
ple. c. No. Since the sample used in the Healthy Steps study was 
known to be nationally representative, and since the paper states 
that, compared with the HS trial, parents in the study sample 
were disproportionately older, white, more educated, and mar-
ried, it is clear that it is not reasonable to regard the sample as 
representative of parents of all children at age 5.5 years. d. The 
potential confounding variable mentioned is what the children 
watched.  
e. The quotation from Kamila Mistry makes a statement about 
cause and effect and therefore is inconsistent with the statement 
that the study cannot show that TV was the cause of later 
problems.
2.63	Answers will vary.
2.65	By randomly selecting the phone numbers, calling back 
those for which there are no answers, and asking for the adult in 
the household with the most recent birthday, the researchers are 
avoiding selection bias. However, selection bias could result from 
the fact that not all Californians have phones.
2.67	We rely on random assignment to produce comparable 
experimental groups. If the researchers had hand-picked the 
treatment groups, they might unconsciously have favored one 
group over the other in terms of some variable that affects the 
ability of the people at the centers to respond to the materials 
provided.
2.69	a. Observational study b. It is quite possible that the chil-
dren who watched large amounts of TV in their early years were 
also those, generally speaking, who received less attention from 
their parents, and it was the lack of attention from their parents 
that caused the later attention problems, not the TV-watching.
2.71	For example, it is possible that people who are not married 
are more likely to go out alone (except for the widowed who are 
older and therefore tend to stay home). It could then be possible 
that going out alone is causing the risk of being a victim of vio-
lent crime, not the marital status.
2.73	All the participants were women, from Texas, and volun-
teers. All three of these facts tell us that it is likely to be unrea-
sonable to generalize the results of the study to all college 
students.
2.75	a. The extraneous variables identified are gender, age, 
weight, lean body mass, and capacity to lift weights. They were 
dealt with by direct control: all the volunteers were male, about 
the same age, and similar in weight, lean body mass, and capacity 
to lift weights. b. Yes, it is important that the men were not told 
which treatment they were receiving; otherwise the effect of 
giving a placebo would have been removed. If the participants 
were told which treatment they were receiving, then those taking 
the creatine would have the additional effect of the mere taking of 
a supplement thought to be helpful (the placebo effect) and those 
getting the fake preparation would not get this effect. It would 
then be impossible to distinguish the influence of the placebo 
effect from the effect of the creatine itself. c. Yes, it would have 
been useful if those measuring the increase in muscle mass had 
not known who received which treatment. With this knowledge, 
it is possible that the people would have been unconsciously 
influenced into exaggerating the increase in muscle mass for 
those who took the creatine.
2.77	a. Answers will vary. b. Answers will vary. Some examples 
include soil type, amount of water, amount of sunlight.  
c. experiment
2.79	a. Answers will vary. b. Answers will vary.
Chapter 3
3.3	 a. The second and third categories (“Permitted for business 
purposes only” and “Permitted for limited personal use” were 
combined into one category (“No, but some limits apply”). c. Pie 
chart, regular bar graph
3.5	 a.	
10
20
30
25
15
5
0
Percentage
Strongly
disagree
Disagree
Agree
Strongly
agree
Don’t know
Response
b. Answers will vary. One possible answer: Majority of students 
not ready for ebooks.
3.7	 b. Were the surveys carried out on random samples of 
married women from those countries? How were the questions 
worded? c. In one country, Japan, the percentage of women who 
say they never get help from their husbands is far higher than the 
percentages in any of the other four countries included. The 
percentages in the other four countries are similar, with Canada 
showing the lowest percentage of women who say they do not get 
help from their husbands.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

786 
●  Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises
3.11	a.
0
35
30
25
20
15
5
10
Percentage unﬁt
Male
Female
Adolescent
Male
Female
Adult
b. The percentage unfit was higher for females in both age cate-
gories, but the difference in percentage unfit for males and fe-
males was greater for adults.
3.13	a.	
0.0
0.2
0.6
0.4
0.8
1.0
Relative frequency
Private
non-proﬁt
Good standing
In default
For
proﬁt
Public
Loan status
Private
non-proﬁt
For
proﬁt
Public
Public
College type
Private non-proﬁt
For proﬁt
b. The bar for “in default” for the for-profit colleges is higher than 
the “in default” bars for the other two types of colleges.
3.15	
10
578
11
79
12
1114
13
001122478899
14
0011112235669
15
11122445599
16
1227
17
1
18
19
Stem: Ones
20
8
Leaf: Tenths
A typical number of births per thousand of the population is 
around 14, with most birth rates concentrated in the 13.0 to 15.9 
range. The distribution has just one peak (at the 14–15 class). 
There is an extreme value, 20.8, at the high end of the data set, 
and this is the only birth rate above 17.1. The distribution is not 
symmetrical, since it has a greater spread to the right of its center 
than to the left.
3.17	a.
0H
55567889999
1L
0000111113334
1H
556666666667789
2L
00001122233
Stem: Tens
2H
5
Leaf: Ones
A typical percentage of households with only a wireless phone is 
around 15.
b.
West
East
998
0H
555789
110
1L
00011134
8766
1H
666
21
2L
00
Stem: Tens
5
2H
Leaf: Ones
A typical percentage of households with only a wireless phone for 
the West is around 16, which is greater than that for the East 
(around 11). There is a slightly greater spread of values in the 
West than in the East, with values in the West ranging from 8 to 
25 (a range of 17) and values in the East ranging from 5 to 20 
(a range of 15). The distribution for the West is roughly symmet-
rical, while the distribution in the East shows a slightly greater 
spread to the right of its center than to the left. Neither distribu-
tion has any outliers.
3.19	a.
0
8
1
44
1
67788999
2
00001122233333444
2
5557778
3
012223344
3
57
4
024
Stem: Tens
4
58
Leaf: Ones
b. The data distribution is centered at around 25 cents, but there 
is a lot of variability from state to state. c. None of the data values 
stand out as outliers.
3.21	
0t
4455555
0s
66677777
0*
888888888999999999
1
00001111
1t
222223
1f
445
The stem-and-leaf display shows that the distribution of high 
school dropout rates is roughly symmetrical. A typical dropout 
rate is 7%. The great majority of rates are between 4% and 9%, 
inclusive.
3.23	The distribution of maximum wind speeds is positively 
skewed and is bimodal, with peaks at the 35–40 and 60–65 
intervals.
3.25	b. The typical percentage of workers belonging to a union is 
around 11, with values ranging from 3.5 to 24.9. There are three 
states with percentages that stand out as being higher than those 
of the rest of the states. The distribution is positively skewed. 
c. The dotplot is more informative as it shows where the data 
points actually lie. For example, in the histogram we can tell that 
there are three observations in the 20 to 25 interval, but we don’t 
see the actual values and miss the fact that these values are actu-
ally considerably higher than the other values in the data set. 
d. The histogram in Part (a) could be taken to imply that there 
are states with a percent of workers belonging to a union near 
zero. It is clear from this second histogram that this is not the 
case. Also, the second histogram shows that there is a gap at the 
high end and that the three largest values are noticeably higher 
than those of the other states. This fact is not clear from the his-
togram in Part (a).
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises 
● 
787
3.27	a.
6
21
40
0.0
0.2
0.1
0.4
0.3
0.7
0.5
0.6
Density
1
0
Social network hours
b.	
6
21
40
0.0
0.2
0.1
0.4
0.3
0.7
0.5
0.6
Density
1
0
Video and computer hours
c. Both histograms are positively skewed, but a typical value for 
social networking hours is greater than the typical value for video 
and computer hours.
3.29	a.
Tuition and fees public
0
9000
18000
27000
45000
36000
Percent
50
40
30
20
10
0
The distribution of tuition and fees at public colleges is positively 
skewed. A typical value for tuition and fees is around $10,000 
and there is a lot of variability from college to college.
b.
Tuition and fees private
0
9000
18000
27000
45000
36000
Percent
50
40
30
20
10
0
The distribution of tuition and fees at private not for profit col-
leges is negatively skewed. A typical value for tuition and fees is 
around $30,000 and there is a lot of variability from college to 
college. c. Tuition and fees at private not for profit colleges tends 
to be greater than for public colleges. There is also more variabil-
ity in tuition and fees for the private not for profit colleges than 
for public colleges.
3.35	a.
Years Survived
Relative Frequency
0 to , 2
.10
2 to ​, ​4
.42
4 to ​, ​6
.02
6 to ​, ​8
.10
  8 to ​, ​10
.04
10 to ​, ​12
.02
12 to ​, ​14
.02
14 to ​, ​16
.28
c. The histogram shows a bimodal distribution, with peaks at the 
2–4 year and 14–16 year intervals. All the other survival times 
were considerably less common than these two. d. We would 
need to know that the set of patients used in the study formed a 
random sample of all patients younger than 50 years old who had 
been diagnosed with the disease and had received the high dose 
chemotherapy.
3.37	Answers will vary. One possibility for each part is shown 
below.
a. 
Class Interval
100 to 
,120
120 to 
,140
140 to 
,160
160 to 
,180
180 to 
,200
Frequency
5
10
40
10
5
b.
Class Interval
100 to 
,120
120 to 
,140
140 to 
,160
160 to 
,180
180 to 
,200
Frequency
20
10
4
25
11
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

788 
●  Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises
c.
Class Interval
100 to 
,120
120 to 
,140
140 to 
,160
160 to 
,180
180 to 
,200
Frequency
33
15
10
7
5
d.
Class Interval
100 to 
,120
120 to 
,140
140 to 
,160
160 to 
,180
180 to 
,200
Frequency
5
7
10
15
33
3.39	a. 
Fat
Calories
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
There does appear to be a relationship between fat and calories. 
As fat increases, calories also tends to increase, which is not 
surprising.
b. 
Calories
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Sodium
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
The relationship between sodium and calories is not strong, 
but it does appear that fast food items with more sodium also 
tend to have more calories.
c. 
Fat
Sodium
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
There does not appear to be a relationship between fat and 
sodium. 
d. 
Fat
Sodium
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
3
900
The region in the lower left hand corner corresponds to the 
healthier fast food choices. These are the choices that are lower in 
both sodium and fat.
3.41	b. There appears to be a very weak, positive relationship 
between cost and quality rating. The scatterplot only very weakly 
supports the statement. 
3.43	The plot shows that the amount of waste collected for recy-
cling had grown substantially (not slowly, as is stated in the 
article) in the years 1990 to 2005. The amount increased from 
under 30 million tons to nearly 60 million tons in that period, 
which means that the amount had almost doubled.
3.45	According to the 2001 and 2002 data, there are seasonal 
peaks at weeks 4, 9, and 14, and seasonal lows at weeks 2, 6, 
10–12, and 18.
3.47	b. The graphical display created in Part (a) is more informa-
tive, since it gives an accurate representation of the proportions 
of the ethnic groups. c. The people who designed the original 
display possibly felt that the four ethnic groups shown in the seg-
mented bar section might seem to be underrepresented at the col-
lege if they used a single pie chart.
3.49	The first graphical display is not drawn appropriately. The 
Z’s have been drawn so that their heights are in proportion to the 
percentages shown. However, the widths and the perceived 
depths are also in proportion to the percentages, and so neither 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises 
● 
789
the areas nor the perceived volumes of the Z’s are proportional to 
the percentages. The graph is therefore misleading to the reader. 
In the second graphical display, however, only the heights of the 
cars are in proportion to the percentages shown. The widths of 
the cars are all equal. Therefore the areas of the cars are in pro-
portion to the percentages, and this is an appropriately drawn 
graphical display.
3.51	The piles of cocaine have been drawn so that their heights 
are in proportion to the percentages shown. However, the widths 
are also in proportion to the percentages, and therefore neither 
the areas (nor the perceived volumes) are in proportion to the 
percentages. The graph is therefore misleading to the reader.
3.55	a.
1
9
2
23788999
3
0011112233459
Stem: Tens
4
0123
Leaf: Ones
b. A typical calorie content for these light beers is 31 calories per 
100 ml, with the great majority lying in the 22–39 range. The 
distribution is negatively skewed, with one peak (in the 30–39 
range). There are no gaps in the data.
3.57	a. 
0
0033344555568888888999999
1
0001223344567
2
001123689
3
0
4
0
5
Stem: Tens
6
6
Leaf: Ones
b. A typical percentage population increase is around 10, with 
the great majority of states in the 0–29 range. The distribution is 
positively skewed, with one peak (in the 0–9 range). There are 
two states showing significantly greater increases than the other 
48 states: one at 40 (Arizona) and one at 66 (Nevada).
c. 
West
East
9988880
0
033344555568889999
432
1
0001234567
982100
2
136
0
3
0
4
5
Stem: Tens
6
6
Leaf: Ones
On average, the percentage population increases in the West were 
greater than those for the East, with a typical value for the West 
of about 14 and a typical value for the East of about 9. There is a 
far greater spread in the values in the West, with values ranging 
from 0 to 66, than in the East where values ranged from 0 to 26. 
Both distributions are positively skewed, with a single peak for 
the East data, and two peaks for the West. In the West, there are 
two states showing significantly greater increases than the remain-
ing states, with values at 40 and 60. There are no such extreme 
values in the East.
3.59	 a. High graft weight ratios are clearly associated with low 
body weights (and vice versa), and the relationship is not linear. 
(In fact, roughly speaking, there seems to be an inverse propor-
tionality between the two variables, apart from a small increase in 
the graft weight ratios for increasing body weights among those re-
cipients with the greater body weights. This is interesting in that an 
inverse proportionality between the variables would imply that the 
actual weights of transplanted livers are chosen independently of 
the recipients’ body weights.) b. A likely reason for the negative re-
lationship is that the livers to be transplanted are probably chosen 
according to whatever happens to be available at the time. There-
fore, lighter patients are likely to receive livers that are too large 
and heavier patients are likely to receive livers that are too small.
3.61	b. Continuing the growth trend, we estimate that the aver-
age home size in 2010 will be approximately 2500 square feet.
3.63	a.
Disney
Other
975332100
0
0001259
765
1
156
920
2
0
3
4
Stem: Hundreds
4
5
Leaf: Tens
b. On average, the total tobacco exposure times for the Disney 
movies are higher than the others, with a typical value for Disney 
of about 90 seconds and a typical value for the other companies 
of about 50 seconds. Both distributions have one peak and are 
positively skewed. There is one extreme value (548) in the Disney 
data and no extreme value in the data for the other companies. 
There is a greater spread in the Disney data, with values ranging 
from 6 seconds to 540 seconds, than for the other companies, 
with values ranging from 1 second to 205 seconds.
3.65	c. The segmented bar graph is slightly preferable in that it is 
a little easier in it than in the pie chart to see that the proportion 
of children responding “Most of the time” was slightly higher 
than the proportion responding “Some of the time.”
3.67	b. The peaks were probably caused by the incidence of 
major hurricanes in those years.
3.69	d. In every year the number of related donors was much 
greater than the number of unrelated donors. In both categories 
the number of transplants increased every year, but the increases 
in unrelated donors were greater proportionately than the in-
creases in related donors.
3.71	a.
Skeletal Retention
Frequency
0.15 to ,0.20
  4
0.20 to ,0.25
  2
0.25 to ,0.30
  5
0.30 to ,0.35
21
0.35 to ,0.40
  9
0.40 to ,0.45
  9
0.45 to ,0.50
  4
0.50 to ,0.55
  0
0.55 to ,0.60
  1
b. The histogram is centered at approximately 0.34, with values rang-
ing from 0.15 to 0.5, plus one extreme value in the 0.55–0.6 range. 
The distribution has a single peak and is slightly positively skewed.
Cumulative Review 3
CR3.1	
No. For example, it is quite possible that men who ate 
a high proportion of cruciferous vegetables generally speaking 
also had healthier lifestyles than those who did not, and that it 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

790 
●  Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises
was the healthier lifestyles that were causing the lower incidence 
of prostate cancer, not the eating of cruciferous vegetables.
CR3.3	
Very often those who choose to respond generally have 
a different opinion on the subject of the study from those who do 
not respond. (In particular, those who respond often have strong 
feelings against the status quo.) This can lead to results that are 
not representative of the population that is being studied.
CR3.5	
Only a small proportion (around 11%) of the doctors 
responded, and it is quite possible that those who did respond 
had different opinions regarding managed care than the majority 
who did not. Therefore, the results could have been very inaccu-
rate for the population of doctors in California.
CR3.7	
For example, suppose the women had been allowed to 
choose whether or not they participated in the program. Then it 
is quite possible, generally speaking, that those women with more 
social awareness would have chosen to participate, and those 
with less social awareness would have chosen not to. Then it 
would be impossible to tell whether the stated results came about 
as a result of the program or of the greater social awareness 
among the women who participated. By randomly assigning the 
women to participate or not, comparable groups of women 
would have been obtained.
CR3.9	
b. Between 2002 and 2003 and between 2003 and 
2004, the pass rates rose for both the high school and the state, 
with a particularly sharp rise between 2003 and 2004 for the 
state. However, the pass rate for the county fell between 2002 
and 2003 and then rose between 2003 and 2004.
CR3.11	
a. 
0
123334555599
1
00122234688
2
1112344477
3
0113338
4
37
Stem: Thousands
5
23778
Leaf: Hundreds
The stem-and-leaf display shows a positively skewed distribution 
with a single peak. There are no extreme values. A typical total 
length is around 2100 and the great majority of total lengths lie 
in the 100 to 3800 range.
c. The number of subdivisions that have total lengths less than 
2000 is 12 ​1 ​11 ​5 ​23, and so the proportion of subdivisions that 
have total lengths less than 2000 is 23/47 ​5 ​0.489.
The number of subdivisions that have total lengths between 2000 
and 4000 is 10 ​1 ​7 ​5 ​17, and so the proportion of subdivisions 
that have total lengths between 2000 and 4000 is 17/47 ​5 ​0.361.
CR3.13	 a. The histogram shows a smooth positively skewed 
distribution with a single peak. b. A typical time difference 
between the two phases of the race is 150 seconds, with the 
majority of time differences lying between 50 and 350 seconds. 
There are about three values that could be considered extreme, 
with those values lying in the 650 to 750 range. c. Estimating the 
frequencies from the histogram we see that approximately 920 
runners were included in the study and that approximately eight 
of those runners ran the late distance more quickly than the early 
distance (indicated by a negative time difference). Therefore the 
proportion of runners who ran the late distance more quickly 
than the early distance is approximately 8/920 ​5 ​0.009.
CR3.15	 There is a strong negative linear relationship between 
racket resonance frequency and sum of peak-to-peak accelera-
tions. There are two rackets with data points separated from the 
remaining data points. Those two rackets have very high 
resonance frequencies and their peak-to-peak accelerations are 
lower than those of all the other rackets.
Chapter 4
4.1	 a. x ​5 ​$2118.71. Median ​5 ​$1688. b. The value of the 
mean is pulled up by the two large values in the data set. c. The 
median is better since it is not influenced by the two extreme 
values.
4.3	 The mean caffeine concentration for the brands of coffee 
listed ​5 ​125.417 mg/cup. Therefore, the mean caffeine concentra- 
tion of the coffee brands in mg/ounce is 15.677. This is signifi-
cantly greater than the previous mean caffeine concentration of 
the energy drinks.
4.5	 It tells us that a small number of individuals who donate a 
large amount of time are greatly increasing the mean.
4.7	 a. The mean is greater than the median. b. The mean is 
683,315.2. The median is 433,246.5. c. The median d. It is not 
reasonable to generalize this sample of daily newspapers to the 
population of the United States since the sample consists only of 
the top 20 newspapers in the country.
4.9	 a. The mean is 448.3. b. The median is 446. c. This sample 
represents the 20 days with the highest number of speeding-
related fatalities, and so it is not reasonable to generalize from 
this sample to the other 345 days of the year.
4.11	Neither statement is correct. Regarding the first statement, 
we should note that unless the “fairly expensive houses” consti-
tute a majority of the houses selling, these more costly houses 
will not have an effect on the median. Turning to the second 
statement, we point out that the small number of very high or 
very low prices will have no effect on the median, whatever the 
number of sales. Both statements can be corrected by replacing 
the median with the mean.
4.13	The two possible solutions are x5 5 32 and x5 5 39.5.
4.15	The median is 680 hours. 
4.17	a. x 5 52.111. Variance 5 279.111. s 5 16.707.
b. The addition of the very expensive cheese would increase both 
the mean and the standard deviation.
4.19	 a. Lower quartile ​5 ​4th value ​5 ​41. Upper quartile ​5 ​12th  
value ​5 ​62. Iqr ​5 ​21. b. The iqr for cereals rated good (calculated in 
exercise 4.18) is 24. This is greater than the value calculated in Part 
(a).
4.21	 x 5 51.33 s 5 15.22. A typical amount poured into tall 
slender glass is 51.33 ml. A typical deviation from the mean 
amount poured is 15.22 ml.
4.23	a. Variance 5 1176027.905, s 5 1084.448. b. The fairly 
large value of the standard deviation tells us that there is consid-
erable variation between the repair costs.
4.25	 a. Lower quartile ​5 ​0. Upper quartile ​5 ​195. Interquartile  
range ​5 ​195. b. The lower quartile equals the minimum value for this 
data set because there is a large number of equal values (zero in this 
case) at the lower end of the distribution. This is unusual, and therefore, 
generally speaking, the lower quartile is not equal to the minimum 
value.
4.27	The volatility of a portfolio is the amount by which its 
return varies, and the standard deviation of the annual returns 
measures exactly that. A lower-risk portfolio is one in which the 
return is less variable. This can be interpreted in terms of a low 
standard deviation of annual returns.
4.29 	a. i b. iii c. iv
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises 
● 
791
4.31	a. 
Mean
Standard 
Deviation
Coefficient  
of Variation
Sample 1
  7.81
0.398
5.102
Sample 2
49.68
1.739
3.500
b. The values of the coefficient of variation are given in the table 
in Part (a). The fact that the coefficient of variation is smaller for 
Sample 2 than for Sample 1 is not surprising since, relative to the 
actual amount placed in the containers, it is easier to be more 
accurate when larger amounts are being placed in the containers.
4.33	 a. Median ​5 ​58. Lower quartile ​5 ​13th value ​5 ​53.5. Upper 
quartile ​5 ​38th value ​5 ​64.4. b. Lower quartile 2 1.5(iqr) ​5 ​
53.5 21.5(10.9) ​5 ​37.15. Since 28.2 and 35.7 are both less than 
37.15, they are both outliers. c. The median percentage of popula-
tion born and still living in the state is 58. There are two outliers at 
the lower end of the distribution. If they are disregarded the distri-
bution is roughly symmetrical, with values ranging from 40.4 to 
75.8.
4.35	a.
5
10
15
20
25
Wireless %
Region
E
M
W
b. The distributions of wireless percent for the Midwest states 
and West states are centered at a higher value than for states in 
the East.
4.37	a. It would be more appropriate to use the interquartile 
range than the standard deviation. b. Lower quartile ​5 ​81.5,  
upper quartile ​5 ​94, iqr ​5 ​12.5. (Lower quartile) 2 3(iqr) ​5 ​
81.5 2 3(12.5) ​5 ​44. (Lower quartile) 2 1.5(iqr) ​5 ​81.5 2 
1.5(12.5) ​5 ​62.75	 (Upper quartile) ​1 ​1.5(iqr) ​5 ​94 ​1 ​1.5(12.5) ​
5 ​112.75. (Upper quartile) ​1 ​3(iqr) ​5 ​94 ​1 ​3(12.5) ​5 ​131.5. 
Since the value for students (152) is greater than 131.5, this is an 
extreme outlier. Since the value for farmers (43) is less than 44, 
this is an extreme outlier. There are no mild outliers. d. The 
insurance company might decide only to offer discounts to 
occupations that are outliers at the lower end of the distribution, 
in which case only farmers would receive the discount. If the 
company was willing to offer discounts to the quarter of 
occupations with the lowest accident rates, then the last 10 
occupations on the list should be the ones to receive discounts.
4.39	a. Roughly 68% of speeds would have been between those 
two values. b. Roughly 16% of speeds would exceed 57 mph.
4.41	a. At least 75% of observations must lie between those two 
values. b. The required interval is s2.90, 70.94d. c. The 
distribution cannot be approximately normal.
4.43	For the first test, z ​5 ​1.5; for the second test, z ​5 ​1.875. 
Since the student’s z score in the second test is higher, the 
student did better relative to the other test takers in the second 
test.
4.45	At least 10% of the students had no debt. At least 25% of 
the students had no debt. Approximately 50% of the students 
had a debt of $11,000 or less. Approximately 75% of the 
students had a debt of $24,600 or less. Approximately 90% of 
the students had a debt of $39,300 or less.
4.47	The best conclusion we can reach is that at most 16% of 
weight readings will be between 49.75 and 50.25.
4.49	The distribution is positively skewed. Using Chebyshev’s 
Rule, we can conclude that at most, 18 students changed at least 
six answers from correct to incorrect.
4.51	a. 
Per Capita Expenditure
Frequency
0 to ,2
13
2 to ,4
18
4 to ,6
10
6 to ,8
  5
  8 to ,10
  1
10 to ,12
  2
12 to ,14
  0
14 to ,16
  0
16 to ,18
  2
b. i. 3.4  ii. 5.0  iii. 0.8  iv. 8.0  v. 2.8
4.53	a. The minimum value and the lower quartile were both 1. 
b. More than half of the data values were equal to the minimum 
value. c. Between 25% and 50% of patients had unacceptable 
times to defibrillation.  
d. (Upper quartile) ​1 ​3(iqr) ​5 ​9. Since 7 is less than 9, 7 must 
be a mild outlier.
4.55	a. x 5 287.714. The seven deviations are: 209.286, 
294.714, 40.286, 2132.714, 38.286, 242.714, 217.714. 
b. The sum of the rounded deviations is 0.002.  
c. Variance 5 12,601.905. Standard deviation ​5 ​112.258
4.57	 a. This is the median, and its value is $4286. The other measure 
of center is the mean, and its value is $3968.67. b. This is smaller 
than the median and, therefore, less favorable to the supervisors.
4.59	a. This is a correct interpretation of the median. b. Here the 
word “range” is being used to describe the interval from the mini-
mum value to the maximum value. The statement claims that the 
median is defined as the midpoint of this interval, which is not 
true. c. If there is no home below $300,000, then certainly the 
median will be greater than $300,000 (unless more than half of 
the homes cost exactly $300,000).
4.61	The new mean is x 5 38.364. The new values and their 
deviations from the mean are shown in the table below.
Value
Deviation
52
   13.636
13
225.364
17
221.364
46
     7.636
42
     3.636
24
214.364
32
  26.364
30
  28.364
58
  19.636
35
   23.364
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

792 
●  Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises
The value of s2 for the new values is the same as for the old values.
4.63	a. Lower quartile ​5 ​44, upper quartile ​5 ​53, iqr ​5 ​9. 
(Lower quartile) 2 1.5(iqr) ​5 ​44 2 1.5(9) ​5 ​30.5. (Upper 
quartile) ​1 ​1.5(iqr) ​5 ​53 ​1 ​1.5(9) ​5 ​66.5. Since there are no 
data values less than 30.5 and no data values greater than 66.5, 
there are no outliers. b. The median of the distribution is 46. The 
middle 50% of the data range from 44 to 53 and the whole data 
set ranges from 33 to 60. There are no outliers. The lower half of 
the middle 50% of data values shows less spread than the upper 
half of the middle 50% of data values. The spread of the lowest 
25% of data values is slightly greater than the spread of the 
highest 25% of data values.
4.65	a. x 5 192.571. This is a measure of center that incorpo-
rates all the sample values. Median ​5 ​189. This is a measure of 
center that is the “middle value” in the sample. b. The mean 
would decrease and the median would remain the same. 
4.67	The median aluminum contamination is 119. There is one 
(extreme) outlier—a value of 511. If the outlier is disregarded, 
the data values range from 30 to 291. The middle 50% of data 
values range from 87 to 182. Even if the outlier is disregarded, 
the distribution is positively skewed.
4.69	The medians for the three different types of hotel are 
roughly the same, with the median for the midrange hotels 
slightly higher than the other two medians. The midrange hotels 
have two outliers (one extreme) at the lower end of the 
distribution and the first-class hotels have one (extreme) outlier 
at the lower end. There are no outliers for the budget hotels. If 
the outliers are taken into account, the midrange and first-class 
groups have a greater range than the budget group. If the outliers 
are disregarded, the budget group has a much greater spread than 
the other two groups. If the outliers are taken into account, all 
three distributions are negatively skewed. If the outliers are 
disregarded, the distribution for the budget group is negatively 
skewed whereas the distributions for the other two groups are 
positively skewed.
4.71	The distribution is positively skewed.
4.73	a. The 84th percentile is 120. b. The standard deviation is 
approximately 20. c. z ​5 ​20.5. d. 140 is at approximately the 
97.5th percentile. e. A score of 40 is 3 standard deviations below 
the mean, and so the proportion of scores below 40 would be 
approximately (100 2 99.7)/2 ​5 ​0.15%. Therefore, there would 
be very few scores below 40.
Chapter 5
5.1	 Scatterplot 1	(i) Yes	
(ii) Yes	 (iii) Positive
	
Scatterplot 2	(i) Yes	
(ii) Yes	 (iii) Negative
	
Scatterplot 3	(i) Yes	
(ii) No	
(iii) -
	
Scatterplot 4	(i) Yes	
(ii) Yes	 (iii) Negative
5.3	 No. A correlation coefficient of 0 implies that there is no 
linear relationship between the variables. There could still be a 
nonlinear relationship.
5.5	 a.
	
Quality rating
Satisfaction rating
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
880
860
840
820
800
780
760
740
720
There does not appear to be a relationship between quality rating 
and satisfaction rating.
b. r ​5 ​20.239. The linear relationship between quality rating 
and satisfaction rating is weak and negative.
5.7	 a. There is a weak negative linear relationship between 
average hopping height and arch height. The negative correlation 
tells us that large arch heights are (weakly) associated with small 
hopping heights, and vice versa. b. Yes. Since all five correlation 
coefficients are close to zero, the results imply that there is at best 
a weak linear relationship between arch height and the motor 
skills measured.
5.9	 a. r 5 0.118 b. Yes. The scatterplot does not suggest a 
strong relationship between the variables.
5.11	r 5 0.935.
There is a strong positive linear relationship.
5.13	The correlation coefficient is most likely to be close to 20.9.
5.15	a. The equation of the least squares regression line is 
y⁄ 5 11.482 2 0.970x, where x 5 mini-Wright meter reading and 
y 5 Wright meter reading. b. When x 5  500, y⁄ 5 496.454 . 
The least squares regression line predicts a Wright meter reading 
of 496.454 for a person whose mini-Wright meter reading was 
500. c. When x 5 300, y⁄ 5 302.465. The least squares regres-
sion line predicts a Wright meter reading of 302.465 for a person 
whose mini-Wright meter reading was 500. However, 300 is well 
outside the range of mini-Wright meter readings in the data set, 
so this prediction involves extrapolation and is therefore not 
­reliable.	
5.17	a. The dependent variable is the number of fruit-and-vegetable 
servings per day, and the predictor variable is the number of hours 
of television viewed per day. b. Negative. As the number of hours of 
television viewed per day increases, the number of fruit-and-vegeta-
ble servings per day (on average) decreases.
5.19	The equation of the least-squares regression line is 
y⁄ 5 0.884 1 0.699x, where x 5 passenger complaint rank and  
y 5 J.D. Powers quality score. When x 5 3, y⁄ 5 2.982, and 
when x 5 9, y⁄ 5 7.178.	
5.21	a. There is a strong negative relationship between mean 
call-to-shock time and survival rate. The relationship is close to 
linear, particularly if the point with the highest x value is disre-
garded. If that point is included, then there is the suggestion of a 
curve. b. y⁄ 5 101.32847 2 9.29562x
5.25	We do not know that the same linear relationship will apply 
for x values outside this range.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises 
● 
793
5.27	b 5 rssyysxd, where sy and sx are the standard deviations of 
the y values and the x values, respectively. Since standard 
deviations are always positive, b and r must have the same sign.
5.29	a. The equation of the least squares regression line is 
y⁄ 5 29.071 1 1.571x, where x 5 years of schooling and y 5 
median hourly wage gain. When x 5 15, y⁄ 5 14.5 . The least 
squares regression line predicts a median hourly wage gain of 
14.5 percent for the 15th year of schooling. b. The actual wage 
gain percent is very close to the value predicted in Part (a).	
5.31	b. The scatterplot for girls shows stronger evidence of a 
curved relationship.c. y⁄ 5 479.997 1 12.525x e. The decision to 
use a curve is supported by the curved pattern in the residual 
plot.
5.33	a The equation of the least-squares regression line is  
y⁄ 5 232.258 2 2.926x, , where x 5 rock surface area and  
y 5 algae colony density. b. r2 5 0.300. Thirty percent of the 
variation in algae colony density can be attributed to the approxi-
mate linear relationship between rock surface area and algae 
­colony density. c. se 5 63.315. This is a typical deviation of an 
algae colony density value from the value predicted by the least-
squares regression line. d. r 5 20.547. The linear relationship 
between rock surface area and algae colony density is moderate 
and negative. 
5.35	a. y⁄ 5 4788.839 2 29.015x b. Residuals: 2149.964, 
244.514, 96.236, 168.886, 97.236, 36.286, 2204.164.
c. The clear curve in the residual plot suggests that a linear model 
is not appropriate. d. No, data only included men.
5.37	a. 0.154 b. No, since the r2 value for y ​5 ​first-year-college 
GPA and x ​5 ​SAT II score was 0.16, which is not large. Only 
16% of the variation in first-year-college GPA could be attributed 
to the approximate linear relationship between SAT II score and 
first-year-college GPA.
5.39	b. y⁄ 5 85.334 2 0.0000259x. r2 5 0.016. c. The line will 
not give accurate predictions. d. Deleting the point 
(620,231, 67), the equation of the least-squares line is now 
y⁄ 5 83.402 1 0.0000387x. Removal of the point does greatly 
affect the equation of the line.
5.41	r2 5 0.951. 95.1% of the variation in hardness is 
attributable to the approximate linear relationship between time 
elapsed and hardness.
5.43	 a. r 5 0, y⁄ 5 y. b. For values of r close to 1 or 21, se will be 
much smaller than sy. c. se < 1.5. d. y⁄ 5 7.92 1 0.544x, se < 1.02 
5.45	a. The pattern in the scatterplot is curved.
b. The curved pattern is not as pronounced as in the scatterplot 
from Part (a), but there is still curvature in the plot. 
c. Answers will vary.
5.47	a. The relationship appears to be nonlinear. 
b. There is an obvious pattern in the residual plot. 
c. The second transformation (ln(x) vs. y) seems to be somewhat 
more successful in straightening the data. 
d. y⁄ 5 62.42 1 43.81x, where y⁄ is the predicted success %, and 
x is the natural logarithm of the energy of shock. 
e. 86.94%, 52.64% 
5.49	a. The scatterplot shows a positive relationship.
b. The squaring transformation straightens the plot. 
c. This transformation straightens the plot. In addition, the 
variability in log(Agricultural Intensity) does not seem to increase 
as population density increases, as was the case in Part (b). 
d. These transformations were not effective in straightening the 
plot. There is obvious curvature in the scatterplot.
5.51	a. Any image plotted between the dashed lines would be 
associated with Cal Poly by approximately the same percentages 
of enrolling and nonenrolling students. b. The images that were 
more commonly associated with nonenrolling students than with 
enrolling students were: “Average,” “Isolated,” and “Back-up 
school,” with “Back-up school” as the most common of these 
among nonenrolling students. The images that were more 
commonly associated with enrolling students than with 
nonenrolling students were (in increasing order of commonality 
among enrolling students): “Excitingly different,” “Personal,” 
“Selective,” “Prestigious,” “Exciting,” “Intellectual,” “Challenging,” 
“Comfortable,” “Fun,” “Career-oriented,” “Highly respected,” and 
“Friendly,” with this last image marked by over 60% of students 
who enrolled and over 45% of students who didn’t enroll. The 
most commonly marked image among students who didn’t enroll 
was “Career-oriented.”
5.53	a. r 5 0.943, strong positive linear relationship. No, we 
cannot conclude that lead exposure causes increased assault rates. A 
value of r close to 1 tells us that there is a strong linear association 
but tells us nothing about causation. b. y⁄ 5 224.08 1 327.41x. 
When x ​5 ​0.5, y⁄ 5 139.625 assaults per 100,000 people. c. 0.89 
d. The two time-series plots, generally speaking, move together. 
Thus, high assault rates are associated with high lead exposures 23 
years earlier, and low assault rates are associated with low lead 
exposures 23 years earlier.
5.55	a. r ​5 ​20.981, strong linear relationship b. The word linear 
is not the most effective description of the relationship. A curve 
would provide a better fit.
5.57	a. One point, (0, 77), is far separated from the other points 
in the plot. There is a negative relationship. b. There appears to 
be a negative linear relationship between test anxiety and exam 
score. c. r ​5 ​20.912. This is consistent with the observations 
given in Part (b). d. No, we cannot conclude that test anxiety 
caused poor exam performance.
5.59	a. There is a positive relationship between  
the percentages of students who were proficient at the  
two times. There is the suggestion of a curve in the plot.  
b. y⁄ 5 23.13603 1 1.52206x  
c. When x ​5 ​14, y⁄ 5 18.173. This is slightly lower than the 
actual value of 20 for Nevada.
5.61	a. y 2 y⁄ 5 20.796 b. r 5 20.755 c. se 5 11.638
5.63	a. r 5 20.717 b. r 5 20.835; the absolute value of this 
correlation is greater than the absolute value of the correlation 
calculated in Part (a). This suggests that the transformation was 
successful in straightening the plot.
5.65	b. Using log(y) and log(x), 15.007 parts per million
5.67	a. r 5 0 b. For example, adding the point (6, 1) gives 
r 5 0.510. (Any y-coordinate greater than 0.973 will work.)  
c. For example, adding the point (6, 21) gives r 5 20.510. 
(Any y-coordinate less than 20.973 will work.)
Cumulative Review 5
CR5.3	
The peaks in rainfall do seem to be followed by peaks 
in the number of E. coli cases, with rainfall peaks around May 12, 
May 17, and May 23 followed by peaks in the number of cases 
on May 17, May 23, and May 28. (The incubation period seems 
to be more like 5 days than the 3 to 4 days mentioned in the 
caption.) Thus, the graph does show a close connection between 
unusually heavy rainfall and the incidence of the infection. The 
storms may not be responsible for the increased illness levels, 
however, since the graph can only show us association, not 
causation.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

794 
●  Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises
CR5.5	
The random pattern in the scatterplot shows there is 
little relationship between the weight of the mare and the weight 
of her foal. This is supported by the value of the correlation 
coefficient.
CR5.7	
b. Mean ​5 ​3.654%, median ​5 ​3.35%.
CR5.9	
b. Approximately equal c. Mean ​5 ​$9.459,  
median ​5 $9.48 e. Mean ​5 ​$72.85, median ​5 ​$68.61
CR5.11	 a. x 5 2965.2, s2 5 294416.622, s 5 542.602, Lower  
quartile ​5 ​2510, Upper quartile ​5 ​3112, Interquartile 
range 5 602 b. less
CR5.13	 a. x 5 4.93, Median ​5 ​3.6. The mean is greater than 
the median. This is explained by the fact that the distribution of 
blood lead levels is positively skewed. b. The median blood lead 
level for the African Americans (3.6) is slightly higher than for 
the Whites (3.1). Both distributions are positively skewed. There 
are two outliers in the data set for the African Americans. The 
distribution for the African Americans shows a greater range than 
the distribution for the Whites, even disregarding the two 
outliers.
CR5.15	 a. Yes b. Strong positive linear relationship c. Perfect 
correlation would result in the points lying exactly on some 
straight line, but not necessarily on the line described.
CR5.17	 a. 76.64% of the variability in clutch size can be 
attributed to the approximate linear relationship between snout-
vent length and clutch size. b. se 5 29.250. This is a typical 
deviation of an observed clutch size from the clutch size 
predicted by the least-squares line.
CR5.19	 a. Yes, the scatterplot shows a strong positive 
association. b. The plot seems to be straight, particularly if you 
disregard the point with the greatest x value. c. This 
transformation is successful in straightening the plot. Also, unlike 
the plot in Part (b), the variability of the quantity measured 
on the vertical axis does not seem to increase as x increases. 
d. No, this transformation has not been successful in producing a 
linear relationship. There is a curved pattern in the plot.
Chapter 6
6.1	 A chance experiment is any activity or situation in which 
there is uncertainty about which of two or more possible out-
comes will result.
6.3	 a. {AA, AM, MA, MM} c. i. B ​5 ​{AA, AM, MA}  
ii. C ​5 ​{AM, MA} iii. D ​5 ​{MM}. D is a simple event.  
d. B and C ​5 ​{AM, MA}; B or C ​5 ​{AA, AM, MA}.
6.5	 b. i. AC ​5 ​{(15, 50), (15, 100), (15, 150), (15, 200)}
  ii. A ø B 55
s10, 50d, s10, 100d, s10, 150d, s10, 200d, s12, 50d
s12, 100d, s12, 150d, s12, 200d, s15, 50d, s15, 100d6
iii. A >  B 5 hs10, 50d, s10, 100d, s12, 50d, s12, 100dj
c. A and C are not disjoint. B and C are disjoint.
6.7	 b. A ​5 ​{3, 4, 5} c. C ​5 ​{125, 15, 215, 25, 5}
6.9	 a. A ​5 ​{NN, DNN, NDN} b. B ​5 ​{DDNN, DNDN, NDDN} 
c. The number of outcomes is infinite.
6.13	a. {expedited overnight delivery, expedited second-business-
day delivery, standard delivery, delivery to the nearest store for 
customer pick-up} b. i. 0.2 ii. 0.4 iii. 0.6
6.15	a. {fiction hardcover, fiction paperback, fiction digital, 
fiction audio, nonfiction hardcover, nonfiction paperback, nonfic-
tion digital, nonfiction audio} b. No c. 0.72 d. 0.28; 0.28 e. 0.8
6.17	a. P(Red) ​5 18/38 ​5 0.474. b. No. If the segments were re-
arranged, there would still be 18 red segments out of a total of 38 
segments, and so the probability of landing in a red segment 
would still be 18/38 5 0.474. c. 1000(0.474) 5 474. So, if the 
wheel is balanced you would expect the resulting color to be red 
on approximately 474 of the 1000 spins. If the number of spins 
resulting in red is very different from 474, then you would sus-
pect that the wheel is not balanced.
6.19	a. 0.3 b. No. The problems to be graded will be selected at 
random, so the probability of being able to turn in both of the se-
lected problems is the same whatever your choice of three prob-
lems to complete. c. 0.6 
6.21	P(credit card used) 5 37100/80500 5 0.461.
6.23	a. P(female) 5 488142/787325 5 0.620. b. P(male) 5  
1 2 0.620 5 0.380.
6.25	a. 0.000495, 0.00198 b. 0.024 c. 0.146
6.27	a. BC, BM, BP, BS, CM, CP, CS, MP, MS, PS b. 0.1 c. 0.4  
d. 0.3
6.29	a. PsO1d 5 PsO3d 5 PsO5d 5 1y9 and 
PsO2d 5 PsO4d 5 PsO6d 5 2y9 b. 1/3, 4/9 c. 9/21, 2/7
6.31	a. 0.24 b. 0.36 c. 0.12 d. 0.75
6.33	a. 0.72 b. The value 0.45 is the conditional probability that 
the selected individual drinks 2 or more cups a day given that he 
or she drinks coffee. We know this because the percentages given 
in the display total 100, and yet we know that only 72% of 
Americans drink coffee. So, the percentages given in the table 
must be the proportions of coffee drinkers who drink the given 
amounts.
6.37	PsAuBd is larger. PsAuBd is the probability that a randomly 
chosen professional basketball player is over 6 feet tall—a reason-
ably large probability. PsBuAd is the probability that a randomly 
chosen person over 6 feet tall is a professional basketball player—
a very small probability.
6.39	a. 0.337 b. 0.762 c. 0.625 d. 0.788 e. 0.869 f. Current 
smokers are the least likely to believe that smoking is very 
harmful, and those who have never smoked are the most likely to 
think that smoking is very harmful. This is not surprising since 
you would expect those who smoke to be the most confident 
about the health prospects of a smoker, with those who formerly 
smoked being a little more concerned, and those who have never 
smoked being the most concerned.
6.41	a. i. 0.167 ii. 0.068 iii. 0.238 iv. 0.833 v. 0.41 vi. 0.18  
b. 18- to 24-year-olds are more likely than seniors to regularly 
wear seat belts.
6.43	a. 85% b. 0.15 c. 0.7225 d. 0.1275 e. 0.255 f. It is not 
reasonable.
6.45	P(L)P(F) 5 0.29, not independent
6.47	Not independent
6.49	a. 0.001. We have to assume that she deals with the three 
errands independently. b. 0.999 c. 0.009
6.51	a. 0.81 b. P(1–2 subsystem doesn’t work) 5 0.19,  
P(3–4 subsystem doesn’t work) ​5 ​0.19 c. P(system won’t work) 5  
0.0361, P(system will work) 5 0.9639 d. 0.9931, increases  
e. 0.9266, decreases
6.53	a. The expert was assuming that there was a 1 in 12 chance 
of a valve being in any one of the 12 clock positions and that the 
positions of the two air valves were independent. b. The positions 
of the two air valves are not independent, and 1/144 is smaller 
than the correct probability.
6.55	a. No b. 0.992 c. PsE2uE1d 5 39y4999 5 0.00780. 
PsE2unot E1d 5 40y4999 5 0.00800. If the first board is defective, 
then it is slightly less likely that the second board will be defec-
tive than if the first board is not defective. d. Yes
6.57	a. 0.00391 b. 0.00383
6.59	a. 0.6, slightly smaller b. 0.556 c. 0.333
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises 
● 
795
6.61	a. 0.55 b. 0.45 c. 0.4 d. 0.25
6.63	a	
P(at least one food allergy and severe reaction) 5  
(0.08)(0.39) 5 0.0312. b. P(allergic to multiple foods) 5  
(0.08)(0.3) 5 0.024.
6.65	a  0.49 b. 0.3125 c. 0.24 d. 0.1
6.67 a. 0.645 b. 0.676, higher
6.69	a. i. 0.307 ii. 0.693 iii. 0.399 iv. 0.275 v. 0.122 b. 30.7% 
of faculty members use Twitter; 69.3% of faculty members do not 
use Twitter; 39.9% of faculty members who use Twitter also use 
it to communicate with students; 27.5% of faculty members who 
use Twitter also use it as a learning tool in the classroom; 12.2% 
of faculty members use Twitter and use it to communicate with 
students c. 0.122 d. 0.084
6.71	There are different numbers of people driving the three dif-
ferent types of vehicle (and also that there are some drivers who 
are driving vehicles not included in those three types).
6.73	
Radiologist 1
Predicted  
Male
Predicted  
Female
Total
Baby Is Male
74
12
86
Baby Is Female
14
59
73
Total
88
71
159
a. Psprediction is male u baby is maled 5 74/86 5 0.860.
b. Psprediction is female u baby is femaled 5 59/73 5 0.808.
c. Yes. Since the answer to (a) is greater than the answer to (b), 
the prediction is more likely to be correct when the baby is male.
d. The radiologist was correct for 74 1 59 5 133 of the 159 ba-
bies in the study. So P(correct) 5 133/159 5 0.836.
6.75	a.  i. 0.99  ii. 0.01  iii. 0.99  iv. 0.01  b. 0.02
c. 0.5, it is consistent with the quote.
6.77	b. 0.00095 c. 0.10085 
d. Pshas diseaseupositive testd 5 0.00942 This means that in less 
than 1% of positive tests the person actually has the disease. This 
happens because so many more people do not have the disease 
than have the disease, and the minority of people who do not 
have the disease but still test positive greatly outnumbers the 
people who have the disease and test positive.
6.79	b. 0.27 c. 0.43 d. Not independent e. 0.526 f. 0.140
6.81	a. 0.425 b. 0.314 c. 0.4375 d. 0.005 e. 0.201 f. 0.196  
g. 0.335 h. 0.177 i. 0.488 j. 0.295 k. 0.566
6.83	b. This is not a fair way to distribute licenses, since any 
given company applying for multiple licenses has approximately 
the same chance of obtaining all of its licenses as an individual 
applying for a single license has of obtaining his/her license. It 
might be fairer for companies who require two licenses to submit 
two separate applications and companies who require three 
licenses to submit three separate applications (with individuals/
companies applying for single licenses submitting applications as 
before). Then, 10 of the applications would be randomly selected 
and licenses would be awarded accordingly.
6.85	Results of the simulation will vary. The probability should 
be approximately 0.8468.
6.87	b. 0.025 c. 0.069
6.89	a. 0.140 b. 0.218 c. 0.098 d. 0.452 e. 0.704
6.91	Dependent events
6.93	a. 0.018 b. PsA1uLd 5 0.444 c. PsA2uLd 5 0.278  
d. PsA3uLd 5 0.278
6.97	0.6
6.99	a. 0.106 b. 0.446 c. 0.547
6.101	a. 4/5 b. 19/24 c. 18/23 d. 0.496
6.103	a. 0.512 b. 0.608
Chapter 7
7.1	 a. Discrete b. Continuous c. Discrete d. Discrete  
e. Continuous
7.3	 a. Positive integers b. For example, S with y 5 1, RS, LS 
with y 5 2, RLS, RRS,LES,LLS with 5 2, RLS, RRS,LES,LLS 
with y 5 3.
7.5	 a. The possible values are the real numbers between 0 and 
100, inclusive; b. y is continuous.
7.7	 a. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 b. 23, 22, 21, 0, 1, 2, 3 c. 0, 1, 2 d. 0, 1
7.9	 a. 0.01 b. Over a large number of cartons, about 20% will 
contain one broken egg. c. 0.95. Over a large number of cartons, 
95% will contain at most two broken eggs. d. 0.85. It does not 
include exactly two broken eggs. e. 0.1 f. 0.95
7.11	a. 0.82 b. 0.18 c. 0.65, 0.27
7.15	a. 
x
0
1
2
3
4
p(x)
0.4096
0.4096
0.1536
0.0256
0.0016
b. 0 and 1 c. 0.1808
7.17	a. The smallest possible y value is 1, and the corresponding 
outcome is S. The second smallest y value is 2, and the 
corresponding outcome is FS. b. The set of positive integers.  
c. psyd 5 s0.3dy21s0.7d, for y 5 1,  2,  3, Á
7.19
y
0
1
2
3
p(y)
0.16
0.33
0.32
0.19
7.21	a. 0.5 b. 0.2
7.23	b. 0.08 c. 0.36 d. 0.4 e. 0.4 f. equal because associated 
areas are equal
7.25	a. 0.5, 0.25 b. 0.25 c. 18
7.27	3.306
7.29	a. 0.56 b. 65% c. The mean is not s0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4dy5 
since, for example, far more cartons have 0 broken eggs than  
4 broken eggs, and so 0 needs a much greater weighting than 4 
in the calculation of the mean.
7.31	a. 0.14 b. m 2 2s 5 4.66 2 2s1.2d 5 2.26. 
m 1 2s 5 4.66 1 2s1.2d 5 7.06. The values of x more than 
2 standard deviations away from the mean are 1 and 2. c. The 
probability that x is more than 2 standard deviations away from 
its mean is 0.05.
7.33	a. 2.8, 1.288 b. 0.7, 0.781 c. 8.4, 14.94 d. 7, 61 e. 3.5, 
2.27 f. 15.4, 75.94
7.35	a. 46.5 b. $890
7.39	a. Whether y is positive or negative tells us whether or not 
the peg will fit into the hole. b. 0.003 c. 0.00632 d. Yes. Since 
there is no reason to believe that the pegs are being specially 
selected to match the holes (or vice versa), it is reasonable to 
think that x1 and x2 are independent. e. Since 0 is less than half a 
standard deviation from the mean in the distribution of y, it is 
relatively likely that a value of y will be negative, and, therefore, 
that the peg will be too big to fit the hole.
7.41	a 3.5, 2.9167, 1.7078 b 3.5, 2.9167, 1.7078 c 0, 2.094 
d 0, 5.124 e Depends on how much risk you are willing to take. 
The variability in winnings would be much greater for game 2, 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

796 
●  Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises
which means the potential for greater winnings is with game 2, 
but there is also the potential for greater losses.
7.43	a 0.988 b 0.999 c 0.001 d 0.400
7.45	a. 0.246. Over a large number of random selections of six 
passengers, 24.6% will have exactly four people resting or 
sleeping. b. 0.262 c. 0.901
7.47	a. 0.264 b. 0.633 c. 0.367 d. 0.736
7.49	a. 0.630 b. 0.000 c. More likely to be .8.
7.51	a. 0.197 b. 0.180 c. 75, 7.984 d. The value 25 is more than 
6 standard deviations below the mean. It is surprising that fewer 
than 25 are said to have failed the test.
7.53	a. 200 b. 13.416
7.55	a. Binomial distribution with n 5 100 and p 5 0.2 b. 20  
c. 16, 4 d. A score of 50 is s50 2 20dy4 5 7.5 standard 
deviations from the mean in the distribution of x. So, a score of 
over 50 is very unlikely.
7.57	a. 0.017 b. 0.811, c. 0.425 d. The error probability when 
p 5 0.7 is now 0.902. The error probability when p 5 0.6 is now 
0.586.
7.59	a. There is not a fixed number of trials. b. i. 0.062 ii. 0.284 
iii. 0.716 iv. 0.779
7.61	a. 0.0975 b. 0.043 c. 0.815
7.63	a. 0.9599 b. 0.2483 c. 0.1151 d. 0.9976 e. 0.6887 
f. 0.6826 g. 1.0000
7.65	a. 0.9909 b. 0.9909 c. 0.1093 d. 0.1267 e. 0.0706 
f. 0.0228 g. 0.9996 h. approximately 1
7.67	a. 21.96 b. 22.33 c. 21.645 d. z* ​5 ​2.05 e. z* ​5 ​2.33  
f. z* ​5 ​1.28
7.69	a. z* ​5 ​1.96 b. z* ​5 ​1.645 c. z* ​5 ​2.33 d. z* ​5 ​1.75
7.71	a. 0.5 b. 0.9772 c. 0.9772 d. 0.8185 e. 0.9938  
f. Approximately 1
7.73	Those with emissions . 2.113 parts per billion
7.75	a. 0.2843 b. 0.0918 c. 0.4344 d. 29.928
7.77	a. 0.4013 b. 0.1314
7.79	The second machine
7.81	94.4 seconds or less
7.83	b. The clear curve in the normal probability plot tells us 
that the distribution of fussing times is not normal. d. The 
transformation results in a pattern that is much closer to linear 
than the pattern in Part (b).
7.85	b. No. The distribution of x is positively skewed. d. Yes. 
The histogram shows a distribution that is slightly closer to being 
symmetric than the distribution of the untransformed data. 
f. Both transformations produce histograms that are closer to 
being symmetric than the histogram of the untransformed data, 
but neither transformation produces a distribution that is truly 
close to being normal.
7.87	Yes. The curve in the normal probability plot suggests that 
the distribution is not normal.
7.89	Since the pattern in the normal probability plot is very close 
to linear, it is plausible that disk diameter is normally distributed.
7.91	a. The histogram is positively skewed. b. No. The 
transformation has resulted in a histogram which is still clearly 
positively skewed.
7.93	Yes. In each case, the transformation has resulted in a 
histogram that is much closer to symmetric than the original 
histogram.
7.95	a. 0.0016 b. 0.9946 c. 0.7925
7.97	a. 0.1114 b. 0.0409 c. 0.0968 d. 0.9429 e. 0.9001
7.99	a. There is a fixed number of trials, in which the probability 
of an undetected tumor is the same in each trial, and the 
outcomes of the trials are independent since the sample is 
random. Thus, it is reasonable to think that the distribution 
of x is binomial. b. Yes, since np 5 15.5 $ 10 and 
ns1 2 pd 5 484.5 $ 10. c. i. 0.0606 ii. 0.9345 iii. 0.0985
7.101  a. 0.7970 b. 0.7016 c. 0.0143 d. 0.05
7.103  a. No, since np 5 50s0.05d 5 2.5 , 10. b. Now n 5 500 
and p 5 0.05, so np 5 500s0.05d 5 25 $ 10. So the techniques 
of this section can be used Psat least 20 are defectived< 0.8708.
7.105  a 0.8247 b 0.0516 c 0.68826 d Yes, the probability of a 
pregnancy having a duration of at least 310 days is only 0.0030.
7.107  a. 0.7 b. 0.45 c. 0.55 d. 0.71 e. 0.65 f. 0.45
7.109  a. 0.64 b. 0.256 c. 0.02048 d. In order for it to take y 
selections to find two acceptable batteries, the first y 2 1 batteries 
must include exactly 1 acceptable battery (and, therefore, y 2 2 
unacceptable batteries), and the yth battery must be acceptable. 
There are y 2 1 ways in which the first y 2 1 batteries can 
include exactly 1 acceptable battery. So 
psyd 5 sy 2 1ds0.8d1s0.2dy22 ? s0.8d 5 sy 2 1ds0.2dy22s0.8d2.
7.111  a. 0.5934 b. Psx , 25d 5 0.0000. Yes, you are very un-
likely to select a car of this model with a fuel efficiency of less 
than 25 mpg. c. Psx . 32d 5 0.0475. So, if three cars are 
selected, the probability that they all have fuel efficiencies more 
than 32 mpg is s0.0475d3 5 0.0001. d. 28.026
7.113  s2x 5 2.52, sx 5 1.587
7.115  a. 0.9876 b. 0.9888 c. 6.608
7.117  a. No, since 5 feet 7 inches is 67 inches, and if x ​5 ​height 
of a randomly chosen woman, then Psx , 67d 5 0.6915, which 
is not more than 94%. b. About 69%
7.119  a. 
w
0
1
2
3
4
5
p(w)
1/6
5/18
2/9
1/6
1/9
1/18
b. 1.944 hours
7.121  a. 0.1552 b. 0.2688
c. 
x
4
5
6
7
p(x)
0.1552
0.2688
0.29952
0.27648
d. 5.697
7.123  The lowest score to be designated an A is 85.28. Since 
89 . 85.28, yes, I received an A.
7.125  658 hours
Cumulative Review 7
CR7.3	
No. The percentages given in the graph are said to be, 
for each year, the “percent increase in the number of 
communities installing” red-light cameras. This presumably 
means the percentage increase in the number of communities 
with red-light cameras installed, in which case the positive results 
for all of the years 2003 to 2009 show that a great many more 
communities had red-light cameras installed in 2009 than 
in 2002.
CR7.5	
0.1243
CR7.7	
PsService 1uLated 5 0.349 and PsService 2uLated 5 0.651. 
Service 2 is more likely to have been used.
CR7.9	
1. PsMd 5 0.021 2. PsMuBd 5 0.043 3. PsMuWd 5 0.07
CR7.11	 statement iv
CR7.13	 a. 0.09 b. 0.045 c. 0.135 d. 0.667
CR7.15	 a. mx 5 2.3. b. s2x 5 0.81, sx 5 0.9
CR7.17	 Let x be the number of correct identifications. Assume 
that the graphologist was merely guessing—in other words, that 
the probability of success on each trial was 0.5. Then 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises 
● 
797
Psx $ 6d 5 0.377. Since this probability is not particularly small, 
it would not have been unlikely for him/her to get six or more 
correct identifications when guessing. No ability to distinguish 
the handwriting of psychotics is indicated.
CR7.19	 a. 0.1587 b. 51.4 minutes c. 41.65 minutes
CR7.21	 b. Positive c. Yes. If a symmetrical distribution were 
required, then a transformation would be advisable.
Chapter 8
8.1	 A population characteristic is a quantity that summarizes 
the whole population. A statistic is a quantity calculated from the 
values in a sample.
8.3	 a. Population characteristic b. Statistic c. Population charac-
teristic d. Statistic e. Statistic
8.7	 a. and b.
x
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
psxd
1/6
1/6
1/3
1/6
1/6
c. 
x
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
psxd
1/16
1/8
3/16
1/4
3/16
1/8
1/16
d. Both distributions are symmetrical, and their means are equal 
(2.5). However, the “with replacement” version has a greater 
spread than the first distribution, with values ranging from 1 to 4 
in the “with replacement” distribution and from 1.5 to 3.5 in the 
“without replacement” distribution. The stepped pattern of the 
“with replacement” distribution more closely resembles a normal 
distribution than does the shape of the “without replacement” 
distribution.
8.9	 a. and b.
x
22/3
3
31/3
32/3
psxd
0.1
0.4
0.3
0.2
Sample Median
3
4
p(Sample Median)
0.7
0.3
(Max ​1 ​Min)/2
2.5
3
3.5
p((Max ​1 ​Min)/2)
0.1
0.5
0.4
c. Since m 5 3.2 and m x 5 3.2, x is an unbiased estimator of m, 
which is not the case for either of the two other statistics. Since 
the distribution of the sample mean has less variability than ei-
ther of the other two sampling distributions, the sample mean 
will tend to produce values that are closer to m than the values 
produced by either of the other statistics.
8.11	The sampling distribution of x will be approximately nor-
mal for the sample sizes in Parts (c)–(f), since those sample sizes 
are all greater than or equal to 30.
8.13	a. m x 5 40, s x 5 0.625 approximately normal b. 0.5762  
c. 0.2628
8.15	a. m x 5 2, s x 5 0.267 b. In each case m x 5 2. When  
n 5 20, s x 5 0.179, and when n 5 100, s x 5 0.008. c. All 
three centers are the same, and the larger the sample size, the 
smaller the standard deviation of x. Since the distribution of  
x when n 5 100 is the one with the smallest standard deviation 
of the three, this sample size is most likely to result in a value of 
x close to m.
8.17	a. 0.8185, 0.0013 b. 0.9772, 0.0000
8.19	 ps0.49 , x , 0.51d 5 0.9974; the probability that the man-
ufacturing line will be shut down unnecessarily is 1 2 0.9974 5 
0.0026.
8.21	Approximately 0.
8.23	a. m⁄p 5 0.65, s⁄p 5 0.151. b. m⁄p 5 0.65, s⁄p 5 0.107.  
c. m⁄p 5 0.65, s⁄p 5 0.087. d. m⁄p 5 0.65, s⁄p 5 0.067. 
e. m⁄p 5 0.65, s⁄p 5 0.048. f. m⁄p 5 0.65, s⁄p 5 0.034.
8.25	a. m⁄p 5 0.65, s⁄p 5 0.026. b. No, since 
np 5 100s0.07d 5 7, which is not greater than or equal to 10.  
c. The mean is unchanged, but the standard deviation changes to 
s⁄p 5 0.018 d. Yes, since np 5 14 and ns1 2 pd 5 186, which are 
both greater than or equal to 10. e. 0.0485
8.27	a. m⁄p 5 0.005, s⁄p 5 0.007 b. No, since np 5 0.5, which is 
not greater than or equal to 10. c. We need both np and ns1 2 pd 
to be greater than or equal to 10; need n $ 2000.
8.29	a. If p 5 0.5, m⁄p 5 0.5, s⁄p 5 0.0333, approximately nor-
mal. If p 5 0.6, m⁄p 5 0.6, s⁄p 5 0.0327, approximately normal. 
b. If p 5 0.5, Psp⁄ $ 0.6d 5 0.0013. If p 5 0.6, Psp⁄u0.6d 5 0.5  
c. For a larger sample size, the value of p⁄ is likely to be closer to p. 
So, for n 5 400, when p 5 0.5, Psp⁄ $ 0.6d will be smaller. When 
p 5 0.6, Psp⁄ $ 0.6d will still be 0.5, and it will remain the same.
8.31	a. 0.9744 b. Approximately 0
8.33	a. x is approximately normally distributed with mean 50 
and standard deviation 0.1. b. 0.9876 c. 0.5
8.35	a. 0.8185 b. i. 0.8357 ii. 0.9992
8.37	0.0793
Chapter 9
9.1	 Statistics II and III are preferable to Statistic I since they are 
unbiased (their means are equal to the value of the population 
characteristic). However, Statistic II is preferable to Statistic III 
since its standard deviation is smaller. So Statistic II should be 
recommended.
9.3	 p⁄ 5 0.277
9.5	 p⁄ 5 0.7
9.7	 a. x 5 421.429 b. s2 5 10414.286 c. s 5 102.050. No, s is 
not an unbiased statistic for estimating s.
9.9	 a. x 5 120.6 therms b. The value of t is estimated to be 
10000(120.6) ​5 ​1,206,000 therms. c. p⁄ 5 0.8 d. sample median ​
5 ​120 therms
9.11	a. 1.96 b. 1.645 c. 2.58 d. 1.28 e. 1.44
9.13	a. The larger the confidence level, the wider the interval.  
b. The larger the sample size, the narrower the interval. c. Values 
of p⁄ farther from 0.5 give smaller values of p⁄s1 2 p⁄d. Therefore, 
the farther the value of p⁄ from 0.5, the narrower the interval.
9.15	If a large number of random samples of size 1200 were to 
be taken, 90% of the resulting confidence intervals would contain 
the true proportion of all Facebook users who would say it is not 
OK to “friend” someone who reports to you at work.
9.17	 a. (0.675, 0.705). b. We are 98% confident that the pro-
portion of all coastal residents who would evacuate is between 
0.675 and 0.705. If we were to take a large number of random 
samples of size 5046, about 98% of the resulting confidence in-
tervals would contain the true proportion of all coastal residents 
who would evacuate.
9.19	a. (0.642, 0.677). We are 90% confident that the propor-
tion of all Americans age 8 to 18 who own a cell phone is be-
tween 0.642 and 0.677. b. (0.745, 0.776). We are 90% confident 
that the proportion of all Americans age 8 to 18 who own an 
MP3 player is between 0.745 and 0.776. c. The interval in 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

798 
●  Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises
Part (b) is narrower than the interval in Part (a) because the 
sample proportion in Part (b) is farther from 0.5.
9.21	a. (0.660, 0.740). We are 95% confident that the propor-
tion of all potential jurors who regularly watch at least one crime-
scene investigation series is between 0.660 and 0.740. b. Wider
9.23	a. (0.223, 0.298). We are 95% confident that the propor-
tion of all U.S. businesses that have fired workers for misuse of 
the Internet is between 0.223 and 0.298. b. The estimated stan-
dard error is smaller and the confidence level is lower.
9.25	0.024. We are 95% confident that the proportion of all 
adults who believe that the shows are either “totally made up” or 
“mostly distorted” is within 0.024 of the sample proportion 
of 0.82.
9.27	We are 95% confident that the proportion of all adult 
drivers who would say that they often or sometimes talk on a cell 
phone while driving is within 1.96Ïp⁄s1 2 pd
⁄ /n 5 0.030 (that is, 
3.0 percentage points) of the sample proportion of 0.36.
9.29	a. (0.119, 0.286). We are 95% confident that the propor-
tion of all patients under 50 years old who experience a failure 
within the first 2 years after receiving this type of defibrillator is 
between 0.119 and 0.286. b. (0.011, 0.061). We are 99% confi-
dent that the proportion of all patients age 50 or older who expe-
rience a failure within the first 2 years after receiving this type of 
defibrillator is between 0.011 and 0.061. c. Using the estimate of 
p from the study, 18/89, the required sample size is n 5 688.685. 
A sample of size at least 689 is required.
9.31	A sample size of 2401 is required.
9.33	Using p 5 0.32, a sample size of 335 is required. Using the 
conservative value, p 5 0.5, a sample size of 385 is required. The 
conservative estimate of p gives the larger sample size. Since the 
relevant proportion could have changed significantly since 2011, 
it would be sensible to use a sample size of 385.
9.35	a. 2.12 b. 1.80 c. 2.81 d. 1.71 e. 1.78 f. 2.26
9.37	The second interval is based on the larger sample size; the 
interval is narrower.
9.39	a. (7.411, 8.069). b. (41.439, 44.921).
9.41	a. The fact that the mean is much greater than the median 
suggests that the distribution of times spent volunteering in the 
sample was positively skewed. b. With the sample mean much 
greater than the sample median, and with the sample regarded as 
representative of the population, it seems very likely that the 
population is strongly positively skewed and, therefore, not 
normally distributed. c. Since n 5 1086 $ 30, the sample size  
is large enough for us to use the t confidence interval, even 
though the population distribution is not approximately normal. 
d. (5.232, 5.968). We are 98% confident that the mean time 
spent volunteering for the population of parents of school-age 
children is between 5.232 and 5.968 hours.
9.43	a. Narrower. b. The statement is not correct. The popula-
tion mean, m, is a constant, and therefore, we cannot talk about 
the probability that it falls within a certain interval. c. The state-
ment is not correct. We can say that on average 95 out of every 
100 samples will result in confidence intervals that will contain 
m, but we cannot say that in 100 such samples, exactly 95 will 
result in confidence intervals that contain m.
9.45	a. The samples from 12 to 23 month and 24 to 35 month 
are the ones with the greater variability. b. The less-than-12-
month sample is the one with the greater sample size. c. The new 
interval has a 99% confidence level.
9.47	a. (179.02, 186.98). We are 95% confident that the mean 
summer weight is between 179.02 and 186.98 pounds.  
b. (185.423, 194.577). We are 95% confident that the mean 
winter weight is between 185.423 and 194.577 pounds. c. Based 
on the Frontier Airlines data, neither recommendation is likely to 
be an accurate estimate of the mean passenger weight, since 190 
is not contained in the confidence interval for the mean summer 
weight and 195 is not contained in the confidence interval for the 
mean winter weight.
9.49	A boxplot shows that the distribution of the sample values 
is negatively skewed, and so the population may not be not ap-
proximately normally distributed. Therefore, since the sample is 
small, it is not appropriate to use the t confidence interval 
method of this section.
9.51	A reasonable estimate of s is given by (sample range)/4 5 
162.5. A sample size of 1015 is needed.
9.53	First, we need to know that the information is based on a 
random sample of middle-income consumers age 65 and older. 
Second, it would be useful if some sort of margin of error was 
given for the estimated mean of $10,235.
9.55	a. The paper states that queens flew for an average of 24.2 6 
9.21 minutes on their mating flights, and so this interval is a con-
fidence interval for a population mean. b. (3.301, 5.899)
9.57	a. (0.217, 0.475) b. We are 95% confident that the propor-
tion of all young people with pierced tongues who have receding 
gums is between 0.217 and 0.475. The assumption we have 
made is that the sample of 52 is representative of the population 
of young adults with pierced tongues.
9.59	The standard error for the mean cost for Native Americans 
is much larger than that for Hispanics since the sample size was 
much smaller for Native Americans.
9.61	a. (0.409, 0.591)
9.63	The point estimate is .43 and the bound on error is 
approximately .03.
9.65	(0.671, 0.749)
9.67	(8.571, 9429)
9.69	(17.899, 25.901)
Chapter 10
10.1	 x is a sample statistic.
10.3	Ha: m . 100 will be used.
10.7	H0: p 5 0.1 versus Ha: p , 0.1
10.9	H0: p 5 0.5 Ha: p . 0.5
10.11	H0: p 5 0.83  versus Ha: p ≠ 0.83
10.13	a. Type I error, 0.091 b. 0.097
10.15	a. A Type I error would be concluding the man is not the 
father when in fact he is. A Type II error would be concluding 
the man is the father when in fact he is not the father.  
b. a 5 0.001, b 5 0 c. b 5 0.008
10.17	a. A Type I error concluding that there is evidence that 
more than 1% of a shipment is defective when in fact (at least) 
1% of the shipment is defective. A Type II error is not being con-
vinced that more than 1% of a shipment is defective when in fact 
more than 1% of the shipment is defective. b. Type II c. Type I
10.19	The probability of a Type I error is equal to the signifi-
cance level. Here the aim is to reduce the probability of a Type I 
error, so a small significance level (such as 0.01) should be used.
10.21	a. The researchers failed to reject H0. b. Type II error c. Yes
10.23	a. A P-value of 0.0003 means that it is very unlikely (prob-
ability ​5 ​0.0003), assuming that H0 is true, that you would get a 
sample result at least as inconsistent with H0 as the one obtained 
in the study. Thus, H0 is rejected. b. A P-value of 0.350 means 
that it is not particularly unlikely (probability ​5 ​0.350), assuming 
that H0 is true, that you would get a sample result at least as in-
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises 
● 
799
consistent with H0 as the one obtained in the study. Thus, there 
is no reason to reject H0.
10.25	a. H0 is not rejected. b. H0 is not rejected. c. H0 is not re-
jected. d. H0 is rejected. e. H0 is not rejected. f. H0 is not rejected.
10.27	a. Not appropriate b. Is appropriate c. Is appropriate  
d. Not appropriate
10.29	a. z ​5 ​2.530, P-value ​5 ​0.0057, reject H0 b. No. The sur-
vey only included women age 22 to 35. 
10.31	z ​5 ​6.647, P-value ¯ 0, reject H0
10.33	z 5 0.446, P-value 5 0.328, fail to reject H0
10.35	z ​5 ​15.436, P-value ¯ 0, reject H0
10.37	z ​5 ​0.791, P-value ​5 ​0.2146, fail to reject H0
10.39	If the null hypothesis is true, p(p⁄ $ 0.33) < 0. It is very 
unlikely that you would observe a sample proportion as large as 
0.33 if the null hypothesis is true.
10.41	The “38%” value given in the article is a proportion of all 
felons; in other words, it is a population proportion. Therefore, we 
know that the population proportion is less than 0.4, and there is 
no need for a hypothesis test.
10.43	a. 0.484 b. 0.686 c. 0.025 d. 0.000 e. 0.097
10.45	a. H0 is rejected. b. H0 is not rejected. c. H0 is not rejected.
10.47	a. t ​5 ​0.748, P-value ​5 ​0.468, fail to reject H0 b. t ​5 ​8.731, 
P-value ¯ 0, reject H0
10.49	t ​5 ​2.417, P-value ​5 ​0.010, reject H0
10.51	t ​5 ​14.266, P-value < 0, reject H0
10.53	t ​5 ​25.001, P-value < 0, reject H0
10.55	a. t ​5 ​1.265, P-value ​5 ​0.103, fail to reject H0
b. t ​5 ​3.162, P-value ​5 ​0.001, reject H0
10.57	a. Yes. Since the pattern in the normal probability plot is 
roughly linear, and since the sample was a random sample from 
the population, the t test is appropriate. b. The boxplot shows a 
median of around 245, and since the distribution is a roughly 
symmetrical distribution, this tells us that the sample mean is also 
around 245. This might initially suggest that the population mean 
differs from 240. But, the sample is relatively small, and the sam-
ple values range all the way from 225 to 265; such a sample 
mean would still be feasible if the population mean were 240.  
c. t ​5 ​1.212, P-value ​5 ​0.251, fail to reject H0
10.59	a. Increasing the sample size increases the power. 
b. Increasing the significance level increases the power.
10.61	a. 0.1003 b. 0.2358 c. 0.0001 d. Power when m 5 9.8 is 
1 2 0.2358 5 0.7642; power when m 5 9.5 is 1 2 0.0001 5
0.9999.
10.63	a. t ​5 ​0.466, P-value ​5 ​0.329, fail to reject H0 b. b ¯ 0.75 
c. Power ¯ 1 2 0.75 5 0.25
10.65	a. b ¯ 0.04 b. b ¯ 0.04 c. b ¯ 0.24 d. b ¯ 0 e. b ¯ 0.04 
f. b ¯ 0.01
10.67	a. z ​5 ​3.370, P-value ​5 ​0.0004, reject H0
10.69	z ​5 ​211.671, P-value < 0, reject H0
10.71	t ​5 ​25.051, P-value ​< ​0, reject H0
10.73	z ​5 ​1.069, P-value ​5 ​0.143, fail to reject H0
10.75	z ​5 ​21.927, P-value ​5 ​0.027, reject H0
10.77	t ​5 ​20.599, P-value ​5 ​0.277, fail to reject H0
10.79	z ​5 ​4.186, P-value < 0, reject H0
10.81	t ​5 ​25.324, P-value < 0, reject H0
Cumulative Review 10
CR10.3	 a. Three airlines stand out from the rest and have large 
numbers of delayed flights. These airlines are ExpressJet, Delta, 
and Continental, with 93, 81, and 72 delayed flights, respec-
tively. b. A typical number of flights delayed per 100,000 flights 
is around 1.1, with most rates lying between 0 and 1.6. Four 
airlines stand out from the rest and have high rates, with two of 
those four having particularly high rates. c. The rate per 
100,000 flights data should be used, since this measures the like-
lihood of any given flight being late. An airline could stand out in 
the number of flights delayed data purely as a result of having a 
large number of flights.
CR10.5	 a. 0.134 b. 0.041 c. mx 5 25, sx 5 4.330 d. 0.102
CR10.7	 a. 0.4 b. 0.18 c. 0.26 d. 0.45 e. Since anyone who 
accepts a job offer must have received at least one job offer, 
PsOuAd 5 1. f. 0.18
CR10.9	 a. (0.244, 0.416). We are 95% confident that the pro-
portion of all U.S. medical residents who work moonlighting jobs 
is between 0.244 and 0.416. b. (0.131, 0.252). We are 90% con-
fident that the proportion of all U.S. medical residents who have 
credit card debt of more than $3000 is between 0.131 and 0.252. 
c. The interval in Part (a) is wider than the interval in Part (b) 
because the confidence level in Part (a) (95%) is greater than the 
confidence level in Part (b) (90%) and because the sample pro-
portion in Part (a) (38/115) is closer to 0.5 than the sample pro-
portion in Part (b) (22/115).
CR10.11	A reasonable estimate of s is given by 
ssample rangedy4 5 0.1. A sample size of 385 is needed.
CR10.13	z ​5 ​7.557, P-value < 0, reject H0
CR10.15	a. With a sample mean of 14.6, the sample standard 
deviation of 11.6 places zero just over one standard deviation 
below the mean. Since no teenager can spend a negative time on-
line, to get a typical deviation from the mean of just over 1, there 
must be values that are substantially more than one standard 
deviation above the mean. This suggests that the distribution of 
online times in the sample is positively skewed. b. t ​5 ​9.164, 
P-value < 0, reject H0 
Chapter 11
11.1	The distribution of x1 2 x2 is approximately normal with 
mean 5 and standard deviation 0.529.
11.3	t 5 23.770, df 5 243, P-value 5 0.0002, reject H0
11.5	a. Since boxplots are roughly symmetrical and since there is 
no outlier in either sample, the assumption of normality is justi-
fied, and it is reasonable to carry out a two-sample t test.  
b. t ​5 ​3.332, P-value ​5 ​0.001, reject H0 c. (0.423, 2.910). We 
are 98% confident that the difference between the mean number 
of hours per day spent using electronic media in 2009 and 1999 
is between 0.423 and 2.910.
11.7	t ​5 ​20.445, P-value ​5 ​0.660, fail to reject H0
11.9	a. If the vertebroplasty group had been compared to a 
group of patients who did not receive any treatment, and if, for 
example, the people in the vertebroplasty group experienced a 
greater pain reduction on average than the people in the “no 
treatment” group, then it would be impossible to tell whether the 
observed pain reduction in the vertebroplasty group was caused 
by the treatment or merely by the subjects’ knowledge that some 
treatment was being applied. By using a placebo group, it is en-
sured that the subjects in both groups have the knowledge of 
some “treatment,” so that any differences between the pain reduc-
tion in the two groups can be attributed to the nature of the ver-
tebroplasty treatment. b. (20.687, 1.287). We are 95% confident 
that the difference in mean pain intensity 3 days after treatment 
for the vertebroplasty treatment and the fake treatment is be-
tween 20.687 and 1.287. c. (21.186, 0.786). We are 95% confi-
dent that the difference in mean pain intensity 14 days after 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

800 
●  Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises
treatment for the vertebroplasty treatment and the fake treatment 
is between 21.186 and 0.786. (21.722, 0.322). We are 95% 
confident that the difference in mean pain intensity 1 month after 
treatment for the vertebroplasty treatment and the fake treatment 
is between 21.722 and 0.322. d. The fact that all of the intervals 
contain zero tells us that we do not have convincing evidence of a 
difference in the mean pain intensity for the vertebroplasty treat-
ment and the fake treatment at any of the three times.
11.11	t 5 1.065, df 5 497, P-value 5 0.288, fail to reject H0
11.13	a. m15 ​mean payment for claims not involving errors;  
m2 5 ​mean payment for claims involving errors; H0: m12 m1 5 0; 
Ha: m1 2 m2 , 0 b. Answer: (ii) 2.65. Since the samples are  
large, we are using a t distribution with a large number of degrees 
of freedom, which can be approximated with the standard nor-
mal distribution. Psz . 2.65d 5 0.004, which is the P-value 
given. None of the other possible values of t gives the correct 
P-value.
11.15	(278.154, 261.846). We are 99% confident that the dif-
ference in mean time spent watching time-shifted television for 
2010 and 2011 (2010 minus 2011) is between 278.154 and 
261.846. 
11.17	a. t ​5 ​10.359, P-value ¯ 0, reject H0 b. t ​5 ​216.316,  
P-value < 0, reject H0 c. t ​5 ​4.690, P-value < 0, reject H0 d. The 
results do seem to provide convincing evidence of a gender bias 
in the monkeys’ choices of how much time to spend playing with 
each toy, with the male monkeys spending significantly more 
time with the “masculine toy” than the female monkeys, and with 
the female monkeys spending significantly more time with the 
“feminine toy” than the male monkeys. However, the data also 
provide convincing evidence of a difference between male and 
female monkeys in the time they choose to spend playing with a 
“neutral toy.” It is possible that it was some attribute other than 
masculinity/femininity in the toys that was attracting the different 
genders of monkey in different ways. e. The given mean time 
playing with the police car and mean time playing with the doll 
for female monkeys are sample means for the same sample of 
female monkeys. The two-sample t test can only be performed 
when there are two independent random samples.
11.19	a. Since the samples are small it is necessary to know—or 
to assume—that the distributions from which the random sam-
ples were taken are normal. However, in this case, since both 
standard deviations are large compared to the means, it seems 
unlikely that these distributions would have been normal.  
b. Since the samples are large, it is appropriate to carry out  
the two-sample t test. c. t ​5 ​22.207, P-value ​5 ​0.030, fail to 
reject H0
11.21	a. t ​5 ​29.863, P-value ¯ 0, reject H0 b. For the two-
sample t test, t 5 29.979, df 5 22.566, and  P-value ¯ 0 Thus, 
the conclusion is the same.
11.23	t 5 0.639, P-value 5 0.267, fail to reject H0
11.25	t ​5 ​20.515, P-value ​5 ​0.612, fail to reject H0
11.27	t 5 2.684, P-value 5 0.010, reject H0
11.29	a. t ​5 ​4.451, P-value ¯ 0, reject H0 b. (20.210, 0.270).  
c. t ​5 ​3.094, P-value ​5 ​0.001, reject H0 d. In Part (a), the male 
profile heights and the male actual heights are paired (according 
to which individual has the actual height and the height stated in 
the profile), and with paired samples, we use the paired t test. In 
Part (c), we were dealing with two independent samples (the 
sample of males and the sample of females), and therefore, the 
two-sample t test was appropriate.
11.31	t ​5 ​22.457, P-value ​5 ​0.018, reject H0
11.33	a. t ​5 ​4.321, P-value ¯ 0, reject H0 b. t ​5 ​1.662,  
P-value ​5 ​0.055, fail to reject H0 c. A smaller standard deviation 
in the sample of differences means that we have a lower estimate 
of the standard deviation of the population of differences. Assum-
ing that the mean wrist extensions for the two mouse types are 
the same (in other words, that the mean of the population of dif-
ferences is zero), a sample mean difference of as much as 8.82 is 
much less likely when the standard deviation of the population of 
differences is around 10 than when the standard deviation of the 
population of differences is around 26.
11.35	t ​5 ​3.17, P-value ​5 ​0.001, reject H0
11.37	z 5 23.94, P-value ¯ 0, reject H0
11.39	a. z ​5 ​1.172, P-value ​5 ​0.121, fail to reject H0  
b. (20.036, 0.096). We are 99% confident that the difference be-
tween the proportion of Gen Y and the proportion of Gen X who 
made a donation via text message is between 20.036 and 0.096. 
In repeated sampling with random samples of size 400, approxi-
mately 99% of the resulting confidence intervals would contain 
the true difference in proportions who donated via text message.
11.41	a. z ​5 ​20.298, P-value ​5 ​0.766, fail to reject H0  
b. z ​5 ​22.022, P-value ​5 ​0.043, reject H0 c. Assuming that the 
population proportions are equal, you are much less likely to get 
a difference in sample proportions as large as the one given when 
the samples are very large than when the samples are relatively 
small.
11.43	a. (20.078, 0.058). b. Zero is included in the confidence 
interval. This tells us that there is not convincing evidence of a 
difference between the proportions.
11.45	No. It is not appropriate to use the two-sample z test be-
cause the groups are not large enough. We are not told the sizes 
of the groups, but we know that each is, at most, 81. The sample 
proportion for the fish oil group is 0.05, and 81(0.05) ​5 ​4.05, 
which is less than 10. So, the conditions for the two-sample z test 
are not satisfied.
11.47	z 5 25.33, P-value < 0, reject H0
11.49	(20.043, 0.003). We are 95% confident that the difference 
in the proportions of college graduates who were unemployed in 
these two years (2008 minus 2009) is between 20.043 and 0.003.
11.51	z ​5 ​6.306, P-value < 0, reject H0
11.53	z ​5 ​3.800, P-value < 0, reject H0
11.55	a. z ​5 ​9.169, P-value < 0, reject H0 b. No. Since this is an 
observational study, causation cannot be inferred from the result.
11.57	Since the data given are population characteristics, an 
inference procedure is not applicable. It is known that the rate of 
Lou Gehrig’s disease among soldiers sent to the war is higher 
than for those not sent to the war.
11.59	b. If we want to know whether the e-mail intervention re-
duces (as opposed to changes) adolescents’ display of risk behavior 
in their profiles, then we use one-sided alternative hypotheses 
and the P-values are halved. If that is the case, using a 0.05 sig-
nificance level, we are convinced that the intervention is effective 
with regard to reduction of references to sex and that the propor-
tion showing any of the three protective changes is greater for 
those receiving the e-mail intervention. Each of the other two 
apparently reduced proportions could have occurred by chance.
11.61	a. t ​5 ​26.565, P-value < 0, reject H0 b. t ​5 ​6.249,  
P-value < 0, reject H0 c. t ​5 ​0.079, P-value ​5 ​0.937, fail to reject 
H0. d. This does not imply that students and faculty consider it 
acceptable to talk on a cell phone during class; in fact, the low 
sample mean ratings for both students and faculty show that both 
groups, on the whole, feel that the behavior is inappropriate.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises 
● 
801
11.63	a. t ​5 ​217.382, P-value < 0, reject H0 b. t ​5 ​2.440,  
P-value ​5 ​0.030, reject H0 c. No, the paired t test would not be  
appropriate since the treatment and control groups were not 
paired samples.
11.65	z ​5 ​4.245, P-value < 0, reject H0
11.67	a. t ​5 ​211.952, P-value < 0, reject H0 b. t ​5 ​268.803,  
P-value < 0, reject H0 c. t ​5 ​0.698, P-value ​5 ​0.494, fail to  
reject H0
11.69	t ​5 ​0.856, P-value ​5 ​0.210, fail to reject H0
11.71	t ​5 ​21.336, P-value ​5 ​0.193, fail to reject H0
11.73	z ​5 ​21.263, P-value ​5 ​0.103, fail to reject H0
11.75	(20.274, 20.082). We are 90% confident that p1 2 p2 lies 
between 20.274 and 20.082, where p1 is the proportion of chil-
dren in the community with fluoridated water who have decayed 
teeth and p2 is the proportion of children in the community with-
out fluoridated water who have decayed teeth. The interval does 
not contain zero, which means that we have evidence at the 0.1 
level of a difference between the proportions of children with 
decayed teeth in the two communities, and evidence at the 0.05 
level that the proportion of children with decayed teeth is smaller 
in the community with fluoridated water.
11.77	a. (24.738, 22.738). b. t ​5 ​0.140, P-value ​5 ​0.890, fail to 
reject H0 c. t ​5 ​20.446, P-value ​5 ​0.330, fail to reject H0
11.79	a. t ​5 ​3.948, P-value ¯ 0, reject H0 b. t ​5 ​21.165,  
P-value ​5 ​0.249, fail to reject H0
11.81	z ​5 ​5.590, P-value ¯ 0, reject H0
Chapter 12
12.1	a. fail to reject H0 b. reject H0 c. reject H0
12.3	X2 5 20.686, P-value 5 0.0003, reject H0
12.5	X2 5 19.599, P-value < 0, reject H0
12.7	Since the P-value is small, there is convincing evidence that 
the population proportions of people who respond “Monday” and 
“Friday” are not equal.
12.9	a. X2 5 166.958, P-value < 0, reject H0
b. X255.052, P-value 5 0.025, reject H0
12.11  X2 5 25.486, P-value < 0, reject H0
12.13  X2 5 1.469, P-value 5 0.690, fail to reject H0
12.15  a. P-value 5 0.844, fail to reject H0 b. P-value 5 0.106, 
fail to reject H0
12.17  X2 5 29.507, P-value 5 0.001, reject H0
12.19  a. X2 5 ​90.853, P-value < 0, reject H0
b. The particularly high contributions to the chi-square statistic 
(in order of importance) come from the field of communication, 
languages, and cultural studies, in which there was a dispropor-
tionately high number of smokers; from the field of mathematics, 
engineering, and sciences, in which there was a disproportion-
ately low number of smokers; and from the field of social science 
and human services, in which there was a disproportionately high 
number of smokers.
12.21  a. X2 5 2.314, P-value 5 0.128, fail to reject H0 b. Yes  
c. Yes. Since P-value 5 0.127 . 0.05, we do not reject H0.  
d. The two P-values are almost equal; in fact, the difference  
between them is only due to rounding errors in the Minitab 
program. 
12.23  a. X2 5 96.506, P-value < 0, reject H0 b. The result of 
Part (a) tells us that the level of the gift seems to make a differ-
ence. Looking at the data given, 12% of those receiving no gift 
made a donation, 14% of those receiving a small gift made a do-
nation, and 21% of those receiving a large gift made a donation. 
(These percentages can be compared to 16% making donations 
among the expected counts.) So, it seems that the most effective 
strategy is to include a large gift, with the small gift making very 
little difference compared to no gift at all.
12.25  X2 5 46.515, P-value < 0, reject H0
12.27  X2 5 3.030, P-value 5 0.387, fail to reject H0
12.29  X2 5 49.813, P-value < 0, reject H0
12.31  X2 5 1.978, P-value 5 0.372, fail to reject H0
12.33  b. X2 5 8.034, P-value 5 0.005, reject H0
12.35  X2 5 1.08, P-value 5 0.982, fail to reject H0
12.37  X2 5 881.360, P-value < 0, reject H0
12.39  X2 5 4.035, P-value 5 0.258, fail to reject H0
12.41  a. X2 5 10.976, P-value , 0.001, reject H0  
b. representative sample
12.43  X2 5 22.855, P-value < 0, reject H0
Chapter 13
13.1	a. y 5 25.0 1 0.017x c. 30.7 d. 0.017 e. 1.7
f. No, the model should not be used to predict outside the range 
of the data.
13.3	a. When x 5 15, my 5 0.18. When x 5 17, my 5 0.186.
b. When x 5 15, Ps y . 0.18d 5 0.5. c. When x 5 14,
Ps y . 0.175d 5 0.655, Psy , 0.178d 5 0.579.
13.5	a. 47, 4700 b. 0.3156, 0.0643
13.7	a. 0.121 b. se 5 0.155; this is a typical vertical deviation of 
a bone mineral density value in the sample from the value pre-
dicted by the least-squares line. c. 0.009 gycm2 d. 1.098 gycm2
13.9	a. r2 5 0.883 b. se 5 13.682, df ​5 ​14
13.11	 a. The plot shows a linear pattern, and the vertical spread 
of points does not appear to be changing over the range of x val-
ues in the sample. If we assume that the distribution of errors at 
any given x value is approximately normal, then the simple linear 
regression model seems appropriate.  
b. y⁄ 5 2 0.00227 1 1.247x; when x 5 0.09, y⁄ 5 0.110.  
c. r2 5 0.436, 43.6% of the variation in market share can be ex-
plained by the linear regression model relating market share and 
advertising share. d. se 5 0.0263, df ​5 ​8
13.13	 a.	Yes. P-value 5 0.023. Since this value is less than 0.05, 
we have convincing evidence at the 0.05 significance level of a 
useful linear relationship between shrimp catch per tow and oxy-
gen concentration density. b. Yes. r 5 Ï0.496 5 0.704. So there 
is a moderate to strong linear relationship for the values in the 
sample. c. (17.363, 177.077) We are 95% confident that the 
slope of the population regression line relating mean catch per 
tow to O2 saturation is between 17.363 and 177.077.
13.15	 a. 0.1537 b. (2.17, 2.83) c. Yes, the interval is relatively 
narrow.
13.17	 a. a ​5 ​592.1, b ​5 ​97.26 b. When x 5 2, y⁄ 5 786.62, 
y 2 y⁄ 5 229.62. c. (87.76, 106.76)
13.19	 t ​5 ​23.66, P-value < 0, reject H0
13.21	 a. (0.081, 0.199) We are 95% confident that the mean 
change in pleasantness rating associated with an increase of  
1 impulse per second in firing frequency is between 0.081 and 
0.199. b. t ​5 ​5.451, P-value ​5 ​0.001, reject H0
13.23	 a. t ​5 ​6.493, P-value < 0, reject H0 b. t ​5 ​1.56,  
P-value ​5 ​0.079, fail to reject H0
13.25	 a. 0.253 b. 0.179; no c. 4
13.27	 There is a random scatter of points in the residual plot, 
implying that a linear model relating squirrel population density 
to percentage of logging is appropriate. The residual plot shows 
no tendency for the size (magnitude) of the residuals to either 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

802 
●  Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises
increase of decrease as percentage of logging increases. So it is 
justifiable to assume that the vertical deviations from the popula-
tion regression line have equal standard deviations. The last con-
dition is that the vertical deviations be normally distributed. The 
fact that the boxplot of the residuals is roughly symmetrical and 
shows no outliers suggests that this condition is satisfied.
13.29	 There is a curved pattern in the residual plot, which sug-
gest that the simple linear regression model is not appropriate.
13.31	 No. The pattern in the scatterplot looks linear, but the 
spread around the line does not appear to be constant. The histo-
gram of the residuals also appears to be positively skewed.
Cumulative Review 13
CR13.1	 Randomly assign the 400 students to two groups of 
equal size, Group A and Group B. Have the 400 students take the 
same course, attending the same lectures and being given the 
same homework assignments. The only difference between the 
two groups should be that the students in Group A should be 
given daily quizzes and the students in Group B should not. After 
the final exam the exam scores for the students in Group A 
should be compared to the exam scores for the students in  
Group B.
CR13.3	 b. The two airlines with the highest numbers of fines 
assessed may not be the worst in terms of maintenance violations 
since these airlines might have more flights than the other 
airlines.
CR13.5	 a. (0.651, 0.709) We are 95% confident that the pro-
portion of all adult Americans who view a landline phone as a 
necessity is between 0.651 and 0.709. b. z ​5 ​1.267, P-value ​5 ​
0.103, fail to reject H0 c. z ​5 ​9.513, P-value < 0, reject H0
CR13.7	 a. 0.62 b. 0.1216 c. 0.19 d. 0.0684
CR13.9	 b.y⁄ 5 212.887 1 21.126x d. t ​5 ​21.263, P-value < 0, 
reject H0
CR13.11	X2 ​5 ​26.175, P-value < 0, reject H0
CR13.13	X2 ​5 ​15.106, P-value 5 0.002, reject H0
CR13.15	t ​5 2​113.17, df ​5 ​45, P-value < 0, reject H0
CR13.17	X2 ​5 ​4.8, P-value 5 0.684, fail to reject H0
Chapter 14
14.1	a. A deterministic model does not have the random devia-
tion component e, while a probabilistic model does contain such 
a component.
14.3	a. (mean y value for fixed values of x1, x2, x3) ​5 ​
30 1 0.90x1 1 0.08x2 2 4.5x3
b. b0 5 30, b1 5 0.9, b2 5 0.08, b3 5 24.50  c. The average 
change in acceptable load associated with a 1-cm increase in left 
lateral bending, when grip endurance and trunk extension ratio 
are held fixed, is 0.90 kg. d. The average change in acceptable 
load associated with a 1 N/kg increase in trunk extension ratio, 
when grip endurance and left lateral bending are held fixed, is 
24.5 kg. e. 23.5 f. 95%
14.5	a. 13.552 g. b. When length is fixed, the mean increase in 
weight associated with a 1-mm increase in width is 0.828 g. 
When width is fixed, the mean increase in weight associated with 
a 1-mm increase in length is 0.373 g.
14.7	a. 103.11 b. 96.87 c. b1 5 26.6; 6.6 is the expected de-
crease in yield associated with a one-unit increase in mean tem-
perature when the mean percentage of sunshine remains fixed. 
b2 5 24.5; 4.5 is the expected decrease in yield associated with a 
one-unit increase in mean percentage of sunshine when mean 
temperature remains fixed.
14.9	b. Higher for x ​5 ​10 c. When the degree of delignification 
increases from 8 to 9 the mean chlorine content increases by 7. 
Mean chlorine content decreases by 1 when degree of delignifica-
tion increases from 9 to 10.
14.11	c. The parallel lines in each graph are attributable to the 
lack of interaction between the two independent variables.
14.13
a. y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 b3x3 1 e
b. y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 b3x3 1 b4x21 1 b5x22 1 b6x23 1 e
c. y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 b3x3 1 b4x1x2 1 e; 
y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 b3x3 1 b4 x1x3 1 e; 
y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 b3x3 1 b4x2x3 1 e
d. y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 b3x3 1 b4x21 1 b5x22 1 b6 x23 1
b7x1x2 1 b8x1x3 1 b9x2x3 1 e
14.15	a. Three dummy variables would be needed to incorporate 
a nonnumerical variable with four categories. For example, you 
could define x3 ​5 ​1 if the car is a subcompact and 0 otherwise, 
x4 5 ​1 if the car is a compact and 0 otherwise, and x5 ​5 ​1 if the 
car is a midsize and 0 otherwise. The model equation is then 
y 5 a 1 b1x1 1 b2x2 1 b3x3 1 b4x4 1 b5x5 1 e. b. For the vari-
ables defined in Part (a), x6 ​5 ​x1x3, x7 ​5 ​x1x4, and x8 ​5 ​x1x5 are 
the additional predictors needed to incorporate interaction be-
tween age and type of car.
14.17	a. 0.01 ​, ​P-value ​, ​0.05 b. P-value ​. ​0.10  
c. P-value ​5 ​0.01 d. 0.001 ​, ​P-value ​, ​0.01
14.19	a. F ​5 ​12118, P-value < 0, reject H0 b. Since the P-value 
is small and r2 is close to 1, there is strong evidence that the 
model is useful. c. The model in Part (b) should be recom-
mended, since adding the variables x1 and x2 to the model [to 
obtain the model in Part (a)] only increases the value of R2 a 
small amount (from 0.994 to 0.996).
14.21	F ​5 ​24.41, P-value ​, ​0.001, reject H0 and conclude that 
the model is useful.
14.23	F ​5 ​3.5, 0.01 ​, ​P-value ​, ​0.05, reject H0 and conclude 
that the model is useful.
14.25	F ​5 ​7.986, P-value ​, ​0.001, reject H0 and conclude that 
the model is useful.
14.27	 a. y⁄ 5 1.44 2 0.0523length 1 0.00397speed b. 1.3245  
c. F ​5 ​24.02, P-value ≈ 0, reject H0 and conclude that the model is 
useful. d. y⁄ 5 1.59 2 1.401
length
speed2 e. The model in Part (a) has 
R2 5 0.75 and R2 adjusted 5 0.719, whereas the model in Part (d)  
has R2 5 0.543 and R2 adjusted 5 0.516.
14.29	a. SSResid ​5 ​390.4347, SSTo ​5 ​1618.2093, SSRegr ​5 ​
1227.7746 b. R2 ​5 ​0.759; this means that 75.9% of the variation 
in the observed shear strength values has been explained by the 
fitted model. c. F ​5 ​5.039, 0.01 ​, ​P-value ​, ​0.05, reject H0, and 
conclude that the model is useful.
14.31	F ​5 ​96.64, P-value ​, ​0.001, reject H0, and conclude that 
the model is useful.
14.35	 y⁄ 5 35.8 2 0.68x1 1 1.28x2, F ​5 ​18.95, P-value ​, ​0.001, 
reject H0, and conclude that the model is useful.
Chapter 15
15.1	a. 0.001 ​, ​P-value ​, ​0.01 b. P-value ​. ​0.10  
c. P-value ​5 ​0.01 d. P-value ​, ​0.001 e. 0.05 ​, ​P-value ​, ​0.10  
f. 0.01 ​, ​P-value ​, ​0.05 (using df1 ​5 ​4 and df2 ​5 ​60)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises 
● 
803
15.3	a. H0: m1 ​5 ​m2 ​5 ​m3 ​5 ​m4, Ha: At least two of the four mi’s 
are different. b. P-value ​5 ​0.012, fail to reject H0  c. P-value ​5 ​
0.012, fail to reject H0
15.5	F ​5 ​6.687, P-value ​5 ​0.001, reject H0
15.7	F ​5 ​5.273, P-value ​5 ​0.002, reject H0
15.9	F ​5 ​53.8, P-value ​, ​0.001, reject H0
15.11	F ​5 ​2.62, 0.05 ​, ​P-value ​, ​0.10, fail to reject H0	
15.13
Source of 
Variation
df
Sum of 
Squares
Mean 
Square
F
Treatments
3
75,081.72
25,027.24
1.70
Error
16
235,419.04
14,713.69
Total
19
310,500.76
F ​5 ​1.70, P-value ​. ​0.10, fail to reject H0
15.15	Since there is a significant difference in all three of the 
pairs we need a set of intervals that does not include zero. Set 3 
is therefore the required set.
15.17	a. In decreasing order of the resulting mean numbers of 
pretzels eaten the treatments were slides with related text, slides 
with no text, slides with unrelated text, and no slides. There were 
no significant differences between the results for slides with no 
text and slides with unrelated text and for slides with unrelated 
text and no slides. However, there was a significant difference be-
tween the results for slides with related text and each one of the 
other treatments and between the results for no slides and for 
slides with no text (and for slides with related text). b. The results 
for the women and men are almost exactly the reverse of one 
another, with, for example, slides with related text (treatment 2) 
resulting in the smallest mean number of pretzels eaten for the 
women and the largest mean number of pretzels eaten for the 
men. For the men, treatment 2 was significantly different from all 
the other treatments; however, for women treatment 2 was not 
significantly different from treatment 1. For both women and 
men there was a significant difference between treatments 1 and 
4 and no significant difference between treatments 3 and 4. How-
ever, between treatments 1 and 3 there was a significant differ-
ence for the women but no significant difference for the men.
15.19	 a.
Sample 
Driving 
Shooting
Fighting
mean
.42
4.00
5.30
b.
Sample 
Driving 
Shooting
Fighting
mean
2.81
3.44
4.01
15.21	 a. F ​5 ​45.64, P-value ​≈ 0, reject H0 b. Yes; T-K interval is 
(0.388, 0.912)
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
  Index 
●  805
1 in k systematic sample, 42
A
A and B, 287
A or B, 287
Addition rule
for mutually exclusive events, 300
general, 324
Additive multiple regression model, 
703–704
Additive probabilistic model, 663
Adjusted R2, 719
Alternative hypothesis, 506
Analysis of variance (ANOVA), see  
Single-factor analysis of variance
ANOVA table, 741–742
B
Bar chart, 87–88
comparative, 81–82 
Bayes Rule, 330–332
Bell-shaped curve, 109–110
See also Normal distribution
Bias in sampling, 36–37
Biased statistic, 464
Bimodal histogram, 108–109 
Binomial distribution, 381–388
defined, 381
formula for, 383
mean of, 387
normal approximation to, 421–432
standard deviation of, 387
tables of probabilities, 385
Binomial experiment, 381
Binomial random variable, 381
Bivariate data
defined, 10
scatterplot of, 119
Blocking, 48, 50–51
defined, 48
extraneous variables and, 48
random assignment and, 57
Bound on error of estimation
defined, 474
sample size choice and, 475
Boxplot
comparative, 172–173
modified, 173–176
skeletal, 172
small sample size and, 190
C
Categorical data, 9
bar chart for, 13
chi-square test for, 625, 629
comparative bar chart for, 81–82
frequency distribution for, 12
pie chart for, 82–83
Causation
correlation and, 210
Cause-and-effect, determining, 31–33
Cell count see Expected cell count and 
Observed cell count
Census, 35
Center, measures of, 153–160
Central Limit Theorem, 446–448
Chance experiment, 284–285
Chebyshev’s rule, 178–180
Chi-square distribution, 628
Chi-square statistic, 628
Chi square test
goodness-of-fit, 629
homogeneity, 639
independence, 642–643
Class interval, 103, 105
Cluster, 42
Cluster sampling, 42
Coefficient of determination, r2, 
231–235
Coefficient of multiple determination, 
R2, 718
Common population proportion, 595
Comparative bar chart, 81–82
Comparative boxplot, 172–173
Comparative stem-and-leaf display, 95
Complement of an event, 287
Complete second order model, 708
Completely randomized design, 57
Conditional probability, 305–315
Confidence interval
general form of, 474
for population mean, 484
for population proportion, 470–472
for comparing two population or 
treatment means using  
independent samples, 573
for comparing two population or 
treatment means using paired 
samples, 587–588
for comparing two population or 
treatment proportions, 599
for the slope of the population  
regression line, 676
Confidence level, 468–469
Confounded variables, 48
Confounding variable, 31
Contingency table, 636
Continuity correction, 420–421
Continuous numerical data
defined, 11
frequency distribution for, 103–104
histogram for, 105
Continuous random variable, 353, 363
probability distributions for, 
363–367
Control group, 54, 62
Convenience sampling, 43
Correlation, 203 -214
Correlation coefficient, 203–204
and the coefficient of  
determination, 234
formula for, 204
limitations of, 265–266
Cumulative area, 365
Cumulative relative frequency, 
113–114
Cumulative relative frequency plot, 
112–114
D
Danger of extrapolation, 218, 265, 670
Data analysis process, 5–7
Degrees of freedom, 167
ANOVA and, 737
Index
805
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

806 
●  Index
Chi-square distributions and, 628
Simple linear regression and, 670
t distribution and, 481–482
two-sample t test and, 571–572
Density, 106
Density curve, 363–364
Density function, 363
Density scale, 106
Dependent events, 316
Dependent variable, 214
Descriptive statistics, 7
Deterministic relationship, 663
Deviations from the mean, 164–165
Diagram of experimental design, 54–55
Direct control, 47–48, 50–51
Discrete data, 11
Discrete probability distribution, 
364–365
binomial distribution, 381–388
geometric distribution, 388–390
properties of, 358
Discrete random variable
defined, 353–354
mean value of, 367
probability distribution of, 356–362
standard deviation of, 371–372
variance of, 372
Disjoint events see Mutually exclusive 
events 
Dotplot, 14–16
Double-blind experiment, 63–64
Dummy variable, 710
E
Empirical Rule, 180–182
standard normal distribution and, 
395, 398
Equally likely outcomes, 291–292
Error sum of squares (SSE), 737, 756
Errors in hypothesis testing, 510–516 
Estimated regression line, 716 –718, 731
Estimation
choosing a statistic, 464
point estimate, 462
interval estimate see Confidence 
interval
bias in, 464
Event, 285
Expected cell count, 638
Expected value, see mean
Experiment, 31, 46
completely randomized, 57
double-blind, 64
randomized block design, 57
replicating, 50–51
single-blind, 64
using a control group, 54, 62
using volunteers, 43
Experimental conditions, 46
Experimental design, principles of, 50
Experimental unit, 64
Explanatory variable, 214
Extraneous variable, 47–48, 51
Extrapolation, danger of, 218, 265, 670
Extreme outlier, 173
F
F distribution, 719–720
F test, ANOVA,  733–746
F test for model utility, 721–722
Factor, 31, 46, 733
Finite population correction factor, 495
Fitted value, see Predicted value
Five-number summary, 172
Frequency, 12
Frequency distribution, 12–13, 138
for categorical data, 12
for continuous numerical data, 
103–112
for discrete numerical data, 99–103
Full quadratic model, 708
Fundamental identity for single-factor 
ANOVA, 741
G
General addition rule, 324
General additive multiple regression 
model, 703–704
General multiplication rule, 326
Geometric probability distribution, 
388–390
Geometric random variable, 388
Goodness of fit statistic, 628
Goodness of fit test, 629–632
H
Heavy-tailed curve, 110
Histogram
for continuous numerical data with 
equal width intervals, 105–106
for continuous numerical data with 
unequal width intervals, 106–108
for discrete numerical data, 100–103
shapes, 108–110
using density, 106–108
Homogeneity, chi-square test of, 
635–641
Hypergeometric distribution, 386–387
Hypotheses, 506
alternative hypothesis, 506
null hypothesis, 506
Hypothesis test
errors in, 510–516
for population mean, 528–536
for population proportion, 516–526
for comparing two population or 
treatment means using  
independent samples, 562–572
for comparing two population or 
treatment means using paired 
samples, 582–587
for comparing two population or 
treatment proportions, 594–599
for goodness-of-fit, 629
for homogeneity, 639
for independence, 642–643
for the slope of the population re-
gression line, 678–683
power of, see Power, hypothesis testing
significance level of, 511
steps for, 523–524
I
Independence, 315–324  
testing for, 642–643
Independent events
defined, 316–319
multiplication rule for two, 317
multiplication rule for more than 
two, 318
Independent samples, 562
Independent variable, 214
Indicator variable, 710–712
Inferential statistics, 7 
Influential observation, 229–231, 689
Interaction, 706–710 
predictor in multiple regression, 708
Intercept, 214
Interquartile range (iqr), 167–168
Intersection of two events, 287
Interval estimate, see Confidence interval
J
Joint probability table, 315
L
Large sample confidence interval
for a population proportion,  
470–472
for the difference in two population 
or treatment proportions, 599
Degrees of freedom (continued  )
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
  Index 
●  807
histogram for discrete numerical 
data, 100–103
stem-and-leaf display for, 92–95
types of, 9
O
Observational study, 30–32
Observed cell count, 636
Observed significance level, 518  
see also P-value
One-sample t confidence interval, 484
One-sample t test, 531
One sample z confidence interval, 479
One-way frequency table, 625
Outlier, 92, 156, 173
Overcoverage, 66–67
P
Paired samples, 562–563
paired t test and, 584–587
Paired t confidence interval, 587–588
Paired t test, 584–587
Pearson’s sample correlation coefficient, 
see Correlation coefficient
Percentile, 183–184
Pie chart
for categorical data, 82–85
Placebo, 62–63, 73
Plotting residuals, 227–231, 688–693
Point estimation, 462–467
Polynomial regression, 704–706
Pooled t test, 572
Population, 6
Population correlation coefficient, 
209–210
Population mean, 155
comparing two using independent 
samples,  562–573  
comparing two using paired samples, 
582–588  
confidence interval for, 484
hypothesis tests for, 528–536
one-sample t test for, 531
Population proportion
comparing two using large samples, 
594–599
large-sample confidence interval for, 
470–472
large-sample hypothesis test for, 
516–526
Population regression function, 704–705
Population regression line, 664–666
Population standard deviation, 
166–167
Mean square, 737
for error (MSE), 737–738
for treatments (MSTr), 737–738  
Measurement bias, 36–37
Measure of center, 153–160
Measure of relative standing, 182–183
Measure of spread, 163–168 
Median
defined, 157–158
vs. mean, 158–159
outliers and, 158
Mild outlier, 173
Mode, 108
Model utility test
in simple linear regression, 680–682
in multiple regression, 721–722
Modified boxplot, 173–176
Multiple comparison procedure, 746–754
Multiple regression
general additive model, 703–704
interaction variables in, 706–710
model utility F test, 721–722
qualitative predictors in, 710–712
Multiplication rule
general, 326
for independent events, 317
Multivariate data, 10
Mutually exclusive events, 288–289
addition rule for, 300–301
N
Negative skew, 109
Nonlinear regression, 244–262
Nonresponse bias, 36
Normal approximation to the binomial 
distribution, 421–422
Normal curve, 109–110
Normal distribution, 393–409
extreme values in, 404–406
mean value of, 393
standard normal distribution, 
394–398
standard deviation of, 393
Normal probability plot, 409–410
Normal score, 409
Null hypothesis, 506
Numerical data, 11
displaying bivariate, 119 
dotplot for, 14–16
frequency distribution for continu-
ous numerical data, 103–112
frequency distribution for discrete 
numerical,  99–103
histogram for continuous numerical 
data, 105–108
Large-sample hypothesis test
for a population proportion,  
516–536
for the difference in two population 
or treatment proportions,  
594–599 
Law of large numbers, 295, 337
Law of total probability, 328–330
Least squares regression line
assessing fit of, 224–244
defined, 215–221
deviations from, 215–216
influential observations and, 231
population regression line and, 664
making predictions with, 216
outliers and, 231
slope of, 216
standard deviation about, 235–239
y intercept of, 216
Least-squares principle, 215–216
Line
assessing fit of, 224–244 
equation of, 214
least squares principle and, 215–216
Linear combination of random  
variables, 375
mean and standard deviation  
of, 375
Linear function of random variable, 374
mean and standard deviation of, 374
Linear regression, 237
model, 663–675
Linear relationship, strength of,  
204–205, 208
Lower quartile, 167
Lower-tailed test, 522, 531
M
Margin of error, 493 see also Bound on 
error of estimation
Marginal total, 636
Mean
of a binomial distribution, 387 
of a continuous random variable, 
373
of a data set, 153–157
deviations from, 164–165, 192
of a discrete random variable, 
367–371
of a linear combination, 375
of a linear function, 374
vs. median, 158–159 
of a normal distribution, 393–394
outliers and, 156–157
population mean, 155  
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

808 
●  Index
systematic,  42–43
with and without replacement, 39, 
319–321, 385–387
Sampling distribution, 437, 441, 459
of the difference in sample means 
(independent samples), 563
of the difference in sample 
­proportions, 594
of the sample mean, 442 – 452
of the sample proportion, 452 – 457
of the slope of the least squares 
­regression line, 675
Sampling frame, 38
Sampling variability, 438–442
Scatterplot, 119
Segmented bar graph, 85–87
Selection bias, 36, 37
Significance level, 511, 520
and power, 540–541
Simple comparative experiment, 
46–61
design strategies for, 47
Simple event, 286
Simple linear regression, see Least-
squares regression line and Linear 
regression
Simple random sample, 38
  selecting, 38–40
Simulation to estimate probabilities, 
336–346
Simultaneous confidence level, 749
Single-blind experiment, 63–64
Single factor analysis of variance 
(ANOVA), 733
F test for, 733–746
fundamental identity for, 741, 756
Skeletal boxplot, 172
Skewed histogram, 109
Slope
defined, 214
of least-squares regression line, 216, 
265–266, 269
estimate for population regression 
line, 675–685
Smoothed histogram, 108
Spread, measure of, 163–168 
Stacked bar graph  see Segmented bar 
graph
Standard deviation
about the least-squares line, 
235–239
of a data set, 165–167 
of a binomial random variable, 387
of continuous random variable, 373
of difference in means, 563, 610
of a discrete random variable, 
371–373
R
r see Correlation coefficient
Random assignment, 47–53
Random deviation, 664
Random number, 39
Random sampling, 38–40
Random selection, 40
Random variable, 353–356
Randomized block design, 57
Range,  163
Regression, see Least-squares regression 
line and Linear regression
Regression sum of squares (SSRegr), 
721
Relative frequency, 12
Relative frequency distribution, 12
Replacement, sampling with and with-
out, 39, 319–321, 385–387
Replication, 50–51
Residual
in multiple regression, 718
in linear regression, 225–227
plotting, 227–231, 688–693
Residual analysis, 686–688
Residual plot, 227–231, 688–693
standardized residual plot, 688–689
Residual sum of squares (SSResid), 
232–233, 718 
Response bias, 36–37
Response variable, 214
Right skew, 109
S
Sample
defined, 6
independent samples, 562–563
paired samples, 562–563
Sample mean, 154–155
Sample median, 157–158
Sample proportion, 159–160
Sample regression line see Least-squares 
regression line
Sample size, 40–41
determining to achieve a given 
bound on error, 475, 487–488
and power, 540–541
Sample space, 284–285
Sample standard deviation, 165
Sample variance, 165
Sampling, 35 – 46
bias in, 36–37
cluster, 42
convenience, 42
random, 38–40
stratified, 41– 42
Population variance, 166–167
Positive skew, 109
Potentially influential observation, 689
Power
calculating, 541–547
defined, 540
effect of sample size and significance 
level on, 540
Type II error probabilities and, 541
Practical significance, 535–536, 550
Predicted value, 225–227 
Predictor variable, 214
Principle of least-squares, 215–220
Probabilistic model, 663
Probability
of an event, 292, 295, 297–298
classical approach for equally likely 
outcomes, 291–293
of the complement of an event, 318
conditional, 305–315
estimating empirically, 337–338
estimating using simulation, 
339–343
fundamental properties of, 297–305
histogram, 359, 363
of the intersection of two events,  
317, 326 
relative frequency approach to, 
293–296
subjective approach to, 296–297
of the union of two events, 300, 324
Probability distribution
for continuous random variable, 
363–367
for discrete random variable, 
356–362
Probability histogram, 359. 363, 387
P-value, 518
and alternative hypotheses, 522
determining for a t test, 530–531
determining for a z test, 520–526
determining for a chi-square test, 
628–629
drawing conclusions based on, 520
Q
Quadratic regression, 247–249, 705, 
708 
Qualitative data, 9
Qualitative predictor variables, 
710–712
Quantitative data, 9
Quartile, 167
lower, 167
upper, 167
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

	
  Index 
●  809
V
Variability
in data, 156 
interpreting, 178–186
measuring, 163–168, 178–184
nature and role of, 3–5
sampling, 438–442
Variable, 9
dependent, 214
confounding, 31
explanatory, 214
extraneous, 47–48, 51
independent, 214
interaction between, 706–710
predictor, 214  
response, 214
Variance, 165–167 see also standard 
deviation
Venn diagram, 288
Vertical intercept, 214
Voluntary response sampling, 43
Volunteers in experiments, 43, 64
W
Whiskers in a boxplot, 172–173
Y
y intercept, 214
of the least-squares regression line, 
216, 265–266
of the population regression line, 665
Z
z confidence interval
for a difference in population or 
treatment proportions, 599
for a population proportion,  
470–472
z critical value, 473, 477
z curve, 394 see also standard normal 
distribution
z-score, 182, 192, 404
and the correlation coefficient, 204
z test
for a difference in population  
proportions, 594–599
for a population proportion, 
516–526
Transforming data to normal  
distribution, 411–415
Treatment, 46
Treatment means
comparing using independent  
samples, 569–572
comparing using paired samples, 
582–593
confidence interval for comparing 
using independent samples, 573
confidence interval for comparing 
using paired samples, 587–588
Treatment proportions
confidence interval for difference 
in, 599
large sample test for difference in, 
594–599
Treatment sum of squares (SSTr), 737
Tree diagram, 285
Tukey-Kramer (T-K) multiple 
­comparison procedure, 746–752
simultaneous confidence level 
and, 749
Two-sample t confidence interval, 573
Two-sample t test
for comparing two population 
means, 565 
for comparing two ­treatment means, 
569–570 
Two-sample z confidence interval, 599
Two-sample z test
for comparing two proportion, 
594–599
Two-way frequency table, 636
Type I error, 510–513
probability of, 511
Type II error, 510–513
probability of, 511, 541–547
probability of and power, 541
U
Unbiased statistic, 464–466
Unconditional probability
compared to conditional probability, 
307–309, 329
Undercoverage, 36
Unexplained variability, 233
Uniform distribution, 364
Unimodal histogram, 108–109
Union of two events, 287
Univariate data, 9
Upper quartile, 167
of a linear combination, 375
of a linear function, 374
of the slope of the least-squares line, 
675–676
Standard error, 474, 493
Standard normal distribution, 394–398
Standardized residual, 686
Standardized residual plot, 688–689
Statistic, 438
Statistical significance, 535–536
Stem-and-leaf display, 91–99
Comparative, 95
repeated stems, 94
Strata, 41
Stratified random sampling, 41– 42
Studentized range distribution, 747
Symmetric histogram, 109
Systematic sampling, 42–43
T
t confidence interval
for a difference in population or 
treatment means, 573
for a population mean, 484
t critical value, 483–484
t distribution, 481–483  
degrees of freedom and, 481 
properties of, 482
t test
finding P-values for, 530–531
for the slope of the population  
regression line, 678–679
one-sample t test for a population 
mean, 528–536
paired t test, 584–587
pooled t test, 572
power of and Type II error probabil-
ities, 544–547
two-sample t test for difference in 
population or treatment means, 
562–572
Test procedure, 506
Test statistic, 518
Test of hypotheses  see Hypothesis test
Time series plot, 123–124
unequal spacing in, 133
Total sum of squares (SSTo), 232–233
Transformations, 251
models transforming x, 252–254
models transforming y, 254–256
nonlinear regression models, 
244–262
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

