
Introducing Technology  
Computer-Aided Design (TCAD)


Chinmay K. Maiti
Introducing Technology  
Computer-Aided Design (TCAD)
Fundamentals, Simulations, and Applications 

Published by
Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
Penthouse Level, Suntec Tower 3 
8 Temasek Boulevard  
Singapore 038988
Email: editorial@panstanford.com 
Web: www.panstanford.com
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Introducing Technology Computer-Aided Design (TCAD): 
Fundamentals, Simulations, and Applications
Copyright © 2017 by Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, may not be reproduced in any form 
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording 
or any information storage and retrieval system now known or to be invented, 
without written permission from the publisher.
For photocopying of material in this volume, please pay a copying fee through 
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 
USA. In this case permission to photocopy is not required from the publisher.
ISBN  978-981-4745-51-2 (Hardcover)
ISBN  978-1-315-36450-6 (eBook)
Printed in the USA	

Dedicated to
Late Dr. Rakhal Chandra Maiti
and
Dr. Kali Kinkar Das


Contents
Preface	
	
xiii
	
1.	 Introduction	
1
	
1.1	
The Need	
5
	
1.2	
Role of TCAD	
6
	
1.3	
TCAD: Challenges	
6
	
1.4	
TCAD: 2D versus 3D	
9
	
1.5	
TCAD: Design Flow	
10
	
1.6	
Extending TCAD	
11
	
1.7	
Process Compact Model	
13
	
1.8	
Process-Aware Design	
13
	
1.9	
Design for Manufacturing	
14
	
1.10	
TCAD Calibration	
14
	
1.11	
TCAD Tools	
15
	
1.12	
Technology Boosters	
16
	
1.13	
BiCMOS Process Simulation	
17
	
1.14	
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs	
17
	
1.15	
Silicon Hetero-FETs	
18
	
1.16	
FinFETs	
18
	
1.17	
Advanced Devices	
18
	
1.18	
Memory Devices	
19
	
1.19	
Power Devices	
19
	
1.20	
Solar Cells	
20
	
1.21	
TCAD for SPICE Parameter Extraction	
20
	
1.22	
TCAD for DFM	
20
	
1.23	
VWF and Online Laboratory	
21
	
1.24	
Summary	
22
	
2.	 Technology CAD Tools	
25
	
2.1	
History of Process and Device Simulation Tools	
26
	
2.2	
Commercial TCAD Tools	
30
	
2.3	
Silvaco Tool Overview	
31
	
2.3.1	
MaskViews	
32
	
2.4	
ATHENA	
32

viii
Contents
	
2.5	
ATLAS	
35
	
2.5.1	
Physical Structure	
37
	
2.5.2	
Structure Editing	
38
	
2.5.3	
Meshing	
38
	
2.5.4	
Mesh Definition	
39
	
2.5.5	
Regions and Materials	
39
	
2.5.6	
Physical Models	
40
	
2.5.6.1	
Models	
41
	
2.5.7	
Impact Ionization Models	
41
	
2.5.7.1	
C-Interpreter functions	
42
	
2.5.8	
Gate Current Models	
42
	
2.5.9	
Bandgap Narrowing	
42
	
2.5.10	 Solution Methods	
42
	
2.5.11	 VictoryCell	
44
	
2.5.12	 VictoryProcess	
45
	
2.5.13	 VictoryStress	
47
	
2.5.13.1	 VictoryStress features and 
capabilities	
47
	
2.5.14	 VictoryDevice	
48
	
2.6	
Stress Modeling	
50
	
2.6.1	
Stress–Strain Relationship	
51
	
2.6.2	
Mobility	
54
	
2.6.3	
SmartSpice	
56
	
2.7	
Synopsys TCAD Platforms	
56
	
2.7.1	
Taurus-Device	
59
	
2.7.2	
Taurus-Process	
60
	
2.7.3	
Device Simulation	
60
	
2.7.4	
Carrier Recombination-Generation	
61
	
2.7.4.1	
Thin-layer mobility	
62
	
2.7.4.2	
High-k degradation mobility	
62
	
2.7.5	
Stress Effects	
62
	
2.7.5.1	
Band-to-band tunneling  
leakage current	
63
	
2.8	
Atomistic Simulation	
63
	
2.8.1	
GARAND	
64
	
2.8.2	
MYSTIC	
65
	
2.8.3	
RandomSPICE	
66
	
2.9	
Summary	
66

ix
Contents
	
3.	 Technology Boosters	
69
	
3.1	
Stress Engineering	
70
	
3.1.1	
Unintentional Mechanical Stress	
70
	
3.2	
Intentional Mechanical Stress	
71
	
3.3	
Stress-Engineered Transistors	
73
	
3.3.1	
CESL	
73
	
3.3.2	
STI Stress	
77
	
3.4	
Hybrid Orientation Technology	
77
	
3.5	
High-k/Metal Gate	
78
	
3.6	
Stress Evolution during Semiconductor  
Fabrication	
82
	
3.6.1	
Stress Modeling Methodology	
84
	
3.6.2	
Stress Evolution during Thick  
Stress Layer Deposition	
85
	
3.6.3	
Stress Evolution in Thick Stress  
Layer Deposition in 3D	
90
	
3.7	
Summary	
93
	
4.	 BiCMOS Process Simulations	
95
	
4.1	
Ion Implantation Simulation	
97
	
4.2	
Optical Lithography Simulation	
101
	
4.3	
Contact-Printing Simulation	
105
	
4.3.1	
Nonplanar Lithography	
105
	
4.4	
BJT Process Simulation	
105
	
4.4.1	
Polysilicon Emitter Bipolar  
Technology	
107
	
4.5	
3D MOS Process Simulation	
111
	
4.5.1	
VictoryProcess	
114
	
4.6	
Summary	
124
	
5.	 SiGe and SiGeC HBTs	
125
	
5.1	
SiGe HBTs: Process and Device Simulation	
131
	
5.2	
High-Speed SiGe HBTs	
139
	
5.3	
SiGeC HBTs: Process and Device Simulation	
142
	
5.4	
Strain-Engineered SiGe HBTs	
155
	
5.5	
n-p-n SiGe HBTs with an Extrinsic Stress Layer	
157
	
5.6	
n-p-n SiGe HBT Device Employing a Si3N4  
Strain Layer	
160
	
5.7	
n-p-n SiGe HBT Employing a SiO2 Strain Layer	
164
	
5.8	
Summary	
167

x
Contents
	
6.	 Silicon Hetero-FETs	
169
	
6.1	
Electronic Properties of Strained Si and SiGe	
170
	
6.1.1	
Hole Mobility	
176
	
6.1.2	
Electron Mobility	
177
	
6.2	
Strained-Si Channel p-MOSFETs	
180
	
6.3	
Summary	
193
	
7.	 FinFETs	
195
	
7.1	
Basics of FinFETs	
195
	
7.1.1	
Stress-Enhanced Mobility in  
Embedded SiGe p-MOSFETs	
201
	
7.2	
Stress-Engineered FinFETs	
202
	
7.2.1	
VictoryCell Process Steps	
203
	
7.2.2	
Visualization and Analysis of  
Simulation Results, Extraction of  
Average Stresses, and Mobility  
Enhancement Factors	
209
	
7.3	
FinFET Design and Optimization	
211
	
7.3.1	
Simulation Setup	
214
	
7.4	
Summary	
221
	
8.	 Advanced Devices	
223
	
8.1	
Ultrathin-Body SOI	
224
	
8.2	
Gate-First SOI	
226
	
8.3	
Gate-Last SOI	
227
	
8.4	
3D SOI n-MOSFET	
228
	
8.5	
TFT	
232
	
8.6	
HEMTs	
237
	
8.6.1	
Thermal Optimization Using a  
Flip-Chip Structure	
241
	
8.7	
AlGaN/GaN HFET	
245
	
8.8	
3D SiC Process and Device Simulation	
249
	
8.8.1	
Device Simulation	
250
	
8.9	
Summary	
252
	 9.	 Memory Devices	
255
	
9.1	
Nanocrystal Floating-Gate Device	
261
	
9.1.1	
Advanced Nanocrystal Floating-Gate  
Devices with High-k Dielectrics	
262
	
9.2	
Technology Computer-Aided Design of  
Memory Devices	
264

xi
Contents
	
9.3	
Process Simulation of Flash Memory Devices	
266
	
9.4	
Device Simulation of Flash Memory Devices	
267
	
9.5	
State Transition and Single-Event Upset in  
SRAM	
273
	
9.6	
Nanoscale SRAM	
276
	
9.7	
Summary	
280
	 10.	 Power Devices	
281
	
10.1	
LDMOS	
281
	
10.2	
Vertically Diffused MOS Devices	
291
	
10.3	
Summary	
296
	 11.	 Solar Cells	
297
	
11.1	
Solar Cell Simulation	
299
	
11.2	
Organic Solar Cells	
301
	
11.3	
Tandem Solar Cells	
305
	
11.4	
3D Solar Cell Simulation	
309
	
11.5	
Summary	
312
	 12.	 TCAD for SPICE Parameter Extraction	
313
	
12.1	
Compact Model Generation	
313
	
12.2	
Compact Modeling of HBTs	
318
	
12.2.1	 VBIC	
319
	
12.2.2	 MEXTRAM	
320
	
12.2.3	 HICUM	
321
	
12.3	
Device Characterization	
322
	
12.3.1	 ICCAP Device Modeling: 1/f Noise 
Measurement Configuration	
323
	
12.4	
Parameter Extraction Methodology	
326
	
12.5	
UTMOST	
330
	
12.5.1	 BSIM3	
332
	
12.5.2	 Parameter Extraction	
333
	
12.6	
Summary	
338
	 13.	 Technology CAD for DFM	
341
	
13.1	
Process-Aware Design for Manufacturing	
342
	
13.1.1	 Seismos	
342
	
13.1.2	 Paramos	
343
	
13.1.3	 Fammos	
343
	
13.2	
TCAD for Manufacturing	
344
	
13.3	
TCAD for DFM	
348

xii
Contents
	
13.4	
Process Compact Models	
352
	
13.4.1	 Process Parameterization	
354
	
13.4.2	 Process Calibration	
354
	
13.4.3	 TCAD Validation	
355
	
13.4.4	 PCM Simulation	
355
	
13.5	
Summary	
359
	 14.	 VWF and Online Laboratory	
361
	
14.1	
Internet-Based TCAD Laboratory	
368
	
14.2	
Microelectronics and VLSI Engineering  
Laboratory Module	
377
	
14.2.1	 Integrated Technology CAD  
Laboratory	
381
	
14.3	
SPICE Parameter Extraction	
385
	
14.4	
Summary	
387
Index	
	 	
389

xiii
Contents
At the beginning of 2015, the fifth-generation Intel Core processor 
was released, which is built with 14 nm technology containing 
1.3 billion transistors. The first processor built with the 14 nm 
technology is the Intel Core-M processor. Generally speaking, the 
architecture of transistors has now switched from the planar to 
the vertical design. To provide the necessary support to keep the 
semiconductor industry on its technological growth track, heavy 
emphasis is being placed on technology computer-aided design 
(TCAD) now for achieving key long-term research results.
	
Even though the predominant focus of the semiconductor industry 
in the 1990s and early 2000 was on biaxially strained devices, 
the current focus has shifted to process-induced uniaxial stress, 
which is being adopted in all high-performance logic technologies. 
Uniaxial stress has several advantages over biaxial stress, such as 
larger mobility and performance enhancements. Encouraged by 
the strain-enhanced planar metal–oxide–semiconductor field-
effect transistors (MOSFETs), researchers recently applied uniaxial 
stress to multigate devices with a metal gate and high-k dielectric 
as performance boosters. Despite the advantages provided by the 
manufacture of transistors, introduction and optimization of the 
mechanical stresses in the channel remain essential.
	
TCAD simulations provide a comprehensive way to capture the 
electrical behavior of different devices with different materials 
and structures for performance assessment. This monograph aims 
to provide the reader with a comprehensive understanding of the 
technology development for stress- and strain-engineered device 
processing. With specific case studies, applications of the process/
device simulation programs in process and device development 
are shown. The aim of this monograph is also to provide device/
circuit designers with the ability to predict what impact statistical 
process variations will have on their designs, as early as possible, 
using several commercially available tools. As currently, uniaxial 
strain is being adopted in all high-performance logic technologies 
Preface

xiv
Preface
and applications by the industry, we shall focus mainly on process-
induced uniaxial stress in this monograph.
	
Next-generation wireless systems, driven by a vast assortment of 
rapidly emerging applications operating at radio frequency (RF) and 
millimeter-wave frequencies, are placing increasingly stringent cost 
and performance demands upon the supporting microelectronics 
technologies. On the basis of its performance capabilities, low 
cost, and capacity for high integration, silicon germanium (SiGe) 
heterojunction bipolar complementary metal-oxide semiconductor 
(BiCMOS) technology has established itself as a strong technology 
contender for a host of such circuit applications, including analog 
and mixed signals, RF, and millimeter waves. However, as operating 
frequencies for wireless applications are pushed upward in the 
spectrum, SiGe heterojunction bipolar transistor (HBT) technologies 
face significant challenges at the transistor level as operating voltage 
decreases and performance requirements increase.
	
Starting with the 90 nm technology node, improved transistor 
performance has been achieved with the introduction of stress and 
strain in the transistor. One of the major limitations of the currently 
available related books is that the most of the design and simulation 
results presented are obtained using 2D simulations without 
involving stress. Due to the ultrasmall size of state-of-the-art  
devices, 3D effects have been dominant. To achieve a better 
understanding of simulated and fabricated device characteristics, 
3D process/device simulation involving stress is necessary. This 
monograph presents mostly the 3D simulation and analysis of stress- 
and strain-engineered semiconductor devices for digital, analog/RF, 
and power applications. Detailed and extensive TCAD simulations 
are carried out for 3D fin field effect transistors (finFETs), and the 
key parameters are identified.
	
TCAD is shown to be an excellent resource for teaching 
microelectronics. The objective of a laboratory component of any 
semiconductor fabrication course is to teach the students the unit 
processes involved in microelectronic fabrication and to introduce 
the practice of process development. Virtual wafer fabrication 
(VWF) has become an integral part of the semiconductor industry 
now. The possibility of teaching semiconductor manufacturing in a 
university environment in a highly cost-effective manner by taking 
the advantages of high-speed internet and available TCAD tools has 
been explored.

xv
Preface
	
Recently, several excellent books and monographs have 
appeared on multigate MOSFETs, high-mobility substrates and Ge 
microelectronics, and strained semiconductor physics. Numerous 
papers have appeared on strained Si and process-induced strain, 
but there is a lack of a single text that combines both strain- and 
stress-engineered devices and their design and modeling using 
TCAD. Attempts have been made to summarize some of the latest 
efforts to reveal the advantages that strain and stress have brought 
in the development of strain-engineered devices. We have included 
important works by the research community, as well as our own 
research students’ works and ideas. The monograph is mainly 
intended for final-year undergraduate and postgraduate students of 
electrical and electronic engineering disciplines and scientists and 
engineers involved in research and development of high-performance 
devices and circuits. The monograph may serve as a reference on 
strain-engineered heterostructure devices for engineers involved in 
advanced device and process design. Instructors involved in teaching 
microelectronics may also find this monograph useful for laboratory 
education using remote web-based TCAD laboratories.
	
After reading the monograph, the students will learn the 
fundamentals of process and device simulation programs. They 
will be able to analyze arbitrary device structures to speed up the 
designing using commercial software. Approaches presented in this 
monograph are expected also to boost the use of TCAD tools for 
device characterization and compact model generation.
	
I am extremely grateful to my research students who made 
significant contributions to make this monograph a reality. I would 
also like to express my deep appreciation for the Pan Stanford 
Publishing team. Finally, I would like to thank my family members 
(wife, Bhaswati, and sons, Ananda and Anindya) for their support, 
patience, and understanding during the preparation of the 
manuscript.
C K Maiti
SOA University
Bhubaneswar
September 2016


For the last five decades, CMOS and bipolar technologies have 
provided consistent scaling and enabled the implementation of 
high-density, high-speed, and low-power ULSI systems. During the 
1960s and until early 2000, continuous enhancement of MOSFET 
performance has been achieved mostly by geometrical scaling, 
as was predicted by Gordon Moore in 1965. Device performance 
enhancement has been achieved by combining gate oxide thickness 
and gate length scaling. The microelectronics industry has relied 
mainly on the shrinking of transistor geometries for improvements 
in circuit performance and cost per function over the decades. Since 
the 2000s, MOSFET performance enhancements have been achieved 
mainly via device (stress and strain) engineering, while keeping the 
gate dielectric thickness almost constant.
	
In the semiconductor industry, each new technology generation 
is driving toward higher performance and increased complexity, 
which gives rise to higher costs of product development. Over the 
last 60 years, device scaling has been relatively straightforward using 
geometrical scaling. Further downscaling of devices has approached 
the physical limit and the technology cycle has become slow. Figure 
1.1 illustrates the trend of cost per device, transistor leakage, on-
state current, and transistor switching speed as the gate length, gate 
width, and gate dielectric thickness shrink. The aggressive scaling of 
transistors has reduced equivalent oxide thickness of gates to less 
Chapter 1
Introduction
Introducing Technology Computer-Aided Design (TCAD): Fundamentals, Simulations, and Applications
C. K. Maiti
Copyright © 2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-51-2 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36450-6 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

2
Introduction
than 1 nm, and it is expected to be 0.4 nm by 2028. The gate length is 
also expected to be simultaneously scaled down from 20 nm to 5 nm.
	
Further improved performance of integrated circuits (ICs) may be 
obtained by fundamental process improvement of the transistors in 
them—via new device structure and doping strategies and shrinking 
(or downscaling) the transistors’ size, which increases their speed 
and reduces power consumption. The semiconductor industry has 
been looking for alternate performance boosters, in particular, by 
introducing new materials and new device architectures in place of 
traditional standard silicon CMOS and bipolar technology. A new era 
of CMOS technology has begun with the introduction of 22 nm bulk 
fin-shaped field-effect transistors (finFETs) by Intel, continuously 
driving the future CMOS scaling toward low power.
Figure 1.1  Technology trend of CMOS scaling in terms of device dimension 
and performance. Cross-sectional TEM images of transistors for technology 
nodes from 90 nm to 22 nm are shown here [11].
	
With each generation of scaled technology the transistor 
performance has improved. The transistor architecture has 
undergone significant changes from conventional MOSFETs with the 
introduction of strained silicon at the 90 nm node [1] and a HfO2 gate 
dielectric (replacing SiO2) with a metal gate (replacing polysilicon) 
at the 45 nm technology node. Starting with the 90 nm technology 

3
node, improved transistor performance has been achieved with 
the introduction of stress into the transistor channel region. Use 
of intentional and unintentional stress/strain to boost device 
performance and reduce size and power has been very important 
in semiconductor manufacturing. To continue with the Moore’s 
law trend, incorporation of technology boosters such as strained 
Si, high-k gate dielectric, and metal gate have been introduced. It is 
believed that the semiconductor device will continue downscaling 
to the 7 nm gate length by the year 2018. Most of the emerging 
transistor device technologies, such as finFETs and multigate 
transistors are based on SOI material.
	
Strain technology, which employs mechanical stress to alter the 
band structure of silicon and reduces the carrier effective mass and 
scattering rate, is introduced to increase carrier mobility to continue 
scaling. As stress has a major impact on transistor characteristics 
in modern processes, stress effects need to be considered in the 
simulation in order to study the influence of process variations from 
stress-related effects. Figure 1.2 shows the various stress/strain 
techniques currently in use in the microelectronics industry.
Substrate-based
Process-based Induced Stess
SixGe1-x
Based
Cristal
Orientaon
Liners
SiGe SEG
STI
Bulk
SSOI
In-plane
Out of plane
CESL
SMT
SiGe SD
SACVD
Tensile bi-axial stress
Natural mobity boost
Tensile Tensile Compressive Tensile
Bi-axial
Compressive
Mod. Orientaon Si
Channel
Rotated
substrate
Cristal
Orientaon
SiGe
box
Figure 1.2  Schemes of front-end stressor types currently in use in the industry 
[12].
	
The application of new materials and/or technology requires 
considerable time and cost because there are so many options 
Introduction

4
Introduction
and combinations for the development. In this respect, exploiting 
technology computer-aided design (TCAD) has become more 
important for the virtual characterization of technology in advance. 
Recent research efforts have helped us to better understand the 
issues specific to transistor design, and we are currently better 
equipped with process technologies. Also, with the perceived end of 
conventional scaling on the horizon, drastic changes in the device 
structure and/or materials may be the only way to continue with 
the past trends. Obviously, any new transistor design should be 
thoroughly evaluated and benchmarked to existing state-of-the-art 
technology. Figure 1.3 shows the envisaged future for devices and 
systems. In contrast to the past design rules, now systems are more 
and more integrated in a single part. To achieve such integration, 
novel processes and technologies need to be conceived.
130nm
90nm
65nm
45nm
32nm
22nm
V
Baseline CMOS: CPU, Memory, Logic
Figure 1.3  “More than Moore” principle (International Technology Roadmap 
for Semiconductors, http://www.itrs.net/).
	
TCAD may be used for computer-aided design of semiconductor 
devices, fabrication process design and development, technology 
characterization for circuit design, manufacturing yield optimization 
and process centering, and computer-integrated manufacturing. 
Complementing experimental work, the TCAD combination allows 
optimizing and predicting the performance of new devices. It is 
therefore appropriate to use TCAD tools to study comprehensively 

5
The Need
the necessary requirements for realizing the ultimate limit of CMOS 
and bipolar scaling, which poses serious technology and design 
challenges. Simulation is now an essential tool for technology 
development. In fact, numerical modeling is the only way to provide 
comprehensive investigations of the front-end-of-line (FEOL) 
process-induced strain in silicon using piezoresistive-related 
physics.
	
In this chapter, an overview of the evolution, role, need, and 
advantages of TCAD tools as an aid toward process design, device 
simulation, and fabrication of modern ICs, device characterization, 
and compact model generation is given. Since 1990, a major effort 
organized by the TCAD subcommittee of the CAD Framework 
Initiative has been launched to develop an industry standard for 
TCAD. Excellent overviews on various TCAD framework activities 
can be found in Refs. [2, 3].
1.1  The Need
According 
to 
the 
International 
Technology 
Roadmap 
for 
Semiconductors (ITRS), technology computer-aided design (TCAD) 
can lower technology development costs up to 40% by reducing the 
number of experimental lots and shortening development time. This 
is significant, considering the rising costs of product development 
and new wafer fabrication facilities. It is important to develop 
an improved understanding of the correlation between process 
variables and electrical device parameters. TCAD tools provide 
insight into many of the physical effects that impact manufacturability 
and yield. Through proper calibration with prototype wafers, TCAD 
can accurately predict the behavior of devices for a new technology 
node.
	
TCAD-based transistor design can be used at the early stage of 
technology development to introduce accurate statistical variability 
and reliability information in the process design kit (PDK). This 
information is of great importance for designers and can reduce 
the time-to-market, avoid overdesign, increase yield, and reduce 
the expensive chip design process costs. The narrowing of the gap 

6
Introduction
between front-end and backend manufacturing processes is a typical 
example of the new challenges in the electronics market and design 
tools [4, 5].
	
In recent years, the coverage of the interaction between design 
and process engineers has been extended to various aspects with the 
evolution of design for manufacturing (DFM) and design for reliability 
(DFR) methodologies. In combination with wafer data, the strength 
of TCAD lies in the prediction of device and interconnects variability 
due to layout as well as random variations during fabrication. 
The knowledge gained through TCAD can be encapsulated into 
appropriate models and efficiently used for process optimization, 
ultimately leading to more robust designs. Variability information 
can also be incorporated into design tools through statistical 
compact models. Ultimately, this leads to an improved design flow 
that addresses parametric yield and manufacturability issues in a 
comprehensive way.
1.2  Role of TCAD
To understand the challenges facing advanced device design, one 
must first understand the design parameters available to a device 
designer and their significance. The goal of device design is to obtain 
devices with high performance, low power consumption, low cost, 
and high reliability. Figure 1.4 shows the traditional device design 
flow. Instead of going through an expensive and time-consuming 
fabrication process, computer simulations can be used to predict 
the electrical characteristics of a device design quickly and cheaply. 
TCAD can also be used for reducing design costs, improving device 
design productivity, and obtaining better device and technology 
designs (Fig. 1.5). TCAD consists mainly of two parts, process design 
and device simulation.
1.3  TCAD: Challenges
TCAD is now an indispensable part of semiconductor modeling 
and design. In the semiconductor industry, the core production 
process of manufacturing integrated circuits (ICs) takes place 

7
TCAD: Challenges
in a front-end manufacturing facility. The wafers go through a 
specific processing sequence that consists of a certain number of 
processing steps. Modern complex semiconductor manufacturing 
processes consist of a large number of processing steps, long 
processing time, dynamic interactions among different tools, and 
complex interrelations between tool performances and product 
qualities. Semiconductor manufacturing usually involves hundreds 
of processing steps, months of processing time, reentrant process 
flows, and unpredictable relationships between tool performances 
and yield. As semiconductor processes become more complex (e.g., 
for a fin field-effect transistor [finFET] structure) and computational 
algorithms more sophisticated, usability becomes a more severe 
problem. Also, accurate TCAD simulations and modeling of physical 
devices depend critically on calibrated physical models and proper 
input data. With the scaling down of complementary metal-oxide 
semiconductor (CMOS) and bipolar technology, many secondary 
effects become more pronounced, such as drain-induced barrier 
lowering, process variations, gate tunneling leakage, mobility 
degradation, and increasing power consumption. These secondary 
effects lead to dramatic challenges in robust circuit design and 
system integration.
Process
Conditions
Lithography
mask
Anneal
temperature
Anneal
time
Implant
dose
Implant
energy
Fab
Lithography Step
Anneal Step
Implant Step
Semiconductor
Devices
Measurement
Electrical
Characteristics
Gate
Delay
Saturated
Current
Leakage
Figure 1.4  Technology design flow without simulation [13].

8
Introduction
Process
Conditions
Electrical
Characteristics
Process Simulation
Lithography Step
Device Simulation
Anneal Step
Implant Step
Model
Parameters
Model
Parameters
Semiconductor
Devices
Physical
Models
Gate
Delay
Saturated
Current
Leakage
Process
Models
lithography
mask
anneal
temperature
implant
dose
implant
energy
anneal
time
Figure 1.5  TCAD-based technology design flow [13].
	
As the device densities are growing exponentially, fundamental 
physical limits are being approached and design constraints are 
becoming serious issues. The conventional way of describing, 
designing, modeling, and simulating such nanoscale semiconductor 
devices and the assumption of continuous ionized dopant charge 
and smooth boundaries and interfaces is no longer valid. As a 
consequence, TCAD is being challenged by a number of fundamental 
problems such as microscopic diffusion mechanisms, quantum 
mechanical transport, molecular dynamics, quantum chemistry, 
and high-frequency interconnect simulation. Today’s metal–oxide–
semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs) are truly atomistic 
as they have reached decananometer (between 10 and 100 nm) 
dimensions with 40–50 nm physical gate length devices in the 
90 nm technology node, and 10 nm MOSFETs have been demonstrated 
in a research environment. It is expected that in 2016, the physical 

9
dimensions of MOSFETs in the production environment will reach  
9 nm. Some of the main challenges for TCAD to successfully deal 
with current process/device simulation problems are:
	
∑	 Stress/strain can influence point defect concentrations and 
migration, dopant activation, and defect nucleation and 
evolution. All these issues and new materials need to be 
included in process simulation to maintain its usefulness for 
future technology nodes. In further scaling, stress sources will 
be in closer proximity to each other and the silicon body will 
likely be thinner.
	
∑	 Modern manufacturing systems require adaptability to rapidly 
changing environments. In particular, frequent changes in 
the products, processes, or equipment in a semiconductor 
processing facility reduce the value of experiential models 
used in more stable environments.
1.4  TCAD: 2D versus 3D
Aggressive scaling results in complex physical phenomena in 
contributing to the device behavior, and small dimensions severely 
limit the descriptive capabilities of measurements. Device downsizing 
has also led to the introduction of new materials and architectures, 
thus complicating the transistor structure. TCAD as a complement 
to experimental runs provides a more comprehensive way to 
characterize technologies and to optimize their performance. The 
application space of current TCAD tools includes the development 
of semiconductor technologies—from deep-submicron logic, 
memory, solar cells, and sensors to compound semiconductors 
and optoelectronics. More and more complex device modeling 
is needed for computer simulations at the process and physical 
levels. Considering device processing difficulties, device design and 
optimization need to be performed through device physics analysis.
	
3D integration technology is highly compatible with existing 
CMOS manufacturing processes, thereby making 3D technology a 
favorable candidate in the IC industry. 3D integration technology 
offers several advantages to increase performance and functionality, 
TCAD: 2D versus 3D

10
Introduction
while reducing cost. In 3D technologies, multiple dies are stacked in 
a monolithic fashion where the communication among the dies is 
achieved by vertical through-silicon vias (TSVs). Despite important 
advantages, however, 3D integration has certain challenges that 
need to be addressed. The traditional role of TCAD has been the 
continuum-based large-scale 2D/3D simulation. To achieve a better 
matching between simulated and fabricated device characteristics, 
3D process/device simulators need to be employed as the verification 
tool to validate simulation results.
1.5  TCAD: Design Flow
The shortening of the design-to-manufacture time for a new product 
mandates a rapid design cycle for bringing up new technologies. The 
proliferation of TCAD tools has thus a significant economic impact 
on product development. In fact, an effective use of TCAD tools 
saves much experimental time for calibrating process and device 
parameters and minimizes the number of trial-and-error iterations. 
To develop a general framework and a systematic approach to the 
use of TCAD in aiding technology development and circuit design, 
it is important to understand the nature of TCAD and to make the 
best use of it. With the maturity of TCAD tools, real wafer fabrication 
(RWF) can be emulated by process simulation, from which realistic 
device structures and doping profiles can be generated, and transistor 
performance can be characterized through device simulation with 
reasonable accuracy. The multilevel design flow for fabricating ICs 
is shown in Fig. 1.6.
	
Simulation Program with Integrated Circuit Emphasis (SPICE) 
parameters can be extracted from the virtual device I–V characteristics 
for circuit simulators and timing analyzers. Interconnect delays 
can also be extracted through technology characterization, which 
can provide information for design rule checker (DRC) and layout 
parasitic extraction (LPE) tools in the physical design. Advanced 
simulation capability greatly reduces the cost by (i) detecting design 
flaws in the early design stage and (ii) achieving optimal solutions 
through parameter calibration.

11
Figure 1.6  Compact multilevel technology/device/subsystem modeling flow. 
After Ref. [14].
1.6  Extending TCAD
Current TCAD use is mostly limited to process and device simulations; 
however, it may be extended for the development of compact models 
suitable for circuit and system-level analysis. The increasingly 
competitive IC market requires new design approaches using TCAD. 
Fabless companies also need to quantify the final product sensitivity 
to process parameters and to tailor them for specific application, 
aiming at performance optimization for large-volume production 
where TCAD can play an important role. From this point of view, the 
traditional role of TCAD needs to be extended to the advanced high-
level approach and the fundamental low-level approach as well. 
TCAD needs to be extended also for studying process variability 
and using the process parameter analysis in the very large-scale 
integration (VLSI) circuit performance evaluation.
Extending TCAD

12
Introduction
	
Circuit simulation is indispensable for the design of ICs, and a 
compact device model is an essential part of the circuit simulation. 
Technology scaling is increasing the complexity and nonideality of 
the electrical behavior of semiconductor devices. Besides providing 
a deep insight, especially for aggressively scaled devices, TCAD 
simulations may help in the generation of predictive models that 
play a crucial role in reducing circuit development time and cost 
for the semiconductor industry. Device modeling also plays an 
important role in semiconductor fabrication, especially for the 
growing diversity of device requirements.
	
Compact models generally include SPICE-like parameters 
obtained from the device electrical behavior. Also, variations of 
SPICE-like parameters need to be carefully estimated to achieve 
acceptable model predictivity, including process yield evaluation. 
As such, compact model extraction tools are becoming very 
important. In the following section, we introduce several such 
tools available in the public domain. Mystic [6] is a compact model 
extraction tool specifically designed for accurate statistical compact 
model extraction. It provides a scripted environment that enables 
the development of advanced devices based on data from TCAD 
simulations or silicon measurement. Mystic is applicable to bulk 
CMOS, finFET, and fully depleted SOI processes.
	
DFR is becoming indispensable for every aspect of product qual-
ity assurance, and it needs be implemented in the design flow via 
various levels of abstraction. As a low-level approach, it is impor-
tant to understand the fundamental physics involved and to incor-
porate them into models. There is a growing need to understand the 
effect of process variation on circuit performance. Using calibrated 
TCAD simulations it is possible to study the effects of slight process 
variation on device characteristics. Process-aware SPICE models 
offer a way to bring process variation information to the design 
sphere. Using TCAD tools, many reliability issues can also be studied 
quantitatively. Examples are hot-carrier degradation of interfaces, 
threshold voltage shifts during negative-bias temperature insta-
bility (NBTI) stress, radiation effects and soft errors, electrostatic  
discharge (ESD) and latch-up, thermomechanical issues, electromi-
gration, and stress voiding.

13
1.7  Process Compact Model
Design complexity is getting constantly enhanced due to the 
increasing density of integration (more than a billion components), 
which has led to a huge gap between physical simulation at the 
nanoscale and earlier large-geometry IC design. Along with this 
come significant parametric variations in the devices due to very 
small feature sizes. TCAD for the manufacturing paradigm effectively 
strengthens the connection between technology development and 
manufacturing. TCAD modeling algorithms need to take care of the 
interaction between design layout and manufacturing processes, 
which creates layout pattern–dependent systematic yield models 
that encompass process technologies such as lithography, etch, and 
interlayer dielectric chemical-mechanical polishing (CMP), copper 
CMP, and shallow trench isolation CMP. Yield optimization has 
become the single-most important factor for reducing the product 
cost. Using a process compact model (PCM), manufacturing engineers 
can analyze process sensitivity, recenter a process, and identify key 
process steps to improve overall process capability to improve the 
yield. The TCAD-for-manufacturing (TFM) paradigm effectively 
strengthens the connection between technology development and 
manufacturing.
1.8  Process-Aware Design
A systematic methodology also needs to be developed for identifying 
and characterizing the main sources of transistor performance 
variation. Paramos [7] from Synopsys is one of the first automated 
software programs that links process and circuit simulation. It stands 
as an example of what should be the new bridge between design and 
manufacturing, a process-aware transistor model. Process-aware 
device modeling involves the study of the impact of geometrical 
variation (e.g., nonuniform lateral dimension, nonideal cross 
section, atomic-level dopant fluctuation) on the I–V characteristics, 
including quantum effects. Techniques for evaluating variability at 
an affordable computational cost are being sought, in addition to 
increasing complexity of the device structure and behavior. One 
Process-Aware Design

14
Introduction
needs to develop models based on an orthogonal set of parameters 
that correlate the geometry data to electrical characteristics.
1.9  Design for Manufacturing
DFM consists of three stages: physical design, resolution enhancement 
techniques, and design-driven techniques. Predictive potentials of 
TCAD depend on process variations that get increasingly critical 
with device downscaling into the nanometer range. For example, 
phenomena such as line edge roughness (LER) and random dopant 
fluctuations (RDFs) broaden the device parameter distributions, 
thus requiring statistical analysis. DFM and design for yield (DFY) 
require EDA tools that fully comprehend the impact of novel 
technology concepts and their influence on the process variability of 
devices and interconnects.
	
A collaborative platform for DFM aims to meet this challenge 
by joining process and circuit simulators as well as a set of process 
characterization experiments that are needed to enable quantitative 
DFM. At the 22 nm node and beyond, process variability will 
increase with feature scaling and the introduction of new materials 
and techniques such as strain engineering. TCAD is now being 
given a major emphasis in DFM. TCAD addresses variability as 
it complements silicon metrology data with accurate, calibrated 
process and device models. This is inherently a multidisciplinary 
problem that requires a process/device/design framework for an 
optimal solution.
1.10  TCAD Calibration
Considering the diverse requirements, it is natural to ask for 
the level of confidence at which process simulation is useful for 
process development. In fact, there are generally delays between 
the technological concepts, the qualitative understanding of their 
effects, and finally the quantitative reproduction within TCAD. For 
accurate device characterization the process and device simulators 
in the TCAD suite of tools must be calibrated.
	
Written from an engineering application standpoint, this 
monograph provides the background and physical insight needed 

15
to understand new and future developments in the modeling and 
design of devices at the nanoscale. The focus of this monograph 
is on the state-of-the-art devices, implemented in high-mobility 
substrates such as GaAs, GaN, silicon-germanium (SiGe), strained Si, 
Ge, and ultrathin germanium-on-insulator platforms, combined with 
high-k insulators and metal gates. We offer plenty of 3D examples 
with step-by-step procedures, making the monograph a useful 
reference for those who wish to set up their 3D simulation using 
any TCAD tool with 3D capability. Important features discussed in 
modeling and simulations provide a survey of the challenging issues 
for TCAD of the next decade with an emphasis on the fundamentals 
of the models themselves. Several examples with different levels of 
difficulty are provided for illustration of the basic concepts, while 
others deal with the state-of-the art technology illustrations. The 
monograph provides a balance between the basic conventional 
technology concepts, equations, physics, and recently developed 
technologies through TCAD simulation. Most of the simulation 
results presented throughout this monograph were performed using 
Silvaco and Synopsys TCAD tools.
	
The monograph consists of 14 chapters (substrate-induced strain 
engineering in CMOS to bipolar technology, process-induced stress, 
electronic properties of strained semiconductors, stress-engineered 
MOSFETs, noise in SiGe heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBTs), 
strain-engineered HBTs, process compact modeling, and process-
aware design of strain-engineered devices) and looks ahead of the 
22 nm node.
1.11  TCAD Tools
The main objective of this chapter is to introduce the advantages of 
TCAD simulations for device and process technology development 
and characterization, to introduce the fundamental physics and 
mathematics involved with TCAD tools, and to expose readers to the 
most popular commercial TCAD simulation tools such as from Silvaco 
and Synopsys. Various tools used in this monograph for simulation 
purposes are introduced in a comprehensive manner. As the 
mainstream CMOS technology is scaled below the 22 nm technology 
node, development of a rigorous physical and predictive compact 
TCAD Tools

16
Introduction
model for circuit simulation that covers geometry, bias, temperature, 
DC, AC, radio frequency (RF), and noise characteristics becomes a 
major challenge. In this chapter we also discuss the fundamentals of 
the mathematical model of elasticity, define a system of governing 
equations and corresponding boundary conditions, and describe 
sources of strain/stress and material parameters used for stress 
calculations in isotropic and anisotropic materials.
1.12  Technology Boosters
Even though the predominant focus of the industry in the 1980s and 
1990s was on biaxially strained silicon devices [8, 9], the current 
focus has shifted to uniaxial stress. Uniaxial stress has several 
advantages over biaxial stress, such as larger mobility enhancements 
and smaller shifts in threshold voltage [10]. Encouraged by strain-
enhanced planar MOSFETs, researchers recently applied uniaxial 
stress to multigate devices with a metal gate and high-k dielectric 
as a performance booster. With each generation of technology node, 
the transistor performance has been improved. But, it’s only from 
the 90 nm technology node that some notable changes have been 
made to the traditional transistor architecture, like strained Si and a 
high-k/metal gate at the 45 nm node.
	
The current MOSFET technology is moving toward strained 
devices to optimize mobility. This requires the use of alloys. From 
a process modeling point of view, SiGe materials offer several new 
challenges to our understanding. Most practical device structures 
use the lattice mismatch between SiGe and Si to create strain. 
This means relevant devices are mingling two things, strain and 
chemical composition, both of which can alter activation, diffusion, 
and defects. Stress effects will become more important with device 
scaling and with novel structures. In modern processes, stress is 
difficult to characterize due to nonavailability of nanometer-scale 
probing to measure mechanical stress. While introducing new 
devices structures, innovation has always been an important part in 
device scaling and the integration of new materials. It is envisioned 
that the right combination of global biaxial and local uniaxial strain 
could provide additional mobility improvements.

17
1.13  BiCMOS Process Simulation
Despite the overall industry domination of CMOS logic, there 
remain high-performance niche markets where other transistor 
architectures can still thrive. This is particularly true for the realm of 
analog electronics. CMOS and bipolar technologies have their weak 
and strong points. CMOS has qualified to be the most appropriate 
choice for VLSI applications because of its low DC power dissipation 
and its high packing density, yet its speed is limited by the capacitive 
loading. On the other hand, bipolar digital circuits outperform CMOS 
in terms of speed but are power consuming. The existence of this 
gap implies that neither CMOS nor ECL bipolar have the flexibility 
required to cover the full delay power space. This can only be 
achieved by a technology such as bipolar complementary metal-
oxide semiconductor (BiCMOS). In this chapter, we introduce simple 
CMOS and bipolar process and device simulation. Fully 3D modeling 
approaches for MOSFETs are also demonstrated to represent the 
complicated structure and behavior of aggressively scaled devices.
1.14  SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
Beyond CMOS, bipolar-based technologies target ever-increasing 
analog and mixed-signal IC performance with a strong impact on 
parametric yield. Not surprisingly, there is no single technology 
that gives optimum performance in all aspects. Thus, for a 
specific application, one needs to choose from various available 
technologies. For example, for low-frequency applications up to 2.5 
GHz, Si-based BiCMOS technology could be the best choice. However, 
for very-high-frequency applications, GaAs-based devices could be 
the choice due to their superior high-frequency and breakdown 
characteristics. With steady performance gains and continued 
innovation in process integration, SiGe HBT BiCMOS technology is 
becoming an increasingly viable and affordable solution for highly 
integrated, high-performance mixed-signal applications. In this 
chapter, process and device simulations of advanced SiGe and SiGeC 
HBTs are considered.
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs

18
Introduction
1.15  Silicon Hetero-FETs
The technology-scaling trend leads to increasing complexity of 
ICs. To boost MOSFET electrical performances, stress and strain 
engineering is nowadays used in all advanced semiconductor 
technologies. Most of semiconductor device manufacturers such 
as Intel, IBM, and TSMC are using mechanical stress to enhance the 
performance of nano-CMOS transistors at 45 nm and below. Stress 
is used to increase carrier mobility in the channel [10]. SiGe with a 
biaxial compressive strain has been demonstrated to be favorable 
for hole confinement and hole mobility enhancement because of its 
band offset and split in the valence band. SiGe is the ideal material to 
boost the speed of both n- and p-channel Si MOSFETs. In this chapter, 
we consider the design of strained SiGe and strained Si channel 
MOSFET designs.
1.16  FinFETs
Over the past decade, transistor structures have evolved a step 
further from planar, classical, single-gate FETs to 3D multigate FETs 
whose behavior can only be fully explained by advanced carrier 
transport phenomena. Planar CMOS technology has reached its 
scaling limits at the 22 nm node, where it is increasingly difficult 
to design high-performance, low-power devices with good yield in 
the presence of global and local process variations. Multigate FET 
technology is the best alternative that can extend scaling to the 
sub-10 nm technology nodes with minimum additional processing 
costs. FinFETs may replace conventional CMOS devices in the future 
technology generations due to their intrinsically better scalability. 
From the fabrication perspective, the most likely candidate for 
widespread adoption amongst the multigate devices is the finFET. 
In this chapter, TCAD techniques are used to study the design of 
finFETs.
1.17  Advanced Devices
For applications beyond the 22 nm node trigate/multigate devices, 
Ge and III–V MOSFETs, quantum well and tunnel FETs, and a host of 

19
other novel devices are being explored. Intuitive physical analyses 
yield valuable insights and allow easy and qualitative comparison 
of the different device structures. In this chapter, advanced devices 
such as ultrathin-body silicon-on-insulator (UTBSOI), high-electron-
mobility transistors, AlGaN/GaN HFETs, and high-power SiC devices 
are considered.
1.18  Memory Devices
Nonvolatile semiconductor memory is an increasingly popular 
type of semiconductor memory because of its ability to retain data 
without external power. Because of its high-performance capabilities 
and applications in a wide range of popular consumer products, 
Flash memory is a very important member of the nonvolatile 
semiconductor memory family. Nonvolatile memory has drawn 
much attention over the past years due to their its applications in 
the consumer electronics market where memory devices with a 
retention time of ~10 years are desired. The main failure mechanism 
in Flash-based memory devices is the threshold voltage shift and 
memory window narrowing caused by oxide degradation (due to 
charge trapping caused by electronic stress during program/erase 
cycling) and is of great research interest. In this chapter, design and 
simulation of memory devices are presented.
1.19  Power Devices
Over the last decade, there has been a growing research interest 
in the area of power electronic applications. Conventional MOS 
structures are also not suitable, especially in medium- and high-
voltage power ICs as both small gate length and thin oxide thickness 
are related to the breakdown. To alleviate the effect of the electrical 
field on the gate oxide, several power MOS device structures such 
as lateral double-diffused MOS transistors (LDMOS) and vertically 
diffused MOS (VDMOS) have been proposed to greatly increase the 
breakdown voltage. The physical effects, self-heating and impact 
ionization, which are essential for modeling power devices, can be 
modeled using the corresponding state-of-the-art models. Unstable 
Power Devices

20
Introduction
problems like snap-back, secondary breakdown, and thermal 
runaway effects can be simulated. In this chapter, we shall present 
the results of 3D process/device simulation of LDMOS and VDMOS 
devices.
1.20  Solar Cells
The first homojunction silicon solar cell developed in 1954 had 
an efficiency of only 6%. But the progress in silicon technology 
resulted in single-crystal silicon solar cells with high reliability and 
efficiencies reaching above 25%. Thin-film solar cells have become a 
strong competitor for single-crystal and polycrystalline silicon solar 
cells because of the cheaper raw material as well as processing costs. 
Substrates used in thin-film solar cells are a metal or a glass or a 
polymer. These are relatively cheaper compared to silicon wafers. In 
this chapter, TCAD of organic solar cells and tandem solar cells will 
be considered.
1.21  TCAD for SPICE Parameter Extraction
Strain technology has been successfully integrated into CMOS 
fabrication to enhance carrier transport properties since the  
90 nm node. However, since the stress is nonuniformly distributed 
in the channel, the enhancement in carrier mobility, velocity, and 
threshold voltage shift strongly depend on circuit layout patterns, 
leading to extra process variations. Thus, a compact stress model  
is needed that physically captures this behavior to bridge the 
process technology with design optimization. With its physical basis 
that is capable of capturing detailed process effects, calibrated TCAD 
flows can be used to generate computationally efficient PCMs that 
retain key process-to-device correlations. In this chapter, extension 
of TCAD to extract SPICE parameters of transistors is discussed.
1.22  TCAD for DFM
TCAD is a bridge between the design world and the manufacturing 
world. Process information needs to be communicated into the 

21
design phase in such a way that informed design trade-offs can be 
made consistently. An understanding of the predictive modeling 
principles to gain insights into future technology trends is important 
for future circuit design research and IC development. The concepts 
of process compact and process technology modeling are essential 
to achieve the necessary knowledge transfer that has proven to be 
useful in the manufacturing world. The ultimate goal of predictive 
technology and process compact modeling is to describe any 
process technology accurately. The compact models are useful not 
only for long-term product design but also for early evaluation of a 
technology for circuit manufacturing. In this chapter, PCM generation 
is demonstrated using the Synopsys PCM tool.
1.23  VWF and Online Laboratory
In most undergraduate electrical engineering and virtually all 
graduate programs, there are courses on device physics and 
processing technology based on standard textbooks on MOS and 
bipolar device physics and have a very strong connection to the 
device modeling area and typical process technology. Associated 
with the subject, for simulation, the students generally use device/
process simulation tools and perform circuit simulation with 
probably no interactions between the process/technology and 
device parameters.
	
A new conceptual framework for teaching microelectronics 
technology and device design is needed. All aspects of technology 
cross sections can be illustrated by using TCAD in process/device 
analysis and design via the Internet. The remote, web-based 
experimentation also can augment the laboratory experience of the 
students by offering access to sophisticated instrumentation. User-
friendly, computer-controlled instrumentation and data analysis 
techniques are revolutionizing the way measurements are now 
being made, allowing nearly instantaneous comparison between 
theoretical predictions, simulations, and actual experimental 
results. Once this integration happens, it will no longer be crucial to 
have a piece of equipment physically located next to an engineer or 
scientist, thus opening the door for remote access via the Internet.
VWF and Online Laboratory

22
Introduction
	
How micro- and nanoelectronic subjects can be taught efficiently 
and cost-effectively by using process and device simulation tools 
without any physical processing laboratory setup is demonstrated 
in this chapter. An integrated, remote, hardware-based online 
laboratory system for extending micro- and nanoelectronics 
education via characterization of semiconductor devices and 
their SPICE parameter extraction is described. The developed 
laboratory system combines both the convenience of remote and 
the effectiveness of traditional physical campus laboratories. As 
an educational tool the laboratory platform will enable students 
who do not have access to hardware laboratories to complement 
their theoretical knowledge by carrying out experiments remotely, 
performing simulations and comparing simulations with measured 
data using equipment located anywhere in the world and at any time 
of the day.
1.24  Summary
In this chapter, we briefly described the role, benefits, capabilities, 
and future perspectives of TCAD applications for semiconductor 
technology and provided an overview of TCAD usage. The evolution 
of modern TCAD and its challenges are discussed. Next-generation 
TCAD will play a key role in quantifying potential roadblocks, 
indicating new solutions, and keeping technology development on 
the path of Moore’s law. Use of TCAD is shown as a crucial enabling 
methodology in supporting semiconductor technology progress. 
TCAD applications for the semiconductor technology development 
and the role of TCAD as a design-technology interface have been 
discussed in detail. Some of the main challenges for TCAD to 
successfully deal with process/device simulation problems are 
highlighted.
	
The purpose of the monograph is to bring various aspects of 
TCAD for microelectronic applications into one resource, presenting 
a comprehensive perspective of the field. The aim is also to provide 
students with device and process simulation examples applied to 
a number of different technologies, illustrating a quantitative link 
between the basic technological parameters and electrical behavior 
of microelectronic devices. Finally, in Chapter 14, we introduce the 

23
reader to an advanced tool (remote, hardware-based, web-based 
online laboratory) now available for extending the microelectronics 
education.
References
	 1.	 Maiti, C. K., and Maiti, T. K. (2012). Strain-Engineered MOSFETs (CRC 
Press, Taylor and Francis, USA).
	 2.	 (1995). Microelectron. J., special issue, 26(2–3), 77–315.
	 3.	 (1990). Solid-State Electron., special issue, 33(6), 591–791.
	 4.	 Dutton, R. W., and Yu, Z. (1993). Technology CAD Computer Simulation 
of IC Processes and Devices (Kluwer Academic, USA).
	 5.	 Armstrong, G. A., and Maiti, C. K. (2008). TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs 
Integrated Circuits (Institution of Engineering and Technology [IET], 
UK).
	 6.	 Garand, Mystic, 2013, http://www.goldstandardsimulations.com/.
	 7.	 Synopsys Inc., Paramos User Guide, Version J-2015.03, March 2015.
	 8.	 Maiti, C. K., and Armstrong, G. A. (2001). Applications of Silicon-
Germanium Heterostructure Devices (Institute of Physics Publishing 
[IOP], UK).
	 9.	 Maiti, C. K., Chakrabarti, N. B., and Ray, S. K. (2001). Silicon 
Heterostructures: Materials and Devices (Institute of Electrical 
Engineers [IEE], UK).
	10.	 Maiti, C. K., Chattopadhyay, S., and Bera, L. K. (2007). Strained-Si 
Heterostructure Field-Effect Devices (CRC Press, Taylor and Francis, 
USA).
	11.	 Ran, C. (2014). Strain Engineering for Advanced Silicon, Germanium 
and Germanium-Tin Transistors, PhD thesis, National University of 
Singapore.
	12.	 Fiori, V. (2010). How Do Mechanics and Thermomechanics Affect 
Microelectronic Products: Some Residual Stress and Strain Effects, 
Investigations and Industrial Management, PhD thesis, L’institut 
National des Sciences Appliquées de Lyon.
	13.	 Kwong, M. Y. (2002). Impact of Extension Lateral Doping Abruptness on 
Deep Submicron Device Performance, PhD thesis, Stanford University.
	14.	 Maiti, T. K. (2009). Process-Induced Stress Engineering in Silicon CMOS 
Technology, PhD thesis, Jadavpur University.
References


In technology computer-aided design (TCAD), a broad range of 
modeling and analysis activities that consist of detailed simulation 
of IC fabrication processes, device electrical performance, and 
extraction of device parameters for equivalent circuit models are 
involved. TCAD tools provide detailed physical insight to achieve 
the optimum process performance affecting yield. TCAD represents 
our physical understanding of processes and devices in terms of 
computer models of semiconductor physics. The conventional role 
of TCAD in IC processing is shown in Fig. 2.1.
Layout
Process
Process
simulaon
Device
simulaon
Circuit
simulaon
Technology
characterizaon
TCAD
+
Figure 2.1  Role of conventional technology CAD in IC processing—the simple 
picture.
	
While advances in physical modeling of semiconductor devices 
and numerical methods have resulted in more accurate and robust 
TCAD tools, the usability, maintainability, and extensibility of these 
tools still remain a problem. The following is a brief introduction to 
Chapter 2
Technology CAD Tools
Introducing Technology Computer-Aided Design (TCAD): Fundamentals, Simulations, and Applications
C. K. Maiti
Copyright © 2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-51-2 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36450-6 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

26
Technology CAD Tools
the evolution of technology and TCAD simulations, where the role 
of computer-aided design (CAD) and the increasing dimension of 
simulation problems are highlighted. Next-generation TCAD can and 
will play a key role in quantifying potential roadblocks, indicating 
new solutions, and keeping technology development on the path 
of Moore’s law. This chapter offers insight into the physical basis of 
TCAD to allow users to leverage these tools effectively. We provide a 
detailed survey of the challenging issues for TCAD, with an emphasis 
on the fundamentals of the models themselves. Figure 2.2 shows 
the typical steps involved in computational device research and 
development with TCAD.
	
The scope of TCAD includes:
 
∑	 Front-end process modeling and simulation, such as implant, 
diffusion, oxidation, etc.
 
∑	 Device modeling and simulation for I–V, C–V, etc., characteristic 
generation
 
∑	 Topography modeling and simulation
 
∑	 Device modeling for circuit simulation
 
∑	 Compact Simulation Program with Integrated Circuit 
Emphasis (SPICE) modeling
Test structure
fabricaon
Process
assumpons
Process
simulaon
Device
simulaon
Hardware
measurements
SPICE model
generaon
Device parameter
extracon
Figure 2.2  TCAD to SPICE model generation flow [27].
2.1  History of Process and Device Simulation 
Tools
In the 1970s, 1D approaches were generally sufficient to deal with 
bipolar technology and early metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect 

27
transistors (MOSFETs). Use of 1D charge transport phenomena was 
predominant in large-geometry devices. Extrapolation of quasi-
2D doping distributions from sets of 1D profiles helped process 
design optimization. Since the 1980s, aggressive MOS scaling led 
to the very-large- and ultralarge-scale integration (VLSI and ULSI) 
era based on complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) 
technology. Fully 2D simulators soon became indispensable 
to model, increasing process complexity and coupled physical 
effects, including local oxide isolation (local oxidation of silicon 
[LOCOS]), dopant diffusion, subthreshold conduction, and parasitic 
phenomena such as latch-up and punch-through. Technology 
computer-aided design (TCAD) products should enable users to 
explore and optimize easily the broad spectrum of process and 
device alternatives and provide improvement in parametric yield 
modeling in manufacturing. The integrated TCAD should address 
all phases of the product development life cycle: (a) research and 
development to explore the physical limits of processes and devices 
for technology development, (b) product integration to optimize 
process and device performance, and (c) manufacturing to control 
process variability, thereby increasing parametric yield. Integrated 
circuit (IC) design methodologies and the applied electronic design 
automation (EDA) tools are continuously changing. To keep pace 
with these changes, there is a critical need to acquire knowledge of 
available IC design tools, including EDA.
	
TCAD product suites have set a new standard for simulation. Tools 
are being designed to address the challenges by combining the best-
in-class features together with a wide range of new features arising 
out of new technology generations. TCAD is predominantly physics 
based and has traditionally been the primary vehicle for predictive 
modeling of transistors and other active devices, considered to be 
part of front-end-of-line (FEOL) manufacturing. TCAD is also used to 
explore newer device designs and extrapolate to the next technology 
node, besides giving engineers a better understanding of the benefits 
and drawbacks of any modifications to existing manufacturing 
processes, as well as the development of compact/SPICE models.
	
Use of framework technology can encapsulate TCAD-specific 
knowledge from the user, transparently transfer data between 
simulation modules, and improve software modularity. TCAD 
environment (such as Synopsys and Silvaco) is developed by 
commercial vendors with highly user-friendly, interactive interfaces. 
History of Process and Device Simulation Tools

28
Technology CAD Tools
Typical requirements for the TCAD simulation graphical user 
interface (GUI) are:
 
∑	 Easy to use. New users should be able to pick up the basics 
within minutes.
 
∑	 Real-time help for the command syntax.
 
∑	 Integration with other GUIs of the software suite, like the 3D 
setting-up tool and plotting GUI.
	
One highly demanding feature of the TCAD simulation GUI is 
the capability to perform batch simulation: this refers to a series of 
simulations associated with different process parameters, different 
device simulation parameters, etc. In the semiconductor industry 
this is useful because optimizing device performance often requires 
adjusting process parameters. There may be hundreds of possible 
process step combinations, so it is useful to automate the process as 
much as possible.
	
Process simulation creates a semiconductor device representa-
tion using modern semiconductor processing methods, such as dif-
fusion, oxidation, etching, deposition, and implantation. Process and 
device simulation tools are linked to predict the influence of vari-
ous IC processing steps on device and circuit performance. Most of 
the device simulators were designed to analyze device structures 
and solve the fundamental semiconductor equations, consisting of 
Poisson’s equation and two carrier continuity equations, and solved 
numerically in 1D, 2D, and 3D space. The following is a brief intro-
duction to the evolution of TCAD simulation tools where the role of 
CAD and the increasing dimension of simulation problems are high-
lighted. Only a brief history of the major development in the device 
and process simulation tools leading to commercial TCAD tools will 
be presented.
	
The seminal work of Gummel in 1964 led to the foundation 
of device simulation. Gummel’s numerical approach was further 
developed and applied to simulate the p-n junction by De Mari 
in 1968. The discretization scheme reported for the transport 
equations by Scharfetter and Gummel is still almost universally used 
in device simulation. In the 1970s, 1D approaches were generally 
sufficient to deal with bipolar technology and early MOSFETs. Use 
of 1D charge transport phenomena was predominant in large-
geometry devices. Extrapolation of quasi-2D doping distributions 

29
History of Process and Device Simulation Tools
from sets of 1D profiles helped process and design optimization. 
During the 1970s, the finite element analysis of the semiconductor 
equations was reported, which helped in the development of the 
more general-purpose tools.
	
In the late 1970s, some of the first publicly available device 
simulation tools were released, viz., CADDETH from Hitachi, to 
simulate single-carrier field-effect transistor (FET) structures, 
SEDAN from Stanford University to simulate 1D bipolar devices, 
and the MOSFET simulation program MINIMOS from Vienna. 
During the 1970s and 1980s, several 1D and 2D programs were 
developed. Examples include SEDAN for 1D simulations and 
MINIMOS for 2D MOS transistor simulation, BAMBI for arbitrary 
semiconductor structures, and PISCES, a 2D finite element simulator 
which rapidly became an industry standard and formed the basis 
of future commercial products such as Silvaco-ATLAS. A nonplanar 
multidimensional device simulation tool for bipolar device analysis 
was FIELDAY from IBM. Other first-generation nonplanar device 
simulators include GEMINI and PISCES I from Stanford.
	
Since the 1980s, aggressive MOS scaling led to the very-large- and 
ultralarge-scale integration era based on CMOS technology. Full 2D 
simulators soon became indispensable to model, increasing process 
complexity and coupled physical effects, including local oxide 
isolation, dopant diffusion, subthreshold conduction, and parasitic 
phenomena such as latch-up and punch-through. Development of 
programs like PISCES II at Stanford University, DEVICE at AT&T Bell 
Laboratories, BAMBI at TU (Vienna), and HFIELDS at the University of 
Bologna came in the mid-1980s. PISCES II has been commercialized 
by Technology Modeling Associates (now Synopsys), and Silvaco and 
is the source of widely used device simulators MEDICI and ATLAS 
respectively. TMA developed its first 3D device simulator known as 
DAVINCI in 1991, which has been the basis of the Taurus 3D Device 
simulator from Synopsys.
	
With the increasing complexities of IC device structures due to 
continuous downscaling of feature size, 3D numerical analysis became 
critical. In 1987 TU, Vienna, announced the 3D device simulator 
MINIMOS Ver. 5 for MOSFET structures, silicon-on-insulator (SOI) 
transistors, and gallium arsenide metal–semiconductor field-effect 
transistors (MESFETs). MINIMOS supports transient analysis and 
MC modeling to replace the drift-diffusion approximation in critical 

30
Technology CAD Tools
device areas. Some of the other reported 3D device CAD tools include 
HFIELDS 3D, DESSIS, and FLOODS from the University of Florida. 
DESSIS is the basis of the commercial Sentaurus Device (SDevice) 
simulator from Synopsys.
	
In 1977, the first version of the 1D process simulator SUPREM 
developed in Stanford was released. Process simulation has 
continued to improve dramatically since the release of SUPREM. Since 
then, the process models in SUPREM have developed substantially 
and versions II and III of SUPREM were released in 1978 and 1983, 
respectively. In 1986, the most advanced 2D process simulation 
program SUPREM IV was released. The 2D SUPREM IV has been 
commercialized by Crosslight as CSUPREM, as ATHENA by Silvaco, 
and as TSUPREM4 by TMA. In 1992, ISE (now Synopsys) developed 
1D and 2D process simulators TESIM and DIOS, respectively. DIOS 
is the basis of Sentaurus Process (SProcess) released by Synopsys 
in 2005. Other 3D process simulators include PROPHET from AT&T 
Bell Laboratories released in 1991.
2.2  Commercial TCAD Tools
The history of commercial TCAD began with the foundation of TMA 
in 1979. TCAD environments such as Synopsys [1–12] and Silvaco 
[13–23] have been developed by commercial vendors with highly 
user-friendly interactive interfaces. Currently, the main sources of 
commercial TCAD tools are Silvaco and Synopsys. Synopsys TCAD 
tools include Taurus-Process/Taurus-Device TSUPREM4/MEDICI 
for 2D TCAD and SProcess/SDevice for both 2D and 3D TCAD. Silvaco 
TCAD tools include ATHENA for 2D process simulation, ATLAS for 
2D device simulation, and VictoryProcess/VictoryDevice for 3D 
simulation.
	
TCAD products should enable users to explore and optimize 
easily the broad spectrum of process and device alternatives 
and provide improvement in parametric yield modeling in 
manufacturing. Integrated TCAD should address all phases of the 
product development life cycle: (a) research and development to 
explore the physical limits of processes and devices for technology 
development, (b) product integration to optimize process and device 
performance, and (c) manufacturing to control process variability, 

31
Silvaco Tool Overview
thereby increasing parametric yield. IC design methodologies and 
the applied EDA tools are continuously changing. To keep pace 
with these changes, there is a critical need to acquire knowledge of 
available IC design tools, including EDA.
	
One of the most important GUIs for TCAD simulation is the 
plotting GUI. Without the ability to plot simulation results, there is 
not much point in doing the modeling in the first place. The plotting 
GUI allows the user to view both process and device simulation 
results: IV characteristics, bandgap diagrams, doping profiles, etc.
2.3  Silvaco Tool Overview
 
∑	 ATLAS can be used in conjunction with the Virtual Wafer 
Framework (VWF) interactive tools. The VWF includes 
DeckBuild, Tonyplot, DevEdit, MaskViews, and Optimizer.
 
∑	 ATHENA: 2D SSUPREM4-based process simulator.
 
∑	 ATLAS: 2D (and basic 3D) device simulation.
 
∑	 MaskViews: An IC Layout Editor.
 
∑	 VictoryCell: GDS-based 3D process simulation.
 
∑	 VictoryProcess: 3D process simulation.
 
∑	 VictoryDevice: 3D device simulation.
 
∑	 VictoryStress: 3D stress simulation.
 
∑	 Virtual Wafer Fab: Wrapper of the different tool in a GUI.
 
∑	 DeckBuild: Provides an interactive run time environment.
 
∑	 TonyPlot: Visualization tool.
 
∑	 TonyPlot 2D.
 
∑	 TonyPlot 3D.
 
∑	 Optimizer: Supports black-box optimization across multiple 
simulators.
	
Combining ATHENA, ATLAS, UTMOST, and SmartSpice makes 
it possible to predict the impact of process parameters on circuit 
characteristics. The VWF makes it convenient to perform highly 
automated simulation-based experimentation. It therefore links 
simulation very closely to technology development, resulting in 
significantly increased benefits from simulation use. The Silvaco 
simulation software suite may be used for modeling of III–V 
heterostructure 
devices 
in 
radio-frequency 
(RF)/microwave  

32
Technology CAD Tools
front-end electronics. The software can characterize all DC and RF 
data of the device. It is suitable for compound semiconductor–based 
solar/optical devices and may be used for process design, analysis, 
and optimization of various fabrication technologies. Silvaco TCAD 
offers complete and well-integrated simulation software for all 
aspects of solar cell technology. TCAD modules required for solar 
cell simulation include S-PISCES, Blaze, Luminous, TFT, Device3D, 
Luminous3D, and TFT3D. The TCAD-driven CAD approach provides 
the most accurate models to device engineers. Silvaco is a one-stop 
vendor for all companies interested in advanced solar cell technology 
simulation solutions.
2.3.1  MaskViews
IC Layout Editor is a versatile IC layout editor used to specify layout 
information to process simulators. MaskViews supports simulation-
based experimentation with layout variations. Experimentation-
based simulation was previously restricted to the varying of process 
flow parameters only. MaskViews supports experimentation 
dealing with phase shift masking technologies, critical dimensions, 
misalignment tolerances, and global shrinks. It is fully interfaced to 
GDS2 stream formats so that complete IC layouts may be imported 
and exported. Small subregions can be selected for detailed analysis. 
MaskViews can be used interactively, in which case it communicates 
via DeckBuild.
2.4  ATHENA
ATHENA is a 1D, 2D, and 3D process simulator used to model 
semiconductor devices. It is very effective tool, which replaces costly 
experiments on real-time fabrication of devices. Each fabrication 
step can be modeled and simulated in ATHENA, which includes 
oxidation, deposition, ion implantation, conventional furnace 
annealing, spike anneal, geometric etches, and lithography. ATHENA 
input and output profiles are shown in Fig. 2.3.
	
ATHENA simulation involves the following steps:
	
1.	 Generating an ATHENA input file
	
2.	 Running an ATHENA simulation
	
3.	 Analyzing an ATHENA output file

33
Process steps and
condions
1D and 2D
structures
ATHENA Inputs/Outputs
Structures export to
ATLAS and DevEdit
Doping and
etch proﬁles
E-test data(Vt)
analysis
Material thickness, junc-
on depth, sheet rho
GDS layout
Mask layers
ATHENA
Structure import
from DevEdit
C-Interpreter
funcons
CD proﬁles, smile
plots
lon Implant
trajectories
Figure 2.3  ATHENA input and output profiles.
	
Basic operations to create an ATHENA input file involves the 
following steps:
	
1.	 Developing a good simulation grid
	
2.	 Defining an initial substrate
	
3.	 Performing layer deposition
	
4.	 Performing geometrical etching
	
5.	 Performing ion implantation and diffusion
	
6.	 Specifying the electrodes
	
7.	 Saving the structure file
	
The simulation problem is defined using the following steps:
	
1.	 To initial geometry
	
2.	 To specify a simulation grid
	
3.	 To define an initial substrate
	
4.	 To specify process steps
	
5.	 To specify the electrodes
	
6.	 To save a structure file
	
7.	 To access the ATHENA coefficients file
	
8.	 To generate an EXTRACT statement
ATHENA

34
Technology CAD Tools
	
The sequence of process steps involves:
	
1.	 Epitaxial growth
	
2.	 Layers deposition
	
3.	 Geometrical etching
	
4.	 Ion implantation
	
5.	 Diffusion
	
Physical models needed in simulation:
 
∑	 Implant models
 
∑	 Diffusion models
 
∑	 Oxidation models
	
ATHENA output file: Creating a device structure
	
The main ATHENA output is the standard structure file, a univer-
sal file format used by Silvaco simulation programs. The STRUCTURE 
statement of ATHENA creates a standard structure file (.str), which 
contains mesh and solution information, model information, and 
other related parameters. The details of export process which links 
the process to the device simulation depends on the software suite 
being used but the principles are usually similar. The saved structure 
file can be used for further simulation/visualization by:
 
∑	 ATHENA to continue process simulation
 
∑	 ATLAS or other device simulators to perform electrical 
analysis
 
∑	 TonyPlot to graphically display the structure created by 
ATHENA
 
∑	 DevEdit to modify the mesh and the structure before running 
a device simulation
	
The simulation grid represents the points (nodes) of the 
structure where the model equations are solved. Therefore  
the correct specification of a grid is critical in process simulation. 
The number of nodes in the grid has a direct influence on simulation 
accuracy and time. A finer grid should exist only in the critical areas 
of the simulation structure (where ion implantation will occur or 
where a p-n junction will be formed). The simulators are popular 
due to two main reasons. First, they help in predicting trends and 
understanding the device performance better. Second, the simulators 

35
are used to optimize a device structure for performance, which can 
then be verified by device fabrication. ATHENA features include:
 
∑	 The ATHENA process simulation framework enables 
process and integration engineers to develop and optimize 
semiconductor manufacturing processes.
 
∑	 ATHENA provides an easy-to-use, modular, and extensible 
platform for simulating ion implantation, diffusion, etch, 
deposition, lithography, oxidation, and silicidation of 
semiconductor materials.
 
∑	 ATHENA replaces costly wafer experiments with simulations 
to deliver shorter development cycles and higher yields.
 
∑	 SSuprem4 is the state-of-the-art 2D process simulator 
widely used in semiconductor industry for design, analysis, 
and optimization of Si, SiGe, and compound semiconductor 
technologies.
 
∑	 SSuprem4 accurately simulates all major process steps using 
a wide range of advanced physical models for diffusion, 
implantation, oxidation, silicidation, and epitaxy.
 
∑	 MC Implant is a physics-based 3D ion implantation simulator 
to model stopping and ranges in crystalline and amorphous 
materials.
 
∑	 MC Implant accurately predicts implant profiles and damage 
for all major ion/target combinations.
 
∑	 Elite is an advanced 2D moving boundary topography 
simulator for modeling physical etch, deposition, reflow, 
and chemical-mechanical polishing (CMP) planarization 
processes.
 
∑	 MC Etch and Deposit is an advanced topology simulator.
 
∑	 MC Etch and Deposit includes several Monte Carlo–based 
models for simulation of various etch and deposit processes 
which use a flux of atomic particles.
2.5  ATLAS
ATLAS is a physics-based device simulator. It provides general 
capabilities for 2D and 3D simulations of semiconductor devices. 
It specifies the device simulation problems by defining the physical 
structure to be simulated, the physical models to be used, and 
ATLAS

36
Technology CAD Tools
the bias conditions for which electrical characteristics are to be 
simulated (Fig. 2.4). The electrical characteristics predicted by 
ATLAS can be used as input by the UTMOST device characterization 
and SPICE modeling software. Compact models based on simulated 
device characteristics can then be supplied to circuit designers for 
groundwork circuit design. ATLAS features include:
 
∑	 The ATLAS device simulation framework enables device 
technology engineers to simulate the electrical, optical, and 
thermal behavior of semiconductor devices.
 
∑	 ATLAS provides a physics-based, easy-to-use, modular, and 
extensible platform to analyze DC, AC, and time domain 
responses for all semiconductor-based technologies in two 
and three dimensions.
 
∑	 Device designs for simulation may be created directly within 
ATLAS, drawn in DevEdit, or imported from the ATHENA 
framework.
Figure 2.4  ATLAS inputs and outputs. Source: Maria Concetta Allia.
	
ATLAS is often used in conjunction with the ATHENA process 
simulator, which predicts the physical structures that result from 
processing steps. The resulting physical structures are used as 
input by ATLAS, which then predicts the electrical characteristics 
associated with specified bias conditions. The combination of 
ATHENA and ATLAS makes it possible to determine the impact of 
process parameters on device characteristics. ATLAS produces three 
types of output files. The first type of output file is the run-time 
output, which gives the progress and the error and warning messages 
as the simulation proceeds. The second type of output file is the log 
file, which stores all terminal voltages and currents from the device 
analysis. The third type of output file is the solution file, which stores 

37
2D and 3D data relating to the values of solution variables within the 
device at a given bias point. Firstly, ATLAS helps in predicting trends 
and understanding the device performance better. Second, the 
simulators are used to optimize a device structure for performance, 
which can then be verified by device fabrication.
2.5.1  Physical Structure
A device structure can be defined in several different ways in ATLAS. 
A fabrication simulator ATHENA can be used to “build” a device by 
simulating the device’s fabrication or a CAD tool like DEVEDIT can 
be used to define the structure. This device structure can then be 
read into DeckBuild, which is the run-time environment of ATLAS. 
Another way of defining the structure is to directly construct the 
device using the ATLAS command language. This method was 
used in defining the SiGe heterojunction bipolar transistor (HBT) 
structure for this power amplification investigation. To define a 
device through the ATLAS command language, a simulation domain 
is first defined by defining a mesh and setting air as the material 
for this domain. The regions within the domain are then defined by 
defining the size of that region and the type of material. Defining 
a material automatically overrides the default material (air) set 
in the first step. After the regions are defined, the locations of the 
electrodes are specified. The final step is to specify the doping in 
each region.
	
Defining the mesh is one of the most important steps of the 
structure definition. By increasing the number of mesh points, the 
accuracy of the result of the simulation can be increased. This is 
because each mesh point represents a point in the structure where 
the physical models are solved. But at the same time, increasing 
the mesh points increases the simulation time. Moreover, the 
number of mesh points cannot exceed a particular limit as dictated 
by the simulator. Therefore, there is always a trade-off between 
the accuracy and the simulation time. For getting the best results,  
the mesh density is large at critical regions of the structure, like the 
junction of the emitter and the base, while keeping the mesh density 
to a minimum in regions that are less critical. It is also important, 
especially in the case of comparative study, to avoid changing mesh 
density. When using this tool to define a structure, the information 
ATLAS

38
Technology CAD Tools
described in the following four subsections must be specified in 
the order listed. In the following, we describe each of these in more 
detail. Advantages of ATHENA/ATLAS are:
 
∑	 3D simulation built in
 
∑	 Seamless transition from 2D to 3D
 
∑	 Excellent user interface
 
∑	 Parallel 3D solver (takes advantage of a modern multicore 
CPU)
 
∑	 Adaptive meshing and clever 3D meshing algorithm
2.5.2  Structure Editing
To prepare a structure for device simulation, structure editing is 
performed using Sentaurus Structure Editor. The n-type metal-
oxide-semiconductor (NMOS) structure from process simulation 
is reduced in size by removing the lower portion of the substrate. 
Next, contacts are placed for the substrate, gate, source, and drain. 
After contact placement, the structure is ready to be remeshed. Since 
mesh requirements are different for process and device simulations, 
the structure editor is also utilized to remesh the structure prior to 
device simulation.
	
An optimum mesh is important to resolve key regions of the 
transistor pertaining to charge injection and clock feed-through; 
these areas include the inversion layer and overlap regions. To 
properly resolve the inversion layer, the mesh in the gate oxide is 
10 Å, followed by a fine mesh in the first 300 Å of the channel. In the 
channel’s first 10 Å the mesh spacing is 2 Å, and as the channel depth 
increases to 300 Å the mesh spacing increases to 20 Å. The source 
and drain are remeshed to complete the NMOS device.
2.5.3  Meshing
TCAD simulators are based on finite element solutions to solve the 
nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs). Therefore, good 
meshing techniques are required to perform numerically stable 
and accurate simulations. Automated mesh generation is a major 
challenge for semiconductor device and process simulation. Various 
mesh generation schemes have been proposed and implemented 

39
to solve systems of linear and nonlinear PDEs. Optimum meshing 
is important to maintain accuracy without dramatically increasing 
process simulation time. In a transistor, an initial mesh is defined 
by specifying the spacing in the vertical direction. Additional mesh 
refinements are necessary in critical areas of the device, such as the 
channel, source, drain, and lightly doped drain (LDD) regions.
2.5.4  Mesh Definition
The difficulties in mesh generation are a challenging task in TCAD 
and call for automatic and adaptive grid generation techniques. Mesh 
definition is important for simulation accuracy and time. A fine mesh 
gives an accurate solution but increases simulation time. Device 
simulation involves the solution of coupled PDEs which describe 
the evolution of either geometry or impurity distribution as a result 
of manufacturing process steps, or internal physical quantities in 
response to electrical boundary conditions. Solutions of coupled 
PDEs can only obtained numerically; thus, a proper discretization 
(mesh generation) procedure is required. Mesh generation has 
thus a crucial impact on the convergence, accuracy, and efficiency 
of the simulation. Also, meshing has become a major issue because 
device architectures are now essentially 3D. Therefore, automatic 
grid generation and adaptation are highly desirable, for improving 
both the trade-off between computational complexity and solution 
accuracy. To optimizing the mesh grid is the important goal for 
MOSFET structures. Automated gridding procedures (adaptive 
meshing) are desirable in process and device simulations. A mesh 
should be refined in the key areas. These areas are:
 
∑	 Around junctions and depletion regions
 
∑	 Inversion regions
 
∑	 Areas of high electric field
 
∑	 Areas of current flow
2.5.5  Regions and Materials
MOS devices have oxide, poly, gate contact, source contact, drain 
contact, and substrate regions. Region command specifies the 
location of materials in a previously defined mesh. Every triangle 
ATLAS

40
Technology CAD Tools
must be defined as a material. Material parameters required for 
device simulations are:
 
∑	 Lattice constant
 
∑	 Bandgap
 
∑	 Density of states
 
∑	 Bandgap narrowing
 
∑	 Intrinsic carrier concentration
 
∑	 Dielectric constants
 
∑	 Electron affinity
 
∑	 Mobility
2.5.6  Physical Models
Physical models are a set of mathematical equations used to define 
the physical behavior of a system. The basic physical models used to 
define the device physics simulated here are derived from Maxwell’s 
equations. These include Poisson’s equation, current continuity 
equations, and carrier transport equations. An electric field 
accelerates electrons and holes. But eventually they lose momentum 
as a result of various scattering processes. These scattering 
mechanisms are lattice vibrations (phonons), impurity ions, other 
carriers, surfaces, and other material imperfections. Therefore 
mobility is the function of the local electric field, lattice temperature, 
doping concentration.
	
Mobility modeling is divided into:
 
∑	 Low-field mobility
	
o	 Constant low-field mobility
	
o	 Concentration-dependent low-field mobility
	
o	 Analytic low-field mobility
	
o	 Arora model for low-field mobility
	
o	 Carrier–carrier scattering model for low-field mobility
	
o	 Klaassen’s unified low-field mobility
 
∑	 Inversion layer mobility
	
o	 Lombardi CVT model
	
o	 Extended CVT model
	
o	 Yamaguchi model

41
	
o	 Tasch model
 
∑	 Perpendicular electric field–dependent mobility
	
o	 Watt model
	
o	 Shirahata mobility model
 
∑	 Parallel electric field–dependent mobility
 
∑	 Carrier temperature–dependent mobility
 
∑	 Carrier generation-recombination models
Carrier generation-recombination is the process through which 
the semiconductor material attempts to return to equilibrium 
after being disturbed from it. The reasons that cause generation-
recombination are:
 
∑	 Phonon transitions
 
∑	 Photon transitions
 
∑	 Auger transitions
 
∑	 Surface recombination
 
∑	 Impact ionization
 
∑	 Tunneling
2.5.6.1  Models
 
∑	 Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination model
 
∑	 SRH concentration-dependent lifetime model
 
∑	 Klaassen’s concentration-dependent lifetime model
 
∑	 Trap-assisted tunneling
 
∑	 Radiative recombination (photon generation)
 
∑	 Auger recombination
 
∑	 Standard Auger model
 
∑	 Klaassen’s temperature-dependent Auger model
 
∑	 Narrow-bandgap Auger model
 
∑	 Surface recombination
2.5.7  Impact Ionization Models
 
∑	 Local electric field models for impact ionization
	
o	 Selberherr impact ionization model
	
o	 Valdinoci impact ionization model
ATLAS

42
Technology CAD Tools
	
o	 Grant’s impact ionization model
 
∑	 Nonlocal carrier energy models for impact ionization
	
o	 Concannon impact ionization
	
o	 Band-to-band tunneling
2.5.7.1  C-Interpreter functions
The list of models available via the C-Interpreter includes all basic 
physical models: carrier velocities and mobilities, temperature- 
and composition-dependent band parameters, position-dependent 
composition, recombination models and their parameters, materials 
parameters as a function of composition, interface parameters, etc.
2.5.8  Gate Current Models
The conductance of the insulating film would ideally be considered as 
zero. But, for the sub-0.5 pm generation of MOS devices there is now 
considerable conductance being measured on the gate contacts. The 
negative side of this gate current is responsible for the degradation 
in device operating characteristics with time. The models are:
 
∑	 Fowler–Nordheim tunneling
 
∑	 Lucky electron hot-carrier injection model
 
∑	 Concannon’s injection model
2.5.9  Bandgap Narrowing
As the doping level increases, a decrease in the bandgap separation 
occurs, where the conduction band is lowered by approximately the 
same amount as the valence band is raised.
2.5.10  Solution Methods
 
∑	 Numerical Methods
	
o	 Newton’s method
	
o	 Gummel’s method
	
o	 Discretization
	
o	 Continuation method
	
∑	 Electrical analyses
	
o	 DC analysis

43
ATLAS
	
o	 Transient analysis
	
o	 Small-signal analysis
	
o	 Impact ionization analysis
	
o	 Gate current analysis
	
ATLAS and ATHENA solve differential equations describing device 
fabrication and electrical properties using numerical techniques. 
These equations are solved in two dimensions, which is often difficult 
to do analytically. Therefore having a computer program to solve and 
display the results of 2D numerical simulation is an invaluable part 
of modern day IC manufacturing. We shall not discuss how ATLAS 
and ATHENA solve differential equations, other than to say that a 
finite element method is used to solve difference equations on a 
grid of point, known as a mesh. The mesh has a triangular geometry, 
and ATLAS and ATHENA calculate average quantities within the 
triangles. A complete description with respective syntaxes is given 
in the ATHENA and ATLAS manuals from Silvaco International.
	
The trend toward using laptops for mobile computing shows a 
steady increase in the demand for Windows versions of TCAD tools. 
In response, Silvaco supports the following ATHENA and ATLAS 
tools for TCAD for Windows. Products available in PC-TCAD from 
Silvaco are shown in Figs. 2.5 and 2.6.
Flash
Silicides
MC
Deposit
MC
Implant
Elite
CMP
SSuprem4
Optolith
SSuprem3
Process
Adapve
Meshing
ATHENA
Process
Technology
Simulaon
Figure 2.5  PC version of the ATHENA module.

44
Technology CAD Tools
Device
Technology
Simulation
ATLAS
S-Pisces
Blaze
TFT
Laser
Ferro
SiC
Quantum
Luminous
Giga
MixedMode
ESD
Figure 2.6  PC version of the ATLAS module.
2.5.11  VictoryCell
VictoryCell is a layout-driven 3D process simulator specifically 
designed for large-scale structures for creating 3D devices. 
VictoryCell is capable of modeling etch, deposit, implant, diffusion 
and photolithography. It is user-friendly and uses SUPREM-like 
syntax. It can be interfaced to both Silvaco’s 3D device simulators, 
such as Device-3D and VictoryDevice. Using VictoryCell one can 
create a layout-driven device from either GDSII or Silvaco layout 
formats. Layout-driven simulation allows creation of high-aspect-
ratio 3D structures. VictoryCell is equivalent to Synopsys SProcess 
and T-SUPREM4 (SUPREM IV). VictoryCell is a 3D process simulator 
designed to be a very fast way of creating devices. The choice of mesh 

45
formats that can be output is optimized to be as device simulator 
friendly as possible, minimizing device simulation times. VictoryCell 
may be used for simulation of numerous technologies, such as SiC, 
IGBT, and MOSFET. The VictoryCell information flow is shown in  
Fig. 2.7.
Process Flow
Descripon
Mask Layout (GDSII)
Victory Cell Inputs/Outputs
Material Physical
Property Database
Victory Cell
Extracted Prameters
and Proﬁles
Device Structure
Files (gionery, 
deping decuedes.)
Figure 2.7  VictoryCell information flow.
	
To perform a 3D simulation, one needs the mask-layout for all 
the process steps. The mask layout can be designed in a variety of 
drafting tools and specialized EDA tools like Cadence Virtuoso and 
Tanner L-Edit. These tools are used to create a GDSII file which is 
the current industry standard for IC layout work. Silvaco MaskEditor 
may be used to import GDSII files. If GDSII files are not available, 
MaskEditor may be used to create the geometric shapes and layers 
used in the process simulation. The 3D process simulator takes 
the input files created by MaskEditor and performs 3D process 
simulation and export the device structure to the device simulator. 
The device simulator uses the exported mesh and material 
information to perform electrical, thermal and, optical simulations.
2.5.12  VictoryProcess
The 3D process simulator VictoryProcess allows the user to 
generate a wide range structures in order to obtain the device of the 
desired shape. Most of the supported operations correspond to real 
technological processes (etching or deposition, CMP, epitaxy, and 
others) and one can establish a direct link between the technological 
processes step and an input deck statement of VictoryProcess. The 
VictoryProcess information flow is shown in Fig. 2.8. It can simulate 
complicated full physics-based etching and deposition processes 
which take into account
ATLAS

46
Technology CAD Tools
 
∑	 Reactor characteristics (particle flux)
 
∑	 Shading effects and/or secondary effects like redeposition of 
the etched material
Input Deck
Mask Layout
Open Model Files
Open Material
Database
Simulaon Status
Run-me Output
Extracon File
Structure Files(.str)
Victory Process Inputs/Outputs
Victory Process
Figure 2.8  VictoryProcess information flow.
	
As full physics-based simulations can take a long time and may 
be influenced by numerical error. Using either the geometrical mode 
of VictoryProcess or very simple physical models, many advanced 
operations may be performed very quickly and accurately.
	
VictoryProcess features include:
 
∑	 Fast 3D structure prototyping capability
 
∑	 Comprehensive set of diffusion models: Fermi, fullcpl, single-
pair, and five-stream
 
∑	 Physical oxidation simulation with stress analysis
 
∑	 Accurate and fast Monte Carlo implant simulation
 
∑	 Efficient multithreading of time critical operations of Monte 
Carlo implantation, diffusion, oxidation, and physical etching 
and deposition
 
∑	 Sophisticated multiparticle flux models for physical deposition 
and etching with substrate material redeposition
 
∑	 Open architecture allowing easy introduction and modification 
of customer-specific physical models
 
∑	 Seamless link to 3D device simulators, including structure 
mirroring, adaptive doping refinement, and electrode 
specification
 
∑	 Easy-to-learn and user-friendly SUPREM-like syntax
 
∑	 ATHENA compatibility
 
∑	 Convenient calibration platform
 
∑	 Automatic switching from 1D, 2D, and 3D modes

47
2.5.13  VictoryStress
The effect of mechanical stress in semiconductors was reported 
by Smith [24] who studied the relationship between resistivity 
change and tension in silicon and germanium in 1954, establishing a 
linear dependence. Accurate simulation of mechanical stress/strain 
distributions generated during device fabrication is an important 
part of technology and device design. In many cases, stress effects 
should be taken into account to predict better manufacturability and 
to increase reliability of semiconductor devices.
	
In recent years, the stress simulation has become a critical issue 
in TCAD due to advances in stress engineering. Stress engineering 
could be described as a collection of device optimization methods 
based on deliberate introduction of stresses into the device cell 
structure. These methods include dual stress liners, strain SiGe 
channels, SiGe (SiC) S/D pockets, hybrid orientation of NMOS and 
p-type metal-oxide-semiconductor (PMOS) devices, and etch stop 
layers. All these methods are used to improve device performance 
by altering carrier mobility in specific areas of the device structure. 
VictoryStress is a generic 3D stress simulator that allows accurate 
prediction of stresses generated during semiconductor fabrication, 
as well as assisting users in all aspects of stress engineering. The 
three main modules in VictoryStress are input file generation, 3D 
VictoryStress simulation, and output generation. The VictoryStress 
information flow is shown in Fig. 2.9.
Input Command File
Device Structure File
(geometry, deping, electrodes)
Material Physical
Property Database
Stress Models and
Boundary Conditions
VICTORY
STRESS
Extracted Parameters
and Proﬁles
Device Structure File
(stresses, mobility, enhan-
cement factors)
Figure 2.9  VictoryStress information flow.
2.5.13.1  VictoryStress features and capabilities
VictoryStress provides a comprehensive set of models and 
capabilities covering various aspects of stress simulation and stress 
engineering:
ATLAS

48
Technology CAD Tools
 
∑	 Layout-driven stress analysis
 
∑	 Comprehensive material stress models, including the 
dependence of elasticity coefficients on crystal orientation
 
∑	 Generic 3D anisotropic stress simulation for crystalline 
materials suitable for a variety of stress analysis such as:
	
o	 Strained PMOS, compressive capping layers
	
o	 Mobility enhancements in fin field-effect transistor 
(finFET) channels
 
∑	 Stress analysis of arbitrary 3D device structure
 
∑	 Import of device structures from VictoryProcess, VictoryCell, 
and ATLAS3D
 
∑	 Export of 3D stress distributions to VictoryDevice and 
ATLAS3D
 
∑	 Models for various sources of strain and stress
 
∑	 Thermal mismatch between material layers
 
∑	 Local lattice mismatch due to doping
 
∑	 Initial intrinsic stress in specified regions
 
∑	 Hydrostatic stress from capping layers
 
∑	 Stress/strain generated in previous processing step (e.g., 
oxidation)
 
∑	 Stress simulation for various crystalline (e.g., Si, SiGe, GaAs) 
and isotropic (e.g., silicon nitride and oxide) materials
 
∑	 Generic 3D anisotropic stress simulation accounts for wafer 
orientation and arbitrary wafer flat rotation
 
∑	 Estimation of mobility enhancement factors (p- and n-type) 
by use of piezoresistivity model devices
 
∑	 Ability to be used with Virtual Wafer Fab for design of 
experiments to analyze stress dependence on process and 
geometrical parameters of semiconductor
2.5.14  VictoryDevice
VictoryDevice provides general capabilities for physics-based 2D and 
3D simulation of semiconductor devices. VictoryDevice is designed 
to be used with the VWF interactive tools. The VWF interactive tools 
are DeckBuild, TonyPlot, TonyPlot3D, DevEdit, MaskViews, and 
Optimizer. The VictoryDevice information flow is shown in Fig. 2.10. 
VictoryDevice provides a wide set of physical models, including:

49
 
∑	 DC, small-signal AC, and fully time-dependent simulations
 
∑	 Drift-diffusion and energy balance transport
 
∑	 Lattice heating and heat sinks
 
∑	 Fermi–Dirac and Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics
 
∑	 Bulk and field-dependent carrier mobilities
 
∑	 Heavy doping effects
 
∑	 Ohmic and Schottky contacts
 
∑	 SRH, radiative, Auger, and surface recombination
 
∑	 Impact ionization
 
∑	 Band-to-band tunneling
 
∑	 Thermionic emission currents
	
VictoryDevice uses powerful numerical techniques, including:
 
∑	 Accurate and robust discretization techniques
 
∑	 Gummel, Newton, and block-Newton nonlinear iteration 
strategies
 
∑	 Efficient direct and iterative solvers
 
∑	 Powerful initial guess strategies
 
∑	 Small-signal calculation techniques that converge at all 
frequencies
 
∑	 Stable and accurate time integration
	
This section provides the basic equations of elasticity and 
the solution approaches to determine the stress state. Apart from 
process-induced stress, layout-dependent stress effects contribute 
to performance variations in ICs. In earlier technologies, transistor 
sizes were large enough such that their electrical behavior 
was independent of the final layout. However, in highly scaled 
technologies with smaller geometries, the electrical performance 
of a transistor has become increasingly dependent on its location 
in the layout. Unwanted mechanical stresses in the layout, as well 
as unwanted variations on-chip stresses, affect transistor electrical 
properties due to piezoresistivity and electronic band deformation. 
Thus stress effects significantly affect design methodologies in 
modern ICs.
	
In addition, advanced packaging techniques have further 
resulted in proliferation of unwanted sources of mechanical 
stress, and the variations caused by mechanical stress effects have 
become comparable to those from lithography variations. Thus, it 
ATLAS

50
Technology CAD Tools
is important to consider the mechanical stress effects early in the 
design. Since we are mainly concerned with stress and strain, it is 
essential to understand the basics of engineering mechanics like 
stress, strain, and mechanical properties. Within the elastic limit, 
the property of a solid material to deform under the application of 
an external force and to regain its original shape after the force is 
removed is referred to as its elasticity. It is the law of Hooke, who 
described the elastic relation between the mechanical constraint 
and deformation which a material will undergo. The external force 
applied on a specified area is known as stress, while the amount of 
deformation is called the strain. In this section, the theory of stress, 
strain, and their interdependence is briefly discussed. Following the 
ATLAS manual, we describe sources of strain/stress and material 
parameters used for stress calculations in isotropic and anisotropic 
(crystalline) materials. Finally, we will discuss the simulation 
procedure and numerical methods used in VictoryStress.
Input Command File
User Deﬁned Models
Material Physical
Property Database
Device Structure File
(igonity, deping electrodes)
Victory Device
Victory Device Inputs/Outputs
Electrical
Characteristics
Device Structure Files
(potertal, electric ﬁeld, center
concentrations, temperature
Figure 2.10  VictoryDevice information flow.
2.6  Stress Modeling
The stress (σ) at a point may be determined by considering a small 
element of the body enclosed by area (ΔA), on which forces act (ΔP). 
Its unit is Pascal (Pa). By making the element infinitesimally small, 
the stress (σ) vector is defined as the limit
	
σ = lim
D
D
D
A
F
A
dF
dA
Æ
=
0
	
From Fig. 2.11 one can observe that the force acting on a plane can 
be decomposed into a force within the plane, the shear components, 
and one force perpendicular to the plane, the normal component.

51
sxx
sxy
sxz
sxz
szy
szz
syy
syz
syx
Z
X
Figure 2.11  Stress components acting on infinitesimal cube.
	
The shear stress can be further decomposed into two orthogonal 
force components, giving rise to three total stress components acting 
on each plane. Figure 2.11 shows normal and shears stresses in the 
X, Y, and Z directions, acting on different planes of the cube. The first 
subscript identifies the face on which the stress is acting, and the 
second subscript identifies the direction. The σii components are the 
normal stresses, while the σij components are the shear stresses.
2.6.1  Stress–Strain Relationship
Generally, the stress tensor σ is symmetric 3 × 3 matrices. Therefore, it 
only has six independent components. With the index transformation 
rule, it can be written in a six-component vector notation σ11 Æ σ1, 
σ22 Æ σ2, σ33 Æ σ3, σ23 Æ (σ4 )/2, σ13 Æ (σ5)/2, σ12 Æ (σ6)/2 that 
simplifies tensor expressions. For example, to compute the strain 
tensor (which is needed for the deformation potential model), the 
generalized Hooke’s law for anisotropic materials is applied:
	
ij
ij
j
S
e =
=Â
1
6
σj
where Sij is the elasticity modulus. In crystals with cubic symmetry, 
such as silicon, the number of independent coefficients of the 
elasticity tensor (as other material property tensors) reduces to three 
Stress Modeling

52
Technology CAD Tools
by rotating the coordinate system parallel to the high-symmetric 
axes of the crystal. This gives the following elasticity tensor S :
	
_
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
=
11
12
12
12
11
12
12
12
11
44
44
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
44
S
È
Î
Í
Í
Í
Í
Í
Í
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
˙
˙
˙
˙
˙
˙
where the coefficients S11, S12, and S44 correspond to the parallel, 
perpendicular, and shear component, respectively.
	
The stiffness tensor a function of Young’s modulus E and Poisson’s 
ratio ν of the material. The nonzero components are given as
	
C1111 = C2222 = C3333 = E(1 − ν)/(1 + ν)(1 − 2ν)
	
C1122 = C2233 = C1133 = Eν/(1 + ν)(1 − 2ν)
	
C2211 = C3322 = C3311 = Eν/(1 + ν)(1 − 2ν)
	
C1212 = C3131 = C2323 = E/2(1 + ν)
	
Mechanical stress causes change in the band edges in silicon. 
These band edge shifts are given by deformation potential theory. 
The shifts for the conduction band edges are given by
	
DE
D
U
i
xx
yy
zz
ii
c
DEFPOT
DEFPOT
( )
.
(
)
.
*
=
+
+
+
e
e
e
e
where DE i
c
( ) is the shift in the band edge of the i-th ellipsoidal 
conduction band minima. The parameters U.DEFPOT and D.DEFPOT 
are the user-definable dialation and shear deformation potentials, 
respectively, for the conduction band.
	
The exx, eyy, and ezz parameters are the diagonal components of 
the strain tensor. The shifts in the valence band edges are calculated 
by
	
DE
A
hl
xx
yy
zz
v
DEFPOT
(
)
.
(
)
=
+
+
±
e
e
e
x
where DE hl
v
(
)  are the band edge shifts in the light and heavy hole 
valence band maxima. The x parameter is given by
	
x
e
e
e
e
e
e
=
-
+
-
+
-
ÈÎ
˘˚
1
2
2
2
2
2
B
xx
yy
yy
zz
zz
xx
.
(
)
(
)
(
)
DEFPOT
	
	
+ C
xy
yz
zx
.DEFPOT2
2
2
2
e
e
e
+
+
(
)

53
where exy, eyz, and ezz are the off-diagonal components of the strain 
tensor.
	
The strain components are calculated from the stress components 
stored in the input structure file if included (typically imported from 
ATHENA). The conversion between stress and strain is given by
	
e
s
s
xx
xx
yy
s
s
=
+
11
12
	
e
s
s
yy
xx
yy
s
s
=
+
12
11
	
e
s
zz
yys
= 2
44
	
Here, sxx, syy, and szz are the diagonal components of the stress 
tensor and s11, s12, and s44 are the material compliance coefficients.
	
The compliance coefficients are given by
	
s
c
c
c
c c
c
11
11
12
11
2
11 12
12
2
2
=
+
+
-
	
s
c
c
c c
c
12
12
11
2
11 12
12
2
2
=
-
+
-
	
s
c
44
44
1
=
where c11, c12, and c44 are the elastic stiffness coefficients. The 
stiffness coefficients for silicon and germanium are given by
	
c11 = 163.8 – T × 0.0128
	
c12 = 59.2 – T × 0.0048	
Si
	
c44 = 81.7 – T × 0.0059
	
c11 = 126.0
	
c12 = 44.0	
Ge
	
c44 = 67.7
where T is the temperature. The stiffness coefficients for SiGe at 
composition are given by linear interpolation.
	
If the stress tensor is not loaded from a structure file, one can 
specify the values of the strain tensor. If the stress tensor is not 
loaded from a structure file and the strain tensor is not specified, 
then the strain tensor is calculated as
	
e
e
xx
yy
v
v
a
a
a
=
=
+
-
-
(
)
(
)
1
1
SiGe
Si
SiGe
Stress Modeling

54
Technology CAD Tools
where n is Poisson’s ratio, aSiGe is the lattice constant of SiGe, and aSi 
is the lattice constant of Ge. The lattice constants and Poisson’s ratio 
for Si and Ge are given by:
	
aSi = 5.43102 + 1.41 × 10–5(T – 3000)
	
aGe = 5.6579 + 3.34 × 10–5(T – 3000)
	
nSi = 0.28
	
nGe = 0.273
	
The lattice constant and Poisson’s ratio for Si1–xGex is calculated 
by linear interpolation. The net changes in the band edges, under 
Boltzmann’s statistics, are given by
	
D
D
E
kT
E
kT
i
c
c
=
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
È
Î
Í
Í
Í
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
˙
˙
˙
=Â
ln
exp
( )
3
1
3
	
D
D
D
E
k
r
r
E
kT
r
E
kT
T
h
v
v
v
=
+
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
+
+
-
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
È
Î
ln
exp
exp
( )
( )
1
1
1
1
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
	
Here, the parameter r is given by
	
r = (m1/mh)3/2
where ml and mh are the effective masses of light and heavy holes, 
respectively. To enable the model for the stress-dependent bandgap 
in silicon, one needs to specify the STRESS parameter in the MODELS 
statement.
2.6.2  Mobility
Although the mechanisms behind the enhancement in stress-/
strain-induced mobility are fairly well understood qualitatively, 
quantitative evaluation is much more difficult as the type of 
mechanical stress induced is indeed very varied [25]. It may be: 
uniaxial stress or biaxial, with local inhomogeneities, with effects 
which may be very different depending on crystal orientations and 
also the type of carriers (electrons or holes). The switching speed 
of an ideal transistor can be increased primarily by two ways, 
physical gate length scaling and carrier mobility enhancement. In 

55
strained-silicon technology, the switching speed is enhanced solely 
by enhancing the carrier mobility. The carrier mobility is given by
	
m
t
= q m* 	
where 1/τ is the scattering rate and m* is theconductivity effective 
mass. The carrier mobility is enhanced by strain by reducing the 
effective mass and/or the scattering rate. Electron mobility is 
enhanced by both the phenomena, while for holes only mass change 
due to band warping is known to play a significant role at the current 
stress levels in production. The mobility is directly related to the 
carrier velocity υ and applied external electric field E by
	
υ = m.E	
	
The impact of, for example, acoustic and optical phonons, 
impurities, and surface roughness on the carrier mobility at a low 
electric field is generally simulated using several models. Each model 
calculates a proper mobility, depending on the effect. The different 
mobility factors are finally combined to one low-field mobility mlow 
by Mathiessen’s rule:
	
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
m
m
m
m
m
low
=
+
+
+
+
+
b
b
s
s


where mbi are the bulk mobility contributions and msi are the surface 
mobility contributions.
	
m
m
V
const
 K
=
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
-
L
T
300
where x is a fitting exponent which is typically 2.5 and 2.2 for 
electrons and holes, respectively. One contribution to the total 
carrier mobility, calculated by the simulation software, is the so-
called constant mobility mconst, which already includes the mobility 
reduction due to optical phonons and a temperature dependence.
	
However, at high electric fields (>106 V/cm) a saturation of the 
carrier velocity is observed in silicon. The saturation of the carrier 
drift velocity can be explained by the increasing probability of 
scattering events between carriers and phonons or impurities. To 
model this effect, the Caughey–Thomas model is used. This model 
assumes a velocity convergence to a fixed saturation velocity Vsat at 
infinitely high electric fields, which cannot be exceeded:
Stress Modeling

56
Technology CAD Tools
	
m
m
m
b
b
high
low
low
sat
=
+ Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
1
1
F
v
/
	
The parameter b in the Caughey–Thomas model is a fit parameter, 
which is 1.1 for electrons and 1.2 for holes. For electrons in silicon, 
Vsat is 1.0 × 107 cm/s and for holes 0.85 × 107 cm/s.
2.6.3  SmartSpice
SmartSpice is a circuit design tool which is used for the general design 
purposes for circuit simulation of nonlinear DC, nonlinear transient, 
and linear AC analyses. SmartSpice simulates a circuit by calculating 
the behavior of all circuit components simultaneously. Through its 
many reliable models, SmartSpice bases its simulation on physical 
properties, as well as electrical parameters, to simulate the behavior 
of complex circuits. It simulates circuits and subcircuits consisting 
of the five most common semiconductor devices—diodes, junction 
gate field-effect transistors  (JFETs), bipolar junction transistors 
(BJTs), MOSFETs, and MESFETs—and in addition it simulates 
resistors, capacitors, inductors, dependent and independent voltage 
and current sources, switches, and transition lines.
2.7  Synopsys TCAD Platforms
Synopsys is the worldwide leading provider of physics-based 
TCAD simulation software and services that enable semiconductor 
companies to save time and resources during IC product 
development. Sentaurus is the new-generation TCAD simulation 
platform from Synopsys. Sentaurus includes a comprehensive 
suite of core TCAD products for multidimensional process, device, 
and system simulations, embedded into a powerful user interface. 
The application space of Sentaurus spans the complete range 
of semiconductor technologies, from deep-submicron logic, 
memory, and mixed signals to smart power, sensors, compound 
semiconductors, optoelectronics, and RF. SProcess is a process 
simulator capable of handling 3D structures. SProcess is based on the 
FLOOPS program package, which was developed at the University of 

57
Florida. The methodology for the simulation of process technologies 
and the command commands are very similar to those of Tsuprem4. 
The program can be controlled manually or through a command file. 
The command file is an ASCII text file, in which all necessary for the 
simulation commands are included.
	
Tsuprem4 is an easy-to-handle process simulator, with the 1D 
and 2D structure-handling capability. The grid is self-adapting, 
which means that it can automatically adapt changed conditions. 
For example, when the dopant distribution changes rapidly, the 
grid becomes finer in order to better resolve the dopant gradient. 
The Sentaurus TCAD suite bridges the needs of development and 
manufacturing engineers by improving semiconductor process 
control in manufacturing. It includes 2D and 3D simulation products 
that can be used to optimize new technologies and explore a broad 
range of process and device alternatives, and provides a mechanism 
to improve parametric yield in manufacturing. TCAD simulation 
results provide early feedback describing the impact of process 
and device design changes at any stage of the product development 
cycle. Sentaurus combines advanced, calibrated physical models, 
robust algorithms, and numeric and efficient meshing and structure-
editing capabilities to generate accurate and predictive simulation 
results for a broad range of applications, including CMOS, bipolar, 
heterojunction, compound, power, memory, optoelectronics, analog/
RF, and laser. Figure 2.12 shows a sample state-of-the-art tool chain 
from Synopsys.
	
Sentaurus Structure Editor is a CAD program for drawing 
simulation structures. It offers both graphical and command line 
interfaces to define geometries and analytical doping profiles. The 
drawing tools are fully featured, including primitive geometries, 
Boolean operations, and 3D extrusion and sweeping options. 
Sentaurus Structure Editor is also capable of defining meshing 
strategies based on interface, doping, and analytical schemes. 
Since the simulated FETs were generated from process simulation 
in SProcess, this tool is used to redefine the meshing file for more 
efficient device simulation.
	
SProcess of Synopsys is used for the process simulation. The 
software is an advanced 1D, 2D, and 3D process simulator which is 
suitable for silicon and other semiconductor materials. It includes 
several models for standard silicon processing steps, like oxidation, 
Synopsys TCAD Platforms

58
Technology CAD Tools
deposition, etching, implantation, diffusion, and silicidation 
processes. It also allows for designation of masks for processing 
steps to create patterned structures. Material parameters are taken 
from a parameter database developed by Synopsys. Furthermore, it 
accounts for mechanical stress, which has become a big topic in the 
CMOS industry in recent years.
Sentaurus Workbench
Sentaurus Library
Sentaurus Process
Sentaurus
Structure
Editor
Sentaurus Device
Calibration
Technology Development
Manufacturing Control
Sentaurus TFM
Figure 2.12  Sentaurus Workbench. Source: Sentaurus manual.
	
SDevice is a physics-based device simulation tool. By combining 
advanced physical models with robust numerical methods, it is 
capable of simulating the electrical characteristics of a wide range of 
semiconductor devices. The physical models implemented by SDevice 
must be chosen with care and an understanding of the models and 
the device being simulated. The semiconductor device is discretized 
by the points defined in the simulation mesh, and physical device 
equations are solved at each mesh node. It is capable of simulating 
isolated devices and devices connected in a circuit. Devices can be 
simulated under DC conditions for the I–V characteristics or in a 

59
mixed mode, allowing for an AC signal to be coupled to the system to 
measure the C–V characteristics of the simulated device. Sentaurus 
features include:
 
∑	 Sentaurus Workbench, a flexible framework environment 
with advanced visualization and programmability
 
∑	 SProcess, a 2D/3D process simulator
 
∑	 SDevice, a 2D/3D device simulator
 
∑	 Sentaurus Library, SIMS profiles, and calibrated model 
parameters for the latest technologies
 
∑	 Sentaurus Structure Editor, a 2D/3D device editor with 
process emulation mode
 
∑	 Sentaurus TFM, a process compact model extractor and 
optimizer
 
∑	 Ligament
 
∑	 Sentaurus Structure Editor
 
∑	 Mesh and Noffset3D
 
∑	 Tecplot SV
 
∑	 Inspect
 
∑	 Calibration Kit
	
Process-aware design for manufacturing tools from Synopsys 
includes:
 
∑	 SProcess
 
∑	 SDevice
 
∑	 PCM Studio
 
∑	 Raphael
 
∑	 Seismos
 
∑	 Fammos
 
∑	 Paramos
2.7.1  Taurus-Device
Taurus-Device is a multidimensional device simulation tool. 
Taurus-Device simulates electrical and thermal characteristics 
of any semiconductor device in one, two, or three dimensions. A 
wide variety of devices, ranging from deep-submicron MOSFETs or 
bipolar devices to large-power device structures, can be modeled.
Synopsys TCAD Platforms

60
Technology CAD Tools
2.7.2  Taurus-Process
Taurus-Process is a multidimensional process simulation tool. 
Taurus-Process simulates all important fabrication steps used to 
manufacture semiconductor devices. It can simulate for a full 3D 
structure or in one or two dimensions. Typical processes simulated 
are deposition, etching, ion implantation, diffusion, and oxidation. 
Taurus-Process has a direct interface to Taurus-Device for electrical 
and thermal device characterization.
2.7.3  Device Simulation
SDevice provides 1D, 2D, and 3D simulations for a wide range of 
semiconductor devices. It features advanced simulation models 
for charge carrier transport in semiconductors, especially those 
needed for deeply nanoscaled CMOS devices with high numerical 
robustness. SDevice offers three different models of charge carrier 
transport in silicon: drift-diffusion, hydrodynamic transport, and 
Monte Carlo transport. Mixed-mode simulations, which can be 
understood as SPICE simulations with numerical device models, 
offer the ability to investigate the electrical behavior of novel CMOS 
devices under circuit conditions. The major device simulations are 
done by conventional drift-diffusion simulations, since they are 
fast and ensure a reliable convergence behavior and many models 
for different physical effects are already available for this kind of 
simulation method.
	
The calculation of the current densities of electrons Jn and holes 
Jp is dependent on the respective simulation method that is used. 
In the drift-diffusion approach, the electron current density Jn is 
computed by solving the relations
	
J
qn
F
qD dn
dx
n
n
n
=
+
m
and the hole current density is calculated by
	
J
qn
F
qD dp
dx
p
p
p
=
-
m
where mn and mp are the electron and hole mobilities, F is the electric 
field, which is calculated from the electrostatic potential, and D is the 
diffusion coefficient of either electrons (Dn) or holes (Dp).

61
2.7.4  Carrier Recombination-Generation
Generation of a charge carrier occurs if energy is applied to a valence 
electron, higher than the bandgap of the semiconductor material (Eg,Si 
= 1.12 eV ). This valence electron is shifted into the conduction band 
and can contribute to the current transport. During the generation 
process, a hole in the valence band is generated, which can contribute 
to the current transport as well. If the electron loses its energy, for 
example, due to electromagnetic waves (photon) or thermal energy 
(phonon) emission, it drops back to the valence band energy level 
and recombines with a hole. The generation/recombination effect 
is the absolutely basic effect which differentiates semiconductor 
materials from insulator and conductor materials.
	
To simulate generation/recombination, the SRH model is used:
	
R
np
n
n
n
p
p
i
n
p
net
SRH =
-
+
+
+
2
1
1
t
t
(
)
(
)
	
n
n
E
kT
i
1 =
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
exp
trap
	
n
n
E
kT
i
1 =
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
exp
trap
where Rnet
SRH  is the generation/recombination rate and tn and tp are 
the carrier life times of electrons and holes, respectively.
	
In general, physical model selection for device simulation is an 
important issue. Depending on the device, one should consider the 
following for proper selection: For channel length below ~25 nm, 
some carriers may experience ballistic transport, which increases 
the driving current by approximately 10%. One option to account for 
this is to use the 3D Monte Carlo model, which accounts for ballistic 
carrier transport but requires considerable CPU time. A more 
practical approach for the analysis and optimization of transistor 
design, which involves evaluating multiple design trade-offs, is 
a drift-diffusion model with adjusted carrier velocity saturation. 
Therefore, the drift-diffusion model is used with velocity saturation:
 
∑	 Philips unified mobility
 
∑	 High-field mobility saturation
Synopsys TCAD Platforms

62
Technology CAD Tools
 
∑	 Inversion and accumulation layer mobility with auto-
orientation
	
Inversion and accumulation layer mobility is used to model 
accurate 2D Coulomb scattering in the high channel doping region. 
A finFET has top and side surfaces where the carriers flow in the on-
state. In a typical device orientation, the crystal orientations of the 
top and side surfaces are different, for example, top surface is (100) 
and the side surface is (110). The inversion layer mobility has surface 
orientation dependency. This is taken into account by SDevice using 
the auto-orientation framework. Inversion and accumulation layer 
parameters for different surface orientations are well calibrated to 
experimental data.
2.7.4.1  Thin-layer mobility
When Si channel thickness becomes thinner than approximately  
10 nm, low-field mobility is modulated due to the quantum-
mechanical confinement effect. Considering the width of the top 
below 5 nm, the thin-layer mobility model is used.
2.7.4.2  High-k degradation mobility
Since the 45 nm technology node, a high-k metal gate has been used 
to suppress the gate tunneling leakage current. However, a high-k 
metal gate degrades the mobility due to
 
∑	 Remote phonon scattering (RPS)
 
∑	 Remote Coulomb scattering (RCS)
 
∑	 Remote dipole scattering (RDS)
	
The top and side surfaces of finFETs have different crystal 
orientations. Therefore, the auto-orientation framework is 
important to consider orientation-dependent quantum correction. 
Quantum correction parameters are calibrated to the solution of the 
Poisson–Schrödinger equations by Sentaurus Band Structure.
2.7.5  Stress Effects
Strain engineering has been actively researched and used to enhance 
transistor performance. The fifth generation of stress-engineering 
techniques with very high stress levels has been demonstrated in 

63
finFETs. Therefore, sophisticated models are required to accurately 
model stress effects. SDevice provides advanced stress models to 
take into account the subband modulation by the stress:
 
∑	 Stress-dependent deformation of band structure
 
∑	 Strained effective mass and density of states (DOS)
 
∑	 Subband stress-dependent electron/hole mobility
 
∑	 Stress-independent carrier saturation velocity
	
When the carrier velocity is saturated (i.e., when the carrier 
has sufficient energy to be redistributed), the impact of the stress-
induced band structure modulation becomes negligible.
2.7.5.1  Band-to-band tunneling leakage current
The finFET structure tightens the gate control, but it increases the 
gate-induced drain leakage (GIDL) in the off-state. So, the Schenk 
band-to-band tunneling model is selected to simulate the leakage 
mechanism. SiGe models are needed for the SiGe source/drain 
regions of the p-finFET: Considering that the Ge content in the SiGe 
source/drain can exceed 50%, one needs to account for the impact 
of Ge on the source/drain properties.
2.8  Atomistic Simulation
At the nanoscale, the line edge roughness (LER) and random 
dopant fluctuations are considered as two major sources of short-
range variability in aggressively scaled technologies. Predicting the 
impact of such effects on device and circuit matching performance 
has been addressed. Gold Standard Simulations (GSS) have 
announced their process simulator ION. Currently, ION simulates 
only multidimensional implantation using published data for the 
projected range and straggle parameters of the relevant impurities 
in silicon, creating realistic doping profiles. The GSS 3D statistical 
atomistic device simulator GARAND is used to carry out predictive 
simulation of statistical variability and reliability. The GSS compact 
model extractor, MYSTIC, a combination of local optimization and 
group extraction strategy, is employed to extract a complete nominal 
set of BSIM4 parameters. The GSS statistical circuit simulation 
engine RandomSPICE. GSS provides a chain of simulation services 
Atomistic Simulation

64
Technology CAD Tools
that starts with the accurate and predictive simulation of statistical 
variability and reliability at the transistor level. The main features 
include 3D simulation of statistical variability, 3D simulation of 
statistical reliability, statistical compact model (SCM) extraction, 
and statistical circuit simulation.
2.8.1  GARAND
GARAND is a statistical 3D density gradient-corrected drift-diffusion 
simulator which can model various sources of statistical variability 
in contemporary MOSFETs. The main sources of statistical 
fluctuations are (a) random dopant fluctuations, (b) LER, and (c) 
metal gate work function variability (WFV). The 3D atomistic device 
simulator GARAND has been developed over the years by the Device 
Modelling Group at the University of Glasgow. It has been extensively 
calibrated against experimental data and other commercial CAD 
tools. The simulator is based on the drift-diffusion approach to 
solve self-consistently the Poisson and current continuity equations 
with density gradient quantum corrections. GARAND has been 
employed extensively to explore the impact of intrinsic parameter 
fluctuations on a wide range of devices, spanning from traditional 
bulk-Si MOSFETs to alternative device architectures, such as SOI and 
finFETs. The main features of GARAND include:
 
∑	 Drift-diffusion, Monte Carlo, and nonequilibrium Green’s 
function (NEGF) modules
 
∑	 The best-available physical models allowing atomic-scale 
precision, including simultaneous density gradient quantum 
corrections for electrons and holes
 
∑	 Mobility models that take into account the discreteness of 
dopants
 
∑	 All sources of statistical variability known to be important:
	
o	 Random discrete dopants
	
o	 LER
	
o	 Gate stack granularity
	
o	 Trapped discrete charges
	
o	 Others—custom defined
	
The variability sources are introduced automatically in the 
initially idealized device structure through the command line of 

65
the GARAND input language. The variability sources available in 
GARAND include:
 
∑	 Random discrete dopants in the channel and in the source and 
drain regions
 
∑	 LER that can be applied to any geometric object, including the 
gate, the STI isolation, the fin in the case of a finFET, etc.
 
∑	 Material granularity, including polysilicon and metal gates
 
∑	 Interface-trapped charges
 
∑	 Atomic-scale interface roughness
	
GARAND has 3D drift-diffusion, Monte Carlo, and quantum 
transport 
simulation 
engines. 
All 
simulation 
engines 
can 
simulate identical simulation domains, including, individually or 
in combination, all statistical variability sources supported by 
GARAND. The 3D drift-diffusion simulation engine provides accurate 
results for the statistical variability in the subthreshold region, 
including threshold voltage and leakage variability. The 3D Monte 
Carlo simulation engine includes accurate density gradient quantum 
corrections and ab initio scattering from ionized impurities and 
interface roughness, essential to simulate accurately the on-current 
variability. The 3D NEGF quantum transport simulator is essential 
in sub-10 nm transistors with a current component arising from 
direct source-to-drain tunneling. It includes also ab initio scattering 
from ionized impurities and interface roughness, as well as phonon 
scattering. The visualization modules in GARAND are based on 
Paraview and include graphing, statistical, and 3D modules.
2.8.2  MYSTIC
Compact models are the bridge between technology and design, and 
to meet the design challenges of advanced CMOS technologies, they 
need to accurately capture the statistical behavior of devices. Using 
automated push button technology the efficient optimization engine 
and flexible data handling of MYSTIC simplifies the creation of SCM 
libraries. MYSTIC represents the state-of-the-art in SCM extraction.
	
The main features of MYSTIC include:
 
∑	 Advanced optimization engine
 
∑	 Multistage and multitarget compact model extraction
Atomistic Simulation

66
Technology CAD Tools
 
∑	 Powerful data handling and filtering
 
∑	 Flexible SCM extraction based on state-machine workflow
 
∑	 Extraction of nominal models and SCMs
 
∑	 Automated choice of optimal statistical parameter sets
 
∑	 Support for BSIM, BSIM-CMG, and PSP
 
∑	 Seamless integration with GARAND and RandomSPICE
2.8.3  RandomSPICE
The introduction of a reliability-aware design is today accepted as 
mandatory in order to maintain manufacturing yields. Three main 
sources of intrinsic parameter fluctuations are considered, namely 
random dopant fluctuation, gate LER, and metal gate granularity 
(MGG). Statistics-based predictive analysis of these sources of 
variability and their adverse impact on the transistor parameters is 
of great importance from both device and circuit design perspectives. 
To analyze the impact of individual sources of variability, and their 
combined effect on device characteristics, all sources should be 
properly introduced into the device simulator.
	
RandomSPICE is a statistical circuit simulator. The main features 
of RandomSPICE include:
 
∑	 Front end for advanced statistical simulation
 
∑	 Support for standard SPICE formats, including ngspice, Eldo, 
and Spectre
 
∑	 Joint development programs with Mentor and Cadence
2.9  Summary
TCAD has been indicated by the International Technology Roadmap 
for Semiconductors (ITRS) as one of the enabling methodologies 
that can support advance of technology progress at the remarkable 
pace of Moore’s law by reducing development cycle times and 
costs in the semiconductor industry. TCAD approaches yielding 
accurate physical insight and useful predictive results for real-world 
semiconductor applications are described using multidimensional 
(2D and 3D) simulations. In this chapter, a brief background on 
past and present simulation development activities was given. A 

67
brief overview on currently available commercial TCAD tools, viz., 
Silvaco and Synopsys, has been presented. Nevertheless, the reader 
should be aware that a number of other comprehensive simulation 
programs are in existence today. Indeed, several universities have 
created programs and released them for public use.
References
	 1.	 PCM Studio User Guide, Version B-2008.06, June 2008.
	 2.	 Synopsys Inc., Paramos User Guide, Version C-2009.03, March 2009.
	 3.	 Synopsys Inc., Sentaurus Workbench User Guide, September 2011.
	 4.	 Synopsys Inc., Sentaurus Structure Editor User Guide, September 2014.
	 5.	 Synopsys Inc., Sentaurus Mesh User Guide, September 2014.
	 6.	 Synopsys Inc., Sentaurus Device User Guide, September 2011.
	 7.	 Synopsys Inc., Sentaurus Process User Guide, September 2011.
	 8.	 Synopsys Inc., Sentaurus Visual User Guide, September 2014.
	 9.	 Synopsys Inc., Inspect User Guide, December 2010.
	10.	 Synopsys Inc., TecPlot SV User Guide, September 2011.
	11.	 Synopsys Inc., TSuprem4 User Manuals, 2006.
	12.	 Synopsys Inc., Taurus Process User Manuals, 2006.
	13.	 Silvaco Inc., UTMOST User’s Manual, 2013.
	14.	 Silvaco Inc., VWF Interactive Tools, User’s Manual, 2009.
	15.	 Silvaco Inc., DeckBuild User’s Manual, 2013.
	16.	 Silvaco Inc., DevEdit User’s Manual, 2013.
	17.	 Silvaco Inc., ATLAS User’s Manual, 2013.
	18.	 Silvaco Inc., ATHENA User’s Manual, 2013.
	19.	 Silvaco Inc., TonyPlot User’s Manual, 2014.
	20.	 Silvaco Inc., VictoryProcess User’s Manual, 2014.
	21.	 Silvaco Inc., VictoryDevice User’s Manual, 2014.
	22.	 Silvaco Inc., VictoryStress User’s Manual, 2014.
	23.	 Silvaco Inc., VictoryCell User’s Manual, 2014.
	24.	 Smith, C. S. (1954). Piezoresistance effect in germanium and silicon, 
Phys. Rev., 94, 42–49.
	25.	 Sverdlov, V. (2011). Strain-Induced Effects in Advanced MOSFETs 
(Springer-Verlag, Wien).
References

68
Technology CAD Tools
	26.	 Sun, Y., Thompson, S. E., and Nishida, T. (2010). Strain Effect 
in Semiconductors: Theory and Device Applications (Springer 
Science+Business Media, New York).
	27.	 Bhoj, A. N. (2013). Device-Circuit Co-Design Approaches for Multi-Gate 
FET Technologies, PhD thesis, Princeton University.

Until the late twentieth century, manufacturers sought to reduce 
unintentional stresses because of their negative effects for devices, 
for example, by the creation of dislocations promoting leakage 
current. In recent years, new techniques to improve device 
performance have emerged based on the stresses induced by the 
manufacturing process (process-induced stress). In deeply scaled 
technologies, process and environment variations have become 
a major concern as stress is a significant source of variability in 
advanced VLSI technologies that impacts circuit performance. 
Mechanical stress affects transistor electrical parameter mobility 
and threshold voltage due to piezoresistivity and stress-induced 
band deformation, respectively. Unintentional sources of mechanical 
stress and intentional stress variability cause device performance 
to depend upon the underlying layout topology and its location 
in the layout. Consequently, circuit performance becomes highly 
placement dependent. Thus, it is imperative to capture the effects 
of layout-dependent stress during circuit analysis. Evaluating circuit 
performance involves modeling the stress distributions in the layout 
accurately.
Chapter 3
Technology Boosters
Introducing Technology Computer-Aided Design (TCAD): Fundamentals, Simulations, and Applications
C. K. Maiti
Copyright © 2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-51-2 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36450-6 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

70
Technology Boosters
3.1  Stress Engineering
3.1.1  Unintentional Mechanical Stress
The unintentional sources of stress can mainly be attributed to the 
thermal mismatch of the various materials used during integrated 
circuit (IC) manufacturing. The coefficient of thermal expansion 
(CTE) of a material determines how fast a material can contract or 
shrink with decreasing or increasing temperature. Other sources 
of unintentional stresses that may affect transistor mobilities are 
caused by wafer/die warpage during wafer processing and thinning, 
flip-chip package bumps, and CTE mismatch between package 
substrate and silicon die.
	
During fabrication of metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) devices, 
unintentional mechanical stresses are generated throughout the 
manufacturing steps. Moreover, ICs undergo several thermal cycles 
at elevated temperatures during multiple process steps. During 
manufacturing, mechanical stresses develop due the thermal 
mismatch between various layers and constituent materials, 
thereby causing electrical variations in transistors. Thus, it becomes 
imperative to consider the contributions of various unintentional 
stressors on active devices. Mechanical stresses have different 
origins:
 
∑	 Oxidation: During oxidation, there is an expansion of the 
volume of silicon oxide. It induces high local stresses in silicon.
 
∑	 Ion implantation: Particularly when heavy ions are introduced, 
local expansions of the crystal lattice occur.
 
∑	 Annealing: Thermal cycling imposed in furnaces is responsible 
for deformations caused by the differential thermal expansion 
coefficients between different materials. These deformations 
may exceed the elastic limit of materials and thus induce 
plastic deformations.
 
∑	 Chemical-mechanical polishing (CMP): CMP can induce local 
stress, which causes plastic deformation.
 
∑	 Chip packaging technologies are also responsible for inducing 
unintentional stress in silicon.
	
Other major sources of unintentional stress that lie in proximity 
of the transistors in ICs are:

71
 
∑	 Shallow trench isolation, or STI: This is used to isolate 
transistors in the layout and is the most commonly found 
source of unintentional stress in the layout. STI is made up of 
SiO2 whose CTE differs with that of silicon. STI in the layout 
surrounds the active transistor regions and can occur in a 
myriad of shapes, depending upon the neighboring transistors 
in the layout.
 
∑	 Through-silicon vias (TSVs) in 3D ICs: TSVs are used to make 
vertical interconnections between stacked ICs. A TSV is 
embedded in silicon at an elevated temperature of 250°C and 
is made up of copper, whose CTE is higher than that of silicon. 
In the postmanufacturing phase, a thermal residual stress 
develops in the silicon that is in direct contact with the TSV 
structure, thus modulating the mobilities of the transistors in 
near proximity.
3.2  Intentional Mechanical Stress
Technology scaling has exploited the piezoresistive behavior in 
complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) transistors 
by deliberately introducing stress in the channels using various 
techniques. While most of the stress-engineering techniques have 
been introduced for bulk planar transistors, some of them are 
scalable to the fin field-effect transistors (finFETs). The sources of 
intentional stress are summarized as follows:
 
∑	 Uniaxial source/drain stressors: The source/drain regions of 
CMOS transistors are recessed and lattice-mismatched alloys 
are epitaxially grown in the cavities formed. A SiGe alloy 
with a larger lattice constant than silicon creates beneficial 
compressive stress along the channel direction for p-type 
metal-oxide-semiconductor (PMOS) transistors. For n-type 
metal-oxide-semiconductor (NMOS) transistors, a SiC alloy 
with a smaller lattice constant than silicon is epitaxially 
grown in source/drain regions to create a beneficial tensile 
stress along the channel direction. The source/drain stressors 
have also been applied for finFETs. This technique is the 
largest contributor for mobility improvements. The source/
drain stressors in bulk planar transistors and finFETs show 
Intentional Mechanical Stress

72
Technology Boosters
dependence on the gate pitch used in the layout, which may 
vary from technology generations.
 
∑	 Dual stress liner, or DSL: Dielectric nitride films with intrinsic 
compressive or tensile stress are grown over the transistor 
region. While a tensile stress liner is preferred for NMOS 
transistors, a compressive stress liner is preferred for PMOS 
transistors. They rely on creating beneficial stress from the 
vertical direction. However, from the 45 nm technology node 
onward, their effectiveness was observed to decline. The 
stress liners have been shown to be not effective for finFETs.
 
∑	 Stress memorization technique, or SMT: This technique is used 
for NMOS transistors alone. Here a sacrificial compressive 
stressed liner is grown on NMOS transistors with polysilicon 
gate and source/drain regions in the amorphous state. The 
gate and source/drain regions are crystallized following a 
rapid thermal annealing step, and the capping stress liner is 
removed. Even after the stressed capping layer is removed, 
stress is memorized in the gate and source/drain regions. 
The gate creates a compressive stress from vertical direction, 
while tensile stress exists in the source/drain regions. The 
SMT has also been demonstrated for finFETs.
 
∑	 Source/drain contact stress: Tensile stress can similarly 
incorporated in the metal contacts over source/drain regions 
of an NMOS transistor. The metal contacts are deposited by 
creating trenches in source/drain regions. However, the 
effectiveness of this technique is diminishing in sub-45 nm 
technologies, which use raised source/drain regions to reduce 
source/drain resistance.
 
∑	 Replacement metal gate and gate-last process: This method 
has been shown to be effective for bulk planar transistors 
and finFETs. In advanced technologies, metal gates are 
employed instead of polysilicon gates to improve threshold 
voltage control. First a sacrificial polysilicon gate is deposited, 
and subsequent fabrication steps for source/drain epitaxy 
and salicidation are completed. Then the polysilicon gate is 
stripped off, thereby increasing the stress transferred into 
the channels. Subsequently, the metal gate is deposited in the 
gate terminal region. Using certain process conditions the 
metal gate can be incorporated with tensile or compressive 

73
Stress-Engineered Transistors
strain, which acts vertically on the channels. A metal gate 
with compressive stress is preferred for NMOS transistors, 
while a metal gate with tensile stress is preferred for PMOS 
transistors.
3.3  Stress-Engineered Transistors
Strain technology has been successfully integrated into CMOS 
fabrication to improve transistor performance, but the stress is 
nonuniformly distributed in the channel, leading to systematic 
performance variations. A high-mobility channel, providing a high 
drive current, and heterostructure confinement, providing good 
short channel control, make an interesting combination for future 
technology nodes.
3.3.1  CESL
In this section, we focus on the process of inducing mechanical stress 
in MOSFETs using the contact etch stop layer (CESL), which does not 
require any additional step in the standard manufacturing process 
(Fig. 3.1). We shall examine how a nitride layer deforms the silicon 
in the conduction channel. The purpose of the CESL is to change the 
crystal lattice of silicon. To understand the transmission mechanism 
of the CESL in the channel, three areas may be distinguished: the 
nitride which is located at the top of the gate will be the area’s top 
CESL, the part on the spacers on the sidewalls of the gate is the 
lateral CESL, and the layer that covers the source and drain will be 
the CESL bottom. These different areas are shown in Fig. 3.2. If the 
nitride film is in tension, the bottom layer just shoots the source and 
drain, which will cause a compression of the silicon at the base of 
this layer. The top layer will transmit stress throughout the gate, 
which will generate a compressive stress in the plane of the center 
of the channel. The lateral CESL is just in the plane (X and Y) of the 
channel and its major influence will be perpendicular to the channel. 
The deformations in the plane of channel are therefore due to the 
portion of the layer which takes on the CESL source and drain and 
that the part of the top which, via the gate, induces a compressive 
stress in the central part of the channel (Fig. 3.3).

74
Technology Boosters
PMD
Contact
CESL
S/D
STI
Figure 3.1  Schematic presentation of the contact etch stop layer (CESL).
CESL
lateral
CESL
top
CESL
bottom
Figure 3.2  Diagram representing the three different regions of the contact 
etch stop layer (CESL).
Figure 3.3  Representation of the stress effects of the CESL bottom (left) and 
CESL top and bottom combined (right) of the nitride film on the transistor 
channel.

75
Stress-Engineered Transistors
	
The second effect of the etch stop layer (ESL) stress is in the 
direction perpendicular to the plane of the channel. Typical stress 
fields generated by a tensile CESL are depicted in Fig. 3.4 for long 
transistors. The CESL induces mainly a compressive stress whatever 
the stress components are. Figure 3.4 shows the stress in the silicon 
under the gate electrode in the Z direction when the CESL is in 
tension. In this case the channel of the transistor is in compression. 
Thus, considering the CESL film in three parts (Fig. 3.2), the strain 
transmission takes place directly and through the side of portion 
CESL. The state of stress along the Z direction is quite uniform and 
compressive, whereas along the X and Y directions, there are two 
distinct areas, namely (1) a compressive one near the channel center 
and (2) a tensile one near the channel edges. A compressive stress is 
mostly localized near the spacers. Due to the elasticity of the silicon, 
the stress in the Z direction results in a channel deformation in three 
directions. The compressive area takes up about two-thirds of the 
channel and the tensile area takes up about one-third. Contrary to 
long transistors, the CESL induces a tensile stress along the X and Y 
directions, whereas stress in the Z direction remains compressive.
Stress z direction
[MPa]
–50
–40
–30
–20
–10
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
Figure 3.4  Stress in the channel (represents ¼ of the gate region, W = 1 μm, L 
= 1 μm) in the Z direction, perpendicular to the plane of the channel [5].

76
Technology Boosters
	
The nonuniformity of stress field in the X and Y directions for long 
transistors as the uniformity for short transistors can be explained 
by considering a corner effect. The corner effect is due to the 
interaction of the lateral CESL and the bottom CESL. It is responsible 
for the stress field disruptions observed near the bottom edge of 
spacers. Figure 3.5 presents the stress evolution from a long device 
to a short one. It shows that by decreasing the gate length, the size of 
the compressive area (in the X and Y directions) is reduced, whereas 
the size of the tensile area remains the same. For a short device, 
this corner effect has a major impact, which explains the state of 
stress in the X and Y directions. For long devices, the corner effect is 
responsible for nonuniformity of the stress field.
Long channel
Short channel
Stress in
Z-direction
Stress in
Y-direction
Stress in
X-direction
Figure 3.5  Representative stress map in three different directions when the 
gate length is decreased [5].
	
The different impacts of these three zones can be exploited to 
reach the best stress configuration that will enable one to have the 
best performance for both NMOS and PMOS devices. In general, a 
compressive CESL is needed to optimize PMOS, and a tensile CESL 
is needed to optimize NMOS. As such, the performances of NMOS 
and PMOS transistors cannot be enhanced using the same CESL. 
Also, the stress map in the channel is affected by the layout. Thus for 
managing the stress configuration in the channel by an engineered 
CESL, one needs to control and optimize by adjusting either the 

77
thickness or/and the intrinsic stress of the different CESL zones. 
Thus, the suitable combination of these three zones leads not only to 
the maximum electrical performance for NMOS and PMOS but also 
to a wide range of layouts.
3.3.2  STI Stress
In the following section, we discuss the consequences of stress due 
to STI on various types of MOS transistors. We consider mainly 
the effects of dimensions, different types of substrate orientation, 
and new materials for STI. The simplest way to check the impact 
of the stress of STI is to consider transistors all having the same 
electrical characteristics and to vary the intensity of the strain in the 
conduction channel by changing the distance between the gate and 
the trench, while keeping a constant distance between the contacts 
and the gates (the electric field lines then remain unchanged). Figure 
3.6 shows the schematic representation of the stress effect. When 
the length of the source and drain regions reduces, compressive 
stress is generated due to STI, which propagates toward the channel 
and modifies the carrier conduction parameters. The change in 
length of the source and drain zones will give rise to deviations of 
threshold voltage due to a change in the channel current. For NMOS 
transistors, when the distance between the gate and the trench 
isolation decreases, an increase in compressive stress occurs in the 
X direction, leading to a current degradation. It has been shown 
that the variation of the mobility as a function of stress applied 
in any direction and, in this case, with a compressive stress in the 
direction of the current (<110> here), only hole mobility enhances. 
For compressive stress in the X direction (that of the gate length), it 
is beneficial for the mobility of holes in the <110> direction.
3.4  Hybrid Orientation Technology
Hybrid orientation technology (HOT) is a method which involves 
using two different crystallographic planes for two types of devices. 
Plane (110) is used for the PMOS transistors and (100) plane for 
the NMOS. The starting substrate is an silicon-on-insulator (SOI) 
Hybrid Orientation Technology

78
Technology Boosters
substrate which has (a) a substrate part with a given orientation 
(e.g., 110) and (b) a layer of SOI with a different orientation (e.g., 
100). Figure 3.7 shows the main processing sequence for fabrication. 
Using this method one can obtain the best orientation for each of the 
devices. However, the problem is that one obtains a p-type device 
(or n-type) on SOI, while the other n-type (or p-type) is on a solid 
substrate. This can be problematic for designers who need to use 
both types of architectures in MOS for the same circuit.
Distance
Gate-Contact Constant
Compression
STI
Figure 3.6  Schematic representation of the effect of stress when STI reduces 
the distance between the gate and the trench [6].
3.5  High-k/Metal Gate
As scaling has reached fundamental material limits, especially for 
gate oxides, further scaling can be realized only by introducing 
new materials with a high dielectric (high k) constant. The main 
motivation for the migration to high-k materials is to continue 
scaling the equivalent oxide thickness of devices, while maintaining 
a low leakage current. It is clear that high-k materials are promising 
for microelectronic devices. There are a number of materials with 
a k value much higher than that of SiO2. Aluminum oxide (Al2O3) is 
one high-k candidate having overall superior behavior for MOSFET 
applications, except its comparatively low k value. High-k materials 
have a wide array of applications other than as gate oxides. Some of 
their important applications are listed below:

79
Nitride
Si SOI (100)/or (110)
BOX
(1) Nitride deposited as
a hard mask
Burning the SOI and
BOX monitoring
formation of spacers
(2)
(3)
Same plane as silicon
epitaxy that is used for
the solid substrate,
followed by a CMP
(4)
Removing the nitride
surface cleaning
BOX
Isolation trench
formation
(5)
(6)
Continuity for a standard
CMOS process
Figure 3.7  Description of hybrid orientation technology (HOT) [6].
	
∑	 Gate dielectrics
	
∑	 High-aspect-ratio diffusion barriers for Cu interconnects
	
∑	 Adhesion layers
	
∑	 Highly 
conformal 
coatings 
for 
microfluidic 
and 
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) applications
	
∑	 Coating of nanoporous structures
	
∑	 Other nanotechnology and nanoelectronic applications
	
∑	 Fuel cells, for example, single-metal coatings for catalyst 
layers
	
∑	 Bio-MEMS
	
∑	 Electroluminescence
	
∑	 Protective coatings
	
∑	 Storage capacitor dielectrics
High-k/Metal Gate

80
Technology Boosters
	
∑	 Pinhole-free passivation layers for organic light-emitting 
diodes (OLEDs)
	
There is a set of material and electrical requirements for a 
viable alternate high-k gate dielectric material. Major requirements 
include:
 
∑	 Larger energy bandgap with a higher barrier height to the Si 
substrate and metal gate to reduce the leakage current
 
∑	 Large dielectric constant value
 
∑	 Good thermodynamic stability on Si to prevent the formation 
of a low-k SiO2 interface
 
∑	 Good kinetic stability
 
∑	 High amorphous-to-crystalline transition temperature to 
maintain a stable morphology after heat treatment
 
∑	 Low oxygen diffusion coefficients to control the formation of a 
thick, low-k interface layer
 
∑	 Low defect densities in high-k bulk films and at the high-k/Si 
interface with negligible C–V hysteresis (<30 mV)
 
∑	 Low fixed charge density (~1010 cm–2 eV–1)
 
∑	 Low high-k/Si interface state density (~1010 cm–2 eV–1)
 
∑	 High-enough channel carrier mobility (~90% of SiO2/Si 
system)
 
∑	 Good reliability and a long lifetime
	
A conventional CMOS process flow consists of a mature set 
of subsequent process steps. In the initial steps of processing, the 
NMOS and PMOS areas are separated by local oxidation of silicon 
or more advanced STI and doped by ion implantation. The SiO2 gate 
dielectric is formed by thermal oxidation of Si, and poly-Si is then 
deposited atop. The poly-Si is subsequently patterned and etched 
to form the gate electrode. Source and drain areas are implanted to 
form extension junctions in a self-aligned process where the poly-Si 
gate electrode is simultaneously implanted. After reoxidation of the 
gate area, spacers are formed and subsequent deep implantations 
are performed, followed by thermal activation of implanted dopants 
inside both source/drain and gate areas by means of rapid thermal 
processing (RTP). The salicidation process is then performed to 
form silicide in the source, drain, and gate. The final steps in the 

81
front-end processing are capping of the structure and formation of 
contact holes.
	
The introduction of high-k and alternative gates has been, is, 
and will continue to be challenging. New processes and integration 
concepts will be required. First of all, a single high-k material 
(and its corresponding gate electrode material, if not poly-Si) and 
its deposition technique should be identified. Among various 
deposition techniques for high-k gate dielectrics, ALD appears to 
be the most suitable and viable deposition technique. For two types 
of gate electrodes, ALD TiN and in situ doped p+poly-SiGe, process 
steps have been developed at the Royal Institute of Technology, 
Sweden. The process flow for fabrication of p-MOSFETs with high-k 
materials and a TiN gate is shown in Fig. 3.8 and the process flow for 
p-MOSFETs with high-k materials and a p+ poly-SiGe gate in Fig. 3.9.
(a) LOCOS formation well implant and
deposition of high-k TiN
(c) Gate lithography, TEOS dry etch.
(e) First spacer formation, deep implant,
RTP (Ni-silicidation may follow).
(g) LTO passivation.
(g) Contact hole formation, metallization
and forming gas annealing.
(f) Gate opening by HF wet etch.
Gate
Source
Drain
(d) TiN dry etch, extension implant.
(b) TEOS deposition as a hard mask.
n-well
p-type (100) Si
p-type (100) Si
p-type (100) Si
p-type (100) Si
p-type (100) Si
p-type (100) Si
p-type (100) Si
p-type (100) Si
n-well
n-well
n-well
n-well
n-well
n-well
n-well
ALD high-k
ALD high-k
BF2
BF2
Figure 3.8  Process flow for p-MOSFETs with a TiN/high-k gate stack [7].
High-k/Metal Gate

82
Technology Boosters
LPCVD poly-Si0.7Ge0.3
Source
Gate
Drain
(a) LOCOS formation, well implant,
deposition of high-k, TiN and TEOS, gate
lithography and TEOS dry etch.
(c) Poly-SiGe dry etch, extension implant.
(d) Gate opeing by HF wet etch.
(f) Rapid thermal processing and Ni-
salicidation process.
(h) Contact hole formation, metallization
and forming gas annealing.
(c) First spacer formation, high-k,
removal, deep implant.
(e) Second spacer formation by CVD and
dry etch.
(g) LTO passivation.
FOX
FOX
FOX
FOX
FOX
TEOS
FOX
FOX
FOX
FOX
FOX
FOX
FOX
FOX
FOX
FOX
FOX
p-type (100) Si
p-type (100) Si
p-type (100) Si
p-type (100) Si
p-type (100) Si
p-type (100) Si
p-type (100) Si
p-type (100) Si
n-well
n-well
n-well
n-well
n-well
n-well
n-well
n-well
NiSixGe1–x
BF2
BF2
P+
P+
P+
P+
P+
P+
P+
P+
P+
P+
P+
P+
Figure 3.9  Process flow for p-MOSFETs with a p+ poly-SiGe/high-k gate stack 
[7].
3.6  Stress Evolution during Semiconductor 
Fabrication
Most of the semiconductor manufacturing process steps are done at 
high temperature with deposited thin films. Maximum temperatures 
are usually higher in the front end of line (FEOL) and can reach, at 
least in a short time pulse, about 1000°C. As for the backend-of-line 
(BEOL) operations, temperatures are kept under 400°C to save the 

83
global thermal budget. Since the coefficients of thermal expansion 
of the films are different, the cooling back to ambient temperature 
induces stress within the layers and the substrate. The force 
balance leads to both partial stress relaxation of the thin film, and 
wafer curvature. It is important to understand the stress transfer 
mechanisms, and predictive simulation is necessary to calibrate 
models from device layout to enhanced mobility. Producing an 
electronic device is based on a large number of steps, while chips 
are batch-processed on undiced silicon wafers. FEOL consists of 
stages that allow making the core devices and achieve electrical 
functionalities into the silicon. After contacting the transistors 
together, comes BEOL, which handles the interconnections. Beyond 
the manufacturing processes themselves, device integrity must 
be ensured. Using technology computer-aided design (TCAD) the 
evolution of the stress state during the whole process flow can be 
studied.
	
As the race for miniaturization is now reaching its limitations, 
to stick with the performance specification challenges, alternative 
critical dimension (geometric) downscaling has become essential. 
Stress engineering is a low-cost way to boost CMOS technology. 
Mobility can be changed depending on the state of stress in the 
channel [1]. Strain engineering has its own limitations as the stress 
generated cannot be infinite and may lead to various detrimental 
effects such as defect nucleation, dislocation generations, or 
microstructural changes, which would lead to performance 
degradation, such as leakage, opens, or shorts, and finally affect 
device integrity.
	
Since the 90 nm CMOS technology node, the strained nitride 
capping CESL is used as a stress-engineering booster enabling 
transistor improvement. The effectiveness of the nitride layers 
constrained with the source/drain SiGe, SOI substrates, and the 
effect of channel direction will be discussed for MOSFET gate 
lengths up to 14 nm. In this chapter, we present a simulation study 
explaining how the CESL transmits its intrinsic stress to the Si 
channel. It is demonstrated that the CESL stress transmission is the 
outcome of several CESL parts acting separately (direct effect) or in 
association (indirect effect). Finally, some guidelines are given for an 
optimization of CESL use.
Stress Evolution during Semiconductor Fabrication

84
Technology Boosters
3.6.1  Stress Modeling Methodology
Several options have been proposed in the literature to account for 
the modifications in mobility under stress [2, 3]. The first one is 
the so-called piezoresistive approach, which relates the strained to 
the unstrained mobility. It is used to relate mobility to stress as it 
provides information on the lattice parameters, which are related 
directly to transport properties. This approach has the disadvantage 
as it is applied to the overall carrier mobility, leading to various sets 
of piezocoefficients, depending on the doping and electric fields. 
The second alternative relates the change in mobility to the effective 
conduction mass, omitting thereby the impact of the reduced 
intervalley scatterings. In this study, the CESL intrinsic stress is 
tensile and equal to 1 GPa.
	
It is assumed to be a biaxial stress following the curvature of 
the deposited layer. This biaxial stress has been implemented in 
the model as an intrinsic stress oriented along a local work plane, 
whose orientation follows the CESL curvature. To analyze the 
relative contribution of the strained CESL only, all the materials are 
stress free except the nitride capping layer. Thus, the stress state of 
Si channel is here only due to the CESL intrinsic stress. An elastic 
behavior is assumed for all materials so that the contribution of 
other stress sources like STI could simply be added to the CESL one. 
The CESL has been split in three distinct zones making up of the 
whole nitride capping layer:
 
∑	 Top CESL above the gate region
 
∑	 Lateral CESL above the spacer region
 
∑	 Bottom CESL above source/drain and STI regions
	
Thus, the thickness and intrinsic stress of each zone can be 
different from others. The classical CESL is the sum of these three 
CESL zones having the same thickness and the same intrinsic stress. 
The aim of this virtual splitting is to determinate the contribution of 
each CESL zones on the channel state of stress along the X, Y, and Z 
directions.
	
Typical stress fields generated by a tensile CESL are depicted in 
Fig. 3.10. The CESL induces mainly a compressive stress whatever 
the stress components. 

85
Stress in X-direction
Stress in X-direction
Spacer edge
in Y-direction
Spacer
edge in
X-direction
Center of
the channel
Stress in Y-direction
Stress in Y-direction
Stress in Z-direction
Stress (Mpa)
Stress (Mpa)
Stress in Z-direction
–20 MPa
+30 MPa
+90 MPa
+73 MPa
s > 0
s > 0
s > 0
–35 MPa
+73 MPa
+30 MPa
+10 MPa
+30 MPa
–40 MPa
–48 MPa
Spacer edge
in Y-direction
Spacer
edge in
X-direction
Center of
the channel
Z
X
+35 MPa
–30 MPa
–35 MPa
–30 MPa
–50 MPa
–40 MPa
–20 MPa
–10 MPa
Z
X
X
Z
–50
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
–50
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Figure 3.10  Top view of a quarter of the channel stress fields for long devices 
[5].
3.6.2  Stress Evolution during Thick Stress Layer 
Deposition
Any semiconductor device manufacturing process consists of 
multiple steps, including material layer depositions (in some cases 
with specific intrinsic stress), etching of the layers or their portions, 
as well as heating and cooling cycles. Thus, in reality the stresses in 
the device structure change from step to step because of geometry, 
materials, and temperature, which are involved throughout the 
process sequence. Accurate stress simulation has become necessary 
for semiconductor device performance and reliability analysis. 
Stress Evolution during Semiconductor Fabrication

86
Technology Boosters
Commonly one calculates stresses in the final device structure with 
different stressor regions by specifying values of intrinsic stresses, 
which is known as the one-step model, where stresses are calculated 
only once.
	
To accurately predict stresses in thick layers the process should be 
considered as a series of deposition and relaxation steps to emulate 
mechanical quasi-equilibrium during this physical deposition 
process. The more detailed step-by-step model calculates stresses 
after each process step, taking into account current geometry, 
temperature, and material properties, as well as stresses generated 
in the structure during previous steps. This approach is known as the 
stress evolution or stress history model. Obviously, the stress history 
approach is more time consuming but it definitely provides more 
accurate results. The following example shows how simulation can 
help to boost electrical performance. To investigate the CESL stress 
transmission, finite element simulations are commonly performed 
using Ansys software.
	
In the following section, we use VictoryProcess and VictoryStress 
to demonstrate how the stress evolution model can be applied to 
simulation of stresses generated during the thick layer deposition 
process and compare the results with the standard one-step 
model. The deposition of thick layers can be considered as a series 
of deposition and relaxation steps to emulate mechanical quasi-
equilibrium during the physical deposition process.
	
The simulation consists of five steps:
	
1.	 Formation of a test structure with a one-layer nitride stressor 
in ATHENA
	
2.	 Calculation of stresses in the test structure using the one-step 
model of VictoryStress
	
3.	 Formation of a test structure with a multilayer stressor in 
ATHENA
	
4.	 Calculation of stresses using the stress evolution model of 
VictoryStress and the looping capability of DeckBuild
	
5.	 2D visualization and average stress extraction for both models
	
The stress evolution simulation uses 20 layers at each step, while 
the effect of the new sublayer deposition is emulated by changing the 

87
status of this new sublayer from nonactive with properties inherited 
from air to the active material region with properties inherited 
from nitride and the intrinsic stress of 1 GPa. Then VictoryStress 
recalculates stresses in the modified structure after each deposition 
step. The simulation results are shown in two plots which compare 
Sxx and Syy stresses for two models. In flat areas of the deposited layer 
both models produced similar and essentially uniform stress. In the 
single-layer case a nonuniform stress region appears only near the 
corners of the spacer/nitride. However, in the case of multilayer 
stress history simulation a highly nonuniform stress field extends 
diagonally from the spacer/substrate corner to the top of the film. 
In other words, stresses are significantly higher where the layers 
are sharply bent. As the result the integrated stresses under the gate 
appear to be 1.4–2 times higher when the stress history method is 
used. The extracted averaged stresses are calculated and plotted in 
Fig. 3.11.
1   2    3   4    5   6    7   8    9   10 11  12  13 14  15 16  17 18  19 20  21
Numbers of layers
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
–0.4
S, GPa
Sxx
Syy
Figure 3.11  Dependence of Sxx and Syy stresses (averaged under the gate) on 
the number of 8 nm sublayers. Lateral stress becomes more compressive and 
vertical stress becomes more tensile, both asymptotically approaching certain 
limits.
	
Channel stress simulations using single- and multilayer models 
were performed for various nitride CESL films with intrinsic stress 
ranging from highly compressive to highly tensile. Piezoresistivity 
Stress Evolution during Semiconductor Fabrication

88
Technology Boosters
constants for different wafer orientations were used for mobility 
enhancement evaluation [4] in VictoryStress simulation. Mobility 
enhancement factors are calculated (Table 3.1) by use of average 
stress values and piezoresistivity factors from the following 
relations:
xx
xx
xx
zz
yy
TG
DG
D
D
m
m
m
m
p
s
p
s
p
s
=
+
+
¥
+
¥
+
-
2
3
1
3 1
1
1
1
11
12
13
[(
) (
) (
)
]
	
xx
xx
zz
yy
DG
Dm
m
p
s
p
s
p
s
=
+
¥
+
¥
+
-
(
) (
) (
)
1
1
1
1
11
12
13
Table 3.1	
Mobility enhancement factors calculated by use of average stress 
values and piezoresistivity factors
Material
n-type
p-type
10–12 dynes/cm2
<100>
<110>
<100>
<110>
p11
–102.2
–31.1
6.6
71.8
p12
53.4
–17.5
–1.1
–66.3
p13
53.4
53.4
–1.1
–1.1
	
Figure 3.12 shows contours of lateral stress in a simulated 
structure after deposition of a nitride film with compressive 
intrinsic stress, simulated using single- and multilayer models. In 
flat areas, both simulations give identical stress values in the nitride. 
However, stress distributions are very different near and around the 
gate. In the single-layer case, the conformal free surface is smooth 
and has fewer corners. Thus, the stress in the nitride is relatively 
uniform with one noted region of stress concentration located at the 
surface of the nitride associated with the spacer/substrate corner. 
On the contrary, stress is much uniform in the film simulated using 
the multistep approach. The inner layers of the nitride film more 
closely follow sharp contours of the gate structure and the overall 
CESL shape. Stress significantly increases in the areas where the 
layers sharply bend. This region of high compression extends 
diagonally from the film top to the spacer bottom. As a consequence 
stresses in the spacer and the gate become very nonuniform as well, 
changing from tensile on the top to compressive at the bottom, and 

89
the magnitude of compressive stress in silicon underneath the gate 
increases. Lateral stress becomes more compressive and vertical 
stress becomes more tensile, both asymptotically approaching 
certain limits.
0
0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18
0.2
Microns
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0.05
0.1
0
Microns
(a)
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0.05
0.1
0
Microns
(b)
0
0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1
0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18
0.2
Microns
Figure 3.12  The Sxx distribution for stress evolution model contours of lateral 
stress (Pa) in a transistor structure using (a) 20-layer deposition of 160 nm 
compressive intrinsic stress and (b) single layer.
Stress Evolution during Semiconductor Fabrication

90
Technology Boosters
3.6.3  Stress Evolution in Thick Stress Layer Deposition 
in 3D
The next simulation is essentially a 3D version of the earlier 
2D simulation. The stress evolution simulation uses the same 
structure with 20 layers at each step. The test structure used in this  
example is a quarter of a 40 nm MOS transistor. The X direction is  
the gate length direction, the Y direction corresponds to the width 
of the channel, and the Z direction represents the vertical direction.
	
The input deck consists of five sections:
 
∑	 Formation of a test structure with a one-layer nitride stressor 
in VictoryProcess. The structure is shown in the first 3D plot.
 
∑	 Calculation of stresses in the test structure using the one-step 
model of VictoryStress.
 
∑	 Formation of a test structure with a multilayer stressor in 
VictoryStress. The structure is shown in the second 3D plot.
 
∑	 Calculation of stresses using the stress evolution model of 
VictoryStress and the looping capability of DeckBuild.
 
∑	 3D and 2D visualization of simulation results for both models.
	
The material parameters used in the one-step model simulation 
are:
	
Material nitride intrin.sig = 1.0 × 1010
	
Material silicon young.m = 1.67 × 1012
	
Material silicon poiss.r = 0.28
	
Material poly young.m = 1.67 × 1012
	
Material poly poiss.r = 0.28
	
Material oxide young.m = 1.0 × 1012
	
Material oxide poiss.r = 0.25
	
Material aluminum young.m = 0.715 × 1012
	
Material aluminum poiss.r = 0.35
	
The simulation results are shown in two 2D plots which 
compare Sxx stresses for two models (Fig. 3.13). The Sxx stresses 
are also compared in two cut planes: YZ (vertical plane which 
roughly corresponds to the 2D simulation shown in Fig. 3.14) and 
XY (horizontal plane just 1 nm under the silicon surface). The first 
of the 2D comparison plots is very similar to the 2D simulation, as 
shown in Fig. 3.13. It shows that the stress evolution model predicts 
a higher stress level under the gate and is better illustrated in the 
second XY plane. The upper-left corner of the figure is the cut plane 

91
corresponding to the gate area. The simulation results are shown in 
two 3D plots which compare Sxx stresses for two models, as shown in 
Figs. 3.15 and 3.16.
0
0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08
0.1
0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18
0.2
Microns
(a)
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0.05
0.1
0
Microns
(b)
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0.05
0.1
0
Microns
0
0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.2
Microns
Figure 3.13  Contours of lateral stress (Pa) in 40 nm transistor structures with 
a 20 nm source/drain recess simulated using (a) single-layer and (b) 160-layer 
deposition of nitride with compressive intrinsic stress. The Syy distribution for 
stress evolution model: (a) 20-layer deposition of 160 nm compressive intrinsic 
stress and (b) single-layer deposition.
Stress Evolution during Semiconductor Fabrication

92
Technology Boosters
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
Microns
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0.05
0.1
0
Microns
Materials
Aluminum
Polysilicon
SiO2
Silicon
user 1
user 2
user 3
user 4
user 5
user 6
user 7
user 8
user 9
user 10
user 11
user 12
user 13
user 14
user 15
user 16
user 17
user 18
user 19
user 20
Figure 3.14  VictoryStress simulation (2D view) using 160-layer deposition of 
nitride with compressive intrinsic stress.
Figure 3.15  VictoryStress simulation using single-layer deposition with 
compressive intrinsic stress.

93
Figure 3.16  VictoryStress simulation using 160-layer deposition of nitride 
with compressive intrinsic stress.
3.7  Summary
Strain engineering continues to evolve and will remain one of the key 
performance enablers for future generations of CMOS technologies. 
In this chapter, we have discussed the challenges involved in the 
heterogeneous integration of novel strain-engineering techniques 
that have remarkably advanced the silicon CMOS transistor 
architecture, including embedded SiGe (e-SiGe), embedded SiC 
(e-SiC), SMT, dual stress liners (DSLs), and stress proximity technique 
(SPT). We have presented a simulation procedure explaining how 
the CESL transmits its intrinsic stress to the Si channel. It has been 
shown that the CESL stress transmission is the outcome of several 
CESL parts acting separately (direct effect) or in association (indirect 
effect), including the corner effects for small transistors. The stress 
transfer mechanisms for long- and short-channel transistors are 
explained. Finally, some guidelines are given for optimization of 
the usage of the CESL. Channel stress simulations using single- and 
multilayer models were performed for various nitride ESL films with 
intrinsic stress ranging from highly compressive to highly tensile. It 
Summary

94
Technology Boosters
is observed that the stress history model used for stress simulation 
in a thickly deposited stressor film gives more accurate results.
References
	 1.	 Maiti, C. K., and Maiti, T. K. (2012). Strain-Engineered MOSFETs (CRC 
Press, Taylor and Francis, USA). Shin, K. (2006). Technologies for 
Enhancing Multi-Gate Si MOSFET Performance, PhD thesis, University 
of California, Berkeley.
	 2.	 Sun, Y., Thompson, S. E., and Nishida, T. (2010). Strain Effect 
in Semiconductors: Theory and Device Applications (Springer 
Science+Business Media, New York).
	 3.	 Ortolland, C. (2006). Etude des effets des contraintes mécaniques 
induites par les procédés de fabrication sur le comportement électrique 
des transistors CMOS des noeuds technologiques 65nm et en deça, PhD 
thesis, L’Institut National des Sciences Appliquées de Lyon.
	 4.	 Sverdlov, V. (2011). Strain-Induced Effects in Advanced MOSFETs 
(Springer-Verlag, Wien).
	 5.	 Sun, G. (2007). Strain Effects on Hole Mobility of Silicon and Germanium 
p-Type Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor Field-Effect-Transistors, PhD thesis, 
University of Florida.
	 6.	 Fiori, V. (2010). How Do Mechanics and Thermomechanics Affect 
Microelectronic Products: Some Residual Stress and Strain Effects, 
Investigations and Industrial Management, PhD thesis, L’Institut 
National des Sciences Appliquées de Lyon.
	 7.	 Ortolland, C. (2006). Etude des effets des contraintes mécaniques 
induites par les procédés de fabrication sur le comportement électrique 
des transistors CMOS des noeuds technologiques 65nm et en deça, PhD 
thesis, L’Institut National des Sciences Appliquées de Lyon.
	 8.	 Wu, D. (2004). Novel Concepts for Advanced CMOS: Materials, Process 
and Device Architecture, PhD thesis, Royal Institute of Technology.

 Semiconductor technology is a broad and complex field encompassing 
many activities. Modern processes may have roughly 300 steps that 
are carried out on every product wafer. Semiconductor processes 
are continually modified to improve yield and to improve device 
characteristics. The primary objective of process simulation is to 
accurately predict the physical/structural layers and geometry of 
devices at the end of a process run, as well as the active dopant/stress 
distributions. As shown in Fig. 4.1, the input to process simulation 
is a process flow guided by process assumptions and layout/layer 
masks. The initial wafer/substrate is subject to a variety of process 
conditions, each of which may involve steps like oxidation, diffusion, 
implantation, deposition, and etching. Lithography simulation is 
also performed to accurately capture feature geometries. Process 
simulation generally uses a finite-element or finite-volume mesh 
to compute and store the device dopant and stress profiles. Every 
geometric change in the simulation domain requires a new mesh 
that fits the new device boundaries in order to model the next series 
of process steps.
	
Process simulation is especially helpful in the initial phase of 
technology development. As device lots become more and more 
expensive, process modeling is increasingly important. Process 
simulation and modeling is increasingly sophisticated, but accuracy 
remains a problem. There is generally a time lag between the 
Chapter 4
BiCMOS Process Simulations
Introducing Technology Computer-Aided Design (TCAD): Fundamentals, Simulations, and Applications
C. K. Maiti
Copyright © 2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-51-2 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36450-6 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

96
BiCMOS Process Simulations
introduction of a particular process and its accurate modeling. 
Modeling of front-end processes has been facing challenges caused 
by a continuous reduction of the implant energies and of the thermal 
budgets of the annealing schemes from soak anneals to the spike 
anneals which are now used for production. The complexity of 
physical models is a major factor that impacts process simulation. 
Simplified physics minimizes computation time. With technology 
scaling, however, the need for ever more accurate doping/stress 
profiles has increased and complex physical models are added at 
each new generation. Also, the best models available are usually 
too complicated and slow to be used in multidimensional process 
simulation, so often compromises have to be made. It has to 
provide insight during design, optimization guidelines during 
implementation to manufacturing, and debug during large-scale 
manufacturing.
Figure 4.1  Generic process simulation steps [1].
	
The main objective of a device simulation is to understand the 
behavior of a device with different characteristics and under various 
bias conditions. Main elements of device simulation are device 
structure, material system parameters, circuit/contact boundary 
conditions, a list of physical effects to be captured, numerical 
constraints on the solver, a carrier transport model, and the modes 

97
of simulation. In device simulation, first we need to describe the 
geometric structure of the device. Then we discretize the geometry 
region. In a device simulator a semiconductor device is modeled 
through a geometric structure with certain physical properties which 
are governed by a set of partial differential equations. Finally we 
solve the system of equations by applying some numerical schemes, 
such as the finite-difference method or the finite-element method.  
To fully understand the electrical response of a semiconductor 
device, different device simulations are performed. A device 
simulator is used to perform DC, AC, and transient mixed-mode 
simulations. DC simulations provide Id–Vg and Id–Vd characteristics, 
while AC analysis generates C–V characteristics. The resulting I–V 
plots are analyzed to extract electrical parameters. Single-device 
simulation is used to investigate transport phenomena in a single 
device. Mixed-mode simulation is used to study the behavior of 
small circuits constructed out of individual device instances and 
is generally less rigorous in terms of physical models, owing to 
the increase in simulation complexity. In the following sections, 
we perform simulations of some basic unit processes such as ion 
implantation, oxidation, deposition, etching, and photolithography 
by using standard models.
4.1  Ion Implantation Simulation
Simulation of ion implantation is the most commonly used method 
for doping. This technique stood up to other doping techniques such 
as epitaxy and spin-on-dopant sources. However, doping by ion 
implantation causes several problems, for example, creating defects 
in the crystal lattice and amorphization of silicon. Ion implantation 
may be simulated using analytical models based on empirical point-
response distribution. In the case of 2D simulations, an ion beam 
incident at a point is assumed to generate a distribution function. The 
final ion concentration at a certain point is calculated by computing 
the superposition of all distribution functions of all possible points 
of incidence on the surface of the implanted structure. While the 
vertical distribution function is only dependent on the depth,  
the lateral distribution depends on both, the lateral spread and the 
depth which determines the shape of the doped region. Two major 
Ion Implantation Simulation

98
BiCMOS Process Simulations
vertical distributions of the implanted ions are used in simulators 
for calculating the primary doping profile:
	
Gaussian distribution:
	
f
x
x
R
p
p
p
p
( )
exp
)
=
-
-
Ê
Ë
ÁÁ
ˆ
¯
˜˜
1
2
2
2
2
ps
s
(
,
where the projected range Rp is the first moment and s is the 
standard deviation of the projected ranges. The skewness of  
the profile is zero in this approximation, while the fourth moment, 
the kurtosis of the Gaussian profile, is 3.
	
Pearson distribution, which satisfies the relation
	
d
dx f
x
x
R
a
b
b x
R
b x
R
f
x
p
p
p
p
p
( )
(
)
(
)
( )
=
-
-
+
-
+
-
0
1
2
2
,
where b0, b1, b2, and a depend on the second and the third moment. 
In simulators, mainly type IV, type V, type VI, and dual Pearson 
distributions are used for calculating the final doping profile. To 
account for the correlation between the lateral and the vertical ion 
scattering, the standard deviation s2 of the lateral ion spread is, in 
general, assumed to be dependent on the depth:
	
f
y x
x
y
x
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
2
( , )
( )
exp
( )
=
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
ps
s
	
To minimize channeling of the ions through the silicon lattice, 
a tilt of 7° is used in the ion implantation setup of planar devices. 
Arsenic ions are used to form the n+ regions, while boron ions were 
used to form the p+ regions. Due to very thin body thicknesses used 
for the silicon-on-insulator (SOI) transistors, very low implantation 
energies in the range of 1 keV to 5 keV for arsenic and 0.2 keV to 1 keV 
for boron are commonly used in the simulation of ion implantation.
	
Simulation of activation and diffusion of implanted dopants is an 
important issue, as the amount of the active doping concentration 
has a big impact on the device performance. Generally, diffusion 
and activation of implanted dopants is done by annealing at high 
temperatures above 800°C. The implanted dopants diffuse by 
means of either interstitials or vacancies, dependent on the kind 
of dopant. Additionally, they are built in the silicon lattice, where 
they can contribute to the current transport, that is, they are 

99
Ion Implantation Simulation
activated. Furthermore, annealing at high temperatures leads to 
recrystallization of amorphous layers and to elimination of point 
defects resulting from ion implantation. To calculate the diffusion of 
the implanted dopants, the diffusion current may be computed using 
the well-known Fick’s first law with the field-dependent diffusion. 
The implanted dopants diffuse by means of point defects of the 
silicon lattice, either interstitial or vacancies. Therefore, the effective 
diffusion coefficient of any respective dopant-point-defect pair has 
to be calculated by the Arrhenius equation:
	
D
D
E
kT
N
a
C
exp
=
◊
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
0
where D0 is the Arrhenius prefactor of the specific dopant point defect 
pairs and Ea is the respective activation energy. The redistribution of 
the implanted dopants can be expressed by an extension of Fick’s 
second law of diffusion. For modern complementary metal-oxide-
semiconductor (CMOS) devices, rapid thermal annealing (RTA), or 
millisecond annealing (MSA) techniques are commonly used. Two 
examples of such RTA and MSA schemes are the so-called spike 
annealing and flash annealing. Depending on the requirements of 
different device architectures, the most feasible annealing scheme 
has to be chosen. To simulate diffusion and activation of arsenic 
and boron by using RTA or MSA, calibrated simulation models have 
to be used. From the point of view of process simulation, transient 
phenomena in diffusion and activation, especially of boron, were 
for long the main issue. Although these effects are qualitatively 
understood, their quantitative modeling is still a problem.
	
In ion implantation, ions collide elastically with target atoms, 
creating ion deflections, energy loss, and displaced target atoms 
(recoils). Channeling is caused by ions traveling with few collisions 
and little drag along certain crystal directions. Ions come to rest 
after losing all the energy on elastic collisions (nuclear stopping) and 
inelastic drag (electronic stopping). Modeling of ion implantation 
needs to include the following:
	
∑	 Ion energy loss mechanisms
	
∑	 Ion range distribution
	
∑	 Ion channeling in crystalline silicon
	
∑	 Implantation-induced damage modeling

100
BiCMOS Process Simulations
	
Figure 4.2 shows a comparison of Gaussian, Pearson, and 
secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS)-verified dual Pearson 
SVDP methods. This example compares implant analytical models: 
Gaussian (symmetrical) profile, single Pearson (amorphous 
implant), and SVDP method. In Fig. 4.3, a comparison of zero-
tilt boron implant profiles obtained using the SVDP method with 
experimental results is shown.
Distance along line
Phosphorous (/cc)
0
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
SVDP
Pearson
Gaussian
Figure 4.2  Comparison of Gaussian, Pearson, and SVDP methods.
Boron (Icc)
Figure 4.3  Experimental verification of channeling profiles.

101
Optical Lithography Simulation
	
Oxidation-enhanced diffusion of boron is studied next (Fig. 
4.4). The incorporation of models that account for the codiffusion 
of point defects (interstitials and vacancies) with dopant impurities 
addressed the important physical effects of oxidation-enhanced 
diffusion and transient-enhanced diffusion, forming the basis for the 
impurity diffusion models used in modern silicon process simulation 
programs. Such programs combine many different physical modeling 
capabilities, including oxidation, diffusion of various dopants and 
their interactions, etching, deposition, and various approaches to 
simulating ion implantation.
Net Doping (Icc)
Figure 4.4  Oxidation-enhanced diffusion of boron.
4.2  Optical Lithography Simulation
Lithography is a critical pattern transfer process step for the 
fabrication of small device structures, and it is vital to understand the 
limitations and effects of process variations and design parameters. 
The cost of lithography equipment is very high, and as the process 
development time for new lithography methods is large, the cost-
effectiveness of computer modeling of lithography processes is 
very important. We introduce the concepts which are essential to 
understanding how the optical lithography process is simulated. 

102
BiCMOS Process Simulations
The lithography imaging system consists of a wafer upon which the 
structures are patterned, a photomask (reticle) which contains the 
desired pattern, and a wafer stepper, the optical equipment which 
transfers the pattern from the mask to the wafer. The mask contains 
transparent and opaque areas on a glass mask substrate with which 
the light from the source is patterned. The wafer is coated with an 
optically sensitive polymer photoresist. In a positive photoresist, 
the actinic light interacts with the resist, breaking polymer bonds 
and increasing its solubility in a developing solution. In a negative 
resist, the incident light causes bonds to form, thus decreasing the 
local solubility rate. Resists are then baked to diffuse somewhat 
the soluble and insoluble areas. The wafer stepper contains the 
machinery and optics for aligning the wafer and mask, exposing the 
mask, and imaging the resulting optical pattern onto the photoresist-
covered wafer.
	
The lithography system can be divided into (a) a light source, 
(b) the propagation of light through free space, (c) the patterning of 
the light by the mask, (d) the imaging of the patterned light by the 
projection lens, and (e) the interaction of the light with the materials 
on the wafer. The underlying optics of the lithography system can be 
simplified for simulation purposes, as shown in Fig. 4.5. Lithography 
modeling involves development of lithographic model incorporating 
particularly parameters for the light source and 3D mask effects. One 
needs to develop mask synthesis algorithms that are robust against 
mask variations and incorporate regularization methods in solving 
inverse problems in imaging to tackle mask complexity. Technology 
computer-aided design (TCAD) may be used to investigate 
quantitatively relevant types of variability: systematic and random 
variabilities that arise from nonidealities of the lithographic process. 
Three-dimensional simulations are performed in conjunction with 
the modeling of the lithography process. In this section, we perform 
a simple lithography simulation. This example demonstrates the 
first step in lithography simulation. A simple mask (Figs. 4.6, 4.7, and 
4.8) has been used: two elbows and a contact hole (CD = 1 μm). The 
stepper used in the simulation was the model Canon FRA-1550 with 
the following parameters: g-line, numerical aperture (NA) = 0.43, 
and σ = 0.5.

103
Light source
Condenser lens
collimates the
light from source
Photomask selectively
transmits light
Projection lens focuses
light onto the wafer
Incident light bleaches
the resist, altering the
resist chemistry
Figure 4.5  Simplified lithography system.
Microns
1.69
1.48
1.27
1.05
0.844
0.633
0.422
0.211
0
Figure 4.6  Exposure system: numerical aperture (NA) = 0.43; partially coherent 
g-line illumination (wavelength = 435 nm). No aberrations or defocusing is 
found. The minimum feature size is 1 µm.
Optical Lithography Simulation

104
BiCMOS Process Simulations
Microns
3.84
3.36
2.88
2.4
1.92
1.44
0.96
0.48
0
Figure 4.7  Same example as in Fig. 4.6. except that the feature size has been 
reduced to 0.5 µm. Note the poorer image.
Microns
4.63
4.05
3.47
2.89
2.32
1.74
1.16
0.579
0
Figure 4.8  Same example (Fig. 4.6), except that the illumination wavelength 
has now been changed to i-line (wavelength = 365 nm) and the NA has been 
increased to 0.5. Note the improved image.

105
4.3  Contact-Printing Simulation
The simulation of contact printing for a simple mask consisting of a 
contact hole (CD = 1 μm) is performed next. The parameter gap in 
the image statement specifies the mask-to-wafer gap (in microns) 
for contact printing. Figure 4.9 shows the areal image intensity.
Microns
40
30
20
10
10
20
30
40
-10
-10
-20
-20
-30
-30
-40
-40
0
0
Microns
Materials
Mask Opaque
Mask Clear
Figure 4.9  Contact-printing simulation.
4.3.1  Nonplanar Lithography
In this example we show nonplanar lithography simulation. The 
effects of exposing a photoresist over a change in topography are 
demonstrated. The example uses a user-defined aerial image cross 
section. Figures 4.10 and 4.11 show the important stages during 
simulation. The photoresist is developed and effects of the light 
reflected off the 45° slope can be seen.
4.4  BJT Process Simulation
In this section, the different fabrication technologies of bipolar 
junction transistors (BJTs) are explained with emphasis on the 
double poly-Si technology. For bipolar transistors, a variety of 
different process flows are used by manufacturers, unlike for CMOS 
technology, where every company seems to follow a unified process 
flow. The main bipolar process steps are:
BJT Process Simulation

106
BiCMOS Process Simulations
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
Microns
2.4
2.8
2
Microns
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Silicon
AZ1350J
Materials
Figure 4.10  Nonplanar lithography simulation (photoresist development).
Microns
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
Microns
2.4
2.8
2
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
Microns
2.4
2.8
2
Microns
Silicon
AZ1350J
Materials
MaterialsSilicon
AZ1350J
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Figure 4.11  Nonplanar lithography simulation (effect of light reflection).

107
	
1.	 Isolation trench definition
	
2.	 Subcollector implantation
	
3.	 Subcollector activation
	
4.	 Poly-Si base–contact deposition
	
5.	 Active area base opening
	
6.	 Base implantation
	
7.	 Collector implantation
	
8.	 Nitride spacer definition
	
9.	 Metallization
	 10.	 Final anneal
4.4.1  Polysilicon Emitter Bipolar Technology
In the single-polysilicon process, the main advantage is the possibility 
of direct integration in a CMOS process. The bipolar complementary 
metal-oxide semiconductor (BiCMOS) process has the advantages of 
having both bipolar, n– and p–metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect 
transistors (MOSFETs), in the same process. A simplified process 
flow is shown in Fig. 4.12. The double-poly-Si bipolar technology 
uses not only an n+*doped poly-Si emitter but also an extrinsic base 
to be contacted with a p+-doped poly-Si layer. This feature enables 
full self-alignment of the active layers of the transistor. A schematic 
process flow for a double-poly-Si technology is shown in Fig. 4.13. 
As can be seen in Fig. 4.13a, the first lithography step of the process 
is the local-oxidation-of-silicon (LOCOS) mask, which defines the 
active areas and the collector contacts. The second mask is the 
collector plug implantation mask (Fig. 4.13b). After deposition and 
boron implantation of the base poly-Si, an oxide is deposited, which 
serves as an isolating layer between the emitter and the base poly-Si. 
Then the base poly-Si mask is exposed and both the oxide layer and 
the base poly-Si layer are etched. Figure 4.13c shows the structure 
after removal of the resist, followed by a drive-in anneal for forming 
the extrinsic base regions. The intrinsic base is then implanted 
through the emitter window. After spacer formation the emitter 
poly-Si is deposited and implanted. The emitter poly-Si also serves 
as a contact to the collector window. The emitter poly-Si and the 
underlying oxide are then etched after exposure and development of 
the last mask. Finally, the uncovered areas of both the base and the 
emitter poly-Si are silicided.
BJT Process Simulation

108
BiCMOS Process Simulations
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Intrinsic base implant
LOCOS
p+
n+
n+
n+
p+
p
LOCOS
Resist
p+
n+
n+
n+
p+
p
n+poly-Si
LOCOS
LOCOS
n+
n+
P
p+
n+
p
p+
p+
n+
n+
n+
p
p
p
B
E
B
C
p+
Figure 4.12  Schematic process flow for a single-poly-Si bipolar transistor [2].
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
LOCOS
n-
n+
p+
p+
p
Resist
LOCOS
p+
n-
n+
p+
p
n+ Collector plugg implant
Intrinsic base implant
B
E
B
C
Si02
p+-poly-Si
LOCOS
p+
p+
p+
n+
n-
n+
p+
p+-poly-Si
LOCOS
p+
n+
n
p+
p+
n+
p
p
p+
Figure 4.13  Schematic process flow for a double-poly-Si bipolar transistor [2].
	
In the following bipolar process simulation example, we use 
ATHENA for process simulation to obtain the bipolar device 
structure, remesh the structure in DEVEDIT, and use ATLAS 
simulation to obtain the electrical characteristics of a poly-Si 
emitter NPN bipolar transistor with two base contacts. As shown in 
Fig. 4.13, the typical process flow for an NPN bipolar transistor is 
provided in ATHENA. The final device structure obtained is shown in  
Fig. 4.14. The first boron implant forms the intrinsic base region  
(Fig. 4.13c). The structure has a heavy n+ emitter, a 1.0 × 1018/cc 
peak base concentration, a buried collector layer, and a heavy p+ 
extrinsic base contact (Fig. 4.15). As the mesh used for process 
simulation is not optimal for use with device simulation, to recreate 
a mesh that has zero obtuse triangles in the semiconductor region, 

109
the mesh generation tool DEVEDIT is used to refine the mesh. The 
remeshed final device structure used in the ATLAS simulation is 
shown in Fig. 4.16. In the ATLAS simulation bipolar models used 
includes 
concentration-dependent 
mobility, 
field-dependent 
mobility, bandgap narrowing, concentration-dependent lifetimes, 
and Auger recombination.
Microns
Figure 4.14  ATHENA (process)-simulated BJT device structure.
Figure 4.15  Doping profile in a BJT.
BJT Process Simulation

110
BiCMOS Process Simulations
-0.8	
-0.6	
-0.4	
-0.2	
0	
0.2	
0.4	
0.6	
0.8
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Microns
Microns
Materials
Silicon
Polysilicon
SiO2
Aluminum
Electrodes
Figure 4.16  DEVEDIT-gridded BJT structure.
Figure 4.17  ATLAS-generated Gummel plot of a BJT.

111
	
Electrical parameters are then extracted from the Gummel plot 
(Fig. 4.17) and the DC output characteristics (IC vs. VCE) for different 
constant values of base currents, while VCE is ramped (Fig. 4.18). 
The Gummel plot is obtained by applying a bias ramp on the base 
electrode up to 1.0 V. The parameter AC on the solve statement sets 
the AC analysis on. The frequency of this signal is set to 1 MHz.
Figure 4.18  ATLAS-generated output characteristics of a BJT.
4.5  3D MOS Process Simulation
For decades, TCAD has been limited to 2D due to a lack of computing 
power for the simulator, and earlier device structures had little 
variations in the third dimension. However, nowadays 3D simulation 
is becoming increasingly important due to pronounced 3D effects 
present in state-of-the-art devices which are truly 3D in structure. 
The need for 3D simulation tools has become indispensable in the 
past few years when scaling limits of bulk CMOS technology have 
boosted research on alternative, essentially 3D architectures, for 
example, multiple-gate devices (MuGFETs). Three-dimensional TCAD 
is now made possible because of advances in computer hardware. 
3D MOS Process Simulation

112
BiCMOS Process Simulations
Three-dimensional TCAD gives us an opportunity in device design 
and new insights into their behavior. We are able to view the devices 
as they actually exist rather than using 2D cross sections. In this 
section, we discuss the methodology used to generate 3D structures 
from process simulation using VictoryProcess. VictoryProcess is a 
general-purpose layout-driven 1D, 2D, and 3D process simulator 
including etching and deposition, implantation, diffusion, and 
oxidation simulation capabilities.
	
To perform a TCAD simulation, we first need the mask layout for 
all the process steps. The mask layout can be designed in a variety 
of drafting tools like Autodesk, AutoCAD, and specialized EDA tools 
like Cadence Virtuoso and Tanner L-Edit. These tools are used to 
create a GDSII file (.gds), which is the current industry standard for 
integrated circuit (IC) layout work. GDSII files are imported from a 
layout by the MaskViews program. MaskViews is an IC layout editor 
designed to interface the IC layout with other Silvaco tools. It can 
draw and edit an IC layout, store and load complete IC layouts, and 
import/export layout information using the industry-standard GDSII 
and CIF layout format. MaskViews provides layout information to the 
simulators, enabling any part of a layout to be simulated. Currently, 
supported simulators are the SSUPREM3 1D process simulator and 
the ATHENA 2D process simulator. MaskViews provides a set of 
mask regions for each layout level, giving the start and end points of 
masks on any arbitrary cross section on the layout. MaskViews also 
provides information on how ATHENA should construct its grid.
	
MaskViews can be used as a viewer of GDSII-formatted files, 
besides the basic function of being an interface between layout 
and process simulator. Various settings are available, including the 
choice of which layers to import into a new design. The scale of the 
pattern being imported is critical: the user can choose to convert 
the units used in the GDSII file and can also specify a scaling factor, 
if required. The basic purpose of MaskViews is to create files that 
will be used in the subsequent 3D process simulation. When GDSII 
files are not available, MaskViews can also be used to create the 
geometric shapes and layers used in the process simulation.
	
In a VictoryCell simulation the process etching steps are driven 
from a layout file generated from MaskViews (see Fig. 4.19). This 

113
file will be included in the support files when this example is 
loaded. VictoryCell is used in the following example to simulate a 
full 3D process and device flow for a 45 nm n-MOSFET. The process 
simulator takes the input files created by MaskViews and performs 
3D process simulation based on the user’s command input. After 
finishing the simulation, the process simulator can export its 
output to the device simulator. The device simulator will then use 
the exported mesh and material information to perform electrical, 
thermal, and other simulations. The output of the device simulator 
can be viewed directly with a plotting GUI or saved to a graphic 
format such as postscript for convenient batch processing.
Figure 4.19  Mask layout for process development.
	
The polysilicon gate, spacer, and electrodes of the final MOSFET 
structure simulated using VictoryCell and MaskViews is shown 
in Fig. 4.20. The cross section along the source–drain electrodes 
showing net doping is shown in Fig. 4.21.
3D MOS Process Simulation

114
BiCMOS Process Simulations
Materials:
Silcon
SiO2
BPSG
Aluminum
SOG
Si3 N4
Polysilicon
19.179
12
14.393
16.786
21.572
Abs Net Doping (/cm3)
Figure 4.20  Polysilicon gate, spacer, and electrodes of the final MOSFET 
structure simulated using VictoryCell and MaskViews.
Figure 4.21  Cross section along source–drain electrodes showing net doping.
4.5.1  VictoryProcess
VictoryProcess integrates four core modules:
	
∑	 Etching and deposition
	
∑	 Oxidation and stress
	
∑	 Implantation
	
∑	 Diffusion

115
	
Different crystal planes of silicon are known to have dif­ferent 
oxidation rates, for example, the silicon plane with Miller indices 
<111> is oxidized approximately 1.7 times faster than the <100> 
plane. During an oxidation process the geometry of a 3D structure 
may change significantly and the silicon/oxide interface may pass 
through various crystal planes with different oxidation rates. 
Therefore, the orientation and type of the silicon wafer affect 
the resulting geometry of an oxidized structure on this wafer. 
VictoryProcess can be used to model the anisotropic behavior of 
silicon during oxidation. VictoryProcess offers several modes for the 
simula­tion/emulation of an oxidation process, namely
	
∑	 The analytical oxidation mode
	
∑	 The empirical oxidation mode
	
∑	 The full physical oxidation mode
	
The oxidation module includes:
	
∑	 Simulation in empirical, full physical, or hybrid mode
	
∑	 Empirical mode applied for very thin oxidation layers
	
∑	 Deal-Grove and Massoud models used in empirical mode
	
∑	 Simulation in full physical mode of oxidant transport, reaction 
on the Si/SiO2 interface, viscous flow, material deformation, 
and stress formation
	
∑	 Automatic switching between empirical and full physical 
modes, depending on oxide thickness
	
∑	 Empirical mode used in planar regions with coarse mesh, 
allowing layer thicknesses smaller than mesh size to be 
resolved
	
∑	 Full physical mode used in regions with fine mesh
	
∑	 Stress-dependent oxygen transport and interface reaction
	
∑	 Orientation dependence, doping dependence, and ambient 
conditions
	
VictoryProcess includes a module for plasma etching. The module 
is designed to simulate plasma etching processes at the feature-scale 
size. The simulation in the reactor-scale region is out of the scope 
of VictoryProcess. All transport characteristics data (as functions 
of reactor parameters needed for the feature-scale simulation) 
are modeled by user-definable C functions and are supplied to the 
3D MOS Process Simulation

116
BiCMOS Process Simulations
module. The plasma etching simulator shares many elements with 
the standard physical etching/deposition module, such as:
	
∑	 The topology of a given feature is defined by its layers of 
various materials, as described by level set functions given on 
Cartesian meshes
	
∑	 All fine details of the structure are captured on embedded 
finer meshes, and automatic and/or manual adaptive mesh 
refinement is available.
	
∑	 Particles fluxes, etch rates for different materials, and types of 
particles involved in the process are modeled by appropriate 
functions, which are implemented in the user-accessible 
C-Interpreter model library.
	
∑	 All feature topological changes caused by the plasma etching 
process during a given time are captured by the solution of 
the corresponding partial differential equations acting on the 
level set functions.
	
∑	 A feature’s structure is automatically updated after the 
simulation time has expired.
	
The physical etching module includes:
	
∑	 Selective etching of several materials
	
∑	 Comprehensive set of default models
	
∑	 Selective isotropic etching
	
∑	 Selective anisotropic etching
	
∑	 Selective directional etching
	
∑	 Plasma etching
	
∑	 Ion milling
	
∑	 Material-dependent yield functions
	
∑	 Redeposition
	
∑	 Rotating beams and static beams
	
∑	 Reactive ion etching
	
∑	 Deep reactive ion etching
	
∑	 Ballistic transport of reactants
	
∑	 High performance due to multithreading
	
Physical deposition includes the following models:
	
∑	 Comprehensive set of default models
	
∑	 Conformal deposition

117
	
∑	 Nonconformal deposition
	
∑	 Directional deposition
	
∑	 Selective deposition
	
∑	 No deposition on selected materials
	
∑	 Ion beam deposition
	
∑	 User-accessible yield functions
	
∑	 Rotating beams and static beams
	
∑	 Ballistic transport of reactants
	
The oxidation step is decomposed as a succession of the following 
basic processes:
	
∑	 Diffusion of oxygen through the oxide
	
∑	 Solving the diffusion equation
	
∑	 Reaction at the SiO2/Si interface
	
∑	 Volume expansion
	
∑	 Interface propagation
	
∑	 Deformation of the structure according to the mechanical 
behavior of each material
	
∑	 Viscous flow
	
∑	 Solving the creep flow problem
	
The diffusion module features include:
	
∑	 Fermi diffusion model compatible with ATHENA/SSuprem4
	
∑	 Fick diffusion model for nonsemiconductor materials
	
∑	 Simulation of multiple dopant diffusion
	
∑	 Accounts for solid solubility, dopant activation, and 
segregation
	
∑	 Simulation of transient enhanced diffusion effects
	
∑	 Three-stream and five-stream diffusion models
	
∑	 Point defect trapping and clustering models
	
∑	 Impurity segregation at all material interfaces
	
∑	 Impurity activation and solid solubility
	
∑	 Simulation of oxidation-mediated diffusion
	
The ion implantation module features include:
	
∑	 Analytical and Monte Carlo method for ion implantation
	
∑	 Analytical method using a wide range of implantation 
conditions
3D MOS Process Simulation

118
BiCMOS Process Simulations
	
∑	 Gaussian profiles, Pearson profiles, and dual Pearson profiles
	
∑	 User-definable profiles
	
∑	 By means of moments of the profile
	
∑	 By means of data files
	
∑	 Range-scaling techniques to take into account multimaterial 
layers
	
∑	 High-performance numerical algorithms and multithreading
	
The Monte Carlo method takes into account the following 
important implantation effects:
	
∑	 Ion channeling
	
∑	 Ion dose dependency due to damage accumulation
	
∑	 Effect of multiple layers of different materials
	
∑	 Partial shadowing of ion flux for tilted implants
	
The set of default models includes:
	
∑	 Direct, Fermi, five-stream, single-pair
	
∑	 Dopant activation and solid solubility
	
∑	 Impurity segregation at material interfaces
	
∑	 Point defect trapping
	
∑	 Point defect clustering
	
VictoryProcess is used for the investigation of a 3D process and 
device as it is suitable for many semiconductor technologies such 
as fin-shaped field-effect transistors (finFETs). There are several 
aspects of basic unit processes such as implantation, oxidation, 
etching, and deposition process characteristics which can be 
obtained by applying the fast operational modes of VictoryProcess. 
Among these characteristics are:
	
∑	 Rounded corners
	
∑	 Tapered sidewall
	
∑	 Nonconformal epitaxial growth
	
∑	 Selective geometrical etch
	
∑	 Selective chemical-mechanical polishing (CMP)
	
Three-dimensional process simulation for an NMOS transistor 
with shallow trench isolation is considered. It may be noted that 
the parameter mirror does create one half of the device with 
source and drain. Process simulation is performed for a quarter of 

119
the device. The model used in simulation is the fullcpl model for 
diffusion simulation, and point defects are taken into account during 
annealing. The fully coupled oxidation diffusion mode is used. The 
simulation starts in 2D and switches over to 3D later in the flow. 
Enhanced diffusion due to implantation-induced damage as well 
as oxidation-enhanced diffusion is taken into account as the fullcpl 
model is used. The main process steps for MOSFET fabrication are:
	
1.	 Initial substrate
	
2.	 Gate oxide deposition
	
3.	 Threshold voltage adjustment implant and gate poly
	
4.	 Lightly doped drain (LDD) implant and nitride spacer
	
5.	 Source/drain implant
	
6.	 Mirror structure and export to the device simulator
	
7.	 Contact definitions for device simulation
	
Specifications of the device are as follows:
	
∑	 Lg = 0.1 (gate length)
	
∑	 Wg = 0.2 (gate width)
	
∑	 Xw = 0.35 (x direction analysis region)
	
∑	 Yw = 0.4 (y direction analysis region)
	
∑	 Zw = 2.0 (substrate depth)
	
∑	 Dep = 0.3 (trench depth)
	
∑	 Hpoly = 0.1 (poly height)
	
∑	 Ztop = 0.3 (analysis region top)
	
∑	 tSi3N4 = 0.05 (Si3N4 sidewall thickness)
	
The simulation procedure includes:
	
1.	 Defining of simulation domain and wafer material
	
2.	 Simulation mesh resolution and substrate doping
	
3.	 Defining of mask layers for the process simulation
	
4.	 Trench etching
	
5.	 Etching and deposition with geometrical mode
	
6.	 Saving of simulation status and export to TonyPlot format for 
visualization
	
Figures 4.22 through 4.34 show the VictoryProcess-generated 
structures for the main process steps described above for a MOSFET.
3D MOS Process Simulation

120
BiCMOS Process Simulations
Materials:
Si3N4
SiO2
Silicon
Figure 4.22  Oxidation of trench sidewall and annealing in dry oxidation 
ambient.
Materials:
Si3N4
SiO2
Silicon
Figure 4.23  Fill in trench/CMP and etching, deposition, and CMP with 
geometrical mode.
Materials:
SiO2
Silicon
Figure 4.24  Channel implantation through scattering oxide and deposition 
with geometrical mode and implantation with analytical mode.

121
Materials:
SiO2
Silicon
Boron (/cm3)
1.2422e + 18
3.7208e + 16
1.1145e + 15
3.3384e + 13
1e + 12
Figure 4.25  Removal of scattering oxide and annealing in wet oxidation 
ambient.
Materials:
SiO2
Silicon
Figure 4.26  Switch to 3D simulation, gate patterning, and deposition with 
geometrical mode and mask.
Materials:
Polysilicon
SiO2
Silicon
Figure 4.27  Poly reoxidation, annealing in dry oxidation ambient, halo 
implantation, implantation with Monte Carlo mode, extension implantation, 
implantation with Monte Carlo mode, and activation of the cluster damage.
3D MOS Process Simulation

122
BiCMOS Process Simulations
Materials:
Polysilicon
SiO2
Silicon
Arsenic (/cm3)
1.6539e + 21
8.2013e + 18
4.0668e + 16
2.0166e + 14
1e + 12
Figure 4.28  Gate sidewall, and etching and deposition with geometrical mode.
Materials:
Si3N4
SiO2
Polysilicon
Silicon
Figure 4.29  N-S/D implantation and implantation with analytical mode.
Materials:
Si3N4
SiO2
Polysilicon
Silicon
Arsenic (/cm3)
1.6539e + 21
8.2013e + 18
4.0668e + 16
2.0166e + 14
1e + 12
Figure 4.30  S/D anneal and annealing in inert ambient.

123
Materials:
Si3N4
SiO2
Polysilicon
Silicon
Net Doping (/cm3)
1.9653e + 18
5.249e + 16
1.4019e + 15
3.7442e + 13
1e + 12
Figure 4.31  End front-end process flow, export structure for device simulation, 
and add mask layer for contact formation.
Materials:
Si3N4
Aluminum
SiO2
Polysilicon
Silicon
Figure 4.32  Export simulation status to a format and a mesh suitable for 
VictoryDevice.
Materials:
Si3N4
Aluminum
SiO2
Polysilicon
Silicon
Net Doping (/cm3)
1.9865e + 18
5.2913e + 16
1.4094e + 15
3.7542e + 13
1e + 12
Figure 4.33  Final device structure showing net doping.
3D MOS Process Simulation

124
BiCMOS Process Simulations
Materials:
Aluminum
SiO2
Si3N4
Polysilicon
Silicon
Net Doping (/cm3)
1.9865e + 18
5.2913e + 16
1.4094e + 15
3.7542e + 13
1e + 13
Figure 4.34  Final device structure showing the grid generated by 
VictoryProcess.
4.6  Summary
A CMOS is the most widely used discrete device structure in the 
semiconductor sector. Process optimization for manufacturability is 
one of the most challenging issues in the semiconductor industry 
since the adoption of the submicron CMOS technology. The CMOS 
process was optimized for understanding the overall process and 
technology limitations. In this chapter, both bipolar and CMOS 
technology issues, such as threshold voltage and saturation current 
control, and methods to optimize the process through a series of 
characterization studies were discussed.
References
	 1.	 Bhoj, A. N. (2013). Device-Circuit Co-Design Approaches for Multi-Gate 
FET Technologies, PhD thesis, Princeton University.
	 2.	 Linder, M. (2001). DC Parameter Extraction and Modeling of Bipolar 
Transistors, 
PhD 
dissertation, 
Kungliga 
Tekniska 
Högskolan, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

The International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors 
(ITRS) predicts required target performances of SiGe/SiGeC HBTs 
for addressing the future need of emerging applications. Figure 
5.1 shows the cutoff frequency, fT, and the maximum oscillation 
frequency, fmax, the ITRS targets for SiGe HBTs, together with an area 
indicating the best experimental frequency performance achieved 
so far. The ITRS longer-term roadmap calls for HBTs operating 
at fT/fmax of 460/500 GHz in 2015 and 570/610 GHz in 2020. 
Bandgap engineering concepts that were previously only possible 
to implement in compound semiconductor technologies, have now 
become viable in silicon technology (see Ref. [8] of Chapter 1). The 
property of Si1-xGex that is of interest for bipolar transistors is the 
bandgap, which is smaller than that of Si and controllable by varying 
the Ge content. State-of-the-art circuits involving SiGe HBTs are 
primarily in data communication and radar systems at 24, 60, and 
77 GHz where SiGe HBTs are operated close to fT/3.
	
Currently many research groups are moving SiGe HBTs into the 
cutoff frequency range close to 500 GHz and above, enabling the 
future development of communication, imaging, or radar-integrated 
circuits working at frequencies up to 160 GHz. Currently, these bands 
are dominated by III–V technologies like GaAs HEMTs. The concept 
of bandgap engineering in Si technology provides a new degree 
of freedom in the design of the base, allowing the base doping to 
Chapter 5
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
Introducing Technology Computer-Aided Design (TCAD): Fundamentals, Simulations, and Applications
C. K. Maiti
Copyright © 2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-51-2 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36450-6 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

126
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
be increased and the base width to be reduced, while at the same 
time maintaining a reasonable value of gain. In this way, much 
higher values of fT and fmax may be achieved. The main drawbacks 
in existing SiGe HBT designs are the necessary high bias currents 
leading to high power dissipation and limited noise. To achieve low 
noise there is a need for transistors with higher fT and fmax.
Figure 5.1  ITRS fT and fmax targets for SiGe HBTs, together with the region 
showing the best SiGe HBTs available [1].
	
As silicon and germanium are completely miscible over the 
entire compositional range, bandgap engineering can be profitably 
used in silicon technology. The lattice constant difference of Si 
and Ge is about 4.17%, and if one is grown on the other below the 
critical thickness, the layer is strained. This strain has been used to 
vary the bandgap energy, band discontinuities, and effective mass 
to split the valley degeneracy and other electronic properties. For 
the last several years, silicon-germanium has shown great promise 
for novel device applications. In the near future, SiGe devices and Si/
SiGe superlattice-based devices may even play an important role in 
the integration of complex electronic circuitry with optoelectronic 
functionality on a single integrated circuit (IC) chip. SiGe is helping 
to meet the challenges of the mobile communication market by 
providing high integration, high performance, low noise, low current 
consumption, and outstanding efficiency.
	
The addition of substitutional carbon to silicon-germanium 
thin films leads to a new class of semiconducting materials (SiGeC). 
This new material can remove some of the constraints (such as the 
critical layer thickness) on strained Si1–xGex and may open up a new 
field of device applications for heteroepitaxial Si-based systems. 

127
The incorporation of carbon can be used to enhance the SiGe layer 
properties, to obtain layers with new properties, and to control 
dopant diffusion. The incorporation of carbon allows one to use 
a higher boron dose within the SiGe base layer and/or narrower 
undoped SiGe spacers, leading to significantly improved transistor 
performance.
	
The introduction of a low concentration of carbon (<1020 cm–3) 
in the SiGe region of SiGe HBTs has several significant effects, a 
compensation of the compressive strain in the lattice, a reduction 
of the boron out-diffusion from the base region, and a change in the 
bandgap being the most important to HBT devices. The presence 
of carbon also relaxes technological process design constraints by 
reducing the sensitivity of dopant profiles to subsequent processing 
steps. When compared to SiGe technologies, the addition of carbon 
offers significantly greater flexibility in process design and a greater 
latitude in processing margins.
	
HBTs outperform BJTs in their high-frequency performance, 
owing to the following reasons. Firstly, for the HBT, the emitter 
being doped lighter than the base leads to significant lowering of 
the emitter junction capacitance, which, in turn, reduces the emitter 
charging time. Another important degree of freedom available 
in HBTs is in increasing the base doping. The facility to increase 
base doping to almost the solubility limit of the material enables 
significant reduction in base sheet resistance. This is quite unlike the 
BJTs, where emitter doping must exceed that of the base to have a 
practically useful current gain. The performance advantages of SiGe 
HBTs over Si BJTs for RF/microwave applications are mainly the 
high cutoff frequencies. Further, by incorporating the grading of the 
energy gap in the base, HBTs can develop large quasi-electric fields 
in the base at higher base-doping levels. This would significantly 
minimize base transit time, thereby boosting cutoff frequency 
values.
	
When optimized, all-silicon devices show a typical cutoff 
frequency of 50 to 70 GHz, while the corresponding SiGe device 
switches at approximately two to three times that speed. In  
the SiGe HBTs the presence of germanium in the base region reduces  
the bandgap of the base. The reduction in the base bandgap of a SiGe 
HBT lowers the potential barrier to electron injection into the base 
and thus exponentially increases the number of electrons injected 
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs

128
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
from emitter to base for a fixed bias, even if the base is doped more 
heavily than the emitter. Although part of this high gain is sacrificed 
to a very high base doping concentration necessary to achieve a low 
base resistance compared to a Si BJT, it offers an additional degree 
of freedom, which relaxes a series of trade-offs affecting the device 
design. Several key advantages of SiGe HBTs over conventional 
bipolar devices include a higher cutoff frequency, improved noise 
performance with a higher cutoff frequency, and high early voltage 
and gain product.
	
Two types of SiGe HBTs have been demonstrated, a graded-base 
HBT and a box-profile HBT. In both processes, the addition of Ge 
in the base allows for a reduced base transit time for a given base 
sheet resistance, thus providing a device with a simultaneously high 
cutoff frequency and maximum oscillation frequency. A higher base 
doping concentration also provides advantages in both a higher 
early voltage (due to less modulation of the space region into the 
neutral base) and low noise due to a low intrinsic base resistance, 
which translates into performance advantages for RF applications. 
The effect of SiGe on the base bandgap and transport properties can 
be advantageously used in the bipolar transistor to provide a higher 
collector current and reduce the carrier transit time. As a SiGeC alloy 
has a lower bandgap than Si, a bipolar transistor could be created 
with SiGeC in the base to obtain much higher values of current gain.
	
The cross section of a representative SiGe HBT is shown in Fig. 5.2. 
Although the inherent band offset caused by the Ge profile occurs in 
the valence band, it is effectively translated to the conduction band. 
With a constant p-type doping in the base, both the Fermi level and 
the energy difference between the Fermi level and valence band are 
fixed; the Ge grading induces a valence band offset, but because the 
Fermi level must remain constant in equilibrium, it must decrease 
in energy along with the conduction band edge. For DC operation, 
one fundamental impact of the graded conduction band offset is to 
enhance minority electron transport across the base by inducing 
a drift field. In addition, the Ge content at the emitter–base (EB) 
junction will reduce the potential barrier for electron injection 
from the emitter to the base, yielding exponentially greater electron 
injection for the same applied VBE (i.e., higher current gain). Finally, 
a finite Ge content at the collector–base (CB) junction will positively 

129
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
influence the output conductance of the transistor (i.e., higher 
early voltage), since the smaller base bandgap near the CB junction 
effectively weights the base profile so that back-side depletion of the 
neutral base with increasing VCB is suppressed. For AC operation, 
the Ge grading-induced drift field will intuitively lead to a reduced 
base transit time, which typically is the limiting transit time that 
determines performance metrics such as the maximum operating 
frequency. In addition, the Ge-enhanced injection of electrons from 
the emitter into the base dynamically produces a back-injection of 
holes from the base into the emitter. This reduces the emitter charge 
storage delay time, which is reciprocally related to the AC current 
gain of the transistor. To understand the differences between the 
SiGeC HBT and the Si BJT the band diagrams of both are compared 
in Fig. 5.3.
Figure 5.2  Cross section of a representative first-generation SiGe HBT [2].
	
These DC and AC effects are dependent on the profile of the 
Ge content, especially the mole fraction at the EB junction and the 
degree of grading across the neutral base. However, trade-offs in 
profile design exist because of the fact that SiGe film stability limits 
the total Ge content that can be present. Consequently, different 
Ge profiles can be designed to achieve specific performance goals. 
For example, a triangular profile beginning at the EB junction and 
peaking just inside the CB space charge region would maximize 
the frequency performance and early voltage, while providing little 
improvement to the current gain. A box-shaped profile that is flat 
across the base would maximize the DC current gain but would 

130
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
not enhance electron transport across the base. Alternately, a 
trapezoidal profile 3 would simultaneously improve all performance 
metrics, albeit to a lesser extent. At present, state-of-the-art n-p-n 
SiGe HBTs have been demonstrated with peak fT and fmax above 
400 GHz at room temperature.
(a)
(b)
BJT
HBT
electrons
EFE
Ee
qVBE
ET
emitter
n+Si
base
p-Si1-xGex
electrons
Ee
EFE
qVBE
ET
emitter
n+Si
base
p-Si1-xGex
DEg
qVBC
EFB
EFC
collector
n+Si
Ge content
emitter
(b)
linear grated
base
cellector
collector
n+Si
EFC
EFB
DEg
qVBC
Ge content
(a)
emitter rectangular
base
cellector
BJT
Liner grade
holes
holes
Figure 5.3  Comparison of the band diagrams of a SiGeC HBT (solid line) and 
a Si bipolar transistor (dashed line). (a) The band structure for a Si bipolar 
transistor and a rectangular Ge base profile (HBT). (b) The band structure for a 
Si bipolar transistor and a linearly Ge-graded SiGe HBT [3].
	
After the introduction to the merits of SiGe HBTs and a brief look 
at the status of SiGe world, we consider in this chapter the following:
 
∑	 The development of a TCAD-based comprehensive simulation 
framework for developing a scaling roadmap for SiGeC
 
∑	 The understanding and modeling of linearity in SiGeC devices 
and circuits
 
∑	 The development of a TCAD-based methodology for reliability 
stress analysis and predictive virtual aging of SiGeC devices 
and circuits

131
SiGe HBTs
5.1  SiGe HBTs: Process and Device Simulation
In this section, we consider the fabrication and analysis of a SiGe 
heterojunction bipolar transistor (HBT) using the ATHENA-ATLAS 
combination. A bipolar device with a SiGe base is created in ATHENA 
and then passed to ATLAS for electrical analysis to extract a Gummel 
plot and other device characteristics. The simulated device structure 
can be directly used as input for device simulation; however, a 
regridding procedure is generally used for robust device simulation. 
Using DeckBuild’s autointerface the process simulation structure 
has been passed into ATLAS automatically. This autointerface 
therefore allows global optimization from process simulation to 
device simulation to SPICE model parameter extraction. Device 
simulation software was used to determine electrical characteristics 
of a given device structure for a set of bias conditions.
	
First is the ATHENA process simulation of the HBT and second 
the ATLAS electrical analysis. Process simulation for SiGe HBTs is 
distinguished from complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor 
(CMOS) process simulation by its critical dependence on Si-Si1–
xGex/Si epitaxy and the interaction of polysilicon on silicon in the 
formation of the emitter and base structures. The challenge for 
SiGe HBT process simulation is to accurately simulate SiGe epitaxy 
and heavily doped polysilicon-silicon systems and combine this 
capability with the CMOS-specific process operations that dominate 
a modern SiGe bipolar complementary metal-oxide semiconductor 
(BiCMOS) technology.
	
The emergence of SiGe BiCMOS technologies has made bipolar 
transistor simulation an important part of the demand for state-
of-the-art process simulation capability. SiGe BiCMOS technologies 
utilize many of the same process operations as CMOS devices and, 
therefore, benefit directly from the simulation expertise gained 
from submicron CMOS process modeling research. However, one 
disadvantage of adding Ge in the base is the possibility of the 
formation of a parasitic barrier at the base–collector junction, which 
becomes more pronounced at high current densities. The epitaxial 
base in SiGe HBTs is a complex region in which B, Ge, and carbon 
atoms are deposited. Point defects flow through the base as a result 
of P and As out-diffused from the subcollector, emitter diffusions, 
extrinsic base implants, and selectively implanted collector (SIC) 
implants, all of which influence the boron diffusion in the intrinsic 

132
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
base. In the SiGe or SiGeC base both the Ge and C concentrations 
have a strong influence in the base diffusion mechanics. It is well 
known that C controls the B diffusivity in SiGeC base by trapping 
the interstitials, while the Ge concentration affects the B diffusion 
by both strain and Ge:B clustering mechanisms. The major SiGe HBT 
fabrication process steps are:
	
o	 Isolation trench definition
	
o	 Subcollector implantation
	
o	 Subcollector activation
	
o	 Polysilicon base–contact deposition
	
o	 Definition of base opening
	
o	 SiGe base deposition
	
o	 Collector implantation (SIC)
	
o	 Nitride spacer definition
	
o	 Metallization and final anneal
	
The ATHENA run starts by defining the mesh and the silicon 
substrate. A 2D SiGe HBT structure is constructed using a technology 
computer-aided design (TCAD) process simulator ATHENA. The 
process started with the formation of the n+ buried collector layer 
by ion implantation of As ions at 50 keV at a dose of 7 × 1017 cm–3. 
This was followed by a diffusion drive-in at 1100°C for two minutes. 
An arsenic-doped, 0.1 μm thick collector epitaxial layer was formed 
next, followed by the formation of the shallow trench isolation (STI) 
regions and the n+ collector reach through by ion implantation 
using arsenic. Geometrical etching was used to form the STI regions, 
which implied that the silicon etched was merely removed from the 
structure. In addition, geometrical etching, which is simulated as a 
low-temperature process, ignores impurity redistribution. Note that 
geometrical etching was used to simulate all etching steps in this 
SiGe HBT fabrication process. The base region was fabricated next.
	
The extrinsic p+ base polysilicon and appropriate etch stop 
layers are deposited and the emitter window is opened. Next, the 
SIC is fabricated using the extrinsic base polysilicon as a self-aligned 
mask. An under etch is performed to remove a thin layer of silicon 
under the emitter window. The intrinsic base had a thickness of  
20 nm and a uniform boron doping profile of 1 × 1019 cm–3. The 
next step is the deposition of the silicon-germanium layer. The Ge 
content was graded from 10% at the emitter side to 30% at the 

133
collector side. To reduce boron out-diffusion during subsequent 
thermal cycles, a boxed carbon profile of 2 × 20 cm–3, which 
corresponds to 0.4% concentration, was also incorporated into 
the SiGe base. The emitter polysilicon was deposited followed by a 
thermal anneal. Out-diffusion of arsenic from the emitter polysilicon 
formed the monoemitter region. Note that in the latest fabrication 
processes, both the emitter and base polysilicon layers are silicided 
with titanium, cobaltm or nickel to reduce their sheet resistivity. 
The cross section of the ATHENA-constructed device is shown in  
Fig. 5.4a. The doping profile is shown in Fig. 5.4b. Note that the 2D 
SiGe HBT structure constructed is fairly ideal.
Microns
-0.2
-0.1
-0.2
-0.8
-0.4
0.4
0.8
1.2
0
Microns
(a)
(b)
0.1
0.2
0
Microns
-0.2
-0.1
0.1
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.8
-0.4
0.4
0.8
1.2
0
Microns
Materials
Silicon
Polysilicon
SiO2
Aluminum
SiGe
Net Doping (/cm)
21.2
20.1
18.9
17.8
16.6
15.5
14.3
13.2
12
Materials
Silicon
Polysilicon
SiO2
Aluminum
Electrodes
SiGe
Figure 5.4  (a) Cross section of a simulated SiGe HBT. (b) Doping profile in the 
simulated SiGe HBT.
SiGe HBTs

134
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
	
Quite often, the mesh used in process simulations is not 
suitable for device simulations. In this particular case of SiGe 
HBTs, for example, a fine mesh is required to properly account for 
the implantation and the subsequent dopant out-diffusion due to 
annealing of the subcollector region. Also, a fine mesh is needed to 
properly resolve the implantation of the SIC region. However, from 
the device simulation point of view, a fine mesh is generally only 
required for the emitter and base regions. Since in most cases the 
simulation time grows geometrically with the number of nodes, 
having a mesh that is too fine unnecessarily increases the simulation 
time. DevEdit, which is a software program part of the Silvaco 
simulation software suite, is used to remesh the structure obtained 
from ATHENA for the device simulations.
	
The new mesh for the structure ensures a gradual change in 
the mesh from the coarse regions to the fine regions, which is also 
important for numerical convergence. The final structure showing 
the new mesh is shown in Fig. 5.5a,b. The following models and 
options are enabled in the device simulations: drift-diffusion 
equations, lattice heating, Auger recombination, concentration-
dependent Shockley–Read–Hall recombination, concentration-
dependent 
mobility, 
field-dependent 
mobility, 
band-to-band 
tunneling, bandgap narrowing, and Fermi–Dirac statistics. Several 
important SiGe HBT parameters such as doping profile, Ge content, 
band diagram, Gummel plot, and cutoff frequency are shown in Figs. 
5.6 through 5.10.
	
For radio-frequency (RF) applications, advanced simulations 
of high-frequency noise as well as intermodulation characteristics 
may be useful in the intrinsic device design phase but are often not 
considered necessary for predictive modeling. RF noise simulations 
are possible using impedance field methods. The noise simulation 
based on the impedance field method module in ATLAS was 
employed for the noise simulation. The correlation between the 
base and collector terminal noise sources is captured. Figure 5.11 
shows the NFMIN at 1.9 GHz versus collector current density of the 
simulated SiGe HBT.

135
-0.2
-0.1
0.1
-1.2
(a)
(b)
-0.8
-0.4
-0.5 -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
0
Microns
Microns
Microns
0
-0.2
-0.1
0.1
Microns
0
Materials
Silicon
Polysilicon
SiO2
Aluminum
SiGe
Materials
Silicon
Polysilicon
SiO2
Aluminum
SiGe
Net Doping (/cm)
21.2
20.1
18.9
17.8
16.6
15.5
14.3
13.2
12
Figure 5.5  (a) Cross section of the simulated SiGe HBT structure after 
remeshing. (b) Cross section of the simulated SiGe HBT structure after 
remeshing (zoomed-in view).
SiGe HBTs

136
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
Figure 5.6  Doping profile as a function of depth in the simulated SiGe HBT.
Figure 5.7  Germanium content in the simulated SiGe HBT.

137
Figure 5.8  Band diagram of the simulated SiGe HBT.
Figure 5.9  Gummel plot of the simulated SiGe HBT.
SiGe HBTs

138
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
1.6e+11
1.4e+11
1.2e+11
1e+11
8e+10
6e+10
4e+10
2e+10
-4
-3
Collector Current (A)
Cutoff Frequency (GHz)
Figure 5.10  Cutoff frequency fT versus collector current density of the 
simulated SiGe HBT.
1.9
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
-4
-3
Collector Current (A)
Minimum Note Figure
1
Figure 5.11  NFMIN at 1.9 GHz versus collector current density of the simulated 
SiGe HBT.

139
5.2  High-Speed SiGe HBTs
Great motivation for continued performance scaling exists as a result 
of increasing performance requirements for existing RF through 
millimeter-wave applications, as well as emerging applications such 
as millimeter-wave to submillimeter-wave radars and sensors for 
security, automotive, and medical applications. The wide spectrum 
of applications includes radar to automotive (77 GHz), wireless 
broadband network, WiHDMI (60 GHz), and a range beyond  
100 GHz. The faster growth of the RF wireless communications 
market requires high-performance devices at low cost, because 
transistors fabricated on silicon offer ultralarge-scale integration 
capability and a high cutoff frequency. Figure 5.12III and Fig. 
5.13IV show the roadmap predicted by the ITRS in terms of transit 
frequency (fT) and maximum oscillation frequency by comparing 
the silicon components (CMOS and SiGe HBT) and III–V (InP high-
electron-mobility transistor [HEMT], InP HBT, GaAs and GaAs 
pHEMT, and nHEMT).
Figure 5.12  Evolution of transit frequency fT versus introduction year for 
silicon and III–V technology [4].
	
In millimeter-wave applications, the III–V technologies have 
dominated the silicon technologies for many years. Performances of 
High-Speed SiGe HBTs

140
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
silicon technologies are still lower than GaAs, pHEMTs, InP, and InP 
HBT HEMTs. However, advancements in silicon technology driven 
by high-performance digital applications offer advantages to the 
millimeter-wave designer. With geometry scaling and technology 
enhancements in both CMOS and SiGe HBTs, SiGe BiCMOS 
technology is the most advanced on the 130 nm node and below. For 
example, IHP Microelectronics announced fT/fmax = 300/500 GHz 
for its SG13G2 technology and STMicroelectronics fT/fmax = 300/400 
GHz for its B5T technology. IBM announced the introduction of 9HP 
technology SiGe BiCMOS with a couple fT/fmax 300/420 GHz on the 
node 90 nm CMOS technology, thus further increasing the degree of 
integration.
	
In 2010, IHP Microelectronics announced a SiGeC HBT with a 
maximum oscillation frequency of 500 GHz under the DOTFIVE 
project, which is considered as the highest for SiGe devices till date. 
The follow-up project DOTSEVEN is targeting the development of 
SiGeC HBT technologies with an fmax of around 700 GHz, which will 
open the door for terahertz (THz) applications. In recent years, the 
development of the SiGe HBT has progressed rapidly. In terms of fT 
and fmax, SiGe HBTs have advanced from 100 GHz of a few years ago 
to today’s 500 GHz and beyond in several research laboratories, as 
shown in Fig. 5.14.
Figure 5.13  Evolution of maximum oscillation frequency fmax versus 
introduction year for silicon and III–V technology [4].

141
Figure 5.14  fmax and the associated fT data from selected SiGe HBT vendors 
[4].
	
With the SiGe HBT breakdown voltage becoming a key challenge 
to performance scaling as a result of the inherent trade-off between 
peak fT and breakdown voltage, the collector doping profile and Ge 
retrograde in the CB junction must be carefully designed. Moreover, 
the development of next-generation SiGe HBTs will require 
implementation of new structures to minimize base resistance and 
CB capacitance.
	
Using 2D device simulations, it is predicted that the cutoff 
frequencies of SiGe HBTs can be scaled beyond 500 GHz. These 
devices have the potential to enable advanced millimeter-wave 
circuits. However, shot noise correlation, which is captured through 
noise transit time, becomes increasingly important as circuit 
designers continue to push the operating frequencies of the circuits. 
Next, we investigate the technology development of state-of-the-art 
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs by means of TCAD. The objective of this work is 
to obtain an advanced HBT device very close to the real device, not 
only in its process fabrication steps, but also in its physical behavior, 
geometric architecture, and electrical results. This investigation 
may lead to achieve the best electrical performances for the devices 
studied, in particular a maximum operating frequency of 500 GHz. 
High-Speed SiGe HBTs

142
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
In the following sections, important parameters of SiGe HBTs (fT, 
fmax, and VA) will be considered in detail and attempts are made to 
illustrate how simulation has been used to optimize the device design 
for circuit applications. Base, emitter, and collector profile design 
issues at room temperature will be discussed. All the simulations 
have been performed using the Sentaurus device simulator. The 
description of the device technology named B3T is done, illustrated 
with structures obtained from process simulation. Models used for 
diffusion of doping species versus layer composition are discussed, 
followed by the introduction of the simulation process flow. The 
methodology used to calibrate model parameters is exposed and 
simulation results are compared to measurements made in real 
devices. The impact of some technological parameters (boron 
doping level, carbon and germanium contents) on doping profiles 
or on electrical performances is analyzed. Finally, simulation results 
are compared to fabricated B3T devices.
	
The predictive simulation of a SiGeC HBT with a base biaxially 
stressed on silicon requires taking into account the combined effects 
of specific properties of the ternary SiGeC alloy and the biaxial strain 
induced by the lattice mismatch. In our simulations, we consider 
anisotropic analytical mobility models based on Monte Carlo 
simulations for a low electric field for SiGeC alloys.
	
Of all the parameters studied, in this study we will focus on the 
influence of the boron doping level in the base, the carbon content, 
and germanium on the device characteristics. These three parameters 
are very important for the improvement of transistor performance. 
On the percentage carbon for obtaining good performance for the 
transistor, it can be concluded that it must remain below 1%, with 
an optimum of about 0.5% for maximum-possible fT and fmax.
5.3  SiGeC HBTs: Process and Device Simulation
We consider the SiGeC bipolar process technology in the latest 
high-speed 0.13 μm BiCMOS technology from STMicroelectronics, 
as available in Ref. [3]. The development of this TCAD simulation 
is based on STMicroelectronics’ advanced BiCMOS technology 

143
for SiGe and SiGeC HBTs. The front-end-of-line process of SiGeC 
HBT fabrication is shown in Fig. 5.15. The main steps of this HBT 
fabrication process is also illustrated in Figs. 5.16 through 5.24, with 
device cross sections obtained from the process simulation. The 
architecture and process flow of the HBT is quite complex due to 
diffusion of doping species (boron, arsenic) in the strained-SiGeC 
layer and formation of polycrystalline materials (emitter, extrinsic 
base layer) during the process. On a p-type silicon substrate, the 
process starts with the deposition of a thin oxide layer to keep out 
dirt, followed by an arsenic implantation to form the n+ buried 
layer. After the removal of the oxide a lightly doped n-type layer is 
deposited to form the collector. The active area of the transistor is 
then isolated and defined by the formation of the STI (Fig. 5.17). 
To contact the collector buried layer and to avoid a high-resistivity 
area between the buried layer and the contact area, n+ implantation 
(SINKER) is performed (Fig. 5.17). This is followed by the CMOS well 
implantation, the definition and opening of the bipolar area. The 
pedestal oxide layer is deposited, followed by a P-doped polybase 
and a stack of oxide/nitride layers (Fig. 5.18). Once etched selectively, 
the pedestal oxide is used to prepare the intrinsic base region and 
the connection with the extrinsic polybase layer.
	
After these successive depositions the emitter window is defined 
and opened via photolithography (Fig. 5.19). Thin and thick layer 
stacks of oxide and nitride are used and anisotropically etched. The 
pedestal oxide is isotropically etched in order to release the surface 
on top of the collector, giving enough space under the polybase for 
the subsequent connection between the intrinsic and the extrinsic 
base (Fig. 5.20). The fully self-alignment of junctions lies on this 
method associated with the selective SiGeC base epitaxy. The SIC 
is carried out through this opening. The boron-doped SiGeC base is 
then grown epitaxially, producing a thin single-crystal layer on top 
of the SIC (Fig. 5.21). The base growth is followed by the emitter 
spacers’ formation (Fig. 5.22) and the polyemitter deposition (Fig. 
5.23). The final device is defined by the polyemitter and polybase 
patterning (Fig. 5.24) and finalized with the spike activation and the 
cobalt silicidation. Then, tungsten plugs and via are processed, and 
the subsequent BiCMOS 6 levels metal back-end-of-line is performed.
SiGeC HBTs

144
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
P substrate
N+ buried layer
Collector epitaxy
Shallow Trench
Isolation
N+ Sinker
Implantation
CMOS Well
Implantation
Cobalt salicidation
SIC implantation
Emitter window
patterning
Oxide/nitride
stack implantation
Polybase
implantation
Pedestal oxide &
polybase deposition
Bipolar area
opening
Spike activation
anneal
Polyemitter &
polybase patterning
Polyemitter
deposition
Emitter inside
spacers formation
SiGe:C base epitaxy
Figure 5.15  Process flow for SiGeC HBT fabrication. Main fabrication steps are 
shown [3].
Figure 5.16  Implantation of the N + buried layer and collector epitaxy. This 
figure and the following figure show the cross section of the HBT process.

145
Figure 5.17  Shallow trench isolation (STI in dark region) and N+ sinker 
implantation (between the two STI). The left edge of the figure is the central 
axis of the HBT.
Figure 5.18  Deposition of the pedestal oxide (dark), the polybase, and the 
nitride.
Figure 5.19  Emitter window patterning (thick protecting layers, anisotropic 
etching).
SiGeC HBTs

146
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
Figure 5.20  Oxide etching to define the intrinsic base region (self-alignment of 
the two junctions) and selective implantation of the collector (SIC) owing to this 
nitride uncovered region (left side of the figure).
Figure 5.21  Intrinsic SiGe:C boron-doped base epitaxy, and Si-cap.
Figure 5.22  Emitter inside spacers’ formation.

147
Figure 5.23  Polyemitter depositions and annealing.
Figure 5.24  Polyemitter and polybase patterning.
	
Figure 5.25 illustrates the 2D device structure generated with 
the TCAD tool. As detailed in previous sections, the HBT results from 
a double-polysilicon fully self-aligned (FSA), with a boron-doped 
SiGeC base and one arsenic-doped monoemitter. The collector 
module is formed by an n+ buried layer, a collector epitaxy, and a 
SIC. Figure 5.26 focuses on the core of the HBT, showing more finely 
the different region of Si, SiGeC, oxide, nitride, and poly.
SiGeC HBTs

148
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
2
-1.5
-0.5
0.5
1.5
0
1
2
-1
Figure 5.25  Structure generated with the 2D simulation. Brown areas indicate 
oxide regions, orange areas the n-type doping, and blue areas the p-type 
doping. Because of symmetry, only one half of the structure is simulated [3].
Poly-Emitter
Extrinsic Base
Base-Collector Oxide
Collector
Emitter Contact
Nitride Spacer
L Spacer
SiGe:C Intrinsic Base
Figure 5.26  Structure obtained at the end of the electrical simulation with its 
main components. Brown areas indicate oxide regions, orange areas the n-type 
doping, and blue areas the p-type doping [3].
	
In the Sentaurus process simulator (SProcess), the different 
fabrication steps are introduced in an Sprocess command file. This 
file is the main input for the process simulator, containing all the 
process steps, and it can be edited according to user specifications. 
One-dimensional simulations are performed in order to obtain 
accurate layer profiles of dopants under the emitter window. The 
base epitaxy is formed by a Si/SiGeC/Si stack with a total thickness 
of about 50 nm. Boron doping and carbon incorporation is done 
during the epitaxy only in the central part of the SiGe layer. Ge 
content follows a graded profile, with 20% to 30% from the emitter 
side to the collector side of the SiGe base. The SiGe thickness is 
typically 20 nm. During the growth and the final thermal annealing, 
the diffusion of doping species gives broader layers than those 

149
deposited. Figure 5.27 shows the final structure obtained from 
TCAD according to the technology process flow shown in Fig. 5.15. 
The 2D process simulations lead to an accurate representation of 
real device and consequently realistic results. Figure 5.27 shows 
such critical parameters as L-shaped spacer length and thickness,  
nitride spacer thickness, BC oxide thickness, and external-to-internal 
base connection length. The 1D and 2D simulations are gathered for 
the species and doping profiles, and this structure will be used for 
device simulation.
Figure 5.27  2D key process parameters: (a) L-shaped oxide spacer width, (b) 
L-shaped oxide spacer thickness, (c) nitride spacer, (d) base–collector oxide, and 
(e) external-to-internal base connection [3].
	
Boron diffusion effect on the base width is shown in Fig. 5.28. 
The 2D representations shown in Fig. 5.28 illustrate the behavior for 
a doping level of 2 × 1019 cm–3 (~7 × 1018 cm–3 after diffusion), for 
which the base width is about 15 nm (Fig. 5.28b); for a doping level 
of 5 × 1019 cm–3 (~1 × 1019 cm–3), this is about 20 nm (Fig. 5.28c), 
and for a doping level of 8 × 1019 cm–3 (~2 × 1019 cm–3), this is about 
25 nm (Fig. 5.28d). Effects of carbon diffusion on the base width are 
shown in Fig. 5.29. The 1D doping profile of Fig. 5.29a shows the 
reduction of the boron diffusion with the addition of carbon. For 
the same B doping level (5 × 1019 at/cm–3), the increase of the C 
content leads to a higher boron peak and to a narrower base. Figure 
5.29 shows this effect for three different contents of carbon. Thus a 
content of 0.01% leads to a base width of 28 nm (Fig. 5.29b), while 
0.05% leads to 25 nm (Fig. 5.29c), and 0.1% reduces the base width 
to 20 nm (Fig. 5.29d).
SiGeC HBTs

150
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
1E22
1E21
1E20
1E19
1E18
1E17
1E16
1E15
–0.02      0       0.02     0.04    0.08
–0.32
–0.32
–0.32
–0.30
–0.30
–0.30
–0.24
–0.24
–0.24
–0.20
–0.20
–0.20
–0.26
–0.26
–0.26
–0.25
–0.25
–0.25
0
0
0
1.0b
1.0b
1.0b
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.15
0.15
0.15
r[mm]
r[mm]
r[mm]
Dpeth [mm]
l [mm]
l [mm]
l [mm]
Figure 5.28  (a) Simulated 1D profile for three different boron doping levels, 
(b) base width resulting from a doping level of 2 × 1019 at/cm3, (c) base width for 
B doping of 5 × 1019 at/cm3, and (d) base width for B 8 × 1019 at/cm3 [3].
	
After the 1D and 2D process simulation toward a predictive 
TCAD simulation, the device simulations are performed to account 
for the impact of the strained-SiGeC layer on the different electrical 
characteristics of the device. Figure 5.30 shows the structure 
simulated electrically, with a meshing density adapted to the HBT. 
The main material models used in all the device simulations are 
the Shockley–Read–Hall doping-dependent lifetime recombination 
model, Caughey–Thomas doping-dependent mobility model, and 
electric field–dependent mobility model.
	
For accurate device calibration, many electrical characteristics 
are compared to measurements, and a calibration methodology is 
applied with the following electrical characteristics:
 
∑	 The Gummel plot in order to precisely reproduce the collector 
and base currents in the low-to-moderate injection regime
 
∑	 The standard Gummel plot for the high injection regime

151
1E22
1E21
1E20
1E19
1E18
1E17
1E16
1E15
–0.3b
–0.3b
–0.3b
–0.3
–0.3
–0.3
–0.2b
–0.2b
–0.2b
–0.2b
–0.0
–0.0
–0.0
–0.0
1.00
1.0b
0.0b
0.1
1.1
0.1
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.2
0.2
0.2
–0.02       0        0.02     0.04     0.08
r [mm]
Dpeth [mm]
r [mm]
r [mm]
l [mm]
1.0E◊04
8.0E◊05
6.0E◊05
4.0E◊05
2.0E◊05
0.0E◊05
l [mm]
l [mm]
C perc.=0.1%
C perc.=0.05%
C perc.=0.01%
Figure 5.29  Impact of the carbon content on boron diffusion and base 
width. (a) 1D representation for three different boron doping levels and (b) 2D 
simulation for C percentage = 0.1%, (c) for C percentage = 0.05%, and (d) for C 
percentage = 0.01% [3].
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.30  TCAD cross section of a SiGe HBT elaborated under B3T 
technology process flow. (a) Process meshing and (b) electrical meshing of the 
final structure. 1D and 2D simulations are gathered for device simulation [3].
 
∑	 The Ib (VCE) characteristics extracted with the BVCEO simulation 
for the collector resistance and the base–collector junction
SiGeC HBTs

152
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
 
∑	 The fT(Ic) characteristics for the good evaluation of the 
dynamic device parameters
 
∑	 The fmax(Ic) characteristics for the good evaluation of the 
dynamic device parameters and parasitic capacitances and 
resistances
	
Next, we discuss different possible architectures of advanced 
SiGeC HBTs for achieving an fmax of 500 GHz. The simulated 
devices were fabricated in the framework of the Dotfive European 
program, where the objective was to design HBTs with a maximum 
oscillation frequency of 500 GHz. The simulated devices are SiGeC 
HBTs fabricated in low-cost B3T architecture and B4T and B5T 
technologies. B3T is a bipolar process technology derived from 
high-speed 0.13 μm BiCMOS technology from STMicroelectronics. It 
features 260 GHz/350 GHz for fT/fmax. The base epitaxy is formed by 
a Si/SiGeC stack with a thickness of about 40 nm of which 20 nm is 
the SiGeC base. The Ge-graded profile increases from the emitter side 
up to the collector side, varying from 20% to 30%. The C content is 
less than 1% within the same region. B4T was proposed to develop 
a device to give maximum oscillation frequencies beyond 400 GHz. 
This is an FSA HBT with a selective epitaxial growth of the boron-
doped SiGeC base layer. The collector is formed by an n+ buried layer, 
an epitaxial low-doped layer on it, and an SIC. The emitter is arsenic 
doped and covered by the polyemitter. The B5T technology is based 
in the B3T and B4T device platforms. B5T platform was proposed to 
improve the performance by pushing to limits of processing steps 
and find an optimized technology with design of experiments. The 
increase in frequency of operation can be obtained by optimizing the 
geometry doping profiles in the transistor regions and by reducing 
parasitic elements.
	
The main key process parameters and frequency values of the 
devices studied are compared in Table 5.1. The equivalent models 
used by default in the device simulator for the SiGeC HBT device are 
as follows:
 
∑	 Klaassen’s mobility model, which unifies the description of 
majority and minority carrier silicon bulk mobilities. The 
model includes the temperature dependence of the mobility 
and takes into account electron–hole scattering, screening 
of ionized impurities by charge carriers, and clustering of 
impurities.

153
 
∑	 The carrier energy relaxation time is assumed by the simulator 
as the same value as that of bulk silicon. By default, this is 
constant and is set to 0.3 ps for electrons and 0.25 ps for holes.
 
∑	 The bandgap model with Ge mole fraction dependencies. The 
fT and fmax performances for B5T devices are compared in Fig. 
5.31 with B4T and B3T technologies. While the fT enhancement 
is moderate among the three transistor technologies with a 
maximum value of ~260 GHz for B3T and B4T+ and ~280 GHz 
for B5T, fmax is improved by 17% from B3T to B4T+ and by 18% 
from B4T+ to B5T. Figure 5.32 compares fmax and fT values for 
the three architectures studied. The three structures have the 
same emitter window (200 nm) and the same emitter junction 
width (110 nm). A comparison of dynamic performances for 
the three architectures is made.
Table 5.1	
Comparison of process parameters and frequency values for the 
technologies studied
B3T
B4T+
B5T
Units
N+ buried layer 
doping
4 × 1017
8 × 1017
8 × 1017
at/cm–2
Emitter window
250
230
170
nm
Emitter width 
(WE)
120
90
75
nm
SIC dose/energy
6 × 1013/230
6 × 1013/155
5 × 1013/155
cm–2/keV
Si cap
18
15
14
nm
Carbon
0.8
0.8
0.5
%
Boron doping
5 × 1019
5 × 1019
5 × 1019
at/cm–3
fT
260
275
295
GHz
fmax
350
425
554
GHz
	
The 1D key process parameters are:
 
∑	 Silicon cap thickness implantation
 
∑	 Ge percentage, collector side
 
∑	 Ge percentage in the middle
 
∑	 Ge percentage, emitter side
 
∑	 C percentage
 
∑	 Emitter doping
SiGeC HBTs

154
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
Figure 5.31  TCAD simulations: comparison of fT and fmax versus Ic for B3T, B4T, 
and B5T technologies for VCB = 0.5V at 300 K (VCE ≈ 1.35V) [3].
f MAX
f T
250
200
150
100
50
Frequency (GHz)
I0(A)
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
0
I0(A)
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
I0(A)
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
f MAX
f T
f MAX
f T
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Frequency (GHz)
Frequency (GHz)
500
400
300
200
100
0
(a)
(b)
(c)
–0.4
–0.4
–0.4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.2
0.5
0.5
0.5
1
4b
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.4
g [mm]
c [mm]
c [mm]
c [mm]
g [mm]
g [mm]
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
Figure 5.32  Comparison of dynamic performances for the three architectures. 
(a) Low-cost B3T, (b) buried collector B3T, and (c) B4T at VCB = 0 V [3].

155
	
The 2D key process parameters are:
 
∑	 Emitter window opening
 
∑	 Base–collector oxide thickness
 
∑	 Emitter width
 
∑	 SIC option
 
∑	 SIC implantation energy
 
∑	 Definition of SIC depth
5.4  Strain-Engineered SiGe HBTs
The introduction of silicon-germanium in the base region of silicon-
based bipolar transistors offers improved overall performance at 
higher operating frequencies. SiGe BiCMOS technology features 
important advantages such as:
 
∑	 Inherently high forward current gain
 
∑	 Homogeneous high integration of bipolar transistors and 
CMOS
 
∑	 Power saving due to a higher transit frequency allowing a 
lower bias current for a given gain at a given frequency
 
∑	 Lower noise and high linearity
	
Advances in the development of Si/SiGe heterostructure devices 
have revealed many exciting possibilities for extending CMOS and 
BiCMOS technologies comfortably into RF circuitry. The current 
state-of-the-art SiGe BiCMOS is based on the integration of an 
advanced CMOS with n-p-n SiGe base HBTs on a silicon substrate. 
Consequently, the development and optimization of HBT devices has 
been mainly focused on n-p-n HBTs.
	
Currently the use of SiGe HBTs is widespread in CMOS technology. 
For over the last 50 years, performance enhancement in Si CMOS 
technology has been via the scaling laws. However, below the 90 nm 
technology node, performance enhancement through device scaling, 
such as shrinking the gate length and thinning the gate oxide, 
has become more and more difficult because of several physical 
limitations in downscaling of metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect 
transistors (MOSFETs). The so-called technology boosters as per the 
International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS) 2013 
Strain-Engineered SiGe HBTs

156
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
edition include strained-Si channels, ultrathin silicon-on-insulator 
(SOI), metal gate electrodes, multigate structures, ballistic transport 
channels, metal source/drain junctions, etc. Among the technology 
boosters, strained-Si channels (see Ref. [1] of Chapter 1) have been 
recognized as the technology applicable to near-term technology 
nodes. Strain engineering involves uniaxial and biaxial strain 
induction in silicon wafers. Process-induced strain and substrate-
induced strain have become the main avenues for strain engineering. 
The key differences between process-induced and substrate-induced 
strain have been discussed (see Ref. [10] of Chapter 1). Rapid 
progress in local strain techniques has been included in 90 nm logic 
CMOS technologies and below. Advancements in silicon technology 
driven by high-performance digital applications offer advantages to 
the millimeter-wave designer. Performance, quantified by fT and fmax 
has dramatically increased with geometry scaling and technology 
enhancements in both CMOS and SiGe HBTs. High-performance 
silicon-germanium technology has been used in high-frequency 
transceivers for millimeter-wave applications. To maintain this 
rapid rate of improvement, aggressive strain engineering of bipolar 
devices is required.
	
SiGe HBTs are realized by the pseudomorphic growth of the 
SiGe layer on a Si substrate, which allows engineering of the base 
region to improve performance where the base has a smaller energy 
bandgap than the emitter, which increases the gain. The energy 
bandgap of SiGe decreases with increasing Ge mole fraction, but 
the maximum Ge content is limited by the amount of strain that can 
be accommodated within a given base layer thickness. Therefore, a 
new innovation is necessary to overcome this limitation and meet 
the continuous demand for high-speed devices. Reports on attempts 
toward improvement of the performance of bipolar transistors using 
strain technology are limited. Application of the strain technology at 
a selected region of a bipolar device by means of a strained layer can 
strongly enhance the device performance due to the sensitivity of 
silicon material to strain.
	
Next, new device concepts and novel device architectures for 
bipolar devices that are based on strain engineering technology will 
be explored using TCAD modeling. The impact of strain engineering 
in n-p-n SiGe HBT devices on the electrical properties and frequency 
response will be presented. New n-p-n SiGe HBT device architecture 

157
employing strain engineering technology at the base and collector 
regions will be presented. In this approach the desired strain is 
introduced during the device fabrication process through the 
specific device architecture employing silicon nitride (Si3N4) and 
silicon oxide (SiO2) strain layers at the collector region of the bipolar 
device. The TCAD simulation methodology used consists of the 
following steps:
	
1.	 Virtually fabricate the device using process simulation.
	
2.	 Incorporate strain in process and evaluate the strain level 
obtained in the device.
	
3.	 Study the strain distribution in different zones in the device.
	
4.	 Define simulation parameters and physical models for device 
simulation.
	
5.	 Perform device simulation to analyze the device electrical 
performance.
5.5  n-p-n SiGe HBTs with an Extrinsic Stress 
Layer
Process and device simulations have been performed using 
Sentaurus TCAD software tools to build the device structure and 
to calculate the associated mechanical stress. The final devices 
structure is exported to Sentaurus Device for device simulation. 
The major processing steps of the stressed n-p-n SiGe HBT device 
architecture are:
 
∑	 Shallow and deep trenches’ isolation
 
∑	 Deposition of etch stop material and a thin layer of polysilicon
 
∑	 Formation of a base region
 
∑	 Deposition of oxide and nitride layers
 
∑	 Formation of an emitter mandrel and recesses
 
∑	 Deposition of a SiGe extrinsic stress layer
 
∑	 Emitter opening and formation of sidewall spacers
 
∑	 Formation of a T-shaped emitter
	
The complete HBT device structure with a SiGe extrinsic stress 
layer is shown in Fig. 5.33. Specific models for the SiGe bandgap, 
bandgap narrowing, effective mass, energy relaxation, mobility 
n-p-n SiGe HBTs with an Extrinsic Stress Layer

158
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
for hydrodynamic (HD), and drift-diffusion simulations have been 
implemented in the simulation. The study examined not only the 
transistor DC performance but also the RF performance through 
multiple optimizations for the explored vertical transistors.
Figure 5.33  Complete structure of the n-p-n SiGe HBT device with an extrinsic 
SiGe stress layer [5].
	
Due to the addition of the extrinsic stress layer, stress is 
generated inside the device (i.e., Sxx) and the stress values are 
calculated at the middle of the base. Approximately 500 MPa of an 
additive compressive stress (Sxx) is generated at the base region, and 
500 MPa of tensile stress (Sxx) is lessened at the collector region. 
Chapter 2 provides a detailed discussion of the stress calculation and 
the impact strain on the bandgap energy and the carrier mobility. 
Sentaurus TCAD software tools have been used to perform the 2D 
device simulations using an HD transport model. The default silicon 
models and parameter files included in the TCAD software library 
cannot be used for the SiGe device with external stress. Therefore, 
specific parameter files and physical models have been calculated 
and were implemented during device simulation.
	
To obtain accurate simulation results, the HBT device has been 
divided into two regions: The first one is the SiGe base, which is 
divided into two zones corresponding to different Ge content and 
doping concentration. The second region is the remaining part of the 
device without Ge content (the emitter and collector regions). The 
different device regions and zones are shown in Fig. 5.34.

159
-0.1
0.1
0.2
0.6
0.7
0.8
X [mm]
Y [mm]
0.9
0
Zone (I)
Zone (II)
graded Ge profile
Figure 5.34  Different regions and zones used for device simulations [5].
	
Simulation results show that introducing an extrinsic stress 
layer on the HBT device structure will enhance the maximum 
oscillation frequency and the cutoff frequency. Approximately 5% 
of improvement in fmax, and 3% of improvement in fT have been 
achieved in comparison to the standard, conventional SiGe HBT 
device (without an extrinsic stress layer). The intensive study of the 
transit time in the strain-engineered n-p-n SiGe HBT device shows 
a significant decrease in total transit time in comparison to the 
standard, conventional n-p-n SiGe HBT device, which arises from the 
reduction of the collector transit time, verifying that silicon material 
is more sensitive to strain than the SiGe base region and the device 
performance improvements are mainly due to the impact of the 
induced strain at the collector region. The components of the transit 
time have been extracted for both SiGe HBT devices as a function 
of the collector current and are shown in Fig. 5.35. Simulation 
results show that introducing the extrinsic stress layer on the device 
structure will decrease the total transit time and hence improve the 
device performance.
	
In addition, the impact of changing the device’s emitter width 
on the device performance has been studied. The result shows that 
increasing the emitter width will decrease the stress values induced 
at the base, resulting in degradation in device performance. The 
n-p-n SiGe HBTs with an Extrinsic Stress Layer

160
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
impact of changing the Ge content at the extrinsic stress layer on 
the stress values generated inside the device (Sxx, and Szz) has been 
studied. As expected, increasing the Ge content at the extrinsic stress 
layer will increase the stress values generated inside the device. This 
is related to the increase of the lattice constant difference between 
the SiGe base layer and the SiGe stress layer, which will increase the 
stress values induced at the base. Nevertheless, increasing the Ge 
content at the stress layer will also increase the misfit dislocations 
between the two layers, which may cause degradation of device 
performance. Therefore, the Ge content at the stress layer must 
be controlled and chosen carefully to ensure device performance 
enhancement.
te, tb, tc [Ps]
1
0.1
0.1
1
10
Ic [mA]
te_without_stress
tc_without_stress
tb_without_stress
te_with_stress
tb_with_stress
tc_with_stress
Figure 5.35  Transit time versus collector current for an HBT device with and 
without an extrinsic stress layer [5].
5.6  n-p-n SiGe HBT Device Employing a Si3N4 
Strain Layer
Application of strain on the base region of an n-p-n SiGe HBT device 
has shown that it is less efficient in comparison to the Si bipolar 
junction transistor (BJT) as the SiGe base is already stressed due 
to the existence of Ge at the base. Here, a new n-p-n SiGe HBT 
device architecture employing strain engineering technology at 
the collector region will be presented. In this approach the desired 
strain is introduced during the device fabrication process through 

161
a specific device architecture employing silicon nitride (Si3N4) 
using the local strain technique. Nitride films can induce stresses 
greater than 1 GPa upon thermal treatment, which arises from two 
sources, the coefficient of thermal expansion mismatch between 
silicon and the nitride film and intrinsic film stress caused by film 
shrinkage. Processing conditions such as temperature, pressure, 
deposition power, and reactant and impurity concentrations are 
important factors in determining the magnitude and strain type 
(i.e., compressive or tensile). Details on the stress model used for 
the nitride film are available in Chapter 2. Process simulations  
are performed using Sentaurus TCAD software tools to build the 
device structure and to calculate the associated mechanical stress. 
The major processing steps of the silicon-nitride-stressed n-p-n SiGe 
HBT device architecture are:
 
∑	 Deposition of a silicon layer
 
∑	 Etching of the silicon layer
 
∑	 Deposition of a nitride layer
 
∑	 Nitride layer etching and silicon layer deposition
 
∑	 Deposition of a SiGe base
 
∑	 Deposition of an oxide layer, emitter opening, and deposition 
of a polysilicon layer
 
∑	 Etching of oxide and nitride layers and formation of a T-shaped 
emitter
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0.2
0
0.8
1.2
X [mm]
Y [mm]
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
1
Strees XX [Pa]
6.0E + 08
1.0E + 08
-2.4E + 08
-6.4E + 08
-1.1E + 09
-1.5E + 09
Figure 5.36  Final device structure showing stress isocontour lines generated 
inside the device [5].
	
Figure 5.36 shows the final device structure showing stress 
isocontour lines generated inside the device. Figure 5.37 shows a 
comparison between the stress values generated inside the standard, 
conventional SiGe HBT device and the proposed SiGe HBT device 
n-p-n SiGe HBT Device Employing a Si3N4 Strain Layer

162
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
employing a nitride strain layer at the collector region. Sentaurus 
TCAD software tools have been used to perform the 2D device 
simulations using an HD model without taking in consideration self-
heating effects. The stress-induced mobility enhancement has been 
calculated using the piezoresistivity model. A detailed description of 
the models used in the simulation is presented in Chapter 2.
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.1
0.2
X [mm]
Y [mm]
1.1
1
1
1.2
X [mm]
1.3
0
StrossXX [Pa]
4.0E + 00
1.2E + 08
-1.6E + 08
-4.4E + 08
-7.2E + 08
-1.0E + 09
StrossXX [Pa]
4.0E + 00
1.2E + 08
-1.6E + 08
-4.4E + 08
-7.2E + 08
-1.0E + 09
1.1
1.2
1.3
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.1
0.2
Y [mm]
0
Figure 5.37  Isocontour lines representing the stress values generated inside 
the device; standard, conventional n-p-n SiGe HBT device (left) and strained–
silicon nitride n-p-n SiGe HBT device (right) [5].
	
Simulation results of a comparison of fT and fmax for a strained-
HBT and a standard, conventional SiGe HBT device (without strain) 
are shown in Fig. 5.38 as a function of the collector current. The values 
of fT and fmax are obtained assuming a constant-gain-bandwidth 
product (–20 dB/decade slope) with respect to the current gain |h21| 
and the unilateral gain |U| characteristics at a spot frequency of 30 
GHz. The influence of introducing a nitride strain layer at the collector 
region is demonstrated. The results show that the poststrain HBT 
device exhibits better high-frequency characteristics in comparison 
to an equivalent standard, conventional device. Approximately 8% 
of improvement in fT and 5% of improvement in fmax have been 
achieved for the strained-silicon n-p-n SiGe HBT device. A trade-off 
between fT and fmax values may be achieved, as shown in Fig. 5.39, 
where fT is plotted versus fmax for different BVCEO values (i.e., with 
different collector doping). As shown in Fig. 5.39, an improvement of 
up to 43% in the fT value can be achieved for a given fmax, and up to 

163
7% of improvement in the fmax value for a given fT can be achieved by 
means of strain engineering, as well by choosing the proper collector 
doping level.
Figure 5.38  fT and fmax versus Ic for both strained- and unstrained-SiGe HBT 
devices (WE = 130 nm, VBC = 0 V) [5].
Figure 5.39  Trade-off between fT and fmax for both strained- and unstrained-
SiGe HBT devices [5].
n-p-n SiGe HBT Device Employing a Si3N4 Strain Layer

164
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
5.7  n-p-n SiGe HBT Employing a SiO2 Strain 
Layer
A second approach to improve the SiGe HBT device performance is 
to introduce strain in the device through using a silicon oxide (SiO2) 
stain layer at the collector region during device fabrication. Silicon 
has a high affinity for oxygen, and an amorphous native oxide film 
rapidly forms on Si upon exposure to an oxidizing ambient. During 
thermal processing the SiO2 layer expands and contracts at different 
rates compared to the silicon substrate according to their thermal 
expansion coefficients. Because of this mismatch, as well the growth 
of oxide on top of the silicon substrate, a mechanical strain is induced. 
In this case, the desired strain is induced at the collector region. A 
mechanical compressive strain is induced along the horizontal axis, 
and a mechanical tensile strain is induced along the vertical axis. 
Like the n-p-n SiGe HBT device employing a nitride strain at the 
collector region, process simulations are performed using Sentaurus 
TCAD software tools to build the device structure and to calculate 
the associated mechanical stress. The major processing steps are:
 
∑	 Deposition of a silicon layer
 
∑	 Etching of the silicon layer
 
∑	 Deposition of oxide, etching of oxide, and deposition of 
polysilicon
 
∑	 Deposition of silicon, followed by etching of oxide and 
polysilicon layers
 
∑	 Deposition of a SiGe base
 
∑	 Deposition of an oxide layer, emitter opening, and deposition 
of a polysilicon layer
 
∑	 Etching of oxide and nitride layers and formation of a T-shaped 
emitter
	
Figure 5.40 shows the final device structure obtained from 
process simulation showing stress isocontour lines generated 
inside the device. Figure 5.41 shows a comparison of isocontour 
lines representing the stress values generated inside the device: a 
conventional n-p-n SiGe HBT device (left) and a strained-SiO2 n-p-n 
SiGe HBT device (right). TCAD Sentaurus software tools have been 

165
used to perform the 2D device simulations using an HD model 
without taking in consideration the self-heating effect and thermal 
behavior. However, the device’s thermal behavior could be degraded 
by the formation of the oxide layer through affecting the device’s 
thermal conductivity. The fT and fmax characteristics as a function of 
the collector current for an n-p-n SiGe HBT device utilizing a SiO2 
strain layer at the collector region and a standard, conventional n-p-n 
SiGe HBT device are shown in Figs. 5.42a and 5.42b, respectively.
-0.4
-0.2
0
0
0.2
0.5
1.5
1
X[mm]
Y[mm]
2
StressXX [Pa]
8.0E + 08
4.4E + 08
8.0E + 07
-2.8E + 08
-6.4E + 08
-1.0E + 09
Figure 5.40  Final device structure obtained from process simulation showing 
stress isocontour lines generated inside the device [5].
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.1
0.2
X [mm]
Y [mm]
1.1
1
1
1.2
X [mm]
1.3
0
1.1
1.2
1.3
7.0E + 08
3.6E + 08
2.0E + 07
-3.2E + 08
-6.6E + 08
-1.0E + 09
StrossXX [Pa]
7.0E + 08
3.6E + 08
2.0E + 07
-3.2E + 08
-6.6E + 08
-1.0E + 09
StrossXX [Pa]
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.1
0.2
Y [mm]
0
Figure 5.41  Isocontour lines representing the stress values generated inside 
the device; standard, conventional n-p-n SiGe HBT device (left) and SiO2 strained 
n-p-n SiGe HBT device (right) [5].
	
The impact of introducing a SiO2 strain layer at the collector region 
on the device frequency response is demonstrated. Approximately 
14% of improvement in fT, and 9% of improvement in fmax have been 
n-p-n SiGe HBT Employing a SiO2 Strain Layer

166
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
achieved for n-p-n SiGe HBT device architecture employing a SiO2 
strain layer at the collector region in comparison to an equivalent 
standard, conventional HBT device. A trade-off between fT and fmax 
values may be achieved, as shown in Fig. 5.43, where fT is plotted 
versus fmax for different BVCEO values (i.e., with different collector 
doping). As shown in Fig. 5.43, an improvement up to 47% in the fT 
value can be achieved for a given fmax and up to 14% of improvement 
in the fmax value for a given fT can be achieved by means of strain 
engineering, as well by choosing the proper collector doping level.
Figure 5.42  (a) fT versus Ic and (b) fmax versus Ic for both strained- and 
unstrained-SiGe HBT devices (VCB = 0) [5].

167
340
330
320
310
300
290
280
270
260
160
180
200
220
240
260
fMAX [GHz]
280
300
320
340
360
380
~14%
~47%
Nc
Without_stress
With_stress
fT [GHz]
Figure 5.43  Trade-off between fT and fmax for both strained- and unstrained-
SiGe HBT devices [5].
5.8  Summary
In this chapter we have demonstrated the impact that TCAD can have 
in SiGe technology development, with an emphasis on the ability to 
simulate the full development cycle from the most sensitive process 
variation to the development of predictive compact models. The 
operating principle and properties of SiGe heterojunction and Si 
homojunction bipolar technologies are discussed from both DC and 
AC perspectives. The work presented in this chapter should help to 
obtain more physical and realistic simulations, better understanding 
the development and optimization of SiGe and SiGeC HBT devices. 
Important figures of merit such as cutoff frequency, fT; maximum 
oscillation frequency, fmax; and breakdown voltages are discussed. 
As part of the simulation study, different design issues of the emitter, 
base, and collector are discussed. New device concepts and novel 
device architectures for bipolar devices that are based on strain 
engineering technology have been explored using TCAD modeling. 
The impact of strain engineering technology in n-p-n SiGe HBT 
devices on the electrical properties and frequency response has been 
Summary

168
SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
studied in detail. Simulation results show that the strained-SiGe HBT 
device exhibits better high-frequency characteristics in comparison 
to an equivalent standard, conventional SiGe HBT device.
References
	 1.	 Krishna, V. R. (2009). Physical Modelling of Advanced SiGe Transistors, 
PhD thesis, University of Bremen.
	 2.	 Moen, K. A. (2012). Predictive Modeling of Device and Circuit Reliability 
in Highly Scaled CMOS and Silicon Germanium BiCMOS Technology, PhD 
thesis, Georgia Institute of Technology.
	 3.	 Quiroga, A. (2013). Investigation and Development of Advanced Si/SiGe 
and Si/SiGeC Heterojunction Bipolar Transistors by Means of Technology 
Modeling, PhD thesis, Universite Paris-Sud.
	 4.	 Sahoo, A. K. (2012). Electro-Thermal Characterizations, Compact 
Modeling and TCAD Based Device Simulations of Advanced SiGe:C 
BiCMOS HBTs and of Nanometric CMOS FET, PhD thesis, Universite 
Bordeaux I.
	 5.	 Al-Sadi, M. (2011). TCAD Based SiGe HBT Advanced Architecture 
Exploration, PhD thesis, Universite Bordeaux I.

Silicon technology has reached a very mature stage at which 
incremental progress is achieved with increasing difficulty. Further 
improvements in the performance of silicon ICs can be expected by 
using novel materials and device structures. The conventional way 
of enhancing the performance of field-effect transistors is to scale 
down the gate length. Another technique is to use a material with 
better transport properties as the conductive channel between 
source and drain. Solutions to achieving a higher carrier mobility 
and saturation velocity have been sought among different materials 
intended for the MOSFET channel. Process-induced strain as 
discussed in previous chapters is the widely adopted method for 
CMOS transistor. However, process-induced strain has a drawback 
due to its dependence on geometry and gate pitch. The performance 
deteriorates for gate feature beyond 45 nm. Si1–xGex with a biaxial 
compressive strain has been demonstrated to be favorable for hole 
confinement and hole mobility enhancement, because of its band 
offset and split in the valence band. SiGe is the ideal material to boost 
the speed of both n- and p-channel Si MOSFETs.
	
One of these possibilities is being offered by an alloy of silicon and 
germanium, SiGe, grown on Si substrates, which can form the basis 
for a host of new high-speed electronic and optoelectronic devices 
(see Ref. [8] of Chapter 1). For the process-induced strain technology, 
the fundamental material properties and increasing process 
Chapter 6
Silicon Hetero-FETs
Introducing Technology Computer-Aided Design (TCAD): Fundamentals, Simulations, and Applications
C. K. Maiti
Copyright © 2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-51-2 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36450-6 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

170
Silicon Hetero-FETs
integration complexities are some of the limitations and challenges 
seen by this technology. While compatible with existing silicon 
technology, SiGe offers a significant increase in device performance 
due to its superior transport properties as compared to silicon. The 
energy bandgap of SiGe is smaller than that of silicon and linearly 
scales with the Ge content, opening up exciting opportunities to 
build devices based on bandgap-engineering concepts. High-speed 
Si/SiGe CMOS devices would also facilitate a significant increase 
in the digital data rate. Dual-channel architecture, consisting of 
strained Si/Si1–xGex on a relaxed-SiGe buffer provides a platform 
for fabricating MOS transistors with high drive currents, resulting 
from high carrier mobility and carrier velocity, due to the presence 
of compressively strained-silicon-germanium layer. The MOSFET 
structures described in this chapter use SiGe film thicknesses within 
the Mathews–Blakeslee critical thickness.
	
Most of the experimental work on heterostructure Si-SiGe 
MOSFETs has been carried out on devices with channel lengths 
greater than 0.25 µm. It is critical for the future prospects of Si-based 
heterostructure ICs that their performance edge be maintained 
as the dimensions shrink to 0.1 µm and beyond. In the deep sub 
micrometer realm, nonlocal transport effects play a significant role, 
and a meaningful attempt to predict device behavior ultimately 
requires their inclusion. To date, such studies have been hindered 
by the complexity of the numerical modeling problem and by the 
scarcity of experimental data referring to the transport properties 
of SiGe. The purpose of this chapter is to (a) propose a fully 
compositionally graded SiGe channel concept as leading to the best 
performance in deep sub micrometer MOS devices, (b) quantify the 
high-frequency performance of Si-SiGe FET’s, and (c) estimate the 
impact of compositional channel grading on hot-carrier and short-
channel effects.
6.1  Electronic Properties of Strained Si and SiGe
Silicon and germanium are column IV semiconductors with a 
diamond crystal structure. The mismatch between their lattice 
constants is 4.2%. In the case of a relaxed-SiGe alloy, the lattice 
parameter can be estimated by Vegard’s law, which represents 
the linear interpolation of the lattice constants of Si and Ge. If a 

171
thin layer of Si is pseudomorphically grown on an unstrained bulk  
Si1–xGex substrate, the lattice of the epitaxially grown Si is stretched 
in-plane to match the lattice constant of the underlying Si1–xGex layer. 
Such structure is said to be tensilely strained, referring to the in-
plane strain state. Inversely, a compressively strained-SiGe film can 
be obtained by growing a layer with higher Ge content on a substrate 
with lower Ge concentration. For strain engineering, one needs to 
choose the appropriate type of stress to create a proper symmetry 
reduction and thus to produce a desirable splitting and warping.
	
In Si and SiGe alloys with Ge content up to 85%, the conduction 
band is 6 fold degenerated with a minimum in the ∆-point (∆6 
valleys), and the valence band is comprised of the degenerated 
heavy and light hole bands (HH and LH) with their minima located at 
the Γ-point. In the conduction band, the effective mass of the six-fold 
degenerated ∆6 valleys is anisotropic with a longitudinal mass ml 
and a transverse mass mt. The HH effective mass is higher than the 
LH as well as pronouncedly more anisotropic due to band warping 
along different crystal directions. A schematic of the conduction 
band energy contour and the valence band E-k dispersion for relaxed 
Si is shown in Fig. 6.1.
Relaxed
strain
strain
Biaxial tensile
Biaxial
compressive
[001]
[100]
[010]
D6
D4
D4
D2
D2
E
kx
ky
HH
LH
LH
HH
LH
HH
Figure 6.1  Schematics of the conduction band energy contour (top) and the 
valence band E-k dispersion (bottom) for relaxed Si, biaxial tensile strain, and 
biaxial compressive strain [1].
Electronic Properties of Strained Si and SiGe

172
Silicon Hetero-FETs
	
Silicon-germanium has emerged as a promising alternative for 
expanding the performance of silicon-based VLSI technology. In 
conventional Si/SiGe channels metal-oxide-semiconductor field-
effect transistors (MOSFETs), carriers are confined in 2D potential 
wells as the applied transverse electric field bends the band below 
the Fermi level, thus accumulating carriers in the gate oxide/channel 
interface to form an inversion layer. In Si/SiGe MOSFETs, since the 
effective mass of the conduction band valleys is anisotropic, and 
the effective masses of HH and LH in the valence band are different, 
the energy of bands with lower transverse masses (in the direction 
of the applied electrical field) is lifted and band splitting occurs. 
For the p-MOSFET, the biaxial tensile strain configuration leads to 
serious shortcomings. Although the strain populates the lower-
energy LH band that has considerably smaller effective mass, this 
configuration contradicts the confinement effect, where LH shifts 
to higher energies. As a result, the scattering rate increases and the 
mobility enhancement eventually disappear at high inversion charge 
densities. High strain levels are therefore needed to maintain the 
band splitting in high vertical electrical field. The impact of biaxial 
tensile strain on the band splitting of the conduction and valence 
bands of Si is schematically shown in Fig. 6.2. One of the key features 
of SiGe is its energy bandgap, which is lower than that of silicon 
which is lower than that of silicon. The bandgap of SiGe depends on 
the Ge mole fraction and changes from 1.17 eV for x = 0 to 0.78 eV 
for x = 0.5. In this range of Ge mole fractions, the dependence has an 
approximately linear character.
	
In strained-channel transistors, the final system energy band 
structure is determined by both, confinement quantization and 
strain effects. The direction and magnitude of the strain as well as the 
plane orientation of the applied electric field determines whether 
the impact of confinement and strain on mobility enhancement are 
additive or not.
	
In addition to the energy bandgap, a critical issue for device 
operation is the actual bandgap alignment between SiGe and Si. 
The two combinations of Si and SiGe that are relevant for device 
operation and the corresponding energy bands alignments are 
illustrated schematically Fig. 6.3.
	
Figure 6.3 shows a schematic illustration of the energy bands 
alignment and of the layer structure in type I and type II Si/SiGe 

173
Electronic Properties of Strained Si and SiGe
heterostructures. In both cases the Ge mole fraction x is 0.3. The 
band alignment shown in the left side of Fig. 6.3 is of the type I, i.e., 
the SiGe bandgap lies within the Si bandgap. The bandgap difference 
∆
g is the sum of the valence band ∆Ev and of the conduction band 
∆Ec offsets and is accommodated almost entirely in the valence band.
Figure 6.2  Schematics of the band splitting in biaxial tensile strained Si (left) 
and biaxial compressive strained SiGe (right) associated with the electrical 
confinement effect. Biaxial tensile strain reduces interband phonon scattering 
of electrons, while biaxial compressive strain enhances hole mobilities.
Figure 6.3  Type I and type II band offsets in a strained-SiGe layer.
	
The large valence band discontinuity and its monotonic increase 
with the Ge mole fraction are two of the most attractive features of the 
type I Si/SiGe alignment that can be used to control hole confinement 
in field-effect transistors and hole injection and electron transport 
in heterostructure bipolar transistors. Type I Si/SiGe/Si p-channel 
MOSFETs, which are relatively easy to fabricate in a VLSI process 
have exhibited hole mobilities higher than in Si devices. However, 
practical implementations of large Ge mole fractions in type I 
p-MOSFETs have been precluded by the necessity of complying with 

174
Silicon Hetero-FETs
the Matthews-Blakeslee critical layer thickness, by the rectangular 
or trapezoidal shape of the Ge profile in the channel, and by interface 
scattering at very abrupt Si/SiGe interfaces.
	
The band diagram is significantly different for the second case, 
that of strained silicon on a relaxed-SiGe substrate. This band 
alignment, in which the SiGe bandgap lies partially above the silicon 
bandgap, is defined as type II. The type II energy bands alignment 
scheme allows for the separate confinement of electrons and holes 
at the heterojunction, that is holes in the SiGe layer and electrons in 
the strained-Si layer. This property of the type II system is used in 
both n- and p-MOSFETs. Due to the negligible conduction band offset 
in the type I Si/SiGe system, there is minimal electron confinement 
to increase n-MOSFET speed and have therefore been attempted 
primarily in the type II system. High electron and hole mobilities 
have so far been the exclusive domain of type II Si/SiGe MOSFETs. 
However, these devices, which require a relaxed-SiGe substrate, 
which is difficult to integrate in conventional Si technology. 
Furthermore, the defect density in type II Si/SiGe layers is high to 
meet VLSI specifications.
	
The electronic properties and material parameter models used in 
simulation for relaxed SiGe and the strained Si, as discussed below, 
are based mainly on the work reported in the literature. The band 
edge offsets between the relaxed-SiGe/strained-Si layers are critical 
in determining the heterostructure device characteristics. The 
type II strained Si on the Si1–xGex heterostructure has considerable 
band offsets in both the conduction and valence bands. The strain 
induces band splitting of both degenerate conduction and valence 
bands, which lowers the effective mass and reduces the inter-valley 
scattering and therefore enhances both hole and electron transport. 
The Si1–xGex alloy has been found to have an indirect bandgap and 
the conduction band changes from Si-like. The measured Si1–xGex 
bandgap at 4.2 K using photoluminescence measurements results 
in the following quadratic expression as a function of Ge content is 
given by
	
Eg (x, 4.2K) = 1.155 – 0.43x + 0.206x2 (x < 0.85)
	
To estimate the Si1–xGex bandgap at higher temperature, one can 
modify the well-known relationship of temperature on the bandgap 

175
Electronic Properties of Strained Si and SiGe
of Si. The bandgap of strained Si as a function of the Ge content, x, in 
the bottom relaxed-Si1–xGex substrate at room temperature is given 
by:
	
Eg(x) = 1.11 – 0.6x
	
The calculation of the heterostructure band offsets is based on 
the average offset of the valence band and is given by­
	
DEv,av = (0.06x – 0.47)x
	
The valence band offset, ΔEv, is thus determined by considering 
the highest valence band splitting of ΔEv,av. The conduction band 
offset, ΔEc, is calculated by subtracting the bandgap of relaxed  
Si1–xGex), from the sum of the strained-Si bandgap, and the valence 
band offset of the heterostructure, ΔEv which may be expressed by 
the following quadratic expression as a function of Ge content:
	
ΔEv = –0.238x + 0.03x2
where the negative sign indicates that the valence band of strained Si 
is lower than that of relaxed Si1–xGex. The conduction band splitting 
of strained Si exhibits a linear relationship, ΔEc,split = 0.67x. A cubic 
fit for the conduction band offset as a function of the substrate Ge 
content, x, has been proposed as:
	
DEc = Eg(SSi) + DEv – Eg(SiGe) –0.35x + 0.12x3
where the negative offset denotes that the conduction band edge 
of strained Si is lower than that of relaxed Si1–xGex, providing 
electron confinement in the strained-Si layer at the strained-Si/
Si1–xGex interface. The material properties used in simulation are 
summarized as follows:
 
χss = 4.17 + 0.67x
	
Eg,ss = 1.1 – 0.4x
 
εr,ss = 11.8
 
χSiGe = 4.17
	
Eg,SiGe = 1.1 – 0.7289x
 
εr,SiGe = 11.8 + 4.2x
where x is the Ge content in the Si1–xGex layer, χ is the affinity, Eg is the 
bandgap energy, and SS denotes the strained Si.

176
Silicon Hetero-FETs
6.1.1  Hole Mobility
Electron and hole mobility in Si is strongly dependent on the 
temperature, doping concentration, electric field and the alloy 
composition in case of strained Si. The mobility in bulk relaxed-
SiGe alloy is generally lower than the bulk unstrained Si and 
approaches towards the mobility of pure Ge at large Ge fraction due 
to alloy scattering. Thus the device design is critically dependent 
on the information about the transport parameters of the Si-
based heterolayer. State-of-the-art transport modeling in strained 
Si consists of full-band Monte Carlo simulations using nonlocal 
empirical pseudo potentials method to determine the strained Si 
band structure. The electron and hole mobility of a relaxed, undoped 
SiGe layer depend on the Ge fraction in the SiGe layer.
	
In case of strained-Si device simulation it is necessary to take 
into account both the electron and hole mobility in the strained Si 
and also the bottom relaxed-SiGe layer. Due to presence of the Ge 
atom an extra scattering mechanism called alloy scattering has to be 
taken into account. Theoretical calculation shows that the relaxed-
SiGe alloy exhibits only a moderate mobility enhancement. Also, 
the measured experimental room temperature mobility values 
of the holes in strained-SiGe layers show much less enhancement 
compared to the theoretical predictions. The in-plane hole mobility 
in compressively strained Si1–xGex can be modeled through the 
modification of the low field hole mobility in Si. This is because the 
fact that the holes in the buried channel do not suffer from surface 
scattering and hence its dependence on the vertical electric field can 
be neglected. The doping concentration and temperature dependent 
low field Arora model has been modified by the hole mobility 
enhancement factor, which essentially takes into account the first 
order effect of reduction in the in-plane hole effective mass. The 
mobility has been calculated for various doping concentration and 
compared with the theoretical results. The modified Arora mobility 
and alloy scattering limited mobility are combined according to the 
Mathiessen’s rule as follows:
	
1
1
1
4 31
2 28
1
1
2
m
m
m
Si
Ge
Arora
alloy
-
=
+
-
+
x
x
x
x
(
.
.
)

177
where x is the Ge fraction in the compressively strained-Si1–xGex 
layer and µalloy is the alloy scattering limited mobility.
	
In the simulation, the low field hole mobility for Si1–xGex has 
been modeled where both these effects are taken into account. The 
doping concentration and temperature dependent mobility model 
due to Arora is modified by using an analytic expression involving Ge 
content, x, as follows:
	
m(x,T,N) = mArora (T,N)◊(1 + 4.31x – 2.28x2)
where µArora is given by
	
m
m
m
a
b
g
Arora
p
2p
cp
p
p
p
=
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
+
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
1
300
300
1
300
T
T
N N
T
where µ1p = 54.3 cm2/V.s, µ2p = 407.0 cm2/V.s, αp = –0.57, βp = –2.23, 
γp = 2.546, and Ncp = 2.67 × 1017 cm–3.
	
Mobility due to alloy scattering is given by
	
1
1
7 86
124 1
malloy
=
-
-
x
x
x
(
)exp(
.
)/
.  x ≤ 0.2
	
1
2 68
2150
malloy
=
-
exp(
.
)/
x
 for 0.2 < x < 0.6
	
In the simulation, the carrier mobility enhancement factor in a 
strained-SiGe layer perpendicular to the <100> growth plane has 
been modeled by modifying the Lombardi (CVT) model. In the 2D 
device simulation the Poisson and Schrödinger equations have to be 
self-consistently solved together with the drift-diffusion equations.
6.1.2  Electron Mobility
The semiconductor–insulator interface is very important for 
determining the mobility and hence the performance of MOSFET 
devices. The effective mobility of the carrier in the channel is 
nearly two times (or more) lower than the bulk mobility in 
the semiconductor. While the Coulomb and phonon scattering 
mechanisms mostly determine the bulk mobility in a semiconductor, 
surface roughness scattering plays an important role in inversion 
Electronic Properties of Strained Si and SiGe

178
Silicon Hetero-FETs
layer mobility. The electron mobility in the strained-Si surface 
channel has been experimentally determined by several groups. In 
simulation, the enhancement factor, F, for electron mobility has been 
empirically modeled as
	
F = 1 + 7.3x – 22x2 + 21x3, for x ≤ 0.4
where x is the Ge fraction of the relaxed-Si1–xGex virtual substrate, 
creating strain in the epitaxial Si layer. The electron mobility 
increases up to the 20% Ge fraction in the relaxed-SiGe virtual 
substrate. The electron mobility has been modeled by modifying the 
CVT mobility model for Si as follows:
	
ms-Si(E^,T,NA,x) = mSi.CVT(E^,T,NA)(F)
	
The carrier mobility µSi.CVT is approximated by
	
1
1
1
1
m
m
m
m
Si CVT
ac
b
sr
.
=
+
+
where µac is the carrier mobility, limited by the scattering with the 
surface acoustics phonons, µb is the carrier mobility limited by the 
scattering with optical intervalley phonons, and µsr­­ is the mobility 
limited by surface roughness. µac is given by
	
m
t
ac =
+
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
^
^
-
BT
E
CN
E
T
1 3
1
/
where E^is the perpendicular electric field, N is the total doping 
concentration, and T is the temperature. µsr is given by
	
m
d
sr =
^
E2
and µb is given by
	
m
m
m
m
g
a
b
o
c
o
r
=
-
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜ +
Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
-
È
Î
Í
Í
˘
˚
˙
˙
+ Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
-
exp
max
P
N
T
N
C
300
1
-
+ Ê
ËÁ
ˆ
¯˜
m
b
1
1
C
N
s
	
Strained Si under biaxial tension has been extensively 
investigated recently for both n- and p-channel MOSFETs. Since 
strained Si provides large band offsets in both conduction and 

179
valence bands and does not suffer from alloy scattering (hence 
mobility degradation) as in Si1–xGex, a significant improvement, 
especially for electron mobility, can be achieved.
	
By inserting a precisely controlled SiGe layer in the vertical 
structure of a field-effect transistor an additional design freedom 
is obtained. As a consequence, the current and voltage gain, unity 
gain cutoff frequency, and maximum frequency of oscillation 
can be optimized over wider voltage and temperature ranges, as 
compared to the original silicon devices. Because of the possibility 
of controlling both the bandgap and the index of refraction, strain-
induced changes must be computed for the bandgap, the effective 
densities-of-states, and the conduction and valence band offsets. The 
substrate-induced strain improves the transport properties which 
are due to modifications of the band structure in the form of valley 
and band splitting and changes of the effective mass. A modified 
band structure leads to a changed low-field bulk mobility, which is 
the most basic transport quantity.
	
It has been reported that the strain-induced improvement of the 
bulk low-field drift mobility of electrons and holes as a function of the 
germanium content x in the Si1–xGex substrate, the lattice mismatch 
of which to silicon is the origin of the biaxial tensile strain in the 
silicon layer. The Ge content is a measure for the involved stress; 
for example, a Ge content of 10% in the SiGe substrate corresponds 
to a stress of 664 MPa. The reported results of the piezoresistive 
model are based on the piezoresistive coefficients extracted from 
measurements in the linear stress regime. In the case of holes, the 
strong increase of the drift mobility is due to a continuing decrease 
of the effective hole mass in the top most valence band. Consequently, 
the piezoresistive mobility model must be modified when used in 
classical device simulation for higher stress levels.
	
In MOSFETs, surface roughness scattering occurs in addition to 
phonon and impurity scattering. SPARTA simulation results for the 
strain-induced improvement of the long-channel effective electron 
and hole mobility as a function of the effective field for several 
substrate germanium contents in comparison with measurements. 
While there are some quantitative deviations, the overall agreement 
is satisfying. In particular, the experimental trends with respect to 
germanium content and effective field are reproduced. In the case 
of electrons, the improvement saturates above a Ge content of 20% 
Electronic Properties of Strained Si and SiGe

180
Silicon Hetero-FETs
and the dependence on the effective field is relatively weak. The 
effective hole mobility enhancement continues up to Ge contents 
of 40%, but is strongly degraded at high effective fields. In device 
simulation, where the total low-field mobility is decomposed 
according to Mathiessen’s rule, the stress dependence of bulk and 
surface mobility, therefore, should be modeled differently. However, 
for short-channel MOSFETs, in the high-field regime, the influence of 
stress on the high-field drift velocity must be considered.
6.2  Strained-Si Channel p-MOSFETs
To improve PMOS performance yet without decreasing its size is being 
explored. In the following, we simulate the electrical performance of 
nanoscale dual-channel heterostructure biaxial strained-Si channel 
PMOS and single-channel biaxial strained-Si PMOS. Simulation tools 
used will be Silvaco TCAD tools, which are used for the simulation of 
fabrication using ATHENA and electrical characteristics simulation 
using ATLAS software. Several performance matrices including hole 
mobility, threshold voltage, subthreshold swing, drain induce barrier 
lowering, and leakage current, will be evaluated and compared with 
a conventional MOSFET.
	
In this section, typical process steps for n- and p-MOSFET 
fabrication using strained Si (on relaxed SiGe) as a channel are 
discussed. At first, the ATHENA process tool is used to create a 
strained-Si channel p-MOSFET structure. Typical Si MOS process 
steps are used. On the basis of the default materials library data 
and reference design provided by ATHENA, strained-silicon layers 
are deposited on the relaxed-SiGe layer. Subsequently, the device 
structure generated by the ATHENA tool is passed on to the device 
simulation tool ATLAS.
	
To study the effects of germanium concentration in the relaxed-
SiGe layer, which is used to physically strain the silicon lattice, Ge 
content is increased from 20 to 40%. Although increase in the Ge 
concentration results in higher carrier mobility, it is impractical 
to use more than 40% Ge in the relaxed-SiGe layer due to critical 
layer thickness limitation of strained Si. The design of the SiGe layer 
has been optimized by numerical simulations using Ge fraction 
dependent process and device simulation model parameters. For 

181
hole mobility that takes into account Ge fraction and doping density 
has been used in simulation. The process steps for generating 
the surface channel strained-Si channel p-MOSFET structure are 
performed in ATHENA. Parameters used in process simulation 
were chosen from Reference (see Ref. [10] of Chapter 1). Physical 
deposition and etch models are used to provide realistic topography. 
The results of the process/device simulation are discussed below. 
This example demonstrates the interface from process to device 
simulation for a strained-Si p-MOSFET device.
	
The main parameters used in process simulation were obtained 
from the Silvaco ATHENA tool. Modification in process steps and 
optimization were carried out to obtain different devices and 
enhance the device performance. The gate oxide thickness, the gate 
length, and the Ge concentration are modified to improve device 
performance. As the process flow for all types of devices is almost 
similar, the main process steps are shown for the devices and only 
the differences are highlighted. The main process steps used in 
simulation for single-channel SiGe p-MOSFETs are as follows:
 
∑	 Growth of Si epitaxial layer
 
∑	 Pad oxidation (local oxidation of silicon [LOCOS] process)
 
∑	 Deposition and patterning nitride
 
∑	 Growth of oxide (LOCOS)
 
∑	 Etching of nitride and oxide
 
∑	 8 nm Si layer deposition
 
∑	 10 nm Si layer deposition
 
∑	 15 nm SiGe layer deposition
 
∑	 7 nm strained-Si layer deposition
 
∑	 Photoresist deposition for masking
 
∑	 Etching of Si, SiGe, and SiO2 layers
 
∑	 5 nm gate oxide deposition
 
∑	 Poly-Si gate formation
 
∑	 Boron implantation
 
∑	 Nitride deposition
 
∑	 Photoresist deposition and pattering
 
∑	 Etching of nitride
 
∑	 Photoresist removal
 
∑	 Aluminum deposition and patterning
Strained-Si Channel p-MOSFETs

182
Silicon Hetero-FETs
	
The initial n-type Si substrate with [100] surface orientation 
and phosphorus doping concentration of 2.0 × 1018 atoms/cm3 is 
chosen for the PMOS. A 2.5 µm epitaxial layer of Si was grown on 
to the Si substrate by performing epitaxial growth at 800oC with a 
phosphorus doping concentration of 4.0 × 1016 cm–3. Then another 
0.5 µm thick epi-Si layer was grown. A thin pad oxide layer is grown 
by dry oxidation which is necessary to prevent the substrate from 
stress. Then LOCOS is used to achieve isolation between active 
regions and silicon nitride with 0.35 µm thickness was deposited by 
using chemical vapor deposition (CVD), which acts as a mask. The 
process simulation continued with the deposition of an 8 nm thick, 
Si layer which was doped with boron at a concentration of 1.0 × 1017 
cm–3. This was followed by deposition of a 10 nm Si layer onto the 
existing Si layer, doped with phosphorus at a concentration of 1.0 
× 1016 cm–3.The next process involved was deposition of a Si1–xGex 
layer with the thickness of 15 nm and Ge content, x, of 0.3. This 
Si1–xGex layer was also doped with phosphorus concentration of  
1.0 × 1016 cm–3 and the structure of this simulation is shown in Fig. 
6.4. The deposited thin layer of Si had created a strained Si, as shown 
in Fig. 6.5. A photoresist layer was then deposited on top of the Si cap 
and patterned. The process simulation progressed with the removal 
of the Si and Si1–xGex layer that covered the LOCOS. To remove the Si 
and SiGe layer, etching process was carried out. The removal of the 
Si, SiO2 and SiGe layer started with etching of the silicon layer and 
then followed by an etching of SiGe layer and lastly the oxide layer 
as shown in Fig. 6.6. An ATHENA-generated single-channel SiGe 
p-MOSFET device structure is shown in Fig. 6.4.
	
The gate oxide was deposited at a thickness of 5 nm, as presented 
in Fig. 6.7. The simulation continued with a 0.2 µm polysilicon 
deposition, doped with phosphorus at a concentration of 1.0 × 1015 
cm–3 for minimizing the series resistance. The polysilicon was then 
etched leaving 0.1 µm for the transistor gate length. The structure of 
this polysilicon gate is shown in Fig. 6.8. Next, the boron-phosphorus 
silicate glass (BPSG) deposition for silicon nitride was carried out. 
The BPSG process had a low reflow temperature and it was used 
because it is able to provide a more planar surface for subsequent 
layers.

183
Microns
Figure 6.4  The deposition of SiGe layer structure.
Microns
Figure 6.5  The deposition of strained-Si layer.
Strained-Si Channel p-MOSFETs

184
Silicon Hetero-FETs
Microns
Figure 6.6  The etching of Si, SiGe, and oxide layers.
Microns
Figure 6.7  The deposition of gate oxide structure.

185
Microns
Figure 6.8  The patterning of polysilicon gate oxide structure.
	
Process simulations were continued with photoresist deposition 
and patterning again. This photoresist structure acts as a mask for 
the silicon nitride etching process. With the etching process done, 
the photoresist was stripped off. The deposition of the contact metal 
was carried out using the CVD process. Aluminum was deposited and 
patterned, as shown in Fig. 6.9. Next, the created device structure 
at the ATHENA simulator was mirrored to the right to obtain a 
full PMOS structure. The simulated strained PMOS with a surface 
channel structure from this process simulation was used later in 
ATLAS simulator for device simulation, to extract the electrical 
characteristic of this structure for analysis. Lastly, the electrodes for 
the PMOS structure such as gate, source, drain and substrate were 
labeled using the ATHENA Electrode menu. A complete structure of 
the 100 nm single-channel PMOS was obtained, as shown in Fig. 6.10. 
Various p-MOSFET device structures with different thicknesses of 
the strained-Si cap and different Ge contents in Si1–xGex layer of this 
surface channel p-MOSFET have been generated in ATHENA for use 
in device simulation using ATLAS.
Strained-Si Channel p-MOSFETs

186
Silicon Hetero-FETs
Microns
Figure 6.9  The deposition of metal contact (aluminum) structure.
Microns
-4
-3
-2
0
1
2
Microns
3
4
Abs Not Doping (/cm3)
19.6
18.8
18.1
17.3
16.5
15.8
14.3
13.5
12.8
12
15
drain
gate
Figure 6.10  The simulated 100 nm strained-PMOS structure with net doping 
shown.
	
For this dual-channel process simulation, a 60 nm thickness 
of the relaxed-Si1−xGex layer with Ge concentration of 20% was 
deposited on top of the Si substrate. Then a 15 nm thick, strained-
Si1−xGex layer with a Ge concentration of 30% was deposited on top 

187
of the relaxed-Si1−xGex layer. This was followed with the deposition 
of 7 nm strained-Si (Si cap) layer.
	
Biaxial strained-Si channel p-MOSFETs are designed with the 100 
nm channel length. The strained-Si p-channel devices were designed 
using a modified CMOS process in SUPREM4 based on the Silvaco 
ATHENA process simulator. Strained Si with a single channel and a 
dual channel are designed. Strained Si with single-channel design is 
created when a SiGe layer is grown on the Si substrate, followed by 
growing the strained-Si layer on the SiGe layer. Strained Si with dual-
channel design was created with a relaxed Si1−xGex is deposited on a 
silicon substrate, followed by pseudomorphically grown strained-Si/
SiGe channel layers to the relaxed-Si1−xGex layer. A control device in 
which Si is unstrained was also designed using the ATHENA process 
simulator. Main process steps for the fabrication of heterostructure 
MOSFETs are listed. The process specifications are obtained from 
reported experimental devices for designing the process flow.
	
The following main process steps were used in ATHENA for dual-
channel p-MOSFET device structure:
	
∑	 Growth of Si epitaxial layer
 
∑	 Pad oxidation (LOCOS process)
 
∑	 Deposition and patterning nitride
 
∑	 Growth of oxide (LOCOS)
 
∑	 Etching of nitride and oxide
 
∑	 8 nm Si layer deposition
 
∑	 10 nm Si layer deposition
 
∑	 60 nm SiGe layer deposition
 
∑	 15 nm SiGe layer deposition
 
∑	 7 nm strained-Si layer deposition
 
∑	 Photoresist deposition for masking
 
∑	 Etching of Si, SiGe, and SiO2 layers
 
∑	 5 nm gate oxide deposition
 
∑	 Poly-Si gate formation
 
∑	 Boron implantation
 
∑	 Nitride deposition
 
∑	 Photoresist deposition and pattering
 
∑	 Etching of nitride
 
∑	 Photoresist removal
 
∑	 Aluminum deposition and patterning
Strained-Si Channel p-MOSFETs

188
Silicon Hetero-FETs
	
The ATHENA-generated final dual-channel p-MOSFET device 
structure is shown in Fig. 6.11 The doping profile is shown in Fig. 
6.12.
Microns
Figure 6.11  The process-simulated buried (dual)-channel strained-Si 
p-MOSFET structure.
Microns
Figure 6.12  The simulated 100 nm buried-channel strained-PMOS structure 
showing the doping profile.
	
The simulated strained PMOS with a dual-channel structure from 
the process simulation was used in ATLAS for device simulation. This 
is a necessary step in order to extract the electrical characteristics 
of the structures. The important material parameters needed for 
device simulation include:

189
 
∑	 Valence and conduction band offsets
 
∑	 Electron and hole mobilities
 
∑	 Bandgap and bandgap narrowing
 
∑	 Effective mass for electron and holes
 
∑	 Density of states for conduction and valence bands
 
∑	 Dielectric constant
 
∑	 Saturation velocities of electrons and holes
 
∑	 Minority carrier lifetime
 
∑	 Recombination, including Auger and radiative
 
∑	 Coefficient for impact ionization
Table 6.1  Material properties used in simulation
Material 
property
Si
Ge
SiGe
Lattice 
constant
5.431 Å 300 K
5.658 Å 300 K
Si1–xGex
(5.431 + 0.20x +
0.027x2) Å 300 K
Dielectric 
constant
11.7 300 K
16.2 300 K
Si1–xGex
11.7 + 4.5x 300 K
Effective 
electron mass 
(longitudinal)
0.98mo 300 K
1.6mo 300 K
Si1–xGex
0.92mo 300 K, x < 0.85
0.159mo 300 K, x > 0.85
Effective 
electron mass 
(transverse)
0.19mo 300 K
0.08mo 300 K
Si1–xGex
0.19mo 300 K, x < 0.85
0.08mo 300 K, x > 0.8
Density of 
states
Si1–xGex
1.06mo 300 K, x < 0.85
1.55mo 300K, x > 0.85
Effective 
hole masses 
(heavy) mhh
0.537mo 4.2 K
0.33mo
Effective hole 
masses (light) 
mlh
0.153mo 300 K 0.0430mo 300 K
Effective 
hole masses 
(spin–orbit–
split ) mso
0.234mo 300 K 0.095mo 300 K
Si1–xGex (0.23–0.135x) 
mo 300 K
Source: Ref. [2]
Strained-Si Channel p-MOSFETs

190
Silicon Hetero-FETs
	
Besides that, a suitable model, such as the bandgap-narrowing 
model, the impact ionization model, etc., has been chosen in 
order to run this simulation. The net doping profile (vertical 
cutline) for a dual-channel strained PMOS is shown in Fig. 6.13. 
Other device information such as on the Ge profile, band diagram, 
hole concentration, electric field, output characteristics, and C–V 
characteristics is shown in Figs. 6.14 to 6.20, respectively.
0.1
22
21
20
19
18
Doping concentration (per cc)
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
0.2
Distance along line
0.3
Figure 6.13  Net doping profile (vertical cutline) for dual-channel strained 
PMOS.
0
0
0.05
0.05
0.15
Ge mole fraction
0.2
0.3
0.25
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.1
Distance (mm)
Figure 6.14  Ge content versus depth in dual-channel strained PMOS.

191
0.36
-1
0
Band energy (ev)
1
0.38
0.4
0.42
0.44
Distance along line
0.46
0.48
0.5
vgate = 1.0
vdrain = 0.1
Figure 6.15  The band diagram versus depth in dual-channel strained PMOS.
20
19
18
17
16
15
Hole concentration (per cc)
14
13
12
11
10
0.32
0.33 0.34
0.35
Distance along line
0.36
0.37 0.38
0.39
0.4
Figure 6.16  The hole concentration versus depth in dual-channel strained 
PMOS.
	
The family of Id – Vd (output) characteristics was generated at 
different gate voltages (–0.8 V, –1.0 V, –1.2 V, and –1.4 V) by obtaining 
solutions at each of the stepped bias and was followed with a drain 
voltage sweep (0 V to –3.0 V) with a step voltage of –0.3 V for each 
bias point. Figure 6.18 shows the simulated output characteristics 
for strained-Si device. Drain current versus gate voltage, Id – Vg, 
characteristics were generated by obtaining solutions at each of the 
stepped bias and were followed with a gate voltage sweep for each 
bias point. The drain voltage was biased to –0.1 V, –0.2 V, and –1.0 
Strained-Si Channel p-MOSFETs

192
Silicon Hetero-FETs
V, while the gate voltage was ramped from 1.0 V to –4.0 V with a 
voltage step of –0.2 V.
0.32
-1e.05
1e+05
2e+05
0
Electric field (V/cm)
0.33 0.34 0.35
Distance along line
0.36 0.37 0.38
0.39
0.4
Figure 6.17  The electric field versus depth in dual-channel strained PMOS.
-3
-0.0002
-0.00016
-0.00012
Drain current (A)
-8e-05
-4e-05
0
-2
-1
0
Drain voltage (V)
-0.8V
-1.0V
-1.2V
-1.4V
Figure 6.18  The output characteristics of dual-channel strained PMOS.
	
Gate capacitance versus gate voltage characteristics were 
obtained by ramping the gate voltage from –4 V to 4 V with a 0.2 V 
voltage step at 1 kHz using the quasi-static statement. Figure 6.20 
shows the simulated characteristics for strained-Si devices. The 
strained-Si devices show a plateau in the accumulation region due to 
hole confinement.

193
-4
-0.0008
-0.0006
-0.0004
Drain current (A)
-0.0002
0
-3
-2
-1
Gate voltage (V)
0
-0.2V
-0.1V
-1.0V
Figure 6.19  The Id – Vg characteristics of dual-channel strained PMOS.
-3
-2
-1
0
0
1e-15
2e-15
3e-15
Total quasi-static C-V(F/mm)
4e-15
5e-15
6e-15
1
Gate voltage (V)
2
3
Figure 6.20  The quasi-static capacitance versus gate voltage characteristics of 
dual-channel strained PMOS.
6.3  Summary
With its high speed, low voltage, and low power features, Si/SiGe 
technology has the potential to integrate all these functions on 
a single chip. In this chapter, some important device simulation 
results for surface and buried-channel strained-Si p-MOSFETs are 
Summary

194
Silicon Hetero-FETs
presented. This study provides a guideline for the design of strained-
silicon channel p-MOSFETs. Simulations provide more realistic 
results and will allow researchers to gain a better understanding 
of the effects of different device parameters on the overall device 
performance without fabrication. Strained-Si channel p-MOSFETs 
require the more attention to enhance the device performance.
References
	 1.	 Minamisawa, R. A. (2011). Physical Studies of Strained Si/SiGe 
Heterostructures: From Virtual Substrates to Nano Devices, PhD thesis, 
Informatik und Naturwissenschaften der RWTH Aachen, University 
zur Erlangen.
	 2.	 Ioffe Physico-Technical Institute. New Semiconductor Materials 
Characteristics and Properties, http://www.ioffe.ru/.

The most revolutionary MOSFET architecture is a double-
gate MOSFET which was first proposed in the early 1980s and 
represented by FinFET in late 1990s. It has been recently regarded 
as the ultimately scalable MOSFET. In the area of multigate 
transistors, double-gate finFETs are considered a serious contender 
for channel scaling because of their quasi-planar structure and the 
compatibility with CMOS. The salient features of the double-gate 
MOSFET include (1) reduced 2D short-channel effects, leading to a 
shorter allowable channel length compared to bulk MOSFET; (2) a 
sharper subthreshold slope, which allows for a larger gate overdrive 
for the same power supply and the same off-current; and (3) better 
carrier transport behavior as the channel doping can be reduced.
7.1  Basics of FinFETs
Fin-shaped field-effect transistors (finFETs) provide excellent 
electrostatics and short-channel effect (SCE) control, and can 
tolerate low channel doping which reduces the dopant-induced 
variability. A nonclassical structure, such as a finFET, is schematically 
shown in Fig. 7.1. The silicon fin is surrounded by two sidewall gates 
and optionally by a top one, thus providing a better short-channel 
control. Charge transport is therefore a real 3D phenomenon, 
Chapter 7
FinFETs
Introducing Technology Computer-Aided Design (TCAD): Fundamentals, Simulations, and Applications
C. K. Maiti
Copyright © 2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-51-2 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36450-6 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

196
FinFETs
composed of two current flows parallel to the fin sidewalls and, 
optionally, an additional third one at the fin top. Compared with bulk 
finFETs, silicon-on-insulator (SOI) finFETs exhibit many compelling 
advantages:
 
•	 Shallower junction depth (lower junction capacitance) due to 
the natural barrier (BOX) against dopants diffusion
 
•	 No punch-through due to the thin film and BOX
 
•	 Higher mobility and reduced threshold voltage mismatch due 
to low-doped channel
 
•	 Better control of SCEs
 
•	 Easier mobility boosters such as strained SOI and SiGe
	
	 However, 3D structures face some challenges:
 
•	 For further scaling, more advanced photolithography is 
needed to fabricate narrower fins.
 
•	 The enhanced quantum confinement in an extremely narrow 
fin can cause mobility degradation.
 
•	 The coupling effect between the multiple gates is amplified in 
narrow finFETs.
 
•	 The corner effect amplifies the local electric field, so optimized 
design is needed.
	
At the early stage of novel technology development, the 
application of technology computer-aided design (TCAD) can give 
a physical insight and guideline for process optimization. The 
finFET is one such emerging device which is considered to be a 
suitable successor to the conventional metal-oxide-semiconductor 
field-effect transistor (MOSFET) winning over many of the hurdles 
mentioned above. It is so called because the thin channel region 
(body) stands vertically like the fin of a fish between the source and 
drain regions. The gate wraps around the body from three sides, 
and this is responsible for higher gate channel control and therefore 
reduced SCE.
	
After the first introduction of the 3D finFET architecture at 
the 22 nm node by Intel in 2011, it is now considered as a major 
candidate for 14 nm node mainstream technology. FinFETs provide 
excellent electrostatics and SCE control, and can tolerate low 
channel doping which reduces the dopant-induced variability. 
Recently, there is strong interest in finFET technology on bulk for 
lower cost and good compatibility with planar complementary 

197
metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS). Intel’s 22 nm CMOS node is the 
first commercially available bulk finFET technology and opens a new 
era of 3D CMOS for the low-power applications.
Table 7.1	
Operation characteristics and design considerations for various 
multiple-gate devices
DG 
design
Current 
direction
Electric field 
from gate
Design considerations
Planar
|| to substrate
_|_ to 
substrate
Precise control of silicon 
thickness and bottom gate 
dimension, gate alignment
Fin
|| to substrate
|| to substrate
High aspect ratio and short 
pitch fin definition, nonplanar 
gate stack patterning
Vertical
_|_ to substrate
|| to substrate
S/D doping and contacts, gate 
isolation
Trigate
|| to substrate
|| and _|_ to 
substrate
Active area hard mask 
removal and surface prep, 
layout efficiency
GAA
|| or _|_ to 
substrate
variable
Access for gate stack 
deposition and etch, active 
area dimension uniformity
Source: Ref. [1]
	
Multiple-gate field-effect transistors (mugFETs) show great 
promise as alternative to planar CMOS technologies below gate 
lengths below 15 nm, as evidenced by endorsement from the 
International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors. Several 
designs depicted in Fig. 7.1 have been proposed, including planar, 
vertical, fin, trigate, and gate all around (GAA), that all make use 
of enhanced gate control due to the action of multiple electrodes 
surrounding the channel. The key operation differences and 
technological issues for each device type are summarized in  
Table 7.1.
	
Multiple-gate devices do not require any channel doping to reduce 
the depletion width (and subsequent decrease in gate length) as this 
parameter is defined primarily by the active volume. Moreover, the 
S/D junction depth is similarly defined by the silicon body thickness 
and shifts the onus from developing complicated Halo/LDD doping 
Basics of FinFETs

198
FinFETs
schemes to ensure uniform body-doping profiles with appropriate 
activation anneals to control diffusion near the gate edge. While 
the manufacturability of mugFETs remains challenging due to their 
3D structure, most utilize self-aligned gate electrodes amenable to 
conventional planar CMOS process modules.
Planar
Fin
Vertical
Tri-gate
Gate-All-Around
I
I
I
Eg
Eg
Eg
Figure 7.1  Various mugFET structures [1].
	
Of the varieties discussed above, the finFET and trigate are 
reported to be the most manufacturable. However, a 3D scaling 
paradigm that forms channel width perpendicular to the substrate 
requires building mugFETs as tall as possible (>50 nm) to maximize 
the channel width per die area benefit. If the trigate device height 
is increased accordingly, the body thickness to height ratio must 
migrate away from 1:1 toward ratios typically seen on finFETs to 
maintain channel control. In this scenario, the top gate is no longer 
playing an important role and the device behaves as a dual-gate 
(DG) field-effect transistor (FET). Hence, the best channel control, 
manufacturability, scalability, and channel width per die area can be 
achieved with the finFET structure.
	
Numerous technical reports and academic papers show that 
scaled finFET manifest itself with a higher Ion/Ioff ratio, a lower 
subthreshold slope SS and an improved drain-induced barrier 
lowering (DIBL) by the enhanced gate controllability compared to 
conventional planar counterpart. The ultimate electrical control 
of the conductive channel is expected to be realized by the GAA 

199
Basics of FinFETs
(nanowire) transistors. The fundamental idea of the GAA transistors 
is similar to that of the multigate transistors, except that the 
conductive channel is thoroughly surrounded by the gate material. 
The cross-sectional views of the conductive channels of the double-
gate finFETs, trigate transistors, and GAA transistors are drawn 
together in Fig. 7.2 to compare. The conductive channel material is 
a bunch of nanowires, including Si nanowires and III–V nanowires. 
The outstanding controllability of the conductive channel is expected 
to introduce tremendous improvement of the performance, and 
maximize the density of the integrated circuits. Recent progresses 
at Intel’s 22 nm node not only shows the phasing out of the planar 
CMOS and the dawn of a 3D CMOS (finFET) era, but also the start 
of the low power for mobile applications as a new driving force of 
device scaling and extending Moore’s law.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Rectangular
Cylindrical
Rectangular
Triangular
Figure 7.2  Cross-sectional views of the conductive channels of (a) double-
gate finFETs, (b) trigate transistors, and (c) gate-all-around transistors [2].

200
FinFETs
	
In this chapter we shall address briefly the manufacturing issues 
of advanced CMOS process and present process solutions to the 
new and novel set of problems faced in 28 nm planar and 22/14 
nm finFET technology. Key processing details are presented, as well 
as previews of the main manufacturing issues at the 10 nm node. 
FinFET-based CMOS and memory cells are very promising for sub-
32 nm technology node. In order to familiarize the reader with the 
established methods of finFET device fabrication and to illustrate 
the compatibility with current planar CMOS processing techniques, 
a simplified process flow is discussed in the following section.
Figure 7.3  Generic multigate device fabrication flow [3]. (A) SOI wafer with 
predefined silicon thickness (fin height). (B) Lithography for fins followed by 
plasma etching. (C) Growth of gate dielectric and deposition of metal gate. (D) 
Gate stack deposition and planarization. (E) Gate patterning and gate etching. 
(F) Low-energy implant for source/drain regions. (G) Epitaxial source/drain 
region and nitride spacers along sidewalls of gate/fin. (H) Spacer removal and 
extended source/drain region formation.
	
The finFET process flow starts the fin formation similarly as the 
formation of an active area (in planar CMOS) and is followed by STI 
gap fill and planarization and oxide recessing to reveal the fins. The 
Si surface on fins appears different than in bulk. Then the rest of flow 
proceeds to similar steps (e.g., well, gate, epi-S/D, etc.) as the planar 

201
Basics of FinFETs
CMOS with gate-last high-k, and metal gate (HKMG) flow. As a result 
of the fin shape, the low doping in channel is preferred for minimizing 
threshold voltage variations. Vertical multigate transistors such 
as finFETs, Ω-FETs, and trigate FETs have self-aligned gates, which 
is a major advantage from a fabrication perspective. The major 
fabrication steps for FEOL processing of generic SOI finFETs is 
shown in Fig. 7.3.
7.1.1  Stress-Enhanced Mobility in Embedded SiGe 
p-MOSFETs
From 90 nm technology node onward, strained silicon is in use for 
improving transistor performance in scaled devices. Mobility gains 
as high as 50% and drive current enhancements of 25% have been 
demonstrated in 45 nm gate length devices. Stress engineering has 
clearly shown that due to stress generated by the stressors mobility 
enhancement takes place in individual n-finFETs. However, when 
different devices (e.g., p- and n-FETs) are placed in close proximity 
(e.g., in a cell) with both n- and p-liners, noticeably different stresses 
and mobility enhancements can be obtained. This happens because 
of the local nature of S/D stressors and the interaction effect for 
different S/D stressor configurations or for denser cell layouts. 3D 
process and stress simulation is useful for the detailed performance 
analysis and optimization of various stress engineering schemes by 
varying geometry of stressors, substrate orientation, and material 
composition of each device, as well as by changing location and 
density of the individual devices inside the cell layout. Mechanical 
stress sources used in state-of-the-art CMOS technologies are shown 
in Fig. 7.4.
STI
STI
STI
Embedded SiGe
Compressive
Nitride Liner
Tensile
Nitride Liner
Embedded Si:C
Figure 7.4  Mechanical stress sources in a CMOS transistor [4].

202
FinFETs
7.2  Stress-Engineered FinFETs
Strain was implemented intentionally as a mobility booster in devices 
that went into production in 2004. Besides the salient effects on the 
charge carrier mobilities, stress affects the width of the bandgap 
and has widespread direct and indirect effects on the defects in 
semiconductors. As the device width shrinks, 3D simulation might 
first be routinely employed in mechanical stress investigations. 
It is therefore our aim to investigate by full 3D stress, process and 
device simulation. Stress has significant influences on the electrical 
performance and hence where it should be optimized.
	
It has been shown that a simple piezoresistance mobility model 
can describe the stress impact on transistor performance with 
good accuracy. The piezoresistance model provides accurate stress-
dependent mobility values (within about 20%) at stress levels below 
1 GPa. At higher stress levels, holes exhibit super linear mobility gain 
with increasing stress, whereas electron mobility gain with stress 
becomes sublinear and eventually saturates. The following equations 
are used for the calculation of n- and p-mobility enhancement factors 
for (100)/<100> and (110)/<100> crystallographic orientations in 
silicon:
 
μn100 = 1.0 − (–1. 022σxx + 0.534σyy + 0.534σzz)
 
μp100 = 1. 0 – (0. 066σxx – 0.011σyy – 0.011σzz)
 
μn110 = 1.0 − (–0.311σxx – 0.175σyy + 0.534σzz)
 
μp110 = 1. 0 – (0.718σxx – 0.663σyy – 0.011σzz)
	
In these equations the stresses are in units of GPa and coefficients 
of piezoresistivity are in 1/GPa. Considering that the piezoresistance 
model is a linear superposition of the contributions from the principal 
stress components, one can focus on optimizing the transistor to 
achieve the optimal stress pattern in the channel. However, the 
most beneficial stress components are different for NMOS and 
PMOS transistors. The NMOS benefits most from compressive 
vertical stress and also somewhat from tensile stress in the lateral 
directions, whereas the PMOS benefits most from the compressive 
stress in the direction along the channel. A tensile CESL cap layer 
simultaneously introduces compressive vertical and tensile lateral 
stresses that enhance electron mobility. It is important to simulate 

203
stresses not just in an individual device but in the whole cell. In the 
following, a combination of 3D process simulator VictoryCell and 3D 
stress simulator VictoryStress will be employed for stress analysis in 
cell structure. The inverter cell has two p-finFETs located parallel to 
each other and one n-finFET. We use the 3D simulator VictoryStress 
to analyze stress effects on carrier mobilities of individual n-finFET 
and p-finFET devices.
	
The most common method of introducing desirable stresses 
in the transistor channel is the deposition of high-tensile or 
high-compressive films of nitride-type materials. A tensile film 
(when intrinsic stress value is positive) improves drive current in 
n-MOSFETs due to enhancement of electron mobility, whereas a 
compressive film (when intrinsic stress value is negative) enhances 
the hole mobility for p-MOSFETs. The following simulation example 
shows stress simulation in a single n-finFET. We start with process 
simulation, which includes the following steps:
 
•	 Definition of geometrical domain and region limits for 
subsequent consistent mesh formation
 
•	 VictoryCell process steps
 
•	 Cartesian mesh formation and saving the structure for stress 
calculation
 
•	 Stress calculation
 
•	 Visualization and analysis of simulation results, extraction of 
average stresses and mobility enhancement factors
7.2.1  VictoryCell Process Steps
The common method of stress engineering is by the introduction 
of so-called source/drain stressors (SiGe or SiC). The structure in 
this example allows to have such stressor and is called “nstressor.” 
The thickness of the stress liner over the gate is very important as 
it determines the amount and the stress distribution inside the fin. 
The finFET contains vias, which are placed over the metal contacts 
(aluminum). For simplicity the length of each via (for source and for 
drain) was chosen the same as the length of stressors (0.3 μm). Two 
important considerations to form an optimal mesh for Manhattan-
type structures are that (a) a reasonable number of mesh points 
(spacing) should be generated across areas of interest such as 
Stress-Engineered FinFETs

204
FinFETs
gate and fin and that (b) it is preferable that in each direction a 
mesh line coincide with the material region boundary. We explore 
several technology options for the enhancement of electron and 
hole mobility in complementary MOSFETs, focusing on strain 
engineering using lattice-mismatched source/drain (S/D) materials. 
Silicon-carbon (Si1−yCy) and silicon-germanium (Si1−xGex) have 
lattice constants different from that of the Si channel. When Si1−yCy 
or Si1−xGex is embedded in the transistor S/D region, lateral tensile 
or compressive strain is induced in the adjacent Si channel, leading 
to improvement in the electron or hole mobility, respectively.
For the simulation of an n-finFET the following parameters were 
used:
	
gate_length = 0.06
	
gate_height = 0.05
	
stress_liner_height = 0.05
	
fin_width = 0.03
	
fin_height = 0.06
	
fin_length = 0.8 + $gate_length
	
oxide_box_height = 0.6
	
oxide_top_height = 0.15
	
spacer_thick = 0.005
	
met_height = 0.005
	
stress_value = 1.0 × 1010
	
The following process steps were used for the creation of finFET 
structure using VictoryCell:
 
•	 Formation of the n-fin
 
•	 Formation of two p-fins
 
•	 Source side local stressor (nfin)
 
•	 Drain side local stressor (nfin)
 
•	 Source side local stressor (pfin)
 
•	 Drain side local stressor (pfin)
 
•	 Oxide spacer deposition
 
•	 Gate formation
 
•	 Deposition of metal contact layer

205
 
•	 Deposition of stress liner (n-liner)
 
•	 Deposition of stress liner (p-liner)
 
•	 Deposition of the top oxide layer
 
•	 Etching of top oxide and stress liner for the via formation
 
•	 Deposition of metal (aluminum) for formation of via
Materials
box
nfin
nstressor
pfin
psterssor
metal
Polysilicon
pliner
nliner
Aluminum
SiO~2
Figure 7.5  3D view of an inverter cell having two p-finFETs located parallel to 
each other and one n-finFET. Only a BOX substrate and an active area of devices 
are shown.
	
By default the absolute value of the initial intrinsic stress is 1GPa; 
for the n-FET it is positive; for the p-FET it is negative. The following 
material parameters are used for user-defined materials in the 
structure:
	
stress_value = 1.0 × 1010
	
material silicon nitride (“nliner”) young.m = 3.89 × 1012
	
material Silicon nitride (“nliner”) poiss.r = 0.3
	
material silicon nitride (“pliner”) young.m = 3.89 × 1012
	
material silicon nitride (“pliner”) poiss.r = 0.3
	
material oxide (“box”) young.m = 6.6 × 1012
	
material oxide (“box”) poiss.r = 0.2
	
material silicon (“nfin”) young.m = 1.67 × 1012
	
material silicon (“nfin”) poiss.r = 0.28
	
material silicon (“pfin”) young.m = 1.67 × 1012
	
material silicon (“pfin”) poiss.r = 0.28
Stress-Engineered FinFETs

206
FinFETs
	
material silicon (“nstressor”) young.m = 1.67 × 1012
	
material silicon (“nstressor”) poiss.r = 0.28
	
material silicon (“pstressor”) young.m = 1.67 × 1012
	
material silicon (“pstressor”) poiss.r = 0.28
Figure 7.6  2D view showing materials in a p-finFET.
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Microns
0            0.5          1           1.5            2          2.5            3 
Microns
7.69e+09
5.14e+09
2.59e+09
3.53e+00
–2.52e+09
–3.07e+09
–7.62e+09
Stress xx (dyne/cm)
Figure 7.7  2D view showing stress distribution in a p-finFET (which is parallel 
to an n-finFET) first sidewall of the p-fin under the gate.

207
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0            0.5             1            1.5            2            2.5             3 
Microns
Microns
7.75e+09
5.22e+09
2.69e+09
1.55e+08
–2.38e+09
–4.91e+09
–7.44e+09
Stress xx (dyne/cm)
Figure 7.8  2D sidewall Sxx stress distribution through the center of a p-finFET.
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Microns
0              0.5              1              1.5              2              2.5             3 
Microns
6.97e+09
4.54e+09
2.11e+09
–3.22e+08
–2.75e+09
–3.18e+09
–7.61e+09
Stress xx (dyne/cm)
Figure 7.9  2D next sidewall Sxx stress distribution through the center of a 
p-finFET.
Stress-Engineered FinFETs

208
FinFETs
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Microns
0             0.5              1             1.5             2             2.5              3 
Microns
Stress xx (dyne/cm)
6.97e+09
4.51e+09
2.05e+09
–4.18e+08
–2.88e+09
–5.34e+09
–7.81e+09
Figure 7.10  2D top-wall stress distribution through the center of a p-finFET.
Figure 7.11  2D top-side Sxx stress distribution through the center of an 
n-finFET.

209
Distance along line
Stress XX (dyne/cm2)
Stress YY (dyne/cm2)
Stress YY (dyne/cm2)
0.1	 0.2	 0.3	 0.4	 0.5	 0.6	 0.7	 0.8
2e+09
1e+09
0
-1e+09
-2e+09
-3e+09
-4e+09
Figure 7.12  1D stress distribution under the gate used for calculation of 
average stress.
7.2.2  Visualization and Analysis of Simulation Results, 
Extraction of Average Stresses, and Mobility 
Enhancement Factors
Since the simulation results are in 3D, the only convenient way of 
analyzing them is to extract figures of merit from inside using cut 
planes within the 3D structure. The five planes selected are as follows: 
The first four planes are parallel to the fin length; two of those planes 
are along sidewalls of the first n-finFET and first p-finFET; the next 
two planes are along the sidewall of other second p-finFET; and the 
final plane (the fifth) is along the top of the fins. These 2D planes are 
generated using the “-cut” option of Tonyplot3D. The exact position 
of the cut could be set manually using the cut plane setting in the cut 
plane view menu of Tonyplot3D. The generated cut plane structures 
with 2D Sxx distribution and 1D stress distribution are shown using 
TonyPlot in Figs. 7.6 through 7.12.
	
Average stress calculations were performed using “factor” (100 in 
this case), which is required for obtaining integrated stresses in GPa. 
The Sxx, Syy, and Szz components in the sidewalls and top side of the 
fin under the gate were computed by integration of corresponding 
stress distributions along the cut 5 nm below the fin-oxide boundary 
under the gate.
Stress-Engineered FinFETs

210
FinFETs
	
Mobility enhancement calculations were performed using the 
piezorestivity coefficients for (100)/<100> n-fin orientation (in 
cm2/GPa) values:
	
nx1 = –1.022
	
ny1 = 0.534
	
nz1 = 0.534
	
The piezorestivity coefficients for (110)/<100> n-fin orientation 
(in cm2/GPa) values used are:
	
nx2 = –0.311
	
ny2 = –0.175
	
nz2 = 0.534
	
Mobility enhancement factors were calculated at the sidewall 
and top of the fin under the gate. Mobility enhancements for 
n-finFET with 2 fin orientations were found to be dependent on fin 
orientation, and also the enhancement factors are different because 
the piezorestivity coefficients are different. For the simulation of a 
p-finFET device having the same structure as n-finFET, the stresses 
can be calculated using the same procedure but with different 
piezorestivity coefficients.
	
The piezorestivity coefficients for (100)/<100> p-fin orientations 
(in cm2/GPa) are:
	
px1 = 0.066
	
py1 = –0.011
	
pz1 = –0.011
	
The piezorestivity coefficients for (110)/<100> p-fin orientations 
(in cm2/GPa) are:
	
px2 = 0.718
	
py2 = –0.663
	
pz2 = –0.011
	
The mobility enhancement factors for the first p-finFET (it is 
parallel to n-finFET): (100)/<100) are:
	
p_factor_side1_p1_1 = 1.00215
	
p_factor_side2_p1_1 = 1.00137

211
	
p_factor_top_p1_1 = 1.00181
	
The mobility enhancement factors of the first p-finFET (it is 
parallel to n-finFET): (110)/<100) are:
	
p_factor_side1_p1_2 = 0.910603
	
p_factor_side2_p1_2 = 0.899863
	
p_factor_top_p1_2 = 0.905628
	
The mobility enhancement factors of the second p-finFET: 
(100)/<100) are:
	
p_factor_side1_p2_1 = 1.00195
	
p_factor_side2_p2_1 = 1.00289
	
p_factor_top_p2_1 = 1.00248
	
The mobility enhancement factors of the second p-finFET: 
(110)/<100) are:
	
p_factor_side1_p2_2 = 0.902494
	
p_factor_side2_p2_2 = 0.91404
	
p_factor_top_p2_2 = 0.909027
	
A combination of the 3D process simulator VictoryCell and the 
3D stress simulator VictoryStress has been employed for fast and 
accurate stress analysis of individual finFETs and also complex 
cell structures. It is important to simulate stresses, not just in an 
individual device, but also in the whole cell.
7.3  FinFET Design and Optimization
In this section a 3D finFET is simulated using the commercial 
package of Taurus Process and Taurus Device simulators along with 
Taurus Layout and Taurus Visual from Synopsys. Design issues for 
a state-of-the-art finFET starting from process to device simulation 
are employed to vary fin width (Wfin), fin height (Hfin), gate oxide 
thickness, buried oxide thickness, and various process parameters 
(such as channel implantation dose and energy) of a trigate SOI 
finFET device. We study the DC an AC behavior, including the DIBL, 
subthreshold swing, Ioff/Ion behavior, and cutoff frequency.
FinFET Design and Optimization

212
FinFETs
Figure 7.13  3D finFET structure used in simulation using Taurus Process and 
Taurus Device.
	
Since the finFET structure is 3D and complex channel profile is 
required to adjust threshold voltage, it cannot be simulated using 
the conventional 1D or 2D simulators. The 3D simulation requires 
dense meshing/gridding and thus takes large time and computer 
memory resources for process simulation. Only one quarter of the 
device was simulated first and at the end of the process simulation, 
the structure was reflected twice to make the complete device. The 
initial grid definition is by default taken from the mask layout file 
at the beginning of process simulation. The mask is held in the X-Z 
plane and the growth direction is in the negative Y axis. The process 
steps included are initialization of the silicon substrate, deposition 
of a 100 nm buried oxide layer, deposition of a 60 nm hard mask 
(TEOS), deposition of a 45 nm Si layer, patterning of the silicon fin 
using dry etching, implantation of boron in the channel with (energy 
= 20 keV, dose = 4.5 × 1013 cm–2) , sacrificial oxidation (optional),  
3 nm gate oxide , 100 nm gate polysilicon with phosphorous doping 
of 4 × 1020 cm–3, deposition of a 65 nm TEOS hard mask, patterning 
of the gate, a nitride spacer of 65 nm, selective silicon epitaxy for 
raised source/drain of 60 nm, implantation of As in the source/drain 
region (energy = 50 keV, dose = 3 × 1015 cm–2), and final anneal. For 
computational efficiency models the PDFermi (equilibrium point 
defect concentrations) and dual Pearson models were used for 
diffusion and ion implantation with their default model parameters. 
All necessary thermal steps included in the process simulation. All 
the devices were process simulated in the traditional (100) plane.
	
The device simulation is performed in Taurus Device simulator 
using the structure file created by Taurus Process. The drift-diffusion 

213
model was used in the device simulation along with the quantum-
mechanical model modified local density approximation (MLDA), 
which is capable of calculating the confined carrier distribution 
near the Si–SiO2 interface for both inversion and accumulation 
and simultaneously for hole and electrons. The MLDA model is 
capable of performing DC, transient, and AC analysis. The bandgap 
narrowing effect due to heavy doping is simulated using the Jain and 
Roulston model. Both models were used with their default model 
parameters. The low-field mobility models include impurity and 
temperature-dependent Aurora mobility model and the Lombardi 
surface scattering model with their default model parameters. The 
Caughey–Thomas mobility model was used for the high-field (along 
the direction of the current flow) regime. Due to the ultrashort 
gate length the quasi-ballistic effects were included by using a gate 
length–dependent velocity model in the high-field regime. The first 
the process flow was simulated for a finFET with Wfin = 20 nm, Hfin 
= 45 nm, and Lg = 20 nm and gate oxide thickness of 3 nm and the 
device simulation was done for calibration with the experimental 
data, as shown in Fig. 7.14.
-0.3
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.9
1.2
0
2
4
6
8
Ids (A)×10-5
Vds (V)
 
Simulated
 
Experimental
Figure 7.14  Validation of simulation with experimental data [5].
FinFET Design and Optimization

214
FinFETs
7.3.1  Simulation Setup
A schematic of a trigate SOI finFET is shown in Fig. 7.13. The axes 
shown in the above figure corresponds to the axes definition of 
Taurus Process. The axes in the schematic refer to that of the process 
simulated device. The fin height (Hfin), the fin width (Wfin), and the 
gate length (Lg) are as shown in the figure. The gate wraps from three 
sides and the gate oxide thickness is the same on the three sides. As 
seen from the figure the three gates are connected together and the 
same bias is applied at three sides of the gate. If a thick spacer oxide 
as compared to the sidewall oxides is at the place of the top gate 
oxide, then even though the gate wraps around from three sides, 
the finFET will be termed “double-gate finFET.” The gate width (Wg) 
in the case of a trigate finFET is given by 2 × Hfim + Wfim, and for a 
double-gate device it is 2 × Hfim. With the same process flow, the fin 
width was varied from 10 to 20 nm with a step of 5 nm. For each 
fin width the fin height was varied from 40 to 70 nm with a step of  
10 nm. In all cases the gate length was kept 25 nm and the gate oxide 
thickness was kept at 1.1 nm. Thus the aspect ratio for the devices 
was varied from 2 to 7.
	
The transfer characteristics of the devices are shown in Fig. 
7.15a–d. The variation of the drain currents with variation of the fin 
width for fixed fin heights is shown in Fig. 7.15e,f for a fixed drain 
voltage and a fixed gate voltage. It is clear from the graphs that the 
drain current falls with the increase in the fin height for a fixed fin 
width, while it increases with fin width for a fixed fin height. The 
gate width is different for different device geometries, so the drain 
current was normalized for the plot. From Fig. 7.15g it can be seen 
that the drain current drops with increases in the aspect ratio.

215
FinFET Design and Optimization

216
FinFETs
Figure 7.15  (a–d) Transfer characteristics of a finFET with fixed Hfin and 
varying Wfin, (e) comparison of normalized drain currents at Vg = 1.1 V and Vd = 
0.05 V at fixed Hfin and varying Wfin, (f) comparison of normalized drain currents 
at Vg = 1.1 V and Vd = 1.1 V at fixed Hfin and varying Wfin, and (g) drain current 
versus aspect ratio plot at Vg = Vd = 1.1 V [5].

217
Figure 7.16  (a–c) Transconductance versus gate voltage plots at drain voltage 
of 1.1 V [5].
FinFET Design and Optimization

218
FinFETs
Wfin = 10nm
Wfin = 15nm
Wfin = 20nm
Figure 7.17  (a) Variation of DIBL with fin height for a fixed fin width, (b) 
variation of subthreshold swing with fin height for fixed fin widths, and (c) plot 
of Ioff versus Ion [5].

219
	
Figure 7.16a–c shows the transconductance versus gate voltage 
plots at drain voltage of 1.1V. From Fig. 7.17a,b, it is seen that as the 
fin height is increased keeping the fin width at a fixed value both 
the DIBL and subthreshold swings increase. So as the fin height is 
increased the top gate has less control over the channel and the two 
sidewall gates govern the channel. Figure 7.17c shows the plot of Ioff 
versus Ion. It can be seen from Fig. 7.18 that at a fixed fin height the 
cutoff frequency increases with the increase in fin width and may 
reach as high as 200 GHz.
FinFET Design and Optimization

220
FinFETs

221
Figure 7.18  Cutoff frequency versus gate current characteristics for various 
fin widths at fixed fin heights of (a) Hfin = 40 nm, (b) Hfin = 50 nm, (c) Hfin = 
60 nm, and (d) Hfin = 70 nm, and (e) peak cutoff frequency versus aspect ratio 
plot [5].
7.4  Summary
FinFETs are widely regarded as the most promising option for 
continued scaling of silicon-based transistors after 2010. In this 
chapter, we examined key process development that enable 
reduction of both device area and fin width necessary for technology  
nodes beyond 16 nm node. Because aggressively scaled finFET 
structures suffer significantly degraded device performance, 
detailed analysis of stress-induced mobility enhancement, including 
high stress levels, has been presented.
References
	 1.	 Smith, C. E. (2008). Advanced Technology for Source Drain Resistance in 
Nanoscale FinFETs, PhD thesis, University of North Texas.
	 2.	 Han, L. (2015). Investigation of Gate Dielectric Materials and Dielectric/
Silicon Interfaces for Metal Oxide Semiconductor Devices, PhD thesis, 
University of Kentucky.
References

222
FinFETs
	 3.	 Bhoj, N. (2013). Device-Circuit Co-Design Approaches for Multi-Gate 
FET Technologies, PhD thesis, Princeton University.
	 4.	 Demircioglu, H. (2013). Modeling Layout Dependent Stress Effects for  
CMOS, PhD thesis, North Carolina State University.
	 5.	 Sengupta, M. Private communication.

As the conventional planar bulk silicon MOSFET reached its limits, 
from the sub–32 nm technology nodes, new architectures such 
as fully depleted (FD) are being considered. The FD silicon-on-
insulator (SOI) architecture is based on adding a buried dielectric 
to improve the control of parasitic effects and limit MOSFET leakage 
currents, while remaining with the classical bulk integration. For 
further scaling, the ultrathin FD SOI MOSFETs have attracted special 
attention. Compared to PD SOI, they have additional key advantages:
	
∑	 Reduction of short-channel effects (SCEs): Benefiting from 
the ultrathin body, the leakage paths between source and 
drain triggered by SCEs are suppressed, leading to limited 
the threshold voltage roll-off and finally to the reduction of 
off-state current and power. On the other hand, drain-induced 
barrier lowering (DIBL) can also be reduced with the film 
thickness shrinking. A thinner BOX also leads to smaller DIBL 
due to the reduction of the fringing field through the BOX and 
the substrate. In addition, the ideal subthreshold swing (~60 
mV/dec) is achieved in ultrathin FD MOSFETs.
	
∑	 Multiple threshold voltage: Another attractive feature for FD 
SOI devices is the back gate, which enables one to adjust the 
threshold voltage for low-power management. Compared to 
bulk silicon technology, where the threshold voltage can only 
Chapter 8
Advanced Devices
Introducing Technology Computer-Aided Design (TCAD): Fundamentals, Simulations, and Applications
C. K. Maiti
Copyright © 2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-51-2 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36450-6 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

224
Advanced Devices
be tuned by processes such as channel implanting and gate 
work function engineering, tuning the threshold voltage by 
the back gate in FD technology is much simpler and more 
flexible. Wise back-gate bias also helps improving the carrier 
mobility and SCEs.
	
∑	 Undoped channel: An undoped channel, typical for ultrathin 
FD MOSFETs, avoids the mobility degradation from channel 
doping and reduces the variability of the threshold voltage 
induced by dopant fluctuation. However, although ultrathin FD 
SOI technology shows unrivalled advantages in suppressing 
SCEs and exhibits high performance, it still faces some issues, 
such as increase of parasitic source/drain resistance, diffusion 
of source/drain dopants, the self-heating effect, the parasitic 
bipolar effect, and coupling effects. In this section, we focus 
on FD SOI MOS transistors on thin-film SOI for the 10 nm 
technology node.
8.1  Ultrathin-Body SOI
The planar bulk silicon metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect 
transistors (MOSFETs) suffer from many parasitic effects:
 
∑	 Current leakage in the substrate is too high.
 
∑	 Doping of the channel induces a high variability of the 
threshold voltage.
 
∑	 The electrostatic control of the gate on the channel is greatly 
degraded.
	
From the 28 nm technology node, therefore, the industry 
migrated to devices with thin silicon under the gate to obtain fully 
depleted (FD) channels. The main advantage of FD channels is the 
improvement of electrostatic control. Two main architectures for 
obtaining these types of channels are:
 
∑	 A planar approach (FD silicon-on-insulator [FD SOI]) where a 
thin silicon film is obtained by inserting a buried oxide.
 
∑	 A nonplanar approach (fin-shaped field-effect transistor 
[finFET]) in which the conduction channel is formed in a 
plane perpendicular to the surface of the substrate.

225
	
For advanced technologies, the use of FD channel transistors is 
mandatory to limit the effects of short channels and ensure good 
electrostatic control which increases performance. Two approaches 
currently in use are:
 
∑	 FinFET or trigate architecture that exploits the third 
dimension to form channels with an aspect ratio (height/
width) significantly greater than 1. These channels have a 
width of about 10 nm and are referred to as fins.
 
∑	 Planar FD SOI architecture where the silicon film is thinned 
(<10 nm) on an insulator.
	
The SOI technology originates from the research on silicon-on-
sapphire (SOS) in the 1960s. The SOI substrate comprises three 
layers: the active silicon film device layer, the buried oxide (BOX) 
and the silicon substrate. Depending on the thickness of silicon 
film, the SOI substrates can be divided into two groups, partially 
depleted (PD) and FD SOI. Compared to bulk silicon transistors, PD 
SOI technology has several advantages:
	
∑	 The BOX simplifies the isolation of devices, and completely 
avoids the parasitic effects such as latch-up, charge sharing, 
and leakage between devices.
	
∑	 Due to the natural isolation by the oxide, SOI devices are 
immunized from radiation effects (especially single-event 
effects due to charge in the channel).
	
∑	 SOI circuits exhibit less parasitic capacitance, substrate noise, 
and energy consumption due to lower leakage and supply 
voltage.
	
An alternative integration technique to form the gate of transistors 
after the annealing for activating the source/drain regions, the so-
called “gate last” on SOI will be presented. The purpose of integration 
gate-last on SOI is to adjust the threshold voltage of the MOSFET and 
to optimize the stress in the channel. This integration also paves the 
way for reducing the gate dielectric thickness. Nowadays, several 
architectures are possible make nanoscale transistors: finFET or 
planar transistors. Decreasing the size of transistors does not only 
aim to reduce the manufacturing cost, the increasing number of 
functionality, and speed is also improved from one technology node 
to another. Since the 2000s, the reduction in size alone has not been 
Ultrathin-Body SOI

226
Advanced Devices
enough to improve the performance of transistors marking the end 
of the “happy scaling” era. For the 10 nm technology node, innovative 
architecture involving a buried SiGe layer to transfer stress to the 
channel beneficial for the n-MOSFET has been proposed [1].
8.2  Gate-First SOI
The main process steps (Fig. 8.1) for the integration of gate-first SOI 
technology are:
	
1.	 The starting substrate is with a thin BOX (25 nm) or a thick 
BOX (145 nm). The isolation is performed by shallow trench 
isolation (STI). Biaxial tension stress can be introduced by 
using substrates such as strained SOI (sSOI) with carrier 
transport in the crystallographic direction <110> for a (001) 
surface.
	
2.	 The gate stack is deposited and then etched using standard 
process lithography. The final gate stack includes:
	
∑	 High-k (1.9 nm HfSiON) on a plasma oxide (0.8 nm)
 
∑	 6.5 nm PVD TiN as metal gate
 
∑	 50 nm polysilicon
	
3.	 After the first spacer, the source and drain are formed by 
selective epitaxy. The source and drain are made of silicon 
but source and drain SiGe can advantageously be integrated 
for the p-MOSFET. The areas between the regions’ source and 
drain and the channel (i.e., the extensions) are electrically 
connected by ion implantation and then annealed.
	
4.	 Then the second spacer is formed and the source and drain 
are doped and annealed for activation (~1050°C). Finally 
silicide (NiSi) is formed on the source and drain.
	
5.	 A nitride layer of 40 nm serving as a barrier layer to the 
etching of the contact is made. This layer, called the contact 
etch stop layer (CESL), can be of a different nature with an 
intrinsic tensile stress (1.6 GPa), neutral, or compressive  
(–3 GPa).
	
6.	 The CESL is then covered by a deposited oxide (interlayer 
dielectric).
	
7.	 Finally, contacts are formed followed by back-end processing.

227
Gate-Last SOI
1/
7/
6/
5/
Contacts
Deposit ILD (ox.)
Deposit CESL:
2/
3/
4/
∑
∑
∑
Substrate:
Deposition
Epi. S/D:
Gate (HKMG) :
HfSiON
PolySi
Isolation STI
- SOI
- Si
- Si0. 7Ge0.3:B
- I/I extensions
I/Implant. S/D
Anneal ~1050°C
Silicide
- sSOI
- tensile (1.6 GPa)
- neutral
- compr. (-3 GPa)
Tin PVD 10nm
Figure 8.1  Main manufacturing steps of gate-first transistors on SOI [1].
8.3  Gate-Last SOI
The main process steps (Fig. 8.2) for the integration of gate-last SOI 
technology are discussed below.
	
The first steps are similar to the integration gate-first:
	
1.	 SOI substrate with a thin BOX (25 nm). The isolation is 
performed by STI.
	
2.	 High-k (HfSiON) is deposited and the polysilicon form the 
sacrificial gate. Unlike the integration gate-first, polysilicon 
is deposited here directly on the high-k and not on the metal 
grid.
	
3.	 After the first spacer, the source and drain are formed by 
selective epitaxy. Then the second spacer is formed, followed 
by the source and drain are doped. The activation annealing 
(~1050°C) is then performed. Finally silicide is formed on the 
source and drain.
	
4.	 A CESL of 20 nm is then deposited on the inter layer dielectric.
	
5.	 Then part of dielectric is etched from CESL: the top of 
the sacrificial gate is discovered by the steps of chemical-
mechanical polishing (CMP).
	
6.	 The polysilicon gate is removed by tetramethyl ammonium 
hydroxide (TMAH) solution.

228
Advanced Devices
	
7.	 The gate metal (TiN PVD) as well as encapsulating metals 
(TiN/W) are deposited in the cavity thus formed.
	
8.	 Metal deposited outside the gates of cavities is removed by 
CMP.
	
9.	 Finally, the contacts are formed.
1/
8/
7/
6/
5/
2/
3/
4/
Substrate SOI
CMP Metal
Deposition TiN PVD
Encapsulation TiN/W
Etch PolySi
CMP /PolySi
Isolation STI
Deposition
Epi. S/D + I/I
Anneal 1050°C
Silicidation
Depo CESL
Depo ILD (Ox.)
KHF PolySi
Figure 8.2  Main manufacturing steps of high-k gate-last transistors on SOI [1].
8.4  3D SOI n-MOSFET
In the following, a SOI n-MOSFET with a body contact is simulated 
using VictoryDevice.
	
A body contact is used to suppress the kink effect. The device 
structure is created using DevEdit and exported to VictoryDevice. 
Use of a body contact on SOI n-MOSFET suppresses the kink 
observed due to impact ionization in the Id–Vd characteristics. The 
effect of lattice heating is also shown. Device simulation involves the 
following steps:
 
∑	 Definition of 3D SOI MOSFET structures using DevEdit
 
∑	 Study the effect of body contact in 3D MOSFET
 
∑	 Calculation of lattice-heating effects
 
∑	 Simulation of impact ionization effects

229
3D SOI n-MOSFET
	
DevEdit defines the basic SOI n-MOSFET structure first. Although 
the geometry of the device is essentially 2D, it is simulated in 3D 
so that the results can be directly compared with those from a 3D 
MOSFET with a body contact. Using a tetrahedral mesh, the first 
MOSFET structure is saved and is shown in Fig. 8.3, which is then 
imported into VictoryDevice.
Materials:
Aluminum
Silicon
SiO2
substrate
Figure 8.3  DevEdit-generated SOI n-MOSFET structure with no body contact.
	
In VictoryDevice, the statement ELECTRODE SUBSTRATE is used 
so that the substrate of the device is recognized as an electrode, 
which will be held at ground potential. The succeeding CONTACT 
statement assigns to the gate the work function of n-type polysilicon. 
The MODELS statement is used to specify the particular models to 
be used during the simulation. In the simulation, CVT, a general-
purpose mobility model, including concentration, temperature, 
parallel-field, and transverse-field dependence, Shockley–Read–Hall 
(SRH) recombination, AUGER, Auger recombination, and bandgap 
narrowing (BGN) in the presence of heavy doping were used. In 
addition to these models, the IMPACT SELB statement specified 
that the Selberherr model for impact ionization to be used. Once the 
contacts, models, and methods have been specified, the simulation 
begins with a SOLVE INIT to initialize the solution at zero bias. Next a 
small initial bias is applied to the drain, and then the gate is brought 
up to its operating bias of 3 V. The bias on the drain is then ramped 
from 0.2 V up to 4 V– and the Id–Vd characteristics was obtained and 
is shown in Fig. 8.4.
	
After this, the entire simulation is repeated for this structure, 
but this time considering lattice-heating effects. The CONTACT and 
MATERIAL statements assign to the gate contact the work function, 
heat capacity, and thermal conductivity of n-type polysilicon. 
The THERMCONTACT statement defines a thermal contact at the 
substrate, and specifies that it will be maintained at 300 K. Once the 

230
Advanced Devices
gate has been biased, lattice temperature simulation is activated by 
the statement MODELS LAT.TEMP. The drain is then biased as before, 
and the Id–Vd characteristics is obtained as shown in Fig. 8.4. The 
second DevEdit run defines the MOSFET with an additional body 
contact besides the gate. The difference between this structure and 
the first one can be seen by comparing the Figs. 8.3 and 8.5.
	
As with the first structure, simulations are run with and without 
lattice-heating effects. With the addition of the body contact (at 0 V), 
however, the device is much more stable. The Id–Vd characteristics 
are shown in Fig. 8.4 for comparison. This comparison clearly shows 
that the addition of the body contact suppresses the kink which is 
due to the impact ionization.
0.0015
0.0012
0.009
0.006
0.003
0
0
1
2
3
4
Drain Voltage (V)
Drain Current (A)
vdex02_0_4.log
vdex02_0_2.log
vdex02_1_2.log
vdex02_1_4.log
Figure 8.4  Id–Vd characteristics showing effects of body contact and heating.
	
Figures 8.6 and 8.7 compare the impact ionization patterns for 
the two device structures. Figures 8.8 and 8.9 compare the heat 
fluxes as well as other lattice-heating effects for the two device 
structures.
Materials:
Aluminum
Silicon
SiO2
substrate
Figure 8.5  SOI n-MOSFET with a body contact.

231
Materials:
Aluminum
Silicon
SiO~2
Impact Gen Rate (/scm3)
9.337
22.003
14.668
7.3342
0
Figure 8.6  Impact ionization when body contact is absent.
Materials:
Aluminum
Silicon
SiO~2
Impact Gen Rate (/scm3)
28.933
21.7
14.467
7.2334
0
Figure 8.7  Impact ionization when body contact is present.
Materials:
Aluminum
Silicon
SiO2
substrate
Total Heat Flow Density (W/cm2)
4.1915e + 05
3.1437e + 05
2.0959e + 05
1.0481e + 05
35.457
Figure 8.8  Total heat fluxes when body contact is absent.
3D SOI n-MOSFET

232
Advanced Devices
substrate
Materials:
Aluminum
Silicon
SiO2
Heat Flow Density X (W/cm2)
2.5716e + 05
1.7453e + 05
91888
9249
-73390
-1.5603e + 05
Figure 8.9  Total heat fluxes when body contact is present.
8.5  TFT
Polysilicon thin-film transistor (TFT) technology, an alternative 
to amorphous silicon technology has shown very high potential 
for high-performance, low-power, small and medium-size flat-
panel mobile displays. Interest in polycrystalline silicon as the 
active material of TFTs has increased significantly in recent years. 
The polysilicon TFT technology has demonstrated its capabilities 
and compatibility with variety of substrates. TFT devices became 
the most important device for active matrix liquid crystal display 
(AMLCD) development. Currently, demand for TFT devices not 
only comes from the AMLCD industry but also from other emerging 
display industries such as organic light-emitting diode (OLED). 
Recently, TFT devices are also being considered for development of 
other large-area electronic systems such as bio and image sensors, 
printing actuators, and radio-frequency (RF) and wireless modules. 
The cross-sectional view of a typical self-aligned polysilicon TFT 
device is shown in Fig. 8.10.
Metal
Metal
Passivation
Oxide
Gate
Dielectric
Island
Gate
Isolation Oxide
Substrate
Drain
Source
Passivation
Oxide
Figure 8.10  Cross-sectional view of a top-gate self-aligned polysilicon TFT [2].

233
	
Next, the design and characterization of polysilicon TFT 
electronics for large-area systems on flexible platform will be 
discussed. An integrated process and device TFT simulations 
performed using ATHENA and ATLAS is shown. ATHENA is used to 
construct the geometry and doping of a TFT device. The starting 
substrate is defined as silicon dioxide to emulate the flat-panel 
display on glass. The transistor is simulated with a metal gate at 
the bottom and a gate insulator made from oxide and nitride. A 
lightly doped silicon layer is deposited to act as the channel region. 
A heavily doped layer is placed on top to form the source/drain 
regions. Single-crystal silicon or polysilicon could also be used. 
Metal for the source/drain contacts is then applied. Then etch back 
through the metal and heavily doped silicon is done. Some of the 
lightly doped silicon layer is also removed. The final etch separates 
the source and drain. Electrodes are defined in ATHENA for use in 
ATLAS. The cross-sectional view of simulated TFT device is shown 
in Fig. 8.11.
0
0.2
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
-1.2
-1
0
1
2
3
Microns
Microns
4
5
6
Silicon
Si3N4
SiO2
Materials
Aluminum
Figure 8.11  Cross-sectional view of a simulated TFT device.
	
In simulating TFT devices the most important requirement is 
setting of the defect statement specifying the density of states in the 
semiconductor bandgap. The defect states are specified as donor-
like and acceptor-like and as tail and midgap Gaussian states. ATLAS 
is used to simulate the gate voltage bias from –20 V to +20 V with 
the drain at +10 V. The material statement is used to set the material 
TFT

234
Advanced Devices
constants of the semiconductor to those of amorphous silicon. The 
interface step defines an interface charge on each semiconductor/
insulator interface. It is possible to vary this charge by position 
using the bounding box parameters on the interface statement. A 
constant mobility as defined by the material statement is used and 
SRH recombination is included. In order to simulate reverse leakage 
the band-to-band tunneling model is included.
	
In simulation, the first step in the solve sequence is to ramp the 
drain voltage up to +10 V. Then the reverse gate voltage ramp is 
applied. The gate voltage is ramped up to –20 V. The drain current 
increases during this ramp due to tunneling current in the TFT. The 
final step is the forward gate voltage sweep. This is done by first 
loading the solution saved with zero gate voltage. Then the gate is 
ramped to +20 V. From the data, the extract syntax is used to get the 
subthreshold leakage slope. The slope is typically 0.5–1.5 V/decade 
which is sensitive to the defect distribution in the semiconductor. 
The forward/reverse gate voltage characteristics of the TFT device 
are shown in Fig. 8.12.
-6
-7
-8
-9
-10
-11
-12
-13
-15
-16
-17
-20
-10
0
10
20
Gate Voltage (V)
-14
Log Drain Current (Atum)
Figure 8.12  Forward/reverse gate voltage characteristics of a TFT device.
	
In the following example, the TFT structure is formed using 
ATLAS syntax, and material and model parameters for passivated 
a-Si are included to obtain the forward Id–Vg characteristics. When 
silicon is deposited on an amorphous surface (normally SiO2), small 
Si crystalline clusters or so called grains are formed over the entire 
surface area. Unlike single-crystal silicon, polysilicon films consist 

235
of a number of grains (crystallites) of various sizes and different 
orientations. The atomic disorder and unsaturated Si atom bonds 
(dangling bonds) at grain boundaries, and sometimes within the 
grains, are directly responsible for transport properties of polysilicon 
films. Figure 8.13 shows the device structure for simulation of grains 
and grain boundaries in polysilicon TFT. ATLAS and SPISCES have 
been used to model the influence of grain boundaries on the device. 
The grain and grain boundary are created by defining two regions 
in the polysilicon. Each region then has its own material and defect 
statements that define the properties within the grain and the grain 
boundary.
-0.1
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Microns
Microns
0
Gate Oxide
Graia
Graia
Graia beuadary
Buried Oxide
Materials
SiO2
Silicon
Conductor
Figure 8.13  Device structure for simulation of grains and grain boundaries in 
a polysilicon TFT.
	
In TFT simulation, the defect statement is most important. It 
is used to define a continuous density of trap states in the silicon 
and the relevant trapping cross sections. In ATLAS, it is possible to 
specify an energy-dependent distribution of traps in two ways and 
comparison of discrete and continuous distribution of traps can be 
made. The DEFECTS statement allows the user to specify a fixed 
density of states versus energy distribution. This would normally 
comprise one Gaussian and/or one exponential energy distribution 
of traps across the bandgap. The capture cross sections are taken 
from the parameters in the DEFECTS statement. The acceptor 
capture cross section is defined by the Gaussian acceptor value and 
TFT

236
Advanced Devices
the donor capture cross section is defined by the Gaussian donor 
value. ATLAS allows the user to use the C-interpreter to specify the 
density of states versus energy distribution in which the acceptor 
and donor densities are defined by two exponential equations each 
of which begin from the conduction and the valence bands. The 
effects of a discrete and continuous distribution of traps on Id–Vg 
characteristics are shown in Figs. 8.14 and 8.15.
0
-12
-11
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
4
8
Gate Voltage (V)
Drain Current (A)
12
16
20
Continuous
Discrete
Figure 8.14  Comparison of discrete and continuous distribution of traps on 
Id–Vg characteristics.
0
0
4e-05
8e-05
Drain Current (A)
1.2e-05
1.6e-05
2e-05
2.4e-05
4
8
Gate Voltage (V)
12
16
20
Discrete
Continuous
Figure 8.15  Comparison of discrete and continuous distribution of traps on 
Id–Vg characteristics.

237
8.6  HEMTs
Current wireless communication systems face several technology 
challenges, despite the steady development in the last decade. One 
of the key technologies that made this evolution possible was the 
gallium nitride–based high-electron-mobility transistor (HEMT). 
It offers a high current density at RFs that, combined with its high 
breakdown voltage, makes it an excellent choice for high-power 
amplifiers. It is finding applications in RF communication systems, 
automotive electronics, and sensors. Due to higher low-field 
electron mobility, GaAs devices are faster and better compared with 
conventional silicon devices. Due to lower saturation field, GaAs can 
be semi-insulating with a high-energy gap. GaAs shows less parasitic 
capacitance resulting in further speed advantages than silicon. As 
GaAs operates at higher voltages, it is more also useful for RF power 
amplifiers. However, migration from silicon to GaAs is difficult for 
several reasons. In Si technology, silicon dioxide, SiO2, is used for 
masking, which is not possible in GaAs technology.
	
The first GaN-based transistors were realized in the early to mid-
1990s. GaN HEMT and other wide-bandgap semiconductor devices 
are being investigated for applications in communications. Using 
GaN technology over currently fielded gallium arsenide (GaAs) could 
result in a tenfold increase in power density at identical frequencies. 
GaN devices offer superior material properties for high-power, high-
bandwidth applications, especially at high voltages where current 
GaAs technology is unsuitable. Diamond has the highest thermal 
conductivity of any known substance and can be easily grown on 
large wafers.
	
Understanding the thermal and electrical properties will allow 
for optimization of the GaN transistor structure, the geometry of the 
diamond substrate and prediction of thermal conductivity across 
layer interfaces. If a high thermal conductor such as diamond can 
be utilized in a GaN HEMT to reduce channel temperatures, both 
improved device performance and most importantly component 
lifetimes may be increased by several orders of magnitude. Popular 
substrate materials currently used for GaN HEMTs include sapphire,
	
Silicon carbide (SiC), silicon, and aluminum nitride (AlN): Each 
substrate choice has been proven with individual successes and 
HEMTs

238
Advanced Devices
challenges. There is a requirement for simulation tools to accurately 
predict device performance prior to fabrication because of the high 
inherent cost involved.
	
An HEMT is a FET that operates very similar to a metal–
semiconductor field-effect transistor (MESFET). Electron flow across 
the carrier channel from source to drain is modulated by changing 
gate voltage. The main difference between a MESFET and a HEMT 
is the device structure. HEMTs use different compounds grown in 
layers to optimize and extend the performance of the MESFET. The 
different layers form a heterojunction. Figure 8.16 shows the basic 
HEMT structure.
Source
Gate
2DEG
Drain
Substrate
III-V Compound Semiconductor
Wider
BandGap
Figure 8.16  The basic HEMT structure.
	
The device under consideration is an AlGaN/GaN HEMT. The 
2D structure is obtained by ATHENA and the stress distribution 
is simulated by VictoryStress. The simulation produces stress 
distributions via the stress liner made of nitride (tensile or 
compressive). Note that the stressor in this case study is used to 
illustrate strain polarization, on top of lattice and spontaneous 
polarization. The polarization model that supports dependency on 
a loaded strain tensor has been used. The model is enabled by the 
TEN.PIEZO flag in the MODELS statement.
	
The simulation steps are:
 
∑	 Construction of the heterojunction structure using the 
ATHENA syntax

239
 
∑	 Stress simulation, material and model parameter specification
 
∑	 Simulation of Id–Vg characteristics
	
The main idea of GaN-based power devices is to use epitaxial 
strain to create a 2DEG. The polarization model that supports 
epitaxial strain due to lattice mismatch is enabled by the CALC.
STRAIN flag on the MODELS statement. When both models are set 
in the simulation both the imported strain and the lattice mismatch 
calculation are accounted for. The lattice and imported strain-
dependent components of polarization can be independently scaled 
using the scale factors TENSO.SCALE and PIEZO.SCALE on the 
MODELS statement. When enabling the TEN.PIEZO flag spontaneous 
polarization is automatically included in the calculation. The 
size of the spontaneous component can be scaled using the PSP.
SCALE parameter of the MODELS statement. The device under 
consideration is a 3D AlGaN/GaN HEMT shown in Fig. 8.17. Figure 
8.18 illustrates strain polarization on top of lattice and spontaneous 
polarization. The stress distribution is simulated by VictoryStress 
and stress distributions via the stress liner made of nitride as shown 
in Fig. 8.19.
Materials:
Si3N4
Aluminum
AlGaN
GaN
Sapphire
Stress XX (dyne/cm2)
3.1815e + 09
-2.84469e + 07
-3.2384e + 09
-6.4483e + 09
-9.6583e + 09
Figure 8.17  A 3D AlGaN/GaN HEMT structure.
	
After the initial solution is obtained the drain voltage is ramped to 
1 V, then the Id–Vg characteristic is extracted from Vg = –5 to Vg = 1.0 V.  
The effect of strain is seen on Id–Vg characteristic. For illustration 
HEMTs

240
Advanced Devices
purpose we combined, in this case study, different intrinsic stresses 
(compressive or tensile), leading to different stress distributions 
and signs in the channel and the source and drain regions. As a result 
Id–Vd characteristics change accordingly, as shown in Fig. 8.20.
Figure 8.18  lllustration of strain polarization on top of a lattice and 
spontaneous polarization in a GaN HEMT.
Figure 8.19  VictoryStress-generated stress distribution in a HEMT.

241
Figure 8.20  Id–Vg characteristics of a stressed GaN HEMT.
8.6.1  Thermal Optimization Using a Flip-Chip Structure
The thermal conductivity of GaN is a challenge to overcome. 
While able to support high temperature operation, GaN by 
itself is unable to sufficiently remove the heat generated during  
intended device operation. Increased thermal resistance and 
shortened device component lifetimes are just two of the many 
undesired effects of high device temperatures. Removing the heat 
generated during operation could dramatically increase device 
performance, reliability and lifetime. Substrate selection for GaN 
HEMTs has primarily focused on sapphire and SiC due to their 
availability and ease of growing GaN onto these substrates.
	
In this case study, 2D electrothermal simulations with heat sink 
structures are under taken. Although the superiority of GaN HEMT 
device characteristics has been demonstrated, the self-heating effect 
has hindered the production of high-power and high-speed GaN-
based switching devices. This effect can be significantly reduced 
by the cost-effective heat sink approach. In this case, in order to 
understand and control the self-heating effect, a GaN HEMT with 
a flip-chip concept is simulated, and device characteristics are 
compared versus a normal structure.
	
For HFETs, the GaN/AlGaN epitaxial layers have been grown 
on either sapphire or SiC substrates. Although sapphire has the 
HEMTs

242
Advanced Devices
advantage of lower cost and availability in larger wafer sizes, its poor 
thermal conductivity (0.3 W/cm-K) limits the achievable powers 
due to severe self-heating. The self-heating effect can be significantly 
reduced by flip-chip mounting the devices onto highly conducting 
substrates such as AlN (1.8 W/cm-K).
	
The typical GaN HFET flip-chip structure in this example is 
an Al0.25Ga0.75 N-GaN HFET on a sapphire substrate. The Silvaco 
software, a physics-based modeling program, was utilized to model 
and simulate the GaN HEMT on a sapphire. The structure consists 
of an AlN layer as a heat sink, a 2.7 nm undoped AlGaN layer, and 
two GaN layers which includes 20 nm doped 1 × 1015 per cc GaN 
and 1 μm undoped GaN as shown in Fig. 8.21. The spaces of the 
source-gate and drain-gate are 2.0 μm and 2.0 μm respectively, and 
gate length is 1.0 μm. The spontaneous polarization of the interface 
of AlGaN/GaN is taken into account in ATLAS. The 2DEG was cali­
brated to 9 × 1012 cm–2 using the polarization scaling factor. The 
drift-diffusion transport model is used for this sim­ulation with the 
modified Caughey–Thomas mobility for the low field, and the high-
field-dependent mobility model is based on fitted Monte Carlo data 
for bulk nitride.
Figure 8.21  Schematic cross section of a simulated GaN HFET with a flip-chip 
structure.
	
The self-heating is a local increase of crystal temperature due to 
dissipated Joule electric power, this effect can significantly reduce 

243
the electron mobility and degrade device performance. DC, transient, 
and AC simulations are performed and compared with and without 
the flip-chip structure. Figure 8.22 shows the current–voltage (Id–Vg) 
comparison. In Fig. 8.22, simulations for the normal structure show 
significant degradation of transconductance compared to the case of 
the flip-chip structure. Figure 8.23 shows the Id–Vd characteristics 
versus gate bias. We can clearly see significant degradation of 
output characteristics with pronounced negative differential output 
conductance (NDC) region and with relatively high temperature at 
the drain-side gate edge due to the self-heating effect (Fig. 8.24). 
Degradation of output characteristics in the case of the flip-chip is 
significantly improved. Figure 8.24 shows the lattice temperature 
distribution. The NDC depends on the thermal dissipation. The 
nor­mal structure exhibits stronger NDC compared to the flip-chip 
structure, because the sapphire thermal conductiv­ity is smaller than 
AlN.
Figure 8.22  Id–Vg comparison.
	
Figure 8.25 shows the self-heating impact on transient 
performance. In gate lag simulation, a turn-on step voltage (≤10 ns) 
is applied to the gate terminal (from Vg = –6 to 0 V), main­taining 
a fixed drain bias of Vg = 5 V. The drain–current transient versus 
time is analyzed. In Fig. 8.25, simulation for the normal structure 
clearly shows significant cur­rent collapse compared to the flip-chip 
structure. This cur­rent collapse can be correlated to temperature 
effect due to self-heating. Figure 8.26 shows RF characteristics. 
HEMTs

244
Advanced Devices
Simulations indicate ~50% enhancement in fT and fmax with a flip-
chip structure that is in good agreement with transconductance and 
output simulation data. As expected the performance of the device is 
better using the flip-chip architecture.
Figure 8.23  Id–Vd comparison.
Figure 8.24  Lattice temperature distribution: Vd = 15 V; Vg = 0 V.

245
Figure 8.25  Drain current versus transient time.
Figure 8.26  RF performance comparison.
8.7  AlGaN/GaN HFET
In the following, we take up the simulation of a normally off AlGaN/
GaN HFET with p-type GaN gate and AlGaN buffer. GaN-based 
devices exhibit piezoelectric as well as sponta­neous polarization. 
AlGaN/GaN HFET

246
Advanced Devices
Gradients of polarization charges lead to charge accumulation 
at heterointerfaces and a strongly induced localized 2DEG. 
Polarization modeling is thus critical for GaN-based devic­es. ATLAS 
provides three different polarization models for GaN and the related 
nitrides. The latest model TEN.POLAR cal­culates the piezoelectric 
and spontaneous polarization but also includes contributions by 
external mechanical strain and axial strain due to lattice mismatch. 
ATLAS uses specific physical models and material pa­rameters to 
take into account the mole fraction of the AlGaN/GaN system.
	
We choose to model low field mo­bility using the ALBRCT model 
allowing the control of electrons and holes separately thus taking into 
account the fact that the gate is p-type. This mobility model is also 
a function of lattice temperature. We have selected a nitride-specific 
high-field-dependent mobility model. This model is based on a fit 
to Monte Carlo data for bulk nitride and is set by adding GANSET.N 
(for electrons) in the model statement. In some cases, lattice heating 
may be important. This typically occurs at high current oper­ation, 
just like the case of power devices. The lattice heat­ing model should 
be used to simulate the heat flow in the device and reproduce 
negative differential resistance. To enable heat flow simulation, the 
LAT.TEMP parameter is set on the MODEL statement. The structure 
was created using the ATLAS syntax. Mesh was optimized in order 
to get an accurate and quick simulation, paying special attention at 
the interfaces where induced charge from polarization are present. 
The structure as well as the polarization charges automatically 
calculated from the polarization model are shown in Figs. 8.27 and 
8.28. While a Schottky-type metal on the AlGaN barrier acts as gate 
for normally on HEMTs, a p-type doped semiconductor as gate is 
able to deplete the transistor channel when unbiased, thus yielding 
a normally off device. The p-GaN gate transistors presented here 
combine the high-mobility 2DEG transistor channel with secure 
normally off operation, as is required for applications in power 
electronics. However, the required Vt > +1 V is often achieved by a 
low Al concentration in the AlGaN barrier, giving a reduced electron 
density in the 2DEG of the transistor channel and compromising 
RON. A low-A-concentration AlGaN buffer beneath the GaN channel 
is introduced to gain both a high electron concentration in the 2DEG 
and a high V.

247
Figure 8.27  GaN FET structure used in simulation.
	
The simulation results of the Id–Vg and Ig–Vg characteristics 
are shown in Fig. 8.29. The threshold voltage is around 1.25 V. The 
subthreshold leakage current drops significantly immediately below 
the threshold voltage; however, the drop slows down to around  
4 µA/mm at Vg = 0 V. The leakage current is determined by the traps. 
The gate current in the on state (defined as Vg = 5 V) is around 3 µA/
mm and thus around 5 orders of magnitude below the drain current.
Figure 8.28  GaN FET structure showing polarization charges.
AlGaN/GaN HFET

248
Advanced Devices
Figure 8.29  Id–Vg and Ig–Vg characteristics.
	
The output characteristic shown in Fig. 8.30 exhibits a negative 
differential resistance due to lattice heating and simulated by solving 
the lattice heating equation set by the LAT.TEMP parameter of the 
MODELS statement. A breakdown voltage of 870 V for an 18 µm  
gate–drain spacing is shown in Fig. 8.31. GaN power devices are 
expected to prevail in high end applications over more traditional 
semiconductors such as Si or gallium arsenide with GaN offering up 
to five times the power density than that of GaAs.
Figure 8.30  Output characteristics.

249
Figure 8.31  Breakdown voltage characteristics.
8.8  3D SiC Process and Device Simulation
Power MOSFETs are widely used electronic devices capable of 
delivering high power levels. Silicon carbide is a promising wide-
bandgap semiconductor material for high-temperature, high-power, 
and high-frequency device applications due to its high thermal 
conductivity and high critical field for breakdown. Interest in silicon 
carbide power electronic devices has been increasing steadily with 
the advancement of obtaining devices with low defect concentrations. 
It has been shown that SiC devices have a higher power density than 
silicon devices. In general, wide-bandgap semiconductors of­fer a 
lower intrinsic carrier concentration, a higher electric breakdown 
field, a higher thermal conductivity, and a faster saturated electron 
drift velocity. SiC is an attractive material for high-temperature 
operating (>650°C) gas sensors as well as solid-state transducers 
such as pressure sensors and accelerometers for automotive and 
space industry applications using microelectromechanical systems. 
Although with favorable properties of SiC, the full performance of SiC 
devices is limited by the material quality itself and the fabrication of 
high temperature stable Schottky contacts and low-resistivity Ohmic 
contacts. Generally, contacts between metals and semiconductors 
play a major role in all classes of devices.
3D SiC Process and Device Simulation

250
Advanced Devices
	
Out of various polytypes with different crystal structures with the 
same stoichiometry, only the 6H- and 4H-SiC polytypes are available 
commer­cially as both bulk wafers and custom epitaxial layers. 
SiC has equal parts silicon and carbon, both of which are group IV 
elements. The distance between neighboring silicon (a) or carbon 
atom is approximately 3.08 Å for all polytypes. Both 6H- and 4H-SiC 
polytypes have a hexagonal crystal struc­ture and a bandgap in the 
neighborhood of 3 eV. The carbon atom is situated at the center of 
mass of the tetragonal structure outlined by the four neighboring Si 
atoms.
	
In the following, we demonstrate 3D trench SiC IGBT simulation 
using VictoryCell and VictoryDevice. The device has a low doping 
long drift region of about 160 μm which will lead to high breakdown 
voltage. To create the 3D structure we used VictoryCell 3D process 
simulator. After the process simulation is done a 3D structure is 
saved using a tetrahedron mesh to ensure that any shape created 
during 3D process simulation is well conserved and transferred to 
VictoryDevice for device simulation. SiC exhibits hexagonal crystal 
structures. As a consequence anisotropy features like impact 
ionization were taken into account. A 3D SiC MOSFET simulation 
was performed using DEVICED3D.
Materials:
Conductor
SiO2
4H-SiC
Abs Net Doping (/cm3)
19.041
17.281
15.52
13.76
12
Figure 8.32  SiC transistor structure used in simulation.
8.8.1  Device Simulation
One of the features of the SiC/oxide interface is the very high density 
of interface states under the gate, which dominate the determination 

251
of the threshold voltage. Typical interface state density as high as 
1 × 1014/cm2/eV at the band edges, dropping to a near constant 
value of 2 × 1011/cm2/eV throughout the rest of the bandgap that is 
more than 0.5 eV away from each of the band edges. These interface 
states are modeled using the intdefects statement. The high density 
of interface states effectively turn off the channel, thus creating a 
normally off device with a high threshold voltage.
0.012
0.01
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0
0               10               20              30               40              50
Drain Voltage (V)
Drain Current (A)
sice¥08_1.log
sice¥08_2.log
sice¥08_3.log
Figure 8.33  Output characteristics’ simulation of SiC transistors.
0               5              10             15             20             25             30
Gate Voltage (V)
7e-05
6e-05
5e-05
4e-05
3e-05
2e-05
1e-05
0
Drain Current (A)
Figure 8.34  Breakdown voltage simulation of low-voltage SiC transistors.
3D SiC Process and Device Simulation

252
Advanced Devices
-5
-6
-7
-8
-9
-10
-11
-12
-13
-14
-15
-16
-17
-18
-19
-20
-21
-22
-23
-24
-25
-26
-27
-28
-29
-30
-31
-32
-33
-34
-35
-36
0
200
400
Drain Voltage (V)
Drain Current (A)
600
800
1000
sicex08_4.log
sicex08_5.log
Figure 8.35  Breakdown voltage simulation of high-voltage SiC transistors.
8.9  Summary
GaN is a very promising material for high-power switching 
applications. However, the development cost is a serious concern 
for GaN manufacturers. A systematic simulation procedure has 
been followed for optimizing, using 2D simulation, the device 
geometry to obtain the maximum with minimum degradation in 
on resistance. Understanding the self-heating and the temperature 
effect in GaN HFET is an important issue because this device is a 
promising candidate for ultrahigh-power microwave systems, power 
electronics and high temperature applica­tions. Two-dimensional 
electrothermal simulations for the GaN HFET with heat sink 
structures were also performed by ATLAS. The effects of field plate 
geometry and material variables in a HEMT were studied.
	
A normally off GaN transistor for power applications with a low 
on-state resistance and high breakdown strength was simulated. 
The combination of a p-type GaN gate with an AlGaN back-barrier 
yield in a sufficiently high threshold voltage for power electronic 
applications. At last, 3D trench SiC IGBT simulation using VictoryCell 
and VictoryDevice has been performed.

253
References
	 1.	 Morvan, S. (2013). Transistors MOS sur films minces de Silicium-sur-
Isolant (SOI) complètement désertés pour le noeud technologique 10 nm, 
PhD thesis, Universite de Grenoble.
	 2.	 Jamshidi-Roudbari, A. (2010). Design and Characterization of 
Polysilicon TFT Devices, Circuits and Systems for Large Area Flexible 
Electronic Applications, PhD thesis, Lehigh University.
References


The semiconductor memory plays a significant role in the integrated 
circuit (IC) design and has in fact been one of the greatest driving 
forces in the advancement of semiconductor industry. The 
International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors forecasts a 
fourfold increase in the number of bits every 4–5 years. Development 
in technology and design of existing memories has led the chip 
capacity almost doubled every two years. But features in multigigabit 
memory technologies do not scale as easily. In DRAM, for example, the 
storage capacitance must be kept constant for soft error reliability, 
sensing signal margin, and data retention considerations, while the 
transistor’s threshold voltage is kept nearly the same to minimize 
charge leakage from the storage capacitor. Likewise, a typical Flash 
memory cell looks similar to a MOSFET, except that it has a dual-gate 
structure. Flash memories have a fixed tunnel oxide thickness for 
achieving 10 year retention time. High field/current stress caused by 
Fowler–Nordheim tunneling (during program/erase cycling) leads 
to tunnel oxide degradation, which eventually limits the endurance 
characteristics.
	
As a CMOS approaches the 22 nm node and below, to address 
the scaling challenges, new materials and approaches are required 
toward memory scaling with devices which use conventional 
CMOS materials. Lower operating voltages and faster switching 
can be achieved by using bandgap-engineered gate stacks, multiple 
Chapter 9
Memory Devices
Introducing Technology Computer-Aided Design (TCAD): Fundamentals, Simulations, and Applications
C. K. Maiti
Copyright © 2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-51-2 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36450-6 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

256
Memory Devices
metal floating gates, thinner oxides, and tunneling as the main 
programming mechanisms. Floating-gate devices are commonly 
used as storage elements but they may find applications as logic 
circuit elements within CMOS logic. To circumvent the limitations 
of conventional scaling, the semiconductor industry incorporated 
strained-silicon technology to boost the performance of devices. 
Since strain alters several semiconductor properties, its effect on 
all device parameters needs to be investigated. From measurements 
it was observed that DRAM retention degenerates with mechanical 
stress, while in nonvolatile memory (NVM), retention is improved 
with tensile stress. CMOS memory can be divided into two main 
categories, volatile memory (random access memory, or RAM) and 
NVM, or read-only memory (ROM). Figure 9.1 shows the various 
types of semiconductor memory devices.
Figure 9.1  Classification of semiconductor memory [1].
	
In this chapter, we discuss the key challenges in designing 
Flash memories. Scaling the tunnel oxide thickness in nonvolatile 
memories (NVMs) is examined. Semiconductor memory can be 
divided into two categories, volatile memory and NVM. In volatile 
memory, the information is saved only as long as the system power 
is on. SRAM and the DRAM fall into this category. A typical SRAM cell 
is composed of six transistors and is commonly used in the cache 
memory of a central processing unit due to its very high switching 
speed between two states. It is capable of writing and reading a 
bit in just a few nanoseconds. However, its drawback is its big size, 
which results in a low density such that it is not feasible for a high-
density memory array. Unlike the 6T-SRAM cell, the DRAM cell 
typically consists of only one transistor and one capacitor (1T–1C). 
The DRAM is mainly used in the main memory due to its small cell 
size. It can be built with a high density, which enables overall high-
speed data access to recently used data. The drawback of DRAM 

257
is that the capacitor for each cell is leaky, and the cell needs to be 
refreshed periodically to avoid loss of the stored data. Scaling issues 
are related directly to the need to store a critical amount of charge 
on the capacitor over time.
	
NVM has drawn much attention over the past years due to its 
applications in the consumer electronics market, where memory 
devices with a retention time of ~10 years are desired. Flash 
memory is the dominant technology and offers a very high density 
on-chip and very low idle power consumption and low cost. It is 
available in a NOR and NAND architecture and it is the dominant 
NVM technology. In NVM, the information is stored even if the power 
is off. There are many technologies and technology variations that 
in part aim to replace the DRAM in the main memory. However, the 
switching speed between two states is still low compared to the 
volatile memory and is therefore typically used as the secondary 
memory storage or long–term persistent storage where a slow 
speed may be tolerated.
	
The most common NVM is Flash memory, which is based on 
MOSFETs with programmable floating gates embedded in the 
dielectrics. These so-called floating-gate devices have enjoyed 
enormous success as the basis for a scalable NVM technology over 
the past years. Flash memory has attractive features such as high 
density, very low idle power consumption. The biggest challenge in 
scaling Flash technologies is to reduce the programming voltage.
	
There are other NVMs that have high potential and aim for high 
density, high switching speed, high endurance, low power, and long 
data retention simultaneously. They may find applications in next-
generation memory technology and those that are already matured 
in mass production are ferroelectric random access memory 
(FeRAM), magnetic random access memory (MRAM), and phase 
change memory (PCM). Other types of NVMs which are in early 
stages of investigation include resistive random access memory 
(RRAM), carbon nanotube (CNT) memory, molecular memory, and 
polymer memory.
FeRAM
Ferroelectric material is typically a perovskite material and can be 
polarized by an electric field where the dipoles align themselves 
in the same direction of the field. FeRAM is based on a metal–
Memory Devices

258
Memory Devices
ferroelectric–insulator–semiconductor (MFIS) structure and stores 
the data in a ferroelectric film. A change in field direction results 
in a displacement of the dipoles in the crystal structure of the 
ferroelectric material. The distribution of the charge is then also 
shifted. Therefore, the material shows hysteresis characteristics, 
which enables two stable states of the device. However, FeRAM 
devices face several integration challenges as compatibility with a 
CMOS is poor. Also the cost per bit and cell size are relatively large.
MRAM and SPRAM
The MRAM technology stores data by magnetic storage elements 
and uses a magnetic tunnel junction. There are two types of MRAM, 
(i) the conventional MRAM, where the magnetic field is generated 
due to the current flow in the word line and the bit line, and (ii) 
the advanced spin transfer torque RAM (SPRAM), where the write 
operation is performed by the current flow through the magnetic 
tunnel junction itself and a write word line is not required. In MRAM 
the data is stored in a magnetic state of bits and is then read by 
sensing the resistance. Although MRAM offers high speed, excellent 
endurance, and low voltage, its incompatibility with CMOS processes 
results in a high cost per bit.
PCM
PCM, also known as PRAM, is another potential candidate for 
NVM and has a 3D device structure. PCM uses a thin film typically 
composed of a chalcogenide material that is capable of reversible 
phase transitions between amorphous and crystalline phases on 
the application of heat. It is placed between the top electrode (bit 
line) and a heating element that extends from the bottom electrode 
(word line). The memory cell is programmed through a relatively 
high current that heats up the chalcogenide material and leads to a 
thermally induced phase change. The material changes from a low 
resistance to much higher resistance, depending on the state of the 
phase. Although PCM offers high endurance, high performance, and 
high density, along with promising scaling characteristics, it requires 
a high programming current and it is sensitive to temperature 
variation.

259
Memory Devices
RRAM
Another important NVM is RRAM. It has drawn increasing attention 
due to an easier fabrication process. It is scalable to at least the  
16 nm node and has potential for 3D stacking for ultrahigh density. 
Due to its structure, an ultrathin dielectric sandwiched between 
the two electrodes, its operation depends on the current filament 
formed or broken by application of appropriate bias. If a current 
filament is formed, a conductive path created between the two 
electrodes leads to a low-resistance state. If the filament is broken 
it acts as a high resistance. However, control of the formation and 
rupture of the filament is critical. The switching mode between 
low- and high-resistance states can be either unipolar or bipolar. A 
bipolar switching speed of 20 ns to set and 60 ns to reset with a data 
retention time of >10 e5 s has been reported. Other NVMs under 
active research need to be mentioned are CNT memory, molecular 
memory, and polymer memory.
	
Flash memory is the predominant NVM technology with the 
fastest-growing rate due in part to its compatibility with CMOS 
processes. Flash memory is based on the floating-gate device that 
has a structure where a gate is embedded in the oxide of a transistor 
in order to store charge, and thus data. Conventional devices employ 
typically a continuous floating gate but a discontinuous floating gate 
may be introduced where isolated nanocrystals are inserted in the 
oxide. These so-called nanocrystal floating-gate (NCFG) devices are 
superior in many aspects to their counterpart. NCFG devices may 
further be modified to use a high-k dielectric or a dual-layer structure 
to improve charge transfer and/or retention characteristics.
	
The schematic cross section of a continuous floating gate 
embedded in the oxide of a transistor is shown in Fig. 9.2a. The 
upper electrode is the control gate, and the lower electrode is the 
conductive floating gate. The lower oxide that isolates the floating 
gate from the p-type silicon substrate is called the tunnel oxide. 
The upper oxide, which is inserted between the floating gate and 
the control gate, is called the control gate oxide, or sometimes the 
blocking oxide. The floating gate acts as the storage node in this 
NVM device and is configured by applying the appropriate bias on 
the control gate, drain, and source for an appropriate duration. By 
applying a high voltage on the control gate, electrons tunnel from 

260
Memory Devices
the channel through the tunnel oxide to the floating gate, thus 
programming the device. The resulting accumulated negative charge 
on the floating gate acts as a shield between the control gate and 
the channel and results in a positive threshold voltage shift of the 
device’, as shown in Fig. 9.2b.
Poly-Si
SiO2
oxide
control gate
floating
gate
(a)
(b)
Control Gate Voltage
n+
n+
p-type substrate
VT0-DVT
DVT
VT0
VT0+DVT
DVT
Erased
Uncharged
Programmed
Drain Current
Figure 9.2  (a) Schematic cross section of a continuous-floating-gate device 
and (b) threshold voltage of an uncharged, programmed, and erased device. 
After Ref. [2].
	
An applied bias on the control gate in the operation mode, which 
is less than the new threshold voltage of the device, keeps the pro-
grammed device in the cutoff region, which leads to a minimal sub-
threshold leakage current. To remove the charge on the floating gate, 
a high negative voltage needs to be applied on the control gate such 
that the electrons tunnel back to the substrate. Then, the threshold 
voltage of the device shifts back toward the initial value Vt0, thus 
erasing the device. The amount of charge that is transferred between 
the floating gate and the substrate depends on several factors such 
as the control gate voltage, programming/erasing time, and tunnel 
and control gate oxide thicknesses. The materials that are chosen for 
the control gate and the floating gate, as well as the oxides, also con-
tribute significantly to the charge transfer. One of the main difficul-
ties of the continuous-floating-gate device is the formation of defects 
in the tunnel oxide. Defects occur after many programs and erase 
cycles (typically 105–106 cycles) where electrons get trapped in the 
oxide, thus establishing a conductive path between the floating gate 
and the channel. A high-quality and sufficiently thick layer (6–7 nm) 
requiring a high program/erase voltage across the tunnel oxide is 
essential for a reliable device with good endurance. Thus scaling of 
the continuous-floating-gate device is limited due to stress-induced 
leakage current (SILC) beyond the 45 nm technology node.

261
Nanocrystal Floating-Gate Device
9.1  Nanocrystal Floating-Gate Device
Recently, nanocrystal floating-gate (NCFG) devices have drawn much 
attention as nonvolatile memory (NVM). A schematic cross section 
of this device is shown in Fig. 9.3. A discontinuous floating gate with 
a Si nanocrystal embedded in the oxide has been demonstrated. The 
nanocrystal has a diameter of just a few nanometers and an areal 
density of typically 10 × 1011–10 × 1013 cm–2. The tunnel oxide is 
also thinner (less than ~4 nm) than in the continuous-floating-
gate device, resulting in a more efficient charge transfer and better 
scalability. The program and erase characteristics of the NCFG are 
very similar to the continuous-floating-gate device. It applies only 
for ultrathin oxides with a thickness of less than ~4 nm.
control gate
oxide
nano-
crystal
n+
n+
p-type substrate
Figure 9.3  Schematic cross section of an NCFG device [2].
	
One of the advantages of the NCFG device compared to the 
continuous-floating-gate device of equivalent dimensions is the 
improved susceptibility to stress-induced leakage current (SILC) 
by storing the charge on isolated colloids of small dimensions. 
Figure 9.4a demonstrates how defects in the tunnel oxide lead 
to charge leakage of the entire floating gate to the substrate for a 
continuous-floating-gate device. In this case, the device changes 
from a programmed state to an erased state, which results in a bit 
error. Since these defects are very difficult to remove the lifetime of 
the device is practically over. In the case of an NCFG device, defects 
in the tunnel oxide would result in charge leakage of only the nearby 
nanocrystal as illustrated in Fig. 9.4b. The other nanocrystals are not 
affected by this and maintain their charge. Therefore, even if part 
of the total charge on the discontinuous floating gate is lost due to 

262
Memory Devices
SILC, the remaining charge may be sufficient to retain the device in a 
programmed state. This improves the reliability of the NCFG device 
compared to its counterpart and allows thinning of the tunnel oxide, 
which results in a more efficient charge transfer, while maintaining a 
retention time of ~10 years.
(a)
(b)
Defects
Electrons
Defects
Electrons
Figure 9.4  SILC susceptibility of (a) a continuous-floating-gate device and (b) 
an NCFG device. After Ref. [2].
	
The NCFG has been improved by using nanocrystal in the floating 
gate composed of metal instead of Si. They are superior to their 
semiconductor counterparts due to higher density of states, stronger 
coupling with the channel, better scalability and the design freedom 
of the work function of the metal to optimize device characteristics. 
High-work-function metals such as gold (Au), palladium (Pd), and 
platinum (Pt) with a work function of 5.10 eV, 5.12 eV, and 5.65 eV,  
respectively, create a deep potential well in the floating gate for 
efficient data retention without affecting the program characteristics 
of the device. However, erasing the device becomes more difficult 
due to the higher barrier between the floating gate and the tunnel 
oxide.
9.1.1  Advanced Nanocrystal Floating-Gate Devices with 
High-k Dielectrics
Use of a high-dielectric-constant (high-k) material as the insulator 
will reduce the gate leakage current by several orders of magnitude 
due to physically thicker (while keeping the effective oxide thickness 
same) layer to its counterpart, SiO2. Recently, a wide range of 
structures of the NCFG device have been proposed and their 
schematic cross sections are shown in Fig. 9.5. The devices in Fig. 
9.5b–e imply the use of HfO2 as an insulator (HfAlO, HfSiO, ZrO2, 

263
or Al2O3 are also common), while the device in Fig. 9.5f consists of 
a dual-layer NCFG structure. The use of a high-k material in NCFG 
devices such as HfO2 offers many advantages as it is already in use 
in complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor (CMOS) technology, 
especially in the Si CMOS process with 45 nm technology and below.
Figure 9.5  Conventional NCFG device (a) and its modified versions (b–f). After 
Ref. [2].
	
In the case of the device in Fig. 9.5b, a lower programming 
voltage can be achieved due to the smaller conduction band offset 
(i.e., barrier height) at the interface between the Si substrate and 
HfO2 (bandgap 5.8 eV) tunnel oxide and the charge leakage can be 
reduced due to the physically larger thickness of the insulator. Also, 
as the effective electron mass is relatively low, an enhanced charge 
transfer takes place.
	
However, use of HfO2 has problems associated with fabrication 
aspects such as, poor adhesion to Si, mobility degradation, poor 
thermal stability, and poor interface quality. Such fabrication issues 
may be solved at least partially in the device structures Fig. 9.5c–e. 
Device c uses HfO2 as the control gate oxide to enable stronger 
coupling between the floating gate and the channel. The device in 
Fig. 9.5d has an additional HfO2 layer in the tunnel oxide between 
the floating gate and the SiO2 to improve both the retention time and 
charge transfer compared to a SiO2-only tunnel oxide. In the device 
in Fig. 9.5e the tunnel oxide is composed of a symmetric SiO2/HfO2/
SiO2 stack to obtain similar benefits as the device in Fig. 9.5d with 
the additional feature of equal (or almost equal) program and erase 
characteristics. The device in Fig. 9.5f uses SiO2 for both the tunnel 
Nanocrystal Floating-Gate Device

264
Memory Devices
and control gate oxide, but it has a dual-layer NCFG structure with 
the ability to improve both retention time and memory window.
	
Several other NVM devices have shown potential toward long 
retention time, high endurance and switching speed, and low power 
consumption.
9.2  Technology Computer-Aided Design of 
Memory Devices
Metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs) 
employing programmable floating gates have drawn much attention 
in the semiconductor memory industry. Trap-assisted tunneling 
model which explains how drain voltage scaling affects channel hot-
electron programming in the presence of oxide traps is discussed. 
Here, we consider the design of a single-layer NCFG at the device 
level. It is based on uniform direct tunneling and Fowler–Nordheim 
tunneling of electrons. Several NCFG device models have been 
proposed in the literature. Many use a numerical approach either by 
incorporating Monte Carlo simulations or by solving Schrödinger–
Poisson equations, which need to be solved numerically. Parameters 
used in simulation are listed below:
	
∑	 Gate length (nm)
 
∑	 Gate width (nm)
 
∑	 Control gate oxide thickness (nm)
 
∑	 Dielectric constant in the control gate oxide
 
∑	 Tunnel oxide thickness (nm)
 
∑	 Dielectric constant in the tunnel oxide
 
∑	 Control gate work function (eV)
 
∑	 Floating-gate work function (eV)
 
∑	 Nanocrystal diameter (nm)
 
∑	 Nanocrystal density (cm–2)
 
∑	 Bulk doping (cm–3)
 
∑	 Ion-implanted channel doping (cm–3)
 
∑	 Ion-implanted channel depth (nm)
 
∑	 Surface interface charge (C)
 
∑	 Temperature (K)

265
	
The NCFG device is created in the device simulator for the 
computation of the threshold voltage shift but also of the current 
densities, charge on the floating gate, and surface potential.
Figure 9.6  A single-layer NCFG device with 45 nm gate length designed in the 
device simulator. After Ref. [2].
	
Figure 9.6 shows a structure of a device with a gate length of  
45 nm. For the control gate a high-work-function metal is preferred 
for better erase characteristics while program characteristics are 
negligibly affected. A high-work-function metal significantly reduces 
the probability of electron tunneling from the control gate to the 
floating gate, which enables vertical scaling of the control gate oxide. 
Platinum is chosen in the reference model which has a very high 
work function of 5.65 eV. Metal is also used for the nanocrystal in 
the floating gate because they are superior to their semiconductor 
counterparts. Furthermore, controlled palladium (Pd) nanocrystal 
deposition has been demonstrated with very good charge storage. 
Its relatively high work function of 5.12 eV creates a deep potential 
well for efficient data retention. The control gate and tunnel oxide of 
the NCFG device are both composed of SiO2, which has a dielectric 
constant of 3.9. The p-type substrate is uniformly doped with boron 
at a concentration of 5 × 1016 cm–3, and B ions are diffused into the 
channel with a Gaussian distribution at a concentration of 4.5 ×  
1017 cm–3. The n-type source and drain are highly doped with arsenic. 
The geometry parameters for the device are listed in Table 9.1. Note 
also that a very fine mesh is chosen throughout the entire device 
for accurate simulation results. Especially at the material interfaces, 
where electrons begin to tunnel, the mesh is as thin as a hundredth 
of a nanometer. The mesh of the entire device consists of a total of 
8790 grid points and 17,220 triangles. The tunnel oxide thickness in 
simulation is in the range of 2 nm to 3.2 nm. The control gate oxide 
Technology Computer-Aided Design of Memory Devices

266
Memory Devices
thickness is 4 nm. Reducing this thickness would result in significant 
charge leakage from the floating gate to the control gate through the 
control gate oxide. The simulations are executed multiple times for 
different time steps and change in threshold voltage is found to be 
2.0823 V for a time step of 1 × 10–7 s.
Table 9.1  Device geometry parameters used in device simulation
Parameter
Value
Tunnel oxide thickness
2–3.2 nm
Control gate oxide thickness
4 nm
Nanocrystal length
3 nm
Nanocrystal height
2 nm
Nanocrystal spacing
3 nm
Control gate length
45 nm
Control gate width
1 µm
Control gate thickness
50 nm
9.3  Process Simulation of Flash Memory 
Devices
A typical Flash memory process (based on conventional Si CMOS 
processing) and design parameters by using Silvaco ATHENA 
process simulator is presented below. After isolation and standard 
pre–gate cleaning, a 100 nm thick tunnel oxide (SiO2) was thermally 
grown at 950°C with dry O2 and diffuse time is 9 min on a p-type Si 
substrate in (100) orientation. Subsequently, 300 nm thick poly-Si 
deposited as the floating-gate charge storage layer. Approximately 
100 nm thick SiO2 at 950°C with dry O2 and a diffusion time of  
5 min, a 20 nm nitride layer, and a 10 nm oxide layer as a block oxide 
are deposited. A 300 nm thick poly-Si layer is deposited as a gate 
electrode. After gate patterning, As was implanted with dose of 1 × 
1015 cm−2 and energies of 40 keV for shallow source/drain region 
contact formation, metallization, and gas anneal formation at 950°C 
for 50 min. The main process steps used in simulation are shown in 
Fig. 9.7.

267
Figure 9.7  Typical process flow used in ATHENA for Flash memory process 
simulation.
9.4  Device Simulation of Flash Memory Devices
The structure generated by Silvaco ATHENA is characterized using 
the device simulator Silvaco ATLAS. The Flash memory structure 
is shown in Fig. 9.8. Typical ATLAS meshing commands are used to 
set up a MOSFET-like structure. The main difference is the presence 
of a layer of silicon nitride in the gate stack. The insulating layer 
between the nitride and the channel is termed “tunnel oxide,” and 
the insulating layer between the nitride and the contacts is termed 
“blocking layer.” During device simulation, three partial differential 
equations, viz., electrostatic potential and electron and hole 
concentrations were solved self-consistently using Poisson’s and 
continuity equations. The hydrodynamic transport model was used 
for all simulations. During simulation, trapping and recombination 
of the traps were modeled using the Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) and 
hot-electron injection (HEI) mechanism and the Lombardi (CVT) 
mobility model is used. In simulation, material properties, such as 
work function, bandgap, permittivity, and the electron affinity of 
the material were used. The ATLAS-generated SONOS structure is 
shown in Fig. 9.9.
Device Simulation of Flash Memory Devices

268
Memory Devices
Figure 9.8  Flash memory device obtained from ATHENA process simulation.
0
0
0.04
0.08
0.12
0.2
0.24
0.28
0.16
Microns
Microns
Materials
Silicon
SiO2
Si3N4
Conductor
Figure 9.9  SONOS device structure used in simulation.
	
To study the nitride charging characteristics, the ATLAS SONOS 
model is invoked using the INTERFACE N.I DYNASONOS statement. 
The NITRIDECHARGE statement was used to set up the parameters 
of the nitride traps. The density of traps can be set with the 
parameters NT.N (acceptor-like traps) and NT.P (donor-like traps). 

269
The parameter SIGMAT.N gives the cross section for trapping the 
electrons in the nitride conduction band and is set to four different 
values: 1.0E-14 cm2, 1.0E-15 cm2, 1.0E-16 cm2, and 1.0E-17 cm2. The 
parameter ELEC.DEPTH specifies the energy depth of the electron 
trap below the conduction band. The parameter TAU.N gives the 
characteristic timescale for emission from the trap level to the 
conduction band. The parameter SIGMAN.P controls hole capture 
from the valence band and is set to zero with loss of generality.
	
The nitride traps are charged up by ramping the bias to 16 V 
over 1 ns and then maintaining this for 1 ms. The stored charge as a 
function of time (net charge) is plotted for the four different values of 
SIGMAT.N. The larger the cross section, the more the charge stored. 
The stored charge should be the integrated difference between the 
current entering the nitride region from the channel and that leaving 
to the gate contact. As the trapping cross section increases, less 
charge arrives at the interface with the blocking insulator and the 
out current decreases and is delayed, as can be seen in the plots of 
the in and out current (tunneling current) at different values of the 
capture cross section shown in Fig. 9.10.
-13
0
4e-09
8e-09
1.2e-08
1.6e-08
Tunneling current through nitride (A)
2.4e-08
2.8e-08
2e-08
-12
-11
-10
-9
-8
Transient time (s)
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
1.0E-15cm2
1.0E-16cm2
1.0E-17cm2
SONOS tunneling current
Figure 9.10  Tunneling current as a function of trapping cross section.
	
To view the trapped insulator charge, electron charging rate, 
and other relevant parameters the TonyPlot cutline tool was used. 
The charge stored in the nitride layer as a function of charging time 
is shown in Fig. 9.11. The trapped electron concentration in the 
insulator is shown in Fig. 9.12.
Device Simulation of Flash Memory Devices

270
Memory Devices
-4e-15
-3e-15
Net stored charge in nitride (Coulombs)
-2e-15
-1e-15
0
-12
-13
-11
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
Transient time (s)
-2
1.0E-17 cm2
1.0E-16 cm2
1.0E-15 cm2
1.0E-14 cm2
Charge stored in the nitride layer
Figure 9.11  Charge stored in the nitride layer as a function of charging time.
0.004
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Trapped electron cone (Icc)
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
0.006
0.008
Distance along line
0.01
0.012
0.014
Figure 9.12  Trapped electron concentration in the insulator.
	
To study the threshold voltage shift, the device structure shown 
in Fig. 9.8 was used. However, in this structure the blocking insulator 
used is sapphire (Al2O3) and the tunneling insulator is silicon dioxide. 
It is necessary to make this material into a wide-gap semiconductor 
and set other parameters on the MATERIAL statement. The 
DYNASONOS model is selected on the first INTERFACE statement. 
Because of the relatively low conduction band offset between the 
silicon nitride and the sapphire, the INTERFACE S.S THERMIONIC 
statement is used to model any thermionically emitted current 
leaving the device. This current will not appear in the SONOS out 

271
current but in the gate conduction current. In the NITRIDECHARGE 
statement, we set up the relevant parameters and also specify 
PF.BARRIER. This sets the barrier height for the Poole–Frenkel 
detrapping model, which is enabled by the PF.NITRIDE flag on the 
MODELS statement.
	
The gate bias is ramped and the device charged for 1 s. A structure 
file is saved out at various preset charging times. The gate stack layers 
are treated as insulators in this case in order to make the simulation 
simpler. The charge trapped in the nitride layer affects the threshold 
voltage in the same way. After calculating the threshold voltage 
for the set of gate biases and at each of the preset charging times, 
the threshold data is plotted, as shown in Fig. 9.13. The threshold 
voltage increases with gate bias and also with charging time. For a 
charging time of 1.0 s there is a roughly linear relationship between 
gate bias and threshold voltage (0.65 V of threshold voltage change 
for every 1.0 V of bias voltage change).
0
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
Drain current (A)
0.008
0.01
2
4
Gate Voltage (V)
6
8
10
sonosex02_m0.log
sonosex02_m2.log
sonosex02_m4.log
sonosex02_m6.log
Figure 9.13  Threshold voltage (drain current) as a function of gate biases.
	
Here, we study how the position of the trapped charges in the 
silicon nitride varies with time as the device is charged up and 
then erased by changing the gate bias. The device has a 2 nm thick 
tunneling layer, a 5 nm nitride layer, and a 5 nm blocking oxide layer. 
The NITRIDECHARGING statement sets up a density of 1020/cm3 
of electron traps, having a relatively high capture cross section of  
10–10 cm2. A bias of 18 V is applied to the gate and the device is 
charged up. The state of the structure is saved out to a structure file 
at certain values of charge time. It is charged for 1.0 s, after which 
SOLVE INIT is called, with the SONOS parameter specified. After this, 
Device Simulation of Flash Memory Devices

272
Memory Devices
negative bias is applied to the gate, ramping for 1 ns, and then the 
device is erased for 1.0 s. The structure file is generated at preset 
intervals in order to allow the user to inspect the progress of the 
erasing. The integrated net stored charge in C/μm is obtained using 
the PROBE statement and this quantity can be plotted as a function 
of time. When the device is charged, the largest contribution is from 
the tunnel current into the nitride conduction band.
	
For an erase, it is the tunneling direct from the traps to the 
channel. This is illustrated by doing a second erase, with the only 
change being the parameter ELEC.DEPTH in the NITRIDECHARGING 
statement. This is increased from 1.5 eV to 2.0 eV in order to reduce 
the direct trap-to-channel tunnel current (Fig. 9.14). It can be seen 
from the plot that the erase takes longer with deeper traps. The 
TonyPlot cutline tool may be used to see the vertical profile of the 
trapped nitride charge through the gate stack at various time points 
of the charging/erasing.
-14
-1.6e-15
-1.4e-15
Net Trapped charge (Coulomb/um)
-1.2e-15
-1e-15
-8e-16
-6e-16
-4e-16
-2e-16
0
-13 -12 -11 -10 -9
-8
-7
Transient time (s)
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
Charging
Erase ELEC.DEPT-1.5
Erase ELEC.DEPT-2.0
Figure 9.14  Charging and erasing cycle.
	
For the retention characteristics studies a SONOS device with a 
dielectric stack of 4 nm of silicon oxide, 5 nm of silicon nitride, and 
10 nm of sapphire (Al2O3) is used. The device is charged for 1 ms 
with a gate bias of 18 V before the SOLVE INIT SONOS statement 
resets all electrode biases to zero. The device is simulated for up 
to 10 years, with progressively increasing step sizes. It saves the 

273
structure files at preset time points, so the change in charge profile 
and the electron charging rate as time progresses can be observed. 
Figure 9.15 shows the TonyPlot cutline for trapped charges through 
the gate stack after 3 × 108 s.
0.001
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Trapped Charge
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
0.006
0.007
Distance along line
Figure 9.15  Trapped charge profile through the gate stack.
9.5  State Transition and Single-Event Upset in 
SRAM
Another important area of concern for nanoscale SRAM is increased 
susceptibility to radiation-induced soft errors. Soft errors in the 
form of both single-event upsets (SEUs) and SRAM array multibit 
fails represent a reliability concern for the memory designer. The 
two primary sources of soft error–inducing radiation are terrestrial 
radiation and radioactive isotopes within materials used in the IC 
fabrication process. High-energy cosmic radiation interacting with 
the earth’s atmosphere results in a flux of neutron particles with a 
large range of energies extending to several 100 MeV. This process 
produces a charge cloud of electron–hole pairs that, when in close 
proximity to one or more sensitive neighboring circuit nodes, may 
result in a single- or multibit error.
	
A normal memory-state transition due to an SEU caused by an 
energetic particle strike in the SRAM cell is studied in the following 
example. In simulation, a 3D SRAM cell is created using DevEdit. 
Using a tetrahedral mesh, this structure is then exported to a file from 
State Transition and Single-Event Upset in SRAM

274
Memory Devices
which it is imported into VictoryDevice. As usual, in VictoryDevice, 
the first tasks are to define the models and material parameters 
for the simulation. The MODELS statement is used to specify the 
particular models to be used during the simulation. Models used 
in the simulation are SRH recombination with concentration-
dependent carrier lifetimes; Auger recombination; mobility models, 
including concentration, temperature, parallel-field, and transverse-
field dependence; bandgap narrowing in the presence of heavy 
doping; and Fermi–Dirac statistics. CONTACT statements are then 
used to define the work functions of the electrodes.
	
Once the models and contacts have been defined, the cell is 
brought up to its operating condition, first initializing the solution at 
zero bias. The cell is then brought at its operating condition. In one of 
its memory states biases on the emitter and anode electrodes were 
ramped up to 1.2 V, and ramping the bias on the drain electrode up 
to 1.2 V flips the memory state of the cell. The SINGLEEVENTUPSET 
command is used to specify the charge track of the impinging particle. 
VictoryDevice simulation is performed to show an SEU caused by 
an energetic particle strike, which strike forces an unplanned state 
transition in the cell.
	
The transient simulation is carried out in stages because the 
phenomena occurring in each stage occupy a different range of 
timescales, initially beginning with a step of 2.5 × 10–15 s and 
gradually increasing the step size up to a maximum of 2.0 × 10–13 s. 
During the peak of the SEU pulse, a constant time step of 2.0 × 10–13 s 
is used. The peak lasts roughly from 2.0 × 10–12 s to 7.0 × 10–12 s 
after the start of the transient. Following the particle strike itself, the 
simulation begins tracking the response of the device. A gradually 
increasing time step is used again, beginning with a step size of 2.0 
× 10–13 s and increasing up to a maximum of 2.5 × 10–11 s. This part 
of the simulation continues until 3.0 × 10–10 s after the start of the 
transient. The contours of the potential on the surface of the device 
are displayed using TonyPlot3D. Figure 9.16 shows the state of the 
cell before the particle strike, while Fig. 9.17 represents the state 
afterward.
	
Two plots are generated using TonyPlot: One compares the 
various currents involved in setting and flipping the memory state, 
and the other shows the voltages and currents during the state 

275
flip. Once the transient simulation is complete, two more plots 
are generated. One compares the memory-state flip induced by  
the particle strike with the flip induced by raising the drain voltage. 
The other compares the voltages, currents, and carrier generation 
rate occurring during the transient.
Materials:
Aluminim
SiO~2
Silicon
Figure 9.16  SRAM cell before the particle strike.
Materials:
Aluminim
SiO~2
Silicon
Potential (V)
2.4
1.6
0.8
-0.8
0
Figure 9.17  Contours of the potential on the surface of an SRAM cell after the 
particle strike.
State Transition and Single-Event Upset in SRAM

276
Memory Devices
9.6  Nanoscale SRAM
The widespread accessibility of multiple computing platforms 
available today ranging from hand-held and portable devices to 
mainframe supercomputers has been made possible by the reduced 
cost per memory bit and logic gate with each technology generation. 
SRAM remains the most cost-effective embedded memory solution 
for many such applications and could be made possible by continued 
advances in CMOS device scaling. However, increasing variability of 
the CMOS device characteristics have become the most significant 
problem facing future nanoscale SRAM. A number of obstacles exist 
to the continued use and scaling of SRAM designs beyond 32/28 nm. 
These include increased variation, reduced noise margins, increased 
standby leakage, and reliability detractors such as negative-bias 
temperature instability (NBTI) and radiation-induced soft errors.
	
A predictive technology model needs to be developed for scaled 
SRAM in the 90–22 nm technology nodes. The 6T SRAM cell design 
has so far been successfully scaled in bulk and silicon-on-insulator 
(SOI) technologies, the trend in 6T bit cell area is expected to continue 
beyond the 28/32 nm node. This continued trend in area reduction 
is accompanied by the well-known consequence of increased 
variability associated with the reduced channel area. Because of the 
use of narrow devices in the SRAM cell environment, the variation 
associated with random dopant fluctuation is a dominant variation 
mechanism and a major concern for future SRAM designs. Dopant 
fluctuations in nanoscale SRAM devices may be attributed to both 
random and nonrandom components. Cell layout topology, process 
scaling, and pushed design rules used in dense SRAM bit cell designs 
can influence the susceptibility to nonrandom mismatch in present 
and future nanoscale SRAM devices.
	
Here, challenges associated with future SRAM bit cell design are 
discussed, and the geometric variation sources which can contribute 
to within cell mismatch in the highly scaled array environment are 
examined. Because of its advantage in density, the type 4 topology 
remains the dominant cell design in the industry and has been 
successfully migrated across technology nodes (90 nm to 32/28 nm) 
in both bulk and SOI. As SRAM bit cell scaling continues below 32 
nm, it will place increased demands on the alignment and printed 
dimension tolerances. Alignment-related mismatch sources is an 

277
important consideration in future SRAM cell design. The Synopsys 
simulation tools and simulation environments have been used to 
specifically examine the scaling limitations and challenges for the 
SRAM cell design.
	
Figure 9.18 illustrates four alignment driven sources that can 
introduce nonrandom sources of mismatch, (a) transverse or lateral 
straggle in SiO2, (b) polysilicon interdiffusion-driven counterdoping, 
(c) lateral ion straggle from the photoresist, and (d) photoresist 
implant shadowing. Of these four mechanisms, (a) and (c) originate 
from higher energy well formation implant conditions used in bulk 
CMOS processes, while (b) and (d) are consistent with both bulk and 
SOI process technologies. These mechanisms and their impact on 
the SRAM devices are discussed below.
Resist
pwell
nwell
nwell
pwell
A
later n + diffusion
gate poly
n+doping mask edge location
(a)
(b)
nwell
pwell
pwell
nwell
Resist
Resist
gate
(c)
(d)
Figure 9.18  Schematic depiction of four alignment-sensitive sources of 
potential nonrandom mismatch in SRAM devices. (a) Lateral straggle within 
SiO2, (b) lateral counterdoping in gate polysilicon, (c) lateral straggle from resist 
sidewall, and (d) halo shadowing. After Ref. [3].
	
The potential impact of transverse straggle in the SRAM cell 
devices arises from the aggressive n+/p+ space used in the cell to gain 
density. Lateral ion scattering in the shallow trench isolation oxide 
from the higher energy well implants can counterdope the adjacent 
well edge (e.g., point A in Fig. 9.18a). An NWELL mask misalignment 
of 30 nm is sufficient to create a substantial counterdoping path 
Nanoscale SRAM

278
Memory Devices
between the source and drain of the adjacent partial diffusion (PD) 
NMOS device, as shown in Fig. 9.19b.
-0.2
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
X [mm]
X [mm]
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0
0
Figure 9.19  SProcess simulated well contours showing effects of transverse 
straggle in SiO2 on the adjacent PWELL with 30 nm misalignment of the NWELL 
resist using 45 nm pushed rules. The area labeled A is a normal PWELL/NWELL 
boundary, and area B is a counterdoped (n-type) region in PWELL, resulting 
from phosphorus lateral implant straggle in STI. After Ref. [3].
	
Polysilicon interdiffusion is also of significant concern with 
scaling as n+/p+ space is aggressively pushed. The practice of using 
a poly predoping step is commonly used to insure the n+ polysilicon 
is degenerately doped. The alignment of this predoping mask as 
well as the n+ and p+ source drain implant masks must be carefully 
placed to avoid diffusion-induced counterdoping of the gate above 
the channel region of the complementary device, as shown in  
Fig. 9.20.
	
The physical mechanism of lateral dopant straggle stemming 
from the high-energy implant species in the photoresist is well 
known. Depending on the implantation species and acceleration 
energy, this mechanism can impact devices in proximity to the 
well edge. The amount of near-surface doping is proportional to 
the dose of the high-energy implant. As shown in Fig. 9.21, using 
implanted B11 energy of 200 keV with a dose of 3 × 1013 at/cm2, the 
near-surface doping is found to be a function of the distance from 
the resist sidewall. As the surface concentration is a function of the 
distance from the resist sidewall, there is alignment sensitivity for 
the SRAM devices as higher channel doping levels can introduce a 
threshold voltage offset in the SRAM devices.

279
-0.2
C
B
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.2
X [mm]
Y [mm]
0.4
0.6
Figure 9.20  Cross-sectional simulation illustrating the concern with poly-
interdiffusion across the narrow n+/p+ space in the dense SRAM environment 
with type 4 cell topology. Region A shows the phosphorus encroachment over 
the channel region of the pull-up PMOS device altering the PMOS gate work 
function and threshold voltage. After Ref. [3].
-0.4
-0.2
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
X [mm]
X [mm]
Y [mm]
0.8
1
1
0
A
Implanted boron conc.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1017
1016
1015
Boron conc. (cm-3)
Figure 9.21  Doping contour plot following an atomistic Monte Carlo simulation 
of the PWELL deep implant (left). Variation in boron concentration across the 
silicon surface as a function of proximity to resist edge is shown (right). Doping 
profile taken at a depth of approximately 50 nm. The resist is located from 0.5 μm 
to 1 μm on the X axis. Boron lateral straggle emanating from the resist sidewall 
region during a deep PWELL implant results in near-surface concentration 
variation across the PD NMOS channel region (A). After Ref. [3].
Nanoscale SRAM

280
Memory Devices
9.7  Summary
The memory is a growing field in the IC design and intense research 
efforts are being made to keep this trend by improving existing 
technologies and finding new solutions for the future. This chapter 
provided an overview of the current volatile and NVM technologies. 
NCFG memory devices and state transition and SEUs in SRAM have 
been studied via technology computer-aided design simulations.
References
	 1.	 Aghoram, U. (2010). Impact of Strain on Memory and Lateral Power 
MOSFETs, PhD thesis, University of Florida.
	 2.	 Schinke, D. J. (2011). Computing with Novel Floating Gate Devices, PhD 
thesis, North Carolina State University.
	 3.	 Mann, R. W. (2010). Interactions of Technology and Design in Nanoscale 
SRAM, PhD thesis, University of Virginia.

Smart 
power 
technologies, 
integrating 
high-voltage 
CMOS 
transistors with standard low-voltage CMOS cores, are finding an 
increasing use in the area of automotive applications, switching 
power supplies and amplifiers, and devices operating in industrial 
environments where the supply voltage busses are in the 12 V to 50 V  
range. In high-voltage applications double-diffused MOS (DMOS) 
transistors are more attractive than conventional MOS structures 
in integrated circuits, since the drift region between the drain and 
the active channel allows high-voltage biasing. In contrary to the 
DMOS, a transistor which operates in the vertical direction, the 
LDMOS transistor is lateral orientated and thereby length and width 
dependent. Currently 0.7 μm CMOS technology with the addition 
of 100 V n/p DMOS and 80 V NPN/PNP BJTs is in use. Process 
technology need to be developed to allow applications up to 100 V. 
However, in some applications maximum voltages of no more than 
40–50 V are required, thus allowing much smaller devices than the 
existing 100 V devices.
10.1  LDMOS
Power 
metal–oxide–semiconductor 
field-effect 
transistors 
(MOSFETs) are solid-state switches with high power-handling 
Chapter 10
Power Devices
Introducing Technology Computer-Aided Design (TCAD): Fundamentals, Simulations, and Applications
C. K. Maiti
Copyright © 2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-51-2 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36450-6 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

282
Power Devices
capability that evolved from complementary metal–oxide–
semiconductor (CMOS) technology. The process of increasing the 
blocking voltage capability of a lateral MOSFET structure led to the 
development of a diffusion MOSFET. In an n-type lateral drain metal–
oxide–semiconductor (n-LDMOS) structure the source and drain n+ 
regions are self-aligned with the polygate. The p-base region is then 
driven in deeper than the source, which is known as the double-
diffusion process. The two main figures of merit of power devices 
are their on resistance and breakdown voltage. The design of these 
devices is complicated by the trade-off between the requirements 
for minimum on resistance and maximum breakdown voltage.  
The difference in lateral diffusion determines the channel length of 
the device, which is very small and results in low on resistance. The 
n-type drift region increases the breakdown voltage. Figure 10.1 
shows the evolution of an LDMOS from an n-MOSFET.
Low Voltage logic NMOS
N-LDMOS (STI)
N-LDMOS (LOCOS)
N-LDMOS
DENMOS
logic LDD NMOS
Gate
Gate
Gate
n+
n+
p-Si
n+
n+
n-
p-Si
n+
n
n+
p-Si
n+
n+
Gate
STI
p-body
n-region
p-Si
n+
n+
p-body
n-region
p-Si
Gate
LOCOS
n+
p-body
n-region
p-Si
n+
Figure 10.1  Evolution of an LDMOS from an NMOS. After Ref. [1].
	
Development of optimal LDMOS devices is a complex process, 
where several device design parameters need to be taken into 
account, and simultaneous optimization is needed towards 
maximum breakdown at minimal Ron, minimum area, high 
reliability performance, and ideal output characteristics. The 2005 
International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors states that 
the use of technology computer-aided design (TCAD) will provide 
as much as a 40% reduction in technology development costs. In 
today’s competitive environment, time to market for new products 
is of paramount importance. Therefore, a methodology/ strategy is 
required that reduces the development cycle time. TCAD has become 

283
one of the key approaches to predict device performance and to 
optimize process conditions for CMOS development, as it is essential 
to debug process technologies before manufacturing release. 
Utilizing TCAD and design for manufacturability techniques, it is 
possible to reduce the total cycle time needed in the development of 
a technology.
	
In the following, a simple and predictive TCAD calibration 
methodology, which employs inverse modeling to support and 
enhance process technology development, is employed for the 
LDMOS process. Also, a detailed study for the LDMOS process 
development has been done via calibration and verification of the 
TCAD tools. Extensive use of design-of-experiment (DOE) matrices, 
based on TCAD simulations, is done. The results obtained are 
explained for the observed features. Layout parameters are varied 
and the electrical characteristics of the device (e.g., breakdown 
voltages, specific on resistance, etc.), together with hot-carrier 
behavior, are studied. DOE is used to determine the optimum 
process flow in order to achieve the desired electrical performance 
and analysis of the predicted breakdown distribution.
	
Sentaurus SProcess/SDevice simulators are used for process 
development and extracting the simulated electrical parameters. 
The process flow was developed using Sprocess, and the structure 
file was used as input into the device simulator SDevice. The initial 
process specifications (main process steps) are shown below. The 
process flow in this work represents a generic LDMOS technology. 
The major process steps are:
	
1.	 Substrate layer implant and epilayer growth
	
2.	 Well implants
	
3.	 Well drive-in
	
4.	 Local oxidation of silicon (LOCOS) oxide growth
	
5.	 Post-LOCOS cleanup
	
6.	 Gate oxide growth
	
7.	 Polysilicon gate deposition and reoxidation
	
8.	 Source–drain implants
	
9.	 Source–drain annealing
	 10.	 Body contact implants
	 11.	 Body contact annealing
	 12.	 Metallization
LDMOS

284
Power Devices
	
The simulations were based on models used for the smart power 
process from which the flow under investigation was derived, 
therefore providing some confidence in the usefulness of the models, 
and hence, TCAD tools used. In process simulations a fixed-meshing 
strategy as well as an adaptive-meshing strategy was employed. 
The Sentaurus Device performs device simulations to extract key 
electrical parameters in order to facilitate customized calibration 
and optimization. The process model was calibrated by including as 
much process information in the model as possible.
	
The process flow was simulated with Sentaurus Process using 
the equilibrium diffusion model and the parameters are set to the 
TSUPREM-4 defaults values. The two-phase segregation model is 
activated during LOCOS growth and segregation was neglected. 
The advantage is that the number of simulation runs to explore 
the complete parameter space and the resulting device electrical 
properties can be used to help optimize the process control settings 
and the analysis of the impact of process parameter sensitivity on 
device response provides greater insight into, for example, which 
process parameter would require monitoring inline. Figure 10.2 
shows a schematic cross section of a typical LDMOS device.
Gate Plate
Source
Drain
P+Enhance
N+
Gate
P-Channel
N+
N-Ldd
P-Epi
P-Sinker
P-Substrate
Figure 10.2  Schematic cross section of a typical LDMOS device.
	
In the simulation, 2.5 nm thick gate oxides were used. The 
n-well/p-well regions were simulated in 0.3 μm CMOS technology. 
The whole structure is isolated through the use of an n-well/n-
tub/n-type buried layer. After each processing step, the simulated 
intermediate structure is saved. The subsequent processing steps 
are performed in a new simulation and the previous simulation 
results are reloaded. Major process simulation–generated structure 
files, that is, the process steps, are shown in Fig. 10.3a–f. Figures 

285
LDMOS
10.3a and 10.3b show the close-up of the n-well and p-well corner 
after the well drive-in processing step. It has been observed that 
adaptive meshing results in a good resolution at the p–n junction. A 
similar result can be obtained with a fixed mesh.
(a)
(b)
(c)

286
Power Devices
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 10.3  Simulation of an LDMOS process close-up of (a) an n-well corner 
and (b) a p-well corner after well drive-in. (c) Simulation of an LDMOS process 
close-up of a drain-side LOCOS edge after oxidation. (d) Simulation of an 
LDMOS process polysilicon gate deposition and reoxidation. (e) Simulation of 
LDMOS process source–drain annealing: concentrations of dopants in various 
regions are shown. (f) Simulation of LDMOS process body contact implant and 
annealing.

287
LDMOS
	
Figure 10.3c shows a close-up of the drain-side LOCOS edge after 
the oxidation step. It shows the mesh created by the fixed-meshing 
strategy and the adaptive-meshing strategy. In the LOCOS process 
definition, the temperature is first ramped from 700°C to 1000°C in 
an inert environment. Then, the structure is exposed to an oxidizing 
environment for 3 hours. Finally, the temperature is ramped down in 
an inert environment. As previously discussed, adaptive remeshing 
is active only during the inert diffusion parts. Figure 10.3d shows 
the polysilicon gate deposition and reoxidation. Figure 10.3e shows 
the source–drain annealing and concentrations of dopants in 
various regions directly after the implantation. Figure 10.3f shows 
the structure after body contact implant and annealing. Figure 10.4 
shows the final device structure at end of process simulation. Metal 
regions are gray, oxide regions are brown, and concentrations of 
dopants are shown in silicon body region and polysilicon gate.
Figure 10.4  Final device structure at the end of the process simulation.
	
After the process simulation, device simulations were performed 
for Id–Vg characteristics for a low drain bias, Id–Vd characteristics for 
two different gate biases, and an off-state breakdown simulation. 
Sentaurus Device is used to simulate the drain current. In addition, 
the off-state breakdown characteristics are simulated. All I–V 
simulations are performed using a two-carrier drift-diffusion 

288
Power Devices
transport model. For the Id–Vd simulations, lattice self-heating 
effects are included by solving the lattice temperature equation.
	
For all simulations, the doping-dependent mobility model is 
used, and high-field saturation effects and mobility degradation 
at the silicon–oxide interface are accounted for. The Shockley–
Read–Hall (SRH) and Auger recombination models are included. 
For the breakdown simulation, the avalanche impact ionization 
model is activated. Figures 10.5 and 10.6 show the Id–Vg and the 
Id–Vd characteristics, respectively. Figure 10.7 shows the off-state 
breakdown characteristics for the LDMOS structure simulated with 
a fixed mesh and with adaptive meshing. It can be seen that both 
meshing strategies give virtually the same results.
Figure 10.5  Drain current as a function of gate voltage for LDMOS structures 
simulated with a fixed-meshing strategy and an adaptive-meshing strategy.
	
In addition, the capacitance–voltage (C–V) simulation can provide 
detailed information about the channel region. Figure 10.8 shows 
the drain and source grounded C–V characteristics. At s negative 
gate voltage, the channel is in accumulation, and with increasing Vg, 
the drain side of the device enters depletion, the source side is in 
accumulation, and the center of the channel is at the flat band. As 
the gate voltage continues to increase, the depletion layer reduces 
the capacitance until around Vg = 0 V. At this point, the drain side  
of the device enters inversion.

289
Figure 10.6  Drain current as a function of drain voltage for LDMOS structures 
simulated with a fixed-meshing strategy and an adaptive-meshing strategy for 
gate biases of 3.4 V and 4.4 V.
Figure 10.7  Off-state breakdown: drain current as a function of drain voltage 
for LDMOS structures simulated with a fixed-meshing strategy and an adaptive-
meshing strategy for a gate bias of 0 V.
LDMOS

290
Power Devices
	
Currently, substantial research is being carried out to validate 
CMOS processes for radio-frequency (RF) applications. Many 
of these attempts are concerned with efforts to improve the 
device structure to optimize key performance measures such as 
unity gain cutoff frequency fT, maximum oscillation frequency 
fmax. S-parameters provide an evaluation of the high-frequency 
performance. S-parameters have been simulated for frequencies in 
the range of 30–40 MHz. Gate-to-gate (Cgg), gate-to-source (Cgs), and 
gate-to-drain (Cgd) capacitances and transconductance have been 
deduced from Y-parameters, as follows:
	
C
Y
C
C
Y
Y
gg
gs
gb
=
+
=
+
Im(
)
Im(
)
11
11
12
1
w
w
	
C
Y
G
Y
Y
gd
M
= -
=
-
Im(
)
Re(
)
12
21
12
w
	
The simulated S-parameters are shown in Fig. 10.9 and the 
extracted fT and fmax are shown in Fig. 10.10.
Figure 10.8  Simulated Cgg for analysis of the channel region.

291
Figure 10.9  Simulated S-parameters for the LDMOS structure.
Figure 10.10  Simulated fT and fmax for the LDMOS structure.
10.2  Vertically Diffused MOS Devices
Power MOSFETs are used as high current and voltage drivers in 
automotive, telecommunication, and power industries. With their 
Vertically Diffused MOS Devices

292
Power Devices
superior switching speed, power MOSFETs have become one of the 
well-known technologies used in high-power systems. Solid-state 
power devices are capable of handling a wide range of currents and 
voltages. Although solid-state power MOSFETs utilize semiconductor 
processing techniques that are comparable to those of conventional 
very-large-scale integration (VLSI) circuits, voltage and current 
levels are much different from the design used in VLSI devices. A high 
blocking voltage in the off state and a high current capacity in the on 
state are the two important characteristics associated with power 
devices and usually exceed the limitations of modern conventional 
transistors to perform as a high-power switch.
	
MOSFETs for power management applications have a wide range 
of maximum voltage ratings from 10 to 1500 volts. Low voltage 
ratings (<30 V) are typically used for power switches in portable 
electronic equipment. While the basic physics of conventional 
integrated circuit devices is applicable, additional issues need to 
be considered when high-power BJTs and MOSFETs are used in 
power applications. For power applications, MOS transistors need 
a reasonable, short channel length and a low doping level in the 
drain region. Next, we discuss the development, fabrication, and 
characterization of discrete lateral-diffused vertical drain metal–
oxide–semiconductor (VDMOS) power transistors.
	
Typical power VDMOS transistor fabrication steps were used 
to create a 50 V power VDMOS transistor structure were designed 
using Silvaco ATHENA process simulation. Modifications were made 
to include the Faraday shield and unclamped inductive switching 
(UIS) implant steps to address certain parasitic effects. UIS is used 
to reduce the parasitic bipolar junction transistor (BJT) operation or 
avalanche failure. The Faraday shield implant is performed to shift 
the parasitic gate-field capacitance. The ATHENA process simulation 
was used for the process simulation of the fabrication processes. 
The ATLAS device simulator was used for the device simulation. The 
combination of both made it possible to determine the impact of 
process parameters on device characteristics.
	
The fully coupled diffusion model (full.cpl) was used to account 
for the interaction between the impurity atoms and point defects, 
thus accounting for interstitials that were created during oxidation. A 

293
VDMOS structure with parameters given in Table 10.1 was simulated 
both with and without a UIS implant to ensure this implant step 
would truly reduce the effect of a parasitic BJT. Figure 10.11 shows 
a 2D profile of a VDMOS structure showing three different terminals 
and different diffusion regions simulated using ATHENA.
Table 10.1	 Parameters used for the VDMOS process design
Substrate thickness (μm): 650 to 700
Epilayer thickness (μm): 20 to 25
Epilayer resistivity (Ω-cm): 3 to 5
Gate oxide thickness (nm): 100
Polysilicon gate thickness (μm): 0.6
Body dose (cm–2): 5 × 1013
Body implant energy (keV): 100
Body drive-in time (min): 480
Body drive-in temperature (°C): 1100
UIS dose (cm–2): 1 × 1014
UIS implant energy (keV): 300
Source dose (cm–2): 4 × 1015
Source implant energy (keV): 65
Source/UIS anneal time (min): 20
Source drive-in temperature (°C): 1050
Figure 10.11  Two-dimensional profile of a VDMOS structure showing three 
different terminals and different diffusion regions simulated using ATHENA. 
After Ref. [2].
Vertically Diffused MOS Devices

294
Power Devices
20
19
18
17
16
15
Boron
Phosphorus
Figure 10.12  ATHENA simulation result showing the p-doping concentration 
under the source region for the structure without a UIS implant step. After Ref. 
[2].
Boron
Phosphorus
20
19
18
17
16
15
Figure 10.13  ATHENA simulation results showing the p-doping concentration 
under the source region for the structure with a UIS implant step. After Ref. [2].
	
Figures 10.12 and 10.13 illustrate ATHENA simulation results 
showing the p-doping concentration under the source region of a 
structure with and without a UIS implant step. The structure with 
the UIS implant has a boron concentration an order of magnitude 
higher than that of the structure without the UIS implant. This 
higher doped region should reduce the base resistance value, while 
increasing the doping in the parasitic base and eliminating the 

295
current gain mechanism. Figure 10.14 shows Id–Vg characteristic 
characteristics of the simulated VDMOS structures with and without 
the UIS implant, verifying that the additional UIS implant did not 
have any significant effect on Vt or Id behavior. Figure 10.15 shows 
the family of characteristics of the simulated VDMOS structure with 
the UIS implant. The two most important DC characteristics of a 
device (the maximum drain current and the threshold voltage) did 
not change with the addition of the UIS implant step.
Figure 10.14  Id–Vg characteristic characteristics of simulated VDMOS 
structures with and without a UIS implant.
Figure 10.15  Family of characteristics of a simulated VDMOS structure with 
a UIS implant.
Vertically Diffused MOS Devices

296
Power Devices
10.3  Summary
The strategy utilized in this chapter was to use TCAD where process 
and device simulation is used in conjunction with DOEs to reduce 
the process development time. The DOE approach based on TCAD 
simulation has been used for the design of a medium-voltage (40–
50 V) LDMOS. Lateral-diffused VDMOS power transistors using 
interdigitated source/gate design have also been considered. The 
TCAD methodology can be expanded to more critical process design, 
analysis, and ultimately support of shorter design cycles.
References
	 1.	 Aghoram, U. (2010). Impact of Strain on Memory and Lateral Power 
MOSFETs, PhD thesis, University of Florida.
	 2.	 Tokunaga, K. (2008). Development, Fabrication, and Characterization 
of a Vertical-Diffused MOS Process for Power RF Applications, MS thesis, 
Rochester Institute of Technology.

The increasing demand for energy over the past 50 years has 
resulted in a drive for research into possible alternative energy 
sources that are both commercially viable and do not create waste 
products that are detrimental to the environment. It has been 
projected that by 2050, the worldwide energy consumption will 
increase to approximately 28 TW, from its 2006 level of around  
11 TW. Silicon-based cells have dominated the photovoltaic market 
for the last 50 years and much research is still made into enhancing 
existing systems. However, silicon cells have a theoretical maximum 
power conversion capacity of less than 29%. Alternate forms of 
cells are thus being heavily researched, particularly those using 
nanomaterial, due to the favorably small amount of material needed 
and the likely associated decrease in cost per watt. Current silicon-
based solar cells on the market, based on inorganic solid-state 
junction devices, are environmentally clean, but expensive due to 
large amounts of materials required for production, and generally 
heavy or cumbersome. Though silicon cells have relatively high 
reported power conversion efficiencies of between 15% and 20%, 
the efficiencies achieved in laboratory studies are often not conveyed 
in commercially available applications, due to problems with scale-
up and the requirement of highly controlled conditions.
	
As continuous innovation makes solar cells more complex 
involving more process and geometrical variables, it is impractical 
Chapter 11
Solar Cells
Introducing Technology Computer-Aided Design (TCAD): Fundamentals, Simulations, and Applications
C. K. Maiti
Copyright © 2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-51-2 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36450-6 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

298
Solar Cells
to design new cells without simulation as too many experiments 
are needed to investigate design space and risks missing optimum 
design. To use solar energy in an efficient way, it is necessary to 
understand the nature of the spectrum. The solar radiation spectra 
show the incoming levels of energy at different wavelengths. The 
process of absorption of light (photon) is one of the principal aspects 
of electricity conversion. For example, the most commonly used 
semiconductor is silicon, having a bandgap of 1.1 eV, which covers 
most of the radiation spectra. For higher efficiency, collection of as 
much charge as possible, increase in the depth of the thick active 
layers is essential, which, however, results in high recombination 
rates before collection. To avoid this problem, the thickness of the p–n 
junction needs to be kept to a reasonable minimum, compromising 
charge generation over collection.
	
Solar cells to systems involve design and simulation at three 
levels, viz., at the cell level, at the module level, and at the system 
level. At the cell level attention is given to optimize geometric and 
process parameters to maximize the efficiency. At the module level 
one needs to study the effects of interconnects on performance, 
maximum power point as a function of luminance and cell width 
and minimizes the impact of cell variation or degradation on 
module performance. At the system level it is necessary to maximize 
system performance accounting for diurnal solar inclination and 
tracking of solar path and system level efficiency in relation to 
power delivered to the grid, including the inverter system. Solar cell 
optimization involves several steps such as selection of parameters 
to be investigated, unit cell pitch, active layer thickness, doping, and 
lifetime, and surface recombination velocity shows a major influence 
on cell response. Back-contact optimization involves metal finger 
pitch to achieve good performance with low-cost screen-printing 
manufacturing and simulation to correctly capture the measured 
behavior across a range of contact pitch and bulk resistivities. Once 
cell behavior is optimized, one needs the system level simulation 
to (a) minimize interconnect losses and (b) evaluate effects of 
environmental variation such as light intensity and incidence angle 
and temperature variation.
	
The efficiency of solar cells depends on:
 
∑	 The spectral absorbance of the light-absorbing material and 
the electron/hole injection efficiency

299
 
∑	 The electron transport and recombination rates, which are 
dependent on the electron-conducting material
 
∑	 The hole transport and stability, which is related to the hole 
conductor used
11.1  Solar Cell Simulation
In the following example, we simulate a solar cell structure using 
ATHENA and ATLAS. The input file consists of the following steps for 
simulation:
 
∑	 Construction of solar cell doping and geometry in ATHENA
 
∑	 Simulation of short-circuit current
 
∑	 Simulation of open-circuit voltage
 
∑	 Simulation of spectral response
 
∑	 Simulation of illuminated and dark I–V characteristics
	
ATHENA is used to create a typical solar cell structure. The 
device used is a diode of n+ over a p-substrate. The junction depth 
is approximately 0.25 μm. A single contact is placed in the center 
of the structure. The fabrication process consists of an implant and 
diffusion followed by electrode formation. Figure 11.1 shows the 
solar cell structure in which the photogeneration rate is shown. 
The short-circuit current is the current when anode and cathode 
are shorted. This is simulated by illuminating the device with zero 
voltage on all contacts. It is possible to store the optical intensity 
of the illumination by specifying output opt.int at any time before 
saving a structure file. The photogeneration rate will appear in 
the solution structure file by default. The structure stored at this 
point can be plotted to show contours of photogeneration, carrier 
concentration or potential. The photogeneration contours show the 
effect of the opaque cathode contact. At the start the definition of 
material parameters and opaque metal contact is repeated. For this 
test a different light beam is required. A beam origin and angle of 
incidence are set as before. The short-circuit case is considered so 
zero biases are set on both electrodes. The wavelength parameter λ 
of the solve statement is used to set the wavelength of the incident 
light. The range of wavelength used was 300 nm to 1000 nm.
Solar Cell Simulation

300
Solar Cells
0
50
40
30
20
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Microns
14
16
18
20
Microns
Materials
SiO2
Silicon
Aluminum
Figure 11.1  Solar cell structure in which the photogeneration rate is shown.
	
Plotting the resulting log file it is possible to see how the cathode 
current varies with wavelength. Setting a plot versus wavelength of 
the source photocurrent (current available in the light beam), the 
available photocurrent (current available for collection) and the 
actual cathode current can show how the device behaves (Fig. 11.2). 
The losses between source and available photocurrent are caused by 
reflections and transmission. This dominates the losses at all except 
the shortest wavelengths. The losses from available photocurrent 
to the actual simulated cathode current are due to recombination. 
These are very low except at the extremes.
0.3
0
2e-08
4e-08
6e-08
8e-08
Current
1e-07
1.2e-07
1.4e-07
1.6e-07
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Optical wavelength (um)
Available photo current (A)
Source photo current (A)
Cathode current (A)
Figure 11.2  Cathode current variation with wavelength.
	
The plot of illuminated and dark I–V characteristics, allowing the 
designer to choose a suitable load line for the device under normal 
operating conditions is shown in Fig. 11.3. A number of useful 

301
Organic Solar Cells
parameters are can be extracted from this characteristics using the 
extract statement and a plot of efficiency versus light frequency.
-0.4
-4e-09
-3e-09
-2e-09
-1e-09
1e-09
Cathode Current (A)
2e-09
3e-09
4e-09
5e-09
0
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
Cathode Voltage (V)
solarex01_3.log
solarex01_4.log
Figure 11.3  Illuminated and dark I–V characteristics of a solar cell.
11.2  Organic Solar Cells
In recent times there has been considerable interest in the use of 
organic materials in display technologies. Organic solar cells have 
become an important field of study in recent years. The simplicity 
of processing, the low temperature required for fabrication, and 
availability make them very attractive from a cost point of view. 
Recognition of the benefits of inexpensive materials and processing 
as well as large-area conformal construction have also created 
high interest in organic solutions for solar energy applications. In 
particular, conjugated polymer solar cells are among the simplest 
and cheaper of all. Since their first formal appearance in 1987, now 
with different configurations, their efficiency has slowly increased. 
Organic solar cells differ greatly in composition from inorganic cells, 
but the physics governing the processes are almost similar. Whereas 
in inorganic cells the active region of the cell is generally a lattice of 
semiconductor material, organic cells have active regions composed 
of complex organic molecules in solution.
	
Organic cells utilize a bilayer heterojunction structure, where 
there would be two distinct layers of organic materials. One layer 
would be composed of an electron-accepting material and the 

302
Solar Cells
other of an electron-donating material, very much akin to p-type 
and n-type materials. The important distinction to make between 
inorganic cells and organic cells is that in inorganic cells, photons 
stimulate electrons into the conduction band, directly creating 
electron–hole pairs. Once excited, the carriers are able to move 
through the conduction band to elsewhere in the lattice. In organic 
cells, carrier generation requires both a donor and an acceptor 
material. This process starts with a donor molecule absorbing a 
photon, generating an excited electron. This electron is still bound to 
the donor material, so another step is required. If the donor material 
is close enough to an acceptor material, again a very small distance 
since the mobility of the organic materials is so low, the excited 
electron can move to and excited state in the acceptor molecule, 
generating a carrier pair. Since the generation process requires 
both donor and acceptor molecules, the region they are generated 
in is limited to the thin region near the interface of the two layers. 
Carrier lifetime is significantly improved in this design compared 
to the single layer design as once carriers enter the donor/acceptor 
regions recombination is unlikely, dramatically improving efficiency. 
The organic material absorbs the incident photons and generates 
carriers. Since the diffusion length for electrons is short in organic 
films, on the order of only 20 nm, these cells exhibit very low 
conversion efficiencies, on the order of 0.01% or lower.
	
One of the biggest problems in organic materials is charge 
collection. Due to their nature, the hole–electron pairs generated 
have bigger bonding energies than in inorganic materials. Today 
polymer solar cells are based on the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) 
concept and to increase efficiency further, tandem configurations 
are being developed. Normally, the bandgap of conjugated polymers 
is around 2 eV and it is clear that this type of bandgap would leave 
almost half of photons being unabsorbed. Low-bandgap materials, 
reaching a bandgap of 1.2 eV, have been processed giving some hope 
to the solar cell development area. Attempts for tandem solar cells 
including low-bandgap materials are being made.
	
Next, the modeling and design of a polymer BHJ solar cell will be 
presented. The device, comprised of layers of BHJs, takes advantage 
of the diverse absorption characteristics of the materials involved to 

303
Organic Solar Cells
improve efficiency. This approach takes into consideration Langevin 
recombination constants and quantum efficiency modifications to fit 
existing measured data. The characterized layers are then used to 
simulate the tandem solar cell response to the solar spectra.
	
Silvaco has long been a leading supplier of organic solar cell 
simulator which will be used in the simulation. Organic solar models 
for BHJ organic solar cells will be used. In this model, the BHJ solar 
cells consist of an interpenetrating mixture of donor and acceptor 
materials. Absorbed light generates excess exciton which is charge 
neutral and diffuses to the acceptor–donor interface where they 
dissociate into free electron–hole pairs. The electron–hole pairs are 
then separated by the internal field and are swept up at the contacts 
as in crystalline photodetectors. The model includes the standard 
drift-diffusion equations (Poisson’s equation and the electron 
and hole continuity equations) augmented by the singlet exciton 
continuity equation.
	
In this case study we use singlet exciton dissociation in the 
modeling of organic/polymer solar cell devices. As the modeling 
is based on the BHJ concept, we do not consider the detail of the 
location of the heterointerface as it is considered as a random 
interpenetrating mixture of materials. It is assumed that the 
material is electrically uniform and that the mean distance from 
anywhere to the heterointerface. In the simulation, the base material 
considered for the active layers is organic. This material belongs to 
the Organics group in the Silvaco material library. There are three 
keys for simulation of exciton dissociation. The specific models that 
are included in the simulation are exciton generation, dissociation, 
and molecular recombination characteristics. They are the inclusion 
of the singlet exciton continuity equation, the inclusion of Langevin 
recombination and the inclusion of the singlet dissociation model. 
There are two main aspects of the material specification related 
to the simulation, optical and electrical properties. Most of these 
parameters (Tables 11.1 and 11.2) are associated with the continuity 
equations of the system governing the electrical behavior of the 
material.

304
Solar Cells
Table 11.1	 List of the parameters used to characterize the materials involved
nv300
Valence band density at 300 K
cm–3
μn
Low-field electron mobility
cm2/V.s
μp
Low-field hole mobility
cm2/V.s
τn0
Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) lifetime for electrons
s
τp0
SRH lifetime for holes
s
ha
Total acceptor-like trap density
cm–3
hd
Total donor-like trap density
cm–3
s.binding
Singlet binding energy
eV
Table 11.2	 Common parameters used for all the bulk heterojunction layers
Parameter
Value
Source
Affinity 
3.75 eV
–
nc300
2.8 × 1019 cm–3
Silvaco
nv300
1.04 × 1019 cm–3
Silvaco
s.binding
0.4 eV 
Fixed-mean
rst.exciton
0.25
Silvaco
lds.exciton
0.01 microns
Silvaco
qe.exciton
1
Silvaco
a.singlet
1.2 nm
–
a.langevin
1
Silvaco
	
As part of the models, the source of energy considered for this 
simulation needs to be specified. In this case the source of light is 
the solar spectra AM1.5. To include this information in the BEAM 
statement, the data was processed and a file was created according 
to Silvaco’s specification of power density versus frequency. After all 
the materials parameters have been specified, the models need to be 
introduced. The three models are enabled on the MODEL statement 
by the parameters: SINGLET, LANGEVIN and S.DISSOC. QE.EXCITON 
parameter of the MATERIAL statement is used which characterizes 
the number of singlet exciton generated for each photon that 
is absorbed. Absorbed photons not generating singlet generate 
electron–hole pairs. The main interest in the device characterization 

305
and simulation is to obtain the efficiency of the cells. For this, the 
SOLVE statement is set up to change the voltage of the anode in 
increments of 0.05 V. The overall power of the light source needs to 
be specified here as well. During simulation, when the processing 
reaches this point, Silvaco calls the Organic Solar module using the 
power spectra specified in the BEAM statement. Figure 11.4 shows 
the solar cell I–V characteristics.
Figure 11.4  Organic solar cell I–V characteristics.
11.3  Tandem Solar Cells
The first homojunction silicon solar cell developed during 1954 
had an efficiency of only 6%. But the progress in silicon technology 
resulted in single-crystal silicon solar cells with higher reliability 
and efficiencies reaching above 25%. The silicon photovoltaic 
modules are very expensive. However, about 95% of commercially 
available photovoltaic modules are made from crystalline silicon 
cells and only 5% is contributed by thin-film technology. Thin-film 
solar cells have become a strong competitor for the single-crystal 
and polycrystalline silicon solar cells because of the cheaper raw 
material as well as processing costs. Substrates used in thin-film 
solar cells are a metal or a glass or a polymer. These are relatively 
Tandem Solar Cells

306
Solar Cells
cheaper compared to silicon wafers. A tandem solar cell usually has 
two cells having different bandgaps placed one over other with an 
encapsulated between them. They are designed in such a way that 
the top cell has a larger bandgap and hence can absorb shorter 
wavelengths. The bottom cell with a relatively smaller bandgap can 
absorb longer wavelengths that pass through the top cell. To obtain 
efficiencies greater than 25%, the top cell should have a bandgap 
of 1.7 eV. This would mean that the top cell has to contribute to 
two-thirds of the total efficiency. The bottom cell of the tandem 
structure has a bandgap of 1 eV. Tandem solar cells fabricated from 
thin films provide promise of improved efficiency, while keeping the 
processing costs low.
	
Amorphous silicon does not require a costly a manufacturing 
process, which reduces the cost of the Si-based solar cells. Process 
temperatures tend to be significantly lower than in production of 
crystalline Si, allowing the use of much less expensive substrates, 
including float glass or foils made of metal or plastic if amorphous 
silicon is used. Additionally, the absorption coefficient of amorphous 
silicon is significantly higher (upward of 20x) than that of crystalline 
silicon, with layers on the order of microns able to absorb nearly 
all incident light on its surface. Carrier generation occurs much 
like in crystalline silicon, with one noteworthy exception. Despite 
still being composed mainly of silicon (hydrogen is often present 
in the material as well, deposited during the production process), 
the effective bandgap of amorphous silicon can range between 
~1.55–1.8 eV, compared to 1.1 eV for crystalline silicon. Not only is 
the bandgap significantly higher than crystalline silicon, there is a 
certain amount of flexibility that can be used to tailor the material 
to the needed application. These factors make amorphous silicon 
a cheap and versatile photovoltaic device. However, degradation is 
also a significant issue in amorphous silicon cells. When exposed 
to sunlight, a phenomenon known as the Staebler–Wronski effect 
occurs in amorphous photovoltaic. Upon exposure to sunlight, 
even as briefly as a few hours, photoconductivity of the material 
decreases.
	
In the following, we consider the design and simulation of 
a-Si:H/μc-Si:H tandem solar cell (from Silvaco) with the following 
structure in the simulation: ZnO:Al(500nm)/p-a-Si:H(10nm)/i-a-
Si:H(200nm)/n-a-Si:H(15nm)/p-μc-Si:H(10nm)/i-μc-Si:H(2.2μm)/

307
p-μc-Si:H(15nm)/ZnO(100nm)/Ag. Both I–V and external quantum 
efficiency (EQE) simulations of a tandem a-Si:H/μc-Si:H solar cell 
are performed.
	
In simulation, the Tauc–Lorentz dielectric function with the 
Urbach tail model for a complex index of refraction was used for 
a-Si:H material. The model parameters were calibrated to fit the 
EQE of the top cell. For the bottom cell silicon index of refraction 
was used except that the imaginary part of the index of refraction 
was shifted in energy to take into account the bandgap difference 
between silicon and μc-Si:H material. To model the interlayer 
between the two solar cells a simple method was used. The method 
used here consists of adding an electrode which exactly overlays 
the interlayer and attaching a lumped resistance to it using the 
contact name=com resist=1e16 statement. In doing this, we force 
the current to flow from the anode to the cathode and prevent any 
current to flow in the added electrode. Physically it can be justified 
by the fact the interlayer is acting like a resistor letting current 
flows without significant limitation. The value of the resistance can 
be used to adjust the amount of current flowing through the added 
electrode, thus controlling the interlayer resistance. In hydrogenated 
amorphous silicon (a-Si:H), the effect of dangling-bond states on 
recombination can be significant. The dangling-bond states are 
amphoteric and located around the middle of the bandgap. In this 
example the amphoteric parameter on the defect statement was 
used to specify amphoteric defects. Figures 11.5 and 11.6 show the 
I–V characteristics and the EQE simulations of a tandem a-Si:H/μc-
Si:H solar cell, respectively.
	
Thin-film solar cell modules based on copper indium gallium 
selenide (CIGS) are a technology with great potential. Two reasons 
for this are low material consumption and relatively high efficiency. 
The following example demonstrates CIGS solar cell module 
simulation and optimization. In a CIGS solar cell module several cells 
are connected in series. The cells are the active area of the module 
whereas the interconnections between cells are the dead area. 
The efficiency of the module is thus dependent on the number of 
cells in the module. Thus there is a trade-off between maximizing 
absorption and minimizing resistance of the interconnection. Figure 
11.7 shows the efficiency dependence on the number of cells in a 
CIGS solar module.
Tandem Solar Cells

308
Solar Cells
JSC=10.2mA/cm2
VOC=1.356V
1e-09
–1e-09
–2e-09
–3e-09
0
FF=71.95EFF=9.97%
Anode Voltage (V)
0	
0.2	
0.4	
0.6	
0.8	
1	
1.2	
1.4	
1.6
Cathode Current (A)
Figure 11.5  I–V characteristics of a tandem a-Si:H/μc-Si:H solar cell.
Top and Bottom Cell  EQE Simulation
Top
Top
Exp
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.3	
0.4	
0.5	
0.6	
0.7	
0.8	
0.9	
1
Bottom
Exp
Bottom
optical wavelength
User formula
Figure 11.6  EQE simulations of a tandem a-Si:H/μc-Si:H solar cell.

309
2 cells
4 cells
0
1
2
3
4
-2e-06
-1e-06
Cathode current (A)
1e-06
0
5
6
7
8
9
Anode bias (V)
6 cells
10 cells
Figure 11.7  Efficiency dependence on the number of cells in a CIGS solar 
module.
11.4  3D Solar Cell Simulation
In the following case study we simulate a 3D solar cell with and 
without lenses. The simulations performed are:
 
∑	 3D process simulation of the solar cell using VictoryCell
 
∑	 Mesh generation of the 3D solar cell structure
 
∑	 3D device simulation of I–V characteristics using VictoryDevice 
with and without lenses
	
The 3D process simulation starts from a mask and consist of a 
deposition and angled etch of an oxide layer on top of silicon in order 
to define oxide lenses. The shape of the lenses can be adjusted as 
a function of mask size and angle used during the etch. At the end 
of the process simulation a 3D structure is saved and meshed using 
a full 3D Delaunay mesh. Three-dimensional structures are shown 
with the lens after process simulation (Fig. 11.8) and with rays  
(Fig. 11.9), respectively. 3D refinement of the mesh is done as 
a function of net doping. The 3D structure is then passed to 
VictoryDevice, where optical and electro-optical simulations are 
performed. Three-dimensional ray tracing is used during the 
simulation. This is a method by which beams of light are traced 
through a structure, taking into account reflection, refraction, and 
3D Solar Cell Simulation

310
Solar Cells
attenuation. The calculated light intensities and absorptions are 
then used to calculate the photogeneration rates are shown in Figs. 
11.10 and 11.11, respectively. Whenever a ray encounters a region 
interface, or the incident ray encounters a device boundary, the 
ray is split into a reflected and a transmitted beam. For complex 
structures (especially in 3D) this can result in a large number of 
rays. The ANGLE (or PHI) parameter specifies the direction of 
propagation of the beam relative to the x axis. In 3D, one can specify 
the angle THETA, which is the rotation about the y axis. By default 
the beam will automatically be sized to illuminate the entire device. 
The optical and electrical simulations are done using an iterative 
multithreading domain decomposition–based solver called PAM.
MPI. Figure 11.12 shows the I–V characteristics of the solar cell with 
and without a lens.
Materials:
Silicon
SiO2
Figure 11.8  3D structure of a solar cell after process simulation with a lens.
Materials:
Silicon
Aluminum
SiO2
Figure 11.9  3D structure of a solar cell with illumination on the lens.

311
0
1
2
3
Microns
0           0.2          0.4          0.6         0.8            1           1.2         1.4          1.6          1.8           2               
Pasition X (um)
Optical intensity 
distributionr
0.797
0.664
0.532
0.399
0.266
0.133
0
Figure 11.10  Optical intensity distribution in a solar cell.
0
1
2
3
Microns
0           0.2          0.4          0.6         0.8            1           1.2         1.4          1.6          1.8         2               
Pasition X (um)
Photogeneration 
rate distribution
21.8
18.1
14.5
10.9
7.25
3.63
0
Figure 11.11  Photogeneration rate distribution in a solar cell.
3D Solar Cell Simulation

312
Solar Cells
IIIuminated current with lens
5e-08
-5e-08
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Anode Voltage (V)
0.4
0.5
0.6
0
Cathode Current (A)
Dark current
IIIuminated current without lens
Figure 11.12  I–V characteristics with and without a lens.
11.5  Summary
The objective of this chapter has been to design different types of 
solar cells. Silvaco TCAD tools provide a solution for researchers 
interested in solar cell technology. They enable researchers to study 
the electrical properties of solar cells under illumination in both 2D 
and 3D domains. The simulated properties include I–V characteristics, 
spectral response, quantum efficiency, photogeneration rates, 
potential distribution, etc. In this chapter, three types of solar cells, 
viz., organic solar cells, tandem solar cells, and 3D solar cells, have 
been investigated.

Technology scaling is increasing the complexity and nonideality of 
the electrical behavior of semiconductor devices. Besides providing 
a deep insight, especially for aggressively scaled devices, TCAD 
simulations may help in the generation of predictive models which 
play a crucial role in reducing circuit development cycle times 
and costs in semiconductor industry. During the last two decades 
circuit simulation has become an indispensable tool for the design 
of integrated circuits and compact device model is an essential part 
of the simulation (see Ref. [5] of Chapter 1). Device modeling also 
plays an important role in semiconductor fabrication, especially for 
the growing diversity of device requirements. In this chapter we 
review the various models currently in use in the semiconductor 
industry. We discuss on device characterization using available 
semiconductor device analyzer equipment, parameter extraction 
software, and methodologies used today.
12.1  Compact Model Generation
During the last four decades circuit simulation has become an 
indispensable tool for the design of integrated circuits (ICs) and 
device models are an essential part of this simulation. The traditional 
link between design and technology has been defined mainly via the 
Chapter 12
TCAD for SPICE Parameter Extraction
Introducing Technology Computer-Aided Design (TCAD): Fundamentals, Simulations, and Applications
C. K. Maiti
Copyright © 2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-51-2 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36450-6 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

314
TCAD for SPICE Parameter Extraction
compact circuit modeling of devices. Compact device modeling may 
be seen as a bridge between the IC design and the chip fabrication. 
However, compact model development is becoming difficult to 
keep pace with the introduction of novel performance–boosting 
technologies. Circuit simulation needs compact device models. 
Requirements for the advanced compact model are illustrated in 
Fig. 12.1. Models of the performance enhancement techniques such 
as stress engineering, high-k dielectric, and thin-body multigate 
device must be implemented. New phenomena, including the layout 
proximity effect, quantum effect, ballistic transport, and enhanced 
overlap capacitance models, are required. Circuit designers cannot 
begin to design for a significant period of time before the processing, 
characterization, and design kit cycle is complete. Technology 
computer-aided design (TCAD) can be used to generate the SPICE 
model for a target technology under development for concurrent 
development. A typical model extraction procedure includes:
 
∑	 Use of only device simulation to extract SPICE parameters:
	
o	 Define test structures.
	
o	 Generate I–V data using calibrated device models.
	
o	 Extract SPICE model parameters.
 
∑	 Process/device 
TCAD-based 
SPICE 
model 
parameter 
extraction:
	
o	 Calibrate TCAD models for existing/mature technology.
	
o	 Perform process simulation to optimize new process 
recipe/target.
	
o	 Perform device simulation to optimize new device 
specification/target.
	
o	 Generate I–V and C–V data.
	
o	 Extract SPICE model using parameter extraction tool such 
as Paramos.
	
The philosophy behind the compact modeling is to come up with 
closed-form equations that represent the TCAD data with all the 
nonlinearities included and yet efficient to use. The following is a 
brief guideline for formulating compact models:
 
∑	 The approach is different from the analytic formulation 
starting from physical assumptions, since it is assumed that 
the entire complex device physics has already been included in 

315
the TCAD data. The formulation should be based on empirical 
nonlinear regression to curve-fit the TCAD data.
 
∑	 It is important to use physics-based equations whenever 
possible so that the functionality can represent the data 
in a wide range and different conditions. It is important to 
manipulate the data to find a “global” functionality.
 
∑	 The parameters in a compact model should be unambiguously 
defined and should be easily extracted from the TCAD data. 
The extraction procedure should be easily automated since it 
is expected that it will be repeated if a new set of data is given.
 
∑	 It is preferable that the compact model includes as many 
variables as possible such that different target–variable 
dependencies can be easily evaluated. However, there will be 
a trade-off in terms of the complexity in the formulation and 
extraction.
 
∑	 Associated with each compact model, there should be an 
estimation of the relative error to the original TCAD data. In 
this way, the accuracy of the compact model can be quantified.
 
∑	 In principle, the same procedure for the compact model 
formulation can be applied to the same set of data obtained 
from measurements, if available.
Figure 12.1  Requirements for the development of advanced compact models.
	
One can distinguish in principle three strategies for developing 
device models: physics-based, empirical, and tabular models. 
Physics-based models are based upon device physics. Parameters 
Compact Model Generation

316
TCAD for SPICE Parameter Extraction
within these models are based upon physical properties such as 
oxide thicknesses, substrate doping concentrations, carrier mobility, 
etc. An empirical model is based upon curve fitting, using whatever 
functions and parameter values most adequately fit measured data to 
enable simulation of transistor operation. A tabular model is a form 
of a look-up table containing a large number of values for common 
device parameters such as drain current and device parasitic. Table 
models are easier to construct but require high memory space and 
are not very much in use.
	
Circuit simulation is usually based on SPICE compact models. 
These are high-level models that reproduce the device characteristics 
through a set of deterministic analytical equations based on device 
physics. To represent a particular technology, SPICE models use a 
set of parameters, whose number can vary, to fit the data coming 
from electrical measurements. In Fig. 12.2, a flowchart of a unified 
reference, temperature, and geometry parameter extraction 
procedure for the scalable model is shown. It can be implemented 
in parameter extraction software such as ICCAP or UTMOST. The 
essential feature of the parameter extraction procedure is a direct 
extraction of the geometry parameters from the measured electrical 
characteristics and the desired modeling tool such as the vertical 
bipolar intercompany (VBIC) model. The complete parameter 
extraction procedure is integrated in the single environment, which 
saves time in verification of the final scalable model results with 
measured data.
	
In principle, a TCAD synthesis approach can be applied to the 
prediction and characterization of semiconductor technologies and 
devices. The compact models, which are formulated on the basis of 
the TCAD data, could, in principle, be extracted from the measured 
data if the same set of the measurement data as TCAD is available. 
The approach makes use of the expertise of professional modeling 
efforts and provides a solution for nonexpert engineers so that they 
can concentrate on the design optimization and trade-off and do not 
need to care about all the pitfalls in the modeling. As the technology 
development progresses, updates to the compact models can be 
provided to ensure the designers will have minimal design impact 
from the initial models to the final hardware-based models. The 
following section describes the methodology of the TCAD process, 
device, and compact modeling strategy commonly employed in 
developing state-of-the-art technologies.

317
Compact Model Generation
Low current
parameters extraction
for reference geometry
Temperature
parameters extraction
for reference geometry
Low current geometry
parameters extraction
from WL = WDR vs. LL
High current geometry
parameters extraction
from WL = WDR vs. LL
High current geometry
parameters extraction
from LL = LDR vs. WL
High current geometry
parameters extraction
from LL = LDR vs. WL
Low current geometry
parameters extraction
from LL = LDR vs. WL
Low current geometry
parameters extraction
from LL = LDR vs. WL
High current
parameters extraction
for reference geometry
Process and layout
information
WL = WDR
LL= LDR
Figure 12.2  Flowchart of a unified parameter extraction procedure.
	
In fact, for chip design, realistic analog simulation models are 
necessary to simulate circuit performance with a sufficient degree of 
accuracy. The accuracy of circuit simulations not only depends on an 
accurate model but also on the used parameter extraction techniques. 
Compact model parameters are often obtained from extraction 
programs like ICCAP or UTMOST using measured devices over a 
wide range of lengths and widths. In the process of device compact 
modeling, the parameter extraction is very important. The purpose 
of the parameter extraction is to find values for model parameters 
and optimize the parameter values to achieve the best-possible 
fit between simulated and measured data for a given technology. 
In this chapter, automatic parameter extraction techniques of the 

318
TCAD for SPICE Parameter Extraction
UTMOST extraction package are presented to extract compact model 
parameters.
12.2  Compact Modeling of HBTs
The first compact bipolar model was published in 1954 by Ebers and 
Moll; it is a very simple model but hardly used anymore for today’s 
advanced analog circuit design. In 1970 Gummel and Poon published 
their integral charge control model, which was a big step forward: it 
included, among other features, high injection in the base. The SPICE 
version of the Gummel–Poon (SGP) model is still the workhorse of 
the bipolar designer today. It is well known that for bipolar compact 
modeling purpose, the Gummel–Poon (GP) model is not accurate 
for modeling the high-frequency operation of transistors. Accurate 
compact modeling requires the use of more complex models. The 
chosen models are the SGP model because it is widely known and 
can serve as a sort of reference here, the MEXTRAM model for its 
completeness and being used in industry for about 10 years, the 
HICUM model for its proven usefulness in high-speed circuits, and 
the VBIC95 model proposed by the US electronics industry.
	
In the modern semiconductor industry, compact models play 
an important role in connecting semiconductor manufacturing and 
circuit design. Successful IC design relies heavily on accurate SPICE 
modeling. The area of compact modeling for SiGe heterojunction 
bipolar transistors (HBTs) is, therefore, crucial to the successful 
introduction of the SiGe technology to the IC industry. At high 
frequencies, many parasitic effects come into play and make the 
physical extraction of device parameters difficult. Significant testing 
and calibration and de-embedding issues must be overcome for 
the proper modeling of RF devices. The testing issues may be more 
difficult for state-of-the-art SiGe HBTs because of their very high 
cutoff frequencies. HBT models should describe as accurately as 
possible the following effects:
 
∑	 High injection in the base
 
∑	 Quasi-saturation in epilayer, including the Kirk effect
 
∑	 Avalanche multiplication
 
∑	 Base resistance
 
∑	 Noise; 1/f, shot and thermal noise

319
Compact Modeling of HBTs
 
∑	 Self-heating
 
∑	 Collector–base depletion capacitance
	
The SGP model has been in use for the last 30 years because it 
is convenient and computationally efficient and most people in the 
industry prefer to use it unless other more advanced models prove 
necessary. However, the intrinsic limitations of the SGP model at 
radio frequency (RF) are well known. In addition to the most popular 
SGP model, some other advanced models, such as high current 
bipolar compact transistor model (HICUM), MEXTRAM (developed 
by Philips Semiconductors), and the VBIC model are being currently 
used for modeling of advanced devices. The MEXTRAM model has 
been extended to high-speed small-signal applications in Si bipolar 
junction transistors (BJTs) as well as to SiGe HBTs.
	
VBIC is a BJT model that was developed as an industry standard, 
public domain replacement for the SGP model. It is based on the 
extension of the Kull et al. model. A comparison of the models is 
made next. The SGP model has so far been the workhorse of the 
bipolar circuit designer. Advanced compact models such as HICUM, 
MEXTRAM, and VBIC are applied to model SiGe HBTs. More recent 
developments are in the MEXTRAM model, largely depending on 
the modeling of the total stored charge. In the United States efforts 
are undertaken to come to new standard models for metal–oxide–
semiconductor (MOS) and bipolar devices. The proposal for a new 
compact bipolar model called VBIC95 has recently been introduced.
12.2.1  VBIC
VBIC allows accurate simulation, thanks to the following 
improvements:
 
∑	 Improved Early effect modeling
 
∑	 Physical separation of Ic and Ib
 
∑	 Improved HBT-modeling capability
 
∑	 Improved depletion and diffusion capacitances
 
∑	 Parasitic PNP
 
∑	 Modified Kull quasi-saturation modeling
 
∑	 Constant overlap capacitances
 
∑	 Weak avalanche model
 
∑	 Base–emitter breakdown

320
TCAD for SPICE Parameter Extraction
 
∑	 Improved temperature modeling
 
∑	 Self-heating
 
∑	 Parasitic fixed (oxide) capacitance modeling
12.2.2  MEXTRAM
The MEXTRAM model is a strongly physics-based model, which 
has been developed to address many of the shortcomings of the GP 
model. These shortcomings include:
 
∑	 Constant bias-independent Early voltages
 
∑	 Poor modeling of substrate effects
 
∑	 No modeling of avalanche effects
 
∑	 Poor geometry and temperature scaling
 
∑	 Inadequate modeling of high-frequency effects
 
∑	 Weak quasi-saturation modeling
	
The effects modeled by MEXTRAM include:
 
∑	 Variation in base resistance due to emitter current crowding 
and conductivity modulation
 
∑	 Monotonic bias-dependent forward and reverse Early effects
 
∑	 Built-in electric field in the base region
 
∑	 Monotonic Early voltages and fT behavior for lightly doped 
epilayer devices
 
∑	 First-order approximation of high-frequency effects in the 
intrinsic base (high-frequency current crowding and excess 
phase shift)
 
∑	 Physical formulation of collector epilayer resistance, including 
hot-carrier behavior and current spreading
 
∑	 High injection effects in the base
 
∑	 Substrate effects, including parasitic p-n-p
 
∑	 Weak avalanche effects
 
∑	 Hard and quasi-saturation
	
MEXTRAM provides several features that the GP model lacks:
 
∑	 Evolution of a cutoff frequency with a smoothing parameter
 
∑	 Bias-dependent Early effect
 
∑	 High injection effects
 
∑	 Ohmic resistance of the epilayer

321
 
∑	 Velocity saturation effects on the resistance of the epilayer
 
∑	 Hard and quasi-saturation (including the Kirk effect)
 
∑	 Split base–collector and base–emitter depletion capacitance
 
∑	 Substrate effects and parasitic p-n-p current crowding and 
conductivity modulation of the base resistance
	
MEXTRAM is a publicly available compact model for bipolar 
transistors. It has a number of improvements with respect to the 
well-known SGP model, which makes it more accurate, especially in 
analog, RF, and large-signal simulations. MEXTRAM covers several 
effects that are not included in, for example, the original GP model. 
These effects include:
 
∑	 Temperature
 
∑	 Charge storage
 
∑	 Substrate
 
∑	 Parasitic p-n-p
 
∑	 High injection
 
∑	 Built-in electric field in the base region
 
∑	 Bias-dependent Early effect
 
∑	 Low-level, nonideal base currents
 
∑	 Hard and quasi-saturation
 
∑	 Weak avalanche
 
∑	 Hot-carrier effects in the collector epilayer
 
∑	 Explicit modeling of inactive regions
 
∑	 Split base–collector depletion capacitance
 
∑	 Current crowding and conductivity modulation for base 
resistance
 
∑	 First-order approximation of distributed high-frequency 
effects in the intrinsic base (high-frequency current crowding 
and excess phase shift)
12.2.3  HICUM
The HICUM model is particularly well suited for a high-frequency 
and high-current description. The key improvement with regard 
to the GP model is that HICUM describes the Kirk effect and quasi-
saturation via a semiphysical model for the transit time, which is 
an indirectly measurable quantity through the transit frequency. 
Compact Modeling of HBTs

322
TCAD for SPICE Parameter Extraction
The most important model features of a HICUM physics-based 
equivalent circuit containing all relevant effects for present bipolar 
process technologies are:
 
∑	 Emitter periphery effects
 
∑	 Distributed external base–collector region
 
∑	 Parasitic bias-independent base–emitter and base–collector 
capacitances
 
∑	 (Weak) avalanche breakdown
 
∑	 Substrate coupling network
 
∑	 Parasitic substrate transistor
	
	 The major effects taken into account by HICUM are:
 
∑	 High-current effects
 
∑	 Distributed high-frequency model for the external base–
collector region
 
∑	 Emitter periphery injection and associated charge storage
 
∑	 Emitter current crowding
 
∑	 Two- and three-dimensional collector current spreading
 
∑	 Parasitic (bias-dependent) capacitances between base–
emitter and base–collector terminals
 
∑	 Vertical non-quasi-static effects for transfer current and 
minority charge
 
∑	 Temperature dependence and self-heating
 
∑	 Weak avalanche breakdown at the base–collector junction
 
∑	 Tunneling in the base–emitter junction
 
∑	 Parasitic substrate transistor
 
∑	 Bandgap differences occurring in HBTs
 
∑	 Lateral scalability
12.3  Device Characterization
On-wafer measurement is preferred for semiconductor device 
modeling because of much lower parasitic resistances, capacitances, 
and inductances compared to measurement on a packaged device. It 
is usually done in a special chamber on top of a probe station since 
the chamber provides an enclosed environment to shield the device-
under-test (DUT) from environmental lights and noises. There are 
mechanical manipulators outside the chamber to manually move 

323
the chuck under the wafer in xyz directions to accurately position 
probes on a test device. It is also possible to automatically measure 
many devices in a single die or in different dies on a wafer using 
computer-controlled probe station, which controls the chuck 
movement through servomotors. The chuck temperature, which 
offers an ambient temperature to the wafer, is set by a controller 
allowing measurement from –40°C to 200°C. The complete flow from 
on-wafer measurement to model parameter extraction is illustrated 
in Fig. 12.3.
15
10
5
00
0.5
1
1.5
VCE(V)
2
2.5
IC(mA)
25
15
20
CBC(IF)
-2
10
-1,5
-1
VBC(V)
-0,5
0
0,5
100
80
60
40
20
0
L1(GHz)
10-5
10-4
10-2
10-1
IC(A)
10-3
10-17
10-19
10-23
10-25
SIB(A2/Hz)
10-21
100
101 102
103
104
105
Freq(Hz)
Figure 12.3  On-wafer measurement for model parameter extraction. After 
Ref. [1].
12.3.1  ICCAP Device Modeling: 1/f Noise Measurement 
Configuration
Low-frequency and high-frequency noise model equations are 
physics based and describe charge storage, including collector current 
spreading, up to very high current densities and in saturation bias 
dependence of internal base resistance, including both conductivity 
Device Characterization

324
TCAD for SPICE Parameter Extraction
modulation and emitter current crowding temperature dependence 
of all elements. ICCAP is a dedicated toolkit for parameter extraction. 
The extraction routines are based on the device equations of model 
chosen to ensure that the extracted model parameter set gives a 
good physical representation of the device characteristics. Here, we 
describe the methods for accurate RF on-wafer measurement that 
are appropriate for production radio-frequency integrated circuit 
(RFIC) testing environments. The application of on-wafer probing to 
RFIC development, as well as to the evaluation of new semiconductor 
process technologies, is described. For RFIC measurements one 
needs to consider the following:
 
∑	 Available probing technologies
 
∑	 Probe selection
 
∑	 Contacting techniques
 
∑	 Testing of set hardware requirements
 
∑	 Testing of structure layout
 
∑	 System calibration
 
∑	 De-embedding methods
	
Special emphasis is given to Si-based RFIC processes with 
attention to test structure layout criteria, substrate parasitic, and 
extraction of substrate effects, as well as optimum design of high-Q 
inductors. The testing approaches focus on evaluation of small-
signal S-parameters noise parameters and load-pull large-signal 
test for nonlinear distortion. The material is presented to serve as 
a pragmatic guide to the techniques and requirements for accurate 
on-wafer test, the common pitfalls and how to avoid them, and 
the basic tools for performance and parameter extraction of both 
active and passive semiconductor devices in RF environments. A 
detailed technical description explaining the basics of modeling and 
parameter extraction of bipolar devices using the HICUM model has 
been developed [1].
	
Flicker noise or 1/f noise is an important noise source generated 
at low frequencies. The noise can cause severe effects on many 
RF applications. The challenge facing modeling engineers is the 
ability to measure the noise with precision. The Agilent ICCAP 
Device Modeling Configurations can be extended to add 1/f noise 

325
measurement capability with good accuracy. Controlled by ICCAP 
device modeling software, accurate and reliable measurements can 
be extracted and analyzed with the ICCAP Modeling Suite software. 
Figure 12.4 shows a block diagram of the 1/f noise measurement 
solution. The measurement configuration consists of the following 
major components:
 
∑	 Agilent 4156C semiconductor parameter analyzer with two 
source monitor units (SMUs)
 
∑	 Agilent 35670A dynamic signal analyzer
 
∑	 Stanford Research SR570 low-noise current amplifier
 
∑	 Digital voltage multimeter DMM
 
∑	 Low-pass band filter
 
∑	 G-S-G probes for on-wafer measurement (available from 
third-party companies such as Cascade Microtech)
 
∑	 Cables and adapters
	
The following ICCAP software modules are basic requirements 
for a 1/f noise measurement solution:
	
*	 85199A IC-CAP software environment
	
*	 85199B IC-CAP analysis module
	
*	 85199D DC measurement drivers
	
*	 85199G noise measurement drivers
	
*	 85195B 1/f noise modeling package
Figure 12.4  Block diagram of the 1/f noise measurement system.
Device Characterization

326
TCAD for SPICE Parameter Extraction
12.4  Parameter Extraction Methodology
The first step is to specify the target parameters and the design 
variables, which, however, will depend on the particular technology 
to be developed. A list of major targets and variables could be as 
follows:
 
∑	 Targets: threshold voltage, saturation current, off-state 
leakage/punch-through 
current, 
subthreshold 
swing, 
transconductance, gate/junction capacitance, and device 
lifetime, as well as derived circuit parameters such as gate 
propagation delay, static power, and noise margin
 
∑	 Variables: channel length, gate oxide thickness, junction depth, 
channel doping profile, source/drain doping profile, and 
supply voltage, as well as all the major processing variables 
(diffusion/oxidation time and temperature, implant dose and 
energy, etc.) which influence the layer structures and profiles
	
For efficient circuit design, accurate transistor models are 
necessary. Historically the Ebers–Moll model is the first compact 
bipolar transistor model involving two back-to-back diodes. The 
evolution continued with the development of the GP, and more 
advanced models like VBIC, HICUM, and MEXTRAM. For accurate 
BJT modeling different extraction schemes have been proposed. 
Historically, the forward Early voltage has been extracted from the 
intercept with the VCE axis of the extrapolated plot in the output 
characteristics for constant base voltage, as shown in Fig. 12.5. In 
the following, a method is given of how the model parameters are 
extracted (obtained from slopes/intercepts of straight lines) and 
optimized (obtained from least squares fits of data to the full model 
using the extracted values as initial values). The optimization is 
presented step by step on data sets which are limited to regions 
where the considered parameters are prevalent.
	
The reverse Early voltage has similarly been extracted as 
the intercept with the VCE axis of the extrapolated output plot for 
constant base voltage. When the Early effect parameters are known, 
the current parameters ISS, IKF, IKR, βF, and βR are extracted. 
Typically, forward and reverse Gummel characteristics are used 
as shown in Fig. 12.6. The marked region is used for extraction of 
the saturation current IS from measurement data. Measurement is 

327
performed at zero base–collector voltage. The forward knee current 
IKF is extracted from the β (=Ic/Ib) versus log(Ic) plot as the value of 
Ic when β has dropped to half its peak value (Fig. 12.7).
Collector - Emitter Voltage, VCE (V)
VAF = 28 V
–30	
–25	
–20	
–15	
–10	
–5	
0	
5
5
4
3
2
1
0
Collector Current,  lC (nA)
Figure 12.5  Traditional extraction of Early voltage.
Base - Emitter Voltage, VBE (V)
Extraction of lS
10-3
10-5
10-7
10-9
10-11
10-13
0.2	
0.3	
0.4	 0.5	 0.6	
0.7	 0.8	
0.9	 1.0
Collector Current,  lC (A)
Figure 12.6  Extraction of the saturation current.
	
As an example, for the SPICE parameter extraction of a SiGe HBT, 
using HP-4145B semiconductor parameter analyzer one can obtain 
the device characteristics. From the experimental DC characteristics, 
respective model parameters can be extracted and compared. 
Figures 12.8 and 12.9 (forward Gummel and forward current gain) 
clearly show the drawbacks of the GP model to fit the experimental 
Parameter Extraction Methodology

328
TCAD for SPICE Parameter Extraction
data, whereas the VBIC and HICUM models reliably reproduce the 
same. In Figs. 12.10 and 12.11 (reverse Gummel and the reverse 
current gain), a better fit of the VBIC than the GP model is observed. 
Figures 12.12 and 12.13 explicitly show that GP model is too weak to 
model quasi-saturation, avalanche, and self-heating effects, whereas 
VBIC and HICUM are capable of modeling these effects. A closer 
look reveals that in the forward high-current region HICUM model 
performs better, while the VBIC model is more suitable for both the 
forward and reverse regions of SiGe HBTs. A good fit on both, the 
DC and AC characteristics underline the validity of the extraction 
procedure.
10-6	
10-5	
10-4	
10-3
250
200
150
100
50
0
Collector Current, lC (A)
Forward Knee Current,  lKF
Forward Current Gain, bF
Figure 12.7  Extraction of the forward knee current.
10-1
10-3
10-5
10-7
10-9
10-11
0.0
Ic, Ib (Amp)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Base-Emitter Voltage, Vbe (Volts)
Measured lb, lc
G-P Model
HICUM Model
VBIC Model
Figure 12.8  Forward Gummel plot of a SiGe HBT. After Ref. [2].

329
10-13
100
Forward Gain (Ic/Ib)
101
102
10-11 10-9
10-7
10-5
Collector Current. Ic (Amp)
10-3
10-1
101
103
Measured
G-P Model
HICUM Model
VBIC Model
Figure 12.9  Forward DC current gain of a SiGe HBT. After Ref. [2].
0.4
10-7
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
0.5
Ie and Ib, (Amp)
0.6
Base-Collector Voltage, Vbc (Volts)
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Measured
G-P Model
VBIC Model
Figure 12.10  Reverse Gummel plot of a SiGe HBT. After Ref. [2].
Measured
G-P Model
VBIC Model
10-8
10-6
10-4
Emitter Current, le (Amp)
10-2
100
100
Reverse Gain, (le/lb)
101
102
Figure 12.11  Reverse DC current gain of a SiGe HBT. After Ref. [2].
Parameter Extraction Methodology

330
TCAD for SPICE Parameter Extraction
Collector-Emitter Voltage, Vce (Volts)
0
0.000
0.005
0.010
Colleclor Current, Ic (Amp)
0.015
0.020
1
2
3
4
5
Ib Sweep:25 to 125 uA
Measured
G-P Model
HICUM Model
VBIC Model
Figure 12.12  Forward output characteristics of a SiGe HBT. After Ref. [2].
0.0
-0.0001
0.0001
0.0002
Emitter Current, le (Amp)
0.0003
0.0004
0.0005
0.0006
0.0007
0.0000
0.2
0.4
Emitter-Collector Voltage, Vec (Volts)
0.6
0.8
1.0
Ib Sweep : 9 to 45 uA
Measured
G-P Model
HICUM Model
VBIC Model
Figure 12.13  Reverse output characteristics of a SiGe HBT. After Ref. [2].
12.5  UTMOST
This following example adopted from Silvaco demonstrates the 
extraction of BSIM3 SPICE model parameters from ATHENA 
(process) to ATLAS (device) simulations for an n-type metal–oxide–
semiconductor field-effect transistor (n-MOSFET). Using ATHENA, 
a metal–oxide–semiconductor (MOS) device in a salicide process is 
created and the device structure is interfaced to ATLAS with assigned 
variables to parameterize the structure. ATLAS is used to simulate Id–
Vg–Vbs and Id–Vd–Vgs characteristics. Then UTMOST III is interfaced 
for the extraction of BSIM3 parameter set. In the process simulation 

331
a typical NMOS process flow is used. However, as the salicide process 
(titanium silicide) involves self-aligned silicide on the source, drain, 
and gate, the ATHENA/SILICIDES module is used. For the SPICE 
model extraction it is necessary to extract the gate oxide thickness 
in meter for use in UTMOST. Extract statements are used in process 
simulation to obtain these types of process parameters.
	
UTMOST from Silvaco includes a dedicated built-in BSIM3 
parameter extraction algorithm, which is based on the extraction 
methodology proposed by Berkeley. The UTMOST BSIM3 extraction 
routine can perform both the measurements and the extraction 
sequence necessary for the extraction of an accurate scalable BSIM3 
model. UTMOST supports the acquisition of semiconductor device 
electrical data from a wide range of measurement equipment, and 
the generation of model parameter sets from measured or simulated 
data, via parameter extraction and/or optimization methodologies. 
UTMOST extracts DC, AC, and transient device parameters for a 
very wide range of commercial and proprietary models for MOS, 
BJT, and other devices. The capability of UTMOST to use data from 
physically based simulators such as ATHENA and ATLAS is available 
as a component of Silvaco’s Virtual Wafer Fab. Next, we describe the 
BSIM3 measurements using UTMOST and extraction routine. Using 
this routine UTMOST will be used to extract n-channel scalable 
models to devices with effective channel length of 0.6 μm.
	
Two ATLAS runs are used to parameterize using the set 
statement. The first ATLAS run simulates Id–Vg characteristics at 
three substrate biases. The sequence of solve statements is to first 
save three solutions at each back bias with Vd = 0.1 V and Vg = 0 V.  
The second ATLAS run simulates Id–Vd characteristics at three 
different gate voltages. A similar technique to the first run is used. 
Three solution files are saved at each gate bias with Vd = 0 V. These 
are then loaded in turn and the drain voltage ramped to “vdsmax”.
	
The final stage of the example is to run UTMOST to extract the 
SPICE model. Important information about the structure such as 
gate oxide thickness and gate length is transferred to UTMOST using 
the results of extract statements in the ATHENA simulation. The log 
files from ATLAS are loaded and appended. UTMOST then fits the 
SPICE model to the complete Id–Vg–Vbs and Id–Vd–Vgs data sets. All 
the UTMOST parameters are stored in a file and then extract is used 
to print out the parameters of interest.
UTMOST

332
TCAD for SPICE Parameter Extraction
12.5.1  BSIM3
The BSIM3 extraction algorithm requires measurements from:
 
∑	 A device with a large drawn length and a large drawn width (a 
Large device)
 
∑	 Devices with a large drawn length and different drawn widths 
(W-array devices)
 
∑	 Devices with a large drawn width and a range of drawn lengths 
(L-array devices)
	
The number of devices in the W-array or L-array is user-
definable and UTMOST will accept a minimum or one device in each 
array. For a truly accurate scalable model it is recommended that 
a minimum of two devices exist in the L-array. A total of four sets 
of I–V measurements are necessary for the BSIM3 model parameter 
extractions. These measurement sets are detailed below:
Set 1:  Id–Vg measurements where the gate voltage is swept between 
defined minimum and maximum values. The source voltage is 
grounded and the drain voltage is set to a low value (i.e., 0.1 V). 
The bulk voltage is stepped, in six steps, between 0 V and a defined 
maximum.
Set 2:  Id–Vd measurements where the drain voltage is swept 
between defined minimum and maximum values. The source voltage 
is grounded and the bulk voltage is set to a low value (i.e., 0 V). The 
gate voltage is stepped, in five steps, between defined minimum and 
maximum values.
	
The minimum gate voltage is determined using the threshold 
voltage calculated from the data measured in measurement set 1.
Set 3:  Id–Vg measurements where the gate voltage is swept between 
defined minimum and maximum values. The source voltage is 
grounded and the drain voltage is set to a high value (i.e., 5.0 V). 
The bulk voltage is stepped, in six steps, between 0 V and a defined 
maximum.
Set 4:  Id–Vd measurements where the drain voltage is swept 
between defined minimum and maximum values. The source voltage 
is grounded and the bulk voltage is set to a high value (i.e., –3.0 V). 
The gate voltage is stepped, in five steps, between defined minimum 
and maximum values. The minimum gate voltage is determined 

333
using the threshold voltage calculated from the data measured in 
measurement set 1.
12.5.2  Parameter Extraction
Prior to any parameter extraction the user should specify values for 
some of the so-called BSIM3 elementary parameters like TOX, XJ, 
NPEAK, and NSUB. BSIM3 expert parameters can also be specified. 
The UTMOST BSIM3 extraction algorithm will now be described.
Step 1:  Use the Large device linear region data from data set 1, and 
threshold voltages calculated from this data, to extract VTH0, K1, K2, 
U0 (optional), UA, UB, and UC.
Step 2:  Use the W-array linear region data from data set 1, and 
threshold voltages calculated from this data, to extract K3, DW 
(optional), and W0.
Step 3:  Use the L-array linear region data from data set 1, and 
threshold voltages calculated from this data, to extract NLX, DL 
(optional), DVT0, DVT1, and DVT2.
Step 4:  Use the Large and L-array subthreshold region data from 
data set 1, and subthreshold slopes calculated from this data, to 
extract VOFF, NFACTOR, and CDSC.
Step 5:  Use the L-array and W-array linear region data from data set 
1 to extract RDS0 (optional) and RDSW.
Step 6:  Use the Large and L-array data from data set 2 to extract 
VSAT, A0, A1 (if BULKMOD = 2), and A2 (if BULKMOD = 2).
Step 7:  Use the Large and L-array data from data set 4 to extract 
KETA.
Step 8:  Use the L-array saturation region data from data set 2, and 
the output resistances extracted from this data, to extract PCLM, 
DROUT, PDIBL1, PDIBL2, PSCBE1, and PSCBE2.
Step 9:  Use the L-array subthreshold region data from data set 3 to 
extract ETA0, ETAB, and DSUB.
Step 10:  After the extraction algorithm is completed UTMOST will 
optimize any selected BSIM3 parameters to the saturation region 
output conductance data for the L-array devices.
UTMOST

334
TCAD for SPICE Parameter Extraction
	
Scalable BSIM3 model parameters can easily be extracted with 
UTMOST built-in routine. Extraction examples for n-channel and 
p-channel devices from a 0.6 µm metal–oxide–semiconductor 
(CMOS) process were used to demonstrate the effectiveness of the 
extraction algorithm. The results presented here show how worst-
case SPICE model parameters can be derived by the simulation of 
variations in the CMOS manufacturing process. This whole process 
can be automated as an experiment in Virtual Wafer Fab. Screenshots 
(Figs. 12.14 through 12.22) show the steps to be followed for SPICE 
parameter extraction using UTMOST.
Figure 12.14  Screenshot of BSIM3 SPICE parameter extraction steps using 
UTMOST.

335
Figure 12.15  Screenshot of BSIM3 SPICE parameter extraction steps using 
UTMOST.
Figure 12.16  Screenshot of BSIM3 SPICE parameter extraction steps using 
UTMOST.
UTMOST

336
TCAD for SPICE Parameter Extraction
Figure 12.17  Screenshot of BSIM3 SPICE parameter extraction steps using 
UTMOST.
Figure 12.18  Screenshot of BSIM3 SPICE parameter extraction steps using 
UTMOST.

337
Figure 12.19  Screenshot of BSIM3 SPICE parameter extraction steps using 
UTMOST.
Figure 12.20  Screenshot of BSIM3 SPICE parameter extraction steps using 
UTMOST.
UTMOST

338
TCAD for SPICE Parameter Extraction
Figure 12.21  Screenshot of BSIM3 SPICE parameter extraction steps using 
UTMOST.
Figure 12.22  Screenshot of BSIM3 SPICE parameter extraction steps using 
UTMOST.
12.6  Summary
A compact model is needed substantially earlier in the time frame 
than traditionally available, depending on calibrated physical 

339
simulations for circuit designers. From an accurate process and 
device simulation early in the development cycle, the TCAD 
engineer can create the electrical device characteristics to derive 
a predictive compact model. A methodology for capturing process 
variability in SPICE models has been discussed. This chapter briefly 
reviewed available semiconductor device analyzer equipment, 
parameter extraction software, and methodologies used today for 
SPICE parameter extraction. Application of UTMOST for BSIM3 
measurements and SPICE parameter extraction for MOSFETs has 
been described.
References
	 1.	 Wu, H.-C. (2007). A Scalable Mextram Model for Advanced Bipolar 
Circuit Design, PhD thesis, Technische Universiteit, Delft.
	 2.	 Chakravorty, A. (2005). Compact Modelling of Si-Heterostructure 
Bipolar Transistors and Active Inductor Design for RF Applications, PhD 
thesis, IIT Kharagpur.
References


At present, the design houses and wafer foundry are relatively 
independent of each other, but there is an increasing need for 
coupling and information exchange between the two. Most existing 
ECAD tools do not take into consideration the effects of the process 
variation. Presently, circuit designers perform optimization for 
catastrophic yield at a postsynthesis stage. Technology developers 
and circuit designers are generally separate entities and are very 
loosely linked by a set of physical device layout files and SPICE model 
parameters. This worked well before entering into the nanometer 
era because of the fact that transistor characteristics could be 
modeled unambiguously and statistical variations due to process 
fluctuations only represented a relatively small percentage of the 
nominal characteristics being modeled.
	
With 45 nm processes, it is imperative to develop a systematic 
TCAD-based methodology to design, characterize, and optimize 
manufacturability to increase yield. As the manufacturability of 
a process technology may be evaluated by the process window, 
defined as the area between the lower and upper limits of the critical 
process variables that yields acceptable device performance. The 
transition to 90 nm technology proved to be extremely challenging, 
and it is expected to worsen at 65 nm and 45 nm. Beyond pure CMOS, 
bipolar-based technologies target ever-increasing analog and mixed-
signal IC performance, with a strong impact on parametric yield. 
This trend has spurred the need for innovative advanced process 
control methodologies reliant on an improved understanding of 
Chapter 13
Technology CAD for DFM
Introducing Technology Computer-Aided Design (TCAD): Fundamentals, Simulations, and Applications
C. K. Maiti
Copyright © 2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-51-2 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36450-6 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

342
Technology CAD for DFM
the correlation between process variables and electrical device 
parameters.
	
Microelectronics fabrication is facing serious challenges 
due to the introduction of new materials in manufacturing and 
fundamental limitations of nanoscale devices that result in 
increasing unpredictability in the characteristics of the devices. The 
downscaling of CMOS technologies has brought about the increased 
variability of key parameters affecting the performance of integrated 
circuits. In silicon-based microelectronics, technology computer-
aided design is well established not only in the design phase but also 
in the manufacturing process. Device design procedures are now 
more challenging due to high performance specifications, fast design 
cycles, and high yield requirements. Design for manufacturability 
and statistical design techniques are being employed to meet the 
challenges and difficulties of manufacturing of nanoscale integrated 
circuits in CMOS technologies. The methodology used to implement 
the information transfer from the analysis of process variations to 
the stage of circuit design is discussed in this chapter. In this chapter, 
the issues originating from different sources of process variability 
are discussed and modeling approaches which help to analyze the 
problems are presented. A 2D device simulation model is used to 
demonstrate the potential of the methodology. The process-aware 
SPICE model generated from simulations is presented.
13.1  Process-Aware Design for Manufacturing
The Synopsys Process-Aware Design for Manufacturing (PA-DFM) 
product family addresses the two major sources of variability 
in a design—one arising from stress proximity effects and the 
second from the spread of manufacturing process parameters 
across different die—and utilizes accurate physical models of the 
manufacturing process. The PA-DFM product family core products, 
Seismos, Paramos, and Fammos, enable designers to account 
correctly for manufacturing variability without major changes to the 
current design verification flow.
13.1.1  Seismos
As feature sizes continue to shrink beyond the 22 nm node, 
variability arising from advanced silicon technologies, such as 

343
strain engineering, increasingly affects circuit performance. Stress 
engineering has now become a critical factor in chip designs. As 
stress/strain engineering becomes pervasive for performance 
enhancement of advanced devices, study of the layout dependence 
of device characteristics has become essential. A process-aware 
design-for-manufacturing (DFM) solution is necessary for analyzing 
layout-dependent physical effects in advanced technologies. Seismos 
from Synopsys is a transistor-level design tool for the analysis of 
stress proximity effects in nanometer technologies.
13.1.2  Paramos
Paramos, a process-dependent SPICE Model extraction tool, is 
specifically designed to extract process-dependent SPICE model 
parameters for detailed analysis of circuits with process variations. 
The graphical user interface (GUI) allows users to develop an 
extraction strategy, run the extraction, and load the SPICE model 
card data into PCM Studio for visualization of extraction results.
	
Features:
 
∑	 Provides process-related SPICE parameters for detailed 
analysis of circuits with process variations, thereby closing 
the design for manufacturing (DFM) gap
 
∑	 Creates self-consistent process-dependent compact SPICE 
models with the actual process parameter variations as 
explicit variables
 
∑	 Enables designers to comprehend the impact of manufacturing 
issues on design
 
∑	 Allows designers to simulate the impact of process variability 
(statistical or systematic) on circuit performance for design 
margin improvement or parametric yield sensitivity analysis
 
∑	 Allows process engineers to perform design-specific process 
centering
13.1.3  Fammos
The third product in the PA-DFM family is Fammos, the first special-
purpose technology computer-aided design (TCAD) PA-DFM tool 
that analyzes stress evolution for the entire fabrication process of 
interconnects. Fammos performs 3D backend process simulations 
Process-Aware Design for Manufacturing

344
Technology CAD for DFM
using design database and process recipes. With specialized 
algorithms for fast 3D structure construction, mesh generation, and 
equation solving, Fammos predicts interconnect stress distributions 
from multiple stress sources and accounts for proximity effects. 
It employs a set of physics-based models to evaluate reliability 
failures. Using the Sentaurus Workbench user interface, Fammos 
facilitates technology explorations with parameterized input files 
and scheduled run splits.
	
Features:
 
∑	 Generates 3D structures using design database and process 
steps
 
∑	 Analyzes stress evolution for the entire fabrication process
 
∑	 Accounts for multiple stress sources and proximity effects
 
∑	 Performs technology explorations for yield and reliability 
improvements
13.2  TCAD for Manufacturing
TCAD tools provide detailed physical insight into achieving the 
optimum process performance affecting yield. TCAD represents 
our physical understanding of processes and devices in terms 
of computer models of semiconductor physics. The scope of 
conventional TCAD generally includes front-end process modeling 
and simulation, implant, diffusion, oxidation, numerical device 
modeling and simulation for electrical characteristic simulation, 
topography modeling and simulation, deposition, lithography, and 
etching. Over the last decade, there has been steady progress in 
the development and acceptance of CAD programs for technology 
development—integrated tools for process analysis and device/
circuit design. In extending TCAD into the manufacturing and design 
area, one needs to consider the effects of process variability in the 
circuit design phase. DFM involves yield analysis and statistical 
process control.
	
The Sentaurus TFM suite, which includes PCM Studio and PCM 
Library, provides a powerful environment for capturing multivariate 
process–device–circuit relationships in process compact models 
(PCMs), allowing a fast turnaround for identifying and analyzing 

345
TCAD for Manufacturing
factors that cause parametric yield loss in manufacturing. Derived 
from systematic TCAD simulations, PCMs encapsulate relationships 
between process variations and device circuit performance through 
a set of analytic functions.
	
Process-aware design provides a direct link from process varia-
tion to circuit response and is a methodology that assigns variabil-
ity of individual process and its effects to circuit performance. Two 
main tasks process-aware design needs to perform are (i) to quanti-
fy the parametric variability and link it to a specific origin and (ii) to 
identify a suitable compact model (CM) to link process variation to 
circuit performance. Currently, fabless companies who have limited 
or no control over the process use the design kits. Fabless companies 
are considering the opportunity of changing their business model 
as the process research and development are facing new challenges. 
Process-aware circuit simulation becomes more evident for the fab-
less companies who are isolated from the manufacturing process. 
Process-aware circuit simulation may provide an invaluable tool for 
fabless companies to deliver robust designs.
	
Process variability has become the primary concern with regard 
to manufacturability and yield. With scaled feature dimensions in 
the nanometer range, parametric variations become a dominant 
yield loss component. Reasons for yield loss include random defects 
due to a dominant yield loss mechanism, defects due to inadequate 
or incorrect lithography, and defects due to pattern (or design). As 
device dimensions shrink, the sensitivity of device performance to 
process variation also increases. For complex nanometer designs, 
yield might depend more on design attributes than on total chip 
area.
	
Although the problem of variability is becoming more pronounced 
in advanced technologies, it has always been present and is being 
addressed by the industry following different methodologies. As 
process variations are present, there is usually a distribution of 
values for device characteristics such as saturation current, leakage 
current and threshold voltage. There are different ways to extract 
corner, models and the standard approach is based on electrical 
measurements. However, the standard approach needs a frozen 
process and a large set of measurement data. It is thus not applicable 
in an early stage of process development when stable data are not 
yet available.

346
Technology CAD for DFM
	
The problem in extracting SPICE parameters is the definition of 
the typical (or nominal) device. The main procedure for years has 
been to choose a “golden wafer” from which the parameters are 
extracted. The golden wafer provides all the electrical and process 
in-line measurements close to the nominal value. The variability 
of the process is then accounted for with the generation of corner 
models which represent worst-case models for the technology in 
which a designer should test the circuits for functionality. The use of 
corner models for worst-case testing of a circuit in the design stage 
has several limitations. The main drawback of using corner models 
is that it is not possible to link them to a process step. Corner models 
are essentially being a pass/no pass test and do not provide any 
information to the designer on what to look at in the case of circuit 
failure.
	
The scaling of technology has reached a point at which the 
extremely small dimensions of the devices are becoming a challenge 
for manufacturing. The manufacturing tolerances are becoming a 
challenge for devices and circuits, threatening time to market and 
yield. Information transfer between process and design engineers 
is required for robust designs. With feature sizes approaching 
the nanoscale, unavoidable fluctuations that are intrinsic to the 
manufacturing process are becoming important. Polysilicon/metal 
edge grains, gate oxide thickness and permittivity nonuniformities, 
and photoresist edge roughness are among the major sources of 
fluctuations.
	
Systematic variability arises from process–design interactions, 
proximity effects in lithography, chemical-mechanical polishing, 
and stress-related effects that are position dependent. This kind of 
variability affects transistors in the same die in different ways, but 
the die-to-die impact is the same. Parametric variability includes 
the drift of nominal process conditions such as implantation energy, 
dose and temperature. It affects die-to-die, wafer-to-wafer, and lot-
to-lot device characteristics. Parametric variability causes the mean 
value of transistor parameters to change during time or among 
different chips or different lots.
	
Random variability encompasses all kinds of variation that are 
not properly understood or measured. In particular, it includes 
random fluctuations that are beyond process control possibilities. 
Line edge roughness and random dopant fluctuations belong to this 
category. Moreover, this kind of variability is statistical in nature and 

347
TCAD for Manufacturing
results in average transistor parameters such as threshold voltage, 
saturation, and leakage currents. Process variation sources include:
 
∑	 Wafer: Topography, reflectivity
 
∑	 Reticle: CD error, proximity effects, defects
 
∑	 Stepper: Lens heating, focus, dose, lens aberrations
 
∑	 Etch: Power, pressure, flow rate
 
∑	 Resist: Thickness, refractive index
 
∑	 Develop: Time, temperature, rinse
 
∑	 Environment: Humidity, pressure
	
The traditional approach to manage fluctuations in manufacturing 
has been to limit the variability of individual process step. At 
the design level, corner models are typically used to take process 
variability into account. These models represent the worst cases for 
fabricated devices and are used by designers to test the products 
for functionality in extreme cases, leading to only a go/no-go test. 
Predictive potentials of TCAD depend on process variations which 
get increasingly critical with device downscaling into the nanometer 
range. For example, phenomena such as line edge roughness 
and random dopant fluctuations broaden the device parameter 
distributions, thus requiring statistical analysis.
	
DFM is a technique for addressing the producibility issues early 
in the design cycle, and integrating manufacturing concerns and 
considerations into a design to obtain a more producible product. 
Design for manufacturability consists of three stages: physical design, 
resolution enhancement techniques, and design-driven techniques. 
IC design methodologies typically target nominal designs. However, 
defects and variations in the IC manufacturing process can make 
a circuit behave substantially different from the nominal design. 
Yield is the percentage of manufactured products that meet all 
performance and functionality specifications. Parametric yield loss 
usually refers to the effects on circuit performance caused by process 
variations.
	
DFM techniques counter measures against manufacturing 
difficulties. Different DFM tools address the problems derived 
from variability in the manufacturing process. The most common 
ones address systematic variability caused by manufacturing 
limitations. DFM consists of three categories: physical design, 
resolution enhancement, and design-driven techniques. The first 
two are concerned with how to control and reduce the effect 

348
Technology CAD for DFM
of process, voltage, and temperature variations. Design-level 
considerations for parametric yield, a dominant factor to determine 
the total manufacturing yield, are critical and the statistical design 
methodology needs to be reinforced. Analysis of process variability 
in circuit simulation enables designers to enhance the design 
robustness. The effects that a specific process variation has on 
device variability and on the final circuit performance are the key to 
improve yield. In design, the traditional approach to ensure design 
robustness against variability is represented by corner models that 
lump together all sources of variability.
	
DFM and design for yield require electronic design assistant 
(EDA) tools that fully comprehend the impact of novel technology 
concepts and their influence on the process variability of devices 
and interconnects. A collaborative platform for DFM aims to meet 
this challenge by joining process and circuit simulators as well as 
a set of process characterization experiments that are needed to 
enable quantitative DFM. At the 22 nm node and beyond, process 
variability will increase with feature scaling and the introduction 
of new materials and techniques such as strain engineering. With 
processing costs increasing dramatically for advanced technologies, 
the economic necessity for accurate predictive TCAD is apparent.
13.3  TCAD for DFM
State-of-the-art TCAD tools, which not only provide deeper insight 
into novel devices but also have a high-level predictive power, may 
be used successfully to characterize process variability through 
simulations. TCAD is inexpensive and faster than an experimental 
analysis that requires costly design of experiments (DOE). Moreover, 
using simulation, it is possible to analyze quantities not otherwise 
accessible by measurements. The evaluation of doping profiles 
in very small structures as well as electric fields in an operating 
device is only possible through simulation. In the process-aware 
design exercise using TCAD, device characteristics generated using 
simulation is substituted for the measured data. SPICE models are 
extracted in the usual way from simulated devices to perform circuit 
simulation. In TCAD, it is possible to precisely control parameters 
during simulation that are difficult to access through metrology. 
However, the accuracy TCAD simulation depends on the calibration 
of various models.

349
	
Figure 13.1 shows a typical simulation flow. The starting point is a 
technology process flow which creates the device geometry through 
process simulation and provides the topography and doping profiles 
of the final device. The device under study is remeshed in order to 
refine the areas of interest and eventually the device simulation run 
is performed to provide the device electrical characteristics. The 
simulation-based methodology starts from the analysis of process 
variability to the extraction of a process-aware SPICE (PA-SPICE) 
CMs that may be used in circuit simulation.
Process Flow
Process Information
Process Simulation
Device Simulation
Device
Characterization
Figure 13.1  Typical TCAD simulation flow from process information to device 
characteristics.
	
Figure 13.2 shows the simulation flow from process description 
to final circuit simulation. Two different levels of modeling can be 
distinguished: Process optimization links the process variability to 
the device characteristics, while process-aware design brings the 
information on process variability to the circuit simulation stage 
to optimize the design. Next, the methodology to enable a process-
aware circuit simulation is applied to a generic complementary 
metal–oxide–semiconductor (CMOS) process. The Sentaurus TCAD 
simulation suite may be used to perform all the relevant simulations. 
In Fig. 13.2 the simulation flow is shown. Two different levels 
of modeling are involved: (i) The process optimization links the 
process variability to the device characteristics, and (ii) process-
aware design brings the information on process variability to the 
circuit simulation stage to optimize the design. As the entire space of 
process variables is very wide in a manufacturing process, covering 
entire process variable set is extremely difficult even in simulations. 
TCAD for DFM

350
Technology CAD for DFM
It is therefore necessary to limit the optimization study using the 
DOE to those process parameters that have a major impact on the 
final device, reducing the dimensionality of the input space.
	
The main variables that affect the manufacturing process 
output are found by a screening experiment on the process input 
variables. Screening experiments are inexpensive design used in the 
exploratory phase of a process development to gather information on 
the process step. A sensitivity analysis on the parameter of interest 
is considered. In the deterministic context, sensitivity analysis is 
performed by varying one parameter at a time in a small interval 
around its nominal value, while all others are kept fixed in order to 
determine its impact on the process output. Once the main factors 
affecting a process have been determined, it becomes important 
to study their interaction on the final device characteristics and 
eventually on the circuit.
Process simulation
Device simulation
Device characterization
Process variables
SPICE parameter
Circuit simulation
Circuit performance
Process
Optimization
Device Optimization
Figure 13.2  Simulation flow from process to device to final circuit simulation.
	
A factorial design is planned to achieve this from different 
available possibilities. A full factorial design approach requires the 

351
highest number of experiments as it requires different experiment 
for all combinations. However, if the full factorial approach becomes 
impractical, fractional factorial designs which are subsets of the full 
factorial can be used. The information gathered through factorial 
experiments on the relevant process parameters can be used to 
find the functional relationships between input parameters and 
output characteristics of the process under analysis. The functional 
relationship is then used for process optimization. Response surface 
models (RSMs) are classes of models that are well suited for process 
optimization and are also called PCMs.
	
Once a simulation-based methodology to identify the main 
process parameters affecting device characteristics is developed, it 
is important to bring the information of the process variability to 
the circuit design stage. It is now possible to quantify the impact 
of a process step variation not only on the threshold voltage of 
a single transistor but on the response of the circuit. The use of 
TCAD to extract PCMs to account for variability is demonstrated. 
Process parameters are global parameters that affect the full circuit 
response. It is possible to identify two approaches to process-aware 
analysis of circuit performance. The first approach applies response 
surface modeling directly in the SPICE parameter space. The idea is 
to extract a SPICE model whose parameters are not fixed values, but 
functions of process input factors.
	
The extracted PA-SPICE model is compatible with other SPICE 
simulator tools, which allows the designer to use the process 
parameters in the same way as normal library parameters [1]. The 
main advantage of this methodology is that the PA-SPICE model 
requires a single extraction step. It can be used on different circuits 
to evaluate the sensitivity to process variations. PCMs may also be 
used as a figure of merit of a particular circuit. For example, starting 
from the DOE with n experiments, n SPICE models are extracted each 
reflecting a different process condition. Then the circuit is simulated 
n times using different model cards and the PCM linking the process 
parameters to the circuit responses is built. The circuit response 
PCM can then be used for yield considerations and to analyze process 
windows that meet product specifications. However, the generated 
PCM is applicable only to the circuit from which it was generated.
TCAD for DFM

352
Technology CAD for DFM
13.4  Process Compact Models
At the core, traditional TCAD has only process and device 
simulations; however, the TCAD environment can be extended to 
form a self-contained system, from technology development to 
circuit performance extraction. The traditional role of TCAD has to be 
extended to the advanced high-level approach and fundamental low-
level approach. The high-level approach is required for the tightly 
coupled design and technology development. The advance CM has to 
keep pace with the technology development. A CM provides a link for 
process-device-circuit interdependence from a lower-level model. In 
addition, design for reliability (DFR) and DFM must be included.
	
The methodology used to implement the information transfer 
from the analysis of process variations to the stage of circuit design 
is shown in Fig. 13.3. Sentaurus TCAD tools for process and device 
simulation have been used to design and optimize a typical 45 nm 
CMOS process with double-halo implantation and a combination 
of conventional rapid thermal annealing (RTA) with laser anneal 
for low leakage/threshold voltage and high-gain devices. The high 
dopant activation and low transient-enhanced diffusion (TED) 
aspects of this process are fully captured with Sentaurus Process 
simulation tools. Sentaurus Device is used to simulate DC and AC 
characteristics, and the Sentaurus Workbench tool Inspect is used 
to extract device parameters such as Vt, Ion, Ioff, and radio-frequency 
(RF) parameters. Prior to systematic TCAD simulations, a sensitivity 
analysis is carried to determine the critical process variables and 
suitable ranges for the experimental design. A full-factorial DOE 
is executed and the PCM is extracted. From calibrated TCAD it is 
possible to generate an RSM, and find the optimized 45 nm CMOS 
process. The process is optimized (to select a stable process window) 
with respect to threshold voltage, drive current, and leakage.
	
Toward extended TCAD, in process modeling, generally a 
systematic DOE run is performed. A DOE can be systematically 
set up to study the control over process parameters and an 
arbitrary choice of device performance characteristics. The models 
developed from DOE are known as PCMs, which are analogous to 
CMs for semiconductor devices and circuits. PCMs may be used to 
capture the nonlinear behavior and multiparameter interactions of 
manufacturing processes. SPICE process compact models (SPCMs) 

353
can be considered as an extension of PCMs applied to SPICE 
parameters.
Figure 13.3  Flow diagram for PCM creation and evaluation.
	
By combining calibrated TCAD simulations with a global SPICE 
extraction strategy, it is possible to create self-consistent process-
dependent compact SPICE models, with process parameter variations 
as explicit variables. This methodology brings manufacturing to 
design, so that measurable process variations can be fed into design 
as shown in Fig. 13.3. Next, we discuss a general formulation of the 
device optimization problem that is composed of the selected device 
design parameters and constraints. Thereafter the idea behind 
the yield maximization process is established, and the problem is 
formalized by the yield maximization technique. The full simulation 
steps followed are:
 
∑	 Process simulation setup
 
∑	 Electrical response evaluation (Id–Vg, Id–Vd, C–V, and RF)
 
∑	 Process optimization using a PCM
 
∑	 Sensitivity, DOE, and PCM validation
 
∑	 Analysis using PCM
 
∑	 PCM generation
 
∑	 Manufacturability and yield analysis
	
The process-to-device-simulation setup steps are:
 
∑	 Process simulation (using Ligament and Sentaurus Process)
 
∑	 Mesh generation for the device simulator (using Sentaurus 
Structure Editor)
 
∑	 Device simulation (with Sentaurus Device)
Process Compact Models

354
Technology CAD for DFM
 
∑	 Data analysis and postprocessing (using Inspect and Tecplot)
 
∑	 State-of-the-art polynomial model for PCM creation
	
The model selection steps are:
 
∑	 The three-stream pair diffusion model selected for the 
conventional RTA steps and the five-stream react diffusion 
model for the nonequilibrium of dopant–defect pairs during 
the fast ramp rates
 
∑	 Electrostatic simulations using the hydrodynamic transport 
and density gradient models for electrons and holes
 
∑	 Nonhomogeneous thermal distribution performed with the 
LASER subcommand within the Diffusion section
13.4.1  Process Parameterization
To demonstrate process optimization using PCM Studio, one device 
parameter, for example, threshold voltage, is chosen and the process 
is optimized with respect to Vt. As an example, we optimize the 
device performance by minimizing threshold voltage which mainly 
depends on the following parameters: halo implant dose (Halo_
Dose) and extension implant dose (Ext_Dose), gate length (Lg), 
gate oxide thickness (Gox), and peak temperature for RTA which 
modifies the doping concentration in the channel region, as shown 
in Fig. 13.4. The optimization problem consists of finding the best 
combination of the above parameters that produces the desired 
threshold voltage. The visual optimization procedure allows one 
to put constraints on the input parameters which, however, are 
motivated by the manufacturing considerations.
13.4.2  Process Calibration
Validating the impact of parameter variation on the device responses 
has an important role for the PCM generation. To have an accurate 
PCM it is important to have a numerically stable process flow. This 
is typically performed with local sensitivity analysis, such as one 
parameter is varied, while the others are kept constant. The local 
sensitivity analysis also serves for screening, that is, determining 
which parameters are most important. Sensitivity analysis 
determines the amount of change produced in the model responses 

355
by a local change in a model parameter, usually by computing the 
partial derivatives. Uncertainty analysis uses global sensitivity 
analysis to determine the variances of the responses caused by 
variance in the process parameters. Yield analysis performs an 
uncertainty analysis with constrained responses with estimation of 
“good”/total ratio.
Parameter
Parameter Name %Variation
Gate length
Lg
±30%
Gate oxide
Gox
±20%
Halo implant dose
Halo_Dose
±25%
Extension implant dose
Ext_Dose
±10%
Peak temperature for RTA
RTA
±10%
Figure 13.4  Process and geometry variability and range for optimization [1].
13.4.3  TCAD Validation
TCAD validation steps are:
 
∑	 Smoothness analysis: For an accurate PCM a numerically 
stable process flow is important.
 
∑	 Sensitivity analysis: Parameters are varied one at a time.
 
∑	 Screening: Which parameters are most important is 
determined.
 
∑	 Assessment of nonlinearity: Are polynomial expressions 
sufficient to capture the effects?
13.4.4  PCM Simulation
Many experiments are necessary for good PCM characterization. 
A particular choice of DOE is a trade-off between the value of 
Process Compact Models

356
Technology CAD for DFM
knowledge and the cost of experimentation. Generally a practical 
DOE often targets main effects and their interactions, neglecting 
the influence of higher-order interactions. Figure 13.5 shows a 
normalized histogram plot summarizing the sensitivity analysis for 
the critical process steps. The variation of each output parameter for 
the specified input range is normalized to the maximum value; that 
is, the y axis range is 0 to 1. Normalized process variability is used 
to find out the most important and sensitive process, as shown in  
Fig. 13.5.
Dhalo_Dose
Spike T_LA
Spike T_RTA
Ext_Dose
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
Parametric variation
0.2
0.0
VtiLin
lon
loff
logloff
Figure 13.5  Sensitivity analysis of process variability for a 45 nm MOSFET [1].
	
A very useful way of visualizing and analyzing PCM-generated 
data is the parallel coordinate plot which plots multivariate data 
in a single representation. It is created by mapping coordinates in 
a multidimensional space onto a set of parallel axes, one for each 
input and output parameter. A line connects the corresponding 
coordinates. In particular, the parallel coordinate plot is an ideal 
environment in which to perform a visual optimization. Figure 13.6 
shows the parallel coordinate plot. The process is optimized with 
respect to threshold voltage, saturation current, and Ioff.
	
PCM is used to determine the sensitivity of the process 
parameters visually as shown in Fig. 13.7. The local sensitivity and 
global sensitivity can be determined by adjusting the sliders.
	
The combination of SProcess, SDevice, PCM Studio, and Sentaurus 
Workbench forms a powerful DFM TCAD environment. In this study, 
a total of 1200 experiments were generated. The process and device 
simulation results are subsequently used as the basis for generating 
a PCM, which encapsulates the relationships between input (design) 

357
and output parameters. The PCM automatically correlates design 
parameters to the tolerances. Parallel coordinate plots link the 
simulation results to the design variation. The parameter values and 
ranges indicate whether the domain has been covered sufficiently. 
Figure 13.8 is a parallel coordinate plot that links the simulation 
results to the design optimized with respect to threshold voltage, 
saturation current, and Ioff.
DHalo_Dose
1.75e +13
Ext_Dose
2.1e+15
5.5e+12
1.22e+03
0.206
0.000457 -1.038e-08
3.05e-09
6.08e-09
5e+14
974
Spike T_RTA
1.04e+03
Spike T_LA
1.42e+03
VtiLin
0.352
IdSat
0.000966
Ioff
0.45e-08
Figure 13.6  Parallel coordinate plot. The process is optimized with respect to 
threshold voltage, saturation current, and Ioff [1].
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
DHalo_Dose
1.15e+13
Ext_Dose
3e+11
-3e+11
4e+13
-4e+13
1.3e+15
22
-22
1009
5
-5
1325
SpkeT_RTA
SpkeT_LA
Figure 13.7  Visual sensitivity analysis. The local sensitivity and global 
sensitivity can be determined by adjusting the sliders [1].
Process Compact Models

358
Technology CAD for DFM
DHalo_Dose
1.75e +13
Ext_Dose
2.1e+15
5.5e+12
1.22e+03
0.206
0.000457 -1.038e-08
3.05e-09
6.08e-09
5e+14
974
Spike T_RTA
1.04e+03
Spike T_LA
1.42e+03
VtiLin
0.352
IdSat
0.000966
Ioff
0.45e-08
PCM Analysis (Maximize Vt and Minimize loff)
Figure 13.8  Parallel coordinate plot that links simulation results to the design 
optimized with respect to threshold voltage, saturation current, and Ioff [1].
	
It is observed that several process variants exists for the given 
specification limits of the device target. Thus it is important to find 
the most robust process condition for known process variations 
around each process condition using PCMs so that the stability of 
each process condition can be quantified. Determination of the 
most stable process condition is shown in Fig. 13.9. Marked process 
conditions indicate low sensitivity of the device characteristics 
to the variations in corresponding set of process. Similarly, when 
several process variants exists over a wide-design-limit target, 
it is necessary to sort the process conditions on the basis of their 
sensitivities, taking into account the process variations around each 
condition. Using PCMs, the sensitivity of each process condition can 
be quantified.
	
So far, we only optimized device performance. Let us now add 
aspects of manufacturability, that is, the minimization of the impact 
of parametric variations. We introduce the resulting variance in 
device characteristics as an optimization constraint. Figure 13.10 
shows the device specification limits. Quantification (0–1) of yield is 
shown in Fig. 13.11. The maximum yield for a process condition is 1. 
The DFM/PCM simulation example demonstrates how to optimize a 

359
process and reduce the process development time by reducing the 
number of costly and time-consuming design iterations.
7.04e+12
1.26e+03
0.00046
-1.07e-08
3.23e-05
5.63e-10
-1.2e-18
7.13e+14
0.21
979
DHalo_Dose
1.6e +13
Ext_Dose
1.89e+15
Spike T_RTA
1.04e+03
Spike T_LA
1.39e+03
VtiLin
0.35
IdSat
0.000962
Ioff
4.52e-08
(Variance)VtiLin
7.43e-05
(Variance)loff
5.08e-18
Market process conditions indicate low
sensitivity if the device characteristics to the
variations in corressponding Set of process
(Variance)IdSet
9.57e-10
Figure 13.9  Determination of the most stable process condition [1].
DHalo_Dose
1.51e +13
Ext_Dose
1.78e+15
Spike T_RTA
1.04e+03
Spike T_LA
1.39e+03
VtiLin
0.332
IdSat
0.000902
Ioff
4.13e-08
3.86e-09
6.06e-09
7.88e+12
1.26e+03
0.228
0.00052
-6.8e-09
8.2e+14
981
2.95e-01
3.09e-01
8.08e-04
1.30e+13
1.50e+15
1.02e+03
1.35e+03
6.12e-04
1.00e+13
1.10e+15
9.98e+02
1.30e+03
Figure 13.10  Determination of device specification limits [1].
13.5  Summary
The manufacturing challenges introduced by scaling of semiconduc-
tor technologies require a strengthening of the communication pro-
Summary

360
Technology CAD for DFM
cess between process engineers and designers. This chapter focused 
on problems caused by variability in the manufacturing process, and 
it presented modeling capabilities which help to analyze the prob-
lems and ultimately to counter them by delivering robust designs 
to the foundry. Challenges in DFM, how to incorporate process vari-
ations in the design, and how to identify and characterize the main 
sources of transistor performance variation were discussed.
7.13e+12
1.25e+03
Quantification of yield from 0-1. (1 indicating most yield for a process condition)
0.211
0.000467
-2.78e-17
-1.05e-08
1.59e-01
2.00e-01
7.16e+14
978
DHalo_Dose
1.59e +13
Ext_Dose
1.88e+15
Spike T_RTA
1.04e+03
Spike T_LA
1.4e+03
VtiLin
0.349
IdSat
0.000954
Ioff
4.5e-08
(Yield)Ioff
0.29
3.70e-09
6.25e-09
6.14e-04
8.08e-04
3.09e-01
2.90e-01
1.02e+03
1.35e+03
9.98e+02
1.30e+03
1.30e+13
1.50e+15
1.00e+13
1.10e+15
Figure 13.11  Quantification of yield. 1 indicates the maximum yield for a 
process condition [1].
	
The importance of variability in semiconductor production 
process and the need of a process-aware design approach were 
outlined. TCAD was shown to be an essential source of reliable 
information to quantify the variability in a process compared to 
traditional experimental techniques. We discussed the methodology 
to study the parametric variability of a process and to bring the 
relevant information to the design space.
Reference
	 1.	 Maiti, T. K., private communication.

An integrated circuit (IC) chip design starts with the product 
specification, followed by the front-end and backend designs. IC 
design can be broken down into two categories, digital and analog. 
Mixed-signal design works with both digital and analog signals 
simultaneously. Digital IC design has clearly defined steps and 
procedures to produce circuits. Analog IC design is performed at 
the circuit level and the designs are more complex in nature. An 
analog design engineer needs to possess a strong understanding of 
the principles, concepts, and techniques involved in the electrical, 
physical, and testing methodologies employed in circuit fabrication. 
In general, as the EDA vendors who provide electronic computer-
aided design (ECAD) tools for the design houses and TCAD vendors 
who provide TCAD tools for the manufacturing are separate entities, 
the link between the design house and the manufacturing has so far 
been poor. For the design houses, still the current practice is to rely 
on the manufacturer to provide the model parameters necessary for 
design purposes.
	
The IC CAD framework typically consists of four levels of 
modeling, viz., technology level, device level, circuit level, and system 
level. Technology-level modeling is related to the device structure 
and doping profile and their dependence on process variations, as 
well as the resulting electrical characteristics. Device-level modeling 
is related to the description of transistor terminal characteristics 
Chapter 14
VWF and Online Laboratory
Introducing Technology Computer-Aided Design (TCAD): Fundamentals, Simulations, and Applications
C. K. Maiti
Copyright © 2017 Pan Stanford Publishing Pte. Ltd.
ISBN 978-981-4745-51-2 (Hardcover), 978-1-315-36450-6 (eBook)
www.panstanford.com

362
VWF and Online Laboratory
normally expressed in terms of compact model (SPICE) parameters. 
Circuit-level modeling refers to the solution of large linear/nonlinear 
systems of equations by various matrix solution techniques. System-
level modeling refers to the analysis of the behavioral blocks that 
make up a given system. Traditionally, the above levels of abstraction 
are relatively independent and require different tools.
	
In the design phase, for a given technology node, ECAD tools 
are used to develop (synthesize) the logic design from a high-
level hardware description language (HDL), and the circuit net 
list is extracted from the logic functional description, and then the 
layout is extracted from the circuit- and logic-level descriptions. 
Once a set of masks has been designed, combined with the process 
recipe, it goes for manufacturing in a fabrication facility. Technology 
characterization, device parameter extraction and testing are then 
performed on the fabricated devices/circuits. Conventional IC 
manufacturing thus follows the loop design—manufacturing—
characterization—verification. This loop can be very time consuming 
and costly if a first-time silicon success is not achieved and more so 
if a new technology is needed to be developed using this iterative 
experimentation. It is obvious if virtual wafer fabrication (VWF) 
could be used to supplement the real wafer fabrication (RWF) 
experimentation. VWF can then bridge the gap between the design 
and manufacturing which is becoming increasingly vital in the deep 
submicron GSI era and also between the ECAD and TCAD tool users, 
in general. There is always a need for continuous feedback from 
analog designer that help the circuit designer in the early stages 
of the design. VWF provides TCAD services to device researchers, 
technology developers, and circuit designers.
	
Technology developers and circuit designers are generally 
separate entities and are very loosely linked by a set of physical 
device layout files and SPICE model parameters. This worked well 
before entering into the nanometer era, due to the fact that transistor 
characteristics could be modeled unambiguously and statistical 
variations due to process fluctuations only represented a relatively 
small percentage of the nominal characteristics being modeled.
	
In general, as the EDA vendors who provide ECAD tools for the 
design houses and TCAD vendors who provide TCAD tools for the 
manufacturing are separate entities, the link between the design 
house and the manufacturing has so far been poor. For the design 

363
houses, still the current practice is to rely on the manufacturer to 
provide the model parameters necessary for design purposes.
	
Current trends place demands for new design methodologies as 
well as new design tools. An advanced TCAD framework should have 
the following capabilities:
 
∑	 Developing new process technology for device design and 
optimization
 
∑	 Calibrating the process for a technology node so that the 
developed models can be used in the new process
 
∑	 Providing process windows for given device performance 
targets through design of experiments (DOE) for the final 
optimal design
 
∑	 Providing a first-order approximation on device performance 
in relation to process variables
 
∑	 Extracting circuit performance from virtual wafer experiments
	
This means that the transistor structure and processing 
information need to be considered in the early stage of a design before 
it is fabricated. SPICE parameters can be extracted from the virtual 
device I–V characteristics. The SPICE parameters can be obtained 
through parameter extraction on the basis of the simulated electrical 
characteristics obtained through technology characterization. VWF 
is a collection of several software modules, each responsible for part 
of a device simulation. VWF is a feature-rich tool for performing 
DOE and optimization experiments seamlessly which integrates 
Silvaco simulators and postprocessing tools into one graphical user 
interface (GUI). The four principal components are as follows:
 
∑	 DeckBuild provides a “home base” for the user to load 
examples or define code used to fabricate and simulate 
devices.
 
∑	 ATHENA carries out simulation of the device fabrication. 
ATHENA performs various processing steps such as oxidation, 
material deposition, diffusion, and etching.
 
∑	 ATLAS is responsible for device simulation (basically 
performs the device electrical characterization). The user 
specifies terminal voltages, for example, and ATLAS generates 
current–voltage characteristics, and displays equipotential 
lines, electric field lines, and charge carrier concentrations 
(among various other possibilities).
VWF and Online Laboratory

364
VWF and Online Laboratory
	
∑	 TonyPlot performs the plotting of the results of the 
simulations.
	
Silvaco VWF interactive tools provide a versatile environment 
for using semiconductor TCAD tools (Fig. 14.1). VWF tasks are 
performed by physically based process and device simulators which 
are available in the interactive tool environment. VWF is comprised 
of three basic component sets such as, core tools, interactive tools 
and automation tools. Core tools simulate either a semiconductor 
device being processed or a semiconductor device being tested 
electrically. A DOE is performed to determine a response based on 
differing inputs. For example, the transistor electrical characteristics 
are closely coupled with the doping profiles and layer structures, 
and very often, trade-off must be taken for different design targets. 
For modeling a diffusion process, one may wish to vary the effects of 
implant dose, screening oxide thickness, drive-in temperature, and 
drive-in time to see the effects on the implanted dopant profile.
Figure 14.1  Flow diagram for Silvaco VWF.
	
The VWF interactive tools are designed to be used interactively 
in the construction of a single input deck. GUI based, they make the 
job of constructing an input deck more efficient. The interactive tools 
may be used either in conjunction with a set of files or as integral 
components of the surrounding VWF automation tools. The VWF 
automation tools enable a user to perform large scale experimental 
studies to create results for subsequent statistical analysis. Next, we 
present Silvaco Virtual Wafer Fabrication (VFW) as an example.

365
VWF and Online Laboratory
	
Silvaco VFW has two modes of operation, database mode and file 
mode. In order to demonstrate the DOE, one may import an existing 
Silvaco example deck that can be used. A simple diffusion example 
ATHENA diffusion called andfex01.in is used for the DOE, as shown 
in Fig. 14.2. One needs to make some of the constants defined in the 
deck into variables such as dose, energy, time, and temperature as 
variables, as shown in Fig. 14.3. The extracted variable in this case 
study is junction depth, “xj.”
Figure 14.2  Silvaco VWF import deck selection window. After Ref. [1].
Figure 14.3  Silvaco VWF variables defined in the deck. After Ref. [1].

366
VWF and Online Laboratory
	
One can verify the status of design by clicking on the tab marked 
tree. Initially, it will only have five steps, as shown in Fig. 14.4. By 
selecting Edit and then Design from the top menu, one can enter the 
experiment design window. Figure 14.5 shows a filled-out example 
set of settings for the experiment being designed. The final tree view 
should now look like what is shown in Fig. 14.6.
Figure 14.4  Silvaco VWF initial tree layout. After Ref. [1].
Figure 14.5  Silvaco VWF experiment design window. After Ref. [1].

367
VWF and Online Laboratory
Figure 14.6  Silvaco VWF final tree layout. After Ref. [1].
	
Once the simulations have run, there is couple of ways to verify 
the output. One can select any of the bottom squares to look at a 
plot of the data. Otherwise, the easiest way is to export the data to a 
program called Spayn. Select tools and then Spayn needs to have the 
data exported to Spayn after clicking OK on the next dialog window. 
Figure 14.7 shows the data that was exported to Spayn. One can 
use the tools built into the program to produce other graphs and do 
statistical analysis. It is to export the data to a comma delimited file 
for easy import into Microsoft Excel.
Figure 14.7  Silvaco VWF data exported to Spayn. After Ref. [1].

368
VWF and Online Laboratory
14.1  Internet-Based TCAD Laboratory
Although the technology computer-aided design (TCAD) and 
electronic computer-aided design (ECAD) approaches to device 
design, technology development and very-large-scale integration 
(VLSI) circuit design are becoming popular, these are mainly 
restricted to R&D groups and semiconductor companies, and there 
is a barrier for the general CAD tool users since use of these CAD 
tools requires advanced knowledge of process, device physics 
and design. It is well known that laboratory experimentations are 
indispensable in engineering education, which however, traditionally 
been considered impractical for distance education. Hands-on 
experiments form a large portion of engineering education especially 
the undergraduate and postgraduate studies. Traditionally, these 
have been confined to hands-on proximal (face-to-face) experiments 
that require extensive resources including laboratory space and 
supervision. Creating new microelectronics curricula is a challenge. 
The creation of new curricula requires:
 
∑	 Significant time and effort to develop a large number of 
needed subjects, which must include all the necessary 
materials—lectures, laboratories, subject projects, homework, 
examinations, etc.
 
∑	 Expert knowledge of new design challenges and advanced 
integrated circuit (IC) design techniques.
 
∑	 Experience in using best-in-class electronic design assistant 
(EDA) tools in the designs of contemporary ICs and their 
components.
 
∑	 Development of educational design kits (EDKs) and process 
design kits (PDKs) which must correspond to real technologies 
to reflect their specific attributes, available with little to no 
restriction to universities.
 
∑	 Comprehensible presentation to enable students to easily 	
master the capabilities of contemporary methods of IC design 
and their solution methods.
	
A new conceptual framework for teaching technology and 
device design is necessary which will allow the student and teacher 
to interact more in the learning process by doing things in a new 
way—hands-on learning—by means of simulation. All aspects of 
technology cross sections can be illustrated by using the TCAD in 

369
process/device analysis and design. The importance is the fact 
that these simulations are immediately available to the teacher 
and student to rerun and hence explore the multidimensional 
space of physics and device design. Given a reasonable junior-level 
device/process course, this new methodology will provide the 
opportunity to initiate a strong interactive simulation environment 
for both experimenting with physics and technology. There is unique 
opportunity for students to embark on real device/technology 
design and independent study.
	
The Internet is an ideal medium for disseminating educational 
material to students and remote instruction purposes. With 
the globalization of education and the advancement of Internet 
technology, there has been a continuous move toward using more 
online resources in engineering education. The globalization of 
education has imposed extra pressure on courses with hands-on 
laboratory classes, which usually require the student’s physical 
presence. Due to recent technological advances in computer 
technology and software, it is now feasible to implement more 
advanced and efficient, highly interactive, and very user-friendly 
systems without using very costly custom-written software and 
tools. One of the emerging uses of the Internet in engineering is to 
make the laboratory facilities available to the wider community.
	
Currents advancements in the computer and software technology 
are changing the roles of teachers and students. It is clear that the 
computer based educational technology has reached the point, 
specifically in the area of engineering education, where many major 
improvements have been made, such as significant cost reductions 
by possible replacement of the existing lecture-based courses, and 
the virtual instruments (VIs) may provide a highly interactive user 
interface and advanced analysis facilities that are not deliverable in 
the conventional methods. The challenges are:
 
∑	 Providing engineering students with real world relevant 
laboratory experimentation
 
∑	 How to actively engage students in nano- and microelectronic 
experimentation to gain a clear understanding
	
The literature in engineering education research suggests that 
a cohesive series of laboratory exercises improves the learning and 
retention of the material presented in a laboratory course. Currently, 
Internet-Based TCAD Laboratory

370
VWF and Online Laboratory
in most final-year undergraduate and virtually all master programs 
there are courses on device physics and processing technology 
(frequently as one single course) based on standard text books on 
metal–oxide–semiconductor (MOS) and bipolar device physics. 
There is a very strong connection to the device modeling area and 
typical process technology. For simulation, the students generally 
use device simulator (BIPOLE) or process simulator (SUPREM) or 
circuit simulator (SPICE) with probably no interactions between the 
process/technology and device parameters. In the attempt to cope 
with the increasing demand from distant students to have access to 
higher education in the field of engineering technology, universities 
worldwide have initiated activities to offer Internet-based laboratory 
educational programs. A great effort has been put in establishing 
a number of technologically and pedagogically advanced remote 
laboratory (RL) exercises. Some achievements in the development 
and use of such laboratories are presented below.
	
Recent advancements in the Internet, World Wide Web (WWW) 
technology, 
and 
computer-controlled 
instrumentation 
allow 
Internet-based techniques to be used for setting up RLs. Internet-
based RLs are currently being used for experimental demonstrations 
to enhance classroom lectures, assignments, and homework in 
regular courses, and for laboratory experiments. For extending 
microelectronics education, attempts have been made to develop 
Internet-based device characterization laboratories.
	
Advantages of online laboratories are:
Currently many academic institutions offer a variety of web-based 
experimentation environments, the so-called RLs that support remotely 
controlled physical experiments. RL environment is a complete self-
contained environment, which allows users to perform laboratory 
experiments for online distance learning programs. It is a creative step 
that bridges the gap between software simulation and the real physical 
laboratory experience. These new tools enable universities to provide 
students with free experimental resources without a substantial 
increase in laboratory cost. A review on RLs reveals the existence of 
RLs designed for teaching in different engineering fields throughout 
the world, being electronics, robotics, automation, physics, the fields 
that contain the largest amount of developments of RLs. In the majority 
of cases, the remotely accessible online laboratories reported in the 

371
literature are dispersed around the world and represent stand-alone 
systems.
	
The design of remote hardware-based laboratory experiments 
and their web implementation present different levels of complexity 
depending on the nature of the experiment and equipment necessary 
for running the experiment. For example, the development of a fully 
remote-controlled laboratory module (consisting of 15 experiments, 
say) experience goes well beyond the design and implementation 
of a single experiment. Classification and selection of experiments 
(e.g., a short- or a long-duration experiment) itself is a big issue 
in developing the experiment module. The design of experiments 
(DOE) must be pedagogically sound to ensure that students achieve 
the same level of performance (and experience) with respect to 
the learning outcomes as would be expected from a conventional 
laboratory. Thus the development of an RL module goes well beyond 
the design of the experimental apparatus and support software. RLs 
may be offered in three forms:
Hardware-based RLs provide students with web access to actual 
equipment. Physical RLs require space for equipment but less than 
hands-on laboratories, and they also use the real data acquired from 
equipment over the Internet.
Remote virtual laboratories (VLs) offer model simulation which 
needs minimum investment. Moreover, students can easily repeat 
experiments with the same process and results for analysis, although 
the experimental data may not be available.
Hybrid RLs combine both hardware-based experiments and 
remote simulation. Students can choose remote simulation or 
remote physical equipment-based experiments. This helps also 
possible comparison between the simulation results from the 
virtual simulation and the experimental data/results from physical 
equipment for the same experiment.
	
This new trend places demands for new design methodologies as 
well as new design tools. An advanced TCAD framework should have 
the following capabilities:
 
∑	 Developing new process technology for device design and 
optimization
Internet-Based TCAD Laboratory

372
VWF and Online Laboratory
 
∑	 Calibrating the process for a technology node so that the 
developed models can be used in the new process
 
∑	 Providing process windows for given device performance 
targets through DOE for the final optimal design
 
∑	 Providing a first-order approximation on device performance 
in relation to process variables
 
∑	 Extracting circuit performance from virtual wafer experiments
	
In several chapters we have discussed on process and device 
simulation, hardware-based device characterization, and SPICE 
parameter extraction. Next, we describe an Internet-based integrated 
RL system which can be used for laboratory microelectronics 
education purposes. Briefly, virtual wafer fabrication (VWF) 
(described in the first part in this chapter) can now be realized 
with remote Internet-based hardware- and simulation-based 
laboratories. Here, we describe two laboratories:
 
∑	 The Microelectronics and VLSI Engineering Laboratory (MVL) 
is a hardware-based remote microelectronics laboratory for 
device characterization.
 
∑	 The Technology CAD (TCAD) Laboratory is a simulation-
based laboratory dedicated for semiconductor device SPICE 
parameter extraction.
	
TCAD is a specialized field that deals with the design and 
simulation of microelectronic processes and devices. In the field 
of semiconductor TCAD, at present there is rarely any RL for 
educational purposes. It is also possible to integrate the above 
laboratory modules into a single online laboratory system so that 
the students can perform both the measurements and simulations, 
compare the experimental results with simulation and then extract 
SPICE parameters sequentially. The integrated online laboratory 
system will allow students to perform experiment at any time and 
from anywhere using a Java-enabled web browser through the 
Internet. As an educational tool, the laboratory platform will enable 
students and educators, who do not have access to conventional 
laboratories, to complement their theoretical knowledge by carrying 
out experiments and simulations remotely.
	
Microelectronics is a required core course in nearly every 
electrical and computer engineering curriculum. Electrical and 

373
computer engineers need a solid understanding of how to analyze 
and design circuits containing microelectronic devices (op amps, 
diodes and transistors). Although many of the concepts are not 
extremely difficult to visualize, the content is rich in design and 
associated trade-offs. Many of the trade-offs are complex due to the 
nonlinear nature of the active devices used. Integrating simulations 
and experiments is a powerful way to learn about a device. Students 
can compare measurements from real devices with predictions 
derived from the models they learn in class. By doing this, they gain a 
better understanding of the conditions under which these idealized 
models are applicable and where the models fail.
	
To meet the expanding needs for micro- and nanotechnology, 
new education programs and course modules must be developed 
and delivered to students at all levels. Due to the high cost of a 
microelectronic fabrication laboratory, teaching microelectronic 
circuit fabrication is very much driven by the availability of 
resources. Since 2009, efforts have been made to develop integrated 
microelectronics device characterization, parameter extraction and 
device/circuit simulation laboratory, a new online laboratory system 
that may significantly enhance the microelectronics laboratory 
education. MVL has been developed using high-end equipment. The 
simulation-based TCAD laboratory has been developed for the SPICE 
parameter extraction of semiconductor devices. The main focus 
of this work has been how to build low-cost RL experiments with 
the minimum hardware and software still maintaining satisfactory 
quality of the online experiments. Important issues such as, the 
development of an RL module consisting of several experiments, 
management of experiments, quality of service, security, safety 
and the operation of the equipment have been addressed in detail. 
In the first part, the focus has been placed on hardware-based 
RL experiments and their integration into a hybrid (both the 
measurement and simulation based) RL.
	
Different types of remote electronic laboratories are being 
made available via the Internet over the last few years. Design 
of online learning environment requires various elements to 
deliver instruction, facilitate interaction and to enhance the 
quality of learning. In the design phase one needs to decide on the 
Internet-Based TCAD Laboratory

374
VWF and Online Laboratory
target requirements and at the development of the technical and 
pedagogical solutions for the RLs. The fundamental objectives of 
engineering instructional laboratories are as follows:
 
∑	 Appropriate instrumentation and/or software tools to make 
measurements of physical quantities.
 
∑	 Appropriate 
experimental 
approach, 
specification 
of 
appropriate equipment and procedures, implementation of 
the procedures, and interpretation of the resulting data.
 
∑	 Demonstration of appropriate levels of independent thought, 
creativity, and capability in real world problem solving.
 
∑	 Identify issues related to equipment, experimental procedures 
and activities.
 
∑	 Effective communication about laboratory work with teachers 
and students for comprehensive technical and laboratory 
reports.
	
Electronic/electrical measurement-based experiments may be 
conducted using different technologies. However, used technique 
could be unique to that experiment and also in the tools used to 
publish them over the Internet. Java is commonly used to provide 
a good base for Internet functionality and standardization across 
different computer hardware and operating systems (OSs). Choosing 
the best technology for remote-controlled laboratories development 
is dependent on several criteria such as, the current status of the 
technology, the development time, and the system independency 
of the user in terms of the OS and Internet browser as well as 
other necessary installations. Also the design and operation of the 
experiments are topic/domain dependent. Different tools are now 
available like, National Instruments (NI) LabVIEW (Laboratory 
Virtual Instrument Engineering Workbench) to publish the 
developed environment in the web. To minimize special purpose 
hardware and software investment, our system has been developed 
around LabVIEW software and NI hardware. LabVIEW program is 
one of the high level programming languages that is preferred in this 
study to perform VL applications. LabVIEW software provides an 
active and controllable interface for test, measurement, instrument 
control, data processing, and data analysis applications. Virtual 
instrumentation is a new technology paradigm which leverages all 

375
the continuing advancements in processor/PC technologies, bus 
standards, and Internet-based communication, software standards, 
protocols, and all application and network connectivity features. VIs 
are developed using LabVIEW to display process variables, set control 
parameters, and indicate the outcome. HP-VEE and other popular 
programming environments may also be used for VI development. 
Laboratory developers can either deploy the instrument through 
an online laboratory management system or develop their own 
management system using the package.
	
The first task after deciding on a computer one needs to do 
when setting up a cluster is to install an OS. Many considerations 
need to be made to arrive at an answer as to which OS is the best 
for the environment. Obviously, the most important consideration is 
whether or not the target application is supported under the OS in 
question. Sometimes the application is only supported under one OS 
and the choice is then unnecessary. When working with applications 
for the microelectronic industry, the choice will be between 
Microsoft Windows and at least one UNIX-based OS. Looking at 
the platform support from Silvaco is a fair example since it will be 
one of the software vendors utilized in the final design. There are 
numerous choices when it comes to purchasing hardware, which can 
be a daunting task for those who aren’t familiar with the landscape. 
Hardware vendor flexibility should always be a major consideration 
in any of these decisions, especially in the storage arena. 
	
To create a remote experiment, firstly we need implementation 
of local instrument control, and secondly we need implementation 
of remote instrument control through the Internet. To implement 
remote instrument control, interface architecture between the 
WWW server and LabVIEW is developed. Common Gateway Interface 
(CGI) and Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) are two major tools 
for communication between users and the WWW server, and the 
WWW server and the program running in other machines. Interface 
software has been developed for remote instrument control. After 
implementation of remote instrument control, one can set up the 
RL by designing the experiment content, such as user interface of 
the RL and instructions. The user follows the instructions to conduct 
the remote experiment. The system does not allow users to create 
Internet-Based TCAD Laboratory

376
VWF and Online Laboratory
the experiment by them and conduct it, the user can perform only 
available experiments. The major steps for remote online laboratory 
development involve:
	
1.	 Design the experiment.
	
2.	 Remotely control and operate the instruments.
	
3.	 Convert to web applications.
	
4.	 Launch the experiments on the Internet.
	
A modular online RL will typically consist of 10–12 hardware-
based experiments which need to be made available always to 
students. As one particular experiment can be performed at a 
time by an individual student or a group of students (in case of 
collaborative learning) which require a careful scheduling of the 
experiments. Thus, for proper implementation and management of 
online laboratory system an efficient laboratory management system 
is essential. Administrative interface and database management 
should include the following:
	
Details of VL system operating specifications:
 
∑	 Measurement, monitoring, and control interface
 
∑	 Local operator interface and control of experimental setup
 
∑	 Web server configuration
 
∑	 System architecture for sharing RLs in campus and beyond
 
∑	 DOE
	
Before the laboratory session:
 
∑	 The experiment (timetable, students’ list, equipment)
	
During the laboratory session:
 
∑	 The experiment (operation and control of equipment)
 
∑	 Batch experiments versus interactive experiments
 
∑	 Time scheduling
	
After the laboratory session:
 
∑	 The experiment (laboratory report preparation, submission)
 
∑	 Student feedback
 
∑	 Automation of student performance evaluation
 
∑	 Evaluation and grading
 
∑	 Laboratory grade sheet preparation/publishing

377
	
All movements (moving a physical equipment or making 
connections) in the conventional laboratory are done manually by the 
technical personnel. Some experiments in an electronics laboratory 
often require change in experimental setup which is accomplished 
in a conventional laboratory by the technical personnel. Robots can 
be programmed to perform tasks, such as, move forward and/or 
reverse. The development of robot assisted laboratories remotely 
accessible through the Internet is a rather complex task as it involves 
expertise from multiple disciplines such as remote operation of 
robotics, intelligent control, human–computer interaction and web-
based intelligent programming.
14.2  Microelectronics and VLSI Engineering 
Laboratory Module
Measurements are fundamental to an understanding of any 
semiconductor device. Toward teaching device design and 
developing concepts, an online RL for characterizing microelectronic 
devices is described. Through a Java-enabled web browser, users 
from all over the world can run experiments on real transistors, 
diodes, and other devices by means of a semiconductor parameter 
analyzer Agilent 4145B or 4156C. The interface is simple and the 
result of the experiment is the voltage-current characteristic graph 
of the requested device. The tests are made in real time; the results 
shown are given as graphics and as tables and can be reviewed by 
the user at any time. Figure 14.8a shows the home page of the MVL 
module. The list of available experiments is also shown in Fig. 14.8b.
	
Optical microscopy and atomic force microscopy (AFM) are 
used extensively in physics, microelectronics, biotechnology, 
pharmaceutical research, mineralogy and microbiology. An optical 
microscope, often referred to as a light microscope, is a type of 
microscope which uses visible light and a system of lenses to 
magnify images of small samples. Though there has been significant 
progress in developing real-time microscopy and radiological image 
sharing over the Internet, this has not been extended to the domain 
of education. A remote optical microscope experimental setup is 
shown in Fig. 14.9.
Microelectronics and VLSI Engineering Laboratory Module

378
VWF and Online Laboratory
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.8  (a) Home page of the Microelectronics and VLSI Engineering 
Laboratory module. (b) List of available nano- and microelectronic experiments.
	
One can engineer an optical microscope which is operated via 
the Internet using most of the Internet and networking capable 
equipment, including laptops and desktop computers. The system 
offers a user the ability to conduct visual inspection of samples, 
microelectronic devices and manipulation experiments in the field 
of biology. The remote-controlled microscope is programmed to 
perform acquisition of images. The instrument is used to perform 
thin-film characterization experiments in a microelectronics 

379
laboratory. The server operates the microscope via the following 
steps:
	
1.	 Start the camera and obtain a picture.
	
2.	 Save the picture.
	
3.	 Prepare a histogram and send the data to the server.
	
4.	 Store the image in a folder on the web server.
Figure 14.9  Remote optical microscope experiment setup: general 
configuration.
	
All the commands to operate and gather the data from the 
microscope is stored as a LabVIEW program. The program itself is 
hosted as a web services. This gives flexibility of access from different 
platforms. When the client calls a web service, the program is run 
and the data is returned. The histogram of the image is displayed 
along with the image is shown in Fig. 14.10. Apart from viewing the 
user can save and image on the server or download the image in the 
remote PC.
	
Design and implementation of a cost-effective atomic force 
microscope for remote online nanotechnology laboratory is 
described below. Based on a commercially available low-cost 
atomic force microscope (Model EasyScan2) and the NI LabVIEW 
graphical programming environment, we have developed the 
remote-controlled measurement system. The AFM characterization 
experiment is developed using NI LabVIEW which provides 
intuitive developing interface with the possibility of developing GUI 
applications. COM Automation interface of the EasyScan2 software 
has been used in our application. The EasyScan2 control software 
Microelectronics and VLSI Engineering Laboratory Module

380
VWF and Online Laboratory
offers an interface where the user can automate a measurement 
task by writing a script which defines the task. The script objects 
specifically developed for the experiment access the online atomic 
force microscope which controls the scan range or feedback set 
point. The experiment takes a long time (typically 20 minutes) to 
complete the scan. It scans over a fixed area (1 μm ¥ 1 μm) and the 
following information is collected:
 
∑	 The image size
 
∑	 The number of lines
 
∑	 The number of points per lines
 
∑	 The maximum amount of time in seconds to spend on a line
 
∑	 The autoreset parameter in Boolean
	
All these inputs amount to a few bytes of data and can be sent as 
GET parameter to the web service.
Figure 14.10  Histogram of the image displayed on the user’s PC.
	
The experiment (scanned image of the surface of a thin film) 
yields data in several megabytes (see Fig. 14.11) and also it gets 
delayed during transfer to the user PC. Thus, the data has to be 
saved on the server PC itself for the user to fetch the data at a later 
time. The output of the experiment (an image) needs to be displayed 
as an image on the user PC. The image is reconstructed in 2D and 
enhanced by contrast stretching. It is kept in grayscale to minimize 
hard disk space consumption (see Fig. 14.12).

381
Figure 14.11  Scanned image of the surface of a thin film.
Figure 14.12  Scanned image of the surface of a thin film now reconstructed in 
2D and enhanced by contrast stretching.
14.2.1  Integrated Technology CAD Laboratory
With the current maturity of TCAD tools, real wafer fabrication 
(RWF) can be emulated by process simulation from which realistic 
device structures can be generated; and the transistor performance 
can be characterized through device simulation with reasonable 
accuracy. At the heart of microelectronic engineering, one needs to 
be able to produce a device via some process, capture those steps 
into a concise computer model, and then run simulations to improve 
upon the design. VWF has become an integral part of semiconductor 
fabrication. For manpower training (both via lectures and simulation 
laboratory), several advanced educational institutions in the West 
Microelectronics and VLSI Engineering Laboratory Module

382
VWF and Online Laboratory
have recently introduced courses on TCAD in their curricula. With 
the introduction of TCAD for microelectronic fabrication, it is 
imperative now that the teaching institutions in India introduce a 
new course/laboratory on TCAD for teaching [1].
	
Currently, no educational institution in India offers TCAD 
courses/laboratories due to nonavailability of such laboratories. 
Next, an integrated measurement-based MVL with a simulation-
based TCAD laboratory is described. The main aim is to create 
infrastructure for a state-of-the-art TCAD laboratory online. As 
described in the MVL, the students perform real measurements on 
a wide variety of devices. The measured experimental data (device 
characteristics) can then be passed on to the simulation-based TCAD 
laboratory for the extraction of SPICE parameters. The home page of 
the integrated TCAD laboratory is shown in Fig. 14.13.
Figure 
14.13  Home 
page 
of 
the 
integrated 
measurement-based 
Microelectronics and VLSI Engineering Laboratory with a simulation-based 
TCAD laboratory.
	
The transistor electrical characteristics are closely coupled with 
the doping profiles and layer structures, and very often, a trade-off 
must be taken for different design targets. The TCAD laboratory 
has been designed for developing two levels of knowledge: the 
definition/implementation of the simulation script (input file) and 
the analysis/understanding of the results. The current version of the 
laboratory module has the following sessions:

383
 
∑	 Session 1: The process simulator SUPREM is introduced. The 
student simulate step-by-step a bipolar transistor. During 
this session, the doping profiles are investigated after each 
process step.
 
∑	 Session 2: The device simulator BIPOLE is introduced. In this 
session the students compute the output characteristics of the 
bipolar transistor for several process parameters.
 
∑	 Session 3: The student uses the SUPREM to design a process 
flow for a transistor. The students test the process flow by 
simulating it and extracting the doping profiles.
 
∑	 Session 4: With the device simulator BIPOLE, the students 
compute the output and Gummel characteristics of the BJT 
for several process parameters. The electrical characteristics 
are used to obtain the compact model of the transistor. The 
student extracts Gummel-Poon model parameters from TCAD 
device simulations.
	
In this section, we describe the outcomes for some of the above 
tasks:
	
Process simulation is used during technology development to 
refine a process recipe, and during technology characterization to 
model the input structure for device simulation. Figure 14.14 shows 
the process simulation page using SUPREM. Modeling of processes 
provides a way for the student to interactively explore the fabrication 
process, study the effects of process choices, in a word, participate in 
the activity of a VFW “factory.”
	
In the field of microelectronics, a device simulator is an 
important engineering tool with tremendous educational value. 
With a device simulator, a student can examine the characteristics 
of a microelectronic device described by a particular model. This 
makes it easier to develop an intuition for the general behavior of 
that device and examine the impact of particular device parameters 
on device characteristics. A device simulator lets students explore 
device behavior in regimes that would otherwise be infeasible or 
unsafe to examine. Device simulation is used to obtain simulated 
electrical measurements of a device, largely for technology 
characterization. Figure 14.15 shows the device simulation page for 
a bipolar transistor using BIPOLE device simulator.
Microelectronics and VLSI Engineering Laboratory Module

384
VWF and Online Laboratory
Figure 14.14  Process simulation page.
Figure 14.15  Device simulation page.

385
	
Measurement is the final arbiter for any semiconductor 
simulation module. The developed TCAD laboratory includes 
several types of measurement systems as has been described in the 
hardware-based RL. Figure 14.16 shows the device characterization 
(output characteristics) page for a bipolar transistor measured 
using Agilent 4156C device parameter analyzer. The measured 
experimental data is then passed on to the simulation-based TCAD 
laboratory for extraction of SPICE parameters. Figure 14.16 also 
shows the extracted SPICE parameters.
Figure 14.16  Device characterization using Agilent 4156C and SPICE parameter 
extraction.
14.3  SPICE Parameter Extraction
The highest level in the proposed TCAD laboratory module is the 
SPICE parameter extraction. The main link between circuit-level 
simulation and lower-level TCAD tasks is through the compact models 
used in circuit simulators to characterize the behavior of individual 
circuit components. Simulators have tremendous educational value. 
With a device simulator, a student can examine how the device 
SPICE Parameter Extraction

386
VWF and Online Laboratory
described by a particular model behaves when presented with 
various inputs. Although this exploration can be done with a real 
device, the appropriate equipment is often prohibitively expensive. 
These models are fitted to the data produced from process and device 
simulation, providing circuit designers with a CAD environment that 
accurately characterizes the manufacturing lines that will make 
the circuits. In the TCAD laboratory, the exercises are designed 
to expose the students to experimentation with real devices and 
extraction of SPICE parameters. Ordinarily, students are unable to 
practice these skills in conventional device simulation laboratory. In 
the online TCAD laboratory described above, a simulation program, 
Web-based Tool for Electronic Model Automation (WEBTEMA), is 
used for the extraction of SPICE parameters (WEBTEMA, 2010). The 
software is an EDA tool for automated SPICE modeling of advanced 
semiconductor devices.
	
The complete set of semiconductor dc parameters can be 
quickly and accurately evaluated with Agilent 4156C stand-alone 
semiconductor device parameter analyzer. As an example, the 
measured Gummel plot of an NPN transistor is shown in Fig. 14.17. 
The measured data can be graphically analyzed to obtain saturation 
current, current gain, and current gain versus collector current 
characteristics, along with base resistance and recombination 
current characteristics. The extracted SPICE parameters from the 
measured Gummel plot are also shown in the Fig. 14.17.
Figure 14.17  Agilent 4156C–measured Gummel plot of an NPN transistor 
along with the extracted SPICE parameters using the WEBTEMA tool.

387
14.4  Summary
A systematic study based on TCAD is taken up for the design 
and VWF of metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistors 
(MOSFETs) in complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor (CMOS) 
technology. The impact of different types of variability that affect 
CMOS technology has been addressed. The impact of the virtual 
wafer technology on new process development has been described. 
Supplementing expensive iterative experimentation of VLSI 
technology development by VWF and virtual device characterization 
is demonstrated. A full-factorial DOE (TCAD simulations) are executed 
and the process compact model (PCM) is extracted. From calibrated 
TCAD, it is possible to generate a response surface model and find the 
optimized 45 nm CMOS process. The process is optimized (to select 
a stable process window) with respect to threshold voltage, drive 
current, and leakage. Successful implementation of VWF technology 
could lead to the general services to the chip design and fabrication 
industry with the idea of Internet-based TCAD. It represents a novel 
idea of the virtual fab foundry, which is a first attempt at bridging 
the gap between chip design and chip fabrication, and it has 
potential commercial applications in ECAD based on TCAD, as well 
as professional services.
	
The online microelectronics laboratory for professional 
scientists and engineers in advanced device and process 
technologies and, in particular, for the engineering curriculum has 
been discussed. We have described the design, implementation, and 
functionality available on hardware-based RL platforms in order 
to run a number of experiments. The design and implementation 
of a remotely controlled online (Internet-based) experiment on 
thin-film characterization for a nanotechnology laboratory using 
an optical microscope and an atomic force microscope have been 
described. The prototype online AFM characterization and optical 
microscopy experiments developed showed the feasibility of such 
systems for a low-cost shared-resource remote nanoelectronics 
laboratory for education. This work shows that use of a process 
simulator to teach semiconductor processing is indeed possible via 
an online TCAD laboratory. The proposed new methodology will 
Summary

388
VWF and Online Laboratory
provide an opportunity to initiate a strong interactive simulation 
environment for experimenting with both physics and technology. 
There is a unique opportunity for students to embark on real device/
technology design via independent study.
	
The proposed RL can be used not only in the field of 
microelectronics education but also for doing any measurement-
based task with real laboratory instruments. Furthermore, RLs are 
not intended to replace available hands-on experiments but rather 
to give students the possibility to acquire their own data sets for 
further analysis and to think on the way how device/technology 
design should be done.
Reference
	 1.	 Gruener, C. J. (2009). Design and Implementation of a Computational 
Cluster for High Performance Design and Modeling of Integrated 
Circuits, MS thesis, Rochester Institute of Technology.

20-layer deposition   89, 91
absorbed light   303
absorbed photons   304
absorption   298, 310 
	 maximizing   307
abstraction   12, 362
AC analysis   97, 111, 213
AC behavior   211
AC characteristics   328, 352
AC effects   129
AC operation   129
AC perspectives   167
AC signal   59
AC simulations   243
acceptor molecules   302
access
	 high-speed data   256
	 remote   21
	 web   371
accumulation   213, 288
	 damage   118
accumulation layer mobility   62
accumulation layer parameters   62
accumulation region    192
accuracy   10, 37, 39, 95, 202, 315, 
317, 325, 381
activation   16, 98–99, 121, 226
	 impurity   117
	 spike   143
	 subcollector   107, 132
activation annealing    227
activation anneals   198
active layers   107, 303
	 thick   298
active matrix liquid crystal display 
(AMLCD)   232
adaptability   9
Index
adaptive-meshing strategy   284, 
287–289
adhesion layers   79
advanced semiconductor devices   
386
advanced simulation capability   10
advanced statistical simulation   66
AFM, see atomic force microscopy
AFM characterization experiment   
379
AlGaN back-barrier yield   252
AlGaN barrier   246
AlGaN buffer   245–246
AlGaN epitaxial layers   241
algorithms
	 robust    57
	 specialized   344
alignment   276–278
	 band   173–174
alignment sensitivity   278
alloy   16, 71, 169, 176–77
	 lattice-mismatched   71
	 relaxed-SiGe   170, 176
alloy composition   176
alloy scattering   176–177, 179
AlN   237, 242–243
AlN layer   242
aluminum deposition   181, 187
ambient conditions,   115
AMLCD, see active matrix liquid 
crystal display
AMLCD industry   232
amorphization   97
amorphous silicon   234, 306
	 hydrogenated   307
amphoteric   307
amplifier    281
	 high-power   237

390
Index
analog designer   362
analog electronics   17
analog signals   361
analog simulation models   317
analysis
	 current   43
	 device physics   9
	 experimental   348
	 finite element   29
	 numerical   29
	 process-aware   351
	 process parameter   11
	 statistical   14, 347, 364, 367
	 system-level   11
	 transient   29, 43
	 uncertainty   355
analytical mode   120, 122
analytical oxidation mode   115
anisotropic   50, 142, 171–172
anisotropic behavior   115
anisotropic stress simulation   48
anneal   107, 122, 227–28
	 final   107, 132, 212
annealing   70, 98–99, 119–122, 
134, 147, 225, 286–287
	 conventional furnace   32
	 final thermal   148
	 flash   99
	 millisecond   99
	 source–drain   283, 287
	 spike   99
annealing schemes   96, 99
anneal temperature    7
anneal time   7
anode   299, 305, 307
anode voltage   312
Ansys software   86
applications   1, 3, 17–19, 78–79, 
134, 139–140, 195–196, 246, 
248, 255–259, 276, 281, 297, 
375, 379
	 automotive   281
	 circuit   142
	 electronic   19, 252
	 emerging   125, 139
	 high-voltage   281
	 low-frequency   17
	 low-power   197
	 medical    139
	 microwave   127
	 millimeter-wave   139, 156
	 mobile   199
	 nanoelectronic   79
	 target   375
	 web   376
application space    9, 56
approximation   98
	 first-order   320–21, 363, 372
architectures   9, 78, 111, 143, 
153–154, 223, 225
	 flip-chip   244
	 geometric   141
	 innovative   226
	 low-cost B3T   152
area reduction   276
areas
	 active   107, 143, 197, 200, 205, 
307
	 bit cell   276
	 compressive   75–76
	 contact   143
	 critical   34, 39
	 dead   307
	 flat   87–88
	 insoluble   102
	 reduced channel   276
	 solar cell development   302
	 tensile   75–76
	 total chip   345
Arora model for low-field mobility   
40
Arrhenius equation   99
Arrhenius prefactor   99
arsenic   98–99, 122, 132–133, 
143, 152, 265
arsenic-doped monoemitter   147
arsenic implantation   143
arsenic ions   98

391
Index
ASCII text file    57
a-Si    306–7
ATHENA   30–36, 43, 86, 108–109, 
112, 131–132, 134, 180–181, 
185, 233, 267–268, 293, 299, 
330–331, 363
	 fabrication simulator    37
ATHENA coefficients file   33
ATHENA compatibility   46
ATHENA-constructed device   133
ATHENA diffusion   365
ATHENA framework   36
ATHENA process simulation   131, 
292
ATHENA process simulator   36, 
187
ATHENA process tool   180
ATHENA simulation   32, 294, 331
ATHENA simulator    185
ATHENA syntax   238
ATHENA tool   180
ATLAS   29–31, 33–37, 39, 41, 
43–45, 47, 49, 131, 134, 233, 
235–236, 242, 246, 330–331, 
363
ATLAS command language   37
ATLAS device simulation 
framework   36
ATLAS device simulator   292
ATLAS-generated Gummel plot   
110
ATLAS inputs and outputs   36
ATLAS manuals   43, 50
ATLAS meshing commands   267
ATLAS module   44
ATLAS simulation   108–109
ATLAS software   180
ATLAS SONOS model   268
ATLAS syntax   234, 246
ATLAS tools   43
atomic disorder   235
atomic force microscope    
379–380, 387
atomic force microscopy (AFM)   
377
attenuation   310
Auger recombination   41, 109, 
134, 229, 274
Auger recombination models   288
Auger transitions   41
autointerface   131
automation   370, 376
automation interface    379
automation tools    364
average stresses   203, 209
back-contact optimization    298
backend-of-line (BEOL)   82
back-injection   129
ballistic transport   116–117, 314
ballistic transport channels   156
band diagrams   129–130, 134, 
137, 174, 190–191
band discontinuities    126
band edge offsets   174
band edges   52, 54, 251
	 valence   52
band edge shifts   52
bandgap   40, 61, 125–127,  
173–175, 179, 238, 250, 263, 
267, 298, 302, 306–307
	 effective   306
	 indirect   174
	 strained-Si   175
	 stress-dependent   54
bandgap alignment   172
bandgap differences   173, 307, 
322
bandgap energy   126, 158, 175
bandgap model   153
bandgap narrowing (BGN)   40, 42, 
109, 134, 157, 189, 229, 274
bandgap narrowing effect    213
bandgap semiconductor devices   
237
bandgap semiconductor material   
249

392
Index
bandgap separation   42
band offset   18, 128, 169, 174
	 conduction   128, 174, 270
	 heterostructure   175
	 valence   128, 175, 179
bands   125, 172
band splitting   172–174, 179
band structure   3, 63, 130, 176, 
179
barrier    80, 127–28, 180, 196, 
262–63, 271, 368
barrier layer   226
base   37, 73, 107, 125, 127–132, 
134, 142, 149, 156–160, 167, 
318, 320–321, 374
	 epitaxial   131
	 extrinsic   107, 143, 148
	 intrinsic   107, 132, 148,  
320–321
	 neutral   128–129
	 parasitic   294
base bandgap   127–129
base-collector oxide   149, 155
base contacts   108
base currents   111, 150, 321
base doping   125, 127
base electrode   111
base epitaxy   148, 152
	 boron-doped   146
	 selective SiGeC   143
base growth   143
base implantation   107
base poly-Si   107
base region   127, 132, 134,  
155–158, 160, 320–321
	 extrinsic   107
	 intrinsic   108, 143, 146
base resistance   128, 141, 294, 
320–21, 323, 386
base width   126, 149–151
behavior   13, 17–18, 20, 56,  
96–97, 112, 149, 383, 385
	 elastic   84
	 electrical   12, 22, 49, 60, 303
	 hot-carrier   283, 320
	 mechanical   117
	 nonlinear   352
	 physical   40, 141
	 piezoresistive   71
	 statistical   65
BEOL, see backend-of-line
BGN, see bandgap narrowing
BHJ, see bulk heterojunction
BHJ solar cells   303
bias   16, 214, 229, 259, 269, 271, 
274, 331
	 anode   309
	 fixed   128
	 initial   229
	 negative   272
	 operating   229
	 zero   229, 274, 299
bias conditions   36, 96, 131
biaxial strain   142, 156
biaxial tension   178
BiCMOS, see bipolar 
complementary metal-oxide 
semiconductor
bio-MEMS   79
bipolar area   143
bipolar complementary metal-
oxide , semiconductor 
(BiCMOS)   17, 107, 131, 140, 
142–143, 152, 155
bipolar device analysis   29
bipolar device physics   21, 370
bipolar devices   29, 59, 128, 131, 
156–57, 167, 319, 324
bipolar device structure   108
bipolar junction transistor (BJT)   
56, 105, 109–11, 127–30, 160, 
292, 319, 331, 383
bipolar process   17
bipolar process technologies   152, 
322
bipolar scaling   5
bipolar technologies   1–2, 7, 15, 
17, 26, 28

393
Index
	 double-poly-Si   107
	 homojunction   167
bipolar transistors   105, 124–25, 
128, 130, 155–56, 321, 383, 
385
	 heterostructure   173
	 poly-Si emitter NPN   108
	 silicon-based   155
BIPOLE device simulator   383
bit error   261
bit line   258
BJT, see bipolar junction transistor
BJT model   319
BJT process simulation   105, 107, 
109
BJTs, high-power   292
body contact   228–231
body contact annealing   283
body implant energy   293
Boltzmann’s statistics    54
bonds   102
	 dangling   235
Boolean operations   57
boron   98–101, 121, 143, 182, 
212, 265, 279, 294
boron concentration   294
boron diffusion   131, 149, 151
boron diffusion effect   149
boron-doped SiGeC base layer   
152
boron doping   148, 153
boron doping levels   142, 150–151
boron implantation   107, 181, 187, 
212
boron ions   98
boron out-diffusion   127, 133
boron-phosphorus silicate glass 
(BPSG)   182
boundary   278
	 fin-oxide   209
	 material region   204
boundary conditions   16, 47
	 electrical   39
BPSG, see boron-phosphorus 
silicate glass
BPSG process   182
breakdown   19, 249
	 avalanche   322
	 secondary   20
breakdown simulation   288
breakdown voltage   19, 141, 167, 
248, 282–83
	 high   237, 250
breakdown voltage characteristics   
249
BSIM3   332–33
BSIM3 expert parameters   333
BSIM3 extraction algorithm   332
BSIM3 measurements   331, 339
BSIM3 SPICE model parameters   
330
BSIM4 parameters   63
bulk CMOS   12
bulk CMOS processes   277
bulk CMOS technology   111
bulk doping   264
bulk films   80
bulk finFET technology   197
bulk heterojunction (BHJ)    
302–304
bulk heterojunction layers   304
bulk mobility   55, 177, 179
bulk MOSFET   195
bulk resistivities   298
bulk silicon technology   223
bulk silicon transistors   225
bulk voltage   332
bulk wafers   250
buried channel   176
buried collector layer   108, 132
buried layer doping   153
BVCEO simulation   151
BVCEO values   162, 166
CAD, see computer-aided design
CAD approach   32
CAD environment   386

394
Index
CAD framework   361
CAD programs   57, 344
CAD tools   37, 64, 368
calibrated process   14
calibrated simulation models   99
calibrated TCAD flows   20
calibration   5, 58, 150, 213,  
283–284, 318, 348
capacitances   288, 290, 319, 322
	 base depletion   319
	 collector depletion   321
	 parasitic gate-field   292
	 quasi-static   193
	 storage   255
capacitive loading   17
capacitor   56, 256–257
	 storage   255
capacity   297
	 chip   255
	 high current   292
capping layers   48
	 compressive   48
carbon   127, 142, 149, 153, 250
carbon nanotube (CNT)   257, 259
carrier concentration   249, 299
carrier conduction parameters   77
carrier energy relaxation time   
153
carrier generation   302, 306
carrier generation rate   275
carrier generation-recombination   
41
carrier lifetime   302
carrier mobility   3, 18, 20, 47, 55, 
84, 158, 178, 203, 316
carrier mobility enhancement   54
carrier mobility enhancement 
factor   177
carrier pair   302
carriers   3, 40–41, 54–55, 61, 63, 
172, 177, 224, 302
carrier scattering model   40
carrier transit time   128
carrier transport   20, 40, 61, 96, 
226
carrier velocity   42, 55, 63, 170
Cartesian meshes   116
cathode   299–300, 307, 309
Caughey–Thomas mobility   150, 
213, 242
Caughey–Thomas model   55–56
CB, see collector–base
collector–base (CB)   128
CB capacitance   141
CB junction   129, 141
CB space charge region   129
cell behavior   298
cell layout   201
cell layout topology   276
cell level   298
cell mismatch   276
cell response   298, 303
cells   201, 203, 205, 211, 256–257, 
274, 277, 297, 301–302,  
305–307, 309
	 inorganic   301–302
	 organic   301–302
cell size   256, 258
cell structure   203, 299–300, 309
cell topology   279
cell variation   298
cell width   298
CESL, see contact etch stop layer
CESL
	 classical   84
	 compressive   76
	 engineered   76
	 nitride capping   83
	 tensile   75–76, 84
CESL bottom   73–74
CESL curvature   84
CESL film   75
CESL source and drain   73
CESL stress transmission   83, 86, 
93
CESL zones   77, 84

395
Index
CGI, see common gateway interface
challenges   6–7, 10, 22, 27, 93, 96, 
126, 170, 196, 238, 276–277, 
342, 360, 369
	 key   256
	 main   9, 22
	 new   6, 16, 345
	 performance specification   83
chamber   322
channel   18, 20, 38–39, 71–73, 
75–77, 83–84, 201–202, 204, 
219, 224–226, 260, 262–265, 
267, 269, 288
	 active   281
	 carrier   238
	 conductive   169, 198–199
	 dual   187
	 long   76
	 low-doped   196
	 single   187
	 undoped   224
channel center   75
channel control   73, 196, 198
channel deformation   75
channel depth   38
channel direction   71, 83
channel doping   195, 197, 224
channel doping levels, higher   278
channel doping profile   326
channel doping region, high   62
channel edges   75
channel implantation   120
channeling   98–99
channeling profiles   100
channel interface   172
channel length   61, 170, 187, 195, 
282, 326
	 effective   331
	 short   292
channel MOSFET designs   18
channel region   233, 278–279, 
288, 290, 354
channel scaling   195
channel stress fields   85
channel temperatures   237
channel thickness   62
channel width   198
characteristics
	 absorption   302
	 breakdown   17
	 charging   268
	 current   221, 386
	 deposition process   118
	 endurance   255
	 hysteresis   258
	 intermodulation   134
	 molecular recombination   303
	 noise   16
	 operating   42
	 program   262, 265
	 simulated   192
	 terminal   361
	 thermal   59
	 transfer   214, 216
characterization   15, 22, 233, 292, 
296, 314, 316, 362, 387
	 electrical   363
	 thin-film   387
	 virtual   4
charge   225, 234, 257–262, 265, 
269–271, 298, 303
	 continuous ionized dopant   8
	 induced   246
	 leakage   255, 261, 263
	 minority   322
	 negative   260
	 net   269
	 total   261
	 trapped insulator   269
	 trapped nitride   272
charge accumulation   246
charge carrier mobilities   202
charge carriers   61, 152
charge carrier transport   60
charge cloud   273
charge injection   38
charge leakage   255, 261, 263, 266
charge storage   265, 321, 323

396
Index
charge transfer  259–63
charge transport   27–28, 195
charge trapping   19
chemical-mechanical polishing 
(CMP)   13, 35, 43, 45, 70, 79, 
118, 120, 227–228, 346
chemical vapor deposition (CVD)   
182
chip packaging technologies   70
chips   83, 126, 193, 346
chuck movement   323
CIF layout format   112
CIGS, see copper indium gallium 
selenide
CIGS solar cell module   307
CIGS solar module   307, 309
C-interpreter   42, 236
circuit analysis   69
circuit design   4, 7, 10, 21, 36, 
56, 66, 318, 326, 342, 344, 
351–52, 368
circuit designers   36, 141, 314, 
339, 341, 362, 386
circuit fabrication   361, 373
circuit failure   346
circuit layout patterns   20
circuit level   361
circuit models   25
circuit parameters, derived   326
circuit performance   1, 12, 28, 69, 
343, 345, 347, 350–351
circuit responses   345, 351
circuits   11, 56, 58, 78, 97, 130, 
141, 225, 292, 322, 343,  
346–347, 350–352, 361–362, 
386
	 advanced millimeter-wave   141
	 complex   56
	 high-speed   318
	 radar-integrated   125
	 state-of-the-art   125
circuit simulation   12–13, 16, 21, 
26, 56, 314, 316–317, 348–350
	 process-aware   345, 349
	 statistical   64
circuit simulation laboratory   373
circuit simulation stage   349
circuit simulators   10, 14, 348, 
370, 385
	 statistical   66
clustering   118, 152
clustering mechanisms   132
CMOS, see complementary metal-
oxide semiconductor
CMOS
	 planar   199–200
	 traditional standard silicon   2
CMOS approaches   255
CMOS development   283
CMOS device characteristics   276
CMOS devices   131
	 conventional   18
	 nanoscaled   60
	 novel   60
CMOS device scaling   276
CMOS fabrication   20, 73
CMOS industry   58
CMOS logic   17, 256
CMOS manufacturing processes   9, 
334
CMOS materials, conventional   255
CMOS processes   107, 124, 187, 
200, 258–59, 263, 290, 352, 
387
CMOS processing   266
CMOS scaling   2
CMOS technology   2, 29, 83, 93, 
105, 140, 155, 281, 284, 342, 
387
	 advanced   65
	 logic   156
	 mainstream   15
	 planar   197
	 state-of-the-art   201
	 submicron   124
CMOS technology issues   124
CMOS technology node   83
CMOS transistors   71, 169, 201

397
Index
	 high-voltage   281
CMP, see chemical-mechanical 
polishing
CNT, see carbon nanotube
CNT memory   259
codiffusion   101
coefficient of thermal expansion 
(CTE), 70–71, 161
coefficients   52, 70, 83, 161, 202
	 absorption   306
	 compliance   53
	 independent   51
	 low oxygen diffusion   80
	 piezoresistive   179
	 piezorestivity   210
collection   47, 298, 300, 363
collector   132, 134, 138, 143, 146, 
148, 150, 152, 159–160, 162, 
165, 167, 323, 386
	 implanted   131
collector contacts   107
collector doping   162, 166
collector doping level   163, 166
collector doping profile   141
collector epilayer   321
collector epilayer resistance   320
collector epitaxy   144, 147
collector implantation   107, 132
collector junction   131, 151, 322
collector module   147
collector oxide   149, 155
collector region   157–160, 162, 
164–166, 322
collector resistance   151
collector side   133, 148, 152–153
collector terminals   322
collector transit time   159
collector voltage   327
collector window   107
collisions   99
	 elastic   99
colloids, isolated   261
column IV semiconductors   170
common gateway interface (CGI)   
375
compact bipolar model   318–19
compact device modeling   314
compact model development   11, 
314
compact model extraction   12, 65
compact model extraction tools   
12
compact model extractor   63
compact model formulation   315
compact model generation   5, 313, 
315, 317
compact modeling strategy   316
compact models   11–12, 21, 36, 
65, 314–316, 318, 321, 338, 
345, 362, 383, 385
	 advanced   314–15, 319
	 predictive   167, 339
	 statistical   6, 64
compact transistor model   319
comparison   100, 130, 153–154, 
159–162, 164, 166, 168, 179, 
216, 230, 235–236, 243, 319
	 instantaneous   21
	 qualitative   19
compatibility   195–196, 200, 232, 
258–259
complementary metal-oxide 
semiconductor (CMOS)   1, 
7, 15, 17, 124, 131, 195, 197, 
199, 201, 258, 263, 334, 341, 
349
complex cell structures   211
complex electronic circuitry   126
complex interrelations   7
complexity   12, 96, 170, 313, 315, 
371
	 computational   39
complex nanometer designs   345
complex organic molecules   301
component lifetimes   237
components   13, 51, 159, 209, 
331, 363, 368

398
Index
	 current   65
	 dominant yield loss   345
	 imported strain-dependent   239
	 independent   51
	 integral   364
	 nonrandom   276
	 nonzero   52
	 off-diagonal   53
	 orthogonal force   51
	 shear   50, 52
	 spontaneous   239
composition   42, 53, 301
	 chemical   16
	 position-dependent   42
compositional range   126
compound semiconductors   9, 32, 
35, 56, 238
comprehensive material stress 
models   48
comprehensive set   46–47, 116
compression   73, 75, 78
	 high   88
compressive strain   18, 127, 169, 
171, 173, 204
	 mechanical   164
compressive stress   71–73, 75, 77, 
84, 89, 202
	 additive   158
computational algorithms   7
computational device research   26
computational efficiency models   
212
computer   369, 372, 375
computer-aided design, electronic   
361, 368
computer-aided design (CAD)   
4–5, 25–28, 83, 102, 132, 196, 
282, 314, 342–343, 368
computer hardware   111, 374
computer interaction   377
computer models   25, 344
concentration   132–133, 178, 182, 
229, 246, 265, 274, 279
	 charge carrier   363
	 defect   9, 212
	 final ion   97
	 high electron   246
	 impurity   161
	 low   127
	 p-doping   294
	 phosphorus   182
	 trapped electron   269–70
concentration-dependent lifetime 
model   41
conductance   42
conduction   172, 174, 178–179, 
189, 236
	 degenerate   174
	 subthreshold   27, 29
conduction band   42, 52, 61, 128, 
171, 173, 175, 269, 302
conduction band edges   52, 128, 
175
conduction band energy contour   
171
conduction band minima   52
conduction band offsets   175, 189, 
263
conduction band splitting   175
conduction band valleys   172
conduction channel   73, 77, 224
conductive channel material   199
conductivity   323
configurations   172, 301, 379
	 tandem   302
	 web server   376
confinement   172, 174
	 enhanced quantum   196
	 heterostructure   73
confinement effect   172
	 electrical   173
	 quantum-mechanical   62
confinement quantization   172
conformal coatings   79
conformal deposition   116
conjugated polymers   302
conjunction   31, 36, 102, 296, 364
connection   13, 21, 143, 370, 377

399
Index
	 external-to-internal base   149
constraints   126, 353–54
	 numerical   96
construction   238, 364
	 large-area conformal   301
contact etch stop layer (CESL)   3, 
73–76, 83–84, 88, 93, 226–227
contacts   38, 74, 77, 107, 143, 197, 
226–229, 231–232, 249, 267, 
274, 299, 303
	 direct   71
	 extrinsic base   108
	 opaque cathode   299
	 single   299
	 thermal   229
continuity equations   40, 64, 267, 
303
contours   88, 91, 274–275, 278, 
299
	 photogeneration   299
	 sharp   88
contrast stretching   380–81
contributions   55, 70, 84, 202, 246, 
272
control   76, 80, 195, 197, 219, 223, 
241, 246, 259, 345, 347, 352, 
376
	 current   124
	 electrical   198
	 electrostatic   224–225
	 intelligent   377
	 statistical process   344
control device   187
control gate   259–261, 265–266
control gate length   266
control gate oxide   259–60, 
263–66
control gate thickness   266
control gate voltage   260
control gate width   266
control gate work function   264
control hole confinement   173
control interface   376
controllability   199
	 enhanced gate   198
control parameters   348
conventional devices   162, 259
convergence   39
	 numerical   134
conversion   53
	 electricity   298
coordinates   356
	 mapping   356
copper indium gallium selenide 
(CIGS) 307
correlation   5, 98, 134, 342
	 shot noise   141
cost   1, 3, 5–6, 10, 12, 66, 101, 139, 
196, 238, 242, 257–58, 297, 
306, 313
	 computational   13
	 laboratory   370
	 product   13
Coulomb scattering   62
counterdope   277
counterdoping   277
	 diffusion-induced   278
	 lateral   277
counterdoping path   277
CPU   4
	 modern multicore   38
CPU time   61
crystal directions   99, 171
crystalline   35, 48, 50, 306
crystalline clusters   234
crystalline phases   258
crystalline photodetectors   303
crystalline silicon cells   305
crystallites   235
crystallographic direction   226
crystals   51–52
crystal structures   250, 258
	 hexagonal   250
CTE, see coefficient of thermal 
expansion 
CTE   70–71
CTE mismatch   70

400
Index
current densities   60, 134, 138, 
265
	 high   131, 237, 323
current gain mechanism   295
currents   36, 170, 216, 274–275, 
292
	 high bias   126
cutoff frequency   125, 127, 134, 
138, 141, 159, 167, 211, 219, 
221, 320
	 unity gain   179, 290
cutoff frequency range   125
CVD, see chemical vapor deposition
CVD process   185
CVT   40, 177, 229, 267
CVT mobility model   178
cycles   260
	 cooling   85
damage   35
	 cluster   121
	 implantation-induced   119
data
	 associated fT   141
	 default materials library   180
	 electrical   331
	 linear region   333
	 measured   22, 303, 316–17, 
348, 386
	 measurement   316, 326, 345
	 output simulation   244
	 simulated   331
	 stable   345
	 stored   257
	 threshold   271
	 transfer   27
data analysis   354
data analysis applications   374
data communication   125
data files   118
data handling   66
data processing   374
data retention considerations   255
data retention time   259
data set   326, 333, 388
DC   16, 32, 36, 49, 97, 129, 167, 
211, 243, 328
DC analysis   42
DC characteristics   295, 327
DC conditions   58
DC measurement drivers   325
DC operation   128
DC output characteristics   111
DC simulations   97
Deal-Grove and Massoud models   
115
DeckBuild   31–32, 37, 48, 86, 90, 
363
defects   16, 99, 101, 119, 202, 
260–262, 292, 307, 345, 347
	 amphoteric   307
	 random   345
deformations   50–52, 70, 73, 117
	 electronic band   49
	 plastic   70
	 stress-induced band   69
degradation   42, 159–60, 243, 
298, 306
	 current   77
	 hot-carrier   12
degree of freedom   125, 127–128
density   64, 199, 201, 271, 276
	 areal   261
	 continuous   235
	 defect   174
	 fixed   235
	 high   256–58
	 high packing   17
	 interface state   80, 251
	 low fixed charge   80
	 reduced electron   246
	 trap   268, 304
	 ultrahigh   259
density gradient models   354
dependence   48, 72, 169, 172, 176, 
180, 361
	 critical   131
	 linear   47

401
Index
	 saturation bias   323
	 transverse-field   229
dependency   238
	 surface orientation   62
depletion   288
	 back-side   129
depletion layer   288
depletion width   197
deposition   35, 45–46, 58, 60, 
86, 88, 95, 119–122, 143, 
161, 164, 182–187, 200, 212, 
227–228
deposition module   116
deposition power   161
deposition processes   45
deposition techniques   81
depth   33, 97–98, 136, 155,  
190–192, 279, 298
design   6–8, 12–15, 18–19,  
282–283, 298, 312–314, 
341–343, 347–349, 352–353, 
356–358, 360–363, 366,  
368–369, 371–374, 387
	 backend   361
	 chip   317, 343, 361, 387
	 coupled   352
	 experimental   352
	 factorial   350
	 nominal   347
	 optimized   196
	 physical   10, 14, 347
	 process-aware   13, 15, 345, 349
	 profile   129
	 reference   180
	 reliability-aware   66
	 robust   6, 345–346, 360
	 single-channel   187
design and implementation   371, 
379, 387–88
design area   344
design attributes   345
design challenges   5, 65
design circuits   373
design complexity   13
design considerations   197
design constraints   8, 127
design cycles   10, 296, 342, 347
design database   344
design flow   10, 12
	 improved   6
	 multilevel   10
	 traditional device   6
design framework   14
design for manufacturing (DFM)   
6, 14, 20, 341–44, 346–52, 
354, 356, 358, 360
design for reliability (DFR)   6, 12, 
352
design for yield (DFY)   14
design houses   341, 361–362
design issues   167, 211
design kit cycle   314
design kits   345
design layout   13
design level   347
design methodologies   27, 31, 49, 
347, 363, 371
design of experiments   48, 152, 
363, 371
design optimization   20, 29, 316
design parameters   6, 101, 266, 
353, 357
design phase, 21, 134, 342, 362, 
373
design purposes   56, 361, 363
design robustness   348
design rule checker (DRC)   10
design space   298, 360
design stage   10, 346
design targets   364, 382
design techniques   368
	 statistical   342
design tools   6, 27, 31, 363, 371
design variables   326
design variation   357
DevEdit   31, 33–34, 36–37, 48, 
108–9, 134, 228–30, 273

402
Index
development   4, 9, 15, 26–27, 
29–30, 130, 140–142, 155, 
167, 232, 282–283, 314–315, 
344–345, 370–371, 373–374
	 concurrent   314
development cost   252
development cycles   35, 57, 167, 
339
development cycle time   282
development time   5, 12, 374
deviations   77
device alternatives   27, 30, 57
device analysis   21, 36, 369
device applications   126
device architectures   39, 64, 99, 
157, 161
	 novel   156, 167
device areas   30, 221
device behavior   5, 9, 170, 383
device cell structure   47
device characteristics   12, 36, 66, 
95, 131, 142, 316, 324, 327, 
343, 345–346, 348–349, 351, 
358–359, 382–383
	 fabricated   10
	 heterostructure   174
device characterization   5, 304, 
313, 322–323, 325, 349–350, 
372, 385
	 integrated microelectronics   
373
device circuit performance   345
device design   6, 9, 21, 27, 36, 
47, 112, 128, 142, 176, 363, 
368–369, 371
	 advanced   6
	 teaching   377
	 parameters   282
	 procedures   342
	 productivity, improving   6
device designer   6
device downscaling   14, 347
device fabrication   35, 37, 43, 47, 
164, 363
	 process   157, 160
device geometries   214, 252, 349
device integrity   83
device level   264, 361
device-level modeling   361
device modeling   12, 26, 313
	 area   21
	 complex   9
	 numerical   344
device models   14, 313
	 calibrated   314
	 compact   12, 313–314
	 numerical   60
device operation   172, 241
device optimization   353
device orientation   62
device parameter analyzer   385
device parameter distributions   
14, 347
device parameter extraction   25, 
362
device parameters   10, 21, 25, 194, 
256, 318, 354, 370, 383
	 common   316
	 dynamic   152
	 electrical   5, 342
	 extraction   25, 362
device parasitic   316
device performance   27, 30, 34, 
37, 69, 156, 159–160, 181, 
194, 238, 241, 243, 341, 345, 
354
	 enhancement   1, 160
device physics   21, 40, 315–316, 
368, 370
device platforms   152
device regions   158
device requirements   12, 313
device responses   284, 354
devices   12–16, 27–30, 37, 63–66, 
157–158, 160–162, 164–165, 
200–202, 223–225, 249–252, 
258–263, 270–272, 281–284, 
330–332, 348–350

403
Index
	 active   27, 70, 373
	 all-silicon   127
	 complementary   278
	 continuous-floating-gate    
260–261
	 conventional integrated circuit   
292
	 core   83
	 double-gate   214
	 electronic   83, 249
	 epilayer   320
	 erased   260
	 fabricated   347, 362
	 fabricated B3T   142
	 finFET   211
	 floating-gate   256–257, 259
	 high-gain   352
	 high-performance   139
	 high-speed   156
	 high-speed GaN-based switching   
241
	 individual   201, 203, 211
	 inorganic solid-state junction   
297
	 junior-level   369
	 large-geometry   27–28
	 long   76, 85
	 low-power   18
	 measured   317
	 microelectronic   22, 78, 373, 
377–378, 383
	 multigate   16, 18
	 multiple-gate   111, 197
	 nanoscale   342
	 narrow   276
	 new   4, 314
	 novel   19, 348
	 optical   32
	 optoelectronic   169
	 packaged   322
	 p-finFET   203, 210
	 physical   7
	 piezoresistivity model   48
	 planar   98
	 polymer solar cell   303
	 portable   276
	 programmed   260
	 p-type   78
	 pull-up PMOS   279
	 real   141–142, 149, 373, 386, 
388
	 scaled   12, 17, 201, 313
	 short   76
	 simulated   59, 152, 214, 348
	 state-of-the-art   15, 111
	 strained-Si p-MOSFET   181
	 strain-engineered   15
	 superlattice-based   126
	 thin-body multigate   314
	 versatile photovoltaic   306
	 virtual   10, 363
device scaling   1, 16, 155, 199
device shifts   260
device simula   25–26
device simulation   28, 30–31, 
34, 38–40, 96–97, 131, 134, 
149–151, 157–159, 180–181, 
211–213, 249–251, 349–350, 
352–353, 383
	 classical   179
	 efficient   57
	 major   60
	 robust   131
	 strained-Si   176
device simulation model 
parameters   180
device simulation parameters   28
device simulation software   131
device simulation tools   22, 26–29 
device simulator   14, 28–29, 34, 
44–46, 66, 97, 113, 119, 152, 
265, 353, 364, 370, 383, 385
	 nonplanar   29
	 physics-based   35
device structures   10, 13, 28–29, 
34–35, 37, 45, 47–48, 157, 
159, 161, 164, 228, 230, 235, 
238

404
Index
device target   358
device technology   44, 142
device-under-test (DUT)   322
device variability   348
DFM, see design for manufacturing 
	 quantitative, 14, 348
DFM TCAD environment   356
DFM tools   347
DFR, see design for reliability 
DFY, see design for yield
DG, see dual-gate
DG design   197
diamond crystal structure   170
DIBL, see drain-induced barrier 
lowering
dielectric   16, 200, 221, 227, 257, 
259, 314
	 buried   223
	 high   78
	 interlayer   13, 226
	 ultrathin   259
dielectric constant   40, 189, 
264–265
dielectric nitride films   72
dielectric stack   272
differential equations   43
	 nonlinear partial   38
	 partial   97, 116, 267
diffusion   26, 28, 33–35, 44, 46, 
58, 60, 95, 98–99, 101, 112, 
114, 132, 142–143, 148–149
	 adjacent partial   278
	 dopant   27, 29, 196
	 drift   60, 64–65
	 field-dependent   99
	 lateral   282
	 oxidation-enhanced   101, 119
	 transient-enhanced   101
diffusion capacitances   319
diffusion coefficient   60, 99
diffusion equation   117
diffusion length   302
diffusion models   34, 46, 354
	 coupled   292
	 impurity   101
	 three-stream pair   354
diffusion MOSFET   282
diffusion process   364 
diffusion regions   293
diffusion section   354
diffusion simulation   119
diffusion time   266
diffusivity   132
digital applications, high-
performance   140, 156
digital data rate   170
dimensionality   350
dimensions   8–9, 36, 43, 59–60, 
77, 111, 225, 261, 346
	 bottom gate   197
	 critical   32, 83
	 nonuniform lateral   13
	 scaled feature   345
diodes   56, 299, 326, 373, 377
dipoles   257–58
Dirac statistics   134, 274
discreteness   64
discrete device structure   124
discretization   39
dislocations   69, 160
dispersion   171
displacement   258
display   34, 43
	 active matrix liquid crystal   232
	 flat-panel   233
display process variables   375
display technologies   301
distance   77–78, 100, 190–192, 
250, 270, 273, 278, 302–303
	 confined carrier   213
	 defect   234
	 empirical point-response   97
	 energy-dependent   235
	 impurity   39
	 lateral   97
	 lattice temperature   243–44
	 potential   312
	 predicted breakdown   283

405
Index
distribution functions   97
diurnal solar inclination   298
DOE, see design of experiments
design of experiments (DOE)   283, 
348, 350–53, 355–56, 363–65, 
371–72, 376
	 full-factorial   352, 387
	 systematic   352
DOE approach   296
domain   37, 312, 357, 374, 377
	 exclusive   174
	 geometrical   203
	 identical simulation   65
	 public   12
dominant cell design   276
donor   236, 302–3
donor densities   236
donor molecule   302
distribution   206, 208–209, 258, 
345
dopant activation   9, 117–18, 352
dopant fluctuations   224, 276
	 atomic-level   13
	 random   14, 63–64, 66, 276, 346
dopant gradient   57
dopant impurities   101
dopant out-diffusion   134
dopants   64, 98, 101, 148, 286–87, 
354
	 active   95
	 implanted   80, 98–99
doped n-type layer   143
doped region   97, 294
doped semiconductor   246
doping   33, 37, 48, 57, 84, 97, 150, 
186, 197, 224, 233, 294, 298
	 accurate   96
	 heavy   213, 229, 274
	 near-surface   278
	 phosphorous   212
doping concentration   40, 158, 
176–177, 190, 354
doping density   181
doping dependence   115
doping level   42, 149–150
doping profiles   10, 31, 63, 109, 
133–134, 136, 142, 149, 188, 
279, 348–349, 361, 364, 
382–383
	 analytical, 57
	 final   98
	 net   190
	 primary   98
	 uniform boron   132
doping species   142–43, 148
doping strategies   2
doping techniques   97
dose   132, 212, 266, 278,  
346–347, 354, 356–360, 365
	 channel implantation   211
double-diffusion process   282
downscaling   1–3, 83, 155, 342
	 continuous   29
drag   99
	 inelastic   99
drain   38–39, 73, 185–186, 
191–193, 214, 216, 226–227, 
229–230, 232–234, 238, 245, 
247, 271, 281–282, 287–289
	 doped   119
	 maximum   295
drain annealing   283, 286–87
drain areas   80
drain contacts   39, 233
drain dopants   224
drain doping profile   326
drain electrodes   113–14, 274
drain epitaxy   72
drain implants   119, 283
drain-induced barrier   7, 198, 223
drain-induced barrier lowering 
(DIBL)   7, 198, 211, 218–219, 
223
drain junctions   156
drain properties   63
drain recess   91

406
Index
drain regions   63, 65, 71–72, 77, 
196, 200, 212, 225, 233, 240, 
292
drain resistance   72, 224
drain side   204, 288
drain spacing   248
drain stressors   71, 203
drain voltage   191–192, 217, 219, 
230, 234, 239, 251–252, 275, 
331–332
drain voltage scaling, 264
drain voltage sweep, 191
drain zones, 77
DRC, see design rule checker
drift-diffusion   60, 64–65, 212
	 two-carrier   287
drift-diffusion approach   60, 64
drift-diffusion approximation   29
drift-diffusion equations   134, 
177, 303
drift-diffusion simulation engine   
65
drift-diffusion simulations   60, 
158
drift-diffusion transport model   
242
drift mobility   179
	 low-field   179
drift region   250, 281
drive-in   107
DSL, see dual stress liner
dual-channel architecture   170
dual-channel design   187
dual-channel p-MOSFET device 
structure 187
dual-channel process simulation   
186
dual-channel structure   188
dual-gate (DG)   88, 198
dual Pearson distributions   98
dual Pearson models   212
dual stress liner (DSL)   47, 72, 93
DUT, see device-under-test
dynamic interactions   7
dynamic performances   153–54
dynamic signal analyzer   325
DYNASONOS model   270
DYNASONOS statement   268
EasyScan control software   379
EB, see emitter–base
EB junction   129
ECAD, see electronic computer-
aided design
ECAD tools   341, 362
EDA, see electronic design 
automation
EDA tools   14, 31, 45, 112
EDA vendors   361–62
edge   145, 277–78
	 drain-side LOCOS   286–87
EDK, see educational design kit
education, nanoelectronics   22
educational design kit (EDK)   368
effective mass   3, 54–55, 63, 126, 
157, 171–172, 174, 176, 179
effects
	 corner   76, 93, 196
	 coupling   196, 224
	 direct   83, 93
	 indirect   83, 93, 202
	 interaction   201
	 ionization   228
	 kink   228
	 lattice-heating   228–230
	 parasitic   223–225, 292, 318
	 radiation   12, 225
	 secondary   7, 46
	 self-heating   165, 224, 241–243, 
328
	 short-channel   170, 195, 223
efficiency   20, 39, 126, 297–298, 
301–303, 305–307
	 hole injection   298
	 low conversion   302
	 system level   298
efficiency dependence   307, 309
elasticity   16, 49–50, 75

407
Index
elasticity coefficients   48
elasticity modulus   51
elasticity tensor   51–52
elastic relation   50
electrical analysis   34, 131
electrical characteristics   6–7, 
14, 36, 50, 58, 77, 108, 131, 
150, 188, 283, 349, 361, 364, 
382–383
	 measured   316
	 simulated   363
electrical characteristics 
simulation   180, 344
electrical field   19
	 applied   172
	 high vertical   172
electrical functionalities   83
electrical measurements   316, 345
	 simulated   383
electrical parameters   56, 97, 111, 
284
	 simulated, 283
electrical performance   18, 25, 49, 
77, 86, 141–42, 157, 180, 202, 
283
electrical requirements   80
electrical response   97
electric field   40, 60, 84, 172, 
176, 178, 190, 192, 197, 257, 
320–321, 348
	 applied   172
	 applied external   55
	 high   55
	 local   40, 196
	 low   55, 142
	 vertical   176
electric field lines   77, 363
electrode biases   272
electrodes   33, 37, 46–47,  
113–114, 133, 185, 229, 233, 
259, 274, 299, 307
	 anode   274
	 deping   50
	 lower   259
	 multiple   197
	 source–drain   113–114
	 upper   259
electromagnetic waves   61
electromigration   12
electron confinement   174–75
electron flow   238
electronic computer-aided design 
(ECAD)   361, 368, 387
electronic design assistant   348, 
368
electronic design automation 
(EDA)   27, 31, 348, 368
electron injection   127–128
electron mobility   55, 177–179, 
202–203, 243
electron pairs   302
electrons   54, 56, 60–61, 127, 
129, 173–174, 176, 179, 204, 
260, 262, 264–265, 267, 269, 
302–304
	 excited   302
	 free   303
	 stress-dependent   63
	 valence   61
electron transport   128, 130, 
173–74, 299
electron traps   269, 271
electron tunneling   265
electrostatic discharge (ESD)   12
elimination   99
emission   61, 269
emitter   37, 107–108, 127–131, 
133–134, 142–143, 146, 152, 
156, 158, 167, 274, 320, 322, 
324
	 doped poly-Si   107
	 polysilicon   133
	 side   132, 148, 152–153
	 window   107, 132, 143, 148, 
153
emitter–base (EB)   128
emitter breakdown   319
emitter diffusions   131

408
Index
emitter doping   127, 153
emitter junction   322
emitter junction capacitance   127
emitter mandrel   157
emitter opening   161, 164
emitter periphery effects   322
emitter spacers   143
emitter width   153, 155, 159
emitter window   107, 132, 143, 
148, 153
emitter window opening   155
emitter window patterning   145
empirical mode   115
empirical oxidation mode   115
endurance   260
	 excellent   258
	 high   257–58, 264
energy   61, 63, 99, 128, 172,  
211–212, 235, 266, 273,  
297–298, 304, 307, 326, 365
	 acceleration   278
	 band   191
	 bigger bonding   302
	 higher   172, 277
	 implanted B11   278
	 low implantation   98
	 solar   298
	 thermal   61
energy balance transport   49
energy bandgap   80, 156, 170, 172
energy consumption   225, 297
energy depth   269
energy difference   128
energy distribution   235–36
energy gap   127, 237
energy loss   99
energy relaxation   157
enhancement
	 continuous   1
	 resolution   347
entities   341, 361–362
environment   279, 297, 344, 347, 
375
	 competitive   282
	 complete self-contained   370
	 developed   374
	 enclosed   322
	 flexible framework   59
	 graphical programming   379
	 ideal   356
	 inert   287
	 interactive tool   364
	 online learning   373
	 oxidizing   287
	 run-time   37
	 scaled array   276
	 scripted   12
	 single   316
	 strong interactive simulation   
369, 388
	 versatile   364
environmental lights   322
epilayer   318, 320–321
epilayer growth, 283
epilayer resistivity, 293
epitaxial, 152, 178
epitaxial growth, 34
	 selective, 152
epitaxial layer, 181, 187
	 custom, 250
	 thick collector, 132
epitaxy, 35, 45, 97, 131, 148
	 selective, 226–27
EQE, see external quantum 
efficiency
EQE simulations   307–8
equations   15–16, 43, 97, 202, 362
	 analytical   316
	 basic   49
	 closed-form   314
	 difference   43
	 exponential   236
	 mathematical   40
	 physics-based   315
	 transport   28
equilibrium   41, 128
equilibrium diffusion model   284

409
Index
equipment   9, 21–22, 371,  
373–374, 376, 386
	 semiconductor device analyzer   
313, 339
	 capable   378
	 high-end   373
	 optical   102
	 physical   371, 377
	 portable electronic   292
	 semiconductor device analyzer   
313, 339
erase characteristics   261, 263, 
265
erase cycles   260
erase cycling   19, 255
erasing   260, 262, 272
erasing cycle   272
error   36
	 multibit   273
	 numerical   46
	 relative   315
ESD, see electrostatic discharge
ESL, see etch stop layer
estimation   315, 355
etch   13, 35, 132, 197, 233, 309, 
347
	 angled   309
	 final   233
	 physical   35
etching   45–46, 58, 60, 95, 97, 112, 
114, 118–120, 122, 161, 164, 
181–182, 184, 187, 200
	 anisotropic   145
	 dry   212
	 geometrical   33–34, 132
	 physics-based   45
	 plasma   115–16
	 reactive ion   116
etching process   182, 185
	 plasma   116
etching steps   132
etch models   181
etch profiles   33
etch rates   116
etch stop layer (ESL)   47, 73–75, 
132, 226
etch stop material   157
evaluation   152, 290, 324, 348, 
353, 376
	 early   21
	 mobility enhancement   88
	 process yield   12
	 quantitative   54
evolution   5–6, 9, 22, 26, 28, 39, 
83, 139–140, 237, 282, 320, 
326
experiential models   9
experiment access   380
experimental apparatus   371
experimental approach   374
experimental data   62, 64, 170, 
213, 371
experimental demonstrations   370
experimental procedures   374
experimental setup   376–377
experimental time   10
experimental trends   179
experimental work   4, 170
experimentation   32, 356, 362, 
386
	 microelectronic   369
	 web-based   21
experiment design window   366
experiment module   371
experiments   22, 48, 152, 298, 
334, 348, 351, 355–356, 363, 
368, 371–374, 376–377, 380, 
387–388
	 electrical measurement-based   
374
	 factorial   351
	 hardware-based   371, 376
	 hardware-based RL   373
	 interactive   376
	 long-duration   371
	 low-cost RL   373
	 manipulation   378
	 microelectronic   378

410
Index
	 optical microscopy   387
	 physical   370
	 process characterization   14, 
348
	 remote   375
	 thin-film characterization   378
	 virtual wafer   363, 372
	 wafer   35
exploration   386
export   45, 48, 113, 119, 123, 367
export layout information   112
export process   34
export simulation status   123
exposure   107, 164, 306
extensibility   25
extensions   20, 99, 226–27, 319, 
353
external quantum efficiency (EQE)   
307
extract   63, 97, 131, 185, 188, 318, 
331, 333, 343, 351
extraction   64, 203, 315, 324,  
326–328, 330–331, 343, 349
	 average stress   86
	 direct   316
	 layout parasitic   10
	 physical   318
extraction algorithm   333–34
extraction methodology   331
extraction procedure   315, 328
	 complete parameter   316
	 geometry parameter   316
	 unified parameter   317
extraction programs   317
extraction routines   324, 331
extraction schemes   326
extraction sequence   331
extraction strategy   63, 343, 353
extrinsic base layer   143
extrinsic polybase layer   143
extrinsic stress layer   157–160
fabrication   5–6, 70, 78, 81, 101, 
131, 144, 180, 187, 194, 200, 
238, 249, 292, 301
factor   13, 161, 209–211, 260, 306, 
345
FD, see fully depleted
FD silicon-on-insulator   223–224
Fermi level   128, 172, 
Fermi–Dirac statistics   134, 274
Fermi diffusion model   117
FET, see field-effect transistor
field-effect transistor (FET)   2, 
7–8, 29, 48, 56, 71, 107, 118, 
155, 169, 172–173, 179,  
195–198, 224, 238
file, physical device layout   341, 
362
final device structure   86, 108, 
123–124, 157, 161, 164–165, 
287
	 remeshed   109
finFET, see fin-shaped field-effect 
transistor
finFET device   200, 203, 210–211
finFET   2–3, 7, 12, 18, 48, 62–65, 
71–72, 195–204, 206, 208, 
210–214, 216, 218, 220–221, 
224–225
	 double-gate   195, 199, 214
finFET structure   7, 63, 198, 204, 
212, 221
fin height   211, 214, 218–219
	 fixed   214, 219, 221
fins   65, 196–198, 200, 203–204, 
209–210, 218, 225
fin-shaped field-effect transistor 
(finFET)   2–3, 12, 18, 48, 
62–65, 71–72, 118, 195–196, 
199, 201, 203–214, 216, 221, 
224–225
fin width   211, 214, 219, 221
fixed-meshing strategy   284, 
287–289
flash memory   19, 255, 257, 259
flip-chip   241–243
floating gate   259–263, 265–266

411
Index
	 continuous   259
	 discontinuous   259, 261
flow   7–8, 11, 26, 45–47, 50, 108, 
119, 123, 144, 151, 200–201, 
267, 284, 307, 349–350
formation   79–81, 86, 90,  
131–132, 143, 146, 157, 161, 
164–165, 200, 204–205, 
259–260
framework, process/device/design   
14
frequencies   49, 111, 125, 152, 
154, 290, 304
fully depleted (FD)   12, 223–225
function   40, 42, 52, 115–116, 159, 
162, 165, 175, 179, 269–272, 
278–279, 288, 298, 309, 316
functionality   9, 126, 225, 315, 
346–347, 374, 387 
GaN-based devices   245–246
gate   72–73, 77–78, 80–81, 87–90, 
196–197, 200, 203–204,  
209–210, 214, 223–225, 
227–230, 246–247, 271–272, 
277–278, 282
	 sacrificial   227
gate areas   80, 91
gate biases   243, 271–272, 287, 
289, 331
gate contact   39, 42, 229, 269
gate current models   42
gate dielectric materials   80
gate dielectrics   3, 79, 81, 232
gate electrode   75, 80–81, 266
gate-induced drain leakage (GIDL)   
63
gate length   1–3, 19, 76–77, 119, 
155, 169, 181, 197, 214, 242, 
264–265, 331, 354
	 physical   8
gate length devices   201
gate oxide   19, 38, 78, 155, 182, 
211–212
	 deposition   119, 181, 187
	 thickness   1, 181, 213–214, 293, 
326, 331, 346, 354
gate polysilicon   212, 277
gate stack   81–82, 226, 267, 
272–273
gate voltage   191–193, 234, 236, 
251, 271, 288, 331–332
	 forward/reverse   234
gate voltage characteristics    
192–193
gate width   1, 119, 214, 264
Ge concentration   132, 180–181, 
186
Ge content   63, 125, 128–130, 132, 
134, 148, 158, 160, 170–171, 
175, 177, 179–180, 182, 190
	 function of   174–175
Ge fraction   176–178, 180
Ge mole fraction   172–173, 190
geometrical mode   46, 119–122
geometric structure   97
germanium   47, 53, 126–127, 142, 
169–170
GIDL, see gate-induced drain 
leakage
graphical user interface (GUI)   28, 
31, 113, 343, 363–364
grid   34, 43, 57, 112, 124, 227, 298
GUI, see graphical user interface
GUI application   379
Gummel plot   111, 131, 134, 137, 
150
HBT, see heterojunction bipolar 
transistor
HBT devices   127, 155, 158, 160
	 complete   157
	 conventional SiGe   159,  
161–162, 168
	 strained-SiGe   168
	 structure   159
	 unstrained-SiGe   163, 166
height   200, 204, 218, 225

412
Index
	 trigate device   198
HEMT, see high-electron-mobility 
transistor
HEMT structure, basic   238
heterojunction bipolar transistor 
(HBT)   15, 37, 125, 127,  
130–131, 143–145, 147, 150, 
155, 318–319, 321–322
heterostructures   173, 175
high-electron-mobility transistor 
(HEMT)   19, 139, 237–241, 
243, 246, 252
high temperatures   82, 98–99, 249
high-work-function metals   262, 
265
hole concentration   190–191, 267
hole mobilities   60, 77, 173–174, 
176, 179–181, 189, 203–204
holes   40, 54–56, 60–61, 64, 77, 
129–130, 153, 174, 176, 179, 
189, 202, 213, 246, 269
hybrid orientation technology   77, 
79
IC, see integrated circuit
idealized device structure   64
III–V heterostructure devices   31
III–V technologies   125, 139–140
implantation   28, 35, 58, 80, 95, 
112, 114, 118, 120–122, 134, 
143–144, 212, 287
implementation   1, 96, 141, 173, 
371, 374–376, 379, 387
improvement   1, 27, 30, 129, 142, 
156, 159, 162–163, 165–166, 
169, 199, 204, 224, 319, 321
	 strain-induced   179
information   5, 10, 37, 45–47, 50, 
84, 112, 176, 256–257, 288, 
304, 331, 346, 349–351, 360
insulator   15, 61, 225, 262–263, 
269–271
integrated circuit (IC)   2, 6, 12, 18, 
27, 49, 70–71, 112, 199, 255, 
281, 313, 342, 361, 368
integration   4, 10, 13, 16, 21, 28, 
126, 140, 155, 209, 225–227, 
373
integration technology   9
intentional mechanical stress   71
interface   8, 12, 57, 80, 112, 181, 
242, 246, 263, 268–270, 302, 
344, 377, 380
interlayer   307
International Technology Roadmap 
for Semiconductors (ITRS)   5, 
66, 125, 139, 155, 197, 255, 
282
intrinsic base implant   108
intrinsic stress   77, 83–87, 93, 240
	 compressive   88–89, 91–93
intrinsic stress value   203
inversion layer   38, 172
ion implantation   32, 34, 60, 70, 
80, 97–99, 117, 132, 212, 226
ion implantation simulation   
97–99
ionization   19, 41–42, 189,  
228–230, 250
ions   63, 98–99, 132, 218–219, 
265, 352
isocontour lines   161–162,  
164–165
ITRS, see International Technology 
Roadmap for Semiconductors
junction   28, 34, 37, 39, 128, 143, 
146, 196, 326 
	 base–collector   131, 151, 322
	 CB   129, 141
	 EB   129
	 collector–base   128
	 emitter   153
	 emitter–base   128
	 extension   80
	 magnetic tunnel   258, 
	 p–n   28, 34, 285, 298
	 source-drain   156

413
Index
junction depth   196–197, 299, 
326, 365
laboratories   368–372, 377, 379, 
382
	 conventional   371–372, 377
laboratory experiments   370
large-power device structures   59
L-array   332–333
lattice   127, 171, 238–240,  
301–302
lattice constants   40, 54, 71,  
170–171, 189, 204
layer deposition   34, 181, 187
layers   70, 73, 83, 85–88, 90, 112, 
116, 126–127, 156, 160,  
177–178, 182, 225–226,  
301–302, 306
	 buried   143–144, 147, 152, 284
	 relaxed-Si1-xGex   186–187
	 relaxed-SiGe   176, 180
	 strained-SiGe   173, 176
layout   6, 25, 32, 49, 69, 71–72, 
76–77, 112, 362
layout editor   31–32, 112
LDD, see lightly doped drain
leakage   1, 7, 63, 65, 83, 223–225, 
234, 255, 261, 263, 266, 276, 
326, 352, 387
	 low   352
	 stress-induced   260–261
leakage current   62–63, 69, 78, 80, 
180, 223, 247, 260–262, 345, 
347
lenses   309–310, 312, 377
LER, see line edge roughness
light   52, 54, 102–103, 105–106, 
189, 298, 304, 309, 377
lightly doped drain (LDD)   39, 119
light source   102–103, 304–305
line edge roughness (LER)   14, 
63–65
lithography   13, 32, 35, 101, 106, 
200, 344, 346
lithography simulation   95, 102
losses   257, 269, 300
low channel doping   195–196
low-field mobility   40, 55, 62
manufacturability   5, 124, 198, 
341–342, 345, 347, 353, 358
mask   58, 102, 105, 107, 112, 121, 
182, 185, 212, 309, 362
	 layout   45–46, 112
mass, effective electron   189, 263
material information   45, 113
material interfaces   117–118, 265
material oxide   90, 205
material parameters   16, 40, 42, 
50, 58, 90, 188, 205, 246, 274, 
299, 304
material properties   86, 175, 189, 
267
materials   37, 39–40, 50, 70, 
78, 80–81, 84–85, 116–118, 
120–124, 133, 135, 204–206, 
229–235, 302–304, 306–307
	 acceptor   302–303
	 chalcogenide   258
	 donor   302
	 ferroelectric   257–258
	 low-bandgap   302
	 new   2–3, 9, 14, 16, 77–78, 126, 
255, 342, 348
	 organic   301–302
	 semiconductor   35, 41, 57, 61, 
301
maximum oscillation frequency   
128, 139–140, 152, 159, 290
measurements   7, 9, 21, 142, 
150, 179, 256, 315, 322–323, 
326, 331–332, 348, 372–374, 
376–377, 385
	 electrical   316, 345, 383
	 I–V   332
	 Id–Vg   332
	 photoluminescence   174

414
Index
mechanical stresses   3, 16, 18, 47, 
49, 52, 54, 58, 69–70, 256
	 associated   157, 161, 164
mechanical stress sources   49, 201
memory   4, 9, 56–57, 255, 257, 
267–268, 280
mesh   34, 37–39, 43–44, 59, 108–
109, 116, 123, 132, 134, 246, 
265, 287, 309
	 fine   38–39, 115, 134, 265
	 new   95, 134
mesh definition   39
mesh generation   39, 309, 344, 
353
meshing   38–39, 43, 151
metal   20, 200, 205, 227–228, 
232–233, 249, 262, 265, 
305–306
metal gate   2–3, 15–16, 62, 65, 
72–73, 80, 201, 226, 233
metal gate granularity (MGG)   66
metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS)   
21, 70, 78, 189, 197, 319, 
330–331, 370
metal-oxide-semiconductor field-
effect transistor (MOSFET)   
8–9, 17–18, 27, 45, 56, 73, 
155, 169, 172, 179, 223–225, 
228–230, 255, 257, 264
methodology   6, 22, 57, 66, 112, 
142, 282, 313, 316, 339, 342, 
345, 349, 351–353, 360
MEXTRAM model   318–320
MGG, see metal gate granularity
microscope   377, 379
minimum gate voltage   332
mixed-mode simulation   60, 97
mobility   16, 40, 42, 47, 54–55, 
62, 71, 77, 83–84, 152, 157, 
176–178, 201, 224, 302
	 electron and hole   60, 176, 189, 
204
mobility enhancement factors   48, 
88, 203, 209–211
mobility enhancements, stress-
induced   162, 221
modeling   7–8, 11, 15, 25–26, 31, 
35, 69, 95–96, 102, 130,  
302–303, 316, 318–320, 324, 
328
	 compact   21, 314, 317–318
	 levels of   349, 361
modeling power devices   19
model parameter extraction   323
model parameters   234, 307, 317, 
326, 355, 361, 363
	 compact   317–318
	 default   212–213
models   14–16, 26–27, 41–42, 
47–48, 54–55, 57–58, 62–64, 
86–87, 90–91, 119, 229, 274, 
284, 303–304, 318–319
	 advanced   319, 326
	 analytical   97, 100
	 corner   346–348
	 default   116, 118
	 ionization   41–42, 190, 288
	 multilayer   87–88, 93
	 piezoresistance   202
	 tabular   315–316
model semiconductor devices   32
modules   64–65, 115–116, 307, 
373
monograph   14–15, 22
MOS, see metal-oxide 
semiconductor
MOS devices   39, 42
MOSFET, see metal-oxide-
semiconductor field-effect 
transistor
	 double-gate   195
MOSFET structure   29, 39, 
113–114, 170, 180–181, 188, 
228–229, 282
multigate transistors   3, 195, 199
nanocrystal   261–262, 265

415
Index
nanocrystal floating gate (NCFG)  
259, 261–265, 280
nanoscale SRAM devices   276
NBTI, see negative-bias 
temperature instability
NCFG, see nanocrystal floating gate
negative-bias temperature 
instability (NBTI)   12, 276
nitride   73, 79, 87–88, 143, 
145–147, 181, 187, 200, 233, 
238–239, 246, 267–270
	 160-layer deposition of   91–93
nitride capping layer   84
nitride film   73–74, 88, 161
nitride layers   83, 157, 161, 164, 
226, 266, 269–271
nitride strain layer   162
n-MOSFET 	
113, 174, 203, 
226, 228–230, 282, 330
NPN transistor   386
OLED, see organic light-emitting 
diode
one-step model   86
on-wafer measurement   322–325
operation   82, 152, 241, 246,  
258–259, 292, 365, 373–374, 
376
optical microscope   377–378, 387
organic light-emitting diode 
(OLED)   80, 232
output   36, 45–46, 113, 191, 248, 
367, 380, 383
output characteristics   190, 192, 
243, 248, 251, 326, 351, 383, 
385
oxidation   26, 28, 32, 35, 46, 48, 
57, 60, 70, 95, 97, 101,  
114–115, 118, 286
oxide   39, 48, 107, 117, 143, 147, 
157, 161, 164, 181, 187, 204, 
225, 233, 259–261
	 etching of   146, 164
	 pedestal   143, 145
oxide layer   107, 161, 164–165, 
182, 184, 266, 309
oxide regions   148, 287
parameter extraction   317, 324, 
331, 333, 363, 372–373
parasitic   316, 324
parasitic barrier   131
parasitic capacitances   152, 225, 
237
parasitic effects   223–225, 292, 
318
parasitic elements   152
parasitic phenomenon   27, 29
parasitic substrate transistor   322
patterning   102, 147, 181, 185, 
187, 200, 212
p-channel devices   334
PCM, see process compact model
PDK, see process design kit
performance   2, 4, 9, 17–18, 35, 
37, 139, 142, 152, 155–156, 
169, 172, 225–226, 298, 
341–342
performance enhancement   155, 
343
photon   61, 298, 302, 304
photogeneration rate   299–300, 
310, 312
photoresist   105, 185, 277–278
physical deposition process   86
physical models   34–35, 37, 40, 42, 
46, 48, 58, 96–97, 157–158, 
246
physical structures   35–37
planes   3, 50–51, 73, 75, 77, 79, 90, 
115, 209, 212
p-MOSFET   81–82, 172–174,  
180–182, 185, 187–188,  
193–194, 201, 203, 226
polarization, spontaneous    
238–240, 242, 245–246
polarization model   238–239, 246
polybase   143, 145, 147

416
Index
polycrystalline silicon solar cells   
20, 305
polyemitter   143, 147, 152
polysilicon   65, 123–124, 131, 157, 
164, 182, 226–227, 232–233, 
235, 277–278
polysilicon emitter bipolar 
technology   107
polysilicon films   234–235
polysilicon gate   72, 113–114, 182, 
227, 287
polysilicon gate oxide structure   
185
polysilicon layers   161, 164
polytypes   250
power applications   252, 292
power MOS device structures   19
process-aware device modeling   
13
process compact model (PCM)   
13, 15, 21, 59, 257–258, 344, 
351–353, 355–358, 387
process design   5–6, 32, 127
process design kit (PDK)   5, 368
process/device TCAD-based SPICE 
model parameter extraction   
314
process flow   81, 83, 95, 105, 
108, 143, 181, 187, 213–214, 
283–284, 349, 383
processing   25, 80, 301, 305, 314
processing steps   7, 28, 36, 48, 
58, 127, 152, 157, 161, 164, 
284–285, 363
process optimization   6, 124, 196, 
351, 353–354
process simulation   9–10, 30–31, 
34, 38, 95–96, 108, 112–113, 
131, 164–165, 181–182, 185, 
212, 287, 309–310, 349–350
process simulator   30, 32, 35, 
44–45, 56–57, 59, 112–113, 
148, 250, 370, 387
process steps   33–34, 45, 80–81, 
86, 95, 112, 119, 148,  
180–181, 187, 204, 212,  
226–227, 266, 283–284, 344, 
346, 350, 383
process technologies   4, 13, 20–21, 
57, 277, 281, 341, 370, 387
process technology development   
15, 283
process-to-device-simulation setup 
steps   353
process variability   11, 14, 339, 
342–345, 347–349, 351, 356
process variations   3, 7, 12, 14, 
101, 341, 343, 345, 347–348, 
351, 358, 360–361
programs   29, 57, 67, 101,  
260–261, 263, 367, 375, 379
properties, electronic   15, 126, 
170–171, 173–175, 177, 179
proximity   9, 70–71, 278–279
proximity effects   344, 346–347
p-type silicon substrate   143, 259
quasi-2D doping   27–28
quasi-ballistic effects   213
quasi-electric field   127
quasi-equilibrium   86
quasi-planar structure   195
quasi-saturation   318–321, 328
quasi-static   192–193
radio frequency (RF)   16, 31,  
56–57, 134, 139, 232, 237, 
290, 319, 321, 352–353
ramping   192, 269, 272, 274
random dopant fluctuation (RDF)   
14, 63–64, 346–347
rapid thermal annealing (RTA)   99, 
352, 354, 357–360
RDF, see random dopant 
fluctuation
real wafer fabrication (RWF)   10, 
362, 381

417
Index
recombination models   41–42
reduction   127, 149, 159, 176, 221, 
223, 225, 282
refraction   179, 307, 309
regions   37–39, 88, 98, 126, 132, 
134, 147, 152, 158–159, 226, 
235, 243, 278–279, 282, 
286–287
	 active   182, 301
	 critical   37
	 depletion   39
	 inversion   39
	 source/drain   63, 65, 71–72, 77, 
196, 200, 212, 225, 233, 240, 
266, 292
remote laboratory (RL)   370–375, 
388
reoxidation   80, 283, 286–287
resist   102–103, 107–108,  
277–279, 307, 347
resistance   152, 182, 252, 258, 
282–283, 307, 321
response surface model (RSM)   
351–352, 387
retention time   19, 255, 257, 
262–264
RF, see radio frequency
RL, see remote laboratory
RSM, see response surface model
RTA, see rapid thermal annealing
RWF, see real wafer fabrication
sapphire   237, 241–242, 270, 272
saturation   55, 124, 326–327, 345, 
347, 356–358, 386
scaling   3, 7, 9, 18, 78, 196, 221, 
223, 256, 260, 276, 278, 346, 
359
SCE, see short-channel effect
SCM, see statistical compact model
screening experiments   350
self-heating   19, 242–243, 252, 
319–320, 322
semiconductor device modeling   
322
semiconductor devices   3–4, 7, 22, 
25, 36, 38, 47, 58–60, 97, 331, 
352, 364, 372–373, 377
	 electrical behavior of   12, 313
	 simulations of   35, 48
semiconductor fabrication   12, 47, 
82–83, 85, 87, 89, 91, 313, 381
semiconductor industry   1–2, 6, 
12, 28, 35, 66, 124, 255–256, 
313
semiconductor memory   19, 
255–256
sensitivity   127, 156, 345, 351, 
353, 356, 358–359
sensitivity analysis   350, 352, 
354–356
Sentaurus   56–58, 353
	 Device   58, 157, 284, 287,  
352–353
	 Structure Editor   38, 57, 59
	 TCAD software tools   157–158, 
161–162, 164
	 Workbench   58–59, 344, 352
set   14–15, 27, 29, 111–112, 246, 
267–271, 299, 315–316, 332, 
344–345, 356, 358, 362, 364, 
366
	 measurement   332–333
SGP, see SPICE version of Gummel–
Poon 
SGP model   318–319, 321
shallow trench isolation (STI)   3, 
13, 71, 74, 77–78, 84, 118, 132, 
143, 145, 226–227, 277–278, 
282
short-channel effect (SCE)   170, 
195–196, 223–224
sidewalls   73, 200, 207, 209–210
SiGe extrinsic stress layer   157
SiGe HBT device   156, 158–162, 
164–165, 167

418
Index
SiGe layer   148, 156, 176, 180, 
182, 187
SiGe layer deposition   181, 187
SiGe technologies   127, 318
SILC, see stress-induced leakage 
current
silicidation   35, 228
silicide   43, 226–227
silicon   2–3, 51–57, 70–71, 73, 75, 
122–124, 131–132, 139–140, 
164, 169–170, 172, 200–202, 
233–235, 237, 306–307
	 amorphous   232, 234, 306–307
	 crystalline   99, 306
	 single-crystal   233–234
silicon cells   297
silicon devices   16, 179, 249
	 conventional   237
silicon film   225
silicon film device layer, active   
225
silicon-germanium   15, 126, 155, 
172, 204
silicon lattice   98–99, 180
silicon layer   161, 164, 179, 182
	 doped   233
silicon material   156, 159
silicon nitride   48, 182, 267, 
270–272
silicon substrate   132, 155, 164, 
187, 212, 225
silicon technology   20, 125–126, 
139–140, 169–170, 305
	 advancements in   140, 156
simulated BJT device structure   
109
simulated device structure   131
simulation flow   349
simulation grid   33–34
Simulation Program with 
Integrated Circuit Emphasis 
(SPICE)   10, 26, 316, 318, 362, 
370
simulations   25–30, 34–39, 90, 
97–98, 180–182, 228–230, 
242–247, 249–252, 264–268, 
273–274, 286–288, 297–299, 
303–307, 348–350, 372–373
	 channel stress   87, 93
	 process/device   20, 181
	 stress evolution   86, 90
simulation time   37, 39, 116, 134
simulators   27, 29–30, 34, 37, 64, 
98, 111–112, 153, 212, 385
single-layer deposition   91–92
Si/SiGe heterostructure devices   
155
SMU, see source monitor unit
solar cells   9, 20, 297–298,  
300–302, 304–312
	 homojunction silicon   20, 305
	 organic   20, 301, 303, 312
	 single-crystal silicon   20, 305
	 tandem   20, 302, 305–306, 312
	 thin-film   20, 305
source   36, 38–39, 48, 50, 65–66, 
70–71, 77, 80, 102–103,  
196–197, 238, 240, 282, 284, 
304
source/drain   80, 84, 200
source/drain regions   71–72, 200, 
212, 225, 233
source/drain stressors   71, 203
source monitor unit (SMU)   325
source region   294
source side   204, 288
source voltage   332
spacers   73, 75–76, 79–80, 88, 
113–114, 146, 148, 200, 204, 
226–227
SPCM, see SPICE process compact 
model
SPICE, see Simulation Program 
with Integrated Circuit 
Emphasis
SPICE models   314, 316, 331, 339, 
348, 351

419
Index
SPICE parameters   350, 353, 363, 
382, 385–386
	 extracted   385–386
SPICE process compact models 
(SPCMs)   352
SPICE version of Gummel–Poon 
(SGP)   318–319, 321
SPT, see stress proximity technique
state transition   273, 275, 280
statistical compact model (SCM)   
6, 12, 64, 66
statistical variability 63–65
STI, see shallow trench isolation
STI stress   77
stored charge   269–270, 272
strain   14, 16, 18, 48, 50, 53, 55, 
73, 156–160, 162–164,  
166–167, 171–172, 174, 202, 
204
	 epitaxial   239
	 imported   239
	 process-induced   5, 156, 169
	 substrate-induced   156, 179
strained-Si devices   191–192
strained-Si layer   174–175, 183, 
187
strained-Si p-channel devices   187
strain layer   157, 160–161, 163, 
165–166
strain polarization   238–240
strain technology   3, 20, 73, 156
strain tensor   51–53
stress   1, 3, 16, 18, 47–48, 50–51, 
53–54, 69–73, 75–78, 83–88, 
90–91, 160–161, 167,  
179–180, 201–210
	 biaxial   16, 84
	 lateral   87–89, 91
	 shear   51
stress analysis   46, 48, 203
stress components   51, 53, 75, 84, 
202
stress distributions   48, 69, 88, 
203, 209, 238–240
stress effects   3, 16, 47, 49, 62, 74, 
77–78, 203
	 layout-dependent   49, 69
	 mechanical   49–50
stress evolution   76, 82–83, 85–87, 
89, 91, 343–344
	 model   86, 90–91
stress fields   75–76, 84
stress history model   86, 94
stress-induced leakage current 
(SILC)   260–262
stress layer   160
stress liner   72, 203, 205, 238–239
stressors   201, 203, 238
	 local   204
	 multilayer   86, 90
	 one-layer nitride   86, 90
stress proximity effects   342–343
stress proximity technique (SPT)   
93
stress simulation   31, 47–48, 94, 
201, 203, 239
stress simulator VictoryStress   
203, 211
stress sources   9, 84
	 multiple   344
stress state   49, 75–76, 83–84
stress–strain relationship   51
stress tensor   51, 53
stress values   158–162, 164–165
	 average   88
structure   33–34, 37–38, 90,  
107–108, 115–117, 134,  
148–150, 185–186, 203,  
209–210, 212, 241–242,  
258–259, 294, 309–310
	 final   134, 149, 151
	 flip-chip   243
	 layer   172, 326, 364, 382
	 MOSFET   29, 39, 113–114, 170, 
228–229, 282
	 n-MOSFET   229
	 normal   241, 243
	 p-MOSFET   180–181, 188

420
Index
structure editing   38
structure file   33, 46, 53, 212, 
271–273, 283, 299
	 standard   34
substrate   38, 77–78, 80, 83, 169, 
171, 182, 185–187, 197–198, 
223–233, 238, 241–242,  
260–261, 263, 266
	 initial   33, 119
	 p-type   265
	 relaxed-SiGe   174
	 solid   78–79
substrate effects   320, 324
surface   40, 55, 88, 97, 143, 193, 
200, 224, 226, 265, 274–275, 
306, 380–381
systems   4, 16, 39–40, 59, 97,  
297–298, 303, 369, 371,  
374–375, 377–378, 387
Taurus Device   59–60, 211–212
Taurus Process   211–212, 214
TCAD, see technology computer-
aided design
TCAD applications   22
TCAD data   314–316
TCAD laboratory, simulation-based   
373, 382, 385
TCAD simulations   12, 15, 26, 28, 
31, 57, 112, 142, 154, 283, 
296, 313, 387
TCAD tools   4–5, 10, 12, 15, 25, 43, 
147, 283–284, 344, 361–362, 
381
techniques   14, 71–72, 97, 99, 169, 
324, 331, 347–348, 361, 374
	 stress-engineering   62, 71
technology   2–5, 7–10, 17, 21–22, 
25–27, 151–154, 224–227, 
263, 280, 282–283, 313–314, 
341–342, 346, 368–370, 374
	 advanced   72, 225, 343, 345, 
348
	 finFET   196, 200
technology characterization   4, 10, 
362–363, 383
technology computer-aided design 
(TCAD)   4–11, 13–15, 20–22, 
25–27, 30, 69, 169, 281–283, 
313–314, 343–345, 347–349, 
351–352, 360–361, 368, 382
technology designs   6, 388
technology development   5, 13, 
22, 26–27, 30–31, 58, 95, 141, 
316, 344, 352, 368, 383
technology nodes   2, 8–9, 15–16, 
18, 27, 62, 73, 155, 200, 221, 
223–226, 260, 276, 363, 372
TED, see transient-enhanced 
diffusion
temperature   50, 53, 82, 85–86, 
174, 176–179, 264, 274, 287, 
293, 316, 321, 326, 346–347, 
364–365
tensile strain   171–173, 179
tensile stress   71–73, 75, 158, 202, 
256
test   299, 346–347, 374, 377
test structure   86, 90, 314
TFT, see thin-film transistor
TFT devices   232–234
	 self-aligned polysilicon   232
	 simulated   233
thick stress layer deposition   85, 
90
thin-film transistor (TFT)   32, 44, 
232–235
threshold voltage   65, 69, 
223–225, 247, 251, 260, 266, 
271, 326, 332–333, 345, 347, 
351–352, 354, 356–358
threshold voltage shift   12, 19–20, 
265, 270
through-silicon via (TSV)   10, 71
time steps   266
TonyPlot   31, 34, 48, 209, 274, 364
tools   5, 7, 10, 12, 14–15, 25–28, 
31, 37, 45, 57, 112, 348,  
361–362, 367–369, 374

421
Index
	 interactive   31, 48, 364
transconductance   217, 219,  
243–244, 290, 326
transient-enhanced diffusion 
(TED)   101, 352
transistor channel   74, 203, 246
transistor design   4, 61
transistor device technologies, 
emerging   3
transistors   1–2, 27, 29, 38–39, 
49, 69–71, 107–108, 129, 
142–143, 225–226, 251–252, 
256, 259, 281, 382–383
	 long   75–76
	 planar   71–72, 225
	 trigate   199
transistor structures   9, 18, 89, 91, 
250, 363
transit time   159–160, 321
	 reduced base   128–129
trapping   132, 235, 267, 269
traps   235, 247, 267–268, 272
trench   77–78, 157, 250, 252
trigate   197–198, 211, 214
TSV, see through-silicon via
tunnel oxide   259–267
UIS, see unclamped inductive 
switching
UIS implant   293–295
unclamped inductive switching 
(UIS)   292–294
uniaxial stress   16, 54
unintentional stresses   69–71
valence bands   18, 42, 61, 128, 
169, 171–175, 179, 189, 236, 
269
variability   14, 66, 69, 102, 224, 
342, 345–348, 351, 360, 387
	 parametric   345–346, 360
variability sources   64–66, 348
variables   315, 326, 365
variance   355, 358–359
variations   12, 49, 77, 111, 214, 
218, 276, 279, 320, 334,  
346–347, 356, 358–359
vertical stress   87, 89
VictoryCell   31, 44–45, 48,  
113–114, 204, 250, 252, 309
VictoryCell process steps   203
VictoryDevice   31, 44, 48–50, 123, 
228–229, 250, 252, 274, 309
VictoryProcess   31, 45–46, 48, 86, 
90, 112, 114–115, 118, 124
VictoryStress   31, 47, 50, 86, 90, 
238
VictoryStress simulation   47, 88, 
92–93
virtual wafer fabrication (VWF)   
31, 48, 362–364, 372, 381, 387
voltage   179, 274–275, 292, 305, 
348
VWF, see virtual wafer fabrication
wafer   7, 48, 102–103, 115, 200, 
323, 347
W-array   332–333
wavelength   103–104, 298–300, 
306
Web-based Tool for Electronic 
Model Automation 
(WEBTEMA)   386
WEBTEMA, see Web-based Tool for 
Electronic Model Automation
WFV, see work function variability
work function   229, 262, 267, 274
work function variability (WFV)   
64
yield   5, 7, 13–14, 18, 25, 95, 341, 
344–348, 358, 360
zones   76–77, 84, 157–159

