Media Literacy 
and cuLture
StanLey J. Baran
IntroductIon to 
Mass CoMMuniCation 8e


Connect Mass Communication Media Bank: CNN Video Clips
France’s Ban on Full-Face Veils
Photoshop and Image Manipulation
Changes to FCC Media Ownership Rules
Media Coverage of Sensational Stories: The Balloon Boy Hoax
Adult Literacy: America’s Failing Grade
Book Battle: Paper or eBook?
Free Newspaper as a Tool for Development in Mozambique
Generating Revenue with a Digital Paywall: The New York Times
Magazine Advertising Malaise
Cigarette Ads Pulled from Magazines
Walmart’s New Digital Video Rental Plan
Nigeria’s Nollywood
Satellite Radio
FCC Rulings on Broadcast Ownership
Net Neutrality
Closing the Broadband Gap
Supreme Court Examines Ban on Violent Video Games 
Video Games as Tools for Rehabilitation
SOPA Piracy
Social Media Monitoring
Too Big to Fly? Social Media and Public Relations
BP’s Oil Spill Public Relations Disaster
Facebook and Your Ads
Advertising in Schools
Getting Young Latinos to Complete the Census
Violent Video Games: Ratings and Access
Wikileaks and International Diplomacy
Pakistan’s List of Banned Text Message Words
VOA’s Persian News Network: Broadcasting in Iran
Google’s Landing Page in China 
For more information about Connect Mass Communication,  
visit connect.mcgraw-hill.com

 Eighth Edition 
 Introduction to   
Mass Communication 
 MEDIA LITERACY AND CULTURE 
 Stanley J. Baran 
 Bryant University 
TM

INTRODUCTION TO MASS COMMUNICATION: MEDIA LITERACY AND CULTURE, EIGHTH EDITION
 Published by McGraw-Hill, a business unit of Th e McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., 1221 Avenue of the Americas, New York, 
NY 10020. Copyright © 2014 by Th e McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. 
Previous editions © 2013, 2012, and 2010. No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any 
means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written consent of Th e McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., 
including, but not limited to, in any network or other electronic storage or transmission, or broadcast for distance learning. 
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside the United States.
 Th is book is printed on acid-free paper.  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 QDB/QDB 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 
ISBN 978-0-07-352621-8
 MHID 0-07-352621-5 
TM
 Senior Vice President, Products & Markets: Kurt L. Strand
Vice President, General Manager, Products & Markets: 
 Michael Ryan
Vice President, Content Production & Technology Services: 
 Kimberly Meriwether David
Managing Director: David Patterson
Director: Susan Gouijnstook
Marketing Manager: Clare Cashen
Director of Development: Rhona Robbin
Development Editor: Kirstan Price
Lead Digital Content Editor: Scott Harris
Director, Content Production: Terri Schiesl
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the copyright page.
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 Baran, Stanley J. author. 
  Introduction to Mass Communication : Media Literacy and Culture / Stanley Baran, Bryant University.— 
 Eighth Edition. 
  pages cm 
  Includes index. 
 Revision of the 7th ed. published in 2011.
  ISBN  978–0–07–352621–8 — ISBN  0–07–352621–5 (hard copy) 
  1. Mass media. 2. Mass media and culture. 3. Media literacy. I. Title.  
  P90.B284 2013 
  302.23—dc23 
 
  2012041518 
 Th e Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. Th e inclusion of a website does not indicate an 
endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill, and McGraw-Hill does not guarantee the accuracy of the information presented at 
these sites. 
 www.mhhe.com 
Content Project Manager: Jennifer Gehl
Senior Buyer: Laura Fuller
Designer: Tara McDermott
Cover/Interior Design: Ellen Pettengell
Cover Images: (silhouette) © Getty Images/AWL Images; 
 (background) © Getty Images/Alan Copson 
Content Licensing Specialist: Ann Marie Jannette
Photo Research: Emily Tietz, Editorial Image, LLC
Compositor: Aptara®, Inc.
Typeface: 10/12 Minion
Printer: Quad/Graphics 

 In loving memory of my mother, 
Margaret Baran; 
she gave me life; 
and in honor of my wife, 
Susan Baran; 
she gave that life meaning. 

iv 
 Stanley Baran earned his Ph.D. in communication research at the University of 
Massachusetts after taking his M.A. in journalism at Pennsylvania State University. He 
taught for four years at Cleveland State University, eventually moving to the University 
of Texas. He led the Department of Radio-TV-Film’s graduate program for six of his 
nine years in Austin and won numerous teaching awards there, including the AMOCO 
Teaching Excellence Award as the best instructor on that 40,000-student campus, the 
College of Communication’s Teaching Excellence Award as that college’s outstanding 
professor, and  Utmost Magazine’ s Student Poll for best instructor. Dr. Baran moved to 
San Jose State University in 1987 and served nine years as chair of the Department of 
Television, Radio, Film, and Th eatre. At SJSU he was named President’s Scholar as the 
university’s outstanding researcher. Now, he teaches at Bryant University, where he is 
the founding chair of that school’s Communication Department. Among his other 
experiences shaping this book are service as a Fulbright Scholar and his many years 
of professional activity in audience research, writing for radio, and producing for tele-
vision. Dr. Baran has published 10 books and scores of scholarly articles and sits or 
has sat on the editorial boards of six journals. His work has been translated into half 
a dozen languages. He is a skilled boater and a tenor saxophonist for the Wakefi eld, 
Rhode Island, Concert Band. He is married to Susan Baran and has two very cool 
children, Matt and Jordan, who grew up much faster than he wanted. 
 About the Author 

 
v
 Preface   xv 
 PART  ONE  LAYING  THE  GROUNDWORK 
 2 
  1 Mass Communication, Culture, and Media Literacy 2 
  2 Convergence and the Reshaping of Mass 
Communication 28 
 PART   TWO  MEDIA,  MEDIA  INDUSTRIES,  AND  MEDIA  AUDIENCES 
 46 
  3 Books 46 
  4 Newspapers 70 
  5 Magazines 97 
  6 Film 120 
  7 Radio, Recording, and Popular Music 150 
  8 Television, Cable, and Mobile Video 180 
  9 Video Games 208 
  10 The Internet and the World Wide Web 230 
 PART   THREE  STRATEGIC  COMMUNICATION  INDUSTRIES 
 263 
  11 Public Relations 263 
  12 Advertising 286 
 PART   FOUR  MASSMEDIATED  CULTURE  IN  THE  INFORMATION  AGE 
 316 
  13 Theories and Effects of Mass Communication 316 
  14 Media Freedom, Regulation, and Ethics 350 
  15 Global Media 382 
 Glossary  G-1 
 References   R-1 
 Credits  C-1 
 Index   I-1 
 Brief Contents 


vii
 Preface  xv 
 PART ONE  LAYING THE GROUNDWORK 
 2 
 Contents 
1 Mass Communication, Culture, 
and Media Literacy 
2 
 What Is Mass Communication? 4 
  Communication Deﬁ ned  
 4 
 Mass Communication Deﬁ ned  
 6 
 What Is Culture? 9 
 Culture as Socially Constructed Shared 
Meaning  
 9  
 Functions and Effects of Culture  
 9 
 Mass Communication and Culture 14 
 Mass Media as Cultural Storytellers  
 15 
 Mass Communication as Cultural Forum  
 15 
 Scope and Nature of Mass Media 16 
 The Role of Technology  
 16 
 The Role of Money  
 17 
 CULTURAL  FORUM Audience as Consumer or Audience 
as Product? 18 
 Mass Communication, Culture, and Media 
Literacy 18 
 The Gutenberg Revolution  
 19 
 The Industrial Revolution  
 20 
 Media Literacy 21 
 Elements of Media Literacy  
 21 
 Media Literacy Skills 24 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE Recognizing Cultural 
Values 26 
 Resources for Review and Discussion 26 
 Review Points  26  
 Key Terms  27  
 Questions for Review  27 
 Questions for Critical Thinking and 
Discussion 27  
2 Convergence  and   the  Reshaping 
 of  Mass  Communication 
28 
 Industries in Transition 31 
 The Good News for Media 
Industries 32 
 Changes 33 
 Concentration of Ownership and 
Conglomeration  33   
 Globalization 35 
 CULTURAL  FORUM  Concentration, Conglomeration,
 and Serving Democracy 36 
 Audience Fragmentation 37 
 Hypercommercialism 38 
 Erosion of Distinctions  among Media: 
Convergence  39   

viii 
Contents
 DEVELOPING  MEDIA  LITERACY  SKILLS Reconsidering the 
Process of Mass Communication 41 
 Interpreter A— The Content Producer 41 
 The Message 42 
 Feedback and Interpreter B— The Audience 43 
 The Result 44 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE  The  Fraction  of  Selection  44  
 Resources for Review and 
Discussion 44 
 Review Points  44  
 Key Terms  45  
 Questions for Review  45  
 Questions for Critical Thinking and 
Discussion 45  
 PART TWO MEDIA, MEDIA INDUSTRIES, AND MEDIA AUDIENCES 
46 
  3 Books 
46 
 Book Timeline 48 
 A Short History of Books 49 
 Books Come to Colonial North America 49 
 Books and Their Audiences 52 
 The Cultural Value of the Book 52 
 Censorship 53 
 USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE  Our Bodies, 
 Ourselves 54 
 Aliteracy as Self-Censorship 55 
 Scope and Structure of the Book 
Industry 57 
 Categories of Books 57 
 Trends and Convergence in Book 
Publishing 58 
 Convergence 58 
 Smartphones ,  Tablets,  and  e-Readers 59 
 Conglomeration 61 
 Demand for Proﬁ ts and  Hypercommercialism 62 
 Growth of Small Presses 64 
 Restructuring of Book Retailing 65 
 CULTURAL FORUM  Americans Don’t Burn Books 66 
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS  The Lessons of Harry 
Potter 67 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE  Literacy:  Limiting  Access  to 
 Books  in  School  68 
 Resources for Review and Discussion 69 
 Review Points  69 
 Key Terms 69 
 Questions for Review  69 
 Questions for Critical Thinking and 
Discussion 69  
  4  Newspapers 
70 
 Newspaper Timeline 72 
 A Short History of Newspapers 73 
 The Earliest Newspapers 73 
 The Modern Newspaper Emerges 75 
 Newspapers and Their Audiences 78 
 Scope and Structure of the Newspaper 
Industry 78 
 USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE  Nonproﬁ t Newsrooms 
Fill the Reporting Void  79
 Types of Newspapers 79 
 CULTURAL FORUM  Smaller Is (Sometimes) Better 83 

Contents 
ix
 The Newspaper as an Advertising 
Medium 84 
 The News and Feature Services 85 
 Trends and Convergence in Newspaper 
Publishing 85 
 Loss of Competition 86 
 Conglomeration:  Hypercommercialism , Erosion of the 
Firewall, and Loss of Mission 87 
 Convergence  with the Internet 88 
 Smartphones , Tablets, and e-Readers 90
 Changes in Newspaper Readership 91 
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS  Interpreting Relative 
Placement of Stories 93 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE  Reading  the  Newspaper:  Hard 
 Copy  vs.  Online  vs.  Mobile  93 
 Resources for Review and Discussion 94 
 Review Points  94 
 Key Terms 94 
 Questions for Review  94  
 Questions for Critical Thinking and 
Discussion 95 
   5  Magazines 
97 
 Magazine Timeline 98 
 A Short History of Magazines 100 
 The Early Magazine Industry 100 
 The Mass Circulation Era 101 
 The Era of Specialization 102 
 Magazines and Their Audiences 104 
 Scope and Structure of the Magazine 
Industry 104 
 Categories of Consumer Magazines 105 
 Magazine Advertising 105 
 USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE  No Ads? No Problem: 
 Co n sumer Reports 108 
 Types of Circulation 108 
 Measuring Circulation 109 
 Trends and Convergence in Magazine 
Publishing 110 
 Online Magazines 110 
 Smartphones , Tablets, and e-Readers 111
 Custom Magazines 112 
 Meeting Competition from Cable Television 113 
 CULTURAL FORUM  Interruptive Ads: Invasive or 
Necessary? 114 
 Advertorials 114 
 Advertiser Inﬂ uence  over Magazine Content 115 
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS:  Recognizing the Power 
of Graphics 117 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE  Identifying  Digital 
 Alteration  118 
 Resources for Review and Discussion 118 
 Review Points  118  
 Key Terms  119  
 Questions for Review  119 
 Questions for Critical Thinking and 
Discussion 119  
   6  Film 
120 
 Film Timeline 122 
 A Short History of the Movies 124 
 The Early Entrepreneurs 124 
 The Coming of Narrative 126 
 USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE  African American 
Response to D. W. Grifﬁ th: The Lincoln and 
Micheaux Film Companies 129 
 The Big Studios 129 
 Change Comes to Hollywood 130 
 Movies and Their Audiences 134 
 Scope and Nature of the Film Industry 136 
 CULTURAL FORUM  Will We Continue to Go to the 
Movies? 137 
 Three Component Systems  138 
 The Studios 139 
 Trends and Convergence in 
Moviemaking 141 
 Conglomeration and the Blockbuster Mentality 141 
 Convergence Reshapes the Movie Business 143 
 Smartphones, Tablets, and Social Networking 
Sites 145 

x 
Contents
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS  Recognizing Product 
Placements 145 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE  Product Placement in 
Movies 147 
 Resources for Review and Discussion  148  
 Review Points 148  
 Key Terms 148  
 Questions for Review  149 
 Questions for Critical Thinking and 
Discussion 149 
   7  Radio,  Recording,  and  Popular 
 Music 
150 
 Radio/Recording Timeline 152 
 A Short History of Radio and Sound 
Recording 154 
 Early Radio 154 
 Early Sound Recording 155 
 The Coming of Broadcasting 156 
 The Coming of Regulation 157 
 Advertising and the Networks 158 
 The Golden Age 158 
 Radio and Its Audiences 160 
 Scope and Nature of the Radio Industry 160 
 FM, AM, and Noncommercial Radio 160 
 Radio Is Local 161 
 Radio Is Fragmented 161 
 Radio Is Specialized 161 
 Radio Is Personal 162 
 Radio Is Mobile 162 
 The Business of Radio 163 
 Radio as an Advertising Medium 163 
 Deregulation and Ownership 163 
 Scope and Nature of the Recording 
Industry 164 
 The Major Recording Companies 164 
 USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE  Rock ‘n’ Roll, Radio, and 
Race Relations 166 
 Trends and Convergence in Radio and 
Sound Recording 167 
 The Impact of Television 167 
 Satellite and Cable 168 
 Terrestrial Digital Radio 169 
 Web Radio and Podcasting 170 
 Smartphones , Tablets, and Social Networking 
Sites 170  
 Digital Technology 171 
 The Internet and the Future of the 
Recording Industry 172 
 Industry-Approved Downloading 173 
 P2P Downloading 173 
 CULTURAL FORUM  The Future of the Music 
Business? 174 
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS  Listening to Shock 
Jocks 175 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE  Listening to Shock Jocks with 
a Media-Literate Ear 177 
 Resources for Review and Discussion 177 
 Review Points  177  
 Key Terms  178  
 Questions for Review  178  
 Questions for Critical Thinking and 
Discussion 179  
   8  Television,  Cable,  and  Mobile 
 Video 
180 
 Television Timeline 182 
 A Short History of Television 183 
 Mechanical and Electronic Scanning 184 
 The 1950s 185 
 The Coming of Cable 190 
 Television and Its Audiences 191 
 USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE  The Creation of  Sesame 
Street  192 
 Scope and Nature of the Broadcast 
Television Industry 193 
 The Networks and Program Content 193 
 How a Program Gets on the Air 193 
 Cable and Satellite Television 195 
 Programming 196 
 CULTURAL FORUM Bundle or À la Carte? 200 
 Trends and Convergence in Television and 
Cable 200 
 VCR 201 
 DVD 201 
 DVR 201 
 Video on the Internet 202 

 Interactive Television 203 
 Phone-over-Cable 204 
 Smartphones, Tablets, and TV Everywhere 204 
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS  Recognizing Staged 
News 204 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE  No Video for a Week 206 
 Resources for Review and 
Discussion 206 
 Review Points  206  
 Key Terms 207  
 Questions for Review  207  
 Questions for Critical Thinking and 
Discussion 207 
   9  Video  Games 
208 
 Video-Game Timeline 210 
 A Short History of Computer and Video 
Games 211 
 Today’s Games Emerge 212 
 Rapid-Fire Developments 214 
 Games and Their Players 215 
 USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE  Using Games for 
Good 216 
 What Is a Video Game? 216 
 Who Is Playing? 217 
 Scope and Nature of the Video-Game 
Industry 218 
 Trends and Convergence in the Video-Game 
Industry 220 
 Convergence Everywhere 220 
 Smartphones , Tablets, and Social Networking 
Sites 222  
 Hypercommercialism 222 
 CULTURAL FORUM  Are Games Good or Bad? 224 
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS  Using the ESRB 
Ratings 226 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE  Masculinity and Femininity in 
Game World 228 
 Resources for Review and Discussion 228 
 Review Points  228  
 Key Terms 229  
 Questions for Review  229  
 Questions for Critical Thinking and 
Discussion 229 
 10  The  Internet  and  the  World  
Wide  Web 
230 
 Internet and World Wide 
Web Timeline 232 
 A Short History of the Internet 234 
 Development of the Computer 234 
 Military Applications 235 
 The Personal Computer 237 
 The Internet Today 238 
 The World Wide Web 238 
 Smartphones, Tablets, and Social Networking 
Sites 242 
 The Internet and Its Users 243 
 Changes in the Mass Communication 
Process 243 
 The Double Edge of Technology 244 
 McLuhan’s Renaissance 244 
 Reconceptualizing Life in an 
Interconnected World 246 
 The Internet and Freedom of 
Expression   246    
 Freedom of the Press for Whom? 247 
 USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE  Shutting Down the 
Internet to Save the Internet 249  
 Controlling Internet Expression 250 
 Pornography on the World Wide Web 250 
 Copyright (Intellectual Property Ownership) 251 
 Privacy 252 
 Virtual Democracy 255 
 CULTURAL FORUM  My 873 Friends and I Would Like to 
Be Alone, Please: Facebook & Privacy 257 
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS  The Five Internet 
Freedoms 258 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE  A  Cost/Beneﬁ t   Analysis  of 
 Twitter  259 
 Resources for Review and Discussion 260 
 Review Points  260  
 Key Terms  260  
 Questions for Review  261 
 Questions for Critical Thinking and 
Discussion 261  

xii 
Contents
 11  Public  Relations 
263 
 Public Relations Timeline 264 
 Deﬁ ning Public Relations 265 
 A Short History of Public 
Relations 266 
 USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE  The MADD 
Campaign 267 
 Early Public Relations 267 
 The Propaganda–Publicity Stage 268 
 Early Two-Way Communication 269 
 Advanced Two-Way Communication 270 
 Shaping the Character of Public Relations 271 
 Public Relations and Its Audiences 272 
 Scope and Structure of the Public Relations 
Industry 273 
 Public Relations Activities 274 
 CULTURAL FORUM  Big but Silent No More: Protecting a 
Company’s Good Name in the Era of Social 
Media 277 
 Public Relations’ Management Function 278 
 Organization of a Public Relations Operation 278 
 Trends and Convergence in Public 
Relations 279 
 Globalization, Concentration, and Specialization 279 
 Convergence 280 
 Smartphones, Tablets, and Social Networking Sites 281 
 Trust in Public Relations 281 
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS  Recognizing Video News 
Releases 282 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE  Finding VNRs 284 
 Resources for Review and Discussion 284 
 Review Points  284  
 Key Terms 285  
 Questions for Review  285 
 Questions for Critical Thinking and 
Discussion 285 
 12  Advertising 
286 
 Advertising Timeline 288 
 A Short History of Advertising 289 
 Early Advertising 291 
 Industrialization and the Civil War 291 
 Magazine Advertising 292 
 The Advertising Agency and Professionalism 292 
 Advertising and Radio 293 
 World War II 293 
 USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE  Effecting Positive Social 
Change 294 
 Advertising and Television 295 
 Advertising and Its Audiences  296 
 Criticisms and Defenses of Advertising 296 
 Speciﬁ c Complaints 297 
 CULTURAL FORUM  Kids’ Advertising: Is Self-Regulation 
Enough? 299 
 Scope and Nature of the Advertising 
Industry 301 
 The Advertising Agency 301 
 Types of Advertising 302 
 The Regulation of Advertising 303 
 Measuring the Effectiveness of Advertising 305 
 Trends and Convergence in 
Advertising 306 
 New and Converging Technologies 306 
 Smartphones , Tablets, and Social Networking 
Sites 307  
 Increased Audience Segmentation 310 
 Psychographics 310 
 Globalization 311 
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS  Interpreting Intentional 
Imprecision 311 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE  Finding Those Little White 
Lies 313 
 Resources for Review and Discussion 314 
 Review Points  314  
 Key Terms  314  
 Questions for Review  315  
 Questions for Critical Thinking and 
Discussion 315  
 PART THREE STRATEGIC COMMUNICATION INDUSTRIES 
263 

Contents 
xiii
 13  Theories  and  Effects  of  Mass 
 Communication 
316 
 Mass Communication Theories and Effects 
Timeline 318 
 The Effects Debate 318 
 Micro- Versus Macro-Level Effects 320 
 Administrative versus Critical Research 321 
 Transmissional versus Ritual Perspective 322 
 Deﬁ ning Mass Communication Theory 322 
 A Short History of Mass Communication 
Theory 323 
 The Era of Mass Society Theory 324 
 The Emergence of the Limited Effects 
Perspective   325    
 Cultural Theory— A Return to the Idea of Powerful 
Effects   332    
 The Meaning-Making Perspective 337 
 The Effects of Mass Communication—Four 
Questions 339 
 Does Media Violence Lead to Aggression? 339 
 USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE  Television and the 
Designated Driver 342 
 Do Portrayals of Drugs and Alcohol Increase 
Consumption?   343    
 What Is Media’s Contribution to Gender and Racial/
Ethnic Stereotyping?   344    
 CULTURAL FORUM  A Friend by Any Other Name: 
Research on Facebook and Relationships 346 
 Do Media Have  Prosocial Effects? 347 
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS  Applying Mass 
Communication Theory 347 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE  Be a News Production 
Researcher 348 
 Resources for Review and Discussion 348 
 Review Points  348  
 Key Terms 349  
 Questions for Review  349  
 Questions for Critical Thinking and 
Discussion 349 
 14  Media  Freedom,  Regulation,  and 
 Ethics 
350 
 Media Freedom, Regulation, and Ethics 
Timeline 352 
 A Short History of the First 
Amendment 354 
 Early Sentiment for a Free Press 354 
 Deﬁ ning and Reﬁ ning the First Amendment 355 
 CULTURAL FORUM  First Amendment Protection for 
Violence but Not for Sex 356 
 Other Issues of Freedom and 
Responsibility   361    
 Social  Responsibility  Theory  366  
 Media Industry Ethics 366 
 Deﬁ ning Ethics 367 
 Three Levels of Ethics 367 
 Balancing Conﬂ icting Interests 367 
  USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE  Journalists as Truth 
Vigilantes? 372 
 Codes of Ethics and Self-Regulation 374 
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS  Media Reform 376 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE  Talk to the FCC 378 
 Resources for Review and 
Discussion 378 
 Review Points  378  
 Key Terms  379  
 Questions for Review  379 
 Questions for Critical Thinking and 
Discussion 379  
 PART FOUR MASSMEDIATED CULTURE IN THE INFORMATION AGE 
316 

 15  Global  Media 
382 
 Global Media Timeline 384 
 A Short History of Global Media 386 
 The Beginning of International Mass Media 386 
 CULTURAL FORUM  Al Jazeera English: Coming to Your 
Town? 388 
 Global Media Today 390 
 Comparative Analyses 391 
 USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE  Social Media and the 
Middle East Democracy Movement 396 
 Programming 397 
 The Debate over Cultural 
Imperialism 399 
 The MacBride Report and the NWIO  399 
 The Case for the Global Village 400 
 The Case  against the Global Village 400 
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS  Making the Invisible 
Visible: Comparative Analysis 401 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE  Do Your Own Comparative 
Analysis 403 
 Resources for Review and 
Discussion 403 
 Review Points  403  
 Key Terms  404  
 Questions for Review  404  
 Questions for Critical Thinking and 
Discussion 404  
 Glossary   G-1 
 References   R-1 
 Credits  C-1 
 Index  I-1 
xiv 
Contents

 
xv
 Dear Friends, 
 The media, like sports and politics, are what we talk about, argue over, dissect and 
analyze. Those of us who teach media know that these conversations are essential 
to the functioning of a democratic society. We also know that what moves these 
conversations from simple chatting and griping to eﬀ ective public discourse is 
media education. And regardless of what we might call the course—Introduction 
to Mass Communication, Introduction to Mass Media, Media and Society, or Media 
and Culture—media education has been part of the university for more than ﬁ ve 
decades. From the outset, the course has fulﬁ lled these goals: 
  Increasing students’ knowledge and understanding of the mass communication process 
and the mass media industries 
  Increasing students’ awareness of how they interact with those industries and their content 
to create meaning 
  Helping students become more skilled and knowledgeable consumers of media content 
 We now call the fulﬁ llment of these goals  media  literacy . 
 A  Cultural  Perspective 
 This text’s cultural orientation toward mass communication places a great deal of responsibil-
ity on media consumers. In the past, people were considered either victims of media inﬂ uence 
or impervious to it. The cultural orientation asserts that audience members are as much a part 
of the mass communication process as are the media technologies and industries. As impor-
tant agents in the creation and maintenance of their own culture, audience members have an 
obligation not only to participate in the process of mass communication but also to participate 
critically as better consumers of mass media. 
 Enriching  Students’  Literacy 
 The focus of this book, from the start, has been on media literacy and culture, and those empha-
ses have shaped its content and its various learning aids and pedagogical features. But with 
this, the eighth edition, McGraw-Hill and I have added the digital teaching and learning environ-
ment Connect  ® to our arsenal of educational tools. Connect makes managing assignments 
easier for instructors like us and learning and studying more interactive, motivating, and eﬃ  -
cient for our students. Assignable video and critical thinking activities in Connect support the 
themes and goals of  Introduction to Mass Communication.  LearnSmart ™ , a proven adaptive 
learning program, is also available in Connect; it guides students with personalized learning 
plans and frees up valuable class time for discussion and activities. 
 My  Thanks  to   You 
 Thank you for teaching mass communication. There are few college courses that will mean 
more to our students’ lives now and after they graduate than this one. Thank you, too, for 
considering  Introduction to Mass Communication: M e dia Literacy and Culture  for use in your 
course. I have poured the last 15 years of my career into this text and what it has to say about 
mass communication and the world that our interaction with the media produces. Your inter-
est in this text conﬁ rms my passion. 
 —Stanley J. Baran 
 From   the    Author  
 Preface 

xvi 
Preface
 Introducing   Connect   Mass    Communication  
Connect   to   Success 
 Introduction to Mass Communication: Media Literacy and Culture  is available to instructors and students in print and eBook 
formats, as well as within an integrated online assignment and assessment platform. These online tools, collectively 
called Connect Mass Communication, make managing assignments easier for instructors—and make learning and 
studying more motivating and eﬃ  cient for students. 
 Assignable   and   Accessible   Activities   Instructors can 
deliver assignments and tests easily online, and students 
can practice skills related to key course challenges at their 
own pace and on their own schedule. Available activities 
include chapter pre- and post-tests, CNN and Internet 
video activities, and Media Literacy Worksheets. Students 
can review fundamental concepts, practice applying media 
literacy skills, and complete other activities to help them 
achieve success in the course. 
Integrated   eBook   A fully loaded eBook allows students to 
review  Introduction to Mass Comm u nication  anytime and 
anywhere. They can highlight, take notes, and quickly 
search for key terms   and phrases. 
Preface
Real-time   Reports   Printable, exportable reports show 
how well each student (or section) is performing on each 
course segment. Instructors can use this feature to iden-
tify students who are at risk of falling behind as well as 
to spot problem areas  before  they crop up on an exam. 

Preface 
xvii
 Connect  to  Personalized  Learning 
 LearnSmart,   McGraw-Hill’s adaptive learning system, assesses students’ knowledge of course content and maps 
out dynamic, personalized study plans that ground students in the fundamental concepts of mass communication. 
Available within Connect, LearnSmart   uses a series of adaptive questions to pinpoint the concepts students 
understand—and those they don’t. The result is a proven online tool that helps students learn faster, study more 
eﬃ  ciently, and improve their performance. LearnSmart allows   instructors to focus valuable class time on higher-level 
concepts, activities, and discussion. 
 Valuable   Reports   and   Tools  A personalized learning 
calendar shows each student her or his progress through 
the course. Interactive reports help students take respon-
sibility for their own learning. 
 Personalized   Learning   Path  Diagnostic questions adapt 
to individual students, identifying knowledge gaps and 
providing a personalized, round-the-clock study program 
to help them succeed in the course. LearnSmart also 
identiﬁ es the concepts students are most likely to forget, 
and encourages periodic review to ensure that concepts 
are truly retained. 
Mobile   Access  LearnSmart gives students the freedom 
to study whenever and wherever they choose. It can be 
accessed from any computer and via mobile devices 
using an app available from the iTunes store. 

xviii 
Preface
Preface
 Key   Features    and   Learning   Aids  
 Students must bring media literacy—the ability to critically   comprehend and actively use mass media—to the mass 
communication process. The eighth edition of  Introduction to Mass Communication: Media Lit e racy and Culture includes 
a variety of boxed features and in-text learning aids to support student learning and enhance media literacy skills. 
 In-Text  Learning  Aids 
  Chapter learning objectives and chapter-ending lists of key terms focus 
student learning. 
  Historical timelines and overviews provide students with a critical 
 foundation for understanding current issues in the media landscape. 
  Review Points allow students to make sure they have 
focused on each chapter’s most important material; 
new for the eighth edition, the review points are tied 
directly to learning objectives. 
  Questions for Review further highlight key concepts, 
and Questions for Critical Thinking and  Discussion 
encourage students to investigate their own cultural 
assumptions and media use and to engage one 
another in debate on critical issues. 
  A comprehensive list of references is provided at the 
end of the book. 
 Boxed  Features 
 
 Using   Media   to   Make   a   Diﬀ erence  boxes highlight interesting 
examples of how media practitioners and audiences use 
the mass communication process to further important social, 
political, or cultural causes. 
 
 Cultural   Forum  boxes highlight media-related cultural issues 
that are currently debated in the mass media to help students 
develop their critical thinking skills. 
 
 Media   Literacy   Challenge  boxes, new to the eighth edition, 
build on ideas from each chapter’s “Developing Media Literacy 
Skills” section and ask students to think critically about media 
content they encounter in their daily lives. 
1950
1975
2000
2002   FCC mandates digital receivers by 2007
2004   Cable content and pricing face government scrutiny
2005   Networks begin selling program downloads; Brand X decision
2007   Afterworld
2009   All TV stations are digital
2010   Comcast v. FCC; Hulu premieres ﬁrst original show; Mobile
 
digital television
2011   ▲ Netﬂix, Hulu, and YouTube begin original programming
2012   Online movie transactions exceed discs 
1950   Red Channels; Nielsen ratings
1951   U.S. wired coast-to-coast; ▲ I Love Lucy
1954   Army–McCarthy Hearings telecast
1959   Quiz show scandal
1962   All-channel legislation
1963   FCC begins regulation of cable
1975   HBO begins national distribution
1976   VCR introduced
1996   DVD introduced; Telecommunications Act
1998   First digital TV broadcast
1999   ▲ DVR introduced

Preface 
xix
 Changes   to   the   Eighth   Edition:    Highlights  
 The eighth edition maintains its commitment to enhancing students’ critical thinking and media literacy 
skills. Chapters 3 through 15 include new sections dedicated to smartphones, tablets, and social networking 
sites. Statistics and data have been updated throughout. Additional key changes include the following: 
 Chapter 1 Mass Communication, Culture, and Media Literacy:   Sharpened focus on the mass communication process 
and media literacy. 
 Chapter 2 Convergence and the Reshaping of Mass Communication:   New discussion of the explosion of smart-
phones and their convergence with virtually all other electronic and print media. 
 Chapter 3 Books :  New discussion of print-on-demand, the revival of printed books, and the spread and inﬂ uence of 
e-readers and tablets. 
 Chapter 4 Newspapers :  New and updated sections on how newspapers are monetizing their news and going mobile, 
the health of the local press, and new forms of group-funded journalism. 
 Chapter 5 Magazines :  Updated coverage of the digital-only magazine reader, action codes (QR) and near-ﬁ eld 
communication chips (NFC), and greater reader interactivity. 
 Chapter 6 Film :  Enhanced examination of the movement to debut movies on Facebook, Netﬂ ix, and Hulu, as well as 
discussion of Hollywood’s resurgence. 
 Chapter 7 Radio, Recording, and Popular Music :  Updated looks at the seeming paradox of more music (but fewer 
big label sales) than ever; industry concentration and its impact on artists; cloud music services and the rise of streaming 
services like Pandora and Spotify; and the Rush Limbaugh vs. Sandra Fluke controversy. 
 Chapter 8 Television, Cable, and Mobile Video :  New and updated coverage of the TV Everywhere movement, network/
aﬃ  liate relationships, cable cord cutting, and the growth of Facebook video. 
 Chapter 9 Video Games :  Updated discussion of the demise of the console and the rise of smartphone and social 
network gaming, PlayStation Vita as counter to this trend, creation of the likes of Humble Indie Bundle as counter to 
“industrialized” game creation, and a look at the debate over whether games are good or bad. 
 Chapter 10 The Internet and the World Wide Web :  New and updated material on social networking and political 
action (speciﬁ cally Occupy Wall Street and anti-SOPA), growing privacy challenges and the Consumer Privacy Bill of 
Rights, the ICANN expansion of top-level domain names, the Facebook purchase of Instagram, the introduction and 
growth of tablets, and the rise of mobile spam. 
 Chapter 11 Public Relations :  Examination of consumer demand for greater corporate responsibility, the rise of cause 
marketing (aided by smartphones and social networking, such as apps like Gripe), and new FCC rules on video news 
releases. 
 Chapter 12 Advertising :  New discussion of new return on investment (ROI) and accountability measures, the explosion 
of advertising in “developing” markets (the BRICS and MIST, speciﬁ cally China, India, and Brazil), the growth of out-of-home 
advertising, and neuromarketing research. 
 Chapter 13 Theories and Eﬀ ects of Mass Communication :  Updated coverage of theory and research on TV and video 
game violence and on social media use and friendships. 
 Chapter 14 Media Freedom, Regulation, and Ethics :  New sections on  Brown v. EMA,  in which the Supreme Court 
extends First Amendment protection to violent video games; debate over whether WikiLeaks’ source Bradley Manning 
is a traitor or a free speech hero; and examination of the question of the role of journalists—should they be truth 
vigilantes? 
 Chapter 15 Global Media:   Updated discussion of the growing popularity of Al Jazeera in the United States and the 
American government’s challenge to Chinese Internet censorship. 

Preface
xx 
Preface
 Teaching    and   Learning   with   Introduction 
to Mass Communication  
 Online  Learning  Center 
www.mhhe.com/baran8e 
 McGraw-Hill   Create 
 http://www.mcgrawhillcreate.com 
 CourseSmart 
 www.coursesmart.com 
 Design your own ideal course materials with McGraw-Hill’s Create™. Rearrange or omit chapters, com-
bine material from other sources, upload your syllabus or any other content you have written to make 
the perfect resource for your students. Search thousands of leading McGraw-Hill textbooks to ﬁ nd the 
best content for your students; then arrange it to ﬁ t your teaching style. You can even personalize your 
book’s appearance by selecting the cover and adding your name, school, and course information. When you 
order a Create book, you receive a complimentary review copy. Get a printed copy in 3 to 5 business days 
or an electronic copy (e-Comp) via e-mail in about an hour. Register today at http://www.mcgrawhillcreate
.com, and craft your course resources to match the way you teach. 
 CourseSmart oﬀ ers thousands of the most commonly adopted textbooks across hundreds of courses 
from a wide variety of higher education publishers. It is the only place for faculty to review and compare 
the full text of a book online, providing immediate access without the environmental impact of request-
ing a printed exam copy. At CourseSmart, students can save up to 50 percent oﬀ  the cost of a printed 
book, reduce their impact on the environment, and gain access to powerful web tools for learning, 
including full text search, notes and highlighting, and e-mail tools for sharing notes among classmates. 
Visit coursesmart.com   to learn more or to purchase registration codes for this exciting product. 
 The Online Learning Center for  Introduction to Mass Communication  includes comprehensive teaching 
resources: 
 Instructor’s Manual 
 Test Bank 
 PowerPoint presentations 
 Media Literacy Worksheets 
 Refer to the back inside cover of the text for a list of the CNN video clips that can be found in the Con-
nect Media Bank. 

Preface 
xxi
 Tegrity is a service that makes class time available around the clock. It automatically captures every 
lecture in a searchable format for students to review when they study and complete assignments. 
With a simple one-click start-and-stop process, you capture all computer screens and corresponding 
audio. Students replay any part of any class with easy-to-use browser-based viewing on a PC or Mac. 
With Tegrity Campus, students quickly recall key moments by using Tegrity Campus’s unique search 
feature, which lets them eﬃ  ciently ﬁ nd what they need, when they need it, across an entire semes-
ter of class recordings. Help turn all your students’ study time into learning moments immediately 
supported by your lecture. To learn more about Tegrity, watch a two-minute Flash demo at http://
tegritycampus.mhhe.com. 
 Tegrity   Campus 
 http://tegritycampus.mhhe.com 
 McGraw-Hill   Campus ™ 
®
 McGraw-Hill Campus is a new one-stop teaching and learning experience available to users of any 
learning management system. This institutional service allows faculty and students to enjoy single 
sign-on (SSO) access to all McGraw-Hill Higher Education materials, including the award-winning 
McGraw-Hill Connect® platform, from directly within the institution’s website. McGraw-Hill Campus 
provides faculty with instant access to all McGraw-Hill Higher Education teaching materials (e.g., 
eTextbooks, test banks, PowerPoint slides, animations, and learning objects), allowing them to 
browse, search, and use any instructor ancillary content in our vast library at no additional cost to 
instructor or students. Students enjoy SSO access to a variety of free (e.g., quizzes, ﬂ ash cards, nar-
rated presentations) and subscription-based products (e.g., McGraw-Hill Connect). With this pro-
gram enabled, faculty and students will never need to create another account to access McGraw-Hill 
products and services. 

Preface
xxii 
Preface
 Acknowledgements  
 A project of this magnitude requires the assistance of many people. For this latest edi-
tion I benefi tted from several e-mails from readers—instructors and students—making 
suggestions and off ering advice. Th is book is better for those exchanges. 
 Reviewers are an indispensable part of the creation of a good textbook. In preparing 
for the eighth edition, I was again impressed with the thoughtful comments made by 
my colleagues in the fi eld. Although I didn’t know them by name, I found myself in 
long-distance, anonymous debate with several superb thinkers, especially about some 
of the text’s most important concepts. Th eir collective keen eye and questioning atti-
tude sharpened each chapter to the benefi t of both writer and reader. (Any errors or 
misstatements that remain in the book are of course my sole responsibility.) Now that 
I know who they are, I would like to thank the reviewers by name. 
Special thanks to Bob Mendenhall and Cliff  Vaughn for their help in reviewing Connect 
activities. Th anks also to the instructors who supervised class testing of the LearnSmart 
modules: Cathy Bullock (Utah State University), Yolanda Cal (Loyola University, New 
Orleans), Daekyung Kim (Idaho State University), and Bruce Mims (Southeast Missouri 
State University).
 I would also like to thank the reviewers of the fi rst seven editions.  Seventh   Edition
Reviewers:   Kwasi Boateng, University of Arkansas at Little Rock; Mike Igoe, Buff alo 
State College; Joe Marre, Buff alo State College; Sonya Miller, University of North 
 Carolina–Asheville; Yuri Obata, Indiana University–South Bend; Danny Shipka, 
Louisiana State University.  Sixth   Edition   Reviewers: Chris Cakebread, Boston Uni-
versity; Cynthia Chris, College of Staten Island; Laurie Hayes Fluker, Texas State Uni-
versity; Jacob Podber, Southern Illinois University–Carbondale; Biswarup Sen, 
University of Oregon; Lisa A. Stephens, University of Buff alo; Denise Walters, Front 
Range Community College.  Fifth   Edition   Revie w ers:   Jennifer Aubrey, University of 
Missouri; Michael Boyle, Wichita State University; Tim Coombs, Eastern Illinois Uni-
versity; Denise Danford, Delaware County Community College; Tim Edwards, Univer-
sity of Arkansas at Little Rock; Junhao Hong, State University of New York at Buff alo; 
Mark Kelly, University of Maine; Alyse Lancaster, University of Miami; Carol S. Lomick, 
University of Nebraska at Kearney; Susan Dawson-O’Brien, Rose State College; Alicia 
Lee Banville, University of Montana 
Rick Bebout, West Virginia University 
Bob Britten, West Virginia University 
James Burton, Salisbury University 
 Nathan Claes, State University of 
New York–Buff alo 
 Helen Fallon, Point Park University 
 Ray Fanning, University of Montana 
 Richard Ganahl, Bloomsburg University 
Paul Hillier, University of Tampa 
Charles Marsh, University of 
Kansas–Lawrence 
Susan McGraw, Henry Ford 
Community College 
 Bob Mendenhall, Southwestern 
Adventist University 
 Jensen Moore, West Virginia 
University 
Timothy Pasch, University of North 
Dakota 
Kenneth Ross, Eastern Connecticut 
State University 
Siobhan Smith, University of 
Louisville 
 Jeff  South, Virginia Commonwealth 
University 
Richard Tafl inger, Washington State 
University–Pullman 
Cliff ord Vaughn, Belmont University 
Kimberly Vaupel, Henry Ford Com-
munity College 
 Joe Wisinski, University of Tampa 

Preface 
xxiii
C. Shepard, University of Texas at Austin; Tamala Sheree Martin, Oklahoma State Uni-
versity; Stephen D. Perry, Illinois State University; Selene Phillips, University of Louis-
ville.  Fourth   Edition   Reviewers:   Kristen Barton, Florida State University; Kenton Bird, 
University of Idaho; Katia G. Campbell, University of Colorado; Paul A. Creasman, 
Azusa Pacifi c University; Annette Johnson, Georgia State University; James Kelleher, 
New York University; Polly McLean, University of Colorado; Anthony A. Olorunnisola, 
Pennsylvania State University; Stephen D. Perry, Illinois State University; Michael Porter, 
University of Missouri; Stephen J. Resch, Indiana Wesleyan University; Christopher F. 
White, Sam Houston State University.  Th ird   Edition   R e viewers:   Jenny L. Nelson, Ohio 
University; Terri Toles Patkin, Eastern Connecticut State University; Alyse Lancaster, 
University of Miami; Deborah A. Godwin-Starks, Indiana University–Purdue University 
Fort Wayne; Kevin R. Slaugher, George Mason University; Enid Sefcovic, Florida Atlantic 
University; David Whitt, Nebraska Wesleyan University; Roger Desmond, University of 
Hartford; Carol S. Lomicky, University of Nebraska at Kearney; Jules d’Hemecourt, 
Louisiana State University; Junhao Hong, State University of New York at Buff alo; Gary 
J. Wingenbach, Texas A&M University.  Second   Edition   Reviewers:   Rob Bellamy, 
Duquesne University; Beth Grobman Burruss, DeAnza College; Stephen R. Curtis, Jr., 
East Connecticut State University; Lyombe Eko, University of Maine; Junhao Hong, 
State University of New York at Buff alo; Carol Liebler, Syracuse University; Robert 
Main, California State University, Chico; Stephen Perry, Illinois State University; Eric 
Pierson, University of San Diego; Ramona Rush, University of Kentucky; Tony Silvia, 
University of Rhode Island; and Richard Welch, Kennesaw State University.  First   Edi-
tion   Reviewers:   David Allen, Illinois State University; Sandra Braman, University of 
Alabama; Tom Grimes, Kansas State University; Kirk Hallahan, Colorado State Univer-
sity; Katharine Heintz-Knowles, University of Washington; Paul Husselbee, Ohio Uni-
versity; Seong Lee, Appalachian State University; Rebecca Ann Lind, University of 
Illinois at Chicago; Maclyn McClary, Humboldt State University; Guy Meiss, Central 
Michigan University; Debra Merskin, University of Oregon; Scott R. Olsen, Central 
Connecticut State University; Ted Pease, Utah State University; Linda Perry,  Flor i da 
Today  newspaper; Elizabeth Perse, University of Delaware; Tina Pieraccini, State Uni-
versity of New York–College at Oswego; Michael Porter, University of Missouri; Peter 
Pringle, University of Tennessee at Chattanooga; Neal Robison, Washington State Uni-
versity; Linda Steiner, Rutgers University; and Don Tomlinson, Texas A&M University. 
 Th e eighth edition was written with the usual great support (and patience) of my 
McGraw-Hill team. Th e Internet may make producing a book more effi  cient, but it 
does have a big drawback—despite spending hundreds of hours “working together,” I 
have yet to meet my teammates face-to-face. Th is, certainly, is my loss. Still, I have had 
few better colleagues than Julia Akpan, Susan Gouijnstook, Kirstan Price, Jennifer 
Gehl, Ann Jannette, and Emily Tietz. An author cannot surround himself with better 
people than those McGraw-Hill has given me. 
 Finally, my most important inspiration throughout the writing of this book has been 
my family. My wife, Susan, is educated in media literacy and a strong disciple of 
spreading its lessons far and wide—which she does with zest. Her knowledge and 
assistance in my writing is invaluable; her love in my life is sustaining; her fi re—for 
improved media literacy and for our marriage—is empowering. My children—Jordan 
and Matthew—simply by their existence require that I consider and reconsider what 
kind of world we will leave for them. I’ve written this text in the hope that it helps make 
the future for them and their friends better than it might otherwise have been. 
S.J.B. 


 Eighth Edition 
 Introduction to   
Mass Communication 
 MEDIA LITERACY AND CULTURE 


 Our experiences of the world are increasingly mass 
mediated. 
 
3
 Learning Objectives 
 Mass communication, mass media, and the culture that shapes us (and that we shape) are 
inseparable. After studying this chapter, you should be able to  
  Deﬁ ne  communication, mass communication, mass media , and  culture . 
  Describe the relationships among communication, mass communication, culture, and 
those who live in the culture. 
  Evaluate the impact of technology and economics on those relationships. 
  List the components of media literacy. 
  Identify key skills required for developing media literacy. 1
 Mass 
Communication, 
Culture, and 
Media Literacy 

4 
PART 1 
Laying the Groundwork
 Y OUR SMARTPHONE’S RADIO ALARM SINGS YOU AWAKE. It’s Adele, the last few bars of “Rolling in the 
Deep.” Th e laughing deejay shouts at you that it’s 7:41 and you’d better get going. But 
before you do, he adds, listen to a few words from your friends at Best Buy electronics, 
home of fast, friendly, courteous service—“Buyer be happy!” 
 In the living room, you fi nd your roommate has left the television on. You stop for 
a moment and listen: Th e economy is showing stronger signs of rebounding, bright-
ening the employment picture for new college grads, several states are considering 
Clean Election laws to take money out of politics, democratic chaos continues 
to  sweep across the Middle East,  and you deserve a break today at McDonald’s. 
As you head toward the bathroom, your bare feet slip on some magazines littering 
the fl oor— Wired, Rolling Stone, People . You need to talk to your roommate about 
picking up! 
 After showering, you quickly pull on your Levi’s, lace up your Nike cross-trainers, 
and throw on an Under Armour jacket. No time for breakfast; you grab a Nature Val-
ley granola bar and the newspaper and head for the bus stop. As the bus rolls up, 
you can’t help but notice the giant ad on its side:  Transformers: Turning Toys Into 
Gold . Rejecting that as a movie choice for the weekend, you sit down next to a teen-
ager listening to music on his headphones and playing a video game. You bury your-
self in the paper, scanning the lead stories and the local news and then checking out 
 Doonesbury  and  Dilbert . 
 Hopping off  the bus at the campus stop, you run into Chris from your computer lab. 
You walk to class together, talking about last night’s  Family Guy  episode.  It’s not yet 
9:00, and already you’re involved in mass communication. 
 In this chapter we defi ne  communication, interpersonal communication, mass com-
munication, media , and  culture  and explore the relationships among them and how 
they defi ne us and our world. We investigate how communication works, how it 
changes when technology is introduced into the process, and how diff ering views of 
communication and mass communication can lead to diff erent interpretations of their 
power. We also discuss the opportunities mass communication and culture off er us 
and the responsibilities that come with those opportunities. Always crucial, these 
issues are of particular importance now, when we fi nd ourselves in a period of remark-
able development in new communication technologies. Th is discussion inevitably 
leads to an examination of media literacy, its importance and practice.  
 What Is Mass Communication?  
 “Does a fi sh know it’s wet?” infl uential cultural and media critic Marshall McLuhan 
would often ask. Th e answer, he would say, is “No.” Th e fi sh’s existence is so dominated 
by water that only when water is absent is the fi sh aware of its condition. 
 So it is with people and mass media. Th e media so fully saturate our everyday 
lives that we are often unconscious of their presence, not to mention their infl uence. 
Media inform us, entertain us, delight us, annoy us. Th ey move our emotions, chal-
lenge our intellects, insult our intelligence. Media often reduce us to mere com-
modities for sale to the highest bidder. Media help defi ne us; they shape our 
realities. 
 A fundamental theme of this book is that media do none of this alone. Th ey do it 
 with  us as well as  to  us through mass communication, and they do it as a central—
many critics and scholars say  the  central—cultural force in our society.  
 Communication Deﬁ ned 
 In its simplest form,    communication    is the transmission of a message from a source 
to a receiver. For over 60 years now, this view of communication has been identifi ed 

CHAPTER 1 
Mass Communication, Culture, and Media Literacy 
5
with the writing of political scientist Harold Lasswell (1948). He said that a convenient 
way to describe communication is to answer these questions: 
 •  Who? 
 •  Says  what? 
 • Th rough  which channel? 
 • To  whom? 
 •  With  what eff ect? 
 Expressed in terms of the basic elements of the communication process, commu-
nication occurs when 
5
x
A source sends a message
through a medium
to a receiver producing some effect.
 Straightforward enough, but what if the source is a professor who insists on speak-
ing in a technical language far beyond the receiving students’ level of skill? Obviously, 
communication does not occur. Unlike mere message-sending, communication 
requires the response of others. Th erefore, there must be a  sharing  (or correspon-
dence) of meaning for communication to take place. 
 A second problem with this simple model is that it suggests that the receiver pas-
sively accepts the source’s message. However, if our imaginary students do not com-
prehend the professor’s words, they respond with “Huh?” or look confused or yawn. 
Th is response, or    feedback   , is also a message. Th e receivers (the students) now become 
a source, sending their own message to the source (the off ending professor), who is 
now a receiver. Hence, communication is a  reciprocal  and  ongoing process  with all 
involved parties more or less engaged in creating shared meaning. Communication, 
then, is better defi ned as  the process of creating shared meaning . 
 Communication researcher Wilbur Schramm, using ideas originally developed by 
 psychologist Charles E. Osgood, developed a graphic way to represent the reciprocal 
nature of communication ( Figure 1.1 ). Th is depiction of    interpersonal communication — 
Encoder
Interpreter
Decoder
Decoder
Interpreter
Encoder
Message
Message
  Figure 1.1  Osgood and Schramm’s Model of Communication. 
 Source: From The Process and Eﬀ ects of Mass Communication by Wilbur Lang Schramm, 1954. Reprinted by permission of Mary Schramm Coberly. 

6 
PART 1 
Laying the Groundwork
communication between two or a few people—shows that there is no clearly identifi -
able source or receiver. Rather, because communication is an ongoing and reciprocal 
process, all the participants, or “interpreters,” are working to create meaning by 
 encoding and  decoding    messages. A message is fi rst  encoded , that is, transformed into 
an understandable sign and symbol system. Speaking is encoding, as are writing, print-
ing, and fi lming a television program. Once received, the message is  decoded;  that is, 
the signs and symbols are interpreted. Decoding occurs through listening, reading, or 
watching that television show.    
 Th e Osgood–Schramm model demonstrates the ongoing and reciprocal nature of 
the communication process. Th ere is, therefore, no source, no receiver, and no 
 feedback. Th e reason is that, as communication is happening, both interpreters are 
simultaneously source and receiver. Th ere is no feedback because all messages are 
presumed to be in reciprocation of other messages. Even when your friend starts a 
conversation with you, for example, it can be argued that it was your look of inter-
est and willingness that communicated to her that she should speak. In this exam-
ple, it is improper to label either you or your friend as the source—Who really 
initiated this chat?—and, therefore, it is impossible to identify who is providing 
feedback to whom. 
 Not every model can show all aspects of a process as complex as communication. 
Missing from this representation is  noise —anything that interferes with successful 
communication. Noise is more than screeching or loud music when you are trying to 
work online. Biases that lead to incorrect decoding, for example, are noise, as is a page 
torn out of a magazine story you want to read. 
 Encoded messages are carried by a    medium   , that is, the means of sending infor-
mation. Sound waves are the medium that carries our voice to friends across the 
table; the telephone is the medium that carries our voice to friends across town. 
When the medium is a technology that carries messages to a large number of people—
as newspapers carry the printed word and radio conveys the sound of music and 
news—we call it a    mass medium (the plural of medium is  media ). Th e mass media 
we use regularly include radio, television, books, magazines, newspapers, movies, 
sound recordings, cell phones, and computer networks. Each medium is the basis of 
a giant industry, but other related and supporting industries also serve them and 
us—advertising and public relations, for example. In our culture we use the words 
 media  and  mass media  interchangeably to refer to the communication industries 
themselves. We say, “Th e media entertain” or “Th e mass media are too conservative 
(or too liberal).”   
 Mass Communication Deﬁ ned 
 We speak, too, of mass communication.    Mass communication    is the process of 
creating shared meaning between the mass media and their audiences. Schramm 
recast his and Osgood’s general model of communication to help us visualize the 
particular aspects of the mass communication process ( Figure 1.2 ). This model and 
the original Osgood–Schramm model have much in common—interpreters, encod-
ing, decoding, and messages—but it is their differences that are most significant 
for our understanding of how mass communication differs from other forms of 
communication. For example, whereas the original model includes “message,” the 
mass communication model offers “many identical messages.” In addition, the 
mass communication model specifies “feedback,” whereas the interpersonal com-
munication model does not. When two or a few people communicate face-to-face, 
the participants can immediately and clearly recognize the feedback residing in the 
reciprocal messages (our boring professor can see and hear the students’ disen-
chantment as they listen to the lecture). Things are not nearly as simple in mass 
communication.    
 In Schramm’s mass communication model, feedback is represented by a dotted line 
labeled delayed    inferential feedback . Th is feedback is indirect rather than direct. 

CHAPTER 1 
Mass Communication, Culture, and Media Literacy 
7
 Television executives, for example, must wait a day, at the very minimum, and some-
times a week or a month, to discover the ratings for new programs. Even then, the 
ratings measure only how many sets are tuned in, not whether people liked or disliked 
the programs. As a result, these executives can only infer what they must do to improve 
programming; hence the term  inferential feedback . Mass communicators are also 
 subject to additional feedback, usually in the form of criticism in other media, such as 
a television critic writing a column in a newspaper. 
 Th e diff erences between the individual elements of interpersonal and mass com-
munication change the very nature of the communication process. How those alter-
ations infl uence the message itself and how the likelihood of successfully sharing 
meaning varies are shown in  Figure 1.3 . For example, the immediacy and directness 
of feedback in interpersonal communication free communicators to gamble, to 
experiment with diff erent approaches. Th eir knowledge of one another enables 
them to tailor their messages as narrowly as they wish. As a result, interpersonal 
communication is often personally relevant and possibly even adventurous and 
challenging. In contrast, the distance between participants in the mass communica-
tion process, imposed by the technology, creates a sort of “communication conser-
vatism.” Feedback comes too late to enable corrections or alterations in 
communication that fails. Th e sheer number of people in many mass communica-
tion audiences makes personalization and specifi city diffi  cult. As a result, mass 
communication tends to be more constrained, less free. Th is does not mean, how-
ever, that it is less potent than interpersonal communication in shaping our under-
standing of ourselves and our world.    
   Media theorist James W. Carey (1975) recognized this and off ered a    cultural defi ni-
tion of communication that has had a profound impact on the way communication 
scientists and others have viewed the relationship between communication and cul-
ture. Carey wrote, “Communication is a symbolic process whereby reality is produced, 
maintained, repaired and transformed” (p. 10). 
 Carey’s (1989) defi nition asserts that communication and reality are linked. Com-
munication is a process embedded in our everyday lives that informs the way we per-
ceive, understand, and construct our view of reality and the world. Communication is 
the foundation of our culture. Its truest purpose is to maintain ever-evolving, “fragile” 
cultures; communication is that “sacred ceremony that draws persons together in 
 fellowship and commonality” (p. 43). 
Encoder
Interpreter
Decoder
Input from news sources, art sources, etc.
Delayed inferential feedback
Organization
The mass audience
Many receivers, each
decoding, interpreting,
encoding
Many
identical
messages
Each connected with
a group in which the
message is reinterpreted
and often acted upon
 
  Figure 1.2  Schramm’s Model of Mass Communication. 
 Source: From The Process and Eﬀ ects of Mass Communication by Wilbur Lang Schramm, 1954. Reprinted by permission of Mary Schramm Coberly. 

8 
PART 1 
Laying the Groundwork
Communication cannot be 
tailored to the wants, needs, 
and tastes of all audience 
members or even those of all 
members of some subgroup.
Some more or less generally 
acceptable standard is set.
A large, heterogeneous 
audience known to 
Interpreter A only in the 
most rudimentary way, little 
more than basic 
demographics—in this case, 
several million viewers of 
Modern Family
You can tailor your message 
speciﬁcally to Interpreter B.
You can make relatively 
accurate judgments about B 
because of information 
present in the setting.
Your friend is a vegetarian; you 
don't suggest a steak house.
One or a few people, usually 
in direct contact with you 
and, to a greater or lesser 
degree, known to you—in 
this case, your friend
Even if the feedback is 
useful, it is too late to be of 
value for this episode. In 
addition, it doesn’t suggest 
how to improve the 
communication effort.
Delayed and inferential
Even overnight ratings too late 
for this episode of Modern 
Family
Moreover, ratings limited to 
telling the number of sets 
tuned in
You know how successful 
your message is immediately.
You can adjust your 
communication on the spot to 
maximize its effectiveness.
Immediate and direct yes or 
no response
Feedback
Constrained by virtually every aspect of the communication 
situation
A level of communication most likely to meet the greatest 
number of viewers’ needs
A belief that experimentation is dangerous
A belief that to challenge the audience is to risk failure
Flexible, personally relevant, possibly adventurous, 
challenging, or experimental
Result
Who really is Interpreter A? 
Levitan-LIoyd Productions' 
executives? The writers? The 
director? The actors? The 
network and its standards 
and practices people? The 
sponsors?
All must agree, leaving little 
room for individual vision or 
experimentation.
Once production is 
completed, Modern Family 
cannot be changed.
If a plotline or other 
communicative device isn't 
working with the audience, 
nothing can be done.
Identical, mechanically 
produced, simultaneously 
sent
Inﬂexible, unalterable
The completed Modern 
Family episode that is aired
You can change it in 
midstream. If feedback is 
negative, you can offer an 
alternative.
Is feedback still negative? 
Take a whole new approach.
Highly ﬂexible and alterable
A large, hierarchically 
structured organization—in 
this case, Levitan-LIoyd 
Productions and the ABC 
television network
You know your mind. You 
can encode your own 
message to suit yourself, 
your values, your likes and 
dislikes.
One person—in this case, 
you
Message
 
Nature 
Consequences 
Nature 
Consequences
Interpersonal Communication
You invite a friend to lunch.
Mass Communication
Levitan-Lloyd produces Modern Family
Interpreter A
Interpreter B
 
  Figure 1.3  Elements of Interpersonal Communication and Mass Communication Compared. 

CHAPTER 1 
Mass Communication, Culture, and Media Literacy 
9
 What Is Culture?  
 Culture    is the learned behavior of members of a given social group. Many writers and 
thinkers have off ered interesting expansions of this defi nition. Here are four examples, 
all from anthropologists. Th ese defi nitions highlight not only what culture  is  but also 
what culture  does: 
  Culture is the learned, socially acquired traditions and lifestyles of the members of 
a society, including their patterned, repetitive ways of thinking, feeling, and 
 acting. (Harris, 1983, p. 5)  
  Culture lends signifi cance to human experience by selecting from and organizing 
it. It refers broadly to the forms through which people make sense of their lives, 
rather than more narrowly to the opera or art of museums. (Rosaldo, 1989, p. 26)  
  Culture is the medium evolved by humans to survive. Nothing is free from cultural 
infl uences. It is the keystone in civilization’s arch and is the medium through 
which all of life’s events must fl ow. We are culture. (Hall, 1976, p. 14)  
 Culture is an historically transmitted pattern of meanings embodied in symbolic forms 
by means of which [people] communicate, perpetuate, and develop their  knowledge 
about and attitudes toward life. (Geertz, as cited in Taylor, 1991, p. 91)     
 Culture as Socially Constructed Shared Meaning 
 Virtually all defi nitions of culture recognize that culture is  learned . Recall the opening 
vignette. Even if this scenario does not exactly match your early mornings, you probably 
recognize its elements. Moreover, all of us are familiar with most, if not every, cultural 
reference in it.  Family Guy, Rolling Stone , McDonald’s, Under Armour,   Dilbert —all are 
points of reference, things that have some meaning for all of us. How did this come to be? 
 Creation and maintenance of a more or less common culture occurs through com-
munication, including mass communication. When we talk to our friends; when a par-
ent raises a child; when religious leaders instruct their followers; when teachers teach; 
when grandparents pass on recipes; when politicians campaign; when media profes-
sionals produce content that we read, listen to, or watch, meaning is being shared and 
culture is being constructed and maintained.   
 Functions and Eﬀ ects of Culture 
 Culture serves a purpose. It helps us categorize and classify our experiences; it helps 
defi ne us, our world, and our place in it. In doing so, culture can have a number of 
sometimes confl icting eff ects. 
 LIMITING AND LIBERATING EFFECTS OF CULTURE     A culture’s learned traditions and values can be 
seen as patterned, repetitive ways of thinking, feeling, and acting. Culture limits our 
options and provides useful guidelines for behavior. For example, when conversing, 
you do not consciously consider, “Now, how far away should I stand? Am I too close?” 
You simply stand where you stand. After a hearty meal with a friend’s family, you do 
not engage in mental self-debate, “Should I burp? Yes! No! Arghhhh….” Culture pro-
vides information that helps us make meaningful distinctions about right and wrong, 
appropriate and inappropriate, good and bad, attractive and unattractive, and so on. 
How does it do this? 
 Obviously, through communication. Th rough a lifetime of communication we have 
learned just what our culture expects of us. Th e two examples given here are positive 
results of culture’s limiting eff ects. But culture’s limiting eff ects can be negative, such 
as when we are unwilling or unable to move past patterned, repetitive ways of thinking, 
feeling, and acting or when we entrust our “learning” to teachers whose interests are 
selfi sh, narrow, or otherwise not consistent with our own. 
 U.S. culture, for example, values thinness and beauty in women. How many women 
endure weeks of unhealthy diets and succumb to potentially dangerous surgical 

10 
PART 1 
Laying the Groundwork
 These images have meaning for all of us, 
meaning that is socially constructed through 
communication in our culture. How many can you 
recognize? What speciﬁ c meaning or meanings 
does each have for you? How did you develop each 
meaning? How closely do you think your meanings 
match those of your friends? Of your parents? What 
value is there—if any—in having shared meaning 
for these things in our everyday lives?
 procedures in search of a body that for most is physically unattainable? How many 
men (and other women) never get to know, like, or even love those women who can-
not meet our culture’s standards of thinness and beauty? Why do 72% of 10- to 17-year-
old girls feel “tremendous pressure to be beautiful” but only 11% feel comfortable 
using that word, “beautiful,” to describe themselves (Dove Research, 2011)  ? Why do 
91% of all college women report dieting, with 22% dieting “always” or “often”? Why do 
7 million American girls and women suff er from clinically diagnosed eating disorders? 
Why do 90% of American high school girls think they are overweight, up from 34% in 
1995 (Brubach, 2007)? Why, when asked if they would rather be younger, thinner, 

CHAPTER 1 
Mass Communication, Culture, and Media Literacy 
11
richer, or smarter, do 29% of American women prefer to be thinner, while only 14% 
want to be smarter (Braverman, 2010)? 
 Now consider how this situation may have come about. Our mothers did not bounce 
us on their knees when we were babies, telling us that thin was good and fat was bad. 
Th ink back, though, to the stories you were told and the television shows and movies 
you watched growing up. Th e heroines (or, more often, the beautiful love interests of 
the heroes) were invariably tall, beautiful, and thin. Th e bad guys were usually mean 
and fat. From Disney’s depictions of Snow White, Cinderella, Beauty, Tinker Bell, and 
Pocahontas to the impossible dimensions of most video-game heroines, the message 
is embedded in the conscious (and unconscious) mind of every girl and boy: You can’t 
be too thin or too beautiful! Or as one 10-year-old girl explained to Courtney Martin 
(2007), author of  Perfect Girls, Starving Daughters , “It is better to be pretty, which 
means thin and mean, than to be ugly, which means fat and nice. Th at’s just how it is.” 
And it does not help that these messages are reinforced in much advertising, for exam-
ple Abercrombie & Fitch Kids’ promotions for its Ashley bikinis with padded “push up 
triangle” tops for girls as young as 8 years old (Williams, 2011).        
 Th is message and millions of others come to us primarily through the media, and 
although the people who produce these media images are not necessarily selfi sh or 
mean, their motives are undeniably fi nancial. Th eir contribution to our culture’s repet-
itive ways of thinking, feeling, and acting is most certainly not primary among their 
concerns when preparing their communication. 
 Culture need not only limit. Th at media representations of female beauty often meet 
with debate and disagreement points up the fact that culture can be liberating as well. 
Th is is so because cultural values can be  contested . 
 Especially in a pluralistic, democratic society such as ours, the    dominant culture 
(or mainstream culture   )—the one that seems to hold sway with the majority of people—
is often openly challenged. People do meet, fi nd attractive, like, and even love people 
who do not fi t the standard image of beauty. In addition, media sometimes present 
images that suggest diff erent ideals of beauty and success. Comedic actress Sofi a 
Vergara; singer-actresses Queen Latifah, Jennifer Lopez, and Jennifer Hudson; and 
Mad Men’ s Christina Hendricks all represent alternatives to our culture’s idealized 
standards of beauty, and all have undeniable appeal (and power) on the big and small 
screens. Liberation from the limitations imposed by culture resides in our ability and 
willingness to learn and use  new patterned, repetitive ways of thinking, feeling, and 
acting; to challenge existing patterns; and to create our own.   
 DEFINING, DIFFERENTIATING, DIVIDING, AND UNITING EFFECTS OF CULTURE     Have you ever made the mis-
take of calling a dolphin, porpoise, or even a whale a fi sh? Maybe you have heard 
 What is our culture’s deﬁ nition of beauty? Adolescence researchers argue that media oﬀ er young girls few examples of healthy beauty (Daniels, 
2009). They point to the fact that female sports and athletes are woefully underrepresented in American media, appearing in only 1.6% of network 
television sports coverage (down from 5.6% in 2004; Kelly, 2010). Pictured here is California teen Abby Sunderland, who at 16 years old almost 
ﬁ nished an around-the-world sail that would have made her the youngest person ever to complete a nonstop solo circumnavigation. Training from the 
time she was 13, she was thwarted by a dismasting in an Indian Ocean gale. Have you heard of her? Also pictured is Miley Cyrus, another American 
teen. The singer/actress, dubbed one of the world’s 100 sexiest women by magazines like  Maxim and  FHM , is a frequent guest on celebrity television 
shows and a constant topic of Hollywood gossip. Have you heard of her? Which woman has attracted more attention from our culture? Why? 


12 
PART 1 
Laying the Groundwork
others do it. Th is error occurs because when we think of fi sh, we think “lives in the 
water” and “swims.” Fish are defi ned by their “aquatic culture.” Because water-residing, 
swimming dolphins and porpoises share that culture, we sometimes forget that they 
are mammals, not fi sh. 
 We, too, are defi ned by our culture. We are citizens of the United States; we are 
Americans. If we travel to other countries, we will hear ourselves labeled “American,” 
and this label will conjure up stereotypes and expectations in the minds of those who 
use and hear it. Th e stereotype, whatever it may be, will probably fi t us only incom-
pletely, or perhaps hardly at all—perhaps we are dolphins in a sea full of fi sh. Never-
theless, being American defi nes us in innumerable important ways, both to others 
(more obviously) and to ourselves (less obviously).        
 Within this large, national culture, however, there are many smaller,    bounded cul-
tures (or co-cultures   ). For example, we speak comfortably of Italian neighborhoods, 
fraternity row, the South, and the suburbs. Because of our cultural understanding of 
these categories, each expression communicates something about our expectations of 
these places. We think we can predict with a good deal of certainty the types of restau-
rants and shops we will fi nd in the Italian neighborhood, even the kind of music we will 
hear escaping from open windows. We can predict the kinds of clothes and cars we will 
see on fraternity row, the likely behavior of shop clerks in the South, and the political 
orientation of the suburb’s residents. Moreover, the people within these cultures usually 
identify themselves as members of those bounded cultures. An individual may say, for 
example, “I am Italian American” or “I’m from the South.” Th ese smaller cultures unite 
groups of people and enable them to see themselves as diff erent from other groups 
around them. Th us culture also serves to diff erentiate us from others. 
 In the United States, we generally consider this a good thing. We pride ourselves on 
our pluralism and our diversity and on the richness of the cultural heritages repre-
sented within our borders. We enjoy moving from one bounded culture to another or 
from a bounded culture to the dominant national culture and back again. 
 Problems arise, however, when diff erentiation leads to division. All Americans were 
traumatized by the horrifi c events of September 11, 2001, but that tragedy is compounded 
for the 2.35 million Muslim Americans whose patriotism was challenged  simply because 
of membership in their particular bounded culture. Not only has the number of cases of 
violence and discrimination against Muslims in the United States   risen annually since 
9/11, 39% of Americans want Muslims, even their fellow citizens, to carry special iden-
tifi cation cards (Younge, 2010). And although the Department of Homeland Security 
reports that Muslim American terrorism continues to be “a  miniscule threat to public 
  
 Culture can be contested. When a  New York 
Times fashion writer commented unfavorably on 
Christina Hendricks’s size, calling her a “big girl,” 
the Internet erupted in defense of the  Mad Men 
actress, forcing critic Cathy Horyn to defend herself 
on the paper’s website (Wedemeyer, 2010). The 
makers of Dove soap take a diﬀ erent approach, 
contesting the culture’s narrow image of beauty 
with its “Real Women Have Curves” campaign, 
placing images like this on billboards and bus stops 
across the country, running it in national magazines, 
and making it the focus of its TV commercials. 

CHAPTER 1 
Mass Communication, Culture, and Media Literacy 
13
 Pretty Little Liars, CSI Miami, and Gossip Girl—these three television programs are aimed at diﬀ erent audiences, yet in each the characters share 
certain traits that mark them as attractive. Must people in real life look like these performers to be considered attractive? Successful? Good? The 15 
people shown are all slender, tall, and young. Yes, they are just make-believe television characters, but the producers of the shows on which they 
appear chose these people—as opposed to others—for a reason. What do you think it was? How well do you measure up to the cultural standard of 
beauty and attractiveness represented here? Do you ever wish that you could be just a bit more like these people? Why or why not?

14 
PART 1 
Laying the Groundwork
safety” and that cooperation from the Muslim American community has been 
essential in its eff orts to investigate domestic threats (Shane, 2012) , we con-
tinue to see examples of overt discrimination. For example, Lowe’s Hardware, 
after one complaint from an anti-Muslim fringe group, pulled its advertising 
from the television show  All-American Muslim , a program, ironically, designed 
specifi cally to dispel negative stereotypes of Muslims (Anderson, 2011). For 
these good Americans, regardless of what was in their hearts or minds, their 
religion, skin color, maybe even their clothing “communicate” disloyalty to the 
United States to many other Americans. Just as culture is constructed and 
maintained through communication, it is also communication (or miscom-
munication) that turns diff erentiation into division. 
 Yet, U.S. citizens of all colors, ethnicities, genders and gender prefer-
ences, nationalities, places of birth, economic strata, and intelligences often 
get along; in fact, we  can  communicate,  can  prosper,  can  respect one anoth-
er’s diff erences. Culture can divide us, but culture also unites us. Our culture 
represents our collective experience. We converse easily with strangers 
because we share the same culture. We speak the same language, automat-
ically understand how far apart to stand, appropriately use titles or fi rst or 
last names, know how much to say, and know how much to leave unsaid. 
Th rough communication with people in our culture, we internalize cultural 
norms and values—those things that bind our many diverse bounded 
cultures into a functioning, cohesive society.   
 DEFINING CULTURE  From this discussion of culture comes the defi nition of culture on which 
the remainder of this book is based: 
 
 Culture is the world made meaningful; it is socially constructed and 
maintained through communication. It limits as well as liberates 
us; it diff erentiates as well as unites us. It defi nes our realities and 
thereby shapes the ways we think, feel, and act.      
    Mass Communication 
and Culture  
 Because culture can limit and divide or liberate and unite, it 
off ers us infi nite opportunities to use communication for good—
if we choose to do so. James Carey (1975) wrote, 
 
 Because we have looked at each new advance in communication 
technology as opportunities for politics and economics, we have 
devoted them, almost exclusively, to government and trade. We 
have rarely seen them as opportunities to expand [our] powers to 
learn and exchange ideas and experience. (pp. 20–21)   
 Who are “we” in this quote?  We  are everyone involved in cre-
ating and maintaining the culture that defi nes us.  We  are the 
people involved in mass media industries and the people who 
compose their audiences. Together we allow mass communica-
tion not only to occur but also to contribute to the creation and 
maintenance of culture. 
 Everyone involved has an obligation to participate responsi-
bly. For people working in the media industries, this means pro-
fessionally and ethically creating and transmitting content. For 
audience members, it means behaving as critical and thoughtful consumers of that 
content. Two ways to understand our opportunities and our responsibilities in the 
mass communication process are to view the mass media as our cultural storytellers 
and to conceptualize mass communication as a cultural forum.    
  What is it about Muslim Americans that 
“communicated disloyalty” to the United States in 
the wake of the September 11, 2001, terrorist 
attacks on New York and Washington?
  Storytellers play an important role in helping us deﬁ ne ourselves.
 BALLARD STREET. By permission of Jerry Van Amerongen and Creators Syndicate, Inc. 

CHAPTER 1 
Mass Communication, Culture, and Media Literacy 
15
     Mass Media as Cultural Storytellers 
 A culture’s values and beliefs reside in the stories it tells. 
Who are the good guys? Who are the bad guys? How many 
of your childhood heroines were chubby? How many good 
guys dressed in black? How many heroines lived happily 
ever after without marrying Prince Charming? Probably 
not very many. Our stories help defi ne our realities, shap-
ing the ways we think, feel, and act. “Stories are sites of 
observations about self and society,” explains media 
 theorist Hanno Hardt (2007). “Th ese fi ctional accounts are 
the constitutive material signs of a shared conversation” 
(p. 476). Th erefore, the “storytellers” have a responsibility 
to tell their stories in as professional and ethical a way as 
possible. 
 At the same time, we, the audience for these stories, also 
have opportunities and responsibilities. We use these stories 
not only to be entertained but to learn about the world 
around us, to understand the values, the way things work, 
and how the pieces fi t together. We have a responsibility to 
question the tellers and their stories, to interpret the stories 
in ways consistent with larger or more important cultural 
values and truths, to be thoughtful, to refl ect on the stories’ 
meanings and what they say about us and our culture. To do 
less is to miss an opportunity to construct our own meaning 
and, thereby, culture. 
 For example, as journalists tried to tell the story of the 
destruction wrought by Hurricane Katrina, they had a nearly 
infi nite number of images and words available to craft their narratives. Th e wire-
service photos and accompanying captions featured on this cover of  Extra!  were just 
two. Th ey had appeared in newspapers around the world and in proximity to each 
other on Web portal Yahoo! News. Th e young African American man “walks through 
chest deep fl ood water after  looting  a grocery store.” Th e white couple, though, wades 
“through chest-deep water after  fi nding  bread and soda from a local grocery store.” 
Th e plot line is clear—the lazy black man looted . . . naturally . . . while those hard-
working white folks were fortunate enough to have found sustenance! Readers and 
Web surfers of all races, in an instantaneous (and angry) cultural conversation with 
newspapers and Yahoo!, rejected their off ensive, racially simplistic, stories. Th e images 
and captions immediately disappeared from Yahoo! News. Yahoo! and many newspapers 
apologized (Bacon, 2005).      
 Mass Communication as Cultural Forum 
 Imagine a giant courtroom in which we discuss and debate our culture—what it is, and 
what we want it to be. What do we think about welfare? Single motherhood? Labor 
unions? Nursing homes? What is the meaning of “successful,” “good,” “loyal,” “moral,” 
“honest,” “beautiful,” “patriotic”? We have cultural defi nitions or understandings of all 
these things and more. Where do they come from? How do they develop, take shape, 
and mature? 
 Mass communication has become a primary forum for the debate about our cul-
ture. Logically, then, the most powerful voices in the forum have the most power to 
shape our defi nitions and understandings. Where should that power reside—with the 
media industries or with their audiences? If you answer “media industries,” you will 
want members of these industries to act professionally and ethically. If you answer 
“audiences,” you will want individual audience members to be thoughtful and critical 
of the media messages they consume. Th e forum is only as good, fair, and honest as 
those who participate in it.     
  The events captured in these images sent 
globally by Yahoo! News were the same—people 
trying to survive the horrors of Hurricane Katrina. 
But as the race of the “characters” changed, so too 
did the stories. People complained. Yahoo! listened.

16 
PART 1 
Laying the Groundwork
 Scope and Nature of Mass Media  
 No matter how we choose to view the process of mass communication, it is impossible 
to deny that an enormous portion of our lives is spent interacting with mass media. 
On a typical Sunday night, about 40 million people in the United States will tune in to 
a prime-time television show. Television viewing is at record levels, averaging  eight 
and a half hours a day for a typical household. Th e average American watches 35.6 
hours a week; kids 2 to 11 years old watch 25.8 hours a week. Th e average U.S. home 
has 2.5 sets, but 31% have 4 or more (Factsheet, 2011)  . U.S. households devote nearly 
7% of their spending to entertainment media (Masnick & Ho, 2012), and the average 
American adult devotes 11 hours and 33 minutes a day to media (Friedman, 
2011).  Eighty-six percent of all American adults own a cell phone, but half of all Amer-
icans own a device with an advanced operating system, that is, a     smartphone  , a pro-
portion that rises to 62% for people ages 25 to 34 (Smith, 2011c; Smith, 2012a) . 
Worldwide, cell phone users annually download nearly 18 billion     apps  (by 2014 that 
number will jump to 185 billion), and although 81% are free, users will spend over $15 
billion paying for the remaining 19% (Walsh, 2011) . People who regularly use mobile 
and social media spend more than 11 hours and 17 minutes a day—a 35% increase 
over the last decade—on the cell, watching television, surfi ng the Net, listening to the 
radio and MP3s, and reading, typically engaging in more than one consumption activ-
ity at the same time (Lowry, 2010). 
 We spend  over $10 billion a year going to the multiplex, buying  nearly 1.3 billion 
tickets (U.S. Movie, 2012). Th irty-three percent of the world’s population, 2 billion, 
267 million people, regularly access the Internet, a 528% increase in the last 10 years 
(Internet World Stats, 2012). Global music listeners legally buy more than 1.5 billion 
pieces of recorded music—albums, singles, and digital tracks—a year (Masnick & 
Ho, 2012). If it were a country, social networking website Facebook, with its 845 
million active users, 425 million of whom access the site via those smartphones, 
would be the third largest nation in the world, after China and India (Smith, 2011c; 
Ludwig, 2012). Seventy-two percent of American households play video games 
(Entertainment Software Association, 2012).  Figure 1.4  provides data on Americans’ 
media preferences.    
 Despite the pervasiveness of mass media in our lives, many 
of us are dissatisfi ed with or critical of the media industries’ 
performance and much of the content provided. For example, 
only 17% of adults feel that entertainment media provide “very 
good” or “excellent” value (L.D. Smith, 2011).   People’s evalu-
ations of the media have become more negative over the last 
decade. Only 38% of the public holds a positive view of the 
publishing industry (down 9% from 2011); only 32% think 
highly of the public relations industry (down 6%); and only 
39% have positive views of radio and television (down 3%; 
Newport, 2011). As for journalism, “negative opinions about 
the performance of news organizations now equal or surpass 
all-time highs” (Pew Research Center, 2011). 
 Our ambivalence—we criticize, yet we consume—comes in 
part from our uncertainties about the relationships among the 
elements of mass communication. What is the role of technol-
ogy? What is the role of money? And what is  our  role in the 
mass communication process?  
 The Role of Technology 
 To some thinkers, it is machines and their development that 
drive economic and cultural change. Th is idea is referred to as 
 technological determinism   . Certainly there can be no doubt 
that movable type contributed to the Protestant Reformation 
4 hrs.
34 min. 
2 hrs.
47 min. 
65 min.
64 min.
44 min.
Radio
Magazines &
Newspapers 
Mobile
phone
Internet
Television
Minutes per day
  Figure 1.4  Average Number of Minutes per Day a Typical Adult Spends with Selected 
Media, 2011. 
 Source: eMarketer  (in Friedman, 2011) . 

CHAPTER 1 
Mass Communication, Culture, and Media Literacy 
17
and the decline of the Catholic Church’s power in Europe or that television changed 
the way members of American families interact. Th ose who believe in technological 
determinism would argue that these changes in the cultural landscape were the 
inevitable result of new technology. 
 But others see technology as more neutral and claim that the way people  use tech-
nology is what gives it signifi cance. Th is perspective accepts technology as one of many 
factors that shape economic and cultural change; technology’s infl uence is ultimately 
determined by how much power it is given by the people and cultures that use it. 
 Th is disagreement about the power of technology is at the heart of the controversy 
surrounding the new communication technologies. Are we more or less powerless 
in the wake of advances such as the Internet, the World Wide Web, and instant global 
audio and visual communication? If we are at the mercy of technology, the culture 
that surrounds us will not be of our making, and the best we can hope to do is make 
our way reasonably well in a world outside our control. But if these technologies 
are indeed neutral and their power resides in  how  we choose to use them, we can 
utilize them responsibly and thoughtfully to construct and maintain whatever kind 
of culture we want. As fi lm director and technophile Steven Spielberg explained, 
“Technology can be our best friend, and technology can also be the biggest party 
pooper of our lives. It interrupts our own story, interrupts our ability to have a thought 
or daydream, to imagine something wonderful because we’re too busy bridging the 
walk from the cafeteria back to the offi  ce on the cell phone” (quoted in Kennedy, 
2002, p. 109). Or, as Dr. Ian Malcolm (Jeff  Goldblum) said in Spielberg’s 1997  Th e Lost 
World: Jurassic Park , “Oooh! Ahhh! Th at’s how it always starts. Th en later there’s run-
ning and screaming.” 
 Technology does have an impact on communication. At the very least it changes 
the basic elements of communication (see  Figure 1.3 ). What technology does not do 
is relieve us of our obligation to use mass communication responsibly and wisely.   
 The Role of Money 
 Money, too, alters communication. It shifts the balance of power; it tends to make 
audiences products rather than consumers. 
 Th e fi rst newspapers were fi nancially supported by their readers; the money they 
paid for the paper covered its production and distribution. But in the 1830s a new form 
of newspaper fi nancing emerged. Publishers began selling their papers for a penny—
much less than it cost to produce and distribute them. Because so many more papers 
were sold at this bargain price, publishers could “sell” advertising space based on their 
readership. What they were actually selling to advertisers was not space on the page—
it was readers. How much they could charge advertisers was directly related to how 
much product (how many readers) they could produce for them. 
 Th is new type of publication changed the nature of mass communication. Th e goal 
of the process was no longer for audience and media to create meaning together. 
Rather, it was to sell those readers to a third participant—advertisers. 
 Some observers think this was a devastatingly bad development, not only in the his-
tory of mass communication but in the history of democracy. It robbed people of their 
voice, or at least made the voices of the advertisers more powerful. Others think it was 
a huge advance for both mass communication and democracy because it vastly expanded 
the media, broadening and deepening communication. Models showing these two dif-
ferent ways of viewing mass communication are presented in the box “Audience as Con-
sumer or Audience as Product?” Which model makes more sense to you? Which do you 
think is more accurate? ABC journalist Ted Koppel told the  Washington Post , “[Television] 
is an industry. It’s a business. We exist to make money. We exist to put commercials on 
the air. Th e programming that is put on between those commercials is simply the bait we 
put in the mousetrap” (in “Soundbites,” 2005, p. 2). Do you think Koppel is unnecessarily 
cynical or is he correct in his analysis of television? 
 Th e goals of media professionals will be questioned repeatedly throughout this 
book. For now, keep in mind that ours is a capitalist economic system and that media 

18 
PART 1 
Laying the Groundwork
industries are businesses. Movie producers must sell tickets, book publishers must sell 
books, and even public broadcasting has bills to pay. 
 Th is does not mean, however, that the media are or must be slaves to profi t. Our 
task is to understand the constraints placed on these industries by their economics 
and then demand that, within those limits, they perform ethically and responsibly. We 
can do this only by being thoughtful, critical consumers of the media.     
 Mass Communication, Culture, 
and Media Literacy  
 Culture and communication are inseparable, and mass communication, as we’ve seen, 
is a particularly powerful, pervasive, and complex form of communication. Our level 
of skill in the mass communication process is therefore of utmost importance. Th is skill 
is not necessarily a simple one to master (it is much more than booting up the com-
puter, turning on the television set, or fl ipping the pages of your favorite magazine). But 
it is, indeed, a learnable skill, one that can be practiced. Th is skill is    media literacy —
the  ability to eff ectively and effi  ciently comprehend and use any form of mediated 
communication. But let’s start with the fi rst mass medium, books, and the technology 
that enabled their spread, the printing press.  
People base their judgments of media performance and content on the way they see themselves ﬁ tting into the economics of the media industry. Businesses operate to serve their consumers 
and make a proﬁ t. The consumer comes ﬁ rst, then, but who is the consumer in our mass media system? This is a much-debated issue among media practitioners and media critics. Consider the 
following models.
CULTURAL FORUM
Audience as Consumer or 
Audience as Product?
 
PRODUCER 
PRODUCT 
CONSUMER
Basic U.S. Business Model 
A manufacturer . . . 
produces a product . . . 
 for consumers who choose to buy or not. The manufacturer 
must satisfy the consumer. Power resides here.
Basic U.S. Business Model 
Kellogg’s . . . 
produces Rice 
for us, the consumers. If we buy Rice Krispies, Kellogg’s
for Cereal: Rice Krispies as 
 
Krispies . . . 
makes a proﬁ t. Kellogg’s must satisfy us. Power
Product, Public as Consumer 
 
 
resides here.
Basic U.S. Business Model for 
NBC . . . 
produces audiences 
for advertisers. If they buy NBC’s audiences, NBC makes a
Television (A): Audience as Product, 
 
(using its 
proﬁ t. NBC must satisfy its consumers, the advertisers. 
Advertisers as Consumer 
 
programming) . . . 
Power resides here.
Basic U.S. Business Model for 
NBC . . . 
produces (or distributes) 
for us, the audience. If we watch NBC’s shows, NBC makes
Television (B): Programming as 
 
programming . . . 
a proﬁ t. NBC must satisfy us. Power resides here.
Product, Audience as Consumer 
 
 
 
The ﬁ rst three models assume that the consumer buys the product; that is, the consumer is the one with the money and therefore the one who must be satisﬁ ed. The last model makes a 
diﬀ erent assumption. It sees the audience, even though it does not buy anything, as suﬃ  ciently important to NBC’s proﬁ t-making ability to force NBC to consider its interests above others’ (even 
those of advertisers). Which model do you think best represents the economics of U.S. mass media?

CHAPTER 1 
Mass Communication, Culture, and Media Literacy 
19
 The Gutenberg Revolution 
 As it is impossible to overstate the importance of writing, so too is it impossible to 
overstate the signifi cance of Johannes Gutenberg’s development of movable metal 
type. Historian S. H. Steinberg (1959) wrote in  Five Hundred Years of Printing: 
 Neither political, constitutional, ecclesiastical, and economic, nor sociological, philosophical, 
and literary movements can be fully understood without taking into account the infl uence 
the printing press has exerted upon them. (p. 11)   
 Marshall McLuhan expressed his admiration for Gutenberg’s innovation by calling his 
1962 book  Th e Gutenberg Galaxy . In it he argued that the advent of print is the key to 
our modern consciousness, because although     literacy  —the ability to eff ectively and 
effi  ciently comprehend and use written symbols—had existed since the development 
of the fi rst alphabets more than 5,000 years ago, it was reserved for very few, the elites. 
Gutenberg’s invention was world-changing because it opened literacy to all, that is, it 
allowed  mass communication. 
 THE PRINTING PRESS  Printing and the printing press existed long before Gutenberg per-
fected his process in or around 1446. Th e Chinese were using wooden block presses 
as early as 600  c.e . and had movable clay type by 1000  c.e . A simple movable metal 
type was even in use in Korea in the 13th century. Gutenberg’s printing press was a 
signifi cant leap forward, however, for two important reasons.    
 Gutenberg was a goldsmith and a metallurgist. He hit on the idea of using metal 
type crafted from lead molds in place of type made from wood or clay. Th is was an 
important advance. Not only was movable metal type durable enough to print page 
after page, but letters could be arranged and rearranged to make any message possible. 
And Gutenberg was able to produce virtually identical copies. 
 In addition, Gutenberg’s advance over Korean metal mold printing was one of 
scope. Th e Korean press was used to produce books for a very small, royal readership. 
Gutenberg saw his invention as a way to produce many books for profi t. He was, how-
ever, a poor businessman. He stressed quality over quantity, in 
part because of his reverence for the book he was printing, the 
Bible. He used the highest-quality paper and ink and turned out 
far fewer volumes than he otherwise could have. 
 Other printers, however, quickly saw the true economic 
potential of Gutenberg’s invention. Th e fi rst Gutenberg Bible 
appeared in 1456. By the end of that century, 44 years later, print-
ing operations existed in 12 European countries, and the conti-
nent was fl ooded with 20 million volumes of 7,000 titles in 35,000 
diff erent editions (Drucker, 1999).   
 THE IMPACT OF PRINT  Although Gutenberg developed his printing 
press with a limited use in mind, printing Bibles, the cultural 
eff ects of mass printing have been profound. 
 Handwritten or hand-copied materials were expensive to pro-
duce, and the cost of an education, in time and money, had 
made reading an expensive luxury. However, with the spread of 
printing, written communication was available to a much larger 
portion of the population, and the need for literacy among the 
lower and middle classes grew. Th e ability to read became less 
of a luxury and more of a necessity; eventually literacy spread, 
as did education. Soldiers at the front needed to be able to read 
the emperor’s orders. Butchers needed to understand the king’s 
shopping list. So the demand for literacy expanded, and more 
(and more types of) people learned to read. 
 Tradespeople, soldiers, clergy, bakers, and musicians all now 
had business at the printer’s shop. Th ey talked. Th ey learned of 
things, both in conversation and by reading printed material. As 
  This page from a Gutenberg Bible shows the 
exquisite care the printer used in creating his works. 
The artwork in the margins is handpainted, but the 
text is mechanically printed. 

20 
PART 1 
Laying the Groundwork
more people learned to read, new ideas germinated and spread and cross-pollination 
of ideas occurred. 
 More material from various sources was published, and people were freer to read what 
they wanted when they wanted. Dominant authorities—the Crown and the Church—
were now less able to control communication and, therefore, the people. New ideas about 
the world appeared; new understandings of the existing world fl ourished.    
 In addition, duplication permitted standardization and preservation. Myth and 
superstition began to make way for standard, verifi able bodies of knowledge. History, 
economics, physics, and chemistry all became part of the culture’s intellectual life. 
Literate cultures were now on the road to modernization. 
 Printed materials were the fi rst mass-produced product, speeding the development 
and entrenchment of capitalism. We live today in a world built on these changes. Use 
of the printing press helped fuel the establishment and growth of a large middle class. 
No longer were societies composed of rulers and subjects; printing sped the rise of 
democracy. No longer were power and wealth functions of birth. Power and wealth 
could now be created by the industrious. No longer was political discourse limited to 
accepting the dictates of Crown and Church. Printing had given ordinary people a 
powerful voice. 
 Tech writer Kevin Kelly connected printing directly to freedom and the rule of law: 
 When technology shifts, it bends the culture. Once, long ago, culture revolved around the 
spoken word. Th e oral skills of memorization, recitation, and rhetoric instilled in societies 
a reverence for the past, the ambiguous, the ornate, and the subjective. Th en, about 500 years 
ago, orality was overthrown by technology. Gutenberg’s invention of metallic moveable 
type elevated writing into a central position in the culture. By means of cheap and perfect 
copies, text became the engine of change and the foundation of stability. From printing 
came journalism, science and the mathematics of libraries and law. (2008, p. 48)      
 The Industrial Revolution 
 By the mid-18th century, printing and its libraries of science and mathematics had 
become one of the engines driving the Industrial Revolution. Print was responsible for 
building and disseminating bodies of knowledge, leading to scientifi c and technologi-
cal developments and the refi nement of new machines. In addition, industrialization 
  Johannes Gutenberg takes the ﬁ rst proof from 
his printing press. 

CHAPTER 1 
Mass Communication, Culture, and Media Literacy 
21
reduced the time necessary to complete work, and this created something heretofore 
unknown to most working people—leisure time. 
 Industrialization had another eff ect as well. As workers left their sunrise-to-sunset 
jobs in agriculture, the crafts, and trades to work in the newly industrialized factories, 
not only did they have more leisure time but they had more money to spend on their 
leisure. Farmers, fi shermen, and tile makers had to put their profi ts back into their jobs. 
But factory workers took their money home; it was spendable. Combine leisure time 
and expendable cash with the spread of literacy and the result is a large and growing 
audience for printed  information  and  entertainment . By the mid-19th century a mass 
audience and the means to reach it existed.     
 Media Literacy  
 Television infl uences our culture in innumerable ways. One of its eff ects, according to 
many people, is that it has encouraged violence in our society. For example, American 
television viewers overwhelmingly say there is too much violence on television. Yet, 
almost without exception, the local television news program that has the largest propor-
tion of violence in its nightly newscast is the ratings leader. “If it bleeds, it leads” has 
become the motto for much of local television news. It leads because people watch. 
 So, although many of us are quick to condemn improper media performance or to 
identify and lament its harmful eff ects, we rarely question our own role in the mass 
communication process. We overlook it because we participate in mass communica-
tion naturally, almost without conscious eff ort. We possess high-level interpretive and 
comprehension skills that make even the most sophisticated television show, movie, 
or magazine story understandable and enjoyable. We are able, through a lifetime of 
interaction with the media, to  read media texts . 
 Media literacy is a skill we take for granted, but like all skills, it can be improved. 
And if we consider how important the mass media are in creating and maintaining the 
culture that helps defi ne us and our lives, it is a skill that  must  be improved. 
 Hunter College media professor Stuart Ewen (2000) emphasized this point in com-
paring media literacy with traditional literacy. “Historically,” he wrote, “links between 
literacy and democracy are inseparable from the notion of an informed populace, con-
versant with the issues that touch upon their lives, enabled with tools that allow them 
to participate actively in public deliberation and social change…. Literacy was about 
crossing the lines that had historically separated men of ideas from ordinary people, 
about the enfranchisement of those who had been excluded from the compensations 
of citizenship” (p. 448). To Ewen, and others committed to media literacy, media 
literacy represents no less than the means to full participation in the culture.  
 Elements of Media Literacy 
 Media scholar Art Silverblatt (2008) identifi es seven fundamental elements of media 
literacy. To these we will add an eighth. Media literacy includes these characteristics: 
 
 1.  A critical thinking skill enabling audience members to develop independent judg-
ments about media content . Th inking critically about the content we consume is the 
very essence of media literacy. Why do we watch what we watch, read what we read, 
listen to what we listen to? If we cannot answer these questions, we have taken no 
responsibility for ourselves or our choices. As such, we have taken no responsibility for 
the outcome of those choices.  
 
 2.  An understanding of the process of mass communication . If we know the com-
ponents of the mass communication process and how they relate to one another, we 
can form expectations of how they can serve us. How do the various media industries 
operate? What are their obligations to us? What are the obligations of the audience? 
How do diff erent media limit or enhance messages? Which forms of feedback are most 
eff ective, and why?  

22 
PART 1 
Laying the Groundwork
 
 3.  An awareness of the impact of media on the individual and society . Writing and 
the printing press helped change the world and the people in it. Mass media do the 
same. If we ignore the impact of media on our lives, we run the risk of being caught 
up and carried along by that change rather than controlling or leading it.  
 
 4.  Strategies for analyzing and discussing media messages . To consume media 
messages thoughtfully, we need a foundation on which to base thought and refl ection. 
If we make meaning, we must possess the tools with which to make it (for example, 
understanding the intent and impact of fi lm and video conventions, such as camera 
angles and lighting, or the strategy behind the placement of photos on a newspaper 
page). Otherwise, meaning is made for us; the interpretation of media content will 
then rest with its creator, not with us.  
 
 5.  An understanding of media content as a text that provides insight into our cul-
ture and our lives . How do we know a culture and its people, attitudes, values, con-
cerns, and myths? We know them through communication. For modern cultures like 
ours, media messages increasingly dominate that communication, shaping our under-
standing of and insight into our culture.  
 
 6.  Th e ability to enjoy, understand, and appreciate media content . Media literacy 
does not mean living the life of a grump, liking nothing in the media, or always being 
suspicious of harmful eff ects and cultural degradation. We take high school and college 
classes to enhance our understanding and appreciation of novels; we can do the same 
for media texts. 
 Learning to enjoy, understand, and appreciate media content includes the ability 
to use    multiple points of access   —to approach media content from a variety of direc-
tions and derive from it many levels of meaning. Th us, we control meaning making for 
our own enjoyment or appreciation. For example, we can enjoy  all-time global box 
offi  ce champion   Avatar  as an exciting, explosion-laden, action-adventure holiday 
blockbuster, the biggest moneymaker in cinematic history. But as movie buff s we 
might see it as a classic good-guy-rides-into-town movie, the OK Corral transported to 
Pandora. Or we might read it as an environmental allegory—don’t mess with Mother 
Nature—or an attack on war in the Middle East, with Na’vi unobtanium substituting 
for Muslim oil. Maybe it’s a history lesson disguised as sci-fi , reminding us of the futil-
ity of attempting to defeat a native insurgency. Or maybe it is a cool way to spend a 
Saturday night, entertained by the same folks who so delighted us with the  Alien and 
 Terminator movies. 
 In fact, television programs such as  Desperate Housewives ,  Th e Daily Show ,  Th e 
Simpsons ,  Grey’s Anatomy , and  Family Guy  are specifi cally constructed to take advan-
tage of the media literacy skills of sophisticated viewers while providing entertaining 
fare for less skilled consumers. Th e same is true for fi lms such as  Up ,  50/50 ,  Hurt 
Locker , and  Knocked Up , magazines such as  Alarm , and the best of jazz, rap, and rock. 
 Desperate Housewives  and  Th e Daily Show  are produced as television comedies, 
designed to make people laugh. But they are also intentionally produced to provide 
more sophisticated, media-literate viewers with opportunities to make personally 
interesting or relevant meaning. Anyone can laugh while watching these programs, but 
some people can investigate hypocrisy in suburbia ( Housewives ), or they can examine 
the failings and foibles of contemporary journalism ( Daily Show ). 
 
 7.  Development of eff ective and responsible production skills . Traditional literacy 
assumes that people who can read can also write. Media literacy also makes this 
assumption. Our defi nition of literacy (of either type) calls not only for eff ective and 
effi  cient comprehension of content but for its eff ective and effi  cient  use . Th erefore, 
media-literate individuals should develop production skills that enable them to create 
useful media messages. If you have ever tried to make a narrative home video—one 
that tells a story—you know that producing content is much more diffi  cult than con-
suming it. Even producing a telephone answering machine message that is not embar-
rassing is a daunting task for many people. 
 Th is element of media literacy may seem relatively unimportant at fi rst glance. After 
all, if you choose a career in media production, you will get training in school and on 

CHAPTER 1 
Mass Communication, Culture, and Media Literacy 
23
the job. If you choose another calling, you may never be in the position of having to 
produce content. But most professions now employ some form of media to dissemi-
nate information: for use in training, to enhance presentations, or to keep in contact 
with clients and customers. Th e Internet and the World Wide Web, in particular, require 
eff ective production skills of their users—at home, school, and work—because online 
receivers can and do easily become online creators.  
 
 8.  An understanding of the ethical and moral obligations of media practitioners . 
To make informed judgments about the performance of the media, we also must be 
aware of the competing pressures on practitioners as they do their jobs. We must 
 Family Guy is a cartoon about a typical suburban family. It has all the things you would expect from a television situation comedy—an inept 
dad, a precocious daughter, a slacker son, a solid wife, and zany situations. Yet it also oﬀ ers an intellectual dog philosopher and an evil genius, 
scheming baby. Why do you think the producers have gone to the trouble to populate this show with the usual trappings of a sitcom but then add 
other, bizarre elements? And what’s going on in Avatar? Is it another special-eﬀ ects, explosion-laden, action-adventure holiday blockbuster? A classic 
good-guy-rides-into-town movie—the OK Corral transported to Pandora? An environmental allegory? Commentary on war in the Middle East, with 
Na’vi unobtanium substituting for Muslim oil? Or maybe it is a cool way to spend a Saturday night, entertained by the same folks who created the 
Alien and Terminator movies.

24 
PART 1 
Laying the Groundwork
understand the media’s offi  cial and unoffi  cial rules of operation. In other words, we 
must know, respectively, their legal and ethical obligations. Return, for a moment, to 
the question of televised violence. It is legal for a station to air graphic violence. But is 
it ethical? If it is unethical, what power, if any, do we have to demand its removal from 
our screens? Dilemmas such as this are discussed at length in Chapter 14.    
 Media Literacy Skills 
 Consuming media content is simple. Push a button and you have television pictures 
or music on a radio. Come up with enough cash and you can see a movie or buy a 
magazine. Media-literate consumption, however, requires a number of specifi c skills: 
 
 1.  Th e ability and willingness to make an eff ort to understand content, to pay atten-
tion, and to fi lter out noise . As we saw earlier, anything that interferes with successful 
communication is called noise, and much of the noise in the mass communication 
process results from our own consumption behavior. When we watch television, often 
we are also doing other things, such as eating, reading, or chatting on the phone. We 
drive while we listen to the radio. Obviously, the quality of our meaning making is 
related to the eff ort we give it.  
 
 2.  An understanding of and respect for the power of media messages . Th e mass 
media have been around for more than a century and a half. Just about everybody can 
enjoy them. Th eir content is either free or relatively inexpensive. Much of the content 
is banal and a bit silly, so it is easy to dismiss media content as beneath serious con-
sideration or too simple to have any infl uence. 
 We also disregard media’s power through the    third-person eff ect —the common 
attitude that others are infl uenced by media messages but that we are not. Th at is, we 
are media literate enough to understand the infl uence of mass communication on the 
attitudes, behaviors, and values of others but not self-aware or honest enough to see 
its infl uence on our lives.     
 
 3.  Th e ability to distinguish emotional from reasoned reactions when responding to 
content and to act accordingly . Media content is often designed to touch us at the emo-
tional level. We enjoy losing ourselves in a good song or in a well-crafted movie or tele-
vision show; this is among our great pleasures. But because we react emotionally to these 
messages does not mean they don’t have seri-
ous meanings and implications for our lives. 
Television pictures, for example, are intention-
ally shot and broadcast for their emotional 
impact. Reacting emotionally is appropriate 
and proper. But then what? What do these pic-
tures tell us about the larger issue at hand? We 
can use our feelings as a point of departure for 
meaning making. We can ask, “Why does this 
content make me feel this way?  
 
 4.  Development of heightened expectations 
of media content . We all use media to tune out, 
waste a little time, and provide background 
noise. When we decide to watch television, 
we are more likely to turn on the set and fl ip 
channels until we fi nd something passable 
than we are to read the listings to fi nd a specifi c 
program to view. When we search for online 
video,   we often settle for the "10 most shared 
today." When we expect little from the content 
before us, we tend to give meaning making 
little eff ort and attention.  
 
 5.  A knowledge of genre conventions and 
the ability to recognize when they are being 
  The third-person eﬀ ect makes it easy to dismiss media’s inﬂ uence on ourselves…only those other folks are aﬀ ected! 
Media-literate people know that not only is this not the case, but even if it were, we all live in a world where people are 
inﬂ uenced by mass communication. 
 David Horsey. © Tribune Media Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Reprinted with permission. 

CHAPTER 1 
Mass Communication, Culture, and Media Literacy 
25
mixed . Th e term    genre    refers to the categories of expression within the diff erent media, 
such as the “evening news,” “documentary,” “horror movie,” or “entertainment maga-
zine.” Each genre is characterized by certain distinctive, standardized style elements—
the  conventions    of that genre. Th e conventions of the evening news, for example, 
include a short, upbeat introductory theme and one or two good-looking people sitting 
at a space-age desk. When we hear and see these style elements, we expect the evening 
news. We can tell a documentary fi lm from an entertainment movie by its more serious 
tone and the number of talking heads. We know by their appearance—the use of color 
and the amount of text on the cover—which magazines off er serious reading and 
which provide entertainment. 
 Knowledge of these conventions is important because they cue or direct our mean-
ing making. For example, we know to accept the details in a documentary fi lm about 
the sinking of the  Titanic  as more credible than those found in a Hollywood movie 
about that disaster. 
 Th is skill is also important for another reason. Sometimes, in an eff ort to maxi-
mize audiences (and therefore profi ts) or for creative reasons, media content mak-
ers mix genre conventions. Are Oliver Stone’s  Nixon  and  JFK  fact or fi ction? Is 
Geraldo Rivera a journalist, a talk show host, or a showman? Is  Bratz  a kid’s cartoon 
or a 30-minute commercial?  Extra!  and  E! News  look increasingly like  Dateline NBC 
and the  CBS Evening News . Reading media texts becomes more diffi  cult as formats 
are co-opted.  
 
 6.  Th e ability to think critically about media messages, no matter how credible their 
sources . It is crucial that media be credible in a democracy in which the people govern 
because the media are central to the governing process. Th is is why the news media 
are sometimes referred to as the fourth branch of government, complementing the 
executive, judicial, and legislative branches. Th is does not mean, however, that we 
should believe everything they report. But it is often diffi  cult to arrive at the proper 
balance between wanting to believe and accepting what we see and hear unquestion-
ingly, especially when frequently we are willing to suspend disbelief and are encour-
aged by the media themselves to see their content as real and credible. 
 Consider the  New York Times  motto “All the News Th at’s Fit to Print” and the title 
“Eyewitness News.” If it is all there, it must all be real, and who is more credible than 
an eyewitness? But if we examine these media, we would learn that the  Times  in actu-
ality prints all the news that fi ts (in its pages) and that the news is, at best, a very 
selective eyewitness.  
 
 7.  A knowledge of the internal language of various media and the ability to under-
stand its eff ects, no matter how complex . Just as each media genre has its own distinc-
tive style and conventions, each medium also has its own specifi c internal language. 
Th is language is expressed in    production  values   —the choice of lighting, editing, spe-
cial eff ects, music, camera angle, location on the page, and size and placement of 
headline. To be able to read a media text, you must understand its language. We learn 
the grammar of this language automatically from childhood—for example, we know 
that when the television image goes “all woosielike,” the character is dreaming.    
 Let’s consider two versions of the same movie scene. In the fi rst, a man is driving a 
car. Cut to a woman lying tied up on a railroad track. What is the relationship between 
the man and the woman? Where is he going? With no more information than these 
two shots, you know automatically that he cares for her and is on his way to save her. 
Now, here is the second version. Th e man is driving the car. Fade to black. Fade back 
up to the woman on the tracks. Now what is the relationship between the man and the 
woman? Where is he going? It is less clear that these two people even have anything 
to do with each other. We construct completely diff erent meanings from exactly the 
same two pictures because the punctuation (the quick cut/fade) diff ers. 
 Media texts tend to be more complicated than these two scenes. Th e better we can 
handle their grammar, the more we can understand and appreciate texts. Th e more we 
understand texts, the more we can be equal partners with media professionals in 
meaning making.     

26 
PART 1 
Laying the Groundwork
 This television show oﬀ ers all the conventions 
we’d expect from the news—background digital 
graphics, an anchor behind his desk, a well-known 
newsmaker as interviewee. But it also contains 
conventions we’d expect from a comedy 
program—a satirist as host and an unruly, loud 
audience. Why does  The Daily Show mix the 
conventions of these two very diﬀ erent genres? 
Does your knowledge of those conventions add to 
your enjoyment of this hit cable program?  
 Media-literate people develop  an understanding of media content as a text that provides insight into our culture and our lives  and 
they have  an awareness of the impact of media on the individual and society . So, challenge your own media literacy skills. You can 
do this exercise with a parent or other person older than you, or you can speculate after using the Internet to view movies and 
television shows from 20 years ago. Compare your childhood heroes and heroines with those of your parents. What diﬀ erences 
are there between the generations in what you consider heroic qualities? What are some similarities and diﬀ erences between the 
heroic qualities you and your parents identify? Are the good qualities of your personal heroes something you can ﬁ nd in today’s 
movies or TV? Perhaps your hero is even a TV character. Either way, where on TV or in ﬁ lm can you ﬁ nd the qualities you consider 
heroic? Which cultural values, attitudes, and beliefs, if any, do you think have inﬂ uenced how heroes and heroines have changed 
throughout the last few decades? How have the media helped establish the values you identify as important qualities in people?  
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE  
 Recognizing Cultural Values 

 Defi ne  communication, mass communication, mass 
media, and  culture.
  Communication is the process of creating shared 
meaning. 
  Mass communication is the process of creating 
shared meaning between the mass media and their 
 audiences. 
  Mass media is the plural of mass medium, a technology 
that carries messages to a large number of people.  
  Culture is the world made meaningful. It resides all 
around us; it is socially constructed and maintained 
through communication. It limits as well as liberates us; 
it diff erentiates as well as unites us. It defi nes our reali-
ties and shapes the ways we think, feel, and act.  
   Describe the relationships among communication, mass 
communication, culture, and those who live in the 
 culture. 
  Mass media are our culture’s dominant storytellers and 
the forum in which we debate cultural meaning. 
   Evaluate the impact of technology and economics on 
those relationships. 
  Technological determinism argues that technology is 
the predominant agent of social and cultural change. 
But it is not technology that drives culture; it is how 
people use technology. 
  With technology, money, too, shapes mass communica-
tion. Audiences can be either the consumer or the prod-
uct in our mass media system. 
 Resources for Review and Discussion  
 REVIEW POINTS: TYING CONTENT TO LEARNING OUTCOMES   

CHAPTER 1 
Mass Communication, Culture, and Media Literacy 
27
   List the components of media literacy.  
  Media literacy, the ability to eff ectively and effi  ciently 
comprehend and use any form of mediated communi-
cation, consists of several components:  
  Critical thinking skills enabling the development of 
independent judgments about media content 
  An understanding of the process of mass 
communication 
  An awareness of the impact of the media on individuals 
and society  
  Strategies for analyzing and discussing media messages  
  An awareness of media content as a “text” providing 
insight into contemporary culture 
  A cultivation of enhanced enjoyment, understanding, 
and appreciation of media content  
  Th e development of eff ective and responsible 
 production skills 
  Th e development of an understanding of the ethical 
and moral obligations of media practitioners  
   Identify key skills required for developing media literacy. 
  Media skills include 
  Th e ability and willingness to make an eff ort to 
understand content, to pay attention, and to fi lter 
out noise  
  An understanding of and respect for the power of 
media messages  
  Th e ability to distinguish emotional from reasoned 
reactions when responding to content and to act 
accordingly 
  Th e development of heightened expectations of 
media content 
  A knowledge of genre conventions and the 
recognition of their mixing 
  Th e ability to think critically about media messages 
  A knowledge of the internal language of various 
media and the ability to understand its eff ects 
 KEY TERMS
 communication, 4 
 feedback, 5 
 interpersonal communication, 5 
 encoding, 6 
 decoding, 6 
 noise, 6 
 medium (pl. media), 6 
 mass medium, 6 
  mass communication, 6 
 inferential feedback, 6 
 cultural defi nition of communication, 7  
 culture, 9 
 dominant culture (mainstream 
culture), 11 
 bounded culture (co-culture), 12 
 smartphone, 16 
 apps, 16 
 technological determinism, 16 
 media literacy, 18 
 literacy, 19 
 multiple points of access, 22 
 third-person eff ect, 24  
 genre, 25 
 conventions, 25 
 production values, 25 
 QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW 
 1.  What is culture? How does culture defi ne people? 
 2.  What is communication? What is mass communication? 
 3.  What are encoding and decoding? How do they diff er 
when technology enters the communication process? 
 4.  What does it mean to say that communication is a 
reciprocal process? 
 5.  What is James Carey’s cultural defi nition of communication? 
How does it diff er from other defi nitions of that process?  
 6.  What do we mean by mass media as cultural storyteller?  
 7.  What do we mean by mass communication as cultural 
 forum? 
 8.  What is media literacy? What are its components? 
 9.  What are some specifi c media literacy skills? 
 10.  What is the diff erence between genres and production 
conventions? What do these have to do with media 
 literacy? 
For further review, go to the LearnSmart study module for 
this chapter.
 QUESTIONS FOR CRITICAL THINKING AND DISCUSSION 
 1.  Who were your childhood heroes and heroines? Why did 
you choose them? What cultural lessons did you learn 
from them? 
 2.  Th e Gutenberg printing press had just the opposite eff ect 
from what was intended. What optimistic predictions for 
the cultural impact of the Internet and the World Wide 
Web do you think will prove as inaccurate as Gutenberg’s 
hopes for his innovation? What optimistic predictions do 
you think will be realized? Defend your answers.  
 3.  How media literate do you think you are? What about those 
around you—your parents, for example, or your best friend? 
What are your weaknesses as a media-literate person?   


 
29
 Louis C.K.’s  Live at the Beacon Theater . Is it a movie? 
What is a movie? 
 Learning Objectives 
 The mass media system we have today has existed more or less as we know it ever since 
the 1830s. It is a system that has weathered repeated signiﬁ cant change with the coming 
of increasingly sophisticated technologies—the penny press newspaper was soon 
followed by mass market books and mass circulation magazines. As the 1800s became the 
1900s, these popular media were joined by motion pictures, radio, and sound recording. A 
few decades later came television, combining news and entertainment, moving images 
and sound, all in the home and all, ostensibly, for free. The traditional media found new 
functions and prospered side by side with television. Then, more recently, came the 
Internet, World Wide Web, and mobile technologies like smartphones and tablets. Now, 
because of these new technologies, all the media industries are facing profound alterations 
in how they are structured and do business, the nature of their content, and how they 
interact with and respond to their audiences. Naturally, as these changes unfold, so too will 
the very nature of mass communication and our role in that process. After studying this 
chapter you should be able to
  Summarize broad current trends in mass media, especially concentration of 
ownership and conglomeration, globalization, audience fragmentation, 
hypercommercialization, and convergence. 
  Describe in broad terms how the mass communication process itself will evolve as the 
role of the audience in this new media environment is altered. 
2 
 Convergence and 
the Reshaping 
of Mass 
Communication

30 
PART 1 
Laying the Groundwork
  “Y OU WANTED TO PLAY THIS GAME, NOT ME.” 
 “Too bad, but play fair. Th ere have to be limits.” 
 “It is legitimate. As I said, my favorite movie of last year is  Louis C.K.’s Live at the 
Beacon Th eater. ” 
 “It’s not a movie.” 
 “Is  Th e Beaver  a movie?” 
 “Of course. It has big stars like Jodie Foster and Mel Gibson. You could see it at the 
movies. It made almost a million dollars at the box offi  ce.” 
 “ Live at the Beacon  has a big star, one of the biggest in fact, Louis C.K. And it made 
 more  than a million dollars in its fi rst 10 days of release.” 
 “But it wasn’t in the theaters; ergo, not a movie.” 
 “Can you get  Th e Beaver  on DVD? Downloaded from iTunes? Streamed from Hulu?” 
 “Yes, yes, and yes. What’s your point?” 
 “If  Th e Beaver is a movie and can be viewed in any of those ways and still be a 
movie, then  Live at the Beacon  is a movie. You can see it all those same ways, and 
sure, maybe it didn’t screen at the Cineplex, but it screens at its own website; ergo, 
a movie!”   
 Th ere is a seismic shift going on in the mass media—and therefore in mass 
 communication—that dwarfs the changes to the media landscape wrought by television’s 
assault in the 1950s and 1960s on the preeminence of radio and the movies. Encour-
aged by the Internet, digitization, and mobility, new producers are fi nding new ways 
to deliver new content to new audiences. Th e media industries are in turmoil, and 
audience members, as they are confronted by a seemingly bewildering array of pos-
sibilities, are just now starting to come to terms with the new media future. Will you 
pay for movie downloads? How much? What will you pay for on-demand television 
programs? Will you be willing to view the commercials they contain if you could pay 
a bit less per show? Would you pay more or less for classic programming than for 
contemporary shows? Would you be willing to watch a movie or television show on a 
small screen? NBC Television’s Jeff  Zucker off ered his solution to the upheaval, “Th e 
overall strategy is to make all our content available everywhere” (in Bing, 2006, p. 1). 
But will this strategy work? And remember, we’re talking about  all  media. How will you 
listen to the radio—satellite radio or terrestrial radio or digital terrestrial radio or 
streamed Web radio? And what do you think of    day-and-date release , simultaneously 
releasing a movie to the public in some combination of theater, video-on-demand, 
DVD, and download? Director Yann Arthus-Bertrand released his environmentally 
  Ed Burns released his hit movie  Newlyweds  directly to the Web, video-on-demand, and iTunes. 

CHAPTER 2 
Convergence and the Reshaping of Mass Communication 
31
themed  Home in all four  formats    in 127 countries on World Environment Day, 2009. 
Steven Soderbergh released his 2009  Th e Girlfriend Experience  on cable and satellite 
video-on-demand a full month before he put it in theaters. In December 2011, 
director and feature fi lm star Ed Burns avoided the big screen altogether, launching 
 Newlyweds  directly to Web downloading sites, video-on-demand services connected 
to 45 million homes, and iTunes. In some cities, cable company Comcast makes 
day-and-date Hollywood blockbusters like  Spider-Man  available to home televi-
sions. On which    platform    (the means of delivering a specifi c piece of media con-
tent) would you most enjoy watching these fi lms? Can you still call it fi lm? Would 
you be willing to pay more or less for the diff erent platforms? Would you pay the 
$30 to $50 that Comcast charges? Th ese are precisely the kinds of questions that 
audiences will be answering in the next several years. Media-literate audiences will 
be better equipped to do so.    
 Industries in Transition  
 Media consumer “behavior is shifting,” media consultant Mike Vorhaus told industry 
executives at the 2009 Consumer Electronics Show, and that means media companies 
“have to do business diff erently, which is hard enough in normal times. But when you 
add in a deep cyclical economic situation, the result is a deep pain like they’ve never 
seen before” (in Winslow, 2009, p. 15). How much pain has been produced by the 
“perfect storm” of rapid technological change, shifting consumption behavior, and 
 economic turmoil? 
 • Movie attendance in 2011 dropped 4.5% from 2010, the eighth annual decline in the 
last nine years. Th at year’s 1.28 billion admissions was the fewest number of tickets 
sold since 1995’s 1.26 billion (US Movie Market Summary, 2012).  
 •  Th e downward trend in annual sales of recorded music that began in the late 1990s 
continued in 2011, showing a 3% decline from $16.7 billion to $16.2 billion (Collette-
White, 2012).  
 •  Fifteen years ago the four major broadcast networks commanded 61% of all televi-
sion viewing. Today their share hovers around 30%. Th e top-rated program in 1985 
was  Th e Cosby Show , viewed by more than 30% of all homes watching television; 
today it is  American Idol , drawing about 13% (Seabrook, 2012).  
 •  Beginning in 2007, DVD sales have fallen dramatically—for example, as much as 
20% between 2010 and 2011 (Paul, 2011). Rentals, too, are down, dropping 11% in 
that same time (Baar, 2012).  
 •  Video game industry revenues from the sale and rental of both hardware and soft-
ware declined 8% between 2010 and 2011, a fall that would have been steeper if it 
were not for the growth in mobile gaming (Epstein, 2012).  
 •  Sales of printed books peaked in 2005 and have declined each year since (Keller, 
2011).  
 •  Daily and Sunday newspaper circulation has dropped every year since 1998, with 
the sharpest declines among young people under the age of 30. Seventy-three 
 percent of the nation’s 100 biggest newspapers saw circulation declines in 2011 
(Sass, 2011d).  
 •  Circulation revenues, the number of ad pages, and gross revenue growth for 
American consumer magazines have all been fl at since 2002. Total consumer mag-
azine advertising pages fell more than 1% from 2010 to 2011, and 152 titles disap-
peared in 2011 (Sass, 2011e).  
 •  Listenership to American commercial radio has fallen steadily since 1998. Since 
2008 there have been small annual upticks in the number of listeners, but in 2011 
they tuned in for only 94 minutes a day, a big drop from 2008’s 102 minutes 
(Friedman, 2011). 

32 
PART 1 
Laying the Groundwork
 The Good News for 
Media Industries  
 Indeed, what this turmoil indicates is that the challenge facing the media industries 
today is how to capture a mass audience now fragmented into millions of niches. What 
has come about, according to  Variety’s  Jonathan Bing (2006), “is an unfamiliar new 
entertainment landscape, one in which the old rules of media consumption no longer 
apply” (pp. 1, 38). Th e “rules” of media consumption may have changed, but media 
consumption is at an all-time high. 
 Children 8 to 18 years old spend more than 10 hours and 45 minutes a day with 
media content, up by more than 2½ hours from 10 years ago. Th ey amass such large 
amounts of consumption because they are adept at    media multitasking , simultane-
ously consuming many diff erent kinds of media (Rideout, Foehr, & Roberts, 2010). 
Considering all media used only at home, in 1980 Americans received about seven 
hours of information a day. Today they receive 11.8 hours, or more precisely, “3.6 
zettabytes [a zettabyte is a billion trillion bytes]. Imagine a stack of paperback nov-
els stacked seven feet high over the entire United States, including Alaska” (Young, 
2009). Considering video only, by 2013 90% of all the traffi  c carried on the Internet 
will be video, and “the surface area of the world’s digital screens will be nearly 11 
billion square feet, or the equivalent of 2 billion large-screen TVs. Together, this 
amount would be more than 15 times the surface area of Manhattan. If laid end-to-
end, these screens would circle the globe more than 48 times” (Cisco Systems, 
2009). As you can see in  Figure 2.1 , when asked what technologies they need, nearly 
93% of Americans said their cars, as you might expect. But more than 8 in 10 said 
broadband Internet and nearly 7 in 10 said their smartphones, both quickly becom-
ing the primary media content delivery systems for most Americans. Large percent-
ages of Americans also see HDTV, newspapers, Blu-Ray, and satellite radio as 
“necessities” (Carmichael, 2011). In fact, more than at any time in history, Americans 
are watching more video, listening to more music, reading more often, playing more 
video games, and accessing the Internet more often than ever before; they are sim-
ply doing it in new and diff erent ways (Masnick & Ho, 2012). For media industries, 
Car
Broadband Internet
Smartphone
Blu-Ray DVD
HDTV
84.0%
92.7%
66.4%
48.9%
Newspaper
44.7%
Satellite Radio
34.5%
47.7%
Percentage responding “yes” when asked, “Do you need this item?”
  Figure 2.1  Which Technologies Do 
Americans Need? 
Source: Carmichael, 2011

CHAPTER 2 
Convergence and the Reshaping of Mass Communication 
33
these facts off er good news—readers, viewers, and listeners are out there in ever-
increasing numbers, and they value the mass communication experience. Th ese 
data also off er good news for literate media consumers—their consumption choices 
will shape the media landscape to come and, inevitably, the mass communication 
process itself. 
     Together, media industries and media consumers face a number of challenges. Beyond 
fragmenting audiences and the impact of new technologies (and the    convergence —the 
erosion of traditional distinctions among media—they encourage), they must also deal 
with three other forces that promise to alter the nature of the media industries as well 
as the relationship between those industries and the people with whom they interact: 
concentration of media ownership and conglomeration, rapid globalization, and 
hypercommercialization. 
 Changes  
 Concentration of Ownership and Conglomeration 
 Ownership of media companies is increasingly concentrated in fewer and fewer 
hands. Th rough mergers, acquisitions, buyouts, and hostile takeovers, a very small 
number of large conglomerates is coming to own more and more of the world’s 
media outlets. Media observer Ben Bagdikian reported that in 1997 the number of 
media corporations with “dominant power in society” was 10. In 2004 columnist 
William Safi re set the number at just 5: Comcast, Fox, Viacom, GE (NBC-Universal), 
and Time Warner (“Should Comcast,” 2004). Since then, Comcast has grown even 
larger, having bought NBC-Universal from GE to become the country’s largest cable 
company and largest residential broadband Internet provider. Th e conservative  New 
York Times  writer warned, “While political paranoids accuse each other of vast con-
spiracies, the truth is that media mergers have narrowed the range of information 
and entertainment available to people of all ideologies” (quoted in Plate, 2003, 
p. B4). Safi re was correct; people of all ideologies feel the impact of  concentration 
of ownership   . FCC commissioner and Democrat Jonathan Adelstein argued, “Th e 
public has a right to be informed by a diversity of viewpoints so they can make up 
their own minds. Without a diverse, independent media, citizen access to informa-
tion crumbles, along with political and social participation. For the sake of democ-
racy, we should encourage the widest possible dissemination of free expression” 
through our media (quoted in Kennedy, 2004, p. 1). Adelstein was echoing Supreme 
Court Justice Hugo Black’s eloquent defense of a vibrant media in his 1945  Associ-
ated Press v. U.S . decision: “Th e First Amendment rests on the assumption that the 
widest possible dissemination of information from diverse and antagonistic sources 
is essential to the welfare of the public, that a free press is a condition of a free 
society.” 
 Maurice Hinchey (2006), U.S. House of Representatives member from New York, 
explained this concentration’s threat to our democratic process: 
 Changes in media ownership have been swift and staggering. Over the past two decades 
the number of major US media companies fell by more than one half; most of the survivors 
are controlled by fewer than ten huge media conglomerates. As media outlets continue to 
be gobbled up by these giants, the marketplace of ideas shrinks. New and independent 
voices are stifl ed. And the companies that remain are under little obligation to provide reli-
able, quality journalism. Stories that matter deeply to the country’s well-being have been 
replaced by sensationalized murders and celebrity gossip. (p. 15)   
 As White House correspondent Julie Mason said when asked why scandal and crime 
dominate the media, “We are a profi t-driven industry. And if you want the most eye-
balls, you have to go with the thing that people are most talking about. But if you’re 
trying to do a quality program, then maybe you have got to go with Iraq and Iran” (in 
Soundbites, 2011, p. 3). 

34 
PART 1 
Laying the Groundwork
 Closely related to concentration is    conglomeration   , the increase in the ownership 
of media outlets by larger, nonmedia companies. Th e threat is clear, wrote veteran 
journalist Bill Moyers (  2004): 
 Media owners have businesses to run, and these media-owning corporations have enor-
mous interests of their own that impinge on an ever-widening swath of public policy—
hugely important things, ranging from campaign fi nance reform (who ends up with those 
millions of dollars spent on advertising?) to broadcast deregulation and antitrust policy, to 
virtually everything related to the Internet, intellectual property, globalization and free 
trade, even to minimum wage, affi  rmative action, and environmental policy. . . . In this era, 
when its broader and broader economic entanglements make media more dependent on 
state largess, the news business fi nds itself at war with journalism (p. 10).   
 As evidence of conglomeration’s infl uence, critics point to the March 2011 revela-
tion that although NBC News parent company General Electric had $14.2 billion in 
2010 global profi ts, including $5.1 billion in the United States, it paid no federal taxes 
and actually received a $3.2 billion refund. Given the national debate at the time over 
how to fi x America’s troubled economy, the  New York Time’s  front-page exposé was 
featured on all the national cable and broadcast news shows, with one exception—
NBC. Th e story drew zero coverage on NBC’s nightly news show. On the day the story 
broke, however, anchor Lester Holt did fi nd time to cover the addition of the words 
“OMG” and “muffi  n top” to the Oxford English Dictionary (Fahri, 2011).   
 But this confl ict of interest is only one presumed problem with conglomeration. Th e 
other is the dominance of a bottom-line mentality and its inevitable degradation of 
media content.  Variety ’s Peter Bart (2000) explained, “Hence atop every corporation 
there sits a functionary who is empowered to set a number for every unit of every 
company. Th at functionary may in fact have no knowledge whatsoever of the market 
conditions aff ecting that entity and no interest in the product it produces. Nonetheless, 
everyone dances to his tune” (p. 95). Bart was speaking of media in general. As for 
journalism, former CBS anchor Dan Rather added, “Th e larger the entities that own 
and control the news operations, the more distant they become” (quoted in Auletta, 
2001, p. 60). New York University law professor Burt Neuborne warned: 
 Th e press has been subsumed into a market psychology, because they are now owned by 
large conglomerates, of which they are simply a piece. And they (news organizations) are 
expected to contribute their piece of the profi t to the larger pie. You don’t have people 
controlling the press anymore with a fervent sense of responsibility to the First Amendment. 
Concentrating on who’s sleeping with whom, on sensationalism, is concentrating on 
essentially irrelevant issues. (as quoted in Konner, 1999, p. 6)   
 Evidence for Professor Neuborne’s appraisal abounds. Th e Project for Excellence in 
Journalism revealed that while the number of foreign reporters in Washington has 
grown 10 times over the last 20 years, the number of U.S. newspapers with reporters 
covering Congress has fallen by two-thirds. Th e number covering Washington at all has 
fallen by half. Th e number of local television and radio stations with access to their 
own news bureaus in the Capitol has fallen 37% in that time, to 92 stations (MacMillan, 
2009). In 2001, U.S. newspapers had 21 full-time Pentagon reporters; in 2009, amidst 
two ongoing wars, there were 12, and no broadcast network had a full-time correspon-
dent in either Iraq or Afghanistan (Wasserman, 2009). As for the impact of these cuts 
on content, a study by Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government showed that from 
1980 to 2000, the number of news stories in the country’s major media having no con-
nection to policy issues that directly aff ect Americans rose from under 35% of all 
reports to over 50% in 2000. In 1980, 25% of news stories contained a moderate-to-high 
level of sensationalism. In 2000, more than 40% did (Alterman, 2007). Here is one 
example of the new priorities. In March 2011, CNN had 50 people covering the after-
math of the murderous Japanese earthquake and tsunami and the crisis at the 
 Fukushima nuclear power plant. In April it assigned 400 personnel to England’s royal 
wedding, a number that does not include correspondents in all of the British 
 Commonwealth countries, like Australia, New Zealand, India, and South Africa, to get 

CHAPTER 2 
Convergence and the Reshaping of Mass Communication 
35
reaction from locals (Chozick & Rohwedder, 2011). As the editor of a major news-
paper explained, in the current news environment, “if you argue about public trust 
today, you will be dismissed as an obstructionist and a romantic” (Project for Excel-
lence in Journalism, 2006). You can read more about this issue in the box titled 
“Concentration, Conglomeration, and Serving Democracy.”    
 Th ere are, however, less dire observations on concentration and conglomeration. 
Many telecommunications professionals argue that concentration and conglomera-
tion are not only inevitable but necessary in a telecommunications environment 
that is increasingly fragmented and internationalized; companies must maximize 
their number of outlets to reach as much of the divided and far-fl ung audience as 
possible. If they do not, they will become fi nancially insecure, and that is an even 
greater threat to free and eff ective mediated communication because advertisers 
and other well-monied forces will have increased infl uence over them. 
 Another defense of concentration and conglomeration has to do with    economies 
of scale   ; that is, bigger can in fact sometimes be better because the relative cost of an 
operation’s output declines as the size of that endeavor grows. For example, the cost 
of collecting the news or producing a television program does not increase signifi -
cantly when that news report or television program is distributed over 2 outlets, 20 
outlets, or 100 outlets. Th e additional revenues from these other points of distribution 
can then be plowed back into even better news and programming. In the case of 
conglomeration, the parallel argument is that revenues from a conglomerate’s nonmedia 
enterprises can be used to support quality work by its media companies. 
 Th e potential impact of this    oligopoly   —a concentration of media industries into an 
ever smaller number of companies—on the mass communication process is enor-
mous. What becomes of shared meaning when the people running communication 
companies are more committed to the fi nancial demands of their corporate offi  ces 
than they are to their audiences, who are supposedly their partners in the communica-
tion process? What becomes of the process itself when media companies grow more 
removed from those with whom they communicate? And what becomes of the cul-
ture that is dependent on that process when concentration and conglomeration limit 
the diversity of perspective and information? Or are the critics making too much of the 
issue? Is Clear Channel (850 radio stations) founder Lowry Mays correct when he 
argues, “We’re not in the business of providing news and information. We’re simply in 
the business of selling our customers’ products” (quoted in Hightower, 2004a, p. 1)?   
 Globalization 
 Closely related to the concentration of media ownership is    globalization . It is primar-
ily large, multinational conglomerates that are doing the lion’s share of media acquisi-
tions. Th e potential impact of globalization on the mass communication process speaks 
to the issue of diversity of expression. Will distant, anonymous, foreign corporations, 
each with vast holdings in a variety of nonmedia businesses, use their power to shape 
news and entertainment content to suit their own ends? Opinion is divided. Some 
observers feel that this concern is misplaced—the pursuit of profi t will force these 
corporations to respect the values and customs of the nations and cultures in which 
they operate. Some observers have a less optimistic view, arguing that “respecting” 
local values and customs is shorthand for pursuing profi ts at all costs. Th ey point to 
the recent controversy surrounding the decision of Internet giants Yahoo!, Cisco, 
Google, and Microsoft to “respect” the local values and customs of the world’s second-
largest Internet population as well as its fastest-growing consumer market—China. 
Microsoft spokesperson Brooke Richardson explained her company’s position: “Micro-
soft does business in many countries around the world. While diff erent countries have 
diff erent standards, Microsoft and other multinational companies have to ensure that 
our products and services comply with local laws, norms, and industry practices” (in 
Zeller, 2006, p. 4.4). Google attorney Andrew McLaughlin called it “responding to local 
conditions” (Bray, 2006, p. A10). But “local conditions” in this case meant censoring 
searches and keywords and shutting down websites on orders from China’s Communist 
  CNN had 50 people covering the aftermath of the 
March 2011 earthquake and tsunami. It assigned more 
than 400 to England’s royal wedding. 

36 
PART 1 
Laying the Groundwork
York Times‘s John Burns (quoted in Rich, 2004, p. E1). “The credulous press 
corps, when confronted by an Administration intent on war, sank to new 
depths of obsequiousness and docility,” wrote The Nation‘s Scott Sherman 
(2004, p. 4). But in this renewed discussion, concentration’s critics identiﬁ ed 
another problem in addition to cost cutting and reductions in resources.
As in the abandonment of expensive foreign news, it is also economic—
media companies’ quest for proﬁ ts. “Investigative reports share three things: 
They are risky, they upset the wisdom of the established order, and they are 
expensive to produce. Do proﬁ t-conscious enterprises, whether media companies or widget 
ﬁ rms, seek extra costs, extra risk, and the opportunity to be attacked? Not in any business text 
I’ve ever read,” explained BBC journalist Greg Palast (2003, p. 1). In other words, it was easier, 
cheaper, and safer to repeat the government’s explanations than it was to investigate them. For 
example, reporter Judith Miller explained her unwillingness to include the views of skeptical 
intelligence and scientiﬁ c experts in her numerous government-sourced accounts of Iraq’s 
weapons buildup: “My job isn’t to assess the government’s information and be an independent 
intelligence analyst myself. My job is to tell readers of the New York Times what the govern-
ment thought of Iraq’s arsenal” (quoted in Sherman, 2004, pp. 4–5). Rather than “aggressive 
digging for the dark facts of war,” editorialized the Columbia Journalism Review, the public was 
left with “passive transmission of the Pentagon line” (“CJR Comment,” 2003, p. 7).
Enter your voice in the cultural forum. Doesn’t this seem a bit extreme, 
respected media companies placing proﬁ t and self-interest over their tradi-
tional role of serving the public? Or do you agree with media legal scholar 
Charles Tillinghast (2000), who wrote, “One need not be a devotee of con-
spiracy theories to understand that journalists, like other human beings, can 
judge where their interests lie, and what risks are and are not prudent, given 
their desire to continue to eat and feed the family” (pp. 145–146)?
Enter your voice in the cultural forum through your reaction to this 
oddity of our democratic life oﬀ ered by media historian and reformer 
Robert McChesney (2007). Imagine, he suggests, that
the federal government had issued an edict demanding that there be a 
sharp reduction in international journalism, or that local newsrooms be 
closed or their staﬀ s and budgets slashed. Imagine if a president had issued 
an order that news media concentrate upon celebrities and trivia, rather 
than rigorously investigate and pursue scandals and lawbreaking in the 
White House. Had that occurred, there would have been an outcry that 
would have made Watergate look like a day at the beach. It would have 
been second only to the Civil War as a threat to the Republic…. Entire uni-
versities would have shut down in protest. Yet, when quasi-monopolistic 
commercial interests eﬀ ectively do pretty much the same thing, and leave 
our country as impoverished culturally as if it had been the result of a 
 government ﬁ at, it passes with only minor protest. (p. 213)
CULTURAL FORUM
Concentration, Conglomeration, and 
Serving Democracy
 “If we had paid more attention to Afghanistan in 
the ’80s we might not have had 9-11.” 
The horriﬁ c events of September 11, 2001, put concentration and conglomeration and their 
eﬀ ect on news squarely in the public forum. Many observers in and out of the media identiﬁ ed 
corporate-mandated cost reductions and staﬀ  cuts as the primary reason so many Americans 
were caught oﬀ  guard. Philadelphia Inquirer reporter Thomas Ginsberg (2002) explained:
From the early 1990s until September 11, 2001, the U.S. news media had subtly turned foreign 
news into a niche subject. By the end of the ‘90s, with cable TV and the Internet splintering 
audiences, and media conglomerates demanding news divisions make more 
money, broadcasters and some publications gradually changed formats 
to cover more scandal, lifestyle, personalities. There simply were fewer 
shows and pages where hard news, much less foreign news, could find 
a home. (p. 50)
“If we had paid more attention to Afghanistan in the ‘80s we might not have had 9-11,” 
MSNBC reporter Ashleigh Banﬁ eld (2003) lectured students at Kansas State University (p. 6).
The war in Iraq added to the cultural debate. “We failed the American public by being 
insuﬃ  ciently critical about elements of the Administration’s plan to go to war,” said the New 
© 2009 Dave Granlund and PoliticalCartoons.com
leaders. Even more distressing to critics was Yahoo!’s decision to identify one of its 
customers, dissident Shi Tao, as author of e-mails the Chinese government found sub-
versive. Mr. Shi was arrested and sentenced to 10 years in prison. Would we accept this 
behavior from any of these companies here in the United States? How much should 
we accept them elsewhere in the name of “globalization”? Several groups from across 
the political spectrum called for protests and boycotts against Google and other tech 
companies that in their view go too far in meeting “local conditions” (Bray, 2006). 
Th ere is much more on this confl ict between localism and globalization in Chapter 15, 

CHAPTER 2 
Convergence and the Reshaping of Mass Communication 
37
including a discussion of Google’s recent push-back against China’s enforcement of 
local conditions. 
 Still, defenders of increased globalization point to the need to reach a fragmented 
and widespread audience—the same factor that fuels concentration—as encouraging 
this trend. Th ey also cite the growing economic clout of emerging democracies (and 
the need to reach the people who live in them) and the increasing intertwining of the 
world’s economies as additional reasons globalization is necessary for the economic 
survival of media businesses.   
 Audience Fragmentation 
 Th e nature of the other partner in the mass communication process is changing too. 
Individual segments of the audience are becoming more narrowly defi ned; the audi-
ence itself is less of a mass audience. Th is is    audience  fragmentation. 
 Before the advent of television, radio and magazines were national media. Big national 
radio networks brought news and entertainment to the entire country. Magazines such 
as  Life, Look , and the  Saturday Evening Post  once off ered limited text and many pictures 
to a national audience. But television could do these things better. It was radio with 
pictures; it was magazines with motion. To survive, radio and magazines were forced to 
fi nd new functions. No longer able to compete on a mass scale, these media targeted 
smaller audiences that were alike in some important characteristic and therefore more 
attractive to specifi c advertisers. So now we have magazines such as  Ski  and  Internet 
World , and radio station formats such as Country, Urban, and Lithuanian. Th is phenom-
enon is known as    narrowcasting ,  niche marketing , or  targeting . 
 Technology has wrought the same eff ect on television. Before the advent of cable tele-
vision, people could choose from among the three commercial broadcast networks—
ABC, CBS, NBC—one noncommercial public broadcasting station and, in larger markets, 
maybe an independent station or two. Now, with cable, satellite, and DVD, people have 
literally thousands of viewing options. Th e television audience has been fragmented. To 
attract advertisers, each channel now must fi nd a more specifi c group of people to make 
up its viewership. Nickelodeon targets kids, for example; TV Land appeals to baby boomers; 
Spike aims at teen and young adult men; and Bravo seeks upper-income older people. 
 Th e new digital technologies promise even more audience fragmentation, almost to 
the point of audiences of one. For example, 40,000 of  Reason  magazine’s 55,000 subscribers 
received individualized versions of the June 2007 issue. On the cover was an aerial photo 
of each reader’s house and neighborhood. Inside were data on things like the educational 
levels of their neighbors and how many of the children in their zip code were being raised 
by grandparents. Ads were personalized as well, with appeals from public interest groups 
containing information on how each reader’s congressperson voted on various pieces of 
legislation. We are living, said  Reason’ s editors approvingly, in a fragmented,  database 
nation  (Gillespie, 2007). Cable companies have the ability to send very specifi c commer-
cials not only to specifi c neighborhoods but even to individual sets in individual homes. 
Individuated News, or I-News, is a newspaper service that delivers a completely specifi c, 
completely personalized newspaper printed at home. Readers buy the printers at deep 
discount prices, pay a small subscription fee, and receive content, including targeted ads 
and coupons, personalized to their interests and demands. 
 But if these audience-fragmenting    addressable technologies —technologies permit-
ting the transmission of very specifi c content to equally specifi c audience members—
are changing the nature of the mass media’s audiences, then the mass com munication 
process itself must also change. What will happen as smaller, more specifi c audi-
ences become better known to their partners in the process of making meaning? 
What will happen to the national culture that binds us as we become increasingly 
fragmented into demographically targeted    taste publics —groups of people bound 
by little more than an interest in a given form of media content? Will there be a nar-
rowing of our collective cultural experience, as media’s storytelling function (Chap-
ter 1) is disrupted because we are each listening to stories we individually preselect 
or that are preselected for us? “Maybe one day,” wonders  Creativity  magazine editor 
Teressa Iezzi (2007), “you won’t be able to say anything to anyone because a common 

38 
PART 1 
Laying the Groundwork
language or the ability to grapple with or laugh at something 
 outside of your comfort zone will have fallen away” (p. 11). 
 Time ’s James Poniewozik (2004) off ered his vision of our frag-
mented future: “Th rough niche media, niche foods, and niche 
hobbies, we fashion niche lives. We are the America of the iPod 
ads—stark, black silhouettes tethered by our brilliant white ear-
buds, rocking out passionately alone. You make your choices, 
and I make mine. Yours, of course, are wrong. But what do I 
care?” (p. 84).      
 Th ere is an alternative view, however. Audience may well be 
fragmenting, but the interactivity encouraged and facilitated by 
the digital media will reconnect and reconfi gure us into more 
numerous, more robust, more varied communities. Th ere is a lot 
of, "Hey, check this out" going on. Social networks like Twitter and 
Facebook are places where “people can discuss their passions and 
discover others’ on a worldwide basis” (Farhi, 2009). Technology 
writer Steven Johnson says, “We still have national events, but now when we have them, 
we’re actually having a genuine, public conversation with a group that extends far beyond 
our nuclear family and our next-door neighbors. Some of that conversation is juvenile, 
of course. . . . But some of it is moving, witty, observant, subversive” (2009, p. 34).   
 Hypercommercialism 
 Th e costs involved in acquiring numerous or large media outlets, domestic and inter-
national, and of reaching an increasingly fragmented audience must be recouped 
somehow. Selling more advertising on existing and new media and identifying addi-
tional ways to combine content and commercials are the two most common strategies. 
Th is leads to    hypercommercialism . Th e rise in the number of commercial minutes in 
a typical broadcast or cable show is evident to most viewers, as about 25% of a   prime-
time network television hour is devoted to commercial announcement breaks. Hyper-
commercialization has hit the Internet as well. In 1997 users saw 200 billion Net ads. 
In 2011 they endured 5 trillion, resulting in 66% of those people complaining that there 
are “too many digital ads” (Lunden, 2012c)  . 
 Th e sheer growth in the amount of advertising is one troublesome aspect of hyper-
commercialism. But for many observers the increased mixing of commercial and non-
commercial media content is even more troubling. For example, in Chicago, 
WGN-Channel 9 reporters wear branded L. L. Bean clothing on air and WBBM-Channel 
2 off ers Honolulu weather forecasts to promote the television show  Hawaii Five-O . In 
2010, viewers saw 5,381 prime-time television product placements on the 12 largest 
broadcast and cable television networks, a 22% increase over 2006 (Ives, 2011a). A typ-
ical prime-time unscripted program, for example  American Idol  or  Survivor , has more 
than 14 minutes of product placement and more than 15 minutes of actual commercial 
breaks, meaning that one-half of its hour is devoted to promotion. Th e typical scripted 
show, for example  Criminal Minds  or  Revenge , has over four minutes of product 
placement and nearly 15 minutes of commercial break, resulting in one-third of its air 
time devoted to promotions (Kantar Media, 2011). So ubiquitous has this    product 
placement   —the integration, for a fee, of specifi c branded products into media  content—
become, that the Writers Guild of America, hoping to secure a piece of the annual 
$26 billion-and-growing industry, has demanded negotiations with television and fi lm 
producers for additional compensation for writing what are, in eff ect, commercials 
(J. Hall, 2010). Th e producers’ response is that product placement is not a commercial; 
rather, it represents a new form of content,    brand entertainment —when brands are, in 
fact, part of and essential to the program. Pontiac’s Solstice is a “character” in episodes 
of  Th e Apprentice , and the big-hearted workers of  Extreme Makeover—Home Edition 
could not wield any tools other than those from Sears. Musical artists not only take 
payment to include brands in their songs, some, for example Mariah Carey, now inte-
grate brands into their CD booklets  . In North Carolina, the  Charlotte Observer  and the 
  Is this our fragmented future, rocking out 
passionately and alone?

CHAPTER 2 
Convergence and the Reshaping of Mass Communication 
39
 Raleigh News & Observer  publish weekly science and technology sections sponsored by 
Duke Energy, headquartered in Charlotte, one of America’s largest electric power com-
panies and a strong advocate of nuclear power. Sony and Microsoft share information 
about their PlayStation Network and Xbox Live players, respectively, with ratings com-
pany A. C. Nielsen to better entice sponsors into placing ads in their games.    
 Sometimes hypercommercialism involves direct payments of cash rather than 
“mere” branding. An “oral mention” on  Martha Stewart Living  can be had for $100,000. 
Gannett Broadcasting television stations in cities such as Atlanta, Cleveland, and 
 Denver sell entire segments of their morning news and talk shows. For as little as 
$2,500, sponsors (along with their products or services) can buy not only the exclusive 
rights to a portion of a show but the assurance that the programs’ hosts will conduct 
interviews with sponsors and demonstrations of their products as part of those seg-
ments (Klaassen, 2005a). Many radio stations now accept payment from record pro-
moters to play their songs, an activity once illegal and called    payola   . It is now quite 
acceptable as long as the “sponsorship” is acknowledged on the air. 
 Again, as with globalization and concentration, where critics see damage to the 
 integrity of the media themselves and disservice to their audiences, defenders of hyper-
commercialism argue that it is simply the economic reality of today’s media world.   
 Erosion of Distinctions among Media: Convergence 
 Cable channel Comedy Central produces a six-show lineup exclusively for its Internet 
channel,  Motherload . Movie studios make their titles available not only on DVD but for 
handheld video-game systems. Cable’s AMC runs a slate of    webisodes , Web-only televi-
sion shows, to accompany its hit series  Th e Walking Dead . Satellite provider Dish Networks 
off ers interactive, TV remote–based play of classic video games. DVD distributor Netfl ix 
streams not only movies, but a host of new and old network television hits. Th e iPod Nano 
music player contains an FM tuner. Video game consoles not only let players download 
movies and television shows, surf the Internet, check their Facebook accounts, and tune 
in to the Weather Channel and the BBC; they also off er streaming of tens of thousands of 
feature fi lms. Ken Burns unveiled his documentary series  Prohibition  on the iPad and 
iPhone a week before its 2011 airing on PBS, where it was simultaneously streamed over 
the Internet and broadcast in advance of its availability on DVD and at the iTunes store. 
You can subscribe to  National Geographic  and play its issue-matched video game online 
or on a cell phone. Th ere are tens of thousands of U.S. commercial and  noncommercial and 
  Stars come and go on American Idol—Steven 
Tyler and Jennifer Lopez appeared for only two 
seasons. But the real star of the show—Coke—is 
ever present. 

40 
PART 1 
Laying the Groundwork
foreign radio stations delivering their broadcasts over the Web.  Pokémon  is as much a 
30-minute TV commercial for licensed merchandise as it is a cartoon. 
 You can read the  New York Times  or  Time  magazine and hundreds of other newspa-
pers and magazines on your computer screen. Cell phones not only allow users to talk 
to other people; because they include digital camcorders, zoom and rotating lenses, and 
digital still cameras, complete with fl ash, they allow those same users to “broadcast” 
their “television programs” and photos. And what can “newspapers, magazines, and 
books,” “radio and recordings,” and “television and fi lm” really mean (or more accurately, 
really be ) now that people can access printed texts, audio, and moving images virtually 
anyplace, anytime via    Wi-Fi    (wireless Internet) and handheld devices? Th is erosion of 
  Convergence killed the video store, ﬁ rst the 
mom ‘n pop shops, then big chains like Blockbuster, 
victimized by video downloads, streaming, and 
online rentals—products of the convergence of 
movies, video, and the Internet. Convergence is 
strangling the bookstore as well, ﬁ rst the 
independents, then chains like Borders, victimized 
by online sales and downloads to portable 
e-readers, smartphones, and tablets—products 
of the convergence of print, the Internet, and 
smartphones. 

CHAPTER 2 
Convergence and the Reshaping of Mass Communication 
41
distinctions among media is called  convergence , and it is fueled, according to technology 
attorney Tony Kern (2005), by three elements that have come together “almost simulta-
neously. First is the digitization of nearly all information, which provides a common 
means to represent all forms of communication. Second is high-speed connectivity; net-
works are becoming faster and more pervasive—wired and wireless. And third is a seem-
ingly endless advance in technology in which speed, memory, and power improvements 
allow a device to do more. Th at redefi nes the limits of what is possible” (p. 32). 
 Th e traditional lines between media are disappearing. Concentration is one reason. 
If one company owns newspapers, an online service, television stations, book publishers, 
a magazine or two, and a fi lm company, it has a strong incentive to get the greatest 
use from its content, whether news, education, or entertainment, by using as many 
channels of delivery as possible. Th e industry calls this    synergy   , and it is the driving 
force behind several recent mergers and acquisitions in the media and telecommuni-
cations industries. Media giant News Corp. paid well over a billion dollars in 2005 for 
social networking website  MySpace.com  and video-game maker IGN Entertainment in 
order to blend its existing broadcast, fi lm, and print media with the Net and games. In 
2010, Disney bought game maker Tapulous, designer of mobile, music-based games 
such as  Tap Tap Revenge  with the goal of creating customized games for Disney record-
ing and television properties like Miley Cyrus. In that same year, Google paid between 
$100 and $200 million for social gaming giant Zynga, makers of  Farmville  and  Texas 
Hold’em , to anchor its Google Games and user-tracking platforms. 
 Another reason for convergence is audience fragmentation. A mass communicator 
who fi nds it diffi  cult to reach the whole audience can reach its component parts through 
various media. A third reason is the audience itself. We are becoming increasingly 
 platform agnostic   , having no preference for where we access our media content. Will 
this expansion and blurring of traditional media channels confuse audience members, 
further tilting the balance of power in the mass communication process toward the 
media industries? Or will it give audiences more power—power to choose, power to 
reject, and power to combine information and entertainment in individual ways?        
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS   
 Reconsidering the Process of Mass 
Communication 
 One essential element of media literacy is  having an understanding of the process of mass 
communication . As we saw in Chapter 1, understanding the process—how it functions, 
how its components relate to one another, how it limits or enhances messages, which 
forms of feedback are most eff ective and why—permits us to form expectations of how 
the media industries and the process itself can serve us. But throughout this chapter we 
have seen that the process of mass communication is undergoing fundamental change. 
Media-literate individuals must understand why and how this evolution is occurring. We 
can do this by reconsidering its elements as described in  Figure 1.3 .  
 INTERPRETER ATHE CONTENT PRODUCER   
 Traditionally, the content producer, the source, in the mass communication process is a 
large, hierarchically structured organization—for example, Pixar Studios, the  Philadelphia 
Enquirer , CBS Television. And as we saw, the typical consequence of this organizational 
structure is scant room for individual vision or experimentation. But in the age of the 
Internet, with its proliferation of    blogs    (regularly updated online journals that comment 
on just about everything), social-networking sites such as Facebook where users post all 
variety of free, personal content, and other websites, the distinction between content con-
sumer and content provider disappears. Now, Interpreter A can be an independent musi-
cian self-releasing her music online, a lone blogger, a solitary online scrapbooker, or two 
pals who create digital video. Today, 37% of America’s Internet users “have contributed to 

42 
PART 1 
Laying the Groundwork
the creation of news, commented about it, or disseminated it via postings on social media 
sites” (Purcell, Rainie, Mitchell, Rosensteil, & Olmstead, 2010). Users upload 60 hours of 
video every minute to YouTube alone (Oreskovic, 2012). Internet domain company Go 
Daddy traditionally airs a viewer-created commercial during the Super Bowl. Tens of mil-
lions of producers, big and small, distribute their video fare on the Internet. Sites like Vuze, 
On Networks, Joost, and Blip Networks strike fi nancial deals with producers, again big 
and small, for content for their own sites and for syndication to others. Th e National 
Academy of Arts and Sciences announced in 2005 a new category of Emmy award to 
accompany the usual Best Comedy and Best Drama winners: Outstanding Content 
Distributed via Nontraditional Delivery Platforms. 
 In the newly evolving mass communication, content providers are just as likely to 
be individuals who believe in something or who have something to say as they are big 
media companies in search of audiences and profi ts. Now sources themselves, they 
are  the people formerly known as the audience , and it is not simply technological 
change that has given them voice. It is the reduction of the    cost of entry for content 
production to nearly $0 that those digital technologies have wrought that has made 
them all creators. “Rates of authorship are increasing by historic orders of magnitude. 
Nearly universal authorship, like universal literacy before it, stands to reshape society 
by hastening the fl ow of information and making individuals more infl uential,” wrote 
futurists Denis Pelli and Charles Bigelow. “As readers, we consume. As authors, we 
create. Our society is changing from consumers to creators” (2009).        
 What are the likely consequences of this change? Will the proliferation of content 
sources help mitigate the eff ects of concentration and conglomeration in the tradi-
tional media industries? Will the cultural forum be less of a lecture and more of a 
conversation? Will new and diff erent and challenging storytellers fi nd an audience for 
their narratives? Does journalist William Greider (2005), speaking specifi cally of the 
news, overstate when he says, “Th e centralized institutions of press and broadcasting 
are being challenged and steadily eroded by widening circles of unlicensed ‘news’ 
agents—from talk-radio hosts to Internet bloggers and others—who compete with the 
offi  cial press to be believed. Th ese interlopers speak in a diff erent language and from 
many diff erent angles of vision. Less authoritative, but more democratic” (p. 31)?   
 THE MESSAGE 
 Th e message in the traditional mass communication process is typically many identical 
messages, mechanically produced, simultaneously sent, infl exible, and unalterable. Once 
CBS airs tonight’s episode of  NCIS , it has aired tonight’s episode of  NCIS . Th e conse-
quence? Audiences either like it or don’t like it. Th e program either succeeds or fails. But 
we’ve already seen that diff erent commercial spots can be inserted into programs sent 
into specifi c homes and that thousands of issues of the same magazine can be personal-
ized inside and on the cover. You can buy only four downloaded cuts of an artist’s latest 
CD, add three more from an earlier release, and listen to a completely new, personally 
  Convergence and the low cost of entry have made us all authors. 
 DOONESBURY © 2008 G. B. Trudeau. Reprinted with permission of Universal Uclick. All rights reserved. 

CHAPTER 2 
Convergence and the Reshaping of Mass Communication 
43
created CD.    RSS , for  really simple syndication   , feeds are   aggregators that allow Web 
users to create their own content assembled from the Internet’s limitless supply of mate-
rial. Some of the most popular are MyTimes, Blogline, Newsgator, and My Yahoo. Users 
tell the aggregator what sites to collect, or their issues of interest, or even their favorite 
writers. As soon as any new content in their preselected categories appears on the Net, it 
is automatically brought to their RSS fi le. In this way, according to journalist Robert 
Kuttner (2007), users can “pre-assemble an all-star Webpaper [or Webcast or Webmaga-
zine] that no single newspaper [or radio station, cable network, television station, or 
magazine] can possibly duplicate” (p. 26). In other words, each RSS “message” is infi nitely 
alterable, completely unique, and thoroughly idiosyncratic. Alternate-ending DVDs per-
mitting viewers to “re-edit” an existing movie at home are old hat by now. But what do 
you think of director Steven Soderbergh’s vision for a digital movie future? He said that in 
5 or 10 years, when theaters convert more fully from fi lm to digital projection (Chapter 6), 
he plans to exhibit multiple, diff erent versions of the same fi lm. “I think it would be very 
interesting to have a movie out in release,” he said, “and then, just a few weeks later say, 
‘Here’s version 2.0, recut, rescored.’ Th e other version is still out there—people can see 
either or both” (in Jardin, 2005b, p. 257). 
 What will be the impact on the mass communication process when content producers 
no longer have to amass as large an audience as possible with a single, simultaneously 
distributed piece of content? When a producer can sell very specifi c, very idiosyncratic, 
constantly changing content to very specifi c, very idiosyncratic, constantly changing con-
sumers, will profi tability and popularity no longer be so closely linked? What will “popular” 
and “profi table” messages really mean when audience members can create infi nitely “alter-
able” messages? What will happen when the mass communication process, long dependent 
on  appointment consumption    (audiences consume content at a time predetermined by 
the producer and distributor; for example, a movie time at a theater, your favorite television 
show at 9:00 on Tuesdays, news at the top of the hour), evolves more completely to 
 consumption-on-demand    (the ability to consume any content, anytime, anywhere)?   
 FEEDBACK AND INTERPRETER BTHE AUDIENCE   
 In the traditional model of the mass communication process, feedback is inferential and 
delayed—what is a newspaper’s circulation, what were this weekend’s box offi  ce numbers 
for that movie, what are that program’s ratings? Likewise, the audience is typically seen 
as large and heterogeneous, known to content producers and distributors in a relatively 
rudimentary way, little more than basic demographics. But digital media have changed 
what content creators and distributors know about their audiences (Interpreter B) because 
they have changed how audiences talk back to those sources (feedback). Silicon Valley 
marketing consultant Richard Yanowitch explains, “Th e Internet is the most ubiquitous 
experimental lab in history, built on two-way, real-time interactions with millions of con-
sumers whose individual consumption patterns can for the fi rst time be infi nitesimally 
measured, monitored, and molded.” Adds Google advertising executive Tim Armstrong, 
“Traditionally, the focus has been on the outbound message. But we think the information 
coming back in is as important or more important than the messages going out. For years, 
demographics has been a religion among advertisers because it was the only information 
they had” (both in Streisand & Newman, 2005, p. 60). 
 In today’s mass communication, every visit to a specifi c Web address (and every click 
of a mouse once there), every download of a piece of content, and every product bought 
online provide feedback to someone. But it isn’t just the Internet—every selection of a 
channel on cable or satellite, every rental or purchase by credit card of a CD, DVD, video 
game, or movie ticket, and every consumer product scanned at the checkout counter is 
recorded and stored in order to better identify us to Interpreter A,  whoever that might be. 
But this raises the question, Who is that? It might be content providers who want to serve 
us more eff ectively because they know us so much more thoroughly than they once did 
when relying solely on demographics. Or it could be those who would make less honor-
able use of the feedback we so willingly provide—for example, identity thieves or insur-
ance companies that would deny us coverage because of our eating and viewing habits.    

44 
PART 1 
Laying the Groundwork
 The Result 
 How will we use the new communication technologies? What will be our role in the 
new, emerging mass communication process? Th e world of content creators and dis-
tributors is now more democratic. Audiences, even though they may be fragmented 
into groups as small as one person or as large as 100 million, are better known to those 
who produce and distribute content and they can talk back more directly and with 
more immediacy. Content, the message, is now more fl exible, infi nitely alterable, 
unbound by time and space. Clearly, for content producers there is more room for 
experimentation in content creation and consumption. Th ere is less risk, and possibly 
even great reward, in challenging audiences. Th e evolving mass communication pro-
cess promises not only effi  ciency but great joy, boundless choice, and limitless access 
to information for all its partners. But as you might remember from Chapter 1, the 
technologies that help provide these gifts are in fact double-edged swords; they cut 
both ways, good and bad. Media-literate people, because they understand the mass 
communication process through which they operate, are positioned to best decide 
how to benefi t from their potential and limit their peril.     
 An important part of being media literate is having critical thinking skills enabling you to develop independent judgments about 
media and media content. Challenge your own skill by predicting which media will survive and which will disappear as a result 
of the dramatic technological, economic, and audience preference turmoil currently shaking the traditional media industries. Which 
will change and how? The answers depend on you and your media choices. In 1954, when television was doing to movies, 
newspapers, magazines, and radio what the Internet and smartphones are doing to today’s media, communication scholar Wilbur 
Schramm created the  fraction of selection  to answer the question, “What determines which oﬀ erings of mass communication 
will be selected by a given individual?” It looks like this: 
 Expectation of Reward 
 Eﬀ ort Required 
 It suggests that you weigh the level of reward you expect from a given medium or piece of content against how much 
eﬀ ort—in the broadest sense—you make to secure that reward. Now, consider your own media consumption. For example, 
how do you typically watch movies: at the theater, streamed, downloaded, on disc, wait for them to come to cable? What “data” 
would go in your numerator? In your denominator? Create your personal formula for other media consumption as well. News on 
the Internet versus the newspaper? Popular music on commercial radio versus an iPod or other MP3 player? Compare your out-
comes with those of your friends. Based on your results, can you speculate on tomorrow’s media winners and losers? 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE 
 The Fraction of Selection 

 Summarize broad current trends in mass media, espe-
cially concentration of ownership and conglomeration, 
globalization, audience fragmentation, hypercommer-
cialization, and convergence. 
  Encouraged by the Internet and other digital technolo-
gies, content producers are fi nding new ways to deliver 
content to audiences. 
  All of the traditional media have begun to see either fl at-
tening or declines in audience, yet overall consumption 
of media is at all-time highs.  
  Five trends are abetting this situation—convenience, 
 audience fragmentation, concentration of ownership 
and conglomeration, globalization, and 
 hypercommercialism. 
 Resources for Review and Discussion  
 REVIEW POINTS: TYING CONTENT TO LEARNING OUTCOMES   

CHAPTER 2 
Convergence and the Reshaping of Mass Communication 
45
 KEY TERMS 
 day-and-date release, 30 
 formats, 31 
 platform, 31 
 media multitasking, 32 
 convergence, 33  
 concentration of ownership, 33 
 conglomeration, 34 
 economies of scale, 35 
 oligopoly, 35 
 globalization, 35 
 audience fragmentation, 37 
 narrowcasting, 37 
 niche marketing, 37 
 targeting, 37 
  addressable technologies, 37  
 taste publics, 37 
 hypercommercialism,  38 
 product placement, 38 
 brand entertainment, 38 
 payola, 39 
 webisode, 39 
 Wi-Fi, 40 
 synergy,  41 
 platform agnostic, 41 
 blog, 41 
 cost of entry, 42  
 RSS (really simple syndication), 43  
 appointment consumption, 43 
 consumption-on-demand, 43 
 fraction of selection, 44 
 QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW 
 1.  What is convergence? 
 2.  What is media multitasking? 
 3.  Diff erentiate between concentration of media ownership 
and conglomeration. 
 4.  What is globalization? 
 5.  What is hypercommercialism? 
 6.  What is audience fragmentation? 
 7.  What are the two major concerns of globalization’s critics? 
 8.  What three elements are fueling today’s rampant media 
convergence? 
 9.  Diff erentiate between notions of content producers, audi-
ences, messages, and feedback in the traditional view of 
the mass communication process and more contemporary 
understandings of these elements of the process. 
 10.  What is the signifi cance of low cost of entry? 
For further review, go to the LearnSmart study module for 
this chapter.
   Convergence is fueled by three elements—digitization 
of nearly all information, high-speed connectivity, and 
advances in technology’s speed, memory, and power.  
    Describe in broad terms how the mass communication 
process itself will evolve as the role of the audience in 
this new media environment is altered. 
  As a result of this change, traditional conceptions of the 
mass communication process and its elements must be 
reconsidered: 
  Content providers can now be lone individuals aided 
by low cost of entry. 
  Messages can now be quite varied, idiosyncratic, and 
freed of the producers’ time demands. 
     Feedback can now be instantaneous and direct, 
and, as a result, audiences, very small or very large, 
can be quite well known to content producers and 
distributors.  
 QUESTIONS FOR CRITICAL THINKING AND DISCUSSION 
 1.  Many industry insiders attribute the recent falloff  in audi-
ences for movies, recorded music, network television, 
DVD, radio, newspapers, and video games to changes in 
technology; people are fi nding new ways to access content. 
And while this is certainly true to a degree, others say that 
in this age of concentrated and hypercommercialized 
 media, audiences are simply being turned off . Would you 
agree with the critics? Why? Can you give examples from 
your own media consumption? 
 2.  Critics of concentration of media ownership and conglom-
eration argue that they are a threat to democracy. What is the 
thrust of their concern? Do you share it? Why or why not?  
    3.  A close reading of how the mass communication process is 
evolving has led some observers to argue that it is becom-
ing less “mass” and more akin to interpersonal communi-
cation. Revisit  Figure 1.3 . Can you make the argument that 
the “result” of the process has the potential to be more 
“fl exible, personally relevant, possibly adventurous, 
 challenging, or experimental”?  


 
47
 Learning Objectives 
 Books were the ﬁ rst mass medium and are, in many ways, the most personal. They inform 
and entertain. They are repositories of our pasts and agents of personal development and 
social change. Like all media, they mirror the culture. After studying this chapter you 
should be able to
  Outline the history and development of the publishing industry and the book itself as 
a medium. 
  Describe the cultural value of books and the implications of censorship for democracy. 
  Explain how the organizational and economic nature of the contemporary book 
industry shapes the content of books. 
  Act as a more media-literate consumer of books, especially in considering their 
uniqueness in an increasingly mass-mediated, media-converged world. 
Jersey Shore’s Snooki: two books read, one 
novel published. 
 Books 3 

     T HE VHS VIDEO BEGAN WHEN YOU HIT THE PLAY BUTTON ON THE REMOTE CONTROL. But the folks who rented 
the movie before you failed to rewind. So there you were, watching an arresting scene 
from François Truff aut’s 1967 adaptation of Ray Bradbury’s (1953/1981) science fi ction 
classic  Fahrenheit 451 . 
 At fi rst you couldn’t make out what was happening. A group of people were wander-
ing about, and each person was talking to him- or herself. You recognized actress Julie 
Christie, but the other performers and what they were saying were completely unfa-
miliar. You stayed with the scene. Th e trees were bare. Snow was falling, covering 
everything. Puff s of steam fl oated from people’s mouths as they spoke, seemingly to 
no one. As you watched a bit more, you began to recognize some familiar phrases. 
Th ese people were reciting passages from famous books! Before you could fi gure out 
why they were doing this, the fi lm ended. 
 So you rewound and watched the entire video, discovering that these people  were 
the books they had memorized. In this near-future society, all books had been banned 
by the authorities, forcing these people—book lovers all—into hiding. Th ey hold the 
books in their heads because to hold them in their hands is a crime. If discovered with 
books, people are jailed and the books are set afi re—Fahrenheit 451 is the temperature 
at which book paper burns.  
 Moved by the fi lm, you go to the library the next day and check out the book itself. 
Bradbury’s (1981) main character, Guy Montag, a fi reman who until this moment had 
been an offi  cial book burner himself, speaks a line that stays with you, even today. 
After he watches an old woman burn to death with her forbidden volumes, he implores 
his ice-cold, drugged, and television-deadened wife to understand what he is only then 
realizing. He pleads with her to see: “Th ere must be something in books, things we 
can’t imagine, to make a woman stay in a burning house; there must be something 
there” (pp. 49–50). 
1600
1700
1456   ▲ First Gutenberg Bible
1638   First printing press in the Colonies
1644   ▲ The Whole Booke of Psalms, first book printed in the Colonies
1732   ▲ Poor Richard’s Almanack
1765   Stamp Act
1774   Thomas Paine writes Common Sense
48 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences

1800
1900
2000
~1800   Continuous roll paper
1807   John Wiley & Sons established
1811   Steam-powered printing press
1817   Harper Brothers established
1830   Improved pulp making
1852   ▲ Stowe’s Uncle Tom’s Cabin
1860   Dime novels appear
1861   U.S. achieves highest literacy rate in the world
1884   Linotype machine
    1885  Offset lithography
1926   Book of the Month Club begins
1935   Penguin Books (first paperbacks) established in London
1939   Pocket Books (paperbacks) established in the U.S.
1953   ▲ Bradbury’s Fahrenheit 451
1960   Paperback sales surpass hardback sales for the first time
1995   Amazon.com goes online
2003   Project Gutenberg and Search Inside the Book debut
2005   Google ignites controversy with plan to scan copyrighted books
2006   Sony Reader
2007   Final Harry Potter book; Amazon’s Kindle
2008   On-demand titles exceed number of traditional titles
2009   For first time, Amazon sells more e-books than hard-copy books
              in one day (Christmas Day). Espresso Book Machine
2010   ▲ iPad
2011   E–books outsell all print books
 In this chapter we examine the history of books, especially in terms of their role in 
the development of the United States. We discuss the importance that has traditionally 
been ascribed to books, as well as the scope and nature of the book industry. We 
address the various factors that shape the contemporary economics and structures of 
the book industry, examining at some length the impact of convergence, concentra-
tion, and hypercommercialism on the book industry and its relationship with its read-
ers. Finally, we discuss the media literacy issues inherent in the wild success of the 
Harry Potter books.  
 A Short History of Books  
 As we saw in Chapter 1, the use of Gutenberg’s printing press spread rapidly throughout 
Europe in the last half of the 15th century. But the technological advances and the social, 
cultural, and economic conditions necessary for books to become a major mass medium 
were three centuries away. As a result, it was a printing press and a world of books not 
unlike that in Gutenberg’s time that fi rst came to the New World in the 17th century.  
 Books Come to Colonial North America 
 Th e earliest colonists came to America primarily for two reasons—to escape religious 
persecution and to fi nd economic opportunities unavailable to them in Europe. Most 
of the books they carried with them to the New World were religiously oriented. 
 Moreover, they brought very few books at all. Better-educated, wealthier Europeans 
were secure at home. Th ose willing to make the dangerous journey tended to be poor, 
uneducated, and largely illiterate. 
CHAPTER 3 
Books 
49

50 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 Th ere were other reasons early settlers did not fi nd books central to their lives. One 
was the simple fi ght for survival. In the brutal and hostile land to which they had come, 
leisure for reading books was a luxury for which they had little time. People worked 
from sunrise to sunset just to live. If there was to be reading, it would have to be at 
night, and it was folly to waste precious candles on something as unnecessary to sur-
vival as reading. In addition, books and reading were regarded as symbols of wealth 
and status and therefore not priorities for people who considered themselves to be 
pioneers, servants of the Lord, or anti-English colonists. Th e fi nal reason the earliest 
settlers were not active readers was the lack of portability of books. Books were heavy, 
and few were carried across the ocean. Th ose volumes that did make it to North America 
were extremely expensive and not available to most people. 
 Th e fi rst printing press arrived on North American shores in 1638, only 18 years 
after the Plymouth Rock landing. It was operated by a company called Cambridge 
Press. Printing was limited to religious and government documents. Th e fi rst book 
printed in the Colonies appeared in 1644— Th e Whole Booke of Psalms , sometimes 
referred to as the  Bay Psalm Book . Among the very few secular titles were those 
printed by Benjamin Franklin 90 years later.  Poor Richard’s Almanack , which fi rst 
appeared in 1732, sold 10,000 copies annually. Th e  Almanack  contained short stories, 
poetry, weather predictions, and other facts and fi gures useful to a population more 
in command of its environment than those fi rst settlers. As the Colonies grew in 
wealth and sophistication, leisure time increased, as did affl  uence and education. 
Franklin also published the fi rst true novel printed in North America,  Pamela , written 
by English author Samuel  Richardson. Still, by and large, books were religiously ori-
ented or pertained to offi  cial government activities such as tax rolls and the pro-
nouncements of various commissions.    
 Th e primary reason for this lack of variety was the requirement that all printing be 
done with the permission of the colonial governors. Because these men were invari-
ably loyal to King George II, secular printing and criticism of 
the British Crown or even of local authorities was never 
authorized, and publication of such writing meant jail. Many 
printers were imprisoned—including Franklin’s brother 
James—for publishing what they believed to be the truth.    
 Th e printers went into open revolt against offi  cial control 
in March 1765 after passage of the Stamp Act. Designed by 
England to recoup money it spent waging the French and 
Indian War, the Stamp Act mandated that all printing—legal 
documents, books, magazines, and newspapers—be done on 
paper stamped with the government’s seal. Its additional pur-
pose was to control and limit expression in the increasingly 
restless Colonies. Th is aff ront to their freedom, and the steep 
cost of the tax—sometimes doubling the price of a publication—
was simply too much for the colonists. Th e printers used their 
presses to run accounts of antitax protests, demonstrations, 
riots, sermons, boycotts, and other antiauthority activities, 
further fueling revolutionary and secessionist sympathies. In 
November 1765—when the tax was to take eff ect—the author-
ities were so cowed by the reaction of the colonists that they 
were unwilling to enforce it. 
 Anti-British sentiment reached its climax in the mid-
1770s, and books were at its core. Short books, or pamphlets, 
motivated and coalesced political dissent. In 1774 England’s 
right to govern the Colonies was openly challenged by James 
Wilson’s  Considerations on the Nature and Extent of the 
 Legislative Authority of the British Parliament , John Adams’s 
 Novanglus Papers , and Th omas Jeff erson’s  A Summary View 
of the Rights of British America . Most famous of all was 
Th omas Paine’s 47-page  Common Sense . It sold 120,000 
  In the now not-so-distant future of  Fahrenheit 
451 , people must memorize the content of books 
because to own a book is illegal. 

CHAPTER 3 
Books 
51
copies in the fi rst three months after its release to a total population of 400,000 
adults. Between 1776 and 1783, Paine also wrote a series of pamphlets called  Th e 
American Crisis. Common Sense  and  Th e American Crisis  made Paine the most 
widely read colonial author during the American Revolution.  
 THE EARLY BOOK INDUSTRY     After the War of Independence, printing became even more 
central to political, intellectual, and cultural life in major cities like Boston, New 
York, and Philadelphia. To survive fi nancially, printers also operated as booksell-
ers, book publishers, and sometimes as postmasters who sold stationery and even 
groceries. A coff eehouse or tavern often was attached to the print shop. Th e era 
was alive with political change, and printer/bookshops became clearinghouses 
for the collection, exchange, and dissemination of information. 
 Th e U.S. newspaper industry grew rapidly from this mix, as we will see in 
Chapter 4. Th e book industry, however, was slower to develop. Books were still 
expensive, often costing the equivalent of a working person’s weekly pay, and 
literacy remained a luxury. However, due in large measure to a movement begun 
before the Civil War, compulsory education had come to most states by 1900. Th is 
swelled the number of readers, which increased demand for books. Th is increased 
demand, coupled with a number of important technological advances, brought 
the price of books within reach of most people. In 1861 the United States had the 
highest literacy rate of any country in the world (58%), and 40 years later at the 
start of the 20th century, 9 out of every 10 U.S. citizens could read. Today, nearly 
universal literacy reigns in America.    
 THE FLOWERING OF THE NOVEL  Th e 1800s saw a series of important refi nements to the pro-
cess of printing, most notably the    linotype    machine, a typewriter-like keyboard 
allowing printers to set type mechanically rather than manually,    and  off set lithography , 
permitting printing from photographic plates rather than from heavy, fragile metal casts. 
 Th e combination of this technically improved, lower-cost printing (and therefore 
lower-cost publications) and widespread literacy produced the 
fl owering of the novel in the 1800s. Major U.S. book publishers 
Harper Brothers and John Wiley & Sons—both in business today—
were established in New York in 1817 and 1807, respectively. And 
books such as Nathaniel Hawthorne’s  Th e Scarlet Letter (1850), 
Herman Melville’s  Moby Dick  (1851), and Mark Twain’s  Huckle-
berry Finn  (1884) were considered by their readers to be equal 
to or better than the works of famous European authors such as 
Jane Austen, the Brontës, and Charles Dickens. 
 Th e growing popularity of books was noticed by brothers Irwin 
and Erastus Beadle. In 1860 they began publishing novels that 
sold for 10 cents. Th ese  dime novels were inexpensive, and 
because they concentrated on frontier and adventure stories, they 
attracted growing numbers of readers. Within fi ve years of their 
start, Beadle & Company had produced over 4 million volumes of 
what were also sometimes called    pulp novels (Tebbel, 1987). 
Advertising titles like  Malaeska: Indian Wife of the White Hunter 
with the slogan “Dollar Books for a Dime!” the Beadles democra-
tized books and turned them into a mass medium.   
 THE COMING OF PAPERBACK BOOKS     Dime novels were “paperback books” 
because they were produced with paper covers. But publisher 
Allen Lane invented what we now recognize as the paperback in 
the midst of the Great Depression in London when he founded 
Penguin Books in 1935. Four years later, publisher Robert de Graff  
introduced the idea to the United States. His Pocket Books were 
small, inexpensive (25 cents) reissues of books that had already 
become successful as hardcovers. Th ey were sold just about 
 everywhere—newsstands, bookstores, train stations, shipping 
  First published in 1732, Benjamin Franklin’s 
 Poor Richard’s Almanack oﬀ ered readers a wealth of 
information for the upcoming year. 
  British-born writer, patriot, and revolutionary leader Thomas Paine wrote  Common Sense 
and  The American Crisis to rally his colonial compatriots in their struggle against the British. 

52 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 terminals, and drug and department stores. Within weeks of their introduction, de Graff  
was fi elding orders of up to 15,000 copies a day (Tebbel, 1987). Soon, new and existing 
publishers joined the paperback boom. Traditionalists had some concern about the 
“cheapening of the book,” but that was more than off set by the huge popularity of paper-
backs and the willingness of publishers to take chances. For example, in the 1950s and 
‘60s, African American writers such as Richard Wright and Ralph Ellison were published, 
as were controversial works such as  Catcher in the Rye . Eventually, paperback books 
became the norm, surpassing hardcover book sales for the fi rst time in 1960. Today, more 
than 60% of all physical books sold in the United States are  paperbacks. 
 Paperbacks are no longer limited to reprints of successful hardbacks. Many books 
now begin life as paperbacks. Th e John Jakes books  Th e Americans  and  Th e Titans , for 
example, were issued initially as paperbacks and later reissued in hardcover. Paper-
backs sell about 1 million volumes a day, and bookstores generate half their revenue 
from these sales. 
 Books and Their Audiences  
 Th e book is the least “mass” of our mass media in audience reach and in the magni-
tude of the industry itself, and this fact shapes the nature of the relationship between 
medium and audience. Publishing houses, both large and small, produce narrowly or 
broadly aimed titles for readers, who buy and carry away individual units. Th is more 
direct relationship between publishers and readers renders books fundamentally dif-
ferent from other mass media. For example, because books are less dependent than 
other mass media on attracting the largest possible audience, books are more able and 
more likely to incubate new, challenging, or unpopular ideas. As the medium least 
dependent on advertiser support, books can be aimed at extremely small groups of 
readers, challenging them and their imaginations in ways that many sponsors would 
fi nd unacceptable in advertising-based mass media. Because books are produced and 
sold as individual units—as opposed to a single television program simultaneously 
distributed to millions of viewers or a single edition of a mass circulation newspaper—
more “voices” can enter and survive in the industry. Th is medium can sustain more 
voices in the cultural forum than can other traditional mass media. As former head of 
the New York Public Library, Vartan Gregorian, explained to journalist Bill Moyers 
(2007), when among books, “Suddenly you feel humble. Th e whole world of humanity 
is in front of you. . . . Here it is, the human endeavor, human aspiration, human agony, 
human ecstasy, human bravura, human failures—all before you.”  
 The Cultural Value of the Book 
 Th e book industry is bound by many of the same fi nancial and industrial pressures 
that constrain other media, but books, more than the others, are in a position to tran-
scend those constraints. In  Fahrenheit 451  Montag’s boss, Captain Beatty, explains why 
all books must be burned. “Once,” he tells his troubled subordinate, “books appealed 
to a few people, here, there, everywhere. Th ey could aff ord to be diff erent. Th e world 
was roomy. But then the world got full of eyes and elbows and mouths” (Bradbury, 
1981, p. 53). Bradbury’s fi remen of the future destroy books precisely because they  are 
diff erent. It is their diff erence from other mass media that makes books unique in our 
culture. Although all media serve the following cultural functions to some degree (for 
example, people use self-help videos for personal development, and popular music is 
sometimes an agent of social change), books traditionally have been seen as a power-
ful cultural force for these reasons: 
 •  Books are agents of social and cultural change . Free of the need to generate mass cir-
culation for advertisers, off beat, controversial, even revolutionary ideas can reach the 
public. For example, Andrew MacDonald’s  Turner Diaries  is the ideological and how-
to bible of the antigovernment militia movement in the United States. Nonetheless, 
this radical, revolutionary book is openly published, purchased, and  discussed.  

CHAPTER 3 
Books 
53
 •  Books are an important cultural repository . Want to defi nitively win an argument? Look 
it up. We often turn to books for certainty and truth about the world in which we live 
and the ones about which we want to know. Which countries border Chile? Find the 
atlas. James Brown’s sax player? Look in Bob Gulla’s  Icons of R & B and Soul .  
 •  Books are our windows on the past . What was the United States like in the 19th cen-
tury? Read Alexis de Tocqueville’s  Democracy in America . England in the early 1800s? 
Read Jane Austen’s  Pride and Prejudice . Written in the times they refl ect, these books 
are more accurate representations than are available in the modern electronic media.  
 •  Books are important sources of personal development . Th e obvious forms are self-
help and personal improvement volumes. But books also speak to us more indi-
vidually than advertiser-supported media because of their small, focused target 
markets. For example,  Our Bodies, Ourselves , introduced by the Boston Women’s 
Health Book Collective in the very earliest days of the modern feminist movement, 
is still published today. (For more on this infl uential book, see the “Our Bodies, 
Ourselves” box.)  Dr. Spock’s Baby and Child Care  has sold more than 30 million 
copies. J. D. Salinger’s  Catcher in the Rye  was the literary anthem for the Baby Boom-
ers in their teen years, as is William Gibson’s  Neuromancer  for many Web pioneers. 
It is unlikely that any of these voices would have found their initial articulation in 
commercially sponsored media.  
 •  Books are wonderful sources of entertainment, escape, and personal refl ection . 
Suzanne Collins, John Grisham, Stephenie Meyer, and Stephen King all specialize 
in writing highly entertaining and imaginative novels. Th e enjoyment found in the 
works of writers Joyce Carol Oates  (On Boxing, We Were the Mulvaneys) , John Irving 
 (Th e World According to Garp, Hotel New Hampshire, A Prayer for Owen Meany) , 
Pat Conroy  (Th e Prince of Tides, Beach Music) , and J. K. Rowling (the  Harry Potter
series) is undeniable.  
 •  Th e purchase and reading of a book is a much more individual, personal activity than 
consuming advertiser-supported (television, radio, newspapers, and magazines) or 
heavily promoted (popular music and movies) media . As such, books tend to encour-
age personal refl ection to a greater degree than these other media. We are alone 
when we read a book; we are part of the tribe, as Marshall McLuhan would say, when 
we engage other media. As such, in the words of author Julius Lester (2002) ( Look 
Out, Whitey! Black Power’s Gon’ Get Your Mama!; Why Heaven Is Far Away):  
 Th e mystery and miracle of a book is found in the fact that it is a solitary voice penetrating 
time and space to go beyond time and space, and to alight for a moment in that place 
within each of us which is also beyond time and space. . . . Books are the royal road that 
enable us to enter the realm of the imaginative. Books enable us to experience what it is to 
be someone else. Th rough books we experience other modes of being. Th rough books we 
recognize who we are and who we might become. . . . Books invite 
us into realms of the soul by asking us to imagine that we are some-
one other than who we are. Books require that we temporarily put 
our egos in a box by the door and take on the spirit of others. . . . 
Th is is what a book, any book, off ers us the opportunity to do: con-
fess and recognize ourselves. To confess and recognize our fanta-
sies, our joys, and griefs, our aspirations and failures, our hopes and 
our fears. (pp. 26–29)  
•  Books are mirrors of culture . Books, along with other mass 
media, refl ect the culture that produces and consumes them.   
 Censorship 
 Because of their infl uence as cultural repositories and agents of 
social change, books have often been targeted for censorship. A 
book is censored when someone in authority limits publication of 
or access to it. Censorship can and does occur in many situations 
 Stephenie Meyer’s  Twilight  series and Suzanne Collins’  Hunger Games trilogy are hugely 
popular sources of entertainment, escape, and personal reﬂ ection.

54 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
and in all media (more on this in Chapter 14). But because of the respect our culture 
traditionally holds for books, book banning takes on a particularly poisonous connota-
tion in the United States. 
 Reacting to censorship presents a dilemma for book publishers. Publishers have an 
obligation to their owners and stockholders to make a profi t. Yet, if responsible people 
in positions of authority deem a certain book unsuitable for readers, shouldn’t  publishers 
do the right thing for the larger society and comply with demands to cease its publica-
tion? Th is was the argument presented by morals crusader Anthony Comstock in 1873 
when he established the New York Society for the Suppression of Vice. It was the argu-
ment used on the evening of May 10, 1933, in Berlin when Nazi propaganda chief Joseph 
Books have been central to many of the most important social and political movements in 
our nation’s history. Our Bodies, Ourselves, a book for and about women, is credited with 
beginning the women’s health movement. The proﬁ ts this book generates—some 40 years 
after its ﬁ rst appearance—continue to support what has become a world-
wide undertaking. How did this inﬂ uential book, with more than 4  million 
copies sold in 18 diﬀ erent languages, come into being, and how does it 
continue to be so inﬂ uential?
The story of Our Bodies, Ourselves begins in 1969. That year several 
women, aged 23 to 39, were attending a workshop on “Women and Their 
Bodies” at a women’s liberation  conference in Boston. They began exchang-
ing “doctor stories.” They readily came to the conclusion that most women 
were relatively ignorant about their bodies (and by extension, their sexual-
ity) and that the male-dominated medical profession was not particularly 
receptive to their needs. So they gave themselves a “summer project.” As 
explained by the women, who began identifying themselves as the Boston 
Women’s Health Book Collective (Norsigian et al., 1999):
We would research our questions, share what we learned in our group, and then present the 
 information in the fall as a course “by and for women.” We envisioned an ongoing process that 
would involve other women who would go on to teach such a course in other settings. In 
 creating the course, we learned that we were capable of collecting, understanding, and evaluat-
ing medical information; that we could open up to one another and ﬁ nd strength and comfort 
through sharing some of our most private experiences; that what we learned from one another 
was every bit as important as what we read in medical texts; and that our experience contra-
dicted medical pronouncements. Over time these facts, feelings, and controversies were inter-
twined in the various editions of Our Bodies, Ourselves.
How does Our Bodies, Ourselves continue to make a diﬀ erence? One of the original Boston 
Women’s Health Book Collective members, Jane Pincus, explains in her introduction to the 
1998 edition:
Unlike most health books on the market, Our Bodies, Ourselves for the New Century is unique 
in many respects: It is based on, and has grown out of, hundreds of women’s experiences. It 
questions the medicalization of women’s bodies and lives, and highlights holistic knowledge 
along with conventional biomedical information. It places women’s experiences within the social, 
political, and economic forces that determine all of our lives, thus going beyond individualistic, 
narrow, “self-care” and self-help approaches, and views health in the context of the sexist, racist, 
and ﬁ nancial pressures that aﬀ ect far too many girls, women, and families adversely. It condemns 
medical corporate misbehavior driven by “bottom-line” management philosophy and the proﬁ t 
motive. Most of all, Our Bodies, Ourselves encourages you to value and share your own insights 
and experiences, and to use its information to question the assumptions underlying the care 
we all receive so that we can deal eﬀ ectively with the medical system and organize for better 
care. . . . ( p. 21)
You may disagree with some (or all) of the philosophy and goals of the Boston Women’s 
Health Book Collective, but there is no argument that its book, Our Bodies, Ourselves, 
has made—and continues to make—a difference in the health of women around 
the world.
USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE
Our Bodies, Ourselves
“Books have been central to many of the most 
important social and political movements in our 
nation’s history.”

CHAPTER 3 
Books 
55
Goebbels put a torch to a bonfi re that consumed 20,000 
books. It was the argument made in 1953 when U.S. Sen-
ator Joseph McCarthy demanded the removal of more 
than 100 books from U.S. diplomatic libraries because of 
their “procommunist” slant. (Among them was Th omas 
Paine’s  Common Sense .) It is the argument made today by 
people like Arizona’s State Superintendent of Schools 
John Huppenthal who, in 2012, ordered the removal of 
Shakespeare’s  Th e Tempest  from all high school libraries 
because of its “un-American” focus on colonialism; and 
by the Culpeper County (Virginia) school board in 2010 
when it pulled Anne Frank’s diary from its curriculum 
after a lone parental complaint; and in that same year by 
the Menifee Union School District (California) when it 
removed  Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary from its 
classrooms, again after a single complaint. 
 According to the American Library Association Offi  ce 
of Intellectual Freedom and the American Civil Liberties 
Union, among the library and school books most fre-
quently targeted by modern censors are the  Harry Potter 
series, Mark Twain’s  Th e Adventures of Huckleberry Finn , 
Harper Lee’s  To Kill a Mockingbird , John Steinbeck’s  Of 
Mice and Men , the  Goosebumps  series, Alice Walker’s  Th e 
Color Purple , and children’s favorite  In the Night Kitchen 
by Maurice Sendak. One readers’ group’s list of the 25 
banned books that everyone should read is shown in  Fig-
ure 3.1 . With how many are you familiar? Which ones 
have you read? What is it about each of these books that 
might have brought it to the censors’ attention?      
 Book publishers can confront censorship by recogniz-
ing that their obligations to their industry and to them-
selves demand that they resist censorship. Th e book 
publishing industry and the publisher’s role in it are fun-
damental to the operation and maintenance of our dem-
ocratic society. Rather than accepting the censor’s 
argument that certain voices require silencing for the 
good of the culture, publishers in a democracy have an 
obligation to make the stronger argument that free 
speech be protected and encouraged. Th e short list of 
frequently censored titles in the previous paragraph should immediately make it evi-
dent why the power of ideas is worth fi ghting for. You can read more about censorship 
in the Cultural Forum box entitled “Americans Don’t Burn Books.”     
 Aliteracy as Self-Censorship 
 Censors ban and burn books because books are repositories of ideas, ideas that can 
be read and considered with limited outside infl uence or offi  cial supervision. But what 
kind of culture develops when, by our own refusal to read books, we fi guratively save 
the censors the trouble of striking the match?    Aliteracy   , wherein people possess the 
ability to read but are unwilling to do so, amounts to doing the censors’ work for them. 
As Russian immigrant and writer Joseph Brodsky explained when accepting his Nobel 
Prize for Literature, “Since there are no laws that can protect us from ourselves, no 
criminal code is capable of preventing a true crime against literature; though we can 
condemn the material suppression of literature—the persecution of writers, acts of 
censorship, the burning of books—we are powerless when it comes to its worst viola-
tion: that of not reading the books. For that crime, a person pays with his whole life; 
if the off ender is a nation, it pays with its history” (Brodsky, 1987). 
1. To Kill a Mockingbird by Harper Lee
2. American Psycho by Bret Easton Ellis
3. And Tango Makes Three by Peter Parnell and
    Justin Richardson
4. The Awakening by Kate Chopin
5. The Lord of the Rings by J. R. R. Tolkien
6. Candide by Voltaire
7. Cat's Cradle by Kurt Vonnegut
8. Fallen Angels by Walter Dean Myers
9. Forever by Judy Blume
10. Frankenstein by Mary Shelley
11. Harry Potter series by J. K. Rowling
12. I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings by Maya Angelou
13. Lady Chatterley's Lover by D. H. Lawrence
14. Lord of the Flies by William Golding
15. Of Mice and Men by John Steinbeck
16. Grapes of Wrath by John Steinbeck
17. Beloved by Toni Morrison
18. A Day No Pigs Would Die by Robert Newton Peck
19. The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn by Mark Twain
20. The Catcher in the Rye by J. D. Salinger
21. The Chocolate War by Robert Cormier
22. The Color Purple by Alice Walker
23. The Giver by Lois Lowry
24. The Fortunes and Misfortunes of the Famous
      Moll Flanders by Daniel Defoe
25. Ulysses by James Joyce
  Figure 3.1  Banned Books That You Should Read Today: The 25 most challenged books 
in America. 
 Source: 25 Banned, 2011

56 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 In 2007 the National Endowment for the Arts 
(NEA) released its distillation of several govern-
ment and foundation studies of Americans’ read-
ing habits.  To Read or Not to Read  indicated that 
we are reading less and our reading profi ciency is 
declining at troubling rates. Th ese trends are par-
ticularly strong among older teens and young 
adults. For example, only 30% of 13-year-olds read 
almost every day. Fifteen-to-24-year-olds spend 
only 7 to 10 minutes a day reading anything at all, 
but 2½ hours a day watching television. Almost 
half of Americans between 18 and 24 never read 
books for pleasure. Forty percent of fi rst-year col-
lege students (and 35% of seniors) read nothing at 
all for pleasure, while another 26% (and 28% of 
seniors) read for pleasure less than one hour a 
week (Italie, 2007; Th ompson, 2007). 
 NEA chair Dana Gioia summed up the report’s 
fi ndings in four sentences: “We are doing a better 
job of teaching kids to read in elementary school. But once they enter adolescence, they 
fall victim to a general culture which does not encourage or reinforce reading. Because 
these people then read less, they read less well. Because they read less well, they do more 
poorly in school, in the job market, and in civic life.” More than any other, it is the issue 
of quality of civic life that gives the study its subtitle,  A Question of National Consequence . 
Regardless of income, reading correlates closely with quality of social life, voting, political 
activism, participation in culture and fi ne arts, volunteerism, charity work, and exercise. 
  The Diary of a Young Girl: The Deﬁ nitive Edition 
and  Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary were 
banned by school boards in 2010, each after a single 
parental complaint.
*
*
Online
magazines and
newspapers
Newspapers
*Not available
Books
Magazines
21
23
25
15
14
9
7
6
3
2
Daily reading in minutes
Daily reading in minutes
1999
2004
2009
  Figure 3.2  How Much Do 8- to 18-Year-
Olds Read in a Typical Day? 
 Source:  Rideout, Foehr, & Roberts, 2010. 

CHAPTER 3 
Books 
57
Gioia explained, “Th e habit of regular reading awakens something inside a person that 
makes him or her take their own life more seriously and at the same time develops the 
sense that other people’s lives are real.” Added Timothy Shanahan, past president of the 
International Reading Association, “If you’re low in reading ability . . . you’re less likely to 
take part in activities like sports or church. Being low in literacy is self-isolating, tends 
to push you out of culture altogether” (all quoted in Th ompson, 2007, p. C1).        
 You can see how much a typical young person reads each day in  Figure 3.2 . How 
do you account for the declines in newspaper and magazine reading? Th e 2 minutes 
a day of online reading hardly makes up for that dip. How can you explain the small 
rise in book reading? Do you agree with the NEA that this lack of reading for leisure 
has consequences for our country?         
 Scope and Structure of the 
Book Industry  
 More than 3 million traditional and nontraditional (print-on-demand, self-published, and 
niche) titles are published in North America each year; readers annually buy nearly three 
billion books, generating $33 billion in sales (Masnick & Ho, 2012). But there is industry 
concern that these seemingly robust fi gures are an illusion because annual  average 
household spending on books is at a 20-year low (Auletta, 2010).  
 Categories of Books 
 Th e Association of American Publishers divides books into several sales categories: 
 •  Book club editions  are books sold and distributed (sometimes even published) by 
book clubs. Th ere are currently more than 300 book clubs in the United States. 
Th ese organizations off er trade, professional, and more specialized titles—for exam-
ple, books for aviation afi cionados and expensive republications of classic works. 
Th e Book of the Month Club, started in 1926, is the best known; the Literary Guild 
and the Reader’s Digest Book Club are also popular.  
 •  El-hi  are textbooks produced for elementary and high schools.  
 •  Higher education  are textbooks produced for colleges and universities.  
 •  Mail-order books , such as those advertised on television by Time-Life Books, are 
delivered by mail and usually are specialized series  (Th e War Ships)  or elaborately 
bound special editions of classic novels.  
 •  Mass market paperbacks  are typically published only as paperbacks and are designed 
to appeal to a broad readership; many romance novels, diet books, and self-help 
books are in this category.  
 •  Professional books  are reference and educational volumes designed specifi cally for 
professionals such as doctors, engineers, lawyers, scientists, and managers.  
 •  Religious books  are volumes such as Bibles, catechisms, and hymnals.  
 •  Standardized tests  are guide and practice books designed to prepare readers for 
various examinations such as the SAT or the bar exam.  
 •  Subscription reference books  are publications such as the  Encyclopaedia Britannica , 
atlases, and dictionaries bought directly from the publisher rather than purchased 
in a retail setting.  
 •  Trade books    can be hard- or softcover and include not only fi ction and most nonfi c-
tion but also cookbooks, biographies, art books, coff ee-table books, and how-to books.  
 •  University press books  come from publishing houses associated with and often 
underwritten by universities. Th ey typically publish serious nonfi ction and scholarly 
books. Th e University of Chicago Press and the University of California Press are 
two of the better-known university presses, and the Oxford University Press is the 
oldest publisher in the world. 

58 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 Trends and Convergence in 
Book Publishing  
 Like all the media with which we are familiar, convergence is changing the nature of 
the book industry. In addition to convergence, contemporary publishing and its rela-
tionship with its readers are being reshaped by conglomeration, hypercommercialism 
and demand for profi ts, the growth of small presses, restructuring of retailing, and 
changes in readership.  
 Convergence 
 Convergence is altering almost all aspects of the book industry. Most obviously, the 
Internet is changing the way books are distributed and sold. But this new technology, 
in the form of    e-publishing   , the publication of books initially or exclusively online, 
off ers a new way for writers’ ideas to be published. Even the physical form of books is 
changing—many of today’s “books” are no longer composed of paper pages snug 
between two covers. As former Random House editor Peter Osnos (2009) explained, 
“Unlike other printed media, books do not have advertising, so there is none to lose. 
Th ey don’t have subscribers, so holding on to them is not an issue either. Th e main 
challenge is to manage inventory, making books available where, when, and how read-
ers want them. And on that score, the advances in gadgetry and the changes in popu-
lar [reading] habits over the past decade . . . have produced a major advance” (p. 38). 
By gadgetry, Osnos means primarily e-books, print on demand (POD), and a host of 
electronic reading devices.  
 EBOOKS  Twenty-six-year-old Amanda Hocking had written a dozen novels, mostly 
young adult romance stories. Rejected by several major publishing houses, the Austin, 
Minnesota, waitress published nine of her works in 2010 as    e-books —books down-
loaded in electronic form from the Internet to computers, dedicated readers, or mobile 
digital devices. Within a year  My Blood Approves ,  Ascend , and her other titles sold a 
million copies, earning her more than $2 million; today she sells 9,000 books a day 
(Saroyan, 2011). Established authors fare well, too. Stieg Larsson’s best seller,  Th e Girl 
with the Dragon Tattoo , sold 300,000 hard copies from 2008 to April 2011. In that time 
it also sold 1 million e-books, and his trilogy, which includes  Th e Girl Who Played with 
Fire  and  Th e Girl Who Kicked the Hornet’s Nest , combined, sold 3 million digital ver-
sions (Bosman, 2011). 
 Popular acceptance of e-books seemed in place by Christmas Day, 2009, when 
Amazon reported that for the fi rst time in its history, it sold more e-books than hard-
copy volumes in a single day. By summer of 2011, four short years after the introduc-
tion of the fi rst e-book, Amazon was selling 105 e-books for every printed book, 
hardback and paperback (“E-book Sales,” 2011).   
 E-books now account for 10% of traditional publishers’ sales and will soon rise to 
a  quarter of their business. Sales of all e-books increased 190% from 2009 to 2010 
(Bosman, 2010) and should reach $9.7 billion in 2016 (Kulicke, 2012). 
 Still, e-publishing’s greatest impact may be on new writers. Because anyone with a 
computer and a   novel to sell can bypass the traditional book publishers, fi rst-time 
authors or writers of small, niche books now have an outlet for their work. An addi-
tional advantage of e-publishing, especially for new or small-market authors, is that 
e-books can be published almost instantly. Stephen King has made enough money 
selling his books that he can wait the one to two years it typically takes for a traditional 
novel to be produced once it is in the publisher’s hands. Rarely can new authors aff ord 
this luxury.    
    Another advantage is fi nancial. Authors who distribute through e-publishers typi-
cally get royalties of 40% to 70%, compared to the 5% to 10% off ered by traditional 
publishers. Th is lets aspiring writers off er their books for as little as $3 or $4, making 
those works more attractive to readers willing to take a low-cost chance to fi nd 

CHAPTER 3 
Books 
59
 Amazon’s Kindle, Apple’s iPad, and numerous other e-readers are transforming publishing and reading.
 something and someone new and inter-
esting  .  .  . earning writers even more 
sales. And while traditional book pub-
lishers say their lower royalty rates are 
mandated by the expense of the ser-
vices they provide, such as editorial 
assistance and marketing, not to men-
tion the cost of production and distribu-
tion, some digital publishers off er a full 
range of services—copyediting, pub-
lishing, securing or commissioning art-
work, jacket design, promotion, and in 
some cases, even hard-copy distribu-
tion to brick-and-mortar bookstores. 
Print on demand (POD) is another 
form of e-publishing. Companies such 
as Xlibris, AuthorHouse, Toby Press, 
and iUniverse are POD publishers. Th ey 
store works digitally and, once ordered, 
a book can be instantly printed, bound, 
and sent. Alternatively, once ordered, 
that book can be printed and bound at 
a bookstore that has the proper technology. Th e advantage for publisher and reader is 
fi nancial. POD books require no warehouse for storage, there are no    remainders
(unsold books returned to publishers to be sold at great discount) to eat into profi ts, 
and the production costs, in both personnel and equipment, are tiny when compared 
to traditional publishing. Th ese factors not only produce less expensive books for read-
ers but greatly expand the variety of books that can and will be published. And although 
a large publisher like Oxford University Press produces more than 100,000 POD vol-
umes a year (Carnevale, 2005), smaller POD operations can make a profi t on as few as 
100 orders. Large commercial publishers have also found a place for POD in their 
business, using the technology to rush hot, headline-inspired books to readers. In 
2008, for the fi rst time, American publishers released more POD titles than new and 
revised titles produced by traditional methods; in 2010 the ratio was more than three 
to one. Th e availability of POD books will grow even more with the continued rollout 
of the Espresso Book Machine, a joint eff ort of several major book publishers. Th e 
devices, which can print and bind a 300-page book in four minutes, is available in 
hundreds of locations across the globe and has access to more than 7 million books 
available from self-publishers, a growing list of traditional publishing houses, and in 
the public domain. 
 Smartphones, Tablets, and e-Readers 
 Convergence is reshaping reading in other interesting ways. Several websites— www
.fi ctionwise.com ,  www.gutenberg.org , and  www.memoware.com , for example—off er 
e-books specifi cally for PDAs, smartphones, tablets, and    e-readers , digital books with 
the appearance of traditional books but content that is digitally stored and accessed. 
Previous attempts at producing e-readers had failed, but the 2006 unveiling of the Sony 
Reader, dubbed the iBook after its sibling the iPod, has proven so successful that it was 
soon followed by several similar devices, such as Amazon’s Kindle, Kindle DX, and 
Kindle for Blackberry, Apple’s iPad, and Barnes & Noble’s Nook. In addition, smart-
phone and tablet applications like Stanza and ScrollMotion and other e-reading alter-
natives such as online publisher Zinio, which makes titles available for most digital 
devices, and Vook, which off ers video-enhanced books, also appeared. At the end of 
2011, nearly one in three Americans owned at least one e-reader or tablet (Ortutay, 
2012), and more than 807 million people around the world own an e-book-compatible 
advanced personal device (Sheehy, 2011). Issues such as the number of available titles, 

60 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
payment to publishers and authors, ownership of digital versus print rights, cost of 
digital versus hard copies, presence of advertising, and distribution of ad income are 
constantly debated and negotiated between the rivals, publishers, and readers. 
 Nonetheless, readers have welcomed the devices and publishers have understandably 
responded, given the industry’s belief that “any business that requires a truck these days, 
forget it” (Th ompson, 2009). Hundreds of thousands of in- and out-of-print titles are 
available for    platform agnostic publishing   —digital and hard-copy books available for 
any and all reading devices. And those reading devices themselves will continue to 
evolve, with advances in existing fl exible screens so thin they can be rolled up and 
“open” e-readers that let users cut, paste, and exchange text as is routine on other com-
puters. In anticipation of the growth of e-publishing, some traditional publishers, 
Dorchester Publishing, for example, have abandoned bound paper books altogether.    
    For readers in search of almost every book ever written or for those who want to 
search the contents of almost every book ever written (say, for references to the Civil 
War even though “Civil War” does not appear in the title), there are several develop-
ments. Online bookseller  Amazon.com  has scanned every page of every in-print book 
into its Search Inside the Book. Th at means anyone registered (it’s free, but readers 
must provide a credit card number) can eventually search millions (according to Ama-
zon) of books for just about any topic or idea. Th e pages cannot be downloaded, and 
there is a limit to how much searching a given reader can do in a specifi ed period of 
time. Of course, Amazon’s goal is to sell more books (you just might want to order one 
of the books your search has uncovered), but it is developing its own POD service that 
will provide, instantly, any book searched and requested. Several nonprofi t organiza-
tions are also making searchable and downloadable books available online. Project 
Gutenberg will off er 1 million noncopyrighted classics; the Million Book Project has 
set as its goal 1 million government and older titles; the Open Content Alliance seeks 
to digitize the holdings of its many member libraries; and the International Children’s 
Digital Library and the Rosetta Project hope to make downloadable tens of thousands 
of current and antique children’s books from around the world. 
 Whereas these eff orts at digitizing books have been generally well regarded, the 
same cannot be said for Google Print. Internet giant Google announced in late 2005 
its intention to make available online 15 million books from the New York Public 
Library and the libraries of the University of Michigan, Stanford University, Harvard 
University, and Oxford University. Th e vast majority, 90%, would be out-of-print books 
not bound by copyright (see Chapter 14). Th e problem, however, is Google’s plan to 
 The Espresso Book Machine—7 million titles 
from traditional publishers, the public domain, and 
self-publishers, each available in four minutes.

CHAPTER 3 
Books 
61
hold the entire text of all works, in and out of print, on its servers, making only small, 
fair-use portions of copyrighted works available to Web users. Initially, many publish-
ers agreed to participate if the complete text of their copyrighted works could be stored 
on  their  servers, but Google refused. A series of lawsuits from the Author’s Guild and 
fi ve major publishers followed despite Google’s insistence that it would protect the 
interests of authors and publishers as it strives to “organize the world’s information 
and make it universally accessible and useful,” in the words of the company itself. In 
October 2008, the parties reached an agreement in which Google set aside $125 million 
to establish a “Books Rights Registry” to ensure that authors are compensated for the 
use of their work, including payment from income earned by ads placed next to their 
works. Within a year Google, digitizing 1,000 pages an hour, reached the 10-million-
book mark (Timpane, 2010).   
 Conglomeration 
 More than any other medium, the book industry was dominated by relatively small 
operations. Publishing houses were traditionally staff ed by fewer than 20 people, the 
large majority by fewer than 10. Today, however, although more than 81,000 businesses 
call themselves book publishers, only a very small percentage produces four or more 
titles a year (Teague, 2005). Th e industry is dominated now by a few giants: Hearst 
Books; the Penguin Group; Bantam Doubleday Dell; Time Warner Publishing; Farrar, 
Straus & Giroux; Harcourt General; HarperCollins; and Simon & Schuster. Each of 
these giants was once, sometimes with another name, an independent book publisher. 
All are now part of large national or international corporate conglomerates. Th ese 
major publishers control more than 80% of all U.S. book sales. Even e-publishing, her-
alded by some as the future of book publishing, is dominated by the big companies. 
Not only do all the major houses and booksellers maintain e-publishing units, but even 
POD sites such as Xlibris (Random House) and iUniverse (Barnes & Noble) are wholly 
or partly owned by these giants. 
 Opinion is divided on the benefi t of corporate ownership. Th e positive view is that 
the rich parent company can infuse the publishing house with necessary capital, 
enabling it to attract better authors or to take gambles on new writers that would, in 
the past, have been impossible. Another plus is that the corporate parent’s other media 
holdings can be used to promote and repackage the books for greater profi tability. 
Neither of these benefi ts is insignifi cant, argue many industry insiders, because book 
publishing is more like gambling than business. Literary agent Eric Simonoff  says the 
industry is “unpredictable . . . the profi t margins are so small, the cycles (from contract 
to publication) are so incredibly long” and there is an “almost total lack of market 
research” (quoted in Boss, 2007, p. 3.6). Fiction writer James Patterson, for example, 
suff ered 12 rejections for  Th e Th omas Berryman Number  before Little, Brown in 1976 
accepted this fi rst novel. Patterson has since rewarded his publisher with 51  New York 
Times  best sellers, 35 of which were Number Ones. Since 2006, one out of every 17 
hardcover books bought in America was written by James Patterson, and in 2009 alone 
he sold 14 million books in 38 diff erent languages (Mahler, 2010). “It’s guesswork,” says 
Doubleday editor in chief Bill Th omas. “Th e whole thing is educated guesswork, but 
guesswork nonetheless. You just try to make sure your upside mistakes make up for 
your downside mistakes” (quoted in Boss, 2007, p. 3.6). 
 Th e negative view is that as publishing houses become just one in the parent com-
pany’s long list of enterprises, product quality suff ers as important editing and produc-
tion steps are eliminated to maximize profi ts. Before conglomeration, publishing was 
often described as a    cottage industry   ; that is, publishing houses were small opera-
tions, closely identifi ed with their personnel—both their own small staff s and their 
authors. Th e cottage imagery, however, extends beyond smallness of size. Th ere was a 
quaintness and charm associated with publishing houses—their attention to detail, 
their devotion to tradition, the care they gave to their façades (their reputations). Th e 
world of corporate conglomerates has little room for such niceties, as profi t dominates 
all other considerations. Critics of corporate ownership saw profi ts-over-quality at play 

62 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
in 2007 when Simon & Schuster, owned by broadcast conglomerate CBS, announced 
its partnership with MediaPredict, a data collection website that uses readers’ “collec-
tive judgment” to determine which book ideas to sign. Asking readers to “vote” on a 
proposed book’s likelihood of success, they argued, is akin to the  American Idolization 
of the publishing industry and a guarantee of mediocrity.   
 Demand for Proﬁ ts and Hypercommercialism 
 Th e threat from conglomeration is seen in the parent company’s overemphasis on the 
bottom line—that is, profi tability at all costs. Unlike in the days when G. P. Putnam’s 
sons and the Schuster family actually ran the houses that carried their names, critics 
fear that now little pride is taken in the content of books and that risk taking (tackling 
controversial issues, experimenting with new styles, fi nding and nurturing unknown 
authors) is becoming rarer and rarer. 
 Daniel Menaker, fi ction editor for the  New Yorker , explains, “Being a book editor is 
often, on balance, a rum game. Th e arts—high and low—have a way of moving for-
ward, backward, or to the side which leaves their servants perpetually scrambling to 
catch up with and make sense of their direction and their very nature. Profi t, when it 
gets into bed with them, doesn’t like the unpredictability of the arts. It tries to rational-
ize them and make them fi nancially reliable. Can’t be done” (2009). As a result, Jason 
Epstein, longtime editor at Random House and founder of Anchor Books, writes that 
his is an “increasingly distressed industry” mired in “severe structural problems.” 
Among them are a retail bookselling system that favors “brand name” authors and “a 
bestseller-driven system of high royalty advances.” He says that contemporary publish-
ing is “overconcentrated,” “undiff erentiated,” and “fatally rigid” (quoted in Feldman, 
2001, p. 35). To Menaker, Epstein, and other critics of conglomeration, the industry 
seems overwhelmed by a blockbuster mentality—lust for the biggest-selling authors 
and titles possible, sometimes with little consideration for literary merit. Recently, Jus-
tin Timberlake, formerly of the pop group ‘N Sync, received a seven-fi gure advance for 
his fi rst novel,  Crossover Dribble . Michael Crichton got $40 million for a two-book deal 
from HarperCollins; Tom Clancy, $45 million for two books from Penguin Putnam; 
Mary Higgins Clark, $64 million for fi ve books from Simon & Schuster; in 2011 that 
same house published  A Shore Th ing  by Nicole Polizzi, aka Snooki, the star of reality 
television show  Jersey Shore . Not to be outdone, Gotham Books released  Here’s the 
Situation  by another  Jersey Shore  star, Mike “Th e Situation” Sorrentino. “Gossipy, 
inbred, lunch-dependent, and about two years behind the rest of the nation, corporate 
publishing is now in the business of sabotaging the very system it’s supposed to keep 
vital,” wrote Pat Holt, editor of industry website Holt Unlimited. Instead of “selecting 
good books” and fi nding a “creative, devoted, and adventurous way to sell them, the 
big houses continually peddle bland products that are gradually driving readers away” 
(quoted in “Th e Crisis in Publishing,” 2003, p. 22). As the resources and energies of 
publishing houses are committed to a small number of superstar writers and block-
buster books, smaller, more interesting, possibly more serious or important books do 
not get published. If these books cannot get published, they will not be written. We 
will be denied their ideas in the cultural forum. We will see, but as we read earlier in 
this chapter, it is converged technologies like POD and e-books that may well be the 
vehicle to ensure those ideas access to the forum and us to them. 
 Publishers attempt to off set the large investments they do make through the sale of 
 subsidiary rights   , that is, the sale of the book, its contents, and even its characters to 
fi lmmakers, paperback publishers, book clubs, foreign publishers, and product pro-
ducers like T-shirt, poster, coff ee cup, and greeting card manufacturers. For example, 
based on the success of his fi rst book,  Cold Mountain , Charles Frazier’s one-page pro-
posal for his second novel earned his publisher $3 million for the fi lm rights alone from 
Paramount Pictures. Th e industry itself estimates that many publishers would go out 
of business if it were not for the sale of these rights. Writers such as Michael Crichton 
 (Jurassic Park) , John Grisham  (Th e Client) , and Gay Talese  (Th y Neighbor’s Wife) can 
command as much as $2.5 million for the fi lm rights to their books. Although this is 

CHAPTER 3 
Books 
63
good for the profi tability of the publishers and 
the superstar authors, critics fear that those 
books with the greatest subsidiary sales value 
will receive the most publisher attention.    
 As greater and greater sums are tied up in 
blockbusters, and as subsidiary rights there-
fore grow in importance, the marketing, pro-
motion, and public relations surrounding a 
book become crucial. Th is leads to the addi-
tional fear that only the most promotable 
books will be published—the stores are 
fl ooded with Martha Stewart books, celebrity 
picture books, unauthorized biographies of 
celebrities, and tell-all autobiographies from 
the children of famous people. 
 Th e importance of promotion and publicity 
has led to an increase in the release of    instant 
books   . What better way to unleash millions of 
dollars of free publicity for a book than to base 
it on an event currently on the front page and 
the television screen? Publishers see these 
opportunities and then initiate the projects. 
For example, written in 48 hours by James 
Clench,  William and Kate: A Royal Love Story
was in bookstores 10 days after their 2010 engagement was announced by Buckingham 
Palace. Lost in the wake of instant books, easily promotable authors and titles, and 
blockbusters, critics argue, are books of merit, books of substance, and books that 
make a diff erence. 
 Several other recent events suggest that the demand for profi ts is bringing even 
more hypercommercialism to the book business. One trend is the “Hollywoodization” 
of books. Potential synergies between books, television, and movies have spurred big 
media companies such as Viacom, Time Warner, and News Corp. to invest heavily in 
publishing, buying up houses big and small. Some movie studios are striking “exclu-
sive” deals with publishers—for example, Walden Media teams with Penguin Young 
Readers, Focus Films with Random House, and Paramount with Simon & Schuster. In 
addition, in 2005 ReganBooks (owned by HarperCollins, which, in turn, is owned by 
News Corp.) moved its offi  ces from New York to Los Angeles to be in a better position 
to develop material that has both book and fi lm potential. In that same year, studios 
Warner Brothers, Columbia, Paramount, DreamWorks, Fox, New Line, Imagine, 
Tribeca, and Revolution Films set up operations in New York City to fi nd books and 
“mine magazine articles, theater, and other properties” that can be converted to screen 
fare (Fleming, 2005, p. 3). In 2007 Random House and Focus Features announced that 
they would begin coproducing feature fi lms based on the former’s titles. Critics fear 
 © Michael Maslin/The New Yorker Collection/
www.cartoonbank.com
 Typical of thousands of small publishing 
houses, Ten Speed Press oﬀ ers an array of 
interesting, odd, or otherwise “small” books that 
larger publishers may ignore.

64 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
that only those books with the most synergistic potential will be signed and 
published. Advocates argue just the opposite—a work that might have had 
limited profi t potential as a “mere” book, and therefore gone unpublished, 
just might fi nd a home across several mutually promoting platforms. Th ey 
point to  Sideways , a small-selling book that became a best-selling book 
after the movie it inspired became a hit.    
    Another trend that has created much angst among book traditionalists 
is the paid product placement. Movies and television have long accepted 
payments from product manufacturers to feature their brands in their con-
tent, but it was not until May 2000 that the fi rst paid-for placement 
appeared in a fi ction novel. Bill Fitzhugh’s  Cross Dressing , published by 
Avon, contains what are purchased commercials for Seagram liquor. Fay 
Weldon followed suit in 2001, even titling her book  Th e Bulgari Connec-
tion , after her sponsor, a jewelry company by the same name.  Cathy’s 
Book , from Perseus/Running Press, pushed Cover Girl cosmetics, but pub-
lic criticism from several sources, including Consumer Alert and the  New 
York Times  editorial board, led the publisher to abandon product place-
ment when the title went to paperback in 2008. As with other media that 
accept product placements, critics fear that content will be bent to satisfy 
sponsors rather than serve the quality of the work itself. For example, on 
contract with carmaker Ford, Carole Matthews, British writer of “edgy 
romantic comedy [novels] aimed at young contemporary women,” penned 
a scene in which her heroine is “whizzing around Buckinghamshire in 
Imogene, my rather snazzy Ford Fiesta complete with six-CD changer, air-
conditioning, and thoroughly comfy seats.” Said Matthews, “I’ve been very pleased 
with Ford in that they haven’t put any constraints on my writing at all.” But, asks 
author and social critic Jim Hightower (2004b), how free was she to write something 
akin to “whizzing around Buckinghamshire, my snazzy Ford Fiesta sputtered and died 
on me again, just as the six-CD changer went on the fritz and spewed blue smoke in 
my face” (p. 3)?   
 Growth of Small Presses 
 Th e overcommercialization of the book industry is mitigated somewhat by the rise in 
the number of smaller publishing houses. Although these smaller operations are large 
in number, they account for a very small proportion of books sold. Nonetheless, as 
recently as seven years ago there were 20,000 U.S. book publishers. Today there are 
more than 81,000, the vast majority being small presses. Th ey cannot compete in the 
blockbuster world. By defi nition  alternative , they specialize in specifi c areas such as 
the environment, feminism, gay issues, and how-to. Th ey can also publish writing oth-
erwise uninteresting to bigger houses, such as poetry and literary commentary. Relying 
on specialization and narrowly targeted marketing, books such as Ralph Nader and 
Clarence Ditlow’s  Th e Lemon Book , published by Moyer Bell, Claudette McShane’s 
 Warning! Dating May Be Hazardous to Your Health , published by Mother Courage 
Press, and  Split Verse , a book of poems about divorce published by Midmarch Arts, can 
not only earn healthy sales but also make a diff erence in their readers’ lives. And what 
may seem surprising, it is the Internet, specifi cally Amazon, that is boosting the for-
tunes of these smaller houses. Because it compiles data on customer preferences 
(books bought, browsed, recommended to others, or wished for), it can make recom-
mendations to potential buyers, and, quite often, those recommendations are from 
small publishers that the buyer might never have considered (or never have seen at a 
brick-and-mortar retailer). In other words, Amazon levels the book industry playing 
fi eld. As Kent Sturgis, president of the Independent Book Publishers Association, 
explained, “All publishers are basically equal, because just about all publishers’ titles 
are on Amazon and can be delivered to your door in a couple of days” (Gillespie, 2005, 
p. B2). Amazon even set up a special program in 1998, Advantage, to help smaller 
publishers with payment and shipping.   
 Jersey Shore star Mike Sorrentino’s treatise on 
GTL (gym, tan, laundry), Here’s the Situation.

CHAPTER 3 
Books 
65
 Restructuring of Book Retailing 
 Th ere are approximately 20,000 bookstores in the United States, but the number is 
dwindling as small, independent operations fi nd it increasingly diffi  cult to compete 
with such chains as Barnes & Noble, Borders, and Books-A-Million. But the big chains 
themselves are having trouble surviving as well. As recently as 2003 the chain stores, 
located primarily in malls with heavy pedestrian traffi  c, controlled about 20% of all 
books sold in America. Borders alone had 1,249 stores under its own name and 
Waldenbooks. In 2011, however, it fi led for bankruptcy and closed 200 of its remaining 
642 shops (Lowrey, 2011). Th e chains have trouble competing with online retailers like 
Amazon, the explosion of POD, and the rapid migration of books from paper to the 
electronic screens of laptops, tablet computers, e-readers, and smart phones. 
 Where they have prospered it is because their size enables them to purchase inven-
tory cheaply and then off er discounts to shoppers. Because their location attracts 
shoppers, they can also profi tably stock nonbook merchandise such as audio- and 
videotapes, CDs, computer games, calendars, magazines, and greeting cards for the 
drop-in trade. But high-volume, high-traffi  c operations tend to deal in high-volume 
books. To book traditionalists, this only encourages the industry’s blockbuster mental-
ity. When the largest bookstores in the country order only the biggest sellers, the small 
books get lost. When fl oor space is given over to Garfi eld coff ee mugs and pop star 
calendars, there is even less room for small but potentially interesting books. Although 
big bookselling chains have their critics, they also have their defenders. At least the big 
titles, CDs, and cheap prices get people into bookstores, the argument goes. Once folks 
begin reading, even if it is trashy stuff , they might move on to better material. People 
who never buy books will never read books. 
 Indies and chains also have to deal with the discount stores such as Target, 
Walmart, and Costco, which together control 30% of the American book market. As 
a result, today there are only 1,500 independent booksellers in the United States, 
operating 2,500 outlets. Twenty years ago there were 4,700 independents with 5,500 
storefronts (S. Mitchell, 2009; Applebome, 2009). Using their small size and indepen-
dence to their advantage, the independents counter the chains and discount stores 
with expert, personalized service provided by a reading-loving staff , coff ee and snack 
 Personalized service, cushioned chairs, slow 
browsing, and intimate readings by favorite authors 
sustain today’s independent booksellers. Here, 
adolescent literature novelist Erin Dionne reads for 
an adoring group of young fans.

66 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
bars, cushioned chairs and sofas for slow browsing, and intimate readings by favor-
ite authors. In fact, so successful have these devices been that the big stores now are 
copying them. Barnes & Noble, for example, sponsors a program it calls Discover to 
promote notable fi rst novels, and  Borders does the same with Original Voices. Not 
only do these eff orts emulate services more commonly associated with smaller inde-
pendents, but they also help blunt some of the criticism suff ered by the chains, spe-
cifi cally that they ignore new and smaller-selling books. Still, the big operations 
cannot or will not emulate some strategies. Specialization is one. Religious, feminist, 
and animal-lover bookstores exist. Th e in-store book club for children or poetry fans, 
for example, is another small-store strategy.    
    Another alternative to the big mall chain store is buying books online.  Amazon.com  
is the best known of the online book sales services. Th orough, fast, and well stocked, 
 feelings of many of our good local folk and offending everyone except 
like-minded racists? As the s.o.b. began to spout, the TV guys folded 
up their gear, the radio folks hit the off button, and I pocketed my 
notebook” (2010, p. 3).
Is ignoring the rants of racists responsible media practice, or is it meet-
ing censorship with more censorship?
CULTURAL FORUM
Americans Don’t Burn Books
“Not one soldier has ever died so 
we could burn books.”
Few acts of protest are as universally reviled in America as book burning. 
“We have gone to war with people who do burn books,” wrote author 
James Boyce, “Adolph Hitler comes to mind. Stalin. Pol Pot. There are others. 
Our military graveyards are full of the men and women who protected us, 
who gave their lives for us. Not one soldier has ever died so we could burn 
books” (2010). Americans don’t burn books. Such a fundamental truth about 
our democracy would seem beyond debate, but book burning blazed across the 
cultural forum in 2011 when Florida Pastor Terry Jones torched a kerosene-
soaked  Koran, the Muslim holy book. Jones leads the Dove World Outreach 
Center, a church with a membership short of 50, yet his eight-minute mock 
“trial” and “conviction” of the Koran for “crimes against humanity” drew 
national media attention. In response, protestors in Afghanistan killed 10 United 
 Nations workers (Thorp, 2011).
Enter your voice. Why did an abhorrent act committed by a fringe pastor 
of a tiny church attract the attention of the major American broadcast, cable, 
and print news organizations? Was it that the act  itself—book burning—is 
so  repellant that it warranted coverage? Was it because it was the Koran, a 
Muslim book? What if it had been the Christian Bible? The Jewish Torah? What 
is it about books—as opposed to other forms of media—that generate this 
kind of  emotion? How much blame do you put on Jones for the death of those 
people in Afghanistan? How much blame do you put on the media? Might the 
country have been better served if the media had ignored Jones? Consider 
veteran reporter Tom Gardner’s recounting of how he covered a Ku Klux Klan 
“press conference” in 1980s Alabama. Caucusing with other reporters, he 
asked “if any of them thought this was a news story worth covering. Nope. 
Then why would we cover this non-event, letting this racist jerk hurt the 
  

CHAPTER 3 
Books 
67
Amazon boasts low overhead, and that means better 
prices for readers. In addition, its website off ers book 
buyers large amounts of potentially valuable information. 
Once online, customers can identify the books that inter-
est them, read synopses, check reviews from multiple 
sources, read sample pages from a book, and see com-
ments not only from other readers but sometimes from 
the authors and publishers as well. Of course, they can 
also order books. Th e Seattle company controls more 
than half of the U.S. book business across all formats 
(Windwalker, 2011) and is considered the top-value brand 
both in America and globally (Neff , 2011). Some other 
popular online bookstores can be found at  www.powells.
com  and  www.books.com , and almost all publishers of all 
sizes now sell their own titles online.       
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS 
 The Lessons of Harry Potter 
 Th e excitement surrounding the release in July 2007 of the seventh and fi nal install-
ment of J. K. Rowling’s series on youthful British sorcerer Harry Potter off ers several 
important lessons for the media-literate person. Publication of  Harry Potter and the 
Deathly Hallows  highlighted several elements of media literacy and called into play a 
number of media literacy skills. For example, its huge appeal to young people can be 
used to examine one element of media literacy, understanding content as a text pro-
viding insight into our culture and lives. Just why have these books resonated so 
strongly with young readers? Th e controversy surrounding the numerous eff orts to 
have the series banned from schools and libraries as antireligious 
and anti-Christian and its status as the “most challenged” (cen-
sored) children’s literature in the United States call into play the 
particular media literacy skill of developing the ability and will-
ingness to eff ectively and meaningfully understand content.    
    Th e publishing industry classifi es the Harry Potter books as 
juvenile literature. But their phenomenal reception by readers of 
all ages suggests these works not only have broader appeal but are 
in themselves something very special. Th e initial U.S. printing of a 
Harry Potter book is about 14 million copies—100 times that of a 
normal best seller. Although  Deathly Hallows  was not available for 
sale until July 21, 2007, by the fi rst week of February—23 weeks 
before its release—it reached the Number One spot on Amazon’s 
best-seller list. Th e seven  Harry Potter s combined have sold more 
than 450 million copies worldwide, and two-thirds of all American 
children have read at least one edition. Th e Potter series has been 
published in over 67 languages (including Greek, Latin, and 
“Americanized English”) in more than 200 countries. Potter books 
occupy spots 1, 2, 3, and 4 on the all-time fastest-selling booklist. 
 What has been Harry Potter’s impact on reading? In 1963 the 
Gallup polling organization found that fewer than half of all Amer-
icans said they had read a book all the way through in the previous 
year. But soon after the release of  Th e Prisoner of Azkaban  in 1999, 
that number was 84% (Quindlen, 2000). Nobody would claim that 
Harry alone was responsible, but  Newsweek ’s Anna Quindlen 
speculated that he had helped “create a new generation of inveter-
ate readers” (p. 64). Fright master Stephen King agreed, writing, “If 
these millions of readers are awakened to the wonders and 
  Harry Potter, the little wizard who launched a 
million readers.
 The best-known and most successful of the 
online booksellers,  Amazon.com , oﬀ ers potential 
buyers a wealth of information and services.
 © Amazon.com, Inc. or its aﬃ  liates. All Rights Reserved. 
Amazon, Amazon.com and the Amazon.com logo are 
registered trademarks of Amazon.com, Inc. or its aﬃ   liates. 

rewards of fantasy at 11 or 12 . . . well, when they get to age 16 or so, there’s this guy named 
King” (as quoted in Garchik, 2000, p. D10). Caroline Ward, president of the American 
Library Association’s Services to Children, said, “It’s hard to believe that one series of books 
could almost turn an entire nation back to reading, but that is not an exaggeration,” and 
Diane Roback, children’s book editor at  Publishers Weekly , cited “‘the Harry Potter halo 
eff ect,’ in which children come into stores and libraries asking for books that resemble the 
Rowling series” ( USA Today , 2000, p. E4). A Scholastic Books survey of 500 Harry Potter 
readers aged 5 to 7 indicated that 51% said they did not read books for fun until they started 
reading the series. Th ree-quarters said Harry had made them interested in reading other 
books (Rich, 2007), and they did, as data from 2008 and 2009 show that sales of juvenile 
books were the strongest of any category in those years (Lowman, 2010). 
 One element of media literacy is the development of an awareness of the impact of 
media, and the Harry Potter series has amply demonstrated its infl uence. But its wild 
success is used by many media critics to castigate both media professionals who under-
estimate their audiences  and  audience members who encourage that underestimation. 
In other words, the success (and profi tability) of this well-written, thoughtful, high-
quality content stood in stark contrast to what critics contend is a steady decline in quality 
in other media, particularly advertiser-supported media such as radio and television. Th e 
argument is simple: Broadcasters, especially the major national television networks, 
respond to falling viewership not by improving content but by lowering its intelligence 
and worth. Whereas the Harry Potter books get better (and longer;  Deathly Hallows fi lls 
759 pages) in response to reader enthusiasm, network television dumbs down, giving its 
audience  Fear Factor, Flavor of Love , and other so-called reality programming. 
 And radio, as you will see in Chapter 6, has responded to years of declining levels 
of listenership and the loss of interest among its young core audience not with new, 
imaginative programming but with more homogenization, automation, and the disap-
pearance of local programming and news. Th e pressures on advertiser-supported 
media are somewhat diff erent from those on books and fi lm; with the latter two, read-
ers and moviegoers express their desires and tastes directly through the purchase of 
content (the books themselves and tickets, respectively). But media-literate people 
must ask why their exodus from a particular medium is not more often met with the 
presentation of better fare. Harry Potter shows that an audience that develops height-
ened expectations can and will have those expectations met.   
 The Harry Potter books have been best sellers, but they have also been the frequent target of people wanting to censor them 
from school libraries. You may never have read any of these works, but consider the possible reasons that parents might not want 
their children to read certain books without their knowledge and then answer the following questions. To do so will call into play 
important components of media literacy,  the development of an understanding of the ethical and moral obligations of those who 
make (and dispense) media content  and  the awareness of media content as “texts” that provide insight into our culture . Two media 
literacy skills are also involved,  the ability to distinguish emotional from reasoned reactions when responding to content  and  the 
ability to think critically about media messages . 
 Your challenge is to answer these questions. Is it ever okay for groups outside the school, parents or concerned citizens for 
example, to choose not to allow certain books in their schools? Why or why not? If you think it is appropriate to ask (or even 
insist) that movies, TV, video games, and recordings used in schools have warning labels or that parents who object to their 
children’s exposure to that content be allowed to “opt out,” would you hold books to those same controls? Should other in-school 
media be subject to greater control than books? Why or why not? Is it better to have children reading controversial books as long 
as it encouraged them to read or would it be better if those children were not reading at all? Which is the greater “evil?” You can 
approach this challenge as either an opportunity for personal reﬂ ection, committing your thoughts to paper, or you can set it up 
as a debate, for example the No Limits versus the Some Limits versus the Strong Limits.     
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE  
 Literacy: Limiting Access to Books in School 
68 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences

CHAPTER 3 
Books 
69

Outline the history and development of the publishing 
industry and the book itself as a medium. 
  Although the fi rst printing press came to the Colonies in 
1638, books were not central to early  colonial life, but 
books and pamphlets were at the heart of the colonists’ 
revolt against England in the 1770s. 
  Developments in the 18th and 19th centuries, such as 
improvements in printing, the fl owering of the American 
novel, and the introduction of the paperback, helped 
make books a mass medium. 

Describe the cultural value of books and the implications 
of censorship for democracy. 
   Books have cultural value because they are agents of so-
cial and cultural change; important cultural  repositories; 
windows on the past; important sources of personal de-
velopment; sources of  entertainment, escape, and per-
sonal refl ection; mirrors of culture; and because the 
purchase and  reading of a book is a much more individ-
ual, personal activity than consuming advertiser- 
supported or heavily promoted media. 
   Censorship, both formal and in the form of people’s 
own aliteracy, threatens these values, as well as 
 democracy itself.  

 Explain how the organizational and economic nature of the 
contemporary book industry shapes the content of books. 
   Convergence is reshaping the book industry as well as 
the reading experience itself through advances such as 
e-publishing, POD, e-books, e-readers, smartphones 
and tablets, and several diff erent eff orts to digitize most 
of the world’s books. 
  Conglomeration aff ects the publishing industry as it has 
all media, expressing itself through trends such as de-
mand for profi t and hypercommercialization. 
  Demand for profi t and hypercommercialization mani-
fest themselves in the increased importance placed on 
subsidiary rights, instant books, “ Hollywoodization,” 
and product placement. 
  Book retailing is undergoing change; large chains domi-
nate the business but continue to be challenged by 
imaginative, high-quality independent booksellers. 
Much book buying has also gravitated to the Internet. 

 Act as a more media-literate consumer of books, espe-
cially in considering their uniqueness in an increasingly 
mass-mediated, media-converged world. 
   Th e wild success of the Harry Potter series holds several 
lessons for media-literate readers, not the least of which 
is that people value quality media content. 
 Resources for Review and Discussion  
 REVIEW POINTS: TYING CONTENT TO LEARNING OUTCOMES 
 KEY TERMS 
 linotype, 51 
 off set lithography, 51 
 dime novels, 51 
 pulp novels, 51 
 aliteracy, 55 
 trade books,  57 
 e-publishing, 58 
 e-book, 58 
 print on demand (POD), 59 
 remainders, 59 
 e-reader, 59 
 platform agnostic publishing,  60 
 cottage industry, 61 
 subsidiary rights, 62 
 instant book, 63 
 QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW 
 1.  What were the major developments in the modernization of 
the printing press? 
 2.  Why were the early colonists not a book-reading population?  
 3.  What was the Stamp Act? Why did colonial printers object to it?  
 4.  What factors allowed the fl owering of the American novel, 
as well as the expansion of the book industry, in the 1800s? 
    5.  Who developed the paperback in England? In the United States?  
 6.  Name six reasons books are an important cultural resource.  
    7.  What are the major categories of books? 
    8.  What is the impact of conglomeration on the book industry?  
 9.  What are the products of increasing hypercommercialism 
and demands for profi t in the book industry? 
 10.  What are e-books, e-readers, and e-publishing? 
For further review, go to the LearnSmart study module for 
this chapter.
 QUESTIONS FOR CRITICAL THINKING AND DISCUSSION 
 1.  Do you envision books ever again having the power to 
move the nation as they did in Revolutionary or antislavery 
times? Why or why not? 
 2.  Are you proud of your book-reading habits? Why or why 
not? Th is chapter mentioned someone named Mark 
Twain. Who is this? 
    3.  Under what circumstances is censorship permissible? 
Whom do you trust to make the right decision about what 
you should and should not read? If you were a librarian, 
under what circumstances would you pull a book? 


 
71
 Learning Objectives 
 Newspapers were at the center of our nation’s drive for independence and have a long 
history as the people’s medium. The newspaper was also the ﬁ rst mass medium to rely on 
advertising for ﬁ nancial support, changing the relationship between audience and media 
from that time on. After studying this chapter you will be able to
 Outline the history and development of the newspaper industry and the newspaper 
itself as a medium. 
 Identify how the organizational and economic nature of the contemporary newspaper 
industry shapes the content of newspapers. 
 Describe the relationship between the newspaper and its readers. 
 Explain changes in the newspaper industry brought about by converging technologies 
and how those alterations may aﬀ ect the medium’s traditional role in our democracy. 
 Apply key newspaper-reading media literacy skills, especially in interpreting the 
relative placement of stories and use of photos. 
 The  Chicago Defender . Has reading the newspaper 
become old-fashioned? 
 Newspapers 4 

 Y OU STRUGGLE OVER YOUR APPLICATION. Th e last time you had to do something like this was four 
years ago when you were in high school; still, here you are, fi lling out paperwork, hop-
ing to get into graduate school. What’s making it especially tough, though, is your 
friends’ constant teasing. Grad school, they say, isn’t such a bad idea, but  journalism 
grad school!? Aren’t newspapers dying? Didn’t the Internet kill journalism? 
 But you know better. Yes, your friends are half right; thousands of newspaper jour-
nalists have lost their jobs in the last decade (Edmonds, Guskin & Rosenstiel, 2011). 
But you did your research. You also know that the Bureau of Labor Statistics reports 
that by 2016, entry-level positions for journalists will increase by 2% and the need for 
experienced writers and editors will grow by 10%. You also know that applications to 
journalism graduate programs are exploding (Herskowitz, 2011) because newspapers 
are not dead, they’re simply undergoing  disruptive transition  (remember to use that in 
your essay!). “Many young people seem to be excited by the turmoil in journalism and 
see it as an opportunity to get in on something new, rather than as a threat,” wrote one 
journalism school dean. “Th e main problem in journalism today lies on the supply 
side, not the demand side” (Lemann, 2009, p. B8). He’s right; people are reading more 
news than ever before, maybe not on paper, but they’re reading it; someone’s got to 
write it (remember to use this, too!).   
 And despite your friends’ skepticism, your research also showed you that most Amer-
ican newspapers remain fi nancially healthy, many not just surviving, but thriving (Muller, 
2011). So j-school it is. You want to be on the inside as the daily paper fi nds its new place 
in the tumultuous media environment.  Disruptive transition , man, that’s good!   
 In this chapter we examine that disruptive transition and what it means for the 
relationship between the newspaper and its readers. We start with a look at the medi-
um’s roots, beginning with the fi rst papers, following them from Europe to colonial 
America, where many of the traditions of today’s free press were set. We study the 
cultural changes that led to the creation of the penny press and to competition between 
these mass circulation dailies that gave us “yellow journalism.” 
 We then review the modern newspaper in terms of its size and scope. We discuss 
diff erent types of newspapers and the importance of newspapers as an advertising 
1600
1700
100 B.C.E.   ▲ Acta Diurna in Caesar’s Rome
1620   Corantos
    ~1625   Broadsides
1641   Diurnals
    ~1660   “Newspaper” enters the language
1665   Oxford Gazette
1690   ▲ Publick Occurrences Both Foreign and Domestick
1704   Boston News-Letter
1721   New-England Courant’s James Franklin jailed for “scandalous libels”
1729   ▲ Benjamin Franklin’s Pennsylvania Gazette
1734   The Zenger Trial
1765   Stamp Act
1791   The First Amendment to the Constitution
1798   The Alien and Sedition Acts
72 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences

1800
1900
2000
1827   The ﬁrst African American newspaper, Freedom’s Journal
1828   Cherokee Phoenix
1833   The penny press
1844   Introduction of the telegraph
1847   Frederick Douglass’s North Star
1856   The New York Associated Press
1883   Pulitzer’s New York World, yellow journalism
1889   ▲ Wall Street Journal
1905   ▲ Chicago Defender
1907   United Press International
1908   Christian Science Monitor
1909   International News Service
1970   Newspaper Preservation Act
1982   USA TODAY
2003   Readership Institute circulation study
2007   Murdoch buys Wall Street Journal
2009   Christian Science Monitor ceases daily publication; Rocky Mountain
 
News shuttered; Internet overtakes paper as news source
2011   ▲ Apple’s Newsstand
2012   Association of Alternative Newsweeklies becomes Association of
 
Alternative Newsmedia
medium. Th e wire and feature services, important providers of newspaper content, are 
also highlighted. 
 We then detail how the relationship between medium and audience is shifting as a 
result of the loss of competition within the industry, hypercommercialism in the guise of 
commercial pressure on papers’ editorial content, the positive and negative impacts of 
new and converging technology, the rise of online newspapers, and changes in the nature 
of newspaper readership. Finally, we test our media literacy skill through a discussion of 
how to read the newspaper—for example, interpreting the relative positioning of stories.  
 A Short History of Newspapers  
 Th e opening vignette makes an important point about contemporary newspapers—
they are in a state of disruption, but they are working hard to secure new identities for 
themselves in an increasingly crowded media environment. As a medium and as an 
industry, newspapers are poised at the edge of a signifi cant change in their role and 
operation. Th e changing relationship between newspapers and readers is part of this 
upheaval. And while it’s not uncommon to read or hear comments such as this one 
from Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer, “Th ere will be no media consumption left in 10 years 
that is not delivered over IP [Internet Protocol] network. Th ere will be no newspapers, 
no magazines that are delivered in paper form. Everything gets delivered in an elec-
tronic form” (in Dumenco, 2008, p. 48), newspapers have faced similar challenges more 
than once in the past and have survived.  
 The Earliest Newspapers 
 In Caesar’s time Rome had a newspaper. Th e  Acta Diurna    (actions of the day), written 
on a tablet, was posted on a wall after each meeting of the Senate. Its circulation was 
one, and there is no reliable measure of its total readership. However, it does show that 
people have always wanted to know what was happening and that others have helped 
them do so. 
CHAPTER 4 
Newspapers 
73

74 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 Th e newspapers we recognize today have their roots in 17th-century Europe. 
 Corantos , one-page news sheets about specifi c events, were printed in English in Hol-
land in 1620 and imported to England by British booksellers who were eager to satisfy 
public demand for information about Continental happenings that eventually led to 
what we now call the Th irty Years’ War. 
 Englishmen Nathaniel Butter, Th omas Archer, and Nicholas Bourne eventually 
began printing their own occasional news sheets, using the same title for consecutive 
editions. Th ey stopped publishing in 1641, the same year that regular, daily accounts 
of local news started appearing in other news sheets. Th ese true forerunners of our 
daily newspaper were called    diurnals   , but by the 1660s the word  newspaper had 
entered the English language (Lepore, 2009). 
 Political power struggles in England at this time boosted the fl edgling medium, as 
partisans on the side of the monarchy and those on the side of Parliament published 
papers to bolster their positions. When the monarchy prevailed, it granted monopoly 
publication rights to the  Oxford Gazette , the offi  cial voice of the Crown. Founded in 
1665 and later renamed the  London Gazette , this journal used a formula of foreign 
news, offi  cial information, royal proclamations, and local news that became the model 
for the fi rst colonial newspapers.  
 COLONIAL NEWSPAPERS  In Chapter 3 we saw how bookseller/print shops became the focal 
point for the exchange of news and information and how this led to the beginning of 
the colonial newspaper. It was at these establishments that    broadsides (sometimes 
referred to as    broadsheets   ), single-sheet announcements or accounts of events 
imported from England, would be posted. In 1690 Boston bookseller/printer (and cof-
feehouse owner) Benjamin Harris printed his own broadside,  Publick Occurrences Both 
Foreign and Domestick . Intended for continuous publication, the country’s fi rst paper 
lasted only one day. Harris had been critical of local and European dignitaries, and he 
had also failed to obtain a license.    
 More successful was Boston postmaster John Campbell, whose 1704  Boston News-
Letter survived until the Revolution. Th e paper featured foreign news, reprints of arti-
cles from England, government announcements, and shipping news. It was dull, and 
it was also expensive. Nonetheless, it established the newspaper in the Colonies. 
 Th e  Boston News-Letter  was able to survive in part because of government subsidies. 
With government support came government control, but the buildup to the Revolution 
helped establish the medium’s independence. In 1721 Boston had three papers. 
James Franklin’s  New-England Courant  was the only one publishing without author-
ity. Th e  Courant  was popular and controversial, but when it criticized the Massa-
chusetts governor, Franklin was jailed for printing “scandalous libels.” When released, 
he returned to his old ways, earning himself and the  Courant  a publishing ban, 
which he circumvented by installing his younger brother Benjamin as nominal pub-
lisher. Ben Franklin soon moved to Philadelphia, and without his leadership the 
 Courant  was out of business in three years. Its lasting legacy, however, was in prov-
ing that a newspaper with popular support could indeed challenge authority. 
 In Philadelphia, Benjamin Franklin established a print shop and later, in 1729, 
took over a failing newspaper, which he revived and renamed the  Pennsylvania 
Gazette . By combining the income from his bookshop and printing businesses 
with that from his popular daily, Franklin could run the  Gazette  with signifi cant 
independence. Even though he held the contract for Philadelphia’s offi  cial print-
ing, he was unafraid to criticize those in authority. In addition, he began to 
develop advertising support, which also helped shield his newspaper from gov-
ernment control by decreasing its dependence on offi  cial printing contracts for 
survival. Ben Franklin demonstrated that fi nancial independence could lead to 
editorial independence. It was not, however, a guarantee.    
    In 1734  New York Weekly Journal  publisher John Peter Zenger was jailed for crit-
icizing that colony’s royal governor. Th e charge was seditious libel, and the verdict 
was based not on the truth or falsehood of the printed words but on whether they 
had been printed. Th e criticisms had been published, so Zenger was clearly guilty. 
  The ﬁ rst daily newspaper to appear in the 13 
Colonies,  Publick Occurrences Both Foreign and 
Domestick , lasted all of one edition. 

CHAPTER 4 
Newspapers 
75
But his attorney, Andrew Hamilton, argued to 
the jury, “For the words themselves must be 
libelous, that is, false, scandalous and seditious, 
or else we are not guilty.” Zenger’s peers agreed, 
and he was freed. Th e case of Peter Zenger 
became a symbol of colonial newspaper inde-
pendence from the Crown, and its power was 
evident in the refusal by publishers to accept 
the Stamp Act in 1765 (see Chapter 3).   
 NEWSPAPERS AFTER INDEPENDENCE  After the Revolu-
tion, the new government of the United States 
had to determine for itself just how free a 
press it was willing to tolerate. When the fi rst 
Congress convened under the new Constitu-
tion in 1790, the nation’s founders debated, 
drafted, and adopted the fi rst 10 amendments 
to the Constitution, called the    Bill of Rights . 
Th e  First Amendment reads: 
 Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free 
exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the 
people peacefully to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.   
 But a mere eight years later, fearful of the subversive activities of foreigners sympa-
thetic to France, Congress passed a group of four laws known collectively as the    Alien 
and Sedition Acts . Th e Sedition Act made illegal writing, publishing, or printing “any 
false scandalous and malicious writing” about the president, Congress, or the federal 
government. So unpopular were these laws with a people who had just waged a war 
of independence against similar limits on their freedom of expression that they were 
not renewed when Congress reconsidered them two years later in 1800. We will exam-
ine in detail the ongoing commitment to the First Amendment, freedom of the press, 
and open expression in the United States in Chapter 14.    
 The Modern Newspaper Emerges 
 At the turn of the 19th century, New York City provided all the 
ingredients necessary for a new kind of audience for a new 
kind of newspaper and a new kind of journalism. Th e island 
city was densely populated, a center of culture, commerce, 
and politics, and especially because of the wave of immigrants 
that had come to its shores, demographically diverse. Add to 
this growing literacy among working people, and conditions 
were ripe for the    penny press , one-cent newspapers for 
everyone. Benjamin Day’s September 3, 1833, issue of the  New 
York Sun  was the fi rst of the penny papers. Day’s innovation 
was to sell his paper so inexpensively that it would attract a 
large readership, which could then be “sold” to advertisers. 
Day succeeded because he anticipated a new kind of reader. 
He fi lled the  Sun ’s   pages with police and court reports, crime 
stories, entertainment news, and human interest stories. 
Because the paper lived up to its motto, “Th e Sun shines for 
all,” there was little of the elite political and business informa-
tion that had characterized earlier papers.    
 Soon there were penny papers in all the major cities. 
Among the most important was James Gordon Bennett’s  New 
York Morning Herald . Although more sensationalistic than the 
 Sun , the  Herald  pioneered the correspondent system, placing 
 Benjamin Franklin published America’s ﬁ rst 
political cartoon—“Join, or Die,” a rallying call for 
the Colonies—in his  Pennsylvania Gazette in 1754.
  Volume 1, Number 1 of Benjamin Day’s  New 
York Sun , the ﬁ rst of the penny papers. 

76 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
reporters in Washington, D.C., and other major U.S. cities as well as abroad. Corre-
spondents fi led their stories by means of the telegraph, invented in 1844. Horace Greeley’s 
 New York Tribune  was an important penny paper as well. Its nonsensationalistic, 
issues-oriented, and humanitarian reporting established the mass newspaper as a 
powerful medium of social action.  
 THE PEOPLE’S MEDIUM  People typically excluded from the social, cultural, and political 
mainstream quickly saw the value of the mass newspaper. Th e fi rst African American 
newspaper was  Freedom’s Journal , published initially in 1827 by John B. Russwurm and 
the Reverend Samuel Cornish. Forty others soon followed, but it was Frederick Douglass 
who made best use of the new mass circulation style in his newspaper  Th e Ram’s Horn , 
founded expressly to challenge the editorial policies of Benjamin Day’s  Sun . Although 
this particular eff ort failed, Douglass had established himself and the minority press 
as a viable voice for those otherwise silenced. Douglass’s  North Star , founded in 1847 
with the masthead slogan “Right is of no Sex—Truth is of no Color—God is the Father 
of us all, and we are all Brethren,” was the most infl uential African American newspa-
per before the Civil War. 
 Th e most infl uential African American newspaper after the Civil War, and the fi rst 
black   paper to be a commercial success (its predecessors typically were subsidized by 
political and church groups), was the  Chicago Defender . First published on May 5, 
1905, by Robert Sengstacke Abbott, the  Defender  eventually earned a nationwide cir-
culation of more than 230,000. Especially after Abbott declared May 15, 1917, the start 
of “the Great Northern Drive,” the  Defender’s  central editorial goal was to encourage 
southern black people to move north. 
 “I beg of you, my brothers, to leave that benighted land. You are free men. . . . Get 
out of the South,” Abbott editorialized (as quoted in Fitzgerald, 1999, p. 18). Th e paper 
would regularly contrast horrifi c accounts of southern lynchings with northern African 
American success stories. Within two years of the start of the Great Drive, more than 
500,000 former slaves and their families moved north. Within two more years, another 
500,000 followed. 
 Native Americans found early voice in papers such as the  Cherokee Phoenix , 
founded in 1828 in Georgia, and the  Cherokee Rose Bud , which began operation 20 
years later in Oklahoma. Th e rich tradition of the Native American newspaper is main-
tained today around the country in publications such as the Oglala Sioux  Lakota 
Times  and the Shoshone–Bannock  Sho-Ban News , as well as on the World Wide Web. 
For example, the  Cherokee Observer is at  www.cherokeeobserver.org ; the  Navajo 
Times is at  navajotimes.com ; and  News from Indian Country  can be found at  www
.indiancountrynews.com . 
 Th roughout this early period of the popularization of the newspaper, numerous 
 foreign-language dailies also began operation, primarily in major cities in which immi-
grants tended to settle. Sloan, Stovall, and Startt (1993) report that in 1880 there were 
more than 800 foreign-language newspapers publishing in German, Polish, Italian, 
Spanish, and various Scandinavian languages. As you’ll see later in this chapter, the mod-
ern foreign language press and its close cousin, the alternative press, are enjoying sig-
nifi cant success in today’s era of fl at or falling readership for more mainstream papers.   
 THE FIRST WIRE SERVICES  In 1848, six large New York papers, including the  Sun , the  Herald , 
and the  Tribune , decided to pool eff orts and share expenses collecting news from for-
eign ships docking at the city’s harbor. After determining rules of membership and 
other organizational issues, in 1856 the papers established the fi rst news-gathering 
(and distribution) organization, the New York Associated Press. Other domestic    wire 
services    followed—the Associated Press in 1900, the United Press in 1907, and the 
International News Service in 1909. 
 Th is innovation, with its assignment of correspondents to both foreign and domes-
tic bureaus, had a number of important implications. First, it greatly expanded the 
breadth and scope of coverage a newspaper could off er its readers. Th is was a boon to 
dailies wanting to attract as many readers as possible. Greater coverage of distant 
domestic news helped unite an expanding country while encouraging even more 

CHAPTER 4 
Newspapers 
77
expansion. Th e United States was a nation of immigrants, and news from people’s 
homelands drew more readers. Second, the nature of reporting began to change. 
Reporters could now produce stories by rewriting—sometimes a little, sometimes a 
lot—the actual on-the-spot coverage of others. Finally, newspapers were able to reduce 
expenses (and increase profi ts) because they no longer needed to have their own 
reporters in all locations.   
 YELLOW JOURNALISM  In 1883 Hungarian immigrant Joseph Pulitzer bought the troubled 
 New York World . Adopting a populist approach to the news, he brought a crusading, 
activist style of coverage to numerous turn-of-the-century social problems—growing 
slums, labor tensions, and failing farms, to name a few. Th e audience for his “new 
journalism” was the “common man,” and he succeeded in reaching readers with light, 
sensationalistic news coverage, extensive use of illustrations, and circulation-building 
stunts and promotions (for example, an around-the-world balloon fl ight). Ad revenues 
and circulation fi gures exploded. 
 Soon there were other new journalists. William Randolph Hearst applied Pulitzer’s 
successful formula to his  San Francisco Examiner , and then in 1895 he took on Pulitzer 
himself in New York. Th e competition between Hearst’s  Morning Journal  and Pulitzer’s 
 World  was so intense that it debased newspapers and journalism as a whole, which is 
somewhat ironic in that Pulitzer later founded the prize for excellence in journalism 
that still bears his name. 
 Drawing its name from the Yellow Kid, a popular cartoon character of the time, 
 yellow journalism    was a study in excess—sensational sex, crime, and disaster news; 
giant headlines; heavy use of illustrations; and reliance on cartoons and color. It was 
  Several of yellow journalism’s excesses—
dramatic graphics, bold headlines, the reporting of 
rumor—are evident in this front page from Joseph 
Pulitzer’s  New York World . Many historians believe 
that the sinking of the  Maine was engineered by 
yellow journalist William Randolph Hearst, publisher 
of the  New York Morning Journal , in order to create a 
war that his papers could cover as a way to build 
circulation. 

78 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
successful at fi rst, and other papers around the country adopted all or part of its style. 
Although public reaction to the excesses of yellow journalism soon led to its decline, 
traces of its popular features remain. Large headlines, big front-page pictures, extensive 
use of photos and illustrations, and cartoons are characteristic even of today’s best 
newspapers. 
 Th e years between the era of yellow journalism and the coming of television were 
a time of remarkable growth in the development of newspapers. From 1910 to the 
beginning of World War II, daily newspaper subscriptions doubled and ad revenues 
tripled. In 1910 there were 2,600 daily papers in the United States, more than at any 
time before or since. In 1923, the American Society of Newspaper Editors issued the 
“Canons of Journalism and Statement of Principles” in an eff ort to restore order and 
respectability after the yellow era. Th e opening sentence of the Canons was, “Th e right 
of a newspaper to attract and hold readers is restricted by nothing but considerations 
of public welfare.” Th e wire services internationalized. United Press International 
started gathering news from Japan in 1909 and was covering South America and 
Europe by 1921. In response to the competition from radio and magazines for advertis-
ing dollars, newspapers began consolidating into    newspaper chains —papers in dif-
ferent cities across the country owned by a single company. Hearst and Scripps were 
among the most powerful chains in the 1920s. For all practical purposes, the modern 
newspaper had now emerged. Th e next phase of the medium’s life, as we’ll soon see, 
begins with the coming of television.      
 Newspapers and Their Audiences  
 Nearly 46 million newspapers are sold daily in the United States, and 44% of Americans 
report reading a paper or its website every day, 69% at least once a week (Newspaper 
Association of America, 2011). Th e industry that serves those readers looks quite dif-
ferent from the one that operated before television became a dominant medium. Th ere 
are now fewer papers. Th ere are now diff erent types of papers. Th ey deliver the news 
on diff erent platforms, and more newspapers are part of large chains. 
 Th e advent of television at the end of World War II coincided with several important 
social and cultural changes in the United States. Shorter work hours, more leisure, 
more expendable cash, movement to the suburbs, and women joining the workforce 
in greater numbers all served to alter the newspaper–reader relationship. When the 
war ended, each 100 American households bought a daily average of 140 papers; today 
those 100 homes average fewer than 50 (Fallows, 2010). 
 Today, Americans may well buy 46 million papers every day, but in 1970, they 
bought 62.1 million. Th e number of daily newspapers also continues to fall. Th ere were 
more than 1,600 in 1990; the current total is around 1,400. In 2008, the  Baltimore 
Examiner, New York Sun, Albuquerque Tribune, Cincinnati Post, Kentucky Post , and 
 Birmingham Post-Herald closed shop. In 2009 Denver’s 150-year-old  Rocky Mountain 
News  folded and the 146-year-old  Seattle Post-Intelligencer  converted to Web-only. Th e 
101-year-old  Christian Science Monitor  also shut down its print operation to become 
an online daily and a weekend newsmagazine. Circulation has suff ered 10 consecutive 
years of decline, and ad revenues are falling at a double-digit pace. Today’s newspapers 
are buff eted by technological and economic change like no other traditional medium.    
 Scope and Structure of the 
Newspaper Industry  
 Today there are more than 9,800 newspapers operating in the United States. Of these, 
15% are dailies and the rest are weeklies (77%) and semiweeklies (8%). Th ey have a 
combined circulation of nearly 130 million.    Pass-along readership —readers who did 
not originally purchase the paper—brings 104 million people a day in touch with a 

CHAPTER 4 
Newspapers 
79
daily and 200 million a week in touch with a weekly. But as we’ve seen, overall print 
circulation is falling despite a growing population. Th erefore, to have success and to 
ensure their future, newspapers have had to adjust.  
 Types of Newspapers 
 We’ve cited statistics about dailies and weeklies, but these categories actually include 
many diff erent types of papers. Let’s take a closer look at some of them.  
 NATIONAL DAILY NEWSPAPERS  We typically think of the newspaper as a local medium, our 
town’s paper. But two national daily newspapers enjoy large circulations and signifi -
cant social and political impact. Th e older and more respected is the  Wall Street 
 Journal , founded in 1889 by Charles Dow and Edward Jones. Today, as then, its focus 
is on the world of business, although its defi nition of business is broad. Th e  Journal
has a circulation of 2 million, and an average household income of its readers of 
$150,000 makes it a favorite for upscale advertisers. In 2007 it became part of Rupert 
Murdoch’s News Corp. media empire. 
 Th e other national daily is  USA Today . Founded in 1982, it calls itself “Th e Nation’s 
Newspaper,” and despite early derision from industry pros for its lack of depth and 
 Journalist Chris Hedges wrote, “The death of newsprint represents the end 
of an era. And news gathering will not be replaced by the Internet. Journal-
ism, at least on the large scale of old newsrooms, is no longer commercially 
viable. Reporting is time-consuming and labor-intensive. It requires going 
out and talking to people. It means doing this every day. It means looking 
constantly for sources, tips, leads, documents, informants, whistle-blowers, 
new facts and information, untold stories and news. Reporters often spend 
days ﬁ nding little or nothing of signiﬁ cance. The work can be tedious and is 
expensive. And as the budgets of large metropolitan dailies shrink, the very trade of report-
ing declines.” Another reporter, Gary Kamiya, explained why the Internet is not a worthy 
substitute, “What is really threatened by the decline of newspapers and the related rise of 
online media is reporting—on-the-ground reporting by trained journalists who know the 
subject, have developed sources on all sides, strive for objectivity, and are working with 
 editors who check their facts, steer them in the right direction, and are a further check 
against unwarranted assumptions, sloppy thinking and reporting, and conscious or uncon-
scious bias” (2009). And yet although “one third of the newspaper newsrooms in America 
have disappeared,” said Charles Lewis of the Investigative Reporting Workshop, “the papers 
still must cover their markets; they need content” (in Herskowitz, 2011, p. 58). 
   Over the last several years, hundreds of nonproﬁ t newsrooms—staﬀ ed by veteran and 
newly minted professional journalists—have sprung up to ﬁ ll the void, hoping to make a 
diﬀ erence. Some are funded by foundations, some by voluntary payments from their for-
proﬁ t media partners, and some, Spot.us for example, practice    crowdfunded journalism , 
where journalists pitch stories to readers who contribute small amounts of money to those 
they want to see completed. Large investigative reporting nonproﬁ ts ProPublica and the 
Center for Public Integrity are backed by major philanthropies like the Ford and Knight Foun-
dations. And while some nonproﬁ t newsrooms are small and serve local communities and 
local media—for example Backyard News, serving six Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, suburbs, 
and GrossePointToday.com in Michigan—many maintain partnerships with major national 
media. The  New York Times  uses the work of nonproﬁ t newsrooms in Chicago, San Francisco, 
and other locations to strengthen its reporting in those locales. In addition to the  Times , 
major media outlets such as  60 Minutes , National Public Radio, Salon,  USA Today , NBC-
owned television stations, the  Los Angeles Times ,  Bloomberg Businessweek , and the  Wash-
ington Post  make regular use of several nonproﬁ ts’ investigative reporting on controversial 
and expensive investigations into issues like natural gas drilling, abuse of federal stimulus 
dollars, and the failure of many of the nation’s coroner and medical exam-
iner oﬃ  ces. Have nonproﬁ t newsrooms made a diﬀ erence ? “We can get to 
do the kind of investigative and enterprise stories we wouldn’t be able to 
singularly,” says public radio’s Bill Davis (in Rainey, 2011). The Center for 
Public Integrity “has won over 40 national journalism awards. ProPublica 
has won two Pulitzer Prizes, and they’ve been around only since 2008. The Center for Inves-
tigative Reporting, started in ’77, has also won dozens of national journalism awards” 
 (Herskowitz, 2011, p. 61). Columbia  Journalism Review  maintains a list of more than 200 
nonproﬁ t newsrooms at www.cjr.org/the_news_frontier_database/. 
 USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE 
 Nonproﬁ t Newsrooms 
Fill the Reporting Void 
 “The papers still must cover their markets; 
they need content.” 
 ProPublica, started in 2008, has won two Pulitzer Prizes.

80 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
apparent dependence on style over substance, “it shed its lightweight ‘McPaper’ per-
sona in the 1990s, becoming a serious national paper and luring topfl ight talent from 
places like the  Washington Post ” (Smolkin, 2004, p. 20). Today, the paper’s daily circu-
lation of 1.8 million suggests that readers welcome its mix of short, lively, upbeat sto-
ries; full-color graphics; state-by-state news and sports briefs; and liberal use of 
easy-to-read illustrated graphs and tables.   
 LARGE METROPOLITAN DAILIES  To be a daily, a paper must be published at least fi ve times a 
week. Th e circulation of big-city dailies has dropped over the past 30 years, with the 
heavy losses of the evening papers off setting increases for the morning papers. Dailies 
continue to lose circulation at a rate approaching 10% a year (Rosenstiel & Mitchell, 
2011). Many old, established papers, including the  Philadelphia Bulletin  and the 
 Washington Star , have stilled their presses in recent years. When the  Chicago Daily 
News  closed its doors, it had the sixth-highest circulation in the country. 
 As big cities cease to be industrial centers, homes, jobs, and interests have turned 
away from downtown. Th ose large metropolitan dailies that are succeeding have used 
a number of strategies to cut costs and to attract and keep more suburban-oriented 
readers. Some publish    zoned editions   —suburban or regional versions of the paper—
to attract readers and to combat competition for advertising dollars from the suburban 
papers. But once-customary features like these zoned editions ( Providence Journal ), 
stand-alone book review sections ( Chicago Tribune, Washington Post ), weekly maga-
zines ( Los Angeles Times ), classifi ed sections ( Cincinnati Enquirer, Boston Globe ), even 
daily home delivery (Detroit’s two papers) are disappearing as papers big and small 
battle declining ad revenue and rising production and distribution costs. 
 Th e  New York Times  is a special large metropolitan daily. It is a paper local to New 
York, but the high quality of its reporting and commentary, the reach and depth of 
both its national and international news, and the solid reputations of its features (such 
as the weekly  Times Magazine  and the  Book Review ) make it the nation’s newspaper 
of record. Its circulation hovers between 900,000 and a million a day.   
 SUBURBAN AND SMALLTOWN DAILIES  As the United States has become a nation of transient 
suburb dwellers, so too has the newspaper been suburbanized. Since 1985 the number 
Local news
Coupons
National & international news
Habit
Obituaries
67%
85%
58%
37%
Columnists
33%
Other
12%
35%
Percentage who subscribe because of:
  Figure 4.1  Reasons People Subscribe to 
Their Local Paper. 
 Source:  Data Page, 2011b. 

CHAPTER 4 
Newspapers 
81
of suburban dailies has increased by 50%, and one, Long Island’s  Newsday , is the 11th 
largest paper in the country, with a circulation of 404,542. 
 Small-town dailies operate much like their suburban cousins if there is a nearby 
large metropolitan paper; for example, the  Lawrence Eagle-Tribune  publishes in 
the shadow of Boston’s two big dailies. Its focus is the Merrimack River Valley in 
 Massachusetts, 25 miles northwest of Boston. If the small-town paper has no big-city 
competition, it can serve as the heart of its community.  Figure 4.1  details the reasons 
people subscribe to their local paper. 
 WEEKLIES AND SEMIWEEKLIES  Many weeklies and semiweeklies 
have prospered because advertisers have followed them to 
the suburbs. Community reporting makes them valuable to 
those people who identify more with their immediate envi-
ronment than they do with the neighboring big city. Subur-
ban advertisers like the narrowly focused readership and 
more manageable advertising rates. 
 In fact, the thriving newspapers mentioned in this chap-
ter’s opening are primarily the suburban and small-town 
dailies and weeklies. Readers looking for national and inter-
national news have hundreds of online sources for that 
information. But those looking for local and regional news 
as well as the “holy trinity” of local information—high 
school sports, obituaries, and the police blotter—do not 
(Muller, 2011).  Figure 4.2  graphically presents the impor-
tance of the local paper in keeping people in touch with 
Local newspaper (print & Web)
Internet (search & social media)
Local TV (broadcast & Web)
Word of mouth
Radio 
17%
25%
12%
6%
Print bulletin or newsletter
4%
Other sources
8%
Mobile phone (apps & e-mail)
<2%
Local government (ofﬁce & Web)
<2%
5%
Percentage who learn about their local community from:
  High school sports, part of the “holy trinity” of 
local news buoying community papers’ bottom lines.  
  Figure 4.2  How People Learn about Their 
Local Community. 
 Source: Edmonds, Guskin, & Rosenstiel (2011). 

82 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
their communities, and you can read about the how and why of smaller papers’ suc-
cess in the box entitled “Smaller Is (Sometimes) Better.”           
 THE ETHNIC PRESS  One hundred and thirty U.S. cities are served by at least one Spanish-
language publication. Th is number remains constant as publications backed by English-
language papers, such as the Tribune Company’s  Hoy  (in several cities) and the  Dallas 
Morning News’s Al Día , join more traditional weekly and semiweekly independent 
Spanish-language papers, such as the nation’s several  La Voz Hispana  papers. Th is 
phenomenal stability is a result of three factors. First, the big dailies have realized, as 
have all media, that to be successful (and, in this case, to reverse long-standing 
declines in circulation) they must reach an increasingly fragmented audience. Second, 
at more than 18% of the population, self-described Hispanic or Latino people represent 
not only a sizable fragment of the overall audience but America’s fastest-growing 
minority group. Th ird, because the newspaper is the most local of the mass media, and 
nonnative speakers tend to identify closely with their immediate locales, Spanish- 
language papers—like most foreign-language papers—command a loyal readership, 
one attractive to advertisers who have relatively few other ways to reach this group. 
 African American papers, as they have for a century and a half, remain a vibrant part 
of this country’s    ethnic press   . African Americans represent about 12% of the total pop-
ulation. But because English is their native language, African Americans typically read 
mainstream papers. In fact, after whites, they represent the second-largest group of 
newspaper readers in the country. Still, 250 dailies, weeklies, and semiweeklies aim 
specifi cally at African Americans. And papers like the  Amsterdam News  in New York, 
the  Philadelphia New Observer , and the  Michigan Citizen  in Detroit specialize in urban-
based journalism unlike that found in the traditional mainstream dailies.    
 A robust ethnic press exists beyond Spanish-language and African American 
papers. For example, New York City is home to foreign-language papers serving 
nationalities speaking 50 diff erent languages—in the  B s alone there are Bangladeshi, 
Bosnian, Bulgarian, Brazilian, and Byelorussian. Th e  I s have Indian, Iranian, Irish, 
Israeli, and Italian. In addition, the United States is home to more than 200 other 
foreign language papers.   
 THE ALTERNATIVE PRESS  Another type of paper, most commonly a weekly and available at no 
cost, is the    alternative press . Th e off spring of the underground press of the 1960s 
antiwar, antiracism, pro-drug culture, these papers have redefi ned themselves. Th e 
most successful among them—the  Village Voice , the  L.A. Weekly , the  Boston Phoenix , 
  America’s foreign language readers are served 
by a robust ethnic press. 

CHAPTER 4 
Newspapers 
83
and the  Seattle Weekly —succeed by attracting upwardly mobile young people and 
young professionals, not the disaff ected counterculture readers who were their original 
audiences. Th eir strategy of downplaying politics and emphasizing events listings, local 
arts advertising, and eccentric personal classifi ed ads has permitted the country’s 165 
alternative weeklies to attract 25 million hard-copy and online readers a week. But this 
fi gure masks the fact that the number of hard-copy readers is in decline, as content 
once considered “alternative” and therefore not suited for traditional newspapers is 
quite at home on the Web. In response, most alternative papers have a Web presence, 
and there are now Web-only alternative “papers,” leading the industry trade group, the 
Association of Alternative Newsweeklies, to change its name in 2011 to the Association 
of Alternative Newsmedia (Anderson, Guskin, & Rosenstiel, 2012). 
 COMMUTER PAPERS  Modeled after a common form of European newspaper, free dailies 
designed for commuters are becoming commonplace in America’s biggest cities. Like 
you get these elsewhere? Do you even care? What if there really were no local newspapers? 
How diﬀ erent would your life be? Ask your parents and then your grandparents these same 
questions. How similar are their responses to your own? Why do you think you have diﬀ er-
ences or similarities? 
 CULTURAL FORUM 
 Smaller Is (Sometimes) Better 
 “Every American city and town has voters involved in the 
performance of the school system in which their children are 
educated, in the taxes they pay on their property, even the 
behavior of the local sheriff’s department. They vote on these 
on election day, and the only medium that informs them on 
these matters in any detail is the printed newspaper.” 
 Like dozens of papers across the country, the  Birmingham Eccentric , serving 
the Detroit suburb of Birmingham, was going to die. That put the value of 
small papers squarely into the cultural forum. 
 Founded in 1878 and purchased in 2005 by the Gannett chain, the 
 Eccentric’s  new owners were prepared to let the two-times-a-week, 7,000 
circulation paper expire. But local residents, “shocked at the idea of losing a 
touchstone of their community, began an ongoing eﬀ ort to save their paper” 
(Dellamere, 2009). Several thousand new readers subscribed at $52 a year, 
and local merchants, who spend the lion’s share of their advertising dollars on print and did 
not want to lose their primary advertising vehicle, recommitted themselves to the paper. 
 The Eccentric survived, but that came as no surprise to longtime journalist-turned- 
media-critic Ben Bagdikian (2004) who, early in newspapers’ current slide, wrote, 
 Newspapers have a unique social 
function that their media competi-
tors do not. They are crucial to 
American local civic life, which in 
turn, is a unique part of the U.S. 
political system. No other industrial 
democracy leaves to each com-
munity the control of its local 
schools, police, land use, and most 
taxes. In other countries these are 
national functions. Thus, every 
American city and town has voters 
involved in the performance of the school system in which their children are educated, in the 
taxes they pay on their property, even the behavior of the local sheriﬀ ’s department. They vote on 
these on election day, and the only medium that informs them on these matters in any detail is 
the printed newspaper. (p. 70) 
 Recent industry research supports Mr. Bagdikian’s esteem for local papers. In communi-
ties served by small papers (circulation under 15,000), 74% of the adults read the paper 
every week, spending nearly 40 minutes poring over it; 73% read “most or all” of it; 44% 
keep it around the house for 6 or more days; on average, they share it with more than 2.33 
friends; and, a full 94% pay for their papers (Survey, 2011; Muller, 2011). 
 Now enter your voice in the cultural forum. Is the newspaper so vital to the functioning 
of your local community that you can never see yourself without it? Do, or can, other media 
serve this function? But what about “local schools, police, land issues, and most taxes”? Can 
  Is there an  Eccentric in your life? To what lengths would you go to save it?   

84 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
MARCH 16-22, 2012 | RHODE ISLAND’S LARGEST WEEKLY | FREE

EHN8=:9:A>8:B7G68:
Six Star General’s Splinter | p 12
ART
67HIG68I
G:6ABH
‘ACQUIRE/
INQUIRE’ AT 
THE BANNISTER
_by Greg Cook 
p 14
I=:G:
L>AA7:
7ADD9
GWAR’S 
PLANS FOR 
THE 2012 
ELECTION
7A6C96B7>I>DC
Romney is the fight Obama doesn’t want
_by David S. Bernstein | p 7
NEWS
H>A:CI
HEG>C<
WHAT HR-375 
MEANS FOR 
OCCUPY
_by Lance Tapley 
p 8
5i]ZE]dZc^m#Xdb
THEATER
L6>I>C<;DGI=:7><76C<
THE GAMM’S APOCALYPTIC BOOM
_by Bill Rodriguez | p 16
8DB>8H8DCIGDK:GHN
The ProJo stifles ‘Doonesbury’ | p 6
I=>H
?JHI>C
 Meeting the needs of a fragmented 
audience—an alternative weekly and a free 
commuter paper. 
the most successful Spanish-language papers, they represent the major dailies’ eff ort to 
reach a segment of the audience not likely to buy the parent papers’ product. Here, 
though, the target is young readers (who are already used to getting free media from 
the alternative press and the Internet) and the goal is twofold. First, these readers 
represent a valuable demographic, one especially attractive to local advertisers, the 
newspaper’s bread-and-butter fi nancial base. Second, the big dailies hope these young 
readers will develop the daily newspaper-reading habit and will become regular news-
paper readers. Typical of the successful    commuter papers are the  Washington Post ’s 
Express  and the Tribune Company’s  amNewYork .                
 The Newspaper as an 
Advertising Medium  
 Th e reason we have the number and variety of newspapers we do is that readers value 
them. When newspapers prosper fi nancially, it is because advertisers recognize their 
worth as an ad medium. Newspapers account for 17.9% of all advertising spending in 
the United States, totaling $25.8 billion in 2011 (Sass, 2011b). Th e biggest newspaper 
advertisers are retail stores (such as Macy’s) and telecommunications, auto, computer, 
and entertainment brands. 
 Why do so many advertisers choose newspapers? Th e fi rst reason is their reach. 
Nearly 70% of all Americans read a newspaper in print or online every week, 4 out of 
10 every day, or the equivalent of a daily Super Bowl broadcast. Th e second is good 
demographics. Newspaper readers are white-collar employed adults (79%), have 
household incomes of over $100,000 (82%), and are college graduates (84%), exactly 
the kind of folks who have the levels of disposable income that advertisers covet 
 (Sigmund, 2010). Finally, newspapers are local in nature. Supermarkets, local car 
 dealers, department stores, movie theaters, and other local merchants who want to 
off er a coupon turn automatically to the paper. Approximately 65% of daily newspaper 
space is given to advertising. Of that space, 60% is devoted to local retail advertising 
and another 25% to classifi ed, which is overwhelmingly local. As a result, when asked 
which media most infl uence their product purchases, 57% said their local daily or 
Sunday printed paper, compared to 33.3% who said local television news and 28.1% 
who said local radio stations (Advertising Mediums, 2011). 

CHAPTER 4 
Newspapers 
85
 The News and Feature Services  
 Much of the 35% of the newspaper that is not advertising space is fi lled with content 
provided by outside sources, specifi cally the news and feature services. News services, 
as we’ve already seen, collect news and distribute it to their members. (Th ey are no 
longer called “wire” services because they no longer use telephone wires. Today mate-
rial is more likely to come by computer network or satellite.) Unlike the early days of 
the wire services, today’s member is three times more likely to be a broadcast outlet 
than a newspaper. Th ese radio and television stations receive voice and video, as well 
as written copy. In all cases, members receive a choice of material, most commonly 
national and international news, state and regional news, sports, business news, farm 
and weather reports, and human interest and consumer material.    
    Th e feature services, called    feature syndicates   , do not gather and distribute news. 
Instead, they operate as clearinghouses for the work of columnists, essayists, cartoon-
ists, and other creative individuals. Among the material provided (by wire, by com-
puter, or physically in packages) are opinion pieces such as commentaries by Ellen 
Goodman or Garrison Keillor; horoscope, chess, and bridge columns; editorial car-
toons, such as the work of Scott Willis and Ben Sergeant; and comics, the most com-
mon and popular form of syndicated material. Among the major syndicates, the best 
known are the  New York Times  News Service, King Features, Newspaper Enterprise 
Association (NEA), the  Washington Post  News Service, and United Feature Syndicate.    
 Trends and Convergence in 
Newspaper Publishing  
 Loss of competition within the industry, hypercommercialism, convergence, and the 
evolution of newspaper readership are altering not only the nature of the medium but 
also its relationship with its audiences.  
  Newspapers remain a powerful ad medium 
because their readers tend to be college-educated, 
white-collar-employed adults—the kinds of folks 
with a lot of disposable income. 

86 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 Loss of Competition 
 Th e newspaper industry has seen a dramatic decline in competition. Th is has taken 
two forms: loss of competing papers and concentration of ownership. In 1923, 502 
American cities had two or more competing (having diff erent ownership) dailies. 
Today, fewer than 20 have separate competing papers. With circulation and advertising 
revenues leveling out for urban dailies, very few cities can support more than one 
paper. Congress attempted to reverse this trend with the 1970 Newspaper Preservation 
Act, which allowed    joint operating agreements (JOAs)   . A JOA permits a failing paper 
to merge most aspects of its business with a successful local competitor as long as their 
editorial and reporting operations remain separate. Th e philosophy is that it is better 
to have two more or less independent papers in one city than to allow one to close. 
Six cities, including Detroit and Charleston, WV, currently have JOAs. 
 The concern behind the creation of JOAs was editorial diversity. Cities with only 
one newspaper have only one newspaper editorial voice. This runs counter to two 
long-held American beliefs about the relationship between a free press and its 
readers: 
 •  Truth fl ows from a multitude of tongues.  
 •  Th e people are best served by a number of antagonistic voices.    
 Th ese are the same values that fuel worry over concentration as well. What 
becomes of political, cultural, and social debate when there are neither multiple nor 
antagonistic (or at least diff erent) voices? Media critic Robert McChesney (1997) 
off ered this answer: “As ownership concentrated nationally in the form of chains, 
journalism came to refl ect the partisan interests of  owners and advertisers, rather 
than the diverse interests of any given community” (p. 13). Today, fi ve chains— 
Gannett (88 papers), Tribune (9), New York Times 
(20), Advance Publications (59), and Media News 
Group (54)—receive 54% of all newspaper indus-
try revenue (Morrison, 2011).    
 Chains are not new. Hearst owned several big-
city papers in the 1880s, but at that time most cit-
ies enjoyed significant competition between 
papers. Now that most communities have only 
one paper, nonlocal chain or conglomerate con-
trol of that voice is more problematic. Additional 
concern is raised about chain ownership when 
the chain is also a media conglomerate, owning 
several diff erent types of media outlets, as well as 
other nonmedia companies. Will the diff erent 
media holdings speak with one corporate voice? 
Will they speak objectively, and will they cover at 
all the doings of their nonmedia corporations? 
 Chains do have their supporters. Although 
some  critics see big companies as more commit-
ted to profi t and  shareholder dividends, others 
see chains such as McClatchy (77 papers), winner 
of numerous Pulitzer prizes and other awards, as 
turning expanded economic and journalistic 
resources toward better service and journalism. 
Some critics see outside ownership as uncommit-
ted to local communities and issues, but others 
see balance and objectivity (especially important 
in one-paper towns). Ultimately, we must recog-
nize that not all chains operate alike. Some oper-
ate their holdings as little more than profi t 
centers; others see profi t residing in exemplary 
  The Miami Herald, a McLatchy paper. Even though newspaper chains have their critics, defenders point to the 
McClatchy papers as an example of one chain that uses its size to good journalistic ends. 

CHAPTER 4 
Newspapers 
87
service. Some groups require that all their papers toe the corporate line; others grant 
local autonomy. Gannett, for example, openly boasts of its dedication to local man-
agement control.   
 Conglomeration: Hypercommercialism, Erosion of the Firewall, 
and Loss of Mission 
 As in other media, conglomeration has led to increased pressure on newspapers to 
turn a profi t. Th is manifests itself in three distinct but related ways—hypercommercialism, 
erasure of the distinction between ads and news, and ultimately, loss of the journalistic 
mission itself. 
 Many papers, such as  USA Today , the  New York Times , the  Orange County Register , 
and Michigan’s  Oakland Press  and  Macomb Daily , sell ad space on their front pages, 
once the exclusive province of news. Other papers, Rhode Island’s  Providence 
 Journal , for example, take this form of hypercommercialism halfway, affi  xing remov-
able sticker ads to their front pages. Many papers now permit (and charge for) the 
placement of pet obituaries alongside those of deceased humans. Th e  Southeast 
Missourian  sells letters-to-the-editor placement to those who want to support polit-
ical candidates.  
 A second product of conglomeration, say critics, is that the quest for profi ts at all 
costs is eroding the  fi rewall , the once inviolate barrier between newspapers’ editorial 
and advertising missions. Although they fi nd the position of “advertorial editor” at the 
 Fairbanks  (Alaska)  Daily News-Miner —whose salary is split equally between the news-
room and advertising department—strikingly inappropriate, most papers of all sizes 
face the same problem. For example, newsroom staff  at the  Daytona Beach News Jour-
nal , including reporters and editors, are asked to sell advertising in order to earn cash 
rewards for successful sales (Jackson, 2012). Th e  Long Beach  (CA)  Beachcomber sel-
dom sends reporters and/or photographers to staged events, but may do so, in the 
words of editor Jeff  Beeler, if they are “very newsworthy” or organized by “an advertiser 
in our newspaper [who] contribute(s) to the expense of those reporters and photogra-
phers” (Romenesko, 2012). 
 “Th ere’s defi nitely more interaction as newspapers have come under more fi nan-
cial pressure,” said Steve Proctor, deputy managing editor for sports and features at 
the  Baltimore Sun . “It used to be if you had a newspaper in town you were able to 
make a steady profi t. Now, like so many other things in the world, newspapers are 
more at the whim of the opinions of Wall Street analysts. Th ere’s a lot more pressure 
to increase the profi t margin of the paper, and so that has led to a lot more interplay 
between the newsroom and the business side of the paper” (quoted in Vane, 2002, 
pp. 60–61). Entrepreneur Mark Cuban, who made his fortune in the Internet’s early 
days, concurs: “Th e minute you have to run your business for share prices, you’ve 
lost. . . . What [newspapers] should do is step back and ask, ‘What makes us special?’” 
(Cuban Knows, 2006, p. 10). 
 Newspapers will die, say conglomeration’s critics, because they will have aban-
doned their traditional democratic mission, a failure all the more tragic because despite 
falling circulation, more newspapers might have remained fi nancially healthy had they 
invested rather than cut when times were good. William Falk (2005), editor in chief of 
newsmagazine  Th e Week , wrote that the medium’s demise 
 will be suicide. . . . Th e mammoth corporations that now run newspapers have responded 
to the new competitive challenge (of digital technologies) in the stupidest way possible: by 
cutting quality. Th ey’re eliminating foreign bureaus, investigative-reporting teams, and 
experienced editors, and fi lling their pages with shallow fi ller and bland features. Ambitious 
reporting and edgy writing are disappearing. Once-great newspapers . . . are now fl at and 
generic; their authority is leaking away. Th e corporate guys, who think only of pleasing Wall 
Street, keep cutting costs and boosting profi ts—and wringing their hands in puzzlement 
when circulation keeps going down. Guess what guys? People stop buying newspapers 
when there’s nothing in them that they don’t already know. (p. B7)   

88 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 In the era of record revenues and record profi ts, papers were laying off  staff , closing 
state and regional bureaus, hiring younger and less experienced reporters, and shrink-
ing their newsholes. Newspaper owners were so focused on profi t margins that the 
editors who worked for them were distracted from fi nding and running great stories. 
For example, in 1995, at the time the  Baltimore Sun  closed its 85-year-old, 86,000-
 circulation afternoon edition, it was achieving 37% profi t margins. Nonetheless, it fi red 
nearly 100 editors and reporters. “In the years before the Internet deluge, [these] men 
and women who might have made  Th e Sun  a more essential vehicle for news and 
commentary—something so strong that it might have charged for its product online—
were being ushered out the door so that Wall Street could command short-term prof-
its in the extreme,” wrote press critic John Nichols (2009, p. C5). Th e  Sun’ s owners, the 
Tribune Company, fi led for bankruptcy protection in 2008. Says Bill Marimow, two-
time Pulitzer Prize–winning investigative reporter and former editor of the  Sun , “When 
editors become focused on accounting rather than journalism, you have a problem for 
democracy” (in Outing, 2005).   
 Convergence with the Internet 
 Why so much talk about money? You and the new digital technologies are the two 
answers.  Barron’s  online columnist Howard Gold explained, “A crisis of confi dence 
has combined with a technological revolution and structural economic change to 
create what can only be described as a perfect storm. Print’s business model is 
imploding as younger readers turn toward free tabloids and electronic media to get 
news” (in Farhi, 2005, p. 52). It is the fear that the newspaper industry will fail to 
successfully weather the storm—Gold’s “crisis of confi dence”—that drives owners 
and their investors to cut out those characteristics—especially good journalism—that 
once defi ned newspapers. 
 Th e Internet has proven most directly fi nancially damaging in its attack on 
 news papers’ classifi ed advertising business. Before the Internet, classifi ed advertis-
ing was the exclusive domain of local newspapers. Today, the Net challenges 
 newspapers’ one-time dominance through commercial online classifi ed advertising 
sites (for example, eBay,  cars.com , and  traderonline.com ), advertisers connecting 
directly with customers on their own sites and bypassing newspapers altogether, 
and communitarian-minded (that is, free community-based) sites. Craigslist, for 
example, originating in San Francisco in 1995, is now in more than 500 cities across 
50 diff erent countries. More than half of all adult Americans now visit online clas-
sifi ed sites (Zickuhr, 2010). Advertising losses are most striking in employment and 
auto sales classifi eds (more than 50% in both categories at many papers). To coun-
ter career sites like  Monster.com , about one-third of the papers 
across the country created their own national service, Career-
Builder, which rivals Monster’s number of listings but not 
income. Two hundred  dailies  also have an affi  liation with 
Yahoo!’s HotJobs service. Another 75 work with competitor-
turned-partner  Monster.com . To counter online auto sales clas-
sifi ed sites, as well as real estate and general merchandise sites, 
virtually every newspaper in the country now maintains its own 
online classifi ed pages. Th ese eff orts, however, have done little 
to save newspapers’ one-time classifi ed dominance. 
 The problem of the loss of classified ad income is magnified 
by the exodus of young people, that highly desirable demo-
graphic, from print to electronic news sources. Only 12% of 
Americans newspaper readers between 10 and 34 years old 
read the printed paper, while another 79% access newspaper 
content online, on mobile devices, and on e-readers (Data 
Page, 2011c). Not only do the Internet and the World Wide Web 
provide readers with more  information and more depth, and 
  One of the more successful online newspapers. 
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, © September 7, 2010 Cox 
Newspapers. All rights reserved. Used by permission and 
protected by the copyright laws of the United States. The 
printing, copying, redistribution, or retransmission of the 
material without express written permission is prohibited. 
www.ajc.com 

CHAPTER 4 
Newspapers 
89
with greater speed, than the   traditional newspaper, but they empower readers to 
control and interact with the news, in essence becoming their own editors in chief. 
As a result, the traditional newspaper is reinventing itself by converging with these 
very same technologies.    
 Th e marriage of newspapers to the Web has not yet proved fi nancially successful 
for the older medium. Th e problem is replacing  analog dollars  with  digital dimes . 
In other words, despite heavy traffi  c on newspaper websites—average Americans 
spend more than half of their time online reading news, and over 111 million peo-
ple a month click in to a newspaper site—online readers simply are not worth as 
much as print readers (Sass, 2011a; Hendricks, 2012). In fact, to date, papers have 
been able to earn only one digital dime for every one analog (print) dollar they lose 
(Edmonds, Guskin, Rosenstiel, & Mitchell, 2012). Still, there are encouraging signs. 
And, in fact, the newspaper industry recognizes that it must accept economic losses 
while it is building online readers’ trust, acceptance, and above all regular and fre-
quent use. 
 Th e Internet Public Library lists and provides Web links to thousands of online 
newspapers for every state in the union and most foreign countries. Th ese papers have 
adopted a variety of strategies to become “relevant on the Internet.” Th e  Washington 
Post , for example, has joined with  Newsweek  magazine, cable television channel 
MSNBC, and television network NBC to share content among all the parties’ websites 
and to encourage users to link to their respective sites. Others have adopted just the 
opposite approach, focusing on their strength as local media. Th e  Boston Globe , for 
example, off ers readers  Boston.com , the  Miami Herald  Miami.com , and the  Kansas 
City Star  KansasCity.com . Each off ers not only what readers might expect to fi nd in 
these sites’ parent newspapers but also signifi cant additional information on how to 
make the most of the cities they represent. Th ese sites are as much city guides as they 
are local newspapers. 
 Th e local element off ers several advantages. Local searchable and archivable 
 classifi ed ads off er greater effi  ciency than do the big national classifi ed ad websites 
such as  Monster.com  and  Cars.com . No other medium can off er news on crime, 
 housing, neighborhood politics, zoning, school lunch menus, marriage licenses, and 
bankruptcies—all searchable by street or zip code. Local newspapers can use their 
websites to develop their own linked secondary sites, thus providing impressive detail 
on local industry. For example, the  San Jose Mercury News ’s  SiliconValley.com focuses 
on the digital industries. Another localizing strategy is for online papers to build and 
maintain message boards and chat groups on their sites that deal with important 
issues. One more bow to the power of the Web—and users’ demands for interactivity—
is that most papers have begun their own blog sites, inviting readers and journalists 
to talk to one another. 
 Despite all this innovation and the readership it generates (“Newspapers don’t 
have a demand problem,” said former Google CEO Eric Schmidt, “they have a business-
model problem”; in Fallows, 2010, p. 48), papers still face two lingering questions 
about their online success. Th e fi rst, as we’ve seen, is how they will earn income 
from their Web operations. Internet users expect free content, and for years news-
papers were happy to provide their product for free, simply to establish their pres-
ence on the Net. “Th e central economic challenge of a newspaper is printing and 
delivering the newspapers,” explains journalist and media executive Steven Brill. 
“Chopping down all these trees and printing and distributing is by far the biggest 
cost a newspaper has. So the Internet should have let newspapers get rid of their 
major cost. Instead, they decided to be online but do it for free, so they still do the 
newspaper, which they charge for, but not as many people want to buy it, because 
they can get it for free online” (in Th ornton, 2009, p. 2). So, newspapers have to fi x 
themselves. 
 Among those “fixes” are papers that rely on advertising for their online revenue. 
Many continue to provide free access, hoping to attract more readers and, there-
fore, more advertising revenue. Some papers even offer free online classifieds to 

90 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
draw  people to their sites (and their paid advertisers). Other papers, recognizing 
that the Internet surpassed print papers as a source of news in 2009 (Mindlin, 
2009), are experimenting with variations of a    paywall   , that is, making all or some 
of their content available only to those visitors willing to pay. Many papers, large 
and small, have strict paywalls;   readers gain access only by paying for it. The  Wall 
Street Journal ,  Boston Globe , and the  Newport  (RI)  Daily News  employ this method. 
The  New York Times  offers a  metered system . Print subscribers get all online content 
for free, but nonsubscribers are limited to a specified number of free stories before 
they have to pay. Some papers use micropayments, or the “iTune” model, asking 
online readers to pay a small fee, for example a dime for one story, a quarter for a 
whole issue. 
 All this activity, however, is taking place in the face of two realities of online news. 
First, if the story or information is available elsewhere on the Net for free, people are 
unlikely to pay anything, even a dime. Th erefore, whatever is behind the wall has to 
be unique. Second, 77% of Internet users say they will  never  pay to read online news-
papers (Whitney, 2010). Online newspaper optimists point out, however, that 23% of 
North America’s hundreds of millions of Internet users, each paying $5 to $10 a month, 
would provide signifi cant revenue for papers’ Web operations, and industry research 
indicates that many papers’ pre-paywall   “fears of precipitous drops in traffi  c just 
haven’t materialized” (Mitchell, 2011). 
 Th is raises a second question faced by online newspapers, How will circulation 
be measured? In fact, if visitors to a newspaper’s website are added to its hard-copy 
readership, newspapers are more popular than ever; that is, they are drawing readers 
in larger numbers than ever before. Th erefore, if many online papers continue to rely 
on a free-to-the-user, ad-supported model to boost their “circulation,” how do they 
quantify that readership for advertisers, both print and online? Industry insiders 
have called for a new metric to more accurately describe a paper’s true reach. “Cir-
culation,” they say, should be replaced by    integrated audience reach , the total num-
ber of readers of the print edition plus those unduplicated Web readers who access 
the paper only online. Th is is not insignifi cant given the heavy traffi  c enjoyed by 
newspaper websites.   
 Smartphones, Tablets, and e-Readers 
 We saw in Chapter 3 that nearly one in three Americans owns at least one e-reader or 
tablet. In addition, as 2012 opened, more than half of all U.S. mobile phone owners 
carried a smartphone, and industry predictions were that by the end of that year that 
proportion would be 90% (Fischer, 2011). Data such as these have added to the news-
paper industry’s optimism about its digital future. For example, 56% of tablet and 
e-reader owners and 51% of smartphone owners use their devices to read the news 
(Olmstead, Sasseen, Mitchell, & Rosenstiel, 2012), and when doing so they spend more 
time, visit more pages, and return more frequently than when reading on conventional 
computers (Mitchell, Rosenstiel, & Christian, 2012). “Th ere will always be improve-
ments in technology, but it’s hard to beat a lightweight, portable and highly legible, 
multimedia-driven delivery vehicle,” said American Society of News Editors president 
Ken Paulson, speaking specifi cally about tablets, “It’s a newspaper amplifi ed” (in Johnson, 
2012, p. 20). 
 Th e industry shares Mr. Paulson’s enthusiasm. Eighty-eight percent of U.S. newspa-
pers make their content available for mobile devices, up from just about half in 2009, 
and many predict that mobile platforms “will become the dominant form of reading 
the news within three years" (Audit Bureau of Circulations, 2011; Edmonds, Guskin, & 
Rosenstiel, 2011). In fact, some papers, the  Philadelphia Inquirer  and the  Philadelphia 
Daily  News,  for example, have begun subsidizing their readers’ purchase of tablets.  Th e 
Daily , a News Corp. iPad-only, completely paywalled daily newspaper, attracted 
100,000 paid subscribers in its fi rst year of operation, making it 2012’s top-grossing app 
(Walsh, 2012a). 

CHAPTER 4 
Newspapers 
91
 Access to newspapers on tablets and smartphones increased 
dramatically in late 2011 with the arrival of Apple’s Newsstand, 
a preinstalled folder on iPhones and iPads that allows users to 
stock its shelves with the apps of free and subscription publica-
tions which are then automatically delivered daily. Within a 
week of its introduction, the  New York Times ’s iPhone app was 
downloaded 1.8 million times, compared to 21,000 the week 
before; its iPad app was downloaded 189,000 times, a sevenfold 
increase over the previous week (Palser, 2011). iPad users alone 
spend more than $70,000 a day on newsstand papers and maga-
zines (Yarow, 2012).   
 Changes in Newspaper Readership 
 Newspaper publishers know well that newspaper readership in 
the United States is least prevalent among younger people. A 
declining number of young people reads a daily paper. “News-
paper readers are heading into the cemetery,” explained invest-
ment genius Warren  Buff ett, “while newspaper nonreaders are 
just getting out of college” (in Ambrose, 2007, p. B5). Look at 
 Figure 4.3 . Note the decline in newspaper readership, print and 
online, as people get younger. How do you feel about the fact that 
so few young people read the paper? Th e problem facing news-
papers, then, is how to lure young people (readers of the future) 
to their pages. Online and free commuter papers might be two solutions, but the 
fundamental question remains: Should newspapers give these readers what they 
 should  want or what they  do want? 
       Some newspapers confront this problem directly. 
Th ey add inserts or sections directed toward, and 
sometimes written by, teens and young people. Th is 
is good business. But traditionalists disagree with 
another youth-targeted strategy—altering other, 
more serious (presumably more important) parts of 
the paper to cater to the infrequent and non-newspaper 
reader. As more newspaper professionals adopt a 
market-centered approach in their pursuit of what 
media ethicist Jay Black (2001, p. 21) calls (fairly or 
unfairly?) the “bifurcating, self-indulgent, highly 
transient, and signifi cantly younger audiences whose 
pocketbooks are larger than their attention spans”—
using readership studies, focus groups, and other 
tests of customer satisfaction to design their papers—
they increasingly find themselves criticized for 
“cheapening” both the newspaper as a medium and 
journalism as an institution. 
 What happens to journalistic integrity, critics ask, 
to community service, to the traditional role of news-
papers in our democracy, when front pages are given 
over to reports of starlets’ affairs, sports heroes’ 
retirements, and full-color photos of plane wrecks 
because this is what younger readers want? As topics 
of interest to the 18- to 35-year-old reluctant reader 
and nonreader are emphasized, what is ignored? 
What happens to depth, detail, and precision as sto-
ries get shorter and snappier? What kind of culture 
develops on a diet of    soft news (sensational stories 
49.9%
57.1%
Over 54
years old
29.2%
18–34
years old
Percentage of Americans who
read the paper daily, print and/or online 
35–54
years old
  Figure 4.3  Newspaper Audience by Age, 2011. 
 Source:  Newspaper Association of America (2011). 
  Will Apple’s Newsstand “save” the newspaper? 

92 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
that do not serve the democratic function of journalism) rather than    hard news 
(stories that help citizens to make intelligent decisions and keep up with important 
issues of the day)? Molly Ivins offered a pessimistic answer. The late columnist 
suggested that newspapers aren’t dying; they’re committing suicide. “This is the 
most remarkable business plan,” she told  Editor & Publisher . “Newspaper owners 
look at one another and say, ‘Our rate of return is slipping a bit; let’s solve the 
problem by making our product smaller and less helpful and less interesting’” (in 
Nichols, 2007, p. 14). 
 The “softening” of newspapers raises a potential media literacy issue. The 
media-literate person has an obligation to be aware of the impact newspapers have 
on individuals and society and to understand how the text of newspapers offers 
insight into contemporary culture. We might ask ourselves: Are we getting what we 
asked for? What do we as a people and as individuals want from our newspaper? 
Do we understand the role newspapers play in our democratic process? Are we 
fully aware of how newspapers help shape our understanding of ourselves and our 
world? 
 In a 1787 letter, Th omas Jeff erson wrote to a colleague, “Were it left to me to 
decide whether we should have a government without newspapers or newspapers 
without government, I should not hesitate to prefer the latter.” Would he write that 
about today’s newspaper, a newspaper increasingly designed to meet the wants, 
needs, and interests of younger, occasional newspaper readers or those who do not 
read at all? 
 Th ere is another view, however—that there is no problem here at all. Ever since the 
days of the penny press, newspapers have been dominated by soft news. All we are 
seeing today is an extension of what has always been. Moreover, nonreaders are simply 
going elsewhere for the hard news and information that were once the sole province 
of newspapers. Th ey’re going online, to television, and to specifi cally targeted sources, 
including magazines and newsletters.     
  How far can newspapers go in attracting today’s 
young readers before the papers lose their identity? 
 David Horsey. © Tribune Media Services, Inc. All Rights 
Reserved. Reprinted with permission. 

CHAPTER 4 
Newspapers 
93
 Two elements of media literacy are  critical thinking skills enabling the development of independent judgments about media content  
and  strategies for analyzing and discussing media messages . Both are involved in this challenge. 
 Find the Web version of a newspaper with which you are familiar, its app-enabled version for your smartphone or tablet, 
and its dead-tree version, all from the same day. Compare the three. What content is common to all three? What content exists 
online or on mobile technology that is unavailable in the printed newspaper? 
 How would you characterize the Web-speciﬁ c content? The mobile-speciﬁ c content? That is, are there speciﬁ c types of content 
that seem to appear online and on mobile devices as opposed to appearing in the hard-copy version? Can you speculate why 
this might be? 
 How similar or diﬀ erent are the advertisers in the two electronic versions from those in the printed version? Do the Web and 
mobile versions have diﬀ erent advertisers? Can you speculate on why the similarities and diﬀ erences you found exist? Describe 
your experience reading the online and mobile newspapers. What did you like about it? What did you dislike? Do the same for 
the printed version. Despite the demographic trends that might suggest otherwise, do you think you could ever become a regu-
lar reader of the hard-copy newspaper? Why or why not?  
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE 
 Reading the Newspaper: Hard Copy vs. 
Online vs. Mobile  
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS   
 Interpreting Relative 
Placement of Stories 
 Newspapers tell readers what is signifi cant and meaningful through 
their placement of stories in and on their pages. Within a paper’s 
sections (for example, front, leisure, sports, and careers), readers 
almost invariably read pages in order (that is, page 1, then page 2, 
and so on). Recognizing this, papers place the stories they think 
are most important on the earliest pages. Newspaper jargon for 
this phenomenon has even entered our everyday language. “Front-
page news” means the same thing in the living room as in the 
pressroom. 
 Th e placement of stories on a page is also important (Figure. 4.4). 
English readers read from top to bottom and from left to right. 
Stories that the newspaper staff  deems important tend to be 
placed  above the fold and toward the left of the page. Th is is an 
important aspect of the power of newspapers to infl uence public 
opinion and of media literacy. As you’ll see in Chapter 13, relative 
story placement is a factor in    agenda  setting —the way news-
papers and other media infl uence not only what we think but what 
we think about. 
 A media-literate newspaper reader should be able to make judg-
ments about other layout decisions. Th e use of photos suggests the 
importance the editors assign to a story, as do the size and wording 
of headlines, the employment of  jumps  (continuations to other pages), 
and placement of a story in a given section. A report of a person’s 
death on the front page, as opposed to the international section or in 
the obituaries, carries a diff erent  meaning, as does an analysis of an 
issue placed on the front page as opposed to the editorial page. 
1
2
3
4
The Daily
Mass Communicator 
Most important
story
(Especially if
accompanied
by a photo)
Not quite as
important but
too signiﬁcant
for the inside
pages; can be
used for
attention-grabbing
soft news 
Next most
important
story
(Importance
can be
boosted
with a
photo) 
Least
important
front page story;
 can be used for
a report that
accompanies
one of the
above-the-fold
stories 
  Figure 4.4  Placement of Stories on a 
Typical Front Page.   

94 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 KEY TERMS 
 Acta Diurna, 73 
 corantos, 74 
 diurnals, 74 
 broadsides (broadsheets), 74  
 Bill of Rights, 75 
 First Amendment, 75 
 Alien and Sedition Acts, 75 
 penny press, 75 
 wire services, 76 
 yellow journalism, 77 
 newspaper chains, 78 
 pass-along readership, 78 
 crowdfunded journalism, 79 
 zoned editions, 80 
 ethnic press, 82 
 alternative press, 82 
 commuter papers, 84 
 feature syndicates, 85 
 joint operating agreement (JOA), 86  
 paywall, 90 
 integrated audience reach, 90 
 soft news, 91 
 hard news, 92 
 agenda setting, 93 
 QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW 
  1.  What are Acta Diurna, corantos, diurnals, and 
broadsheets? 
 2.  What is the signifi cance of  Publick Occurrences Both 
 Foreign and Domestick , the  Boston News-Letter , the  
New-England Courant , the  Pennsylvania Gazette , and 
the  New York Weekly Journal ? 
    3.  What factors led to the development of the penny press? 
To yellow journalism? 
 4.  What are the similarities and diff erences between wire ser-
vices and feature syndicates?  
    5.  When did newspaper chains begin? Can you characterize 
them as they exist today? 

Outline the history and development of the newspaper 
industry and the newspaper itself as a medium. 
  Newspapers have been a part of public life since Roman 
times, prospering in Europe, and coming to the Colonies 
in the 1690s. 
  Th e newspaper was at the heart of the American Revolu-
tion, and, as such, protection for the press was en-
shrined in the First Amendment. 
  Th e penny press brought the paper to millions of “regu-
lar people,” and the newspaper quickly became the 
 people’s medium. 

Identify how the organizational and economic nature of 
the contemporary newspaper industry shapes the con-
tent of newspapers. 
  Th ere are several types of newspapers, including na-
tional dailies; large metropolitan dailies; suburban and 
small-town dailies; weeklies and semiweeklies; ethnic 
and alternative papers; and free commuter papers. 
  Despite falling hard-copy readership, newspapers re-
main an attractive advertising medium. 
  Th e number of daily newspapers is in decline, and there 
are very few cities with competing papers. Chain owner-
ship has become common. 
  Conglomeration is fueling hypercommercialism, erosion 
of the fi rewall between the business and editorial sides 
of the newspaper, and the loss of the newspaper’s tradi-
tional journalistic mission. 

Describe the relationship between the newspaper 
and its readers. 
  Newspaper readership is changing—it is getting older, 
as young people abandon the paper for the Net or for 
no news at all. How newspapers respond will defi ne 
their future.  
  Localism, that is, providing coverage of material other-
wise diffi  cult to fi nd on the Internet, has proven success-
ful for many papers. 

Explain changes in the newspaper industry brought 
about by converging technologies and how those 
 alterations may aff ect the medium’s traditional role 
in our democracy. 
  Newspapers have converged with the Internet. Although 
most people read news online, still unanswered are 
questions of how to charge for content and how to mea-
sure readership. 
  Th e industry has found new optimism in the success of 
their mobile—smartphone, tablet, and e-reader— off erings. 

Apply key media literacy skills, especially in interpreting 
the relative placement of stories and use of photos. 
  Where content appears—factors such as what page a story 
is on, where on the page it appears, and the presence of 
accompanying photos—off ers signifi cant insight into the 
importance a paper places on that  content.  
  Th is relative placement of stories has infl uence on what 
readers come to see as the important news of the day. 
 Resources for Review and Discussion  
 REVIEW POINTS: TYING CONTENT TO LEARNING OUTCOMES    

CHAPTER 4 
Newspapers 
95
 6.  What are the diff erent types of newspapers?  
  7.  Why is the newspaper an attractive medium for 
 advertisers? 
 8.  How has convergence aff ected newspapers’ 
performance? 
 9.  What is the fi rewall? Why is it important?  
 10.  How do online papers succeed? 
For further review, go to the LearnSmart study module for 
this chapter.
 QUESTIONS FOR CRITICAL THINKING AND DISCUSSION 
 1.  Where do you stand on the debate over chains? Are they 
good or bad for the medium? 
 2.  Do you read an online newspaper? How would you 
 describe your experience? 
    3.  Compare your local paper and an alternative weekly. 
Choose diff erent sections, such as front page, editorials, 
and classifi ed ads. How are they similar; how are they 
 diff erent? Which one, if any, speaks to you and why?  

96 

 
97
5
Learning Objectives 
 Magazines were once a truly national mass medium, the television of their time. But 
changes in the nature of American society and the economics of mass media altered their 
nature. They are the medium that ﬁ rst made specialization a virtue, and they prosper today 
by speaking to even more narrowly deﬁ ned groups of readers. After studying this chapter 
you should be able to
 Describe the history and development of the magazine industry and the magazine 
itself as a medium. 
 Identify how the organizational and economic nature of the contemporary magazine 
industry shapes the content of magazines. 
 Describe the relationship between magazines and their readers. 
 Explain convergence of magazines with the Internet and mobile technologies. 
 Apply key magazine-reading media literacy skills. 
Magazines survive, even prosper, by meeting 
readers’ varied tastes.
 Magazines 

 GOURMET, THE CROWN JEWEL OF THE CONDÉ NAST MAGAZINE EMPIRE. You had arrived, working at one 
of the biggest and best of America’s consumer publications. It wasn’t an easy road, 
not by any stretch. Right out of college you went to work at  Men’s Vogue , the com-
pany’s prized new companion to  GQ . When it closed in January 2009, Condé Nast 
moved you, primarily because you were young, eager, and inexpensive, to   Domino , 
one of its shelter, or home, magazines, always a sure thing—people need homes. But 
when  Domino  died in March 2009 you were shuttled to the company’s experiment in 
high-end, extra-slick magazine publishing,  Portfolio . Launched in 2007, it would 
prove that upscale readers would pay for quality content. Th is was the kind of oppor-
tunity you had always dreamed of. When  Portfolio  shut down in April 2009 you were 
moved to  Cookie , the company’s off ering for moms with disposable income. When 
 Cookie  was put to rest in November 2009 you landed at  Gourmet . Safe at last. Th is 
venerable book has been around since 1941, longer than your parents, maybe even 
your grandparents!   
 You were shocked, then, when you left the meeting. Condé Nast was closing 
 Gourmet and relying on sister publication  Bon Appétit as its entry in the cooking cate-
gory.  Gourmet  had a higher circulation, you were told, but  Bon Appétit , focusing on 
food and entertainment, was less expensive to produce and sold more ad pages. Not 
to worry; you were still young, eager, and inexpensive, so the company would fi nd 
you a spot with one of its magazines’ Web divisions. CEO Charles Townsend assured 
you that the company was committed to developing digitized content across all its 
assets. “We expect to reach mostly new consumers with this digitized content, con-
sumers who have historically not selected magazines as their vehicle of choice for 
information and entertainment services,” he said (“Condé Nast Says,” 2010). But after 
this blow, do you really want to stay in the magazine business? It’s been a rough few 
years for the magazine biz. One hundred and fi fty-two magazines closed in 2011, 
another 176 in 2010, and a disastrous 596 in 2009 (Sass, 2011e). Th ere were some 
pretty big titles among the departed— Brides ,  Cosmo Girl ,  Playgirl ,  Country Home , 
 Teen . But maybe a magazine website would be a wonderful experience. Is that the 
future?  Advertising Age ’s Bob Garfi eld (2007) thinks so, because you are entering a 
1800
1850
1729   Ben Franklin’s Pennsylvania Gazette
1741–1794   45 new American magazines appear
1741   ▲ American Magazine, or a Monthly View of the Political State
               of  the British Colonies and General Magazine, and Historical 
               Chronicle, for All the British Plantations in America, the ﬁrst 
               American magazines
1821   ▲ Saturday Evening Post
1850   ▲ Harper’s
1857   Atlantic Monthly
1879   Postal Act
98 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences

“post-apocalyptic media world . . . in which Canadian 
trees are left standing and broadcast  towers aren’t” 
(p. 1). Th e fallen TV towers don’t bother you, but those 
living t rees mean dead magazines. Maybe the Web  is 
the way to go. But even there the data are mixed. Th e 
fi rst (and best) Web-only magazines,  Slate  and  Salon , 
have barely reached profi tability, and newer Web-only 
titles like  U.S. News Weekly  are too new to give you any 
clue. On the other hand, maybe print magazines have 
a future. Forbes just released  ForbesLife ; Time Warner 
launched  Style & Design ; Bloomberg introduced 
 Pursuits ; McGraw-Hill started a quarterly design maga-
zine,  HQ . All are from big-time operations, and all had 
warm receptions from readers. You just have to be good 
and patient. 
 Still, young people are increasingly consuming all 
media online, and in 2006 Internet advertising revenues 
surpassed those of magazines for the fi rst time (Ives, 
2006b). So online it is! No, wait! Th ere will always be a 
place for magazines! Like Time Inc. senior vice president John Squires said, “Th e tactile 
quality of a magazine, the ‘for me’ time that magazines represent, the ability to take it 
wherever you want, the ability to not have a screen blinking at you, I don’t think that’s 
easily substituted” (in Ives, 2007a, p. 44). 
 In this chapter we examine the dynamics of the contemporary magazine industry—
paper and online—and its audiences. We study the medium’s beginnings in the Colonies, 
its pre–Civil War expansion, and its explosive growth between the Civil War and World 
War I. Th is was the era of great mass circulation magazines, but it was also the era of 
powerful writers known as muckrakers. 
 Infl uenced by television and by the social and cultural changes that followed World 
War II, the magazine took on a new, more narrowly focused nature, which  provided 
1900
1950
2000
1906   Cosmopolitan’s “Treason of the Senate”
1910   Crisis
1914   Audit Bureau of Circulations founded
1922   Reader’s Digest
1923   ▲ Time
1925   New Yorker
1936   Consumers Union Reports
1939   NBC unveils TV at World’s Fair        
1956   Collier’s closes
1969   Saturday Evening Post closes
1971   Look closes
1972   Life closes
1994   Salon goes online
2005   ▲ Salon reaches proﬁtability
2006   Internet advertising surpasses magazine advertising
2007   Slate’s 1st full year of proﬁtability
2009   596 magazines close
2010   More magazines (193) start than close (176) 
2011   Apple's Newsstand
2012   Android app Premium
CHAPTER 5 
Magazines 
99
 Salon’s home page.
Salon.com screenshot featuring Jonathan Bernstein, “Dems 
Desert the Left.” http://www.salon.com/2012/04/27/dems_
desert_the_left. This article ﬁ rst appeared in Salon.com, at 
http://www.Salon.com An online version remains in the Salon 
archives. Reprinted with permission.” 

100 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
the industry with a growing readership and increased profi ts. We detail the various 
categories of magazines, discuss circulation research, and look at the ways the indus-
try protects itself from competition from other media and how advertisers  infl uence 
editorial decisions. Th e infl uence of convergence runs through all these issues. Finally, 
we investigate some of the editorial decisions that should be of particular interest to 
media-literate magazine consumers. 
 A Short History of Magazines  
 Magazines were a favorite medium of the British elite by the mid-1700s, and two 
prominent colonial printers hoped to duplicate that success in the New World. In 
1741 in Philadelphia, Andrew Bradford published  American Magazine, or a Monthly 
View of the Political State of the British Colonies , followed by Benjamin Franklin’s 
 General Magazine, and Historical Chronicle, for All the British Plantations in 
 America . Composed largely of reprinted British material, these publications were 
expensive and aimed at the small number of literate colonists. Without an orga-
nized postal system, distribution was difficult, and neither magazine was success-
ful.  American Magazine  produced three issues;  General Magazine , six. Yet between 
1741 and 1794, 45 new magazines appeared, although no more than three were 
published in the same time period. Entrepreneurial printers hoped to attract edu-
cated, cultured, moneyed gentlemen by copying the successful London magazines. 
Even after the Revolutionary War, U.S. magazines remained clones of their British 
forerunners.  
 The Early Magazine Industry 
 In 1821 the  Saturday Evening Post  appeared; starting life as 
Ben Franklin’s  Pennsylvania Gazette  in 1729, it was to con-
tinue for the next 148 years. Among other successful early 
magazines were  Harper’s  (1850) and  Atlantic Monthly 
(1857). Cheaper printing and growing literacy fueled expan-
sion of the magazine as they had the book (see Chapter 3). 
But an additional factor in the success of the early maga-
zines was the spread of social movements such as abolition-
ism and labor reform. Th ese issues provided compelling 
content, and a boom in magazine publishing began. In 1825 
there were 100 magazines in operation; by 1850 there were 
600. Because magazine articles increasingly focused on 
matters of importance to U.S. readers, magazines such as 
the  United States Literary Gazette  and  American Boy began 
to look less like London publications and more like a new 
and unique product. Journalism historians John Tebbel and 
Mary Ellen Zuckerman (1991) called this “the time of 
 signifi cant beginnings” (p. 13); it was during this time that 
the magazine developed many of the characteristics we 
associate with it even today. Magazines and the people who 
staff ed them began to clearly diff erentiate themselves from 
other publishing endeavors (such as books and newspa-
pers). Th e concept of specialist writers took hold, and their 
numbers rose. In addition, numerous and detailed illustra-
tions began to fi ll the pages of magazines.     
 Still, these early magazines were aimed at a literate elite 
interested in short stories, poetry, social commentary, and 
essays. Th e magazine did not become a true national mass 
medium until after the Civil War.   
 This McClure’s cover captures the spirit of the 
Roaring Twenties as well as the excitement of the 
burgeoning magazine industry.

CHAPTER 5 
Magazines 
101
 The Mass Circulation Era 
 Th e modern era of magazines can be divided into two parts, each 
characterized by a diff erent relationship between medium and 
audience. 
 Mass circulation popular magazines began to prosper in the 
post–Civil War years. In 1865 there were 700 magazines publishing; 
by 1870 there were 1,200; by 1885 there were 3,300. Crucial to this 
expansion was the women’s magazine. Suff rage— women’s right to 
vote—was the social movement that occupied its pages, but a good 
deal of content could also be described as how-to for homemakers. 
Advertisers, too, were eager to appear in the new women’s maga-
zines, hawking their brand-name products. First appearing at this 
time are several magazines still  familiar today, including  Ladies’ 
Home Journal  and  Good Housekeeping . 
 Th ere were several reasons for this phenomenal growth. As with 
books, widespread literacy was one reason. But the Postal Act of 
1879, which permitted mailing magazines at cheap second-class 
postage rates, and the spread of the railroad, which carried people 
and publications westward from the East Coast, were two others. A 
fourth was the reduction in cost. As long as magazines sold for 35 
cents—a lot of money for the time—they were read largely by the 
upper class. However, a circulation war erupted between giants 
 McClure’s, Munsey’s Magazine , and the  Saturday Evening Post . Soon 
they, as well as  Ladies’ Home Journal, McCall’s, Woman’s Home Companion, Collier’s , 
and  Cosmopolitan , were selling for as little as 10 and 15 cents, which brought them 
within reach of many working people.    
 Th is 1870s price war was made possible by the newfound ability of magazines 
to attract growing amounts of advertising. As we’ll see in Chapter 12, social and demo-
graphic changes in the post–Civil War era—urbanization, industrialization, the spread 
of roads and railroads, and development of consumer brands and 
brand names— produced an explosion in the number of advertising 
agencies. Th ese agencies needed to place their messages some-
where. Magazines were the perfect outlet because they were read 
by a large, national audience. As a result, circulation—rather than 
reputation, as had been the case before—became the most impor-
tant factor in setting advertising rates. Magazines kept cover prices 
low to ensure the large readerships coveted by advertisers. Th e fi fth 
reason for the enormous growth in the number of magazines was 
industrialization, which provided people with leisure and more 
personal income. 
 Magazines were truly America’s fi rst  national  mass medium, and 
like books they served as an important force in social change, espe-
cially in the    muckraking    era of the fi rst decades of the 20th cen-
tury. Th eodore Roosevelt coined this label as an insult, but the 
muckrakers wore it proudly, using the pages of  Th e Nation, Harper’s 
Weekly , the  Arena , and even mass circulation publications such as 
 McClure’s  and  Collier’s  to agitate for change. Th eir targets were the 
powerful. Th eir benefi ciaries were the poor. 
 Th e mass circulation magazine grew with the nation. From the 
start there were general interest magazines such as the  Saturday 
Evening Post , women’s magazines such as  Good Housekeeping , 
 pictorial magazines such as  Life  and  Look , and digests such as 
 Reader’s Digest , which was fi rst published in 1922 and off ered 
 condensed and tightly edited articles for people on the go in the 
Roaring Twenties. What these magazines all had in common was 
the size and breadth of readership. Th ey were mass market, mass 
 The ﬁ rst issue of Time.
 Much respected today, Harper’s gave early voice 
to the muckrakers and other serious observers of 
politics and society.

102 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
circulation publications, both national and aff ordable. As such, magazines helped 
unify the nation. Th ey were the television of their time—the dominant advertising 
medium, the primary source for nationally distributed news, and the preeminent pro-
vider of visual, or photo,  journalism. 
 Between 1900 and 1945, the number of families who subscribed to one or more 
magazines grew from 200,000 to more than 32 million. New and important magazines 
continued to appear throughout these decades. For example, African American intel-
lectual W. E. B. DuBois founded and edited the  Crisis  in 1910 as the voice of the 
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP).  Time  was fi rst 
published in 1923. Its brief review of the week’s news was immediately popular (it was 
originally only 28 pages long). It made a profi t within a year. Th e  New Yorker , “the 
world’s best magazine,” debuted in 1925. 
 The Era of Specialization 
 In 1956  Collier’s  declared bankruptcy and became the fi rst mass circulation maga-
zine to cease publication. But its fate, as well as that of other mass circulation mag-
azines, had actually been sealed in the late 1940s and 1950s following the end of 
World War II. Profound alterations in the nation’s culture—and, in particular, the 
advent of television—changed the relationship between magazines and their audi-
ence. No matter how large their circulation, magazines could not match the reach of 
television. Magazines did not have moving pictures or visual and oral storytelling. 
Nor could magazines match television’s timeliness. Magazines were weekly, whereas 
television was continuous. Nor could they match television’s novelty. In the begin-
ning,  everything  on television was of interest to viewers. As a result, magazines began 
to lose advertisers to television. 
 Th e audience changed as well. As we’ve seen, World War II changed the nature of 
American life. Th e new, mobile, product-consuming public was less interested in the 
traditional Norman Rockwell world of the  Saturday Evening Post  (closed in 1969) and 
more in tune with the slick, hip world of narrower interest publications such as  GQ 
and  Self , which spoke to them in and about their new and exciting lives. And because 
 A wide array of specialized magazines exists 
for all lifestyles and interests. Here are some of the 
7,300 special interest consumer magazines 
available to U.S. readers.

CHAPTER 5 
Magazines 
103
 A change in people’s tastes in magazines reﬂ ects some of the ways the world changed after World War II. Norman Rockwell’s America was replaced by that of GQ, Self, and People.

104 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
World War II had further urbanized and industrialized America, people—including 
millions of women who had entered the workforce—had more leisure and more 
money to spend. Th ey could spend both on a wider array of personal interests  and on 
magazines that catered to those interests. Where there were once  Look  (closed in 1971) 
and the  Saturday Evening Post , there were now  Flyfi shing, Surfi ng, Ski , and  Easyrider . 
Th e industry had hit on the secret of success: specialization and a lifestyle orientation. 
We saw in Chapter 1 that all media have moved in this direction in their eff orts to 
attract an increasingly fragmented audience, but it was the magazine industry that 
began the trend. In fact, as the editors of the Project for Excellence in Journalism 
(2004, p. 1) wrote, 
 Magazines often are harbingers of change. When large social, economic, or techno-
logical shifts begin to reshape the culture, magazines frequently are the first media to 
move, and the structure of the industry is one reason. Unlike newspapers, most maga-
zines are not so tied to a specific geographic area, but are instead centered on interests 
or niches. Writers are looking for trends. Publishers can more quickly than in other 
media add and subtract titles aimed at specific audience segments or interests. Adver-
tisers, in turn, can take their dollars to hot titles of the moment aimed at particular 
demographics.       
 Magazines and Their Audiences  
 Exactly who are the audiences for magazines? Magazine industry research indicates 
that among people with at least some college, 94% subscribe to at least one magazine. 
Overall, 93% of all American adults read a magazine, a proportion that’s even higher, 
96%, for the attractive 18- to 35-year-old demographic. All adults read on average 7.7 
issues a month (8.3 issues for the 18 to 35 age group), and they spend 42 minutes on 
each issue. And magazine readers are attentive, as they are much less likely to consume 
other media or to engage in non-media activities than are users of television, radio, or 
the Internet (Association of Magazine Media, 2012a). 
 How  people use magazines also makes them an attractive advertising medium. 
Magazines sell themselves to potential advertisers based not only on the number and 
demographic desirability of their readers, but on readers’ engagement with and affi  n-
ity for magazine advertising. Ed Kelly, CEO of American Express Publishing, explains 
 engagement: “Th e power of magazines is a personal experience. When I pick up a 
magazine to read, I choose a certain magazine because it covers topics that interest 
me, so everything in the issue speaks to me—including the ads.” Adds Hearst 
 Magazines’ chief marketing offi  cer Michael Clinton, “Unlike a lot of media, consum-
ers pay for magazines. Th ey are spending their good old-fashioned dollars to buy the 
product. Th at is an engagement in itself in terms of how they are involved with the 
magazine” (both in “Th e New Imperative,” 2005, p. M24).  Affi  nity  for magazine adver-
tising is demonstrated by industry research that shows that more than all other com-
mercial media, magazine advertising ranks fi rst in making a positive impression and 
second, behind only video games, in people’s assertion that they continue to enjoy 
the content at the time they see the ad. More American adults (48%) trust magazine 
advertising than they do television or Internet advertising (40%; Association of 
 Magazine Media, 2012a).  
 Scope and Structure of the 
Magazine Industry  
 In 1950 there were 6,950 magazines in operation. Th e number now exceeds 20,000, 
some 7,300 of which are general interest consumer magazines. Of these, 800 produce 
three-fourths of the industry’s gross revenues. In 2011 alone, 231 new magazines were 

CHAPTER 5 
Magazines 
105
started, and that’s on top of 2010’s 193 new launches (Sass, 2011e). Contemporary 
magazines are typically divided into three broad types: 
 •  Trade, professional, and business magazines  carry stories, features, and ads aimed 
at people in specifi c professions and are distributed either by the professional orga-
nizations themselves  (American Medical News)  or by media companies such as 
Whittle Communications and Time Warner  (Progressive Farmer) . 
 •  Industrial, company, and sponsored magazines  are produced by companies 
 specifi cally for their own employees, customers, and stockholders, or by clubs 
and associations specifi cally for their members.  Friendly Exchange , for exam-
ple,  is the magazine of the Fireman’s Fund insurance company.  AARP Th e Mag-
azine  is the magazine for members of the American Association of Retired 
Persons (AARP).  
 •  Consumer magazines  are sold by subscription and at newsstands, bookstores, and 
other retail outlets, including supermarkets, garden shops, and computer stores. 
 Sunset  and  Wired fi t here, as do  Road & Track, US, TV Guide , and the  New Yorker 
( Figure 5.1 ).    
  Categories of Consumer Magazines 
 Th e industry typically categorizes consumer magazines in terms of their targeted audi-
ences. Of course, the wants, needs, interests, and wishes of those readers determine the 
content of each publication. Although these categories are neither exclusive (where do 
 Chicago Business  and  Sports Illustrated for Women fi t?) nor exhaustive (what do we 
do with  Hot Rod  and  National Geographic ?), they are at least indicative of the cascade 
of options. Here is a short list of common consumer magazine categories, along with 
examples of each type. 
 Alternative magazines:  Mother Jones , the  Utne Reader 
 Business/money magazines:  Money, Black Enterprise 
  Celebrity and entertainment magazines:  People, Entertainment Weekly 
 Children’s magazines:  Highlights, Ranger Rick 
 Computer magazines:  Internet, PC World 
 Ethnic magazines:  Hispanic, Ebony 
 Family magazines:  Fatherhood, Parenting 
 Fashion magazines:  Bazaar, Elle 
  General interest magazines:  Reader’s Digest, Life 
 Geographical magazines:  Texas Monthly, Bay Area Living 
 Gray magazines:  AARP Th e Magazine 
  Literary magazines:  Atlantic Monthly, Harper’s 
 Men’s magazines:  GQ, Field & Stream, Playboy 
 Newsmagazines:  Time, U.S. News & World Report 
  Political opinion magazines:  Th e Nation, National Review 
 Sports magazines:  Sport, Sports Illustrated 
  Sunday newspaper magazines:  Parade, USA Weekend 
 Women’s magazines:  Working Woman, Good Housekeeping, Ms . 
 Youth magazines:  Seventeen, Tiger Beat 
 Magazine Advertising  
 Magazine specialization exists and succeeds because the demographically similar reader-
ship of these publications is attractive to advertisers. Advertisers want to target ads for 
their products and services to those most likely to respond to them. Despite a 30% tumble 

106 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
7.65
5.95
5.65
4.34
3.83
3.56
3.38
3.27
3.24
3.21
3.03
2.90
2.83
2.53
2.46
2.30
2.23
3.86
4.45
Woman’s Day
Better Homes and Gardens
Game Informer
Reader’s Digest
Good Housekeeping
National Geographic
Family Circle
People
Time
Ladies Home Journal
Maxim
Taste of Home
Sports Illustrated
Cosmopolitan
Southern Living
Prevention
O, the Oprah Magazine
Glamour
Parenting
2.22
Parents
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Magazine title, rank, and circulation (in millions)
 Figure 5.1 Top 20 U.S. Magazines by Circulation, 2011.
Source: Association of Magazine Media, 2012a.

CHAPTER 5 
Magazines 
107
in the number of ad pages sold in American magazines from 
2006 to 2011 (Sass, 2011a), this remains a lucrative situation 
for the magazine industry. Th ere are about 360 million mag-
azines sold in the United States every year, and their average 
editorial-to-advertising-page ratio is 53% to 47%. Th e indus-
try takes in more than $30  billion a year in revenue , about 
half of that amount generated by advertising. Magazines 
command 6% of all the dollars spent on advertising in this 
country (Sass, 2011c). (But for a look at a magazine with no 
advertising at all, see the essay, “No Ads? No Problem:  Con-
sumer Reports .”) How advertising dollars are spread among 
diff erent types of advertisers is shown in  Figure 5.2 .    
 Magazines are often further specialized through  split 
runs   , special versions of a given issue in which editorial con-
tent and ads vary according to some specifi c demographic or 
regional grouping.  Time , for example, has at least eight 
regional editions, more than 50 state editions, and eight pro-
fessionally oriented editions. Magazines work to make them-
selves attractive to advertisers in other ways, especially as the 
country and industry deal with tough  economic conditions. 
One strategy is  single-sponsor magazines —having only one 
advertiser throughout an entire issue. Health publication 
 Walk It Off  uses this technique exclusively, and even 
Rank 
Category
1 
Toiletries and Cosmetics
2 
Drugs and Remedies
3 
Food and Food Products
4 
Apparel and Accessories 
5 
Retail
6 
Media
7 
Direct Response Companies 
8 
Automotive
9 
Home Furnishings and Supplies 
10 
Financial, Insurance, and Real Estate
 Figure 5.2 Top 10 Magazine Advertiser 
Categories, 2011.
Source: Association of Magazine Media, 2012b.
THERE 
ARE NO 
GUARANTEES 
IN LIFE.
© 2012 Doug Rosa
THE MEREDITH SALES GUARANTEE
Powered by Nielsen, this ground-breaking ROI* tool quantiﬁ es the direct impact of your 
Meredith media investment on product sales. And that’s not all. Because we believe so 
strongly in the power of our magazine brands, we’re off ering the industry’s ﬁ rst and only 
proof-of-performance guarantee.
To secure your Media Back Guarantee, contact Michael Brownstein, EVP, Chief Revenue Offi  cer, 
at michael@meredith.com or visit engagingmeredith.com.
*ROI: Incremental sales generated per media dollar spent
 Like many media companies, Meredith oﬀ ers 
accountability guarantees.

108 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
venerable titles like the  New Yorker  (Target stores) and  Time  (Kraft foods) publish single-
sponsor issues on occasion. Another strategy is to make  accountability guarantees .  Th e 
Week , for example, promises that independent testing will demonstrate that its readers 
recall, to an agreed-upon level, a sponsor’s ad; if they do not, the advertiser will receive 
free ad pages until recall reaches that benchmark. Many of the large publishers,  Meredith 
and Time, Inc. for example, also off er similar guarantees. 
 Types of Circulation 
 Magazines price advertising space in their pages based on    circulation , the total num-
ber of issues of a magazine that are sold. Th ese sales can be either subscription or 
single-copy sales. For the industry as a whole, about 68% of all sales are subscription. 
Some magazines, however— Woman’s Day, TV Guide , and  Penthouse , for example—
rely heavily on single-copy sales. Subscriptions have the advantage of an ensured 
ongoing readership, but they are sold below the cover price and have the additional 
burden of postage included in their cost to the publisher. Single-copy sales are less 
reliable, but to advertisers they are sometimes a better barometer of a publication’s 
value to its readers. Single-copy readers must consciously choose to pick up an issue 
and they pay full price for it. 
 A third form of circulation,    controlled circulation   , refers to providing a magazine at no 
cost to readers who meet some specifi c set of advertiser-attractive criteria. Free airline and 
hotel magazines fi t this category. Although they provide no subscription or single-sales 
revenue, these magazines are an attractive, relatively low-cost advertising vehicle for com-
panies seeking narrowly defi ned, captive audiences. Th e magazine with the wealthiest 
readers, in fact, is United Airlines’  Hemisphere . Its 4.5 million readers have a median house-
hold income of $129,487—double, for example,  Vogue’s  $67,024 (Ives, 2011a). Th ese 
 custom publishing    magazines are discussed in more detail later in this chapter. 
Very few magazines survive today without accepting advertising. Those that are ad-free 
 insist that freedom from commercial support allows them to make a greater diﬀ erence in 
the lives of their readers. Ms., for example, cannot advocate development 
of strong, individual females if its pages carry ads that suggest beauty is 
crucial for women’s success. Ms. began life in 1972 as a Warner Communi-
cations publication and has gone through several incarnations as both a 
for-proﬁ t and a not-for-proﬁ t publication. Today it is published four times 
a year, maintains an online version, carries no advertising, and remains 
committed to advancing the cause of women and feminism on a global 
scale. But it is Consumer Reports that makes the no-advertising case most 
strongly—it must be absolutely free of outside inﬂ uence if its articles about consumer 
products are to maintain their well-earned reputation for fairness and objectivity. As its 
editors explain on the magazine’s website, their mission is to “test, inform, and protect. To 
maintain our independence and impartiality, Consumers Union [the magazine’s parent 
 organization] accepts no outside advertising, no free test samples, and has no agenda other 
than the interests of consumers.” So protective is the magazine of that independence that it 
refuses to let its ratings be used in any advertising of the products and services it 
 evaluates, even those that it judges superior.
Consumer Reports, first published in 1936 as Consumer Union 
 Reports and boasting an initial circulation of 400, charges for access to 
its Web version. Its 3.3 million online subscribers pay the same rate as 
its 4.5 million print readers. Nonetheless, its Web readership is the 
highest of any online magazine in the world, and its print circulation is 
higher than that of all but a few major magazines, exceeding that of 
titles like Ladies’ Home Journal ( 3.3 million subscribers), Time (3.4 mil-
lion), and People ( 3.6 million).
There is a discount for subscribing to both, but because the two versions appeal to 
 distinctly diﬀ erent groups of readers, only about 600,000 avail themselves of this option. 
Print readers typically want to be “generally well-informed consumers,” explains Giselle 
Benatar, editor in chief of the online version. “But on the Web site, we’re attracting very 
transaction-minded consumers. They’re shoppers. They’re looking for a product, they 
want ratings, they want recommendations, and they want it now, not once a month” 
(in Perez-Pena, 2007, p. C1). The Web version does oﬀ er a good deal of free information, 
especially when evaluated products may cause health and safety problems. Also 
 occasionally available for free is special content, such as an ongoing series of media 
 literacy videos examining the persuasive appeals used in consumer drug advertising. But 
USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE
No Ads? No Problem: 
Consumer Reports
“Very few magazines survive today without accepting 
advertising. Those that are ad-free insist that 
freedom from commercial support allows them to 
make a greater difference in the lives of their readers.”

CHAPTER 5 
Magazines 
109
subscribers have access to much more. For example, there are videos of front and side 
impact tests on just about every vehicle sold in this country. The Web Consumer Reports 
maintains a searchable archive of all tests and their results as well as up-to-the-minute 
evaluations of new products.
 
Because the electronic version has no paper, printing, trucking, or mailing expenses, it 
actually makes more money than its print sibling. To increase proﬁ ts on its print version, 
Consumer Reports is produced on less expensive paper rather than the glossy stock used by 
most magazines, and as a nonproﬁ t group, it pays lower postage rates than other consumer 
magazines.
Another magazine that, like Ms. and Consumer Reports, eschews advertising because it  
sees it as inimical to its larger mission of making a diﬀ erence with its particular category of 
reader is Adbusters. Founded in 1989, Adbusters boasts a worldwide circulation of 50,000 
and won the Utne Reader Award for General Excellence three times in its ﬁ rst six years of 
operation. It aims to help stem the erosion of the world’s physical and cultural environments 
by what it views as greed and commercial forces. Its online version allows users to download 
spoofs of popular ad campaigns and other anticonsumerism spots for use as banner ads on 
their own sites.
 Consumer Reports, hard copy and online.
Copyright 2012 by Consumers Union of U.S., Inc. Yonkers, NY 10703-1057, a nonproﬁ t organization. Reprinted with 
permission from Consumer Reports® for educational purposes only. www.ConsumerReports.org
 Measuring Circulation 
 Regardless of how circulation occurs, it is monitored through research. Th e Audit 
Bureau of Circulations (ABC) was established in 1914 to provide reliability to a 
booming magazine industry playing loose with self-announced circulation fi gures. 
Th e ABC provides reliable circulation fi gures, as well as important population and 
demographic information. Other research companies, including Simmons Market 
Research Bureau and Standard Rate and Data Service, also generate valuable data 
for advertisers and magazines. Circulation data are often augmented by measures of 
 pass-along readership , which refers to readers who neither subscribe nor buy single 
copies but who borrow a magazine or read one in a doctor’s offi  ce or library.  Hand-
guns , for example, has a paid circulation of 114,000, but its pass-along readership is 
5.4 million (Ives, 2007b).     
 Th is traditional model of measurement, however, is under increasing attack. As 
advertisers demand more precise assessments of accountability and return on their 
investment (Chapter 12), new metrics beyond circulation are being demanded by pro-
fessionals inside and outside the industry. “We live in a very short-term measurement 
world,” says advertising sales executive Steve Lanzano. “I need answers now. Th e time 
lag hurts [magazines] because everybody wants immediate turnaround. It has been the 
same measurement system for 25 years. To get the attention of ad agencies, they need 
to come up with a whole diff erent model” (in Ives, 2006a, p. S-2). Speed is only one 
issue. Others argue that it is one thing for magazine publishers to boast of engagement 
and affi  nity, but how are they measured? As a result, the advertising and magazine 
industries are investigating “a whole diff erent model.” In 2006, audience assessment 
fi rm McPheters & Co. rolled out a new measurement service,  Readership.com ,   designed 
to provide near real-time information on magazine distribution, readership, and 
engagement. It tallies not only the number of people a magazine reaches but the eff ect 

110 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
its ads have on brand awareness, readers’ intent to buy, and actual actions taken. If 
this new model wins enough supporters, measuring “mere” circulation will become a 
thing of the past. 
 Several magazines, most prominently  Time , already off er advertisers the option of 
choosing between  total audience  and paid circulation when setting advertising rates. 
Akin to newspapers’ integrated audience except that it totals all readers, not only 
unique readers, total audience combines print and Web readership. In  Time ’s case, 
for example, circulation jumps from under 4 million to a total audience of fi ve times 
that size. Th e goal is to attract advertisers to the  Time  brand rather than to  Time , the 
magazine.     
 Trends and Convergence 
in Magazine Publishing  
 Even though paid circulation and newsstand sales have fallen over the last several 
years, the total readership of American consumer magazines increased 8% from 2000 
to 2009 (Sass, 2010). Nonetheless, the forces that are reshaping all the mass media are 
having an impact on magazines. Alterations in how the magazine industry does busi-
ness are primarily designed to help magazines compete with television and the Internet 
in the race for advertising dollars. Convergence, too, has its impact.  
 Online Magazines 
 Online magazines have emerged, made possible by convergence of magazines and the 
Internet. Most magazines, 83%, now produce online editions off ering special interac-
tive features not available to their hard-copy readers (Audit Bureau of Circulations, 
2011). Diff erent publications opt for diff erent payment models, but most provide 
online-only content for free and charge nonsubscribers for access to print magazine 
content that appears online. Th is strategy encourages readers who might otherwise go 
completely digital (and drop print) to renew their subscriptions. Th is is important to 
publishers and their advertisers because ads in hard-copy magazines are more eff ec-
tive and therefore more valuable: 60% of readers 14 and older say they pay more atten-
tion to print advertising in magazines than any type of online advertising. Eight in 10 
who have online access to their favorite magazine say they prefer reading the printed 
 Controlled circulation magazines like Amtrak’s 
Arrive (train), Delta’s Sky (airplane), and WebMD, 
the Magazine (doctor’s oﬃ  ce) take advantage or 
readers’ captivity.

CHAPTER 5 
Magazines 
111
version; 70% admit that they enjoy reading print magazines even 
though they know they can fi nd most of the same information 
online; and 55% of Web magazine readers continue to subscribe 
to the printed version (Deloitte, 2011). Nonetheless, more than 
half of magazine readers access their favorite publications elec-
tronically, and 75% say that the digital content they fi nd there 
complements rather than substitutes for the printed content 
(Association of Magazine Media, 2012a). 
 Several strictly online magazines have been attempted. In 
1996, former  New Republic  editor Michael Kinsley moved from 
Washington, D.C., to Washington State to publish the  exclu-
sively online magazine  Slate  for Microsoft. Th e Washington Post 
Company bought  Slate  from Microsoft in 2004 to increase its 
online presence. Two years earlier, several staff ers from the  San 
Francisco Chronicle , armed with $100,000 in start-up money 
from Apple Computer, went online with  Salon . Both  Salon 
and  Slate  wanted to do magazine journalism—a mix of break-
ing news, cultural criticism, political and social commentary, 
interviews—at the Internet’s speed with the Internet’s interac-
tivity and instant feedback.    
 Although both pioneers regularly draw roughly 2 million 
unique monthly visitors, they only recently reached profi tability, 
 Salon  in 2005 and  Slate  in 2007. One reason is that as opposed to 
sites produced by paper magazines, purely online magazines 
must generate original content, an expensive undertaking, yet 
they compete online for readers and advertisers as equals with those subsidized by 
paper magazines. In addition, these sites must compete with all other websites on the 
Internet. Th ey are but one of an infi nite number of choices for potential readers, and 
they do not enjoy the security of readers’ loyalty to a parent publication.   
 Smartphones, Tablets, and e-Readers 
 As with books and newspapers, mobile digital media are reshaping the relationship 
between magazines and readers. Time-Warner CEO Jeff  Bewkes quickly moved his 
company’s 21 publications to mobile, saying, “For digital magazines to take off  we need 
to off er consumers the fl exibility of purchasing single-copy digital issues, having 
digital-only subscriptions, and having a content-everywhere approach that allows us 
to off er dual print and digital subscriptions” (in Matsa, Rosenstiel, & Moore, 2011). 
 Particularly successful, especially after the introduction of Apple’s Newsstand (see 
Chapter 3) are  Th e Economist , whose app has been downloaded by more than 3 million 
readers, and  National Geographic , which saw its app-based subscriptions increase 
fi vefold (Smith, 2011b; Palser, 2011).  Popular Science , which was averaging 75 new 
digital subscriptions a day before Newsstand saw 3,900 people sign on in the fi rst six 
days of Newsstand’s debut (Matsa, Sasseen & Mitchell, 2012). Newsstand’s success 
prompted a consortium of major magazine publishers to create its own version, Unlim-
ited, an app designed for Android tablets that gives readers access to a wide variety 
of titles. 
 Readers have enthusiastically responded to mobile magazines. Fifty-three percent 
of e-book owners read magazines on their devices, and among the 18- to 34-year-olds, 
more than 40% have downloaded magazine apps to their tablets and smartphones 
(Association of Magazine Media, 2012a). Among readers with mobile devices, 90% 
report that since acquiring that technology, they are consuming just as much—if not 
more—magazine content; 66% plan to consume more digital magazines; and 63% 
want even more magazine content in digital form. Readers (55%) especially like to 
access digital back issues of titles; 83% are interested in archiving an article or an 
entire issue; and 86% want to be able to share issues or articles (Association of  Magazine 
Media, 2011). 
 Slate’s home page.
From Slate, © September 7, 2010 The Slate Group. All rights 
reserved. Used by permission and protected by the Copyright 
Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, redistribution, 
or retransmission of the Material without express written 
permission is prohibited. www.slate.com

112 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 And interestingly, smartphones and tablets now make 
hard-copy magazines more attractive to readers and adver-
tisers now that  QR codes ,  quick response codes , appear on 
virtually all consumer magazines. When readers use their 
mobile devices to capture the image of these small, black-
and-white squares, they are instantly directed to a publisher’s 
or marketer’s website, increasing engagement. Even easier to 
use are    NFC (near-fi eld communication) chips , tags embed-
ded in magazines that connect readers to advertisers’ digital 
content when they simply hold their smartphones near an ad; 
no need to have the correct app or to take a picture of the 
QR code. 
 Custom Magazines 
 Another trend fi nds its roots in the magazine industry’s 
response to an increasingly crowded media environment. 
Custom publishing is the creation of magazines specifi -
cally designed for an individual company seeking to reach 
a very narrowly defi ned audience, such as favored custom-
ers or likely users or buyers.  WebMD , the medical informa-
tion website, for example, distributes free to 85% of all 
American doctors’ offi  ces a magazine of the same name 
with a circulation of 1.1 million—rivaling that of the  New 
Yorker  and  PC World , and exceeding that of  BusinessWeek . 
Naturally, such specifi cally targeted magazines take advan-
tage of readers’ engagement with and affi  nity for magazine 
advertising.   
 Th ere are two broad categories of custom publishing. A    brand magazine is a con-
sumer magazine, complete with a variety of general interest articles and features, pub-
lished by a retail or other business for readers having demographic characteristics 
similar to those of consumers with whom it typically does business. Th ese publications 
carry ad pages not only for the products of their parent business, but for others as well. 
Energy drink maker Red Bull publishes  Red Bulletin , for example, and among others, 
Dodge, Hallmark, Bloomingdale’s, Saks Fifth Avenue, Crunch Fitness, and Sea Ray 
 The professional organization, The Custom Content Council, produces its own publication, the high-quality Content magazine.
 Quick response codes have reached near 
ubiquity in the magazine industry.

CHAPTER 5 
Magazines 
113
boats all have successful brand magazines. Th is new form of magazine recognizes two 
important contemporary realities of today’s media environment: (a) Th e cost of retain-
ing existing customers is signifi cantly lower than that of recruiting new ones, and 
(b) marketers must “fi nd ways to stand out from the quantity and clutter of commercial 
messages and to connect with an increasingly cynical and suspicious public” (Virgin, 
2004, p. E1).      
 Closely related is the    magalogue   , a designer catalog produced to look like a con-
sumer magazine. Abercrombie & Fitch, J. Crew, Harry Rosen, and Diesel all produce 
catalogs in which models wear for-sale designer clothes. Magalogues “cut to the 
chase,” says J. Crew’s Margot Brunelle; they bring “a fresh point of view, an imme-
diacy and ease of use that quite frankly has been missing from a lot of magazines.” 
Advertising buyer David Verklin agrees, “People have been ripping pages out of 
magazines and putting them in their purse forever. Th ese magazines are taking it one 
step further by showing pages of the products and having a point of view” (both in 
Carr, 2004, p. C1). 
 Every  Fortune  500 company and every major retailer either already engages in cus-
tom publishing or plans to do so in the very near future. Th ere are more than 100,000 
diff erent brand magazines and magalogues in America, representing over 34 billion 
individual annual copies. Ninety-three percent of adults are familiar with at least one, 
and large numbers of readers fi nd them useful (68%) and have bought something they 
saw (63%) in one of them (Sass, 2009).   
 Meeting Competition from Cable Television 
 As we’ve seen, the move toward specialization in magazines was forced by the emer-
gence of television as a mass-audience, national advertising medium. But television 
again—specifi cally cable television—eventually came to challenge the preeminence 
of magazines as a specialized advertising medium.  Advertiser-supported cable 
channels survive using precisely the same strategy as magazines—they deliver to 
advertisers a relatively large number of consumers who have some important demo-
graphic trait in common. Similar competition also comes from specialized online 
content providers such as ESPN’s several sports-oriented sites and Th e Discovery 
Channel Online. Magazines are well positioned to fend off  these challenges for sev-
eral reasons. 
 First is internationalization, which expands a magazine’s reach, making it possible 
for magazines to attract additional ad revenues for content that, essentially, has already 
been produced. Internationalization can happen in one of several ways. 
Some magazines,  Time  and  Newsweek , for example, produce one or more 
foreign editions in English. Others enter cooperative agreements with over-
seas companies to produce native-language versions of essentially U.S. 
magazines. For example, Hearst and the British company ITP cooperate to 
publish British and Middle Eastern editions of  Esquire , two of the 18 inter-
national versions of the men’s magazine. ITP and Hearst also team up on 
the Dubai version of the fashion magazine  Harper’s Bazaar  and 75 other 
titles in the Middle East and India. Often, American publishers prepare spe-
cial content for foreign-language editions.  Elle  has 42 local language ver-
sions of its magazine, including  countries like Argentina, Serbia, Poland, 
Th ailand, and Turkey.  Vogue off ers 19 in locales such as China, Greece, and 
Portugal. Th e internationalization of magazines will no doubt increase as 
conglomeration and globalization continue to have an impact on the mag-
azine industry as they have on other media businesses.    
 Second is technology. Computers and satellites now allow instant distri-
bution of copy from the editor’s desk to printing plants around the world. 
Th e result—almost immediate delivery to subscribers and sales outlets—
makes production and distribution of even more narrowly targeted split 
runs more cost-eff ective. Th is is an effi  ciency that cable television has yet 
to match. 
 The look alone of this magazine’s cover makes 
it clear that it is the German version of what we know 
in the United States as Psychology Today.

114 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 content? They add that it also diminishes one of magazine’s advantages 
over other  media: readers can “fast forward” through ads by ﬂ ipping to the 
next page.
But the practice has its defenders. Risa Crandall, VP at Scholastic 
 Parents  Media, says, “Seamless visual integration does not interrupt the 
reading  process—it actually  becomes an organic marriage between our 
advertiser’s message and our editorial product . . . Unlike online pop-up 
advertising which actually obscures editorial . . . ad  interruptions deliver a 
more pleasant, ﬂ uid reader experience. We like to compare it to TV’s widely-popular product 
 placement  integration” (in Ives, 2010). Proponents say the  interruptive ads not only improve 
the reading experience, but that in tough  economic times for all media, magazines need to 
be free to compete on a more equal, imaginative, and  aggressive footing.
 
Enter your voice. Is this much ado about nothing? Do interruptive ads disrupt your 
reading experience or do they make it “more pleasant, fluid”? Do you agree with VP 
Crandall that television product placement is “widely-popular”? If not, are you likely to 
be more receptive to interruptive ads? If you do, do you see interruptive magazine ads as 
the same or different from television product placement? Do you think the ASME guide-
lines are fair? Clear? Do you accept the argument that the magazine industry must 
loosen its ethical guidelines, even only a little, in order to compete in a tough media 
environment? Why or why not?
CULTURAL FORUM
Interruptive Ads: 
Invasive or Necessary?
Advertorials and complementary copy are two ways that magazine advertising and editorial 
copy coexist, sometimes uncomfortably. But a third interaction between the two— 
interruptive ads —has become suﬃ  ciently controversial that it has prompted the  American 
Society of Magazine Editors (ASME) to revise its guidelines, pitted industry  professionals 
against one another, and even spilled into 
the cultural forum as readers are invoked 
by both sides to defend their positions.
 
Interruptive ads are ad copy that 
weaves through or around editorial 
copy. Although critics call them invasive 
ads, as long as readers can distinguish between the ad and the editorial content it in-
terrupts they do not violate industry ethical standards. “But,” adds Sid Holt, ASME CEO, 
“that doesn’t mean they’re OK. I think most editors would agree that these kinds of 
ads—ads that intentionally  disrupt the reader experience—are not very good for the 
reader’s relationship with the magazine.”
 
What kinds of disruptions so trouble critics? Ad copy in bright colors weaving through 
several pages of text, ending at a sponsor’s ad. Sequential pictures of rolling animals across 
two pages of copy, ﬂ owing directly into an ad. A boy on the right side of one page sucking a 
noodle from a soup bowl on the left side of the preceding page. This creativity “may be 
groovy,” argues Mr. Holt, “but it still stinks” (in Ives, 2010).
 
It stinks, say critics, because not only is it disruptive, it is potentially deceptive—Is this 
an ad? Who paid for it? Is this editorial? Does the ad placement shape the surrounding 
“This creativity may be groovy, but it still stinks.”
 Th ird is the sale of subscriber lists and a magazine’s own direct marketing of prod-
ucts. Advertisers buy space in specialized magazines to reach a specifi c type of reader. 
Most magazines are more than happy to sell those readers’ names and addresses to 
those same advertisers, as well as to others who want to contact readers with direct 
mail pitches. Many magazines use their own subscriber lists and Web visitors’ details 
for the same purpose, marketing products of interest to their particular readership. 
Some magazines meet television’s challenge by becoming television themselves. Fox 
Television Studios, for example, produces Web-based programs based on Hearst 
 publications  CosmoGirl  and  Popular Mechanics . 
 Advertorials 
 Publishers and advertisers increasingly use advertorials as a means of boosting the 
value of a magazine as an advertising medium.    Advertorials    are ads that appear in 
magazines and take on the appearance of genuine editorial content. Sometimes they 
are a page or less, sometimes inserts composed of several pages. Th ey frequently carry 
the disclaimer “Advertisement,” but it is usually in small print. Sometimes the dis-
claimer is no more than the advertiser’s logo in a page corner. Th e goal is to put com-
mercial content before readers, cloaked in the respectability of editorial content. 
Advertorial-generated revenue in the magazine industry more than doubled in the 
1990s, as did the number of ad pages given over to their use. Advertorials now account 

CHAPTER 5 
Magazines 
115
 This 2-page Woman’s Day masthead asks the question, “How does your pet go to extremes to get what he wants?” At its center are six responses from magazine staﬀ . These lead to an ad for Fresh Step Extreme 
cat litter that spreads across both pages, intrudes a bit into the text of one, and is headlined, “Extremely Clever.” Are the use and placement of the word “extreme” in the editorial content, the sponsor’s name, and the 
ad a coincidence? Is the location of the personnel’s responses? How transparent is the distinction between editorial and advertising?
for over 10% of all magazine advertising income. Th e question for media-literate mag-
azine readers is clear: Is an item journalism or is it advertising? 
 Critics of advertorials argue that this blurring of the distinction between editorial 
and commercial matter is a breach of faith with readers (see the essay “Interruptive 
Ads: Invasive or Necessary?”). Moreover, if the intent is not deception, why is the dis-
claimer typically small; why use the editorial content format at all? Defenders contend 
that advertorials are a well-entrenched aspect of contemporary magazines. Th e indus-
try considers them not only fi nancially necessary in an increasingly competitive media 
market but proper as well. No one is hurt by advertorials. In fact, they often deliver 
useful information. Advertisers are free in America to use whatever legal and truthful 
means are available to sell their products. Magazines always label the paid material as 
such. And readers aren’t idiots, defenders claim. Th ey know an ad when they see one.   
   Advertiser Inﬂ uence over Magazine Content 
 Sometimes controversial, too, is the infl uence that some advertisers attempt to exert 
over content. Th is infl uence is always there, at least implicitly. A magazine editor must 
satisfy advertisers as well as readers. One common way advertisers’ interests shape 
content is in the placement of ads. Airline ads are moved away from stories about plane 
crashes. Cigarette ads rarely appear near articles on lung cancer. In fact, it is an accepted 
industry practice for a magazine to provide advertisers with a heads-up, alerting them 
NI-15144
HEALTH, NUTRITION & FITNESS ADVISORY BOARD
Louis J. Aronne, MD, Obesity/Bariatric Medicine; Robert O. Bonow, MD, Cardiology; Rebecca C. Brightman, MD, 
Obstetrics and Gynecology; Robert J. Carr, MD, Family Medicine; Paula J. Clayton, MD, Psychiatry; Kenneth H. Cooper, 
MD, MPH, Fitness; Myriam J. Curet, MD, Surgery; Sharon Diamond, MD, CSW, Obstetrics and Gynecology; Mary E. Frank, 
MD, Family Medicine; Sandra Adamson Fryhofer, MD, MACP, Internal Medicine; Joyce Generali, MS, RPh, Pharmacy; 
Nieca Goldberg, MD, Cardiology; Letha Y. Griffi  n, MD, Orthopedics; Paul S. Jellinger, MD, Endocrinology; Marjorie R. 
Jenkins, MD, Women’s Health and Gender-Based Medicine; Yosef P. Krespi, MD, Otolaryngology; Christine Laine, MD, 
MPH, Internal Medicine; Barbara Levine, PhD, RD, Nutrition; Maurie Markman, MD, Oncology; Margaret L. McClure, RN, 
EdD, Nursing; Lynn J. McKinley-Grant, MD, Dermatology; Paulo A. Pacheco, MD, Gastroenterology; John C. Pan, MD, 
Complementary Medicine; Laura E. Riley, MD, Obstetrics and Gynecology; Lona Sandon, MEd, RD, LD, Nutrition; 
V. Kathleen Satterﬁ eld, DPM, Podiatry; Robert Sears, MD, Pediatrics; Barbara J. Steinberg, DDS, Dentistry; 
Loraine Stern, MD, Pediatrics; Debra J. Wattenberg, MD, Dermatology; Martha V. White, MD, Allergy and Asthma
WOMEN’S HEART HEALTH ADVISORY BOARD
Michelle A. Albert, MD, MPH, Christie M. Ballantyne, MD, Robert O. Bonow, MD, Nieca Goldberg, MD, Sharonne N. Hayes, 
MD, Noel Bairey Merz, MD, Jennifer Mieres, MD, Lori Mosca, MD, PhD, Barbara H. Roberts, MD, Tracy L. Stevens, MD, 
Amparo C. Villablanca, MD, Nanette Kass Wenger, MD
Occasionally we share our information with other reputable companies whose products and services might interest you. 
If you prefer not to participate in this opportunity, please call 386-597-4375 and inform the operator.

How does your pet go 
to extremes to get 
what he wants?
HEALTH
Health Editor Barbara Brody
Associate Health Editor Abigail L. Cuff ey 
LIFESTYLE
Beauty Editor Melissa Matthews
Style Editor Donna Duarte-Ladd
Home & Garden Editor Peter Walsh
Associate Lifestyle Editor Crystal Tate
Associate Home Design Editor Ayn-Monique Klahre
PRODUCTION
Editorial Production Manager Tara Bernstein
WOMANSDAY.COM 
Executive Editor Heidi Cho 
Senior Associate Editor Meghan Ahearn
Associate Editors Alexandra Gekas, Mandy Major
Staff  Writer/Editor Amanda Greene
Assistant Editors Brynn Mannino, Olivia Putnal
Assistant Photo Editor Nelson Cupeles
CONTRIBUTING EDITORS 
Karen Ansel, RD, Nutrition; Karen Asp, Fitness; Denise Austin, 
Fitness; Joy Bauer, RD, Nutrition; Arianne Cohen, Cleaning and 
Organizing; Mary Hunt, Money; Marissa Lippert, RD, Nutrition; 
Eddie Ross, Home; Laurie Schacht, Toys; Heather Lende, 
Sally Stich, Lee Woodruff , Features
TV CORRESPONDENTS
Rene Syler, Summer Sanders, Tasha Smith, Trish Suhr
Brand Creative Director Liza Aelion
Group Managing Editor Sue Kakstys
Executive Editor Ellen Breslau 
Special Projects Director Jaimee Zanzinger
Articles Director Angela Ebron
Food & Nutrition Director Kate Merker 
Health Director Amy F. Brightﬁ eld
ART
Design Director Sarina Green 
Photo Director Stephanie Kim 
Photo Editor Roni Martin
Designer Bridget Zion
Contributing Designer Isabel Abdai
Contributing Photo Editor Georgia Paralemos
ARTICLES & FEATURES
Senior Editor Brian Underwood
Assistant Editor Brooke Nevils
BUSINESS
Editorial Business Associate Beth Haase
COPY
Group Copy Director Diane Oatis 
Copy Editor Lauren S. Kuczala
FOOD
Associate Editor Donna Meadow
“When my cat, Abby, isn’t satisﬁ ed 
with the type of food I’ve given 
her or how quickly I clean her 
litter box in the morning, she’ll sit 
in front of the food dish or litter 
box and stare at it, then turn her 
head and stare at me. This goes 
on until I change the food or clean 
the box. It’s a test of wills, and she 
always wins.”
Angela Ebron, Articles Director 
“I have three cats, so it’s a 
constant battle for attention. My 
youngest, Jasmine, is anything 
but subtle: She gets a running 
start, then leaps onto my bed to 
wake me up. It works every time.”
Brian Underwood, Senior Editor
Senior VP/Chief Brand Officer Carlos Lamadrid
VP/Editor-in-Chief, Brand Content Elizabeth Mayhew
“Oscar, my beautiful Persian cat, 
gets a monthly bath to keep his 
fur coat silky. If we get busy and 
he doesn’t get his bath, he sits in 
the kitchen sink waiting. Never, 
ever interfere with the grooming 
regimen of a Persian cat.”
Brooke Nevils, Assistant Editor
Extremely Clever
Cats now have a litter that’s 
as ingenious as they are. 
New Fresh Step® Extreme 
scoopable litter is specially 
formulated with CarbonPLUS™ 
to eliminate even the strongest 
odors. It’s extremely effective. 
Visit facebook.com/freshstep 
for more information. 
Join the
conversation! 
How does your pet 
go to extremes to get 
what he wants? Tell us 
at facebook.com/
WomansDay
Magazine
Senior VP/Chief Brand Officer Carlos Lamadrid
VP/Brand Publisher Ginger Sutton   VP/Brand Development Donia Vance
GPS
HACHETTE FILIPACCHI MEDIA U.S. (www.hfmus.com)
President/Chief Executive Offi  cer Steve Parr
Executive VP/Chief Operating Offi  cer Philippe Guelton
Executive VP/General Counsel Catherine R. Flickinger 
Senior VP/Chief Brand Offi  cer, ELLE Group Robin Domeniconi
Senior VP/Chief Brand Offi  cer, Woman’s Day Group Carlos Lamadrid
Senior VP/Chief Financial Offi  cer Philippe Perthuis
VP/Corporate Communications Kate Berg
VP/Corporate Marketing & Strategic Development Al Silvestri
VP/Corporate Planning & Performance Lynn Heatherton 
VP/Human Resources Eileen F. Mullins
Chairman Emeritus Daniel Filipacchi
HFM U.S. is part of Lagardère Active, a division of Lagardère SCA (www.lagardere.com)
Didier Quillot, CEO, Lagardère Active
Jean de Boisdeff re, CEO International of Magazine Division, Lagardère Active
WOMAN’S DAY EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISING OFFICES: 1271 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020
Copyright © 2011, Hachette Filipacchi Media U.S., Inc. The title Woman’s Day is a registered trademark of Hachette Filipacchi Media 
U.S., Inc. Nothing that appears in Woman’s Day may be reprinted either wholly or in part without permission of the publisher. 
Removal of any part of this magazine by other than the reader or the publisher is unauthorized; violators are subject to prosecution. 
To reach us, please see page 2. We are sorry, but we do not accept unsolicited manuscripts, photographs, audiotapes or videos and 
cannot return any that are sent to us. To order back issues dated within the past two years, please go to backissues.womansday.com.
Advertising Director Ann Gobel
VP/Finance Director Ron Minutella
General Manager, Digital Rachel Glickman
Integrated Sales Development Director Ashley Klopfer
ADVERTISING SALES
NEW YORK
Integrated Brand Directors Dan Borchert, Meagan Fouty, 
Amy Simmons
Integrated Beauty & Fashion Director Audrey Bennett
General Manager Greg Roperti
Advertising Services Director Theresa Cestaro-Gein
Executive Assistant to the Senior VP/CBO Paula Spann
Direct Response Advertising Kathy Zito, 212-455-0100
Assistants Nellie Crump, Elizabeth Fennell, Allison Murray, 
Margaux Nacpil, Arlene Presberry
MIDWEST
Integrated Brand Directors Bonnie Hutchinson, 
Teri Jacobucci, Diane Wigger
WEST COAST
Integrated Brand Director Erin Foy-Vian
DETROIT
Integrated Brand Director Colleen Coyne
CREATIVE SERVICES & MARKETING
Creative Director, Advertising Beth Ann Migliore
Brand Strategy Director Lisa Smith
Director, Marketing & Promotions Whitney Cobb
Director, Special Projects & Events Tina Marchisello
Associate Integrated Marketing Director Maggie Gould
Senior Integrated Marketing Manager Toni Nicolino
Assistant Marketing Manager Catherine Peirano
Marketing Assistant Caroline Durrant
Director, Art & Design Sangme Lee
PRODUCTION
VP/Operations Michael Esposito
Production Director Diane Arlotta
Production Manager Edmond Barredo
CIRCULATION
VP/Consumer Marketing Philip Ketonis
VP/Retail Sales & Marketing William Michalopoulos
Group Circulation Director William Carter
Director, National Sales Edward F. Lienau
“My dog, Franklin, pushes his 
empty food bowl around with 
his foot, then pauses and looks 
at us. We call it Puppy Air Hockey 
because it sails across our 
hardwood ﬂ oors.”
Meagan Fouty
New York Integrated Brand Director
“My Lhasa Apso, Charlie, will 
stand up on his hind legs and 
whimper in order to get his 
favorite food—pork ribs!”
Caroline Durrant, Marketing Assistant
“When our cat, Maynard, wants 
the litter box scooped, she taps 
the wall with her nails until we 
scoop it. When she wants to eat, 
she taps the cabinet, and when 
she wants the door opened, she 
taps the door. If we ignore her, 
she goes for the ﬂ at-screen TV. 
When she taps that, we’ll do 
whatever she wants!”
Toni Nicolino
Senior Integrated Marketing Manager

116 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
that soon-to-be-published content may prove uncomfortable for their businesses. 
Advertisers can then request a move of their ad, or pull it and wait to run it in the next 
issue. Magazines, too, often entice advertisers with promises of placement of their ads 
adjacent to relevant articles. 
 But  complementary copy   —content that reinforces the advertiser’s message, or at 
least does not negate it—is problematic when creating such copy becomes a major 
infl uence in a publication’s editorial decision making. Th is happens in a number of 
ways. Editors sometimes engage in self-censorship, making decisions about how 
 stories are written and which stories appear based on the fear that specifi c advertisers 
will be off ended. Some magazines,  Architectural Digest , for example, identify com-
panies by name in their picture caption copy only if they are advertisers. But many 
critics inside and outside the industry see increased crumbling of the wall between 
advertising demands and editorial judgment.      
 Th is problem is particularly acute today, say critics, because a very competitive 
media environment puts additional pressure on magazines to bow to advertiser 
demands. For example, a Sears marketing executive suggested that magazines needed 
to operate “in much less traditional ways” by allowing advertisers to “become a part 
of the storyline” in their articles (Atkinson, 2004). Lexus, for example, asks the maga-
zines it advertises in to use its automobiles in photos used to illustrate editorial con-
tent. But most troubling are advertisers who institute an    ad-pull policy , the demand 
for an advance review of a magazine’s content, with the threat of pulled advertising if 
dissatisfi ed with that content. Th e advertising agencies for oil giant BP and fi nancial 
services company Morgan Stanley shocked the magazine industry by demanding just 
that—in the case of BP, insisting that it be informed “in advance of any news text or 
visuals magazines plan to publish that directly mention the company, a competitor, or 
the oil-and-energy industry” (Sanders & Halliday, 2005). Events like this moved  Adver-
tising Age  to editorialize, “Shame on BP. And shame on Morgan Stanley and General 
Motors and any other advertisers involved in assaults on editorial integrity and inde-
pendence. By wielding their ad budget as weapons to beat down newsrooms, these 
companies threaten the bond that media properties have with their audiences, the very 
thing that gives media their value to advertisers to begin with” (“Shame on BP,” 2005). 
Th is concern is overwrought, say many industry people. When the American Society 
of Magazine Editors announced it would “revise its guidelines for protecting editorial 
Healthy Eating for a Healthy Weight
Content Source: Division of Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Obesity, National Center for Chronic Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion
healthy lifestyle involves many choices. Among them, choosing a 
balanced diet or eating plan. So how do you choose a healthy eating 
plan? Let's begin by defining what a healthy eating plan is. 
According to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, a healthy eating plan:
ͻ
Emphasizes fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and fat-free or low-fat 
milk and milk products 
ͻ
Includes lean meats, poultry, fish, beans, eggs, and nuts
ͻ
Is low in saturated fats, trans fats, 
cholesterol, salt (sodium), and 
added sugars
ͻ
Stays within your daily calorie 
needs 
Eat Healthfully and Enjoy It!
A healthy eating plan that helps you 
manage your weight includes a variety of foods you may not have 
considered. If "healthy eating" makes you think about the foods you can't 
have, try refocusing on all the new foods you can eat—
ͻFresh fruits ͸ĚŽŶΖƚƚŚŝŶŬũƵƐƚĂƉƉůĞƐŽƌďĂŶĂŶĂƐ͘dŚĞƐĞĂƌĞŐƌĞĂƚĐŚŽŝĐĞƐ͕
ďƵƚƚƌǇƐŽŵĞΗĞǆŽƚŝĐΗĨƌƵŝƚƐ͕ƚŽŽ͘,ŽǁĂďŽƵƚĂŵĂŶŐŽ͍KƌĂũƵŝĐǇƉŝŶĞĂƉƉůĞŽƌ
kiwi fruit! When your favorite fresh fruits aren't in season, try a frozen, 
ĐĂŶŶĞĚ͕ŽƌĚƌŝĞĚǀĂƌŝĞƚǇŽĨĂĨƌĞƐŚĨƌƵŝƚǇŽƵĞŶũŽǇ͘KŶĞĐĂƵƚŝŽŶĂďŽƵƚĐĂŶŶĞĚ
fruits is that they may contain added sugars or syrups. Be sure and choose 
canned varieties of fruit pacŬĞĚŝŶǁĂƚĞƌŽƌŝŶƚŚĞŝƌŽǁŶũƵŝĐĞ͘
ͻ  Fresh vegetables
͸ ƚƌǇ
something new. You may find that 
you love grilled vegetables or 
steamed vegetables with an herb 
you haven't tried like rosemary. 
You can sauté vegetables in a non-
stick pan with a small amount of 
cooking spray. Or try frozen or 
canned vegetables for a quick side 
dish — ũƵƐƚŵŝĐƌŽǁĂǀĞĂŶĚƐĞƌǀĞ͘
When trying canned vegetables, 
look for vegetables without added 
salt, butter, or cream sauces. 
Commit to going to the produce 
department and trying a new 
vegetable each week. 
ͻĂůĐŝƵŵ-ƌŝĐŚĨŽŽĚƐ͸ǇŽƵŵĂǇ
automatically think of a glass of 
low-fat or fat-free milk when 
someone says "eat more dairy 
products." But what about low-fat 
and 
fat-free 
yogurts 
without 
added sugars? dŚĞƐĞ ĐŽŵĞ ŝŶ Ă
wide variety of flavors and can be 
a great dessert substitute for 
those 
with 
a 
sweet tooth. 
ͻŶĞǁƚǁŝƐƚŽŶ
ĂŶ ŽůĚ ĨĂǀŽƌŝƚĞ ͸
if your favorite 
recipe 
calls 
for 
frying 
fish 
or 
breaded chicken, try healthier 
variations using baking that uses 
dry beans in place of higher-fat 
meats. Ask around or search the 
internet and magazines for recipes 
ǁŝƚŚ ĨĞǁĞƌ ĐĂůŽƌŝĞƐ ͸ ǇŽƵ ŵŝŐŚƚ
be surprised to find you have a 
new 
favorite 
dish!
(Continued on page 36)
A
“Healthy eating is all about 
balance.  You CAN enjoy your 
favorite foods…” CDC
 Complementing this ad through 
placement near this story troubles very 
few people. But when advertisers invoke 
ad-pull policies, media-literate readers 
rightfully complain.
Photo by Charles Schiller

CHAPTER 5 
Magazines 
117
integrity” in 2008, there was signifi cant push-back. “As long as it’s interesting to the 
reader, who cares?” argued one editor. “Th is ivory-tower approach that edit[orial] is so 
untouchable, and what they’re doing is so wonderful and can’t be tainted by the stink 
of advertising just makes me sick” (in Ives, 2008). 
 Th e critics’ question, however, remains, “How can a magazine function, off ering 
depth, variety, and detail, when BP and Morgan Stanley are joined by dozens of other 
advertisers, each demanding to preview content, not for its direct comment on matters 
of importance to their businesses, but for controversy and potential off ensiveness? 
What will be the impact on the ideals of a free press and of free inquiry?”    
 In October 2007, Glamour’s editors shaved at 
least two dress sizes from America Ferrera’s body in 
an eﬀ ort, in their eyes, to make her a less Ugly Betty. 
This not only put the alteration of magazine graphics 
squarely into the cultural forum, but it led the 
 American Society of Magazine Editors to convene 
an industry committee to discuss possible rule 
changes regarding alteration of images.
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS   
 Recognizing the Power of Graphics 
 Detecting the use of and determining the informational value of advertorials is only 
one reason media literacy is important when reading magazines. Another necessary 
media literacy skill is the ability to understand how graphics and other artwork provide 
the background for interpreting stories. Some recent incidents suggest why. 
 Th e notorious June 27, 1994,  Time O. J. Simpson cover—for which artists altered 
 Simpson’s facial tones on an L.A. police department mug shot—is one controversial 
example of how graphics are used to create meaning. Th e magazine said it wanted to 
show the “real” O. J., free of the glamour and hype that usually surround him. Critics 
claimed that darkening Simpson’s face was designed to play to the ugly stereotype of 
African  Americans as criminals. Media-literate readers might also ask, “How does chang-
ing what was a ‘real’ photograph make the subject seem more real?” 
 More recent examples of digital fakery raise a diff erent question.  Glamour  digitally 
“reduced” television’s  Ugly Betty , America Ferrera, two dress sizes in October 2007, lead-
ing to industry calls for an investigation of the practice. Th en there is the  September 2009 
 Self  cover photo of Kelly Clarkson that pitted her fans against the magazine’s editors. Th e 
Kelly Clarkson who graced that cover, like America Ferrera on the front of  Glamour , was 
much thinner than in real life. Th at was bad enough for some, but editor Lucy Danzinger’s 
response to critics set off  a fi restorm of Internet protest. Editor Danzinger explained that 
even though the singer possessed “the truest beauty . . . the kind that comes 
from within” and that Kelly “doesn’t care what people think of her weight,” 
 Self  altered the image because it wanted to present the  American Idol win-
ner, “the picture of confi dence [that she] truly is,” as looking “her personal 
best” (in Williams, 2009). In other words, to show the  real  Kelly Clarkson, 
 Self  had to show the  unreal  Kelly Clarkson. 
 Th e American Medical Association found the practice suffi  ciently 
harmful that at its 2011 annual meeting it voted to encourage magazine 
industry eff orts to discontinue its use. “Advertisers commonly alter pho-
tographs to enhance the appearance of models’ bodies, and such altera-
tions can contribute to unrealistic expectations of appropriate body 
image—especially among impressionable children and adolescents," 
wrote the AMA. "A large body of literature links exposure to media- 
propagated images of unrealistic body image to eating disorders and 
other child and adolescent health problems" (in Ives, 2011c). 
 An additional media literacy issue here has to do with maintaining 
the confi dence of audience members. As digital altering of images 
becomes more widespread—and its occurrence better known—will 
viewers and readers come to question the veracity of even unaltered 
images and the reports that employ them? “With new technology, faking 
or doctoring photographs has never been simpler, faster, or more diffi  -
cult to detect,” explains  American Journalism Review ’s Sherry Ricchiardi. 
“Skilled operators truly are like magicians, except they use tools like 

118 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
Photoshop . . . to create their illusions.” “Th e public is losing faith in us. Without 
 credibility, we have nothing; we cannot survive,” adds John Long, chair of the ethics 
and standards committee of the National Press Photographers Association (both in 
Ricchiardi, 2007, pp. 37–38). 
 What do you think? Did you see any of these images? Did you know they had been 
altered? If you did, would that have changed your reading of the stories or events that 
they represented? Does the fact that major media outlets sometimes alter the images they 
present to you as news lead you to question their overall performance? Do you believe 
that media outlets that use altered images have an obligation to inform readers and view-
ers of their decision to restructure reality? How does it feel to know that almost all of the 
images that we see in our daily newspapers and news magazines today are digitized? 
Media-literate magazine readers are critical thinkers who make independent judgments about content, they think critically about 
media messages, and they have heightened expectations of the content they read. You’ll have to have all these skills to complete 
this  challenge.
 
Choose your favorite magazine and ﬁ nd all the pages, editorial and advertising, that show images of people. Identify those 
that have been digitally enhanced or changed. Critics and proponents alike acknowledge that just about every image appearing 
in a consumer magazine has been altered. How many did you ﬁ nd? What were your clues? How do you feel about the practice, 
and do you think the magazine had the right to make these alterations? What do your answers say about your understanding 
and respect for the power of media messages, your expectations of magazine content, and your ability to think critically about 
the messages in magazines? You may want to meet this challenge individually, using your favorite publication, or make it a 
competition. You can have diﬀ erent people examining the same magazine to see who can ﬁ nd the greatest number of alterations, 
or you can have teams compete against one another looking at an array of titles.
MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE 
Identifying Digital Alteration

 Describe the history and development of the magazine 
industry and the magazine itself as a medium. 
   Magazines, a favorite of 18th-century British elite, made 
an easy transition to colonial America. 
   Mass circulation magazines prospered in the post–Civil 
War years because of increased literacy, improved trans-
portation, reduced postal costs, and lower cover prices. 
   Magazines’ large readership and fi nancial health em-
powered the muckrakers to challenge society’s  powerful.  

 Identify how the organizational and economic nature of 
the contemporary magazine industry shapes the content 
of magazines. 
   Television changed magazines from mass circulation to 
specialized media; as a result, they are attractive to 
 advertisers because of their demographic specifi city, 
reader engagement, and reader affi  nity for the 
advertising they carry. 
  Th e three broad categories of magazines are trade, 
 professional, and business; industrial, company, and 
sponsored; and consumer magazines. 
   Magazine circulation comes in the form of subscription, 
single-copy sales, and controlled circulation. Advertiser 
demands for better measures of readership and account-
ability may render circulation an outmoded  metric.  

 Describe the relationship between magazines and 
their readers. 
   Custom publishing, in the form of brand magazines 
and magalogues, is one way that magazines stand out 
in a cluttered media environment.  
   Magazines further meet competition from other media, 
especially cable television, through internationalization, 
technology-driven improvements in distribution, and 
the sale of subscriber lists and their own direct market-
ing eff orts. 
 Resources for Review and Discussion  
 REVIEW POINTS: TYING CONTENT TO LEARNING OUTCOMES 

CHAPTER 5 
Magazines 
119
    Explain the convergence of magazines with the Internet 
and mobile technologies. 
   Virtually all magazines have online equivalents, al-
though they employ diff erent fi nancial models. 
   Readers are overwhelmingly positive about electronic 
magazines. 
   Th ey are equally enthusiastic about accessing magazines 
from mobile devices. 
    Apply key magazine-reading media literacy skills. 
   A number of industry revenue-enhancing practices pose 
diff erent challenges to media-literate readers: 
  Advertorials are commercial content designed to 
 appear like genuine editorial material. 
  Interruptive ads are ad copy that weaves in and 
around editorial content. 
  Complementary copy is editorial content that rein-
forces an advertiser’s message. 
  Ad-pull policies are advertiser demands, on threat of 
removal of its ads, for an advance view of a magazine’s 
content. 
  Heavy reliance on digitally altered graphics is regu-
larly employed in both advertising and editorial con-
tent and is highly controversial. 
 KEY TERMS 
 muckraking, 101 
 split runs, 107 
 circulation, 108 
 controlled circulation, 108 
 custom publishing, 108 
 QR (quick response) codes, 112 
 NFC (near-fi eld communication)
chips, 112 
  brand magazine, 112  
 magalogue, 113 
 interruptive ads, 114 
 advertorial, 114 
 complementary copy, 116 
 ad-pull policy, 116 
 QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW 
 1.  How would you characterize the content of the fi rst U.S. 
magazines? 
 2.  What factors fueled the expansion of the magazine industry 
at the beginning of the 20th century?  
 3.  What factors led to the demise of the mass circulation era 
and the development of the era of specialization? 
 4.  What are the three broad types of magazines? 
 5.  Why do advertisers favor specialization in magazines? 
 6.  What are engagement and affi  nity? Why are they important 
to advertisers? 
 7.  In what diff erent ways do magazines internationalize their 
publications? 
 8.  Why is the magazine industry optimistic about the eff ects of 
new mobile technologies on its relationship with readers?  
 9.  What is an advertorial? What is its function? 
    10.  What is complementary copy? Why does it trouble critics? 
For further review, go to the LearnSmart study module for 
this chapter.
 QUESTIONS FOR CRITICAL THINKING AND DISCUSSION 
 1.  Can you think of any contemporary crusading magazine or 
muckraking writers? Compared with those of the progres-
sive era, they are certainly less visible. Why is this the case? 
 2.  Which magazines do you read? Draw a demographic profi le 
of yourself based only on the magazines you regularly read.  
 3.  Are you troubled by the practice of altering photographs? 
Can you think of times when it might be more appropriate 
than others?  


 
121
 Learning Objectives 
 The movies are our dream factories; they are bigger than life. With books, they are the only 
mass medium not dependent on advertising for their ﬁ nancial support. That means they 
must satisfy you, because you buy the tickets. This means that the relationship between 
medium and audience is diﬀ erent from those that exist with other media. After studying 
this chapter you should be able to
 Outline the history and development of the ﬁ lm industry and ﬁ lm itself as a medium. 
 Describe the cultural value of ﬁ lm and the implications of the blockbuster mentality 
for ﬁ lm as an important artistic and cultural medium. 
 Summarize the three components of the ﬁ lm industry—production, distribution, 
and exhibition. 
 Explain how the organizational and economic nature of the contemporary ﬁ lm 
industry shapes the content of ﬁ lms. 
 Describe the promise and peril of convergence and the new digital technologies to 
ﬁ lm as we know it. 
 Production is becoming more expensive and, simultaneously, less expensive.
 Apply ﬁ lm-watching media literacy skills, especially in interpreting merchandise 
tie-ins and product placements. 
 6
Academy Award nominee The Help. Amid the 
blockbusters, Hollywood can still produce mature, 
serious movies.
 Film

  P ARIS IS COLD AND DAMP ON THIS DECEMBER NIGHT, THREE DAYS AFTER CHRISTMAS IN 1895. But you bundle 
up and make your way to the Grand Café in the heart of the city. You’ve read in the 
morning paper that brothers Auguste and Louis Lumière will be displaying their new 
invention that somehow makes pictures move. Your curiosity is piqued. 
 Tables and chairs are set up in the basement room of the café, and a white bedsheet 
is draped above its stage. Th e Lumières appear to polite applause. Th ey announce the 
program:  La Sortie des usines Lumière (Quitting Time at the Lumière Factory); Le Repas 
de bébé , featuring a Lumière child eating;  L’Arroseur arrosé , about a practical-joking 
boy and his victim, the gardener; and fi nally  L’Arrivée d’un train en gare , the arrival of 
a train at a station. 
 Th e lights go out. Somewhere behind you, someone starts the machine. Th ere is 
some brief fl ickering on the suspended sheet and then . . . you are completely awe-
struck. Th ere before you—bigger than life-size—photographs are really moving. You 
see places you know to be miles away. You spy on the secret world of a prankster boy, 
remembering your own childhood. But the last fi lm is the most impressive. As the giant 
locomotive chugs toward the audience, you and most of the others are convinced you 
are about to be crushed. Th ere is panic. People are ducking under their chairs, scream-
ing. Death is imminent! 
 Th e fi rst paying audience in the history of motion pictures has just had a lesson in 
movie watching. 
 Th e Lumière brothers were excellent mechanics, and their father owned a factory 
that made photographic plates. Th eir fi rst fi lms were little more than what we would 
now consider black-and-white home movies. As you can tell from their titles, they were 
simple stories. Th ere was no editing; the camera was simply turned on, then turned 
off . Th ere were no fades, wipes, or fl ashbacks. No computer graphics, no dialogue, and 
no music. And yet much of the audience was terrifi ed by the oncoming cinematic 
locomotive. Th ey were illiterate in the language of fi lm. 
 We begin our study of the movies with the history of fi lm, from its entrepreneur-
ial beginnings, through the introduction of its narrative and visual language, to its 
1800
1850
1816   Niépce develops photography
1839   ▲ Daguerreotype introduced; Talbot’s calotype (paper ﬁlm)
1877   ▲ Muybridge takes race photos
1887   Goodwin’s celluloid roll ﬁlm 
1888   Dickson produces kinetograph
1889   Eastman’s easy-to-use camera
1891   Edison’s kinetoscope
1895   Lumière brothers debut cinématographe
1896   Edison unveils Edison Vitascope
1720s   Early eﬀorts using chemical salts to capture temporary
 
photographic images
1793    ▲ Niépce begins experimenting with methods to set optical
 
images
122 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences

establishment as a large, studio-run industry. We detail Hollywood’s relationship 
with its early audiences and changes in the structure and content of fi lms resulting 
from the introduction of television. We then look at contemporary movie produc-
tion, distribution, and exhibition systems and how convergence is altering all three, 
the infl uence of the major studios, and the economic pressures on them in an 
1900
1950
2000
1902   Méliès’s A Trip to the Moon
1903   Porter’s The Great Train Robbery (montage)
1908   Motion Picture Patents Company founded
1915   Lincoln Motion Picture Company; Griﬃth’s The Birth of a Nation
1922   Hays oﬃce opens
1926   ▲ Sound comes to ﬁlm
1934   Motion Picture Production Code issued
1939   Television unveiled at World’s Fair
1947   HUAC convenes
1948   Paramount Decision Cable TV introduced
2007   Purple Violets released directly to iTunes
2009   ▲ Avatar
2011   27 sequels released, the most ever in one year
2012   The Lorax has 70 merchandising partners
1969   ▲ Indie ﬁlm Easy Rider
1976   VCR introduced
1996   ▲ DVD introduced
 The Lumières’  L’Arrivée d’un train en gare . 
As simple as early ﬁ lms were, their viewers did not 
have suﬃ  cient ﬁ lm literacy to properly interpret, 
understand, and enjoy them. This scene supposedly 
sent people screaming and hiding to avoid being 
crushed by the oncoming train.
CHAPTER 6 
Film 
123

124 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
increasingly multimedia environment. We examine the special place movies hold 
for us and how ever-younger audiences and the fi lms that target them may aff ect 
our culture. Recognizing the use of product placement in movies is the basis for 
improving our media literacy skill.  
 A Short History of the Movies  
 We are no longer illiterate in the grammar of fi lm, nor are movies as simple as the early 
Lumière off erings. Consider the sophistication necessary for fi lmmakers to produce a 
computer-generated movie such as  Rango  and the skill required for audiences to read 
 Inception ’s   shifts in time and space, unconventional camera angles, and other twists 
and turns. How we arrived at this contemporary medium–audience relationship is a 
wonderful story. 
 Early newspapers were developed by businesspeople and patriots for a small, polit-
ically involved elite that could read, but the early movie industry was built largely by 
entrepreneurs who wanted to make money entertaining everyone. Unlike television, 
whose birth and growth were predetermined and guided by the already well-established 
radio industry (see Chapter 7), there were no precedents, no rules, and no expectations 
for movies. 
    Return to the opening vignette. Th e audience for the fi rst Lumière movies did not 
“speak fi lm.” Th ink of it as being stranded in a foreign country with no knowledge of 
the language and cultural conventions. You would have to make your way, with each 
new experience helping you better understand the next. First you’d learn some simple 
words and basic customs. Eventually, you’d be able to better understand the language 
and people. In other words, you’d become increasingly literate in that culture. Begin-
ning with that Paris premiere, people had to become fi lm literate. Th ey had to develop 
an understanding of cinematic alterations in time and place. Th ey had to learn how 
images and sound combined to create meaning. But unlike visiting in another culture, 
there was no existing cinematic culture. Movie creators and their audiences had to 
grow up together.  
 The Early Entrepreneurs 
 In 1873 former California governor Leland Stanford needed help winning a bet he 
had made with a friend. Convinced that a horse in full gallop had all four feet off  
the ground, he had to prove it. He turned to well-known photographer Eadweard 
Muybridge, who worked on the problem for four years before fi nding a solution. In 1877 
Muybridge arranged a series of still cameras along a stretch of racetrack. As the horse 
sprinted by, each camera took its picture. Th e resulting photographs won Stanford his 
bet, but more important, they sparked an idea in their photographer. Muybridge was 
intrigued by the appearance of motion created when photos are viewed sequentially. 
He began taking pictures of numerous kinds of human and animal action. To display 
his work, Muybridge invented the    zoopraxiscope   , a machine for projecting slides onto 
a distant surface. 
 When people watched the rapidly projected, sequential slides, they saw the pictures 
as if they were in motion. Th is perception is the result of a physiological phenomenon 
known as    persistence of vision   , in which the images our eyes gather are retained in 
the brain for about 1/24 of a second. Th erefore, if photographic frames are moved at 
24 frames a second, people perceive them as actually in motion.      
 Muybridge eventually met the prolifi c inventor Th omas Edison in 1888. Edison 
quickly saw the scientifi c and economic potential of the zoopraxiscope and set his top 
scientist, William Dickson, to the task of developing a better projector. But Dickson 
correctly saw the problem as one of developing a better system of  fi lming . He under-
stood that shooting numerous still photos, then putting them in sequential order, then 
redrawing the images they held onto slides was inherently limiting. Dickson combined 

CHAPTER 6 
Film 
125
Hannibal Goodwin’s newly invented celluloid roll fi lm with George Eastman’s easy-
to-use Kodak camera to make a motion picture camera that took 40 photographs a 
second. He used his    kinetograph to fi lm all types of theatrical performances, some by 
unknowns and others by famous entertainers such as Annie Oakley and Buff alo Bill 
Cody. Of course, none of this would have been possible had it 
not been for photography itself. 
 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PHOTOGRAPHY  Th e process of photography was fi rst 
developed by French inventor Joseph Nicéphore Niépce around 
1816. Although there had been much experimentation in the 
realm of image making at the time, Niépce was the fi rst person 
to make practical use of a camera and fi lm. He photographed 
natural objects and produced color prints. Unfortunately, his 
images would last only a short time. 
 Niépce’s success, however, attracted the attention of country-
man Louis Daguerre, who joined with him to perfect the process. 
Niépce died before the 1839 introduction of the    daguerreotype , 
a process of recording images on polished metal plates, usually 
copper, covered with a thin layer of silver iodide emulsion. When 
light refl ected from an object passed through a lens and struck 
the emulsion, the emulsion would etch the image on the plate. 
Th e plate was then washed with a cleaning solvent, leaving a 
positive or replica image. 
 In the same year as Daguerre’s fi rst public display of the 
daguerreotype, British inventor William Henry Fox Talbot intro-
duced a paper fi lm process. Th is process was more important to 
the development of photography than the metal fi lm system, but 
the daguerreotype received widespread attention and acclaim 
and made the public enthusiastic about photography. 
 Muybridge’s horse pictures. When these plates were placed sequentially and rotated, they produced the appearance of motion.
  Typical of daguerreotypes, this plate captures 
a portrait. The method’s long exposure time made 
all but the most stationary subjects impossible 
to photograph. 

126 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 Th e  calotype    (Talbot’s system) used translucent paper, what we now call the 
negative, from which several prints could be made. In addition, his fi lm was much 
more sensitive than Daguerre’s metal plate, allowing for exposure times of only a 
few seconds as opposed to the daguerreotype’s 30 minutes. Until calotype, virtually 
all daguerreotype images were still lifes and portraits, a necessity with long expo-
sure times. 
 Th e fi nal steps in the development of the photographic process necessary for true 
motion pictures were taken, as we’ve just seen, by Goodwin in 1887 and Eastman in 
1889 and were adapted to motion pictures by Edison scientist Dickson.   
 THOMAS EDISON  Edison built the fi rst motion picture studio near his laboratory in New 
Jersey. He called it Black Maria, the common name at that time for a police paddy 
wagon. It had an open roof and revolved to follow the sun so the performers being 
fi lmed would always be illuminated. 
 Th e completed fi lms were not projected. Instead, they were run through a    kineto-
scope   , a sort of peep show device. Often they were accompanied by music provided 
by another Edison invention, the phonograph. Patented in 1891 and commercially 
available three years later, the kinetoscope quickly became a popular feature in penny 
arcades, vaudeville halls, and big-city Kinetoscope parlors. Th is marked the beginning 
of commercial motion picture exhibition.   
 THE LUMIÈRE BROTHERS  Th e Lumière brothers made the next advance. Th eir initial screen-
ings demonstrated that people would sit in a darkened room to watch motion pic-
tures projected on a screen. Th e brothers from Lyon envisioned great wealth in their 
ability to increase the number of people who could simultaneously watch a movie. 
In 1895 they patented their  cinématographe   , a device that both photographed and 
projected action. Within weeks of their Christmastime showing, long lines of enthu-
siastic moviegoers were waiting for their makeshift theater to open. Edison recog-
nized the advantage of the cinématographe over his kinetoscope, so he acquired the 
patent for an advanced projector developed by U.S. inventor Th omas Armat. On 
April 23, 1896, the Edison Vitascope premiered in New York City, and the American 
movie business was born.    
 The Coming of Narrative 
 Th e Edison and Lumière movies were typically only a few minutes long and showed 
little more than fi lmed reproductions of reality—celebrities, weight lifters, jugglers, and 
babies eating. Th ey were shot in fi xed frame (the camera did not move), and there was 
no editing. For the earliest audiences, this was enough. But soon the novelty wore thin. 
People wanted more for their money. French fi lmmaker Georges Méliès began making 
narrative motion pictures, that is, movies that told a story. At the end of the 1890s he 
was shooting and exhibiting one-scene, one-shot movies, but soon he began making 
stories based on sequential shots in diff erent places. He simply took one shot, stopped 
the camera, moved it, took another shot, and so on. Méliès is often called the “fi rst 
artist of the cinema” because he brought narrative to the medium in the form of imag-
inative tales such as  A Trip to the Moon (1902). 
 Méliès had been a magician and caricaturist before he became a fi lmmaker, and his 
inventive movies showed his dramatic fl air. Th ey were extravagant stage plays in which 
people disappeared and reappeared and other wonders occurred.  A Trip to the Moon 
came to America in 1903, and U.S. moviemakers were quick not only to borrow the 
idea of using fi lm to tell stories but also to improve on it.      
    Edwin S. Porter, an Edison Company camera operator, saw that fi lm could be an 
even better storyteller with more artistic use of camera placement and editing. His 
12-minute  Th e Great Train Robbery  (1903) was the fi rst movie to use editing, intercut-
ting of scenes, and a mobile camera to tell a relatively sophisticated tale. It was also 
the fi rst Western. Th is new narrative form using    montage —tying together two sepa-
rate but related shots in such a way that they took on a new, unifi ed meaning—was 

CHAPTER 6 
Film 
127
an instant hit with audiences. Almost immediately hundreds of    nickelodeons , some 
having as many as 100 seats, were opened in converted stores, banks, and halls across 
the United States. Th e price of admission was one nickel, hence the name. By 1905 
cities such as New York were opening a new nickelodeon every day. From 1907 to 
1908, the fi rst year in which there were more narrative than documentary fi lms, 
the number of nickelodeons in the United States increased tenfold. With so many 
 Scene from  A Trip to the Moon . Narrative came 
to the movies through the inventive imagination of 
Georges Méliès. 
  Scene from  The Great Train Robbery . Porter’s 
masterpiece introduced audiences to editing, 
intercutting of scenes, moving cameras … and 
the Western. 

128 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
exhibition halls in so many towns serving such an extremely enthusiastic public, 
many movies were needed. Literally hundreds and hundreds of new    factory studios , 
or production companies, were started. 
 Because so many movies needed to be made and rushed to the nickelodeons, peo-
ple working in the industry had to learn and perform virtually all aspects of production. 
Th ere was precious little time for, or profi tability in, the kind of specialization that 
marks contemporary fi lmmaking. Writer, actor, and camera operator D. W. Griffi  th 
perfected his craft in this environment. He was quickly recognized as a brilliant direc-
tor. He introduced innovations such as scheduled rehearsals before fi nal shooting and 
production based on close adherence to a shooting script. He lavished attention on 
otherwise ignored aspects of a fi lm’s look—costume and lighting—and used close-ups 
and other dramatic camera angles to transmit emotion. 
 All his skill came together in 1915 with the release of  Th e Birth of a Nation . 
Whereas Porter had used montage to tell a story, Griffi  th used it to create passion, 
move emotions, and heighten suspense. Th e most infl uential silent fi lm ever made, 
this three-hour epic was six weeks in rehearsal and nine weeks in shooting, cost 
$125,000 to produce (making it the most expensive movie made to that date), was 
distributed to theaters complete with an orchestral music score, had a cast of thou-
sands of humans and animals, and had an admission price well above the usual 
5 cents—$3. It was the most popular and profi table movie made and remained so 
until 1939, when it was surpassed by  Gone with the Wind . With other Griffi  th mas-
terpieces,  Intolerance  (1916) and  Broken Blossoms  (1919),  Th e Birth of a Nation set 
new standards for the American fi lm. Th ey took movies out of the nickelodeons and 
made them big business. At the same time, however,  Th e Birth of a Nation repre-
sented the basest aspects of U.S. culture because it included an ugly, racist portrayal 
of African Americans and a sympathetic treatment of the Ku Klux Klan. Th e fi lm 
inspired protests in front of theaters across the country and criticism in some news-
papers and magazines, and African Americans fought back with their own fi lms (see 
the essay, “African American Response to D. W. Griffi  th: Th e Lincoln and Micheaux 
Film Companies”). Nevertheless,  Th e Birth of a Nation  found acceptance by the vast 
majority of people.  
  The Ku Klux Klan was the collective hero in 
D. W. Griﬃ  th’s  The Birth of a Nation . This cinematic 
masterpiece and groundbreaking ﬁ lm employed 
production techniques never before used; however, 
its racist theme mars its legacy. 

CHAPTER 6 
Film 
129
 The Big Studios 
 In 1908 Th omas Edison, foreseeing the huge amounts of money that could be made 
from movies, founded the Motion Picture Patents Company (MPPC), often simply 
called the Trust. Th is group of 10 companies under Edison’s control, holding the patents 
to virtually all existing fi lmmaking and exhibition equipment, ran the production and 
distribution of fi lm in the United States with an iron fi st. Anyone who wanted to make 
or exhibit a movie needed Trust permission, which typically was not forthcoming. In 
addition, the MPPC had rules about the look of the movies it would permit: Th ey must 
be one reel, approximately 12 minutes long, and must adopt a “stage perspective”; that 
is, the actors must fi ll the frame as if they were in a stage play. 
 Many independent fi lm companies sprang up in defi ance of the Trust, including 
Griffi  th’s in 1913. To avoid MPPC scrutiny and reprisal, these companies moved to 
 The African American community did not sit passively in the wake of 
D. W. Griffith’s 1915 cinematic but hateful wonder,  The Birth of a Nation. 
The NAACP fought the film in court and on the picket line, largely un-
successfully. But other African Americans decided to use film to combat 
 Birth.  The first was Emmett J. Scott, a quiet, scholarly man. He sought 
money from the country’s Black middle class to produce a short film 
showing the achievements of African Americans. His intention was to 
attach his film,  Lincoln’s Dream,  as a prologue to screenings of the 
Griffith film. Together with screenwriter Elaine Sterne, Scott eventually expanded the 
project into a feature-length movie. He approached Universal Studios with his film but 
was rejected. 
 
 With independent backing from both Black and White investors, the ﬁ lm was 
released in 1918. Produced by an inexperienced cast and crew working on a production 
beset by bad weather and technical diﬃ  culties, the retitled  The Birth of a Race  ﬁ lled 
12 reels of ﬁ lm and ran more than three hours. Its publicity hailed it as “The Greatest and 
Most Daring of Photoplays . . . The Story of Sin . . . A Master Picture Conceived in the 
Spirit of Truth and Dedicated to All the Races of the World” (Bogle, 1989, p. 103). It was an 
artistic and commercial failure. Scott, however, had inspired others. 
 Even before  The Birth of a Race  was completed, the Lincoln Motion Picture Company was 
incorporated, in Nebraska in 1916 and in California in 1917, by brothers Noble P. and George 
Johnson. Their tack diﬀ ered from Scott’s. They understood that their Black ﬁ lms would never 
be allowed on “White” screens, so they produced movies designed to tell Black-oriented 
stories to Black audiences. They might not be able to convince White America of Griﬃ  th’s 
error, but they could reassure African Americans that their views could ﬁ nd expression. 
Lincoln’s ﬁ rst movie was  The Realization of a Negro’s Ambition, and it told the story of Black 
American achievements. The Johnson brothers turned U.S. racism to their advantage. Legal 
segregation in the South and de facto segregation in the North had led to an explosion of 
Black theaters. These movie houses needed content. Lincoln helped provide it by producing 
10 three-reelers between 1916 and 1920. 
 
 Another notable ﬁ lm company soon began operation, hoping to challenge, at least in 
Black theaters, Griﬃ  th’s portrayals. Oscar Micheaux founded the Micheaux Film and Book 
Company in 1918 in Chicago and soon produced  The Homesteader,  an eight-reel ﬁ lm 
based on the autobiographical novel he’d written three years earlier. It was the story of a 
successful Black homestead rancher in South Dakota. But Micheaux was not content to 
boost Black self-esteem. He was determined to make “racial photoplays 
depicting racial life” (as quoted in Sampson, 1977, p. 42). In 1920 he re-
leased  Within Our Gates,  a drama about the southern lynching of a Black 
man. Censored and denied a screening in dozens of cities both North and 
South, Micheaux was undeterred. In 1921 he released the eight-reeler 
 The Gunsaulus Mystery,  based on a well-known murder case in which a 
Black man was convicted. 
 
 These early ﬁ lm pioneers used their medium to make a diﬀ erence. They challenged the 
interpretation of history being circulated by the most popular movie in the world, and they 
provided encouragement and entertainment to the African American community.  
  A scene from  The Realization of a Negro’s Ambition . 
 USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE 
 African American Response to 
D. W. Grifﬁ th: The Lincoln and 
Micheaux Film Companies 
“ They might not be able to convince White America 
of Grifﬁ th’s error, but they could reassure African 
Americans that their views could ﬁ nd expression. ”

130 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
California. Th is westward migration had other benefi ts. Better weather meant longer 
shooting seasons. Free of MPPC standards, people like Griffi  th who wanted to explore 
the potential of fi lms longer than 12 minutes and with imaginative use of the camera 
were free to do so. 
 Th e new studio system, with its more elaborate fi lms and big-name stars, was 
born, and it controlled the movie industry from California. Th omas H. Ince (maker 
of the William S. Hart Westerns), Griffi  th, and comedy genius Mack Sennett formed 
the Triangle Company. Adolph Zukor’s Famous Players in Famous Plays—formed 
when Zukor was denied MPPC permission to distribute one of his fi lms—joined 
with several other independents and a distribution company to become Paramount. 
Other independents joined to create the Fox Film Company (soon called 20th Cen-
tury Fox) and Universal. Although fi lms were still silent, by the mid-1920s there 
were more than 20,000 movie theaters in the United States, and more than 350,000 
people were making their living in fi lm production. More than 1,240,000 feet of fi lm 
was shot each year in Hollywood, and annual domestic U.S. box offi  ce receipts 
exceeded $750 million. 
 Th e industry prospered not just because of its artistry, drive, and innovation but 
because it used these to meet the needs of a growing audience. At the beginning of 
the 20th century, generous immigration rules, combined with political and social 
unrest abroad, encouraged a fl ood of European immigrants who congregated in U.S. 
cities where the jobs were and where people like themselves who spoke their lan-
guage lived. American farmers, largely illiterate, also swarmed to the cities as years 
of drought and farm failure left them without home or hope. Jobs in the big mills 
and factories, although unpleasant, were plentiful. Th ese new city dwellers had 
money and the need for leisure activities. Movies were a nickel, required no ability 
to read or to understand English, and off ered glamorous stars and wonderful stories 
from faraway places. 
 Foreign political unrest proved to be a boon to the infant U.S. movie business in 
another way as well. In 1914 and 1915, when the California studios were remaking the 
industry in their own grand image, war raged in Europe. European moviemaking, most 
signifi cantly the infl uential French, German, and Russian cinema, came to a halt. Euro-
pean demand for movies, however, did not. American movies, produced in huge num-
bers for the hungry home audience, were ideal for overseas distribution. Because so 
few in the domestic audience could read English, few printed titles were used in the 
then-silent movies. Th erefore, little had to be changed to satisfy foreign moviegoers. 
Film was indeed a universal language, but more important, the American fi lm industry 
had fi rmly established itself as the world leader, all within 20 years of the Lumière 
brothers’ fi rst screening. 
 Change Comes to Hollywood 
 As was the case with newspapers and magazines, the advent of television signifi cantly 
altered the movie–audience relationship. But the nature of that relationship had been 
shaped and reshaped in the three decades between the coming of sound and the com-
ing of television.  
 THE TALKIES  Th e fi rst sound fi lm was one of three fi lms produced by Warner Brothers. It 
may have been  Don Juan  (1926), starring John Barrymore, distributed with synchro-
nized music and sound eff ects. Or perhaps Warner’s more famous  Th e Jazz Singer 
(1927), starring Al Jolson, which had several sound and speaking scenes (354 words in 
all) but was largely silent. Or it may have been the 1928 all-sound  Lights of New York . 
Historians disagree because they cannot decide what constitutes a sound fi lm. 
 Th ere is no confusion, however, about the impact of sound on the movies and 
their audiences. First, sound made possible new genres—musicals, for example. Sec-
ond, as actors and actresses now had to really act, performance aesthetics improved. 
Th ird, sound made fi lm production a much more complicated and expensive propo-
sition. As a result, many smaller fi lmmakers closed shop, solidifying the hold of the 

CHAPTER 6 
Film 
131
big studios over the industry. In 1933, 60% of all U.S. fi lms came from Hollywood’s 
eight largest studios. By 1940, they were producing 76% of all U.S. movies and col-
lecting 86% of the total box offi  ce. As for the audience, in 1926, the year of  Don Juan ’s 
release, 50 million people went to the movies each week. In 1929, at the onset of the 
Great Depression, the number had risen to 80 million. By 1930, when sound was 
fi rmly entrenched, the number of weekly moviegoers had risen to 90 million (Mast 
& Kawin, 1996).  
 SCANDAL  Th e popularity of talkies, and of movies in general, inevitably raised questions 
about their impact on the culture. In 1896, well before sound,  Th e Kiss  had generated 
a great moral outcry. Its stars, John C. Rice and May Irwin, were also the leads in the 
popular Broadway play  Th e Widow Jones , which closed with a climactic kiss. Th e Edison 
Company asked Rice and Irwin to re-create the kiss for the big screen. Newspapers 
and politicians were bombarded with complaints from the off ended. Kissing in the 
theater was one thing; in movies it was quite another! Th e then-newborn industry 
responded to this and other calls for censorship with various forms of self-regulation 
and internal codes. But in the early 1920s more Hollywood scandals forced a more 
direct response. 
 In 1920 “America’s Sweetheart” Mary Pickford obtained a questionable Nevada 
divorce from her husband and immediately married the movies’ other darling, Douglas 
Fairbanks, himself newly divorced. In 1920 and 1921 comedian Fatty Arbuckle was 
involved in police problems on two coasts. Th e fi rst was apparently hushed up after a 
$100,000 gift was made to a Massachusetts district attorney, but the second involved 
a murder at a San Francisco hotel party thrown by the actor. Although he was acquit-
ted in his third trial (the fi rst two ended in hung juries), the stain on Arbuckle and the 
industry remained. Th en, in 1922, actor Wallace Reid and director William Desmond 
  Al Jolson, in blackface, and May McAvoy starred in the 1927  The Jazz Singer , one of three claimants to the title of ﬁ rst sound movie. 

132 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
Taylor both died in what the newspapers referred to as “a 
mysterious fashion” in which drugs and sex were thought to 
have played a part. Th e cry for government intervention was 
raised. State legislatures introduced more than 100 separate 
pieces of legislation to censor or otherwise control movies 
and their content. 
 Hollywood responded in 1922 by creating the Motion 
Picture Producers and Distributors of America (MPPDA) 
and appointing Will H. Hays—chair of the Republican 
Party, a Presbyterian church elder, and a former postmaster 
general—president. Th e Hays Offi  ce, as it became known, 
undertook a vast eff ort to improve the image of the movies. 
Stressing the importance of movies to national life and as an 
educational medium, Hays promised better movies and 
founded a committee on public relations that included many 
civic and religious leaders. Eventually, in 1934, the Motion 
Picture Production Code (MPPC) was released. Th e MPPC 
forbade the use of profanity, limited bedroom scenes to mar-
ried couples, required that skimpy outfi ts be replaced by more complete costumes, 
delineated the length of screen kisses, ruled out scenes that ridiculed public offi  cials 
or religious leaders, and outlawed a series of words from “God” to “nuts,” all enforced 
by a $25,000 fi ne. 
 NEW GENRES, NEW PROBLEMS  By 1932 weekly movie attendance had dropped to 60 million. 
Th e Great Depression was having its eff ect. Yet the industry was able to weather the 
crisis for two reasons. Th e fi rst was its creativity. New genres held people’s interest. 
Feature documentaries such as  Th e Plow Th at Broke the Plains  (1936) spoke to audi-
ence needs to understand a world in seeming disorder. Musicals such as  42nd Street 
(1933) and screwball comedies like  Bringing Up Baby (1938) provided easy escapism. 
Gangster movies such as  Little Caesar  (1930) refl ected the grimy reality of Depression 
city streets and daily newspaper headlines. Horror fi lms such as  Frankenstein (1931) 
articulated audience feelings of alienation and powerlessness in a seemingly uncon-
trollable time. Socially conscious comedies such as  Mr. Deeds Goes to Town (1936) 
reminded moviegoers that good could still prevail, and the    double feature with a 
 B-movie   —typically a less expensive movie—was a welcome relief to penny-pinching 
working people. 
 Th e movie business also survived the Depression because of its size and power, 
both residing in a system of operation called    vertical integration . Using this system, 
studios produced their own fi lms, distributed them through their own outlets, and 
exhibited them in their own theaters. In eff ect, the big studios controlled a movie 
from shooting to screening, guaranteeing distribution and an audience regardless 
of quality. 
 When the 1930s ended, weekly attendance was again over 80 million, and Hol-
lywood was churning out 500 pictures a year. Moviegoing had become a central 
family and community activity for most people. Yet the end of that decade also 
brought bad news. In 1938 the Justice Department challenged vertical integration, 
suing the big fi ve studios—Warner Brothers, MGM, Paramount, RKO, and 20th Cen-
tury Fox—for restraint of trade; that is, they accused the studios of illegal monopo-
listic practices. Th e case would take 10 years to decide, but the movie industry, 
basking in the middle of its golden age, was under attack. Its fate was sealed in 1939 
when the Radio Corporation of America (RCA) made the fi rst public broadcast of 
television from atop the Empire State Building. Th e impact of these two events was 
profound, and the medium would have to develop a new relationship with its audi-
ence to survive.   
 TELEVISION   When World War II began, the government took control of all patents for the 
newly developing technology of television as well as of the materials necessary for its 
production. Th e diff usion of the medium to the public was therefore halted, but its 
 Screwball comedies like  Bringing Up Baby  
helped Americans escape the misery of the 
Great Depression.

CHAPTER 6 
Film 
133
technological improvement was not. In addition, the radio networks and advertising 
agencies, recognizing that the war would eventually end and that their futures were in 
television, were preparing for that day. When the war did end, the movie industry 
found itself competing not with a fl edgling medium but with a technologically and 
economically sophisticated one. Th e number of homes with television sets grew from 
10,000 in 1946 to more than 10 million in 1950 and 54 million in 1960. Meanwhile, by 
1955 movie attendance was down to 46 million people a week, fully 25% below even 
the worst attendance fi gures for the Depression years.   
 THE PARAMOUNT DECISION  In 1948, 10 years after the case had begun, the Supreme Court 
issued its Paramount Decision, eff ectively destroying the studios’ hold over moviemak-
ing. Vertical integration was ruled illegal, as was    block booking   , the practice of requir-
ing exhibitors to rent groups of movies, often inferior, to secure a better one. Th e 
studios were forced to sell off  their exhibition businesses (the theaters). Before the 
Paramount Decision, the fi ve major studios owned 75% of the fi rst-run movie houses 
in the United States; after it, they owned none. Not only did they no longer have guar-
anteed exhibition, but other fi lmmakers now had access to the theaters, producing 
even greater competition for the dwindling number of movie patrons.   
 RED SCARE  Th e U.S. response to its postwar position as world leader was fear. So con-
cerned were some members of Congress that communism would steal the people’s 
rights that Congress decided to steal them fi rst. Th e Hollywood chapter of the virulent 
anticommunism movement we now call McCarthyism (after the Republican senator 
from Wisconsin, Joseph McCarthy, its most rabid and public champion) was led by the 
House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) and its chair, J. Parnell Th omas 
(later imprisoned for padding his congressional payroll). First convened in 1947, HUAC 
had as its goal to rid Hollywood of communist infl uence. Th e fear was that communist, 
socialist, and leftist propaganda was being secretly inserted into entertainment fi lms 
by “Reds,” “fellow travelers,” and “pinkos.” Many of the industry’s best and brightest 
talents were called to testify before the committee and were asked, “Are you now or 
have you ever been a member of the Communist Party?” Th ose who came to be known 
as the Hollywood 10, including writers Ring Lardner Jr. and Dalton Trumbo and direc-
tor Edward Dmytryk, refused to answer the question, accusing the committee, by its 
mere existence, of being in violation of the Bill of Rights. All were jailed. Rather than 
defend its First Amendment rights, the fi lm industry abandoned those who were even 
mildly critical of the “Red Scare,” jettisoning much of its best talent at a time when it 
could least aff ord to do so. In the fi ght against television, movies became increasingly 
tame for fear of being too controversial. 
 Th e industry was hurt not only by its cowardice but also by its shortsightedness. 
Hungry for content, the television industry asked Hollywood to sell it old features for 
broadcast. Th e studios responded by imposing on themselves the rule that no fi lms 
could be sold to television and no working fi lm star could appear on “the box.” When 
it could have helped to shape early television viewer tastes and expectations of the new 
medium, Hollywood was absent. It lifted its ban in 1958.   
 FIGHTING BACK  Th e industry worked mightily to recapture audiences from television using 
both technical and content innovations. Some of these innovations remain today and 
serve the medium and its audiences well. Th ese include more attention to special 
eff ects, greater dependence on and improvements in color, and CinemaScope (project-
ing on a large screen two and one-half times wider than it is tall). Among the forget-
table technological innovations were primitive 3-D and smellovision (wafting odors 
throughout the theater). 
 Innovation in content included spectaculars with which the small screen could 
not compete.  Th e Ten Commandments  (1956),  Ben Hur  (1959),  El Cid  (1960), and 
 Spartacus  (1960) fi lled the screen with many thousands of extras and lavish settings. 
Now that television was catering to the mass audience, movies were free to present 
challenging fare for more sophisticated audiences. Th e “message movie” charted 
social trends, especially alienation of youth ( Blackboard Jungle , 1955;  Rebel Without 

134 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
a Cause , 1955) and prejudice ( 12 Angry Men , 1957;  Imitation of Life , 1959;  To Kill a 
Mockingbird , 1962). Changing values toward sex were examined ( Midnight Cowboy , 
1969;  Bob and Carol and Ted and Alice , 1969), as was the new youth culture’s rejec-
tion of middle-class values ( Th e Graduate , 1967;  Goodbye Columbus , 1969) and its 
revulsion/attraction to violence ( Bonnie and Clyde , 1967). Th e movies as an industry 
had changed, but as a medium of social commentary and cultural impact, they may 
have grown up.  
 Movies and Their Audiences  
 We talk of Hollywood as the “dream factory,” the makers of “movie magic.” We want 
our lives and loves to be “just like in the movies.” Th e movies are “larger than life,” and 
movie stars are much more glamorous than television stars. Th e movies, in other 
words, hold a very special place in our culture. Movies, like books, are a culturally 
special medium, an important medium. In this sense the movie–audience relationship 
has more in common with that of books than with that of television. Just as people buy 
books, they buy movie tickets. Because the audience is in fact the true consumer, 
power rests with it in fi lm more than it does in television. 
 For better or worse, today’s movie audience is increasingly a young one. Th e typ-
ical moviegoer in the United States is a teenager or young adult. Th ese teens and 
20-somethings, although making up less than 20% of the total population, represent 
more than 30% of the tickets bought. It’s no surprise, then, that new screens sprout 
at malls, where teens and even younger people can be dropped off  for a day of safe 
entertainment. Many movies are aimed at kids— Alvin and the Chipmunks ,  Ice Age, 
Lilo & Stitch , and  Scooby-Doo;  all the  Toy Story, Rush Hour , and  American Pie fi lms; 
all the movies based on television shows, computer games, and comic books. Look 
at the top 20 worldwide box offi  ce hits of all time in Figure 6.1. With the exception 
of  Titanic  (1997), a special-eff ects showcase itself, all are fantastic adventure fi lms 
that appeal to younger audiences. Th e question asked by serious observers of the 
relationship between fi lm and culture is whether the medium is increasingly domi-
nated by the wants, tastes, and needs of what amounts to an audience of children. 
What becomes of fi lm as an important medium, one with something to say, one that 
challenges people?   
 What becomes of fi lm as an important medium, say the movies’ defenders, is com-
pletely dependent on us, the audience. “It’s the public,” explains popular and distin-
guished actor John Malkovich. “Th e public gets the kind of politics, movies, and culture 
it deserves. Th e current state of aff airs [in American fi lmmaking] is the result of the 
 Warren Beatty eats some lead in the climax of 
the 1967 hit movie  Bonnie and Clyde .

CHAPTER 6 
Film 
135
Avatar (2009)
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: Part 2 (2011)
Titanic (1997)
Marvel's The Avengers (2012)
 
Transformers: Dark of the Moon (2011)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003)
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest (2006)
Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen (2009)
Toy Story 3 (2010)
Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides (2011)
Alice in Wonderland (2010)
The Dark Knight (2008)
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: Part 1 (2010)
Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix (2007)
Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince (2009)
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (2002)
Jurassic Park (1993)
Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone (2001)
Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End (2007)
Movie rank and box ofﬁce revenues (in millions of dollars)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
$1,328
$2,185
$2,782
$1,196
$1,124
$1,119
$1,066
$1,114
$1,063
$1,042
$1,023
$1,022
$946
$923
$937
$934
$922
$920
$969
$958
  Figure 6.1  Top 20 All-Time Worldwide Box Oﬃ  ce Hits (in millions). 
Source: imdb.com

136 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
lack of [a] fundamental and essential trait, which is curiosity” (as quoted in McKenna, 
2000, p. 70). 
 Industry defenders argue that fi lms aimed at young people aren’t necessarily 
movies with nothing to say.  Juno  (2007) and  Saved  (2004) are “teen fi lms” off ering 
important insight into American society and youth culture, as well as into the topics 
they explicitly examine, namely, unwanted pregnancy and religion, respectively. In 
addition, despite Hollywood’s infatuation with younger moviegoers, it still produces 
scores of movies of merit for a wider audience— Gran Torino (2009),  Crash (2005), 
 Revolutionary Road (2008),  Hurt Locker  (2009),  Th e King’s Speech  (2010). All 10 best-
picture nominees in 2011 were adult, important movies that had much to say about 
us as a people and as a culture:  Th e Artist ,  Th e Descendants ,  Extremely Loud & 
Incredibly Close ,  Th e Help ,  Hugo ,  Midnight in Paris ,  Moneyball ,  Th e Tree of Life , and 
 War Horse . 
 If Hollywood is fi xated on kid and teen movies, why does it give us such treasures? 
True, Michael Eisner, as president of Paramount Pictures and then CEO of Disney, 
wrote in an internal memo, “We have no obligation to make history. We have no obli-
gation to make art. We have no obligation to make a statement. Our only obligation is 
to make money” (as quoted in “Friend,” 2000, p. 214). Nevertheless, the movie industry 
continues to produce fi lms that indeed make history, art, and a statement while they 
make money. It does so because we buy tickets to those movies.    
 Scope and Nature of 
the Film Industry  
 Hollywood’s record year of 1946 saw the sale of more than 4 billion tickets. Today, 
about 1.3 billion people a year will see a movie in a U.S. theater. Domestic box offi  ce 
in 2011 was $10.1 billion. Twenty-nine movies in 2011, including  Harry Potter and the 
Deathly Hallows: Part 2  and  Transformers: Dark of the Moon , which each took in more 
than $300 million, exceeded $100 million in U.S.-only box offi  ce. Sixty topped that 
amount worldwide. As impressive as these numbers may seem, like other media peo-
ple, movie industry insiders remain nervous, as you saw in Chapter 2. Ticket sales 
remain fl at when measured against population growth, and much of the relative stabil-
ity in box offi  ce revenues is attributable to higher ticket prices. Th e question they ask 
about the future, one you can try to answer yourself after reading the essay, is “Will 
We Continue to Go to the Movies?” 
 Critics assailed  Titanic for its weak story line and two-dimensional characters—the real stars of the world’s ﬁ rst billion-dollar box oﬃ  ce hit were the special eﬀ ects. But grand special eﬀ ects are no guarantee 
of success. FX-laden  Mars Needs Moms was an all-time box oﬃ  ce stinker, costing $150 million to make and earning only $39 million worldwide in 2011, while 2009’s  Paranormal Activity , devoid of technical 
legerdemain and made in seven days for $15,000, earned $170 million in global box oﬃ  ce that year.

CHAPTER 6 
Film 
137
the price of a trustworthy baby-sitter (if necessary), and “catching a ﬂ ick” becomes 
quite costly.  
  6.  And what happens when people get to their seats? Chatty neighbors—that is,  an 
increasingly loud and rude environment , especially cell phone users, crying babies, 
and antsy children at age-inappropriate movies.  
  7.  But surely once the house goes dark, all is well. Well, no. People who have just 
paid handsomely to be at the movies are then faced with  full-length commercials 
before the trailers . Most of the screens in the United States run these commercials. 
Audiences notice, and anecdotal evidence suggests they’re unhappy. Film critic 
Richard Roeper argues, “If someone’s waiting through 20 minutes of commer-
cials, you’ve got people behind your seat and talking on cell phones, don’t you 
think a lot of people might say, ‘You know what? I’ve got a great sound system, 
I’ve got a 50-inch plasma screen. I’m just going to wait two months until the 
DVD comes out’?” (in Germain, 2005).  
  8.  This, in fact, is the industry’s greatest fear,  new digital technologies , especially wired 
homes (with video-on-demand; high-deﬁ nition, big-screen TVs; pay-per-view 
movies); increasingly sophisticated DVDs (that are not only packed with extra 
features but now released within weeks of the ﬁ lm’s big-screen premiere); dollar-
DVD kiosks at supermarkets, McDonalds, and gas stations (more than 33,000); and 
easy-to-use and inexpensive Internet movie downloads. 
  9.  People’s reliance on sophisticated in-home technologies poses an additional threat 
to the ﬁ lm industry because it presages a generational  shift away from movies . It is 
precisely those young people who will be tomorrow’s seat-ﬁ llers who are abandon-
ing the theater experience with the least regret. Even though males between 13 and 
25 years old still constitute the largest single moviegoing demographic, when box 
oﬃ  ce dips, moviegoing among these valuable fans drops even more than other 
groups because they have ready access to and greater facility with attractive and 
inexpensive options, speciﬁ cally video games and the Internet. 
 Enter your voice. Do you go to the movies as much as you once did? If not, why not? If you 
remain a regular moviegoer, why? What makes the “moviegoing experience” worth the 
eﬀ ort? Many exhibitors are adding “perks,” such as video arcades and wine and martini bars. 
Would moves such as these “improve” the experience for you?    
  Will outlandish snack prices keep you from going to the movies?   
 CULTURAL FORUM 
 Will We Continue to Go to the Movies? 
The data tell a troubling tale. 2011’s 1.3 billion movie attendees, while 
impressive, represent a 13% drop from the decade’s high in 2002; the 
$10.1 billion in ticket sales is also lower than 2002’s $11 billion. The ups and 
downs of the movie business are in the news, but the issue that roils the 
cultural forum is, “Will people keep going to the movies?” As you might 
imagine, there is no shortage of answers.
  1.  The last several years have seen too many bad movies . Only big-budget 
sequels and higher-priced tickets for 3-D movies saved box oﬃ  ce totals from even 
greater declines. These made up for ﬂ ops like  Land of the Lost ,  Mars Needs Moms , and 
 The Three Musketeers . Many critics even saw Hollywood’s 2010 announcement that 
beginning with 2009’s crop of ﬁ lms, there would be 10 nominees for a “Best Picture” 
Academy Award instead of the usual 5 as a cynical attempt to double the number 
of “acclaimed best pictures,” not double the number of actual good movies.  
  2.  Not unrelated,  fewer good movies mean that not as many people are making it to the 
theater in the ﬁ rst place, denying them the opportunity to see trailers for and get 
excited about other ﬁ lms. 
  3.  If there are good ﬁ lms, people 
go the movies; if not, they go 
less frequently and they tend 
to forget about the movies as 
an option when looking for 
entertainment.  Ad Age critic 
T. L. Stanley (2005) calls this 
 out of sight, out of mind (p. 20). 
  4.  This problem is further 
complicated by people’s 
skepticism about just what they will see should they go to the movies. Stanley 
calls this  what you see is not what you get . In other words, desperate studios over-
hyping every new movie as an event or something special or out of the ordinary 
eventually turns oﬀ  inevitably disappointed fans. 
  5.  But what faces fans when they do arrive at the movies? A very  expensive outing. 
The average ticket price has increased at twice the rate of inﬂ ation in the last 
decade, to $7.93, up from $4.69 in 1998 (Verrier, 2012). Add to this the cost of 
the overpriced Goobers, popcorn, and soda plus the cost of gas to get there plus 
 “People’s reliance on sophisticated in-home technologies poses 
an additional threat to the ﬁ lm industry because it presages a 
generational shift away from movies. It is precisely those young 
people who will be tomorrow’s seat-ﬁ llers who are leaving the 
movie experience with the least regret.” 

138 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 Three Component Systems 
 Th ere are three component systems in the movie industry—production, distribution, 
and exhibition. Each is undergoing signifi cant change in the contemporary digital, 
converged media environment.  
 PRODUCTION  Production is the making of movies. About 700 feature-length fi lms are pro-
duced annually in the United States, a large increase over the early 1980s, when, for 
example, in 1985, 288 features were produced. As we’ll see later in this chapter, sig-
nifi cant revenues from home video are one reason for the increase, as is growing con-
glomerate ownership that demands more product for more markets. 
 Technology, too, has aff ected production. Most Hollywood fi lms are shot on video. 
In most cases, this shooting is done in conjunction with capturing the movie on fi lm 
and is used as a form of immediate feedback for directors and cinematographers. 
However, the success of digitally shot movies big (all-time box offi  ce champ, 2009’s 
 Avatar , George Lucas’s 2012  Red Tails ) and small (1999’s  Blair Witch Project , made 
for $35,000, earning $220 million worldwide; 2009’s  Paranormal Activity , shot in 
seven days for $15,000, earning $170 million) has moved even more fi lmmakers to 
greater use of digital capture—on videotape, disc, or memory chip—as a primary 
shooting format. 
 Another infl uence of technology can be seen in the three top-grossing movies of 
2011— Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: Part 2 ,  Transformers: Dark of the Moon , 
and  Pirates of the Caribbean:  On Stranger Tides . Digital fi lmmaking has made grand 
special eff ects not only possible but expected. Stunning special eff ects, of which  Titanic 
(1997) and  Avatar  are fi ne examples, can make a good movie an excellent one. Th e 
downside of computer-generated special eff ects is that they can greatly increase 
production costs.  Titanic  cost more than $200 million to make;  Avatar  more than 
$300 million. Th e Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) reports that the  aver-
age  cost of producing and marketing a Hollywood feature is $112 million, a fi gure 
infl ated, in large part, by the demands of audience-expected digital legerdemain. Many 
observers see this large increase in production costs as a major reason studios are less 
willing to take creative chances in a big-budget fi lm. 
 DISTRIBUTION  Distribution was once as simple as making prints of fi lms and shipping 
them to theaters. Now it means supplying these movies to television networks, cable 
and satellite networks, makers of videodiscs, and Internet streaming companies. In all, 
a distributor must be able to off er a single movie in as many as 250 diff erent digital 
formats worldwide to accommodate the specifi c needs of the many digital retailers it 
must serve (Ault, 2009). Th e sheer scope of the distribution business ensures that large 
companies (most typically the big studios themselves) will dominate. In addition to 
making copies and guaranteeing their delivery, distributors now fi nance production 
and take responsibility for advertising and promotion and for setting and adjusting 
release dates. Th e advertising and promotion budget for a Hollywood feature usually 
equals 50% of the production costs. Sometimes, the ratio of promotion to production 
costs is even higher.  Avatar  may have cost $300 million to produce, but its studio, Fox, 
spent another $200 million in marketing and promotion, bringing the total to half a 
billion dollars, the most expensive movie ever made (Hampp, 2010). Was it worth it? 
 Avatar  took only 39 days from the day of its release to become the highest-grossing 
movie of all time ($1.86 billion), accounting for 56 million tickets in the United States 
alone. Within another month, it had increased that take to $2.36 billion (Cieply, 2010; 
Hampp, 2010). So spending $25 million to $50 million to tout a Hollywood movie (the 
industry average; Graser, 2011) is not uncommon, and the investment is seen as worth-
while, if not necessary. In fact, so important has promotion become to the fi nancial 
success of a movie that studios such as Universal and MGM include their advertising 
and marketing people in the    green light process   , that is, the decision to make a picture 
in the fi rst place. Th ese promotion professionals can say yes or no to a fi lm’s production, 

CHAPTER 6 
Film 
139
and they must also declare how much money and eff ort they will put behind the fi lm 
if they do vote yes. 
 Another important factor in a fi lm’s promotion and eventual fi nancial success is 
the distributor’s decision to release it to a certain number of screens. One strategy, 
called the    platform rollout   , is to open a movie on a few screens and hope that 
critical response, fi lm festival success, and good word-of-mouth reviews from those 
who do see it will propel it to success. Naturally, the advantage of this approach for 
the distributor is that it can greatly reduce the cost of promotion. Th e Weinstein 
Company opened  Th e King’s Speech  on four screens in 2010, awaiting the rush of 
critical acclaim that was sure to follow. It went into wide release—2,553 screens—a 
month later after winning scores of awards, including 12 Oscar nominations, 1 for 
Best Picture. Films likely to suff er at the hands of critics or from poor word-of-
mouth—for example,  Th e Rite  (2011, 2,553 screens) and  Speed Racer  (2008, 3,606 
screens)—typically open in hundreds of theaters simultaneously. However, it is not 
uncommon for a potential hit to open on many screens, as  Avatar did in 2009—on 
more than 18,300 worldwide.   
 EXHIBITION  Th ere are currently over 38,000 movie screens in the United States spread 
over 6,000 sites. More than 80% of theaters have two or more screens and average 340 
seats in front of each. One-half of all screens are owned by a studio. For example, Sony 
owns more than 3,000 under the names Sony/Loews, Sony IMAX, Magic Johnson, and 
Loews-Star Th eaters. Screens not owned by a studio are typically part of larger chains, 
for example, National Cinemas with 10,000 screens. Th e seven largest chains, including 
those owned by studios, control 80% of all U.S. ticket sales. 
 It is no surprise to any moviegoer that exhibitors make much of their money on 
concession sales of items that typically have an 80% profi t margin, accounting for 40% 
of a theater’s profi ts. Th is is the reason that matinees and budget nights are attractive 
promotions for theaters. A low-priced ticket pays dividends in overpriced popcorn and 
Goobers. Th is, too, is why many exhibitors present more than movies to keep seats 
fi lled and concessions fl owing. “Live simulcasts of sporting events or whatever won’t 
displace the fi rst week of  Harry Potter ,” said Landmark Th eater’s Ted Mundorff , “but 
they might displace the fi fth week” (in Barnes, 2008, p. A1). So, too, might stand-up 
comedians, the NFL and NBA in 3-D, live opera performances, big-name musical con-
certs, and classic TV show marathons, especially when augmented by the wine bars 
and restaurants exhibitors are now adding to their cineplexes.    
 The Studios 
 Studios are at the heart of the movie business and increasingly are regaining control 
of the three component systems of the industry. Th ere are major studios, corporate 
independents, and independent studios. Th e majors, who fi nance their fi lms primarily 
 The King’s Speech opened on four screens;  The 
Rite , on 2,553. Can you guess why?

140 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
through the profi ts of their own business, include Warner Brothers, Columbia, Para-
mount, 20th Century Fox, Universal, MGM/UA, and Disney. Th e  corporate indepen-
dents    (so named because they produce movies that have the look and feel of 
independent fi lms) include Sony Classics, New Line Cinema (Warner), Fox Searchlight, 
and Focus Features (Universal). Th ese companies are in fact specialty or niche divi-
sions of the majors, designed to produce more sophisticated—but less costly—fare to 
(1) gain prestige for their parent studios and (2) earn signifi cant cable and DVD income 
after their critically lauded and good word-of-mouth runs in the theaters. Focus Fea-
tures, for example, was responsible for  Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy  (2011) and  Pariah 
(2011); Fox Searchlight was home to Oscar nominees  Black Swan  (2010),  Tree of Life 
(2011), and  Th e Descendants  (2011); New Line Cinema released  Hall Pass  (2011) and 
 Valentine’s Day  (2010); Sony Classics screened Oscar nominee  Midnight In Paris (2011) 
and  Th e Skin I Live In (2011). 
 Together, the majors and their specialty houses account for 80% to 90% of annual 
U.S. box offi  ce revenues, although they produce only about one-third of each year’s 
feature fi lms (“Market Share,” 2012). Th e remainder come from independent studios, 
companies that raise money outside the studio system to produce their fi lms. 
Lionsgate and Weinstein Company are two of the few remaining true independents 
in Hollywood, producing fi lms like  Precious, Th e Lincoln Lawyer , and the Saw and 
Tyler Perry movies (Lionsgate) and  Th e Reader, Halloween II, Th e King’s Speech , and 
 Inglourious Basterds  (Weinstein). But countless other independents continue to 
churn out fi lms, often with the hope of winning a distribution deal with one of the 
Hollywood studios. For example,  Paranormal Activity  was distributed by Paramount, 
which paid $300,000 for the rights; 2005 Oscar-winner for Best Picture,  Crash , from 
Stratus Films, was distributed by Lionsgate; and the 2004–2005 $100 million box 
offi  ce hit  Million Dollar Baby , from independent Lakeshore, was distributed by 
Warner Brothers. 
 Independent fi lms tend to have smaller budgets. Often this leads to much more 
imaginative fi lmmaking and more risk taking than the big studios are willing to under-
take. Th e 1969 independent fi lm  Easy Rider , which cost $370,000 to produce and made 
over $50 million in theater rentals, began the modern independent fi lm boom.  My Big 
Fat Greek Wedding (2002) cost $5 million to make and earned over $300 million in 
global box offi  ce receipts. Some independent fi lms with which you might be familiar 
are  Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind  (2004),  Albert Nobbs  (2011), Oscar-winners 
for Best Screenplay  Pulp Fiction  (1994) and  Th e Pianist  (2002),  Crouching Tiger, Hidden 
Dragon  (2000),  Traffi  c  (2000),  28 Days Later  (2003), and Best Picture Oscar-winner 
 Hurt Locker (2009). 
 Corporate indie Sony Classics’  Midnight in Paris 
earned its parent company an Academy Award 
best-picture nomination and a $155 million box 
oﬃ  ce take. 

CHAPTER 6 
Film 
141
 Trends and Convergence 
in Moviemaking  
 Stagnant box offi  ce, increased production costs largely brought about by digital special 
eff ects wizardry, and the “corporatization” of the independent fi lm are only a few of 
the trends reshaping the fi lm industry. Th ere are several others, however, including 
some that many critics see as contributors to Hollywood’s changing future.  
 Conglomeration and the Blockbuster Mentality 
 Other than MGM, each of the majors is a part of a large conglomerate. Paramount is 
owned by Viacom, Warner Brothers is part of the huge Time Warner family of hold-
ings, Disney is part of the giant conglomerate formed in the 1996 Disney/Capital 
Cities/ABC union, and Universal was bought by NBC’s parent company, General Electric, 
in 2004 and became part of cable TV giant Comcast in 2009. Much of this conglom-
eration takes the form of international ownership. Columbia is owned by Japanese 
Sony and Fox by Australia’s News Corp. According to many critics, this combination 
of conglomeration and foreign ownership forces the industry into a    blockbuster 
mentality —fi lmmaking characterized by reduced risk taking and more formulaic 
movies. Business concerns are said to dominate artistic considerations as accountants 
and fi nanciers control more decisions once made by creative people. “Once you start 
to make crucial decisions by committee and each member of that committee is 
extremely anxious about his or her job,” explains actor Ben Kingsley, “then you’re not 
going to have the right decisions made. You’re going to have decisions that are fear-
based, you are going to have decisions based on what they think they should say, or 
what they think their boss needs to hear, rather than going out on a limb and being 
actually creative” (“Stars Diss Hollywood,” 2012). Th e common outcomes of this 
blockbuster mentality are several.  
 CONCEPT MOVIES   Th e marketing and publicity departments of big companies love    concept 
fi lms   —movies that can be described in one line.  Twister  is about a giant, rogue tor-
nado.  Th e Lost World  is about giant, rogue dinosaurs.  King Kong  (2005) is about a giant, 
rogue ape who comes to New York. 
 The smash success of  Easy Rider (1969) 
ushered in the indie ﬁ lm boom.

142 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 International ownership and international distribution contribute to this phenom-
enon. High-concept fi lms that depend little on characterization, plot development, 
and dialogue are easier to sell to foreign exhibitors than are more sophisticated fi lms. 
Fantastic Four  and  300  play well everywhere. Big-name stars also have international 
appeal. Th at’s why they can command huge salaries. Th e importance of foreign distri-
bution cannot be overstated. Only 2 in 10 U.S. features make a profi t on U.S. box offi  ce. 
Much of their eventual profi t comes from overseas sales. For example, 2011’s  Green 
Hornet  disappointed at home ($99 million) but earned $129 million overseas. Likewise, 
Resident Evil: Afterlife  nearly quadrupled its domestic $60 million, making $236 million 
in foreign box offi  ce. And it’s not just domestic disappointments that do well overseas. 
Titanic  doubled its 2009 $601 million U.S. box offi  ce, earning $1.2 billion elsewhere. 
Avatar  did the same.  Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: Part 2  tripled its domestic 
take, as did  Transformers: Dark of the Moon ; and  Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger 
Tides  more than quadrupled its $241 million domestic box offi  ce. Overseas box offi  ce 
accounts for 55% of the U.S. movie industry’s income.   
 AUDIENCE RESEARCH   Before a movie is released, sometimes even before it is made, its con-
cept, plot, and characters are subjected to market testing. Often multiple endings are 
produced and tested with sample audiences by companies such as National Research 
Group and Marketcast. Despite being “voodoo science, a spin of the roulette wheel,” 
says  Chicago Reader fi lm critic Jonathan Rosenbaum, audience testing is “believed in 
like a religion at this point. It’s considered part of fi lmmaking” (quoted in Scribner, 
2001, p. D3). Th is testing produced the “lowest scores in studio history” for  Pulp Fic-
tion  (1994), which went on to earn more than $200 million, and “the highest scores 
in studio history” for  Akeelah and the Bee  (2006), which made $19 million (Friend, 
2009). If the voodoo is so unreliable, ask fi lm purists, what is to become of the fi lm-
maker’s genius? What separates these market-tested fi lms from any other commodity? 
 Variety fi lm writer Dade Hayes (2003) explains the dilemma facing blockbuster-driven 
Hollywood, “Testing contributes to the sameness of the movies, and feeds into 
 audience expectations of comfortable patterns and makes them uneasy if a fi lm 
diverges from that formula. . . . [B]ut there cannot be much creative freedom with a 
$200 million    tentpole   ” (an expensive blockbuster around which a studio plans its 
other releases; pp. 1, 53).   
 SEQUELS, REMAKES, AND FRANCHISES  Nothing succeeds like success. How many  Batmans 
  have there been?  Indiana Jones es?  Legally Blonde s?  Lethal Weapon s?  American Pie s, 
and  Terminator s? Johnny Depp’s  Charlie and the Chocolate Factory  (2005) is a 
remake of Gene Wilder’s 1971 classic  Willie Wonka and the Chocolate Factory . Th e 
Titans clashed in 1981 and again in 2010. We passed  Th e Last House on the Left in 
1972 and again in 2009.  Th e Birds fl ew in 1963 and in 2011.  Dune  (2010),  Fame 
 Footloose danced across the silver screen in 
1984 and again in 2011. 

CHAPTER 6 
Film 
143
(2010), and  Th e Taking of Pelham 123  (2009) are other recent 
remakes. Hollywood, too, is making increasing use of    franchise 
fi lms   , movies that are produced with the full intention of pro-
ducing several more sequels. Th e fi rst James Bond fi lm (1962) 
has had 22 sequels;  Star Wars  (1977), 5.  Harry Potter (2001) 
had 7. Th ere were 27 sequels among Hollywood’s 2011 releases, 
and the top 7 moneymakers of that year were franchise install-
ments, giving credence to the old industry saying, “Nobody ever 
got fi red for green-lighting a sequel.” Revisit  Figure 6.1 . With the 
exception of  Avatar ,  Titanic , and  Alice in Wonderland, every 
other top 20 all-time box offi  ce champion is a sequel or part 
of a franchise.  Marvel’s Th e Avengers  itself stars a collection of 
characters from a number of other Marvel Comics movie 
franchises.    
 TELEVISION, COMIC BOOK, AND VIDEOGAME REMAKES  Nothing succeeds like success. Th at, and the 
fact that teens and preteens still make up the largest proportion of the movie audience, 
is the reason so many movies are adaptations of television shows, comic books, and 
video games. In the last few years  Inspector Gadget, Dudley Do-Right, Th e Flintstones, 
My Favorite Martian, Th e Fugitive, Th e Saint, Mission: Impossible, George of the Jungle, 
Th e Dukes of Hazzard, Speed Racer ,  Charlie’s Angels, Beavis and Butthead, X-fi les 
(twice),  Th e Brady Bunch, Bewitched , and  Get Smart  have moved from small to big 
screen.  Th e Addams Family, Dennis the Menace, Richie Rich, Spider-Man, Batman , and 
 Superman  have traveled from the comics, through television, to the silver screen.  Sin 
City ,  30Days of Night ,  X-Men ,  Road to Perdition ,  Whiteout ,  300 ,  Th e Lost Squad ,  Men 
in Black ,  Fantastic Four ,  Th e Hulk , and  Th e Crow  have moved directly from comics to 
movies.  Tomb Raider, Resident Evil, Mortal Kombat , and  Final Fantasy  went from game 
box to box offi  ce. Movies from comics and video games are especially attractive to 
studios because of their built-in merchandise tie-in appeal.      
 MERCHANDISE TIEINS  Films are sometimes produced as much for their ability to generate 
interest for nonfi lm products as for their intrinsic value as movies. Kids’ 2012 hit  Lorax 
had more than 70 “product partners.” Hollywood makes close to $200 billion a year 
from merchandise tie-ins to its movie and television shows. Disney, for example, 
earned $2.8 billion from  Toy Story 3  in 2010. Its 2006  Cars  generated $10 billion in 
global merchandise sales, making the studio $2.5 billion in licensing fees. According 
to a Disney executive,  Cars  is less a movie than a “lifestyle brand for young boys . . . the 
male answer to the Disney Princess marketing push” (in Forbes, 2011). And as almost 
all of us know, it is nearly impossible to buy a meal at McDonald’s, Burger King, or 
Taco Bell without being off ered a movie tie-in product. Studios often believe it is risk-
ier to make a $7 million fi lm with no merchandising potential than a $100 million 
movie with greater merchandising appeal.   
 PRODUCT PLACEMENT  Many movies are serving double duty as commercials. We’ll discuss 
this phenomenon in detail later in the chapter as a media literacy issue.    
 Convergence Reshapes the Movie Business 
 So intertwined are today’s movie and television industries that it is often meaningless 
to discuss them separately. As much as 70% of the production done by the studios is 
for television. But the growing relationship between    theatrical fi lms —those produced 
originally for theater exhibition—and television is the result of technological changes 
in the latter. Th e convergence of fi lm with satellite, cable, video-on-demand, pay-per-
view, DVD, and Internet streaming has provided immense distribution and exhibition 
opportunities for the movies. For example, in 1947 box offi  ce receipts accounted for 
95% of the studios’ revenues. Today they make up less than one-fi fth. Today’s distribu-
tors make three times as much from domestic home entertainment (DVD, network and 
cable television, downloads, and streaming) as they do from rentals to movie houses. 
 Remakes and sequels are two products of 
Hollywood’s blockbuster mentality. 
© Alex Gregory/The New Yorker Collection/www.cartoonbank.com

144 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
DVD sales remain a lucrative business as well. In fact, DVD sales of theatrical fi lms 
earned more ($12 billion) than did domestic box offi  ce ($9.5 billion) for the fi rst time 
in 2003. Today they produce about $19 billion a year in sales and rentals. Th e studios 
also maximize their DVD profi ts with trailers for their other video and in-theater fi lms 
and with commercials. Box offi  ce failures can turn loss to profi t with good DVD sales. 
 Old School  made $75 million in domestic box offi  ce and $83 million in DVD sales. 
 National Lampoon’s Van Wilder made $21 million in theaters and $32 million in DVD 
sales (Snyder, 2004). Even many box offi  ce hits ultimately make more in DVD sales. 
 Th e Hangover  made $277 million at the box offi  ce in 2009. Within six months of its 
release on disc it had sold 10 million copies to become the all-time DVD sales champ. 
 Napoleon Dynamite , made for $400,000 and generating $50 million at the box offi  ce, 
has earned more than $120 million in DVD sales. 
 Th e convergence of fi lm with digital technologies is beginning to reshape produc-
tion, distribution,  and  exhibition. Two factors have combined to encourage the rollout 
of digital distribution and exhibition. Th e fi rst is the explosion of popularity of digital 
3-D movies. To take advantage of that success, exhibitors, often splitting installation 
costs with studios, are increasingly making the conversion. Th ere are approximately 
16,000 digital screens worldwide today, 20% of which are 3-D capable, and in 2010 
three chains—AMC, Cinemark, and Regal—announced that they would network a 
series of 3-D projectors to bring 3-D to the 14,000 theaters under their control 
(McClintock, 2010). Th e second factor encouraging digital conversion is the growing 
number of successful movies shot with digital equipment. 
 Th e surprise 1999 hit  Th e Blair Witch Project  is considered the start of the growing 
 microcinema    movement, through which fi lmmakers using digital video cameras and 
desktop digital editing machines are fi nding audiences, both in theaters and online, 
for their low-budget (sometimes as little as $10,000) features. Th e success of  Paranor-
mal Activity  has reinforced interest in microcinema, leading the major studios to create 
their own in-house microcinema divisions—for example, Paramount’s Insurge Pic-
tures. But arguably the biggest boost given to digital production of theatrical fi lms (if 
they can still be called  fi lms ) came in April 2000 when, after a trial run of the equip-
ment, George Lucas announced that he would shoot the live action scenes for the 
sequel to the  Phantom Menace  using digital video cameras. Industry insiders estimate 
that digital shooting will be the standard by 2015 (Taylor, 2005). 
 As digitization and convergence are changing exhibition and production, they are 
also changing distribution. Although slowed by fears of piracy, the online distribution 
of feature fi lms has taken hold. Th e typical American home with Internet and cable 
access has at least 100,000 full-length movies and television shows to choose from on 
any given day (Whitney, 2011). Netfl ix, which originally was a company that delivered 
DVDs to people’s homes by mail, has discontinued that service in every country other 
than the United States. Now focusing on streaming movies, it operates in 45 countries, 
bringing its subscriber total to nearly 30 million. In fact, Netfl ix-streamed content is 
the single largest component of American Internet traffi  c (Manjoo, 2011). And Netfl ix 
is not the only source for streamed movies; Internet giants Google Movies and Amazon 
Instant Video and the Comcast cable operation are only three of the scores of sites 
off ering fans everything from classic and niche fi lms to the latest box offi  ce hits. And 
not to be outdone, studios like Disney, Sony, Universal, Warner Brothers, and Lions-
gate stream their fi lms via YouTube. Paramount has even experimented with direct-to-
consumer streaming, off ering big hits like its Transformers movies. Th ere are industry 
analysts, however, who say direct-to-home digital distribution of movies is even more 
robust than described here because of two new technologies that free downloads from 
the computer screen. Th e fi rst allows downloads directly to TV set-top boxes, avoiding 
the computer altogether (Netfl ix and LG Electronics off er one version; Amazon and 
TiVo another). Th e second, for example Apple TV, transmits computer-downloaded 
movies to any electronic device in the home. Much more will be said about Internet 
distribution of fi lm and video content in Chapter 10. 
 But a potentially bigger alteration to traditional movie distribution resides in the 
eff orts of studios like IFC Entertainment, directors like Steven Soderbergh, and exhibitors 

CHAPTER 6 
Film 
145
such as billionaire Mark Cuban’s Landmark Th eaters. All plan for the simultaneous 
release of movies to theaters, DVD, cable video-on-demand, and streaming. Disney 
has publicly committed to considering this model of distribution as well. Director 
Soderbergh predicts that once digital production, distribution, and exhibition are fi rmly 
in place, “in fi ve or ten years, you’re going to see name fi lmmakers self-distributing” (in 
Jardin, 2005b, p. 257). In fact, this is already taking place. We’ve already seen in Chapter 
2 that actor-director Ed Burns ( Purple Violets ,  Newlyweds ), routinely skips the big screen 
and comedian Louis CK self-produces and distributes his concert fi lms. Director Kevin 
Smith self-distributed his 2011  Red State , personally taking it from city to city for screen-
ing (and to build word-of-mouth) in advance of releasing it to DVD, VOD, and streaming. 
Th ese changes will eventually force signifi cant alterations in the economics of Holly-
wood, argues  Washington Post  media writer Steven Pearlstein (2005). “Th e studios will 
be indiff erent about how you choose to get a movie—their profi t will be the same whether 
you see it in a theater, rent it, or order it up from Comcast.” He sees this as an improve-
ment over the way Hollywood currently operates, forcing studios to become more com-
petitive, effi  cient, and audience-driven. Studios will no longer be able to rely as heavily 
on blockbusters and big-name superstars as they do now. Successful studios will be 
those producing a wide “range of well-done movies for a variety of niche audiences 
reached through targeted marketing and distribution channels” (p. D1).   
 Smartphones, Tablets, and Social Networking Sites 
 Studios are also distributing their movies via the social networking site Facebook. Fans 
not only can get Miramax, Paramount, Universal, and Warner Brothers fi lms, they can 
use Facebook’s many features to “like” and share quotations, scenes, and other parts 
of the movie they enjoy with their friends. Th is utilization of social networking is fueled 
by the migration of movie streaming to smartphones and tablets. Movies available for 
online streaming or download can be accessed on any advanced Android or Apple 
operating system device containing the proper apps. Fans are open to watching mov-
ies on their smartphones and tablets—nearly 300 million people a month access some 
form of mobile video content (“Online Video,” 2011). Th e industry, however, sees this 
advance as a mixed blessing. Yes, studios and distributors have many more ways to get 
content to audiences, but as fans, especially young people already comfortable with 
relatively small, mobile screens, increasingly watch movies in places other than the-
aters, what happens to what we have called “the movies” for more than a century?     
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS   
 Recognizing Product Placements 
 Transformers (the toy) may have been the star of the 2007 movie of the same name, 
but there were enough General Motors cars, especially the Chevy Camaro, sprinkled 
throughout the movie that GM’s sales were up 2.7% in the three months following 
the fi lm’s debut (Brodesser-Akner, 2008). 2012’s  Th e Vow  stars Rachael McAdams, 
Channing Tatum, and nearly 39 “brand partners.” In a pivotal scene in 2005’s  Th e 
Island , a runaway clone (played by Scarlett Johansson) comes upon a Calvin Klein 
storefront display on a Los Angeles street. Th e display includes a television playing a 
Calvin Klein commercial. Th e commercial stars the actress whose DNA was used to 
create Scarlett Johansson, leading Scarlett Johansson to the realization that she is the 
clone of a famous actress. But the commercial is a real (nonmovie) commercial for 
Calvin Klein’s Eternity Moment perfume, one that stars the real (nonmovie, nonclone) 
Scarlett Johansson. In other words, “ Th e Island  took a real Calvin Klein commercial 
starring Scarlett Johansson and made the commercial a major part of a fi ctional fi lm 
in which Scarlett Johansson plays an actress who isn’t Scarlett Johansson but stars in 
the same Calvin Klein commercial” (Sauer, 2006). 

146 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 Th e practice of placing brand-name products in movies is not new; Katharine Hep-
burn throws Gordon’s gin into the river in the 1951  Th e African Queen , and Spencer 
Tracy is splashed with Coca-Cola in the 1950  Father of the Bride . But in today’s movie 
industry, product placement has expanded into a business in its own right. About 100 
product placement agencies are operating in Hollywood, and there’s even an industry 
association, the Entertainment Resources and Marketing Association (ERMA). Th e 
attraction of product placements for sponsors is obvious. For one fl at fee paid up front, 
a product that appears in a movie is in actuality a commercial that lives forever—fi rst 
on the big screen, then on television and cable, and then on purchased and rented discs 
and downloads. Th e commercial is also likely to have worldwide distribution. 
 Many people in and outside the movie industry see product placement as inher-
ently deceptive. “Why not identify the ads for what they are?” they ask. From a media 
literacy standpoint, the issue is the degree to which artistic decisions are being placed 
second to obligations to sponsors. Scripts are altered and camera angles are chosen to 
accommodate paid-for placements. “Th e average viewer probably doesn’t know, for 
example, about the kind of wrangling that goes on behind the scenes to get those 
products into movies—that strong-arming can occur during shooting to ensure that 
you see a certain brand of soda at just the right time,” writes fi lm critic Christy Lemire. 
“Artistic integrity? Whatever,” responds  Rush Hour  director Brett Ratner (both in Lemire, 
2011, p. D3). Equally unconcerned is  Transformer  director Michael Bay, “Th ere are 
products in everything in everyday life. Do people think there shouldn’t be brand 
names or something? Everything is branded. I hate [entertainment content] when they 
take logos off  of stuff . It’s not real life” (in Fagbire, 2007). 
 Knowing how media content is funded and how that fi nancial support shapes con-
tent is an important aspect of understanding the mass communication process. Th ere-
fore, an awareness of the eff orts of the movie industry to maximize income from its 
fi lms is central to good fi lm literacy. 
 Consider, for example, the following product placements. If you saw these two 
recent movies, did you recognize the placements?     
 Valentine’s Day   
  1-800-Flowers, adidas, American Airlines, American Express, 
Apple, BlackBerry, Blazer, Cadillac, Cadillac Escalade, Cartier, 
Chanel, Chevrolet, Chicago Cubs, Christian Louboutin, 
Craigslist, Discovery Channel, ESPN,  evite.com , Facebook, 
FedEx, Ford, Ford Mustang, Gatorade, Hollywood Forever 
Cemetary ( sic ), Indiana University, International Creative 
  In this scene from  The Island , Scarlett 
Johansson (the clone) sees Scarlett Johansson 
(the person from whom she was cloned) in an 
actual, real-world TV commercial that stars 
Scarlett Johansson. 

CHAPTER 6 
Film 
147
Management, Los Angeles Dodgers, Mapquest, Marc Jacobs, 
Moët & Chandon, Nike, Nokia, Northwestern University, 
Polaroid, Porsche, PUMA, Quiksilver, Range Rover, Retin-A, 
Scope, Sharpie, Sony, Southwest Airlines, Stanford University, 
Th e BLVD (Los Angeles), Th e Lawrence Foundation, Toyota, 
Tufts University, US Army, USPS, Versace, Victoria’s Secret, 
Volkswagen Beetle, Walt Disney Concert Hall, Yale, York 
 Th e Social Network   
  adidas, Apache, Apple, Arm & Hammer, Boston University, 
Brooks Brothers, Cadillac, Cambridge University, Columbia 
University, Cornell University, Dell, Disney, Exeter Academy, 
Facebook, Friendster, Gap, Google, Harvard University, 
LiveJournal, London School of Economics, Macy’s, match
.com, Microsoft, Mountain Dew, MySpace, Napster, Network 
Solutions, New England Patriots, NFL, Nike, Oxford Univer-
sity, Patagonia, Philips, Polaroid, Polo Ralph Lauren, Porsche, 
Range Rover, Red Bull, Samsung, Sony VAIO, Stairmaster, 
Stanford University, Th e Harvard Crimson, Th e North Face, 
Th e Unlimited, Th irsty Scholar, Tower Records, Ty Nant, 
Under Armour, Victoria’s Secret, Yale University  
 Does it trouble you that content is altered, even if sometimes only minimally, to 
allow for these brand identifi cations? To what extent would script alterations have 
to occur to accommodate paid-for messages before you fi nd them intrusive? Do you 
think it is fair or honest for a moviemaker who promises you fi lm content in exchange 
for your money to turn you into what amounts to a television viewer by advertising 
sponsors’ products? At least in television, by law, all commercial messages must be 
identifi ed as such, and the sponsors of those messages must be identifi ed. Do you 
think such a rule ought to apply to movies? 
 Literate fi lm consumers may answer these questions diff erently, especially as indi-
viduals hold fi lm in varying degrees of esteem—but they should answer them. And what 
do you make of the latest Hollywood product placement trend,    branding fi lms , the 
sponsor-fi nancing of movies to advance a manufacturer’s product line. Unilever (Dove 
soap) co-fi nanced  Th e Women , Chrysler underwrote  Blue Valentine , and Gatorade co-
fi nanced  Gracie . Universal Studios and Hasbro have a four-picture deal in which the 
world’s second-largest toymaker agreed to co-fi nance a picture a year based on its pop-
ular board games such as Candy Land and Monopoly. Burger King has announced that 
it will produce its own movies.  Variety ’s Peter Bart (2007)   asks, “Would  Waitress  be the 
same edgy movie had Applebee’s decided to fi nance it? How would the script of  Bug 
been altered had it been funded by Raid? Good movies are hard enough to make without 
worrying about the branding needs of consumer companies or the script notes of mar-
keting gurus” (p. 58).     
 Choose two ﬁ lms. Try for variation, for example, a big-budget blockbuster and a romantic comedy, your choice. List every example of 
product placement that you can ﬁ nd. In which instances do you believe the ﬁ lm’s content was altered, however minimally, to 
accommodate the placement? Product placement proponents argue that this is a small price to pay for the “reality” that using real 
brands brings to a ﬁ lm. Do you agree or disagree? Explain your answer in terms of your  expectations of movies’ content  and your  ability 
to recognize when advertising and movie genre conventions are being mixed . Tackle this one individually, committing your ﬁ ndings to 
writing, or make it a challenge against one or more classmates. 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE 
 Product Placement in Movies 

148 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences

Outline the history and development of the fi lm industry 
and fi lm itself as a medium. 
 Film’s beginnings reside in the eff orts of entrepreneurs 
such as Eadweard Muybridge and inventors like Th omas 
Edison and William Dickenson. 
  Photography, an essential precursor to movies, was de-
veloped by Hannibal Goodwin, George Eastman, Joseph 
Nicéphore Niépce, Louis Daguerre, and William Henry 
Fox Talbot. 
  Edison and the Lumière brothers began commercial 
motion picture exhibition, little more than representa-
tions of everyday life. George Méliès added narrative; 
Edwin S. Porter added montage; and D. W. Griffi  th de-
veloped the full-length feature fi lm. 
  Movies became big business at the turn of the 20th cen-
tury, one dominated by big studios, but change soon 
came in the form of talkies, scandal, and control, and 
new genres to fend off  the Depression. 

Describe the cultural value of fi lm and the implications 
of the blockbuster mentality for fi lm as an important ar-
tistic and cultural medium. 
 Conglomeration and concentration aff ect the movie in-
dustry, leading to an overreliance on blockbuster fi lms 
for its success. 
 Debate exists over whether fi lm can survive as an impor-
tant medium if it continues to give its youth-dominated 
audience what it wants. 
 Th e annual roster of adult, important movies suggests 
that fi lm can give all audiences what they want. 

Summarize the three components of the fi lm industry—
production, distribution, and exhibition. 
  Production is the making of movies, increasingly using 
digital technology. 
 Distribution is supplying movies to television 
and cable networks, DVD makers, Internet 
streaming and downloading services, and even to 
individual viewers. 
 Exhibition is showing movies in a theater, increasingly 
using digital technologies. 

Explain how the organizational and economic nature 
of the contemporary fi lm industry shapes the content of 
its fi lms. 
 Studios are at the heart of the movie business and are 
increasingly in control of the three component 
systems. 
 Th ere are major, corporate independent, and 
independent studios.  

Describe the promise and peril of convergence and the 
new digital technologies to fi lm as we know it. 
 Convergence is reshaping the industry, promising to 
alter its structure and economics, especially as new 
distribution models fueled by the Internet and related 
mobile technologies become even more common than 
they are now.  

Production is becoming more expensive and, simultane-
ously, less expensive. 
 Distribution is becoming more complex, getting more 
movies to more people over more platforms. 
 Exhibition is increasingly out-of-theater and mobile, but 
is it still “the movies”? 

Apply fi lm-watching media literacy skills, especially in 
interpreting merchandise tie-ins and product placements. 
 Th e fi nancial benefi ts of merchandise tie-ins and prod-
uct licensing are factors in the industry’s overreliance on 
big budget, youth-oriented movies (and the relative 
scarcity of more adult fi lms) 
 Th e inclusion of product placements in fi lms often 
shapes their scripts and production practices, either for 
better or worse. 
 Resources for Review and Discussion  
 REVIEW POINTS: TYING CONTENT TO LEARNING OUTCOMES 
       KEY TERMS  
 zoopraxiscope, 124 
 persistence of vision, 124 
 kinetograph, 125 
 daguerreotype, 125 
 calotype, 126 
 kinetoscope, 126 
 cinématographe, 126 
 montage, 126 
 nickelodeons, 127 
 factory studios, 128 
 double feature, 132 
 B-movie, 132 
 vertical integration, 132 
 block booking, 133 
 green light process, 138 
 platform rollout, 139 
 corporate independent studio, 140  
 blockbuster mentality, 141 
 concept fi lms, 141  
 tentpole, 142 
 franchise fi lms, 143  
  theatrical fi lms, 143  
 microcinema, 144 
 branding fi lms, 147 

CHAPTER 6 
Film 
149
 QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW 
 1.  What are the kinetograph, kinetoscope, cinématographe, 
daguerreotype, calotype, and nickelodeon?  
 2.  What were Méliès’s, Porter’s, and Griffi  th’s contributions to 
fi lm as a narrative medium? 
 3.  What was the Motion Picture Patents Company, and 
how did it infl uence the content and development of the 
movie industry? 
 4.  What societal, technical, and artistic factors shaped the 
development of movies before World War II? 
 5.  What are the three component systems of the 
movie industry?  
 6.  What are major and corporate independent studios? What 
is an independent? 
 7.  What are concept fi lms? Product tie-ins? 
Product placement?  
 8.  What is platform rollout? When and why is it used? 
 9.  How are digitization and convergence reshaping 
exhibition? Distribution? Production? 
    10.  How will distribution change as the industry becomes 
more fully digital?      
For further review, go to the LearnSmart study module for 
this chapter.
 QUESTIONS FOR CRITICAL THINKING AND DISCUSSION 
 1.  What do you think of the impact of the blockbuster men-
tality on movies? Should profi t always be the determining 
factor in producing movie content? Why or why not? 
 2.  Are you a fan of independent movies? When you are 
watching a movie, how can you tell that it’s an indepen-
dent? If you are an indie fan, do you welcome the micro-
cinema movement? Why or why not? 
    3.  Most industry-watchers see the new distribution model 
promised by digitization of the three component systems 
as inevitably changing the economics of Hollywood. Some, 
though, think it will produce better movies. Do you agree 
or disagree? Why? 


 
151
 Learning Objectives 
 Radio was the ﬁ rst electronic mass medium; it was the ﬁ rst national broadcast medium. It 
produced the networks, program genres, and stars that made television an instant success. 
But for many years radio and records were young people’s media; they gave voice to a 
generation. As such, they may be our most personally signiﬁ cant mass media. After 
studying this chapter you should be able to
 Outline the history and development of the radio and sound recording industries and 
radio and sound recording themselves as media. 
 Describe the importance of early ﬁ nancing and regulatory decisions regarding radio 
and how they have shaped the nature of contemporary broadcasting. 
 Explain how the organizational and economic natures of the contemporary radio and 
sound recording industries shape the content of both media. 
 Identify new and converging radio and recording technologies and their potential 
impact on music, the industries themselves, and listeners. 
 Apply key radio-listening media literacy skills, especially in assessing the cultural 
value of shock jocks. 
Radio, Recording, 
and Popular 
Music  7 
 Homemade YouTube videos brought the then 
12-year-old Justin Bieber to music industry 
attention and then fame. 

1900
1925
1844   Samuel Morse’s telegraph
1860   Scott’s phonautograph
1876   Alexander Graham Bell’s telephone
1877   ▲ Edison patents “talking machine”
1896   Marconi sends wireless signal over 2 miles
1899   Marconi sends wireless signal across the English Channel
   ~1900   Tesla and Marconi ﬁle radio patents
1903   ▲ Marconi sends ﬁrst wireless signal across the Atlantic
1905   Columbia Phonograph Company develops two-sided disc
1906   Fessenden makes ﬁrst public broadcast of voice and music;
 
DeForest invents audion tube
1910   Wireless Ship Act of 1910
1912   Radio Act of 1912
1916   Sarnoﬀ sends Radio Music Box Memo
1919   Radio Corporation of America formed
1920   KDKA goes on air
1922   First radio commercial
1926   NBC, ﬁrst radio network
1927   Radio Act; Federal Radio Commission 
1934   Communications Act; Federal Communications Commission
1939   Television introduced at World’s Fair; FM goes on air
1946   GIs return from Germany with tape recorder 
1947   Columbia Records introduces 33      rpm disc
1949   ▲ Development of the DJ
/
13
152 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 C AN WE LISTEN TO THE RADIO?” 
 “We are listening to the radio.” 
 “I mean something other than this.” 
 “You want music?” 
 “Yes, please, anything but public radio. Too much talk.” 
 “OK. Here.” 
 “What! Th at’s the classical music station!” 
 “What’s wrong with that?” 
 “Nothing . . . much.” 
 “What’s that supposed to mean, ‘Nothing . . . much’?” 
 “Nothing . . . much. Let me choose.” 
 “OK. You fi nd a station.” 
 “Fine. Here.” 
 “What’s that?!” 
 “It’s the New Hot One. KISS 100. All the hits all the time.” 
 “Th at’s not music.” 
 “You sound like my parents.” 
 “I don’t mean the stuff  they play isn’t music, I mean the DJ is yammering away.” 
 “Hang on. A song is coming up. Anyway, this is funny stuff .” 
 “I don’t fi nd jokes about minority wheelchair races funny.” 
 “It’s all in fun.” 
 “Fun for whom?” 

 “What’s  your  problem today?” 
 “Nothing, I just don’t fi nd that kind of stuff  funny. Here, I’ll fi nd something.” 
 “What’s that?” 
 “Th e jazz station.” 
 “Give me a break. How about Sports Talk?” 
 “Nah. How about All News?” 
 “No way. How about the All Talk station?” 
 “Why, you need another fi x of insulting chatter?” 
 “How about silence?” 
 “Yeah, how about it?” 
 In this chapter we study the technical and social beginnings of both radio and 
sound recording. We revisit the coming of broadcasting and see how the growth 
of regulatory, economic, and organizational structures led to the medium’s golden age. 
 Th e heart of the chapter covers how television changed radio and produced the 
medium with which we are now familiar. We review the scope and nature of con-
temporary radio, especially its rebirth as a local, fragmented, specialized, personal, 
and mobile medium. We examine how these characteristics serve advertisers and 
listeners. Th e chapter then explores the relationship between radio, the modern 
recording industry, popular music, and the way new and converging technologies 
serve and challenge all three. Th e popularity of shock jocks inspires our discussion 
of media literacy.  
1950
1975
2000
1951   Car radios exceed home sets
      Mid-50s   Network aﬃliation halved
1955   ▲ DJ Freed brings R&B to New York
        Late-50s   National billings drop nearly 80% 
1983   ▲ CD introduced
1987   MP3 developed
1996   Telecommunications Act
2001   Satellite radio begins
2002   Terrestrial digital radio
2003   ▲ iTunes
2004   Podcasting
2005   MGM v. Grokster P2P decision
2007   Imus ﬁred
2008   Sony BMG lifts copy protection from downloads; Imus back on the air
2009   iTunes becomes DRM free
2010   10 billionth iTunes download sold
2011   Digital music sales surpass physical sales
2012   Limbaugh "slut" controversy
CHAPTER 7 
Radio, Recording, and Popular Music   
153

154 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 A Short History of Radio and 
Sound Recording  
 Th e particular stations you disagree about may be diff erent, but almost all of us have 
been through a conversation similar to the one in the opening vignette. Radio, the 
seemingly ubiquitous medium, matters to us. Because we often listen to it alone, it 
is personal. Radio is also mobile. It travels with us in the car, and we take it along 
in our iPods and smartphones. Radio is specifi c as well. Stations aim their content 
at very narrowly defi ned audiences. But these are characteristics of contemporary 
radio. Radio once occupied a very diff erent place in our culture. Let’s see how it 
all began.  
 Early Radio 
 Because both applied for patents within months of one another in the late 1890s, 
there remains disagreement over who “invented” radio, Eastern European immigrant 
Nikola Tesla, or Guglielmo Marconi, son of a wealthy Italian businessman and his 
Irish wife. Marconi, however, is considered the “Father of Radio” because not only 
was he among the fi rst to send signals through the air, he was adroit at gaining max-
imum publicity for his every success. His improvements over earlier experimental 
designs allowed him to send and receive telegraph code over distances as great as 
two miles by 1896. His native Italy was not interested in his invention, so he used his 
mother’s contacts in Great Britain to fi nd support and fi nancing there. England, with 
a global empire and the world’s largest navy and merchant fl eets, was naturally inter-
ested in long-distance wireless communication. With the fi nancial and technical 
help of the British, Marconi successfully transmitted across the English Channel in 
1899 and across the Atlantic in 1901. Wireless was now a reality. Marconi was satis-
fi ed with his advance, but other scientists saw the transmission of  voices  by wireless 
as the next hurdle, a challenge that was soon surmounted.         
 In 1903 Reginald Fessenden, a Canadian, invented the    liquid barretter , the fi rst 
audio device permitting the reception of wireless voice transmissions. His 1906 Christ-
mas Eve broadcast from Brant Rock, a small New England coastal village, was the fi rst 
public broadcast of voices and music. His listeners were ships at sea and a few news-
paper offi  ces equipped to receive the transmission. 
 Later that same year American Lee DeForest invented the 
 audion tube   , a vacuum tube that improved and amplified 
wireless signals. Now the reliable transmission of clear voices 
and music was a reality. But DeForest’s second important con-
tribution was that he saw radio as a means of  broadcasting . 
The early pioneers, Marconi included, had viewed radio as a 
device for point-to-point communication—for example, from 
ship to ship or ship to shore. But in the 1907 prospectus for 
his radio company DeForest wrote, “It will soon be possible to 
distribute grand opera music from transmitters placed on the 
stage of the Metropolitan Opera House by a Radio Telephone 
station on the roof to almost any dwelling in Greater New York 
and vicinity. . . . The same applies to large cities. Church 
music, lectures, etc., can be spread abroad by the Radio Tele-
phone” (as quoted in Adams, 1996, pp. 104–106). Soon, count-
less “broadcasters” went on the air. Some broadcasters were 
giant corporations, looking to dominate the medium for profit; 
some were hobbyists and hams, playing with the medium for 
the sheer joy of it. There were so many “stations” that havoc 
reigned. Yet the promise of radio was such that the medium 
continued to mature until World War I, when the U.S. govern-
ment ordered “the immediate closing of all stations for radio 
  Guglielmo Marconi (seated).

CHAPTER 7 
Radio, Recording, and Popular Music   
155
communications, both trans-
mitting and receiving.”  
 Early Sound Recording 
 Th e late 1800s have long been 
considered the beginning of 
sound recording. However, 
the 2008 discovery in a Paris 
archive of a 10-second record-
ing by an obscure French tin-
kerer, Edouard-Leon Scott de 
Martinville, has some audio 
historians rethinking record-
ing’s roots. Scott recorded a 
folk song on a device he 
called a phonautograph in 
1860, and he always thought 
that Th omas Edison had sto-
len credit that should have 
been his (“Edison Not,” 2008). 
Nonetheless, in 1877 prolifi c 
inventor Edison patented his 
“talking machine,” a device 
for replicating sound that used a hand-cranked grooved cylinder and a needle. The 
mechanical movement caused by the needle passing along the groove of the rotat-
ing cylinder and hitting bumps was converted into electrical energy that activated 
a diaphragm in a loudspeaker and produced sound. The drawback was that only 
one “recording” could be made of any given sound; the cylinder could not be dupli-
cated. In 1887 that problem was solved by German immigrant Emile Berliner, 
whose gramophone used a flat, rotating, wax-coated disc that could easily be cop-
ied or pressed from a metal master. Two equally important Berliner contributions 
were development of a sophisticated microphone and later (through his company, 
RCA Victor Records)   the import from Europe of recordings by famous opera stars. 
Now people had not only a reasonably priced record player but records to play on 
  Lee DeForest.
   In 1887 Emile Berliner developed the ﬂ at disc 
gramophone and a sophisticated microphone, both 
important to the widespread public acceptance of 
sound recordings for the home. Nipper, the 
trademark for his company, RCA Victor, is on the 
scene even today.

156 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
it. The next advance was introduction of the two-sided disc by the Columbia Pho-
nograph Company in 1905. Soon there were hundreds of phonograph or gramo-
phone companies, and the device, by either name, was a standard feature in U.S. 
homes by 1920. More than 2 million machines and 107 million recordings were sold 
in 1919 alone. Public acceptance of the new medium was enhanced even more 
by development of electromagnetic recording in 1924 by Joseph P. Maxwell at 
Bell Laboratory.  
 Th e parallel development and diff usion of radio and sound recording is signifi cant. 
For the fi rst time in history, radio allowed people to hear the words and music of oth-
ers who were not in their presence. On recordings they could hear words and music 
that may have been created days, months, or even years before.   
 The Coming of Broadcasting 
 Th e idea of broadcasting—that is, transmitting voices and music at great distances to 
a large number of people—predated the development of radio. Alexander Graham 
Bell’s telephone company had a subscription music service in major cities in the late 
1800s, delivering music to homes and businesses by telephone wires. A front-page 
story in an 1877 edition of the  New York Daily Graphic  suggested the possibilities of 
broadcasting to its readers. Th e public anticipated and, after DeForest’s much publi-
cized successes, was eager for music and voices at home. Russian immigrant David 
Sarnoff , then an employee of American Marconi, recognized this desire and in 1916 
sent his superiors what has become famous as the “Radio Music Box Memo.” In this 
memo Sarnoff  wrote of 
 a plan of development which would make radio a “household utility” in the same sense as the 
piano or phonograph. Th e idea is to bring music into the house by wireless. . . . Th e receiver 
can be designed in the form of a simple “Radio Music Box” and arranged for several diff erent 
wavelengths, which should be changeable with the throwing of a single switch or pressing of 
a single button. (Sterling & Kitross, 1990, p. 43)        
    Th e introduction of broadcasting to a mass audience was 
delayed in the fi rst two decades of the 20th century by patent 
fights and lawsuits. DeForest and Fessenden were both 
destroyed fi nancially by the confl ict. Yet when World War I 
ended, an enthusiastic audience awaited what had become a 
much-improved medium. In a series of developments that 
would be duplicated for television at the time of World War II, 
radio was transformed from an exciting technological idea into 
an entertainment and commercial giant. To aid the war eff ort, 
the government took over the patents relating to radio and con-
tinued to improve radio for military use. Th us, refi nement and 
development of the technical aspects of radio continued 
throughout the war. Th en, when the war ended in 1919, the 
patents were returned to their owners—and the bickering 
was renewed. 
 Concerned that the medium would be wasted and fearful that 
a foreign company (British Marconi) would control this vital 
resource, the U.S. government forced the combatants to merge. 
American Marconi, General Electric, American Telephone & Tele-
graph, and Westinghouse (in 1921)—each in control of a vital 
piece of technology—joined to create the Radio Corporation of 
America (RCA). RCA was a government-sanctioned monopoly, 
but its creation avoided direct government control of the new 
medium. Twenty-eight-year-old David Sarnoff , author of the 
Radio Music Box Memo, was made RCA’s commercial manager. 
Th e way for the medium’s popular growth was paved; its success 
was guaranteed by a public that, because of the phonograph, was 
  This cover of an 1877 newspaper proved 
prophetic in its image of speakers’ ability to “broadcast” 
their words.

CHAPTER 7 
Radio, Recording, and Popular Music   
157
already attuned to music in the home and, thanks to the just-concluded war, was awak-
ening to the need for instant, wide-ranging news and information. 
 On September 30, 1920, a Westinghouse executive, impressed with press accounts 
of the number of listeners who were picking up broadcasts from the garage radio 
station of company engineer Frank Conrad, asked him to move his operation to the 
Westinghouse factory and expand its power. Conrad did so, and on October 27, 1920, 
experimental station 8XK in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, received a license from the 
Department of Commerce to broadcast. On November 2 this station, KDKA, made 
the fi rst commercial radio broadcast, announcing the results of the presidential elec-
tion that sent Warren G. Harding to the White House. By mid-1922, there were nearly 
1 million radios in American homes, up from 50,000 just a year before (Tillinghast, 
2000, p. 41).   
 The Coming of Regulation 
 As the RCA agreements demonstrated, the government had a keen interest in the 
development, operation, and diff usion of radio. At fi rst government interest focused 
on point-to-point communication. In 1910 Congress passed the Wireless Ship Act, 
requiring that all ships using U.S. ports and carrying more than 50 passengers have a 
working wireless and operator. Of course, the wireless industry did not object, as the 
legislation boosted sales. But after the  Titanic struck an iceberg in the North Atlantic 
in 1912 and it was learned that hundreds of lives were lost needlessly because other 
ships in the area had left their radios unattended  , Congress passed the Radio Act of 
1912, which not only strengthened rules regarding shipboard wireless but also required 
that wireless operators be licensed by the Secretary of Commerce and Labor.      
 Th e Radio Act of 1912 established spheres of authority for both federal and state 
governments, provided for allocating and revoking licenses and fi ning violators, and 
assigned frequencies for station operation. Th e government was in the business of 
regulating what was to become broadcasting, a development that angered many oper-
ators. Th ey successfully challenged the 1912 act in court, and eventually President 
Calvin Coolidge ordered the cessation of government regulation of radio despite his 
belief that chaos would descend on the medium. 
 He proved prophetic. Th e industry’s years of fl outing the 1912 
act had led it to the brink of disaster. Radio sales and profi ts 
dropped dramatically. Listeners were tired of the chaos. Stations 
arbitrarily changed frequencies, power, and hours of operation, 
and there was constant interference between stations, often 
intentional. Radio industry leaders petitioned Commerce Com-
missioner Herbert Hoover and, according to historian Erik Bar-
nouw (1966)—who titled his book on radio’s early days  A Tower 
in Babel —“encouraged fi rmness” in government eff orts to regu-
late and control the competitors. Th e government’s response 
was a series of four National Radio Conferences involving indus-
try experts, public offi  cials, and government regulators. Th ese 
conferences led to the Radio Act of 1927. Order was restored, 
and the industry prospered. But the broadcasters had made an 
important concession to secure this saving intervention. Th e 
1927 act authorized them to  use  the channels, which belonged 
to the public, but not to  own them. Broadcasters were thus sim-
ply the caretakers of the airwaves, a national resource. 
 Th e act further stated that when a license was awarded, the 
standard of evaluation would be the  public interest, convenience, 
or necessity . Th e Federal Radio Commission (FRC) was estab-
lished to administer the provisions of the act. Th is  trustee 
model    of regulation is based on two premises (Bittner, 1994). 
Th e fi rst is the philosophy of    spectrum scarcity   . Because broad-
cast spectrum space is limited and not everyone who wants to 
  The wireless-telegraphy room of the  Titanic . 
Despite the heroic eﬀ orts of wireless operator Jack 
Philips, scores of people died needlessly in the 
sinking of that great ocean liner because ships in its 
vicinity  did not monitor their receivers.

158 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
broadcast can, those who are granted licenses to serve a local area must accept regu-
lation. Th e second reason for regulation revolves around the issue of infl uence. Broad-
casting reaches virtually everyone in society. By defi nition, this ensures its power. 
 Th e Communications Act of 1934 replaced the 1927 legislation, substituting the 
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) for the FRC and cementing its regulatory 
authority, which continues today.   
 Advertising and the Networks 
 While the regulatory structure of the medium was evolving, so were its fi nancial bases. 
Th e formation of RCA had ensured that radio would be a commercial, profi t-based 
system. Th e industry supported itself through the sale of receivers; that is, it operated 
radio stations in order to sell radios. Th e problem was that once everybody had a radio, 
people would stop buying them. Th e solution was advertising. On August 22, 1922, 
New York station WEAF accepted the fi rst radio commercial, a 10-minute spot for Long 
Island brownstone apartments. Th e cost of the ad was $50. 
 Th e sale of advertising led to establishment of the national radio networks. Groups 
of stations, or    affi  liates   , could deliver larger audiences, realizing greater advertising 
revenues, which would allow them to hire bigger stars and produce better program-
ming, which would attract larger audiences, which could be sold for even greater fees 
to advertisers. RCA set up a 24-station network, the National Broadcasting Company 
(NBC), in 1926. A year later it bought AT&T’s stations and launched a second network, 
NBC Blue (the original NBC was renamed NBC Red). Th e Columbia Broadcasting Sys-
tem (CBS) was also founded in 1927, but it struggled until 26-year-old millionaire cigar 
maker William S. Paley bought it in 1928, making it a worthy competitor to NBC. Th e 
fourth network, Mutual, was established in 1934 largely on the strength of its hit 
Western  Th e Lone Ranger . Four midwestern and eastern stations came together to sell 
advertising on it and other shows; soon Mutual had 60 affi  liates. Mutual diff ered from 
the other major national networks in that it did not own and operate its own fl agship 
stations (called    O&Os   , for owned and operated). By 1938 the four national networks 
had affi  liated virtually all the large U.S. stations and the majority of smaller operations 
as well. Th ese corporations grew so powerful that in 1943 the government forced NBC 
to divest itself of one of its networks. It sold NBC Blue to Life Saver candy maker 
Edward Noble, who renamed it the American Broadcasting Company (ABC). 
 Th e fundamental basis of broadcasting in the United States was set: 
 • Radio broadcasters were private, commercially owned enterprises, rather than gov-
ernment operations.  
 • Governmental regulation was based on the public interest.  
 • Stations were licensed to serve specifi c localities, but national networks programmed 
the most lucrative hours with the largest audiences.  
 • Entertainment and information were the basic broadcast content.  
 • Advertising formed the basis of fi nancial support for broadcasting. 
 The Golden Age 
 Th e networks ushered in radio’s golden age. Although the 1929–1939 Great Depression 
damaged the phonograph industry, with sales dipping to as few as 6 million records 
in 1932, it helped boost radio. Phonographs and records cost money, but once a fam-
ily bought a radio, a whole world of entertainment and information was at its disposal, 
free of charge. Th e number of homes with radios grew from 12 million in 1930 to 30 
million in 1940, and half of them had not one but two receivers. Ad revenues rose from 
$40 million to $155 million over the same period. Between them, the four national 
networks broadcast 156 hours of network-originated programming a week. New genres 
became fi xtures during this period: comedy  (Th e Jack Benny Show, Fibber McGee and 
Molly) , audience participation  (Professor Quiz, Truth or Consequences, Kay Kyser’s 
Kollege of Musical Knowledge) , children’s shows  (Little Orphan Annie, Th e Lone Ranger) , 

CHAPTER 7 
Radio, Recording, and Popular Music   
159
soap operas  (Oxydol’s Own Ma Perkins, Th e Guiding Light) , and drama (Orson Welles’s 
 Mercury Th eater of the Air ). News, too, became a radio staple.  
 RADIO AND SOUND RECORDING IN WORLD WAR II     Th e golden age of radio shone even more brightly 
after Pearl Harbor was bombed by the Japanese in 1941, propelling the United States 
into World War II. Radio was used to sell war bonds, and much content was aimed at 
boosting the nation’s morale. Th e war increased the desire for news, especially from 
abroad. Th e war also caused a paper shortage, reducing advertising space in newspa-
pers. No new stations were licensed during the war years, and the 950 
existing broadcasters reaped all the broadcast advertising revenues, 
as well as additional ad revenues that otherwise would have gone to 
newspapers. Ad revenues were up to $310 million by the end of World 
War II in 1945. 
 Sound recording benefi ted from the war as well. Prior to World War 
II, recording in the United States was done either directly to master 
metal disc or on wire recorders, literally magnetic recording on metal 
wire. But GIs brought a new technology back from occupied Germany, 
a tape recorder that used an easily handled paper tape on a reel. Th en, 
in 1947, Columbia Records introduced a new 33⅓ rpm (rotations-per-
minute) long-playing plastic record perfected by Peter Goldmark. A big 
advance over the previous standard of 78 rpm, it was more durable than 
the older shellac discs and played for 23 rather than 3⅓ minutes. Colum-
bia off ered the technology free to all other record companies. RCA 
refused the off er, introducing its own 45 rpm disc in 1948. It played for 
only 3⅓ minutes and had a huge center hole requiring a special adapter. 
Still, RCA persisted in its marketing, causing a speed war that was settled 
in 1950 when the two giants compromised on 33⅓ as the standard for 
classical music and 45 as the standard for pop. And it was the 45, the 
single, that sustained the music business until the mid-1960s, when the 
Beatles not only ushered in the “British invasion” of rock ‘n’ roll but also 
transformed popular music into a 33⅓ album-dominant cultural force, 
shaping today’s popular music and helping reinvent radio.     
  George Burns and Gracie Allen were CBS 
comedy stars during radio’s golden age. They were 
among the many radio performers to move easily 
and successfully to television.
 The Iowa radio station that bought space on 
the cover of industry “bible”  Broadcasting/
Telecasting wanted readers to believe that all was 
well in radio-land in 1953. It wasn’t. 

160 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 TELEVISION ARRIVES  When the war ended and radio licenses were granted again, 
the number of stations grew rapidly to 2,000. Annual ad revenues reached 
$454 million in 1950. Th en came television. Network affi  liation dropped from 
97% in 1945 to 50% by the mid-1950s, as stations “went local” in the face of 
television’s national dominance. National radio advertising income dipped to 
$35 million in 1960, the year that television found its way into 90% of U.S. homes. 
If radio were to survive, it would have to fi nd new functions.     
 Radio and Its Audiences  
 Radio more than survived; it prospered by changing the nature of its relation-
ship with its audiences. Th e easiest way to understand this is to see pretelevi-
sion radio as television is today—nationally oriented, broadcasting an array of 
recognizable entertainment program formats, populated by well-known stars 
and personalities, and consumed primarily in the home, typically with people 
sitting around the set. Posttelevision radio is local, fragmented, specialized, 
personal, and mobile. Whereas pretelevision radio was characterized by the 
big national networks, today’s radio is dominated by formats, a particular 
sound characteristic of a local station. 
 Who are the people who make up radio’s audience? In an average week, more 
than 242 million people, 93.1% of all Americans 12 and over, will listen to the 
radio (“Radio Broadcasters Attract,” 2011). Broadcast radio’s audience growth, 
however, is stagnant. Th at 93.1% fi gure is in fact a decline from the 95.6% who 
listened regularly in 2009. And while the audience’s  size  has remained relatively 
constant for the last few years,  time spent listening  has fallen, dropping several 
minutes in that span (Walsh, 2011a). But most troubling to radio professionals is 
that time listening  among teenagers  is in decline, as it is with college graduates 
(Sass, 2010). You can see a demographic breakdown of listeners in  Figure 7.1 . 
Note it is teens who listen the least. Th e industry itself attributes this situation to 
dissatisfaction with unimaginative programming, hypercommercialization—on 
average about 12 minutes of commercials an hour—and the availability of online 
music sources and mobile technologies like MP3 players and smartphones. 
Today, 38% of Americans now listen to audio on digital devices, a proportion that 
is expected to double by 2015 (Santhanam, Mitchell & Rosenstiel, 2012).    
 Scope and Nature of the 
Radio Industry  
 Th ere are 14,952 broadcast radio stations operating in the United States today: 
4,766 commercial AM stations, 6,542 commercial FM stations, and 3,644 noncom-
mercial FM stations. Th ese are joined on the dial by 838  Low Power FM (LPFM) 
stations. Th ere are more than two radios for every person in the United States. Th e 
industry as a whole sells more than $17 billion a year of ad time, and radio remains 
people’s primary means of consuming audio content.     
  FM, AM, and Noncommercial Radio 
 Although FMs constitute 58% of all commercial stations (to AMs’ 42%), they attract 
over 75% of all radio listeners. Th is has to do with the technology behind each. Th e 
FM (frequency modulation) signal is wider, allowing the broadcast not only of 
stereo but also of better fi delity to the original sound than the narrower AM 
(amplitude modulation) signal. As a result, people attracted to music gravitate 
toward FM. People favoring news, sports, and information tend to fi nd themselves 
listening to the AM dial. AM signals travel farther than FM signals, making them 
perfect for rural parts of the country. But rural areas tend to be less heavily popu-
lated, and most AM stations serve fewer listeners. Th e FCC approved stereo AM in 
Percentage who listen every week 
(by age)
 
 
All listeners 
12 years old 
and older 
93.1%
92.0% 12–17 yrs.  
93.7% 18–34 yrs.
95.0% 35–54 yrs.
  Figure 7.1  Percentage of Americans Who Listen to the 
Radio Every Week by Age.  Source:  Radio, 2011. 

CHAPTER 7 
Radio, Recording, and Popular Music   
161
1985, but relatively few people have AM stereo receivers. Th ere seems to be little demand 
for news, sports, and information in stereo. 
 Many of today’s FM stations are noncommercial—that is, they accept no advertising. 
When the national frequency allocation plan was established during the deliberations 
leading to the 1934 Communications Act, commercial radio broadcasters persuaded 
Congress that they alone could be trusted to develop this valuable medium. Th ey prom-
ised to make time available for religious, children’s, and other educational program-
ming. No frequencies were set aside for noncommercial radio to fulfi ll these functions. 
At the insistence of critics who contended that the commercial broadcasters were not 
fulfi lling their promise, in 1945 the FCC set aside all FM frequencies between 88.1 and 
91.9 megahertz for noncommercial radio. Today these noncommercial stations not only 
provide local service, but many also off er national network quality programming 
through affi  liation with National Public Radio (NPR) and Public Radio International 
(PRI) or through a number of smaller national networks, such as Pacifi ca Radio.   
 Radio Is Local 
 No longer able to compete with television for the national audience in the 1950s, radio 
began to attract a local audience. Because it costs much more to run a local television 
station than a local radio station, advertising rates on radio tend to be much lower than 
on television. Local advertisers can aff ord radio more easily than they can television, 
which increases the local fl avor of radio.   
 Radio Is Fragmented 
 Radio stations are widely distributed throughout the United States. Virtually every 
town—even those with only a few hundred residents—has at least one station. Th e num-
ber of stations licensed in an area is a function of both population and proximity to other 
towns. Small towns may have only one AM or FM station, and a big city can have as 
many as 40 stations. Th is fragmentation—many stations serving many areas—makes 
possible contemporary radio’s most important characteristic, its ability to specialize.   
 Radio Is Specialized 
 When radio became a local medium, it could no longer program the expensive, star-
fi lled genres of its golden age. Th e problem now was how to program a station with 
interesting content and do so economically. A disc jockey playing records was the best 
solution. And stations soon learned that a highly specialized, specifi c audience of par-
ticular interest to certain advertisers could be attracted with specifi c types of music. 
 Format    radio was born. Of course, choosing a specifi c format means accepting that 
many potential listeners will not tune in. But in format radio the size of the audience 
is secondary to its composition. 
 Radio ratings service Arbitron annually recognizes 60 diff erent formats, from the 
most common, which include Country, Top 40, Album-Oriented Rock, and All Talk, to 
the somewhat uncommon, for example, World Ethnic. Many stations, especially those 
in rural areas, off er  secondary services    (formats). For example, a country station may 
broadcast a religious format for 10 hours on Saturday and Sunday. Figure 7.2 shows 
Arbitron’s 60 formats. 
 Format radio off ers stations many advantages beyond low-cost operations and spe-
cialized audiences that appeal to advertisers. Faced with falling listenership or declin-
ing advertising revenues, a station can simply change disc jockeys (DJs) and discs. 
Neither television nor the print media have this content fl exibility. When confronted 
with competition from a station with a similar format, a station can further narrow its 
audience by specializing its formula even more. 
 Music format radio requires a disc jockey. Someone has to spin the discs and pro-
vide the talk. Th e modern DJ is the invention of Todd Storz, who bought KOHW in 
Omaha, Nebraska, in 1949. He turned the radio personality/music formula on its head. 

162 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
Before Storz, radio announcers would talk most of the time and occasionally play 
music to rest their voices. Storz wanted more music, less talk. He thought radio should 
sound like a jukebox—the same few songs people wanted to hear played over and over 
again. His Top 40 format, which demanded strict adherence to a    playlist (a predeter-
mined sequence of selected records) of popular music for young people, up-tempo 
pacing, and catchy production gimmicks, became the standard for the posttelevision 
popular music station. Gordon McClendon of KLIF in Dallas refi ned the Top 40 format 
and developed others, such as Beautiful Music, and is therefore often considered, 
along with Storz, one of the two pioneers of format radio.     
 Radio Is Personal 
 With the advent of television, the relationship of radio with its audience changed. 
Whereas families had gathered around the radio set to listen together, we now listen 
to the radio alone. We select personally pleasing formats, and we listen as an adjunct 
to other personally important activities.   
 Radio Is Mobile 
 Th e mobility of radio accounts in large part for its personal nature. We can listen 
anywhere, at any time. We listen at work, while exercising, while sitting in the sun. 
By 1947 the combined sale of car and alarm clock radios exceeded that of traditional 
living-room receivers, and in 1951 the annual production of car radios exceeded that 
of home receivers for the fi rst time. Today, two-thirds of all traditional radio listening 
occurs away from home (Santhanam, Mitchell, & Rosenstiel, 2012).     
80s Hits 
Active Rock 
Adult Contemporary 
Adult Hits 
Adult Standards/MOR 
Album Adult Alternative  
Album Oriented Rock 
All News 
All Sports 
Alternative 
Blues 
Children’s Radio 
Christian AC
Classical 
Classic Country 
Classic Hits 
Classic Rock 
Contemporary Christian 
Contemporary Inspirational 
Country 
Easy Listening 
Educational l
Family Hits 
Gospel 
Hot Adult Contemporary 
Jazz 
Latino Urban 
Mexican Regional 
Modern A Adult Contemporary 
New Adult Contemporary /Smooth Jazz 
New Country
News/Talk/Information
Nostalgia
Oldies
Other
Pop Contemporary Hit Radio
Religious
Rhythmic AC
Rhythmic Contemporary Hit Radio
Rhythmic Oldies
Smooth Adult Contemporary
Soft Adult Contemporary
Southern Gospel
Spanish Adult Hits
Spanish Contemporary
Spanish Contemporary Christian
Spanish Hot Adult Contemporary
Spanish News/Talk
Spanish Oldies
Spanish Religious
Spanish Sports
Spanish Tropical
Spanish Variety
Talk/Personality
Tejano
Urban Adult Contemporary
Urban Contemporary
Urban Oldies
Variety
World Ethnic
  Figure 7.2  Arbitron’s Radio Formats. 
 Source: Arbitron, 2012. 

CHAPTER 7 
Radio, Recording, and Popular Music   
163
 The Business of Radio  
 Th e distinctive characteristics of radio serve its listeners, but they also 
make radio a thriving business.  
 Radio as an Advertising Medium 
 Advertisers enjoy the specialization of radio because it gives them 
access to homogeneous groups of listeners to whom products can 
be pitched. Income earned from the sale of airtime is called    billings . 
Local time and national spots (for example, Prestone Antifreeze buys 
time on several thousand stations in winter areas) account for 92% 
of all billings; network time makes up the rest (Television Bureau of 
Advertising, 2011). Th e cost of time is based on the  ratings , the per-
centage of the total available audience reached. 
 Radio is an attractive advertising medium for reasons other than 
its delivery of a homogeneous audience. Radio ads are inexpensive to 
produce and therefore can be changed, updated, and specialized to 
meet specifi c audience demands. Ads can also be specialized to dif-
ferent times of the day. For example, a hamburger restaurant may 
have one version of its commercial for the morning audience, in 
which its breakfast menu is touted, and a diff erent version for the eve-
ning audience driving home, dreading the thought of cooking dinner. 
Radio time is inexpensive to buy, especially when compared with tele-
vision. An audience loyal to a specifi c format station is presumably 
loyal to those who advertise on it. Radio is the listeners’ friend; it trav-
els with them and talks to them personally.   
 Deregulation and Ownership 
 Th e business of radio is being altered by deregulation and changes 
in ownership rules. To ensure that there were many diff erent per-
spectives in the cultural forum, the FCC had long limited the num-
ber of radio stations one person or company could own to one AM 
and one FM locally and seven AMs and seven FMs nationally. 
Th ese numbers were revised upward in the late 1980s, and controls 
were almost totally eliminated by the Telecommunications Act of 
1996. Now, thanks to this    deregulation   , there are no national own-
ership limits, and one person or company can own as many as 
eight stations in one market, depending on the size of the market. 
Th is situation has allowed    duopoly   —one person or company own-
ing and managing multiple radio stations in a single market—to 
explode. Since the passage of the 1996 act, more than 10,000 radio 
stations have been sold, and there are now 1,100 fewer station 
owners, a 30% decline. Th e vast majority of these sales have been 
to already large radio groups such as Clear Channel and Cumulus, 
with 850 and 570 stations, respectively. As a result, in 25 of the 
50 largest radio markets, three companies claim 80% of all listeners. 
In 43 diff erent cities, one-third of the radio stations are owned by 
a single company, making radio “the most consolidated industry 
in the media” (Morrison, 2011). Whereas all of Boston’s 15 FMs and 
14 of Seattle’s 17 FMs are owned by four companies, each of the 
12 FMs in Toronto, Canada, has a diff erent owner. 
 Th is concentration is a source of concern for many radio 
professionals. Local public aff airs shows now make up less than 
one-half of 1 percent of all commercial broadcast time in the 
United States. “Th ere is a crisis,” said FCC Commissioner Michael 
Copps (2011), “when more than one-third of our commercial 
  Fans debate whether Todd Storz or Gordon McClendon ﬁ rst invented the DJ. 
But there is no dispute that Alan Freed, ﬁ rst in Cleveland and then in New York, 
established the DJ as a star. Freed, here in a 1958 photo, is credited with introducing 
America’s white teenagers to rhythm ‘n’ blues artists like Chuck Berry and Little 
Richard and ushering in the age of rock ‘n’ roll.
  What small increase there is in the size of radio’s audience is attributed to “non-
corporate” programming like public radio, sports-talk, and Spanish-language stations. 
Pictured here is Miami’s Javier Ceriani.  

164 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
broadcasters off er little to no news whatsoever to their communities of license. America’s 
news and information resources keep shrinking and hundreds of stories that could 
inform our citizens go untold and, indeed, undiscovered. Where is the vibrancy when 
hundreds of newsrooms have been decimated and tens of thousands of reporters are 
walking the street in search of a job instead of working the beat in search of a story?” As 
for the music, in 2011, when Clear Channel and Cumulus collectively laid off  “dozens to 
hundreds” of DJs in a move toward “more automated or national syndicated program-
ming” (Sass, 2011c), veteran Los Angeles rock DJ Jim Ladd said, “It’s really bad news. It 
was people in my profession that fi rst played Tom Petty, fi rst played the Doors. But the 
people programming stations now are not music people—they’re business people” (in 
Knopper, 2011, p. 19). Does it surprise you, then, that the biggest audience increases over 
the last 10 years come from stations—public radio (up 31%), sports talk (up 25%), and 
Spanish-language (up 54%)—unlikely to receive playlists from Corporate Central (Ste-
venson, 2008)? Low Power FM (LPFM), 10- to 100-watt nonprofi t community radio sta-
tions with a reach of only a few miles, are one response to radio concentration. As a result 
of the Local Community Radio Act of 2005, which enjoyed wide bipartisan support in 
Congress, 838 LPFM stations, serving all 50 states, now off er opportunities for additional 
radio voices to serve their local listenerships. Th e FCC reports that it receives “tens of 
thousands of inquiries annually from groups and individuals wishing to start a low power 
radio station” (Federal Communications Commission, 2012).     
 Scope and Nature of the 
Recording Industry  
 When the DJs and Top 40 formats saved radio in the 1950s, they also changed for all time 
popular music and, by extension, the recording industry. Disc jockeys were color-deaf 
in their selection of records. Th ey introduced record buyers to rhythm ‘n’ blues in the 
music of African American artists such as Chuck Berry and Little Richard. Until the mid-
1950s the work of these performers had to be    covered   —rerecorded by White artists such 
as Perry Como—before it was aired. Teens loved the new sound, however, and it became 
the foundation of their own subculture, as well as the basis for the explosion in recorded 
music. See the essay, “Rock ‘n’ Roll, Radio, and Race Relations,” for more on rock’s roots. 
 Today more than 5,000 U.S. companies annually release around 100,000   new albums 
on thousands of diff erent labels. Customers in America annually buy one-third of the 
world’s recorded music in more than 1.5 billion individual transactions, up from 845 
million in 2000 (Masnick & Ho, 2012).      
 The Major Recording Companies 
 Th ree major recording companies control 90% of the recorded music market in the 
United States. Two (Sony and Universal) control 59% of the  world’s  $30 billion global 
music market. Two of the three are foreign-owned: 
 • Sony, controlling about 23% of the world music market, is co-owned by two global 
media conglomerates, Japan’s Sony and Germany’s Bertelsmann. Its labels include 
Columbia, Epic, RCA, and Arista.  
 • New York–based Warner Music Group, controlling about 15%, is owned by billion-
naire Len Blavatnik’s Access Industries and several private investors. Its labels 
include Atlantic, Electra, and Warner Brothers.  
 • Universal Music Group, controlling about 36%, is owned by French conglomerate 
Vivendi Universal and controls labels such as MCA, Capitol, and Def Jam Records.    
 Critics have long voiced concern over conglomeration and internationalization in 
the music business, a concern that centers on the traditional cultural value of music, 
especially for young people. Multibillion-dollar conglomerates typically are not rebel-
lious in their cultural tastes, nor are they usually willing to take risks on new ideas. 
Th ese duties have fallen primarily to the independent labels, companies such as Real 

CHAPTER 7 
Radio, Recording, and Popular Music   
165
World Records and Epitaph. Still, problems with the music industry–audience relation-
ship remain and have contributed to its current turmoil. 
 Cultural homogenization  is the worrisome outcome of virtually all the world’s infl u-
ential recording being controlled by a few profi t-oriented giants. If bands or artists 
cannot immediately deliver the goods, they aren’t signed. So derivative artists and 
manufactured groups dominate—for example, Justin Bieber and Hannah Montana. 
 Th e  dominance of profi t over artistry  worries many music fans. When a major label must 
spend millions to sign a bankable group such as R.E.M. ($80 million) or Mariah Carey ($80 
million), it typically pares lesser-known, potentially more innovative artists from its roster. 
 Critics and industry people alike see the ascendance of profi ts over artistry as a 
problem for the industry itself, as well as for the music and its listeners. As we saw in 
Chapter 2, record industry sales have dropped consistently over the past decade, with 
the steepest fall-off  coming in more recent years. As a result, EMI let 2,000 employees 
go in 2008, only months after Warner cut loose 400 people of its own. Staff  at the other 
major labels faced the same fate (Garside & Power, 2008). Th e reason for this state of 
aff airs, say many music critics, is not Internet piracy, as asserted by the recording 
industry, but the industry itself. As music critic John Seabrook (2003) explains, “Th e 
record industry has helped to create these thieving, lazy, and disloyal fans. By market-
ing superfi cial, disposable pop stars, labels persuade fans to treat the music as super-
fi cial and disposable.” He quotes legendary music producer Malcolm McLaren: “Th e 
amazing thing about the death of the record industry is that no one cares. If the movie 
industry died, you’d probably have a few people saying, ‘Oh, this is too bad—after all, 
they gave us Garbo and Marilyn Monroe.’ But now the record industry is dying, and 
no one gives a damn” (p. 52). What kept the red ink from fl owing even faster was strong 
sales in    catalogue albums    (more than 30% of all discs sold), albums more than three 
years old. However, sales of    recent catalogue albums   , that is, those that have been out 
for 15 months to three years, have fallen dramatically over the last fi ve years, further 
damaging the industry’s bottom line. “Recent catalogue” cannot become “catalogue” 
unless a label stays with an artist, allowing him or her to grow, possibly through three 
or four albums. Look at the names of the best-selling albums and artists in  Figure 7.3 . 
134.5
177.0
128.0
111.5
81.5
72.0
71.5
71.5
74.5
100.0
Beatles
Pink Floyd
Elvis Presley
Garth Brooks
Led Zeppelin
Billy Joel
Eagles
Elton John
Barbra Streisand
AC/DC
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Best-selling artists (units sold in millions)
Best-selling albums
 1. Thriller (Michael Jackson)
 2. Eagles/Their Greatest Hits (Eagles)
 3. Led Zeppelin IV (Led Zeppelin)
 4. The Wall (Pink Floyd)
 5. Greatest Hits Volumes I & II (Billy Joel)
 6. Back in Black (AC/DC)
 7. Double Lives (Garth Brooks)
 8. Come on Over (Shania Twain)
 9. Beatles (The Beatles)
 10. Rumours (Fleetwood Mac)
 Figure 7.3 The Top 10 Best-selling 
Albums and Artists of All Time, U.S. Sales Only.
 Source: Recording Industry Association of America 
( www.riaa.com ). 

166 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
How many recent or current artists and albums do you think will ever join these ranks? 
Critics of the ascendance of profi ts over artistry argue that the industry simply lacks 
the patience to develop careers.   
 Promotion overshadows the music , say the critics. If groups or artists don’t come 
across well on television or are otherwise a challenge to promote (for example, they 
do not fi t an easily recognizable niche), they aren’t signed. Again, the solution is to 
create marketable artists from scratch. Promoting tours is also an issue. If bands or 
artists do not have corporate sponsorship for their tours, there is no tour. If musicians 
do not tour, they cannot create an enthusiastic fan base. But if they do not have an 
enthusiastic fan base, they cannot attract the corporate sponsorship necessary to 
mount a tour. Th is makes radio even more important for the introduction of new 
artists and forms of music, but radio, too, is increasingly driven by profi t-maximizing 
format narrowing and is therefore dependent on the major labels’ defi nition of play-
able artists. As a result, when the Internet began to undermine a complacent indus-
try’s long-profi table business model, it was ill prepared to meet the challenges that 
came its way.  
 After World War II African Americans in the United States refused to remain invisible. Having 
fought in segregated units in Europe and proven their willingness to ﬁ ght and die for free-
dom abroad, they openly demanded freedom at home. Some Whites began to listen. Presi-
dent Harry Truman, recognizing the absurdity of racial separation in the self-proclaimed 
“greatest democracy on earth,” desegregated the armed forces by executive order in 1948. 
These early stirrings of equality led to a sense among African Americans 
that anything was possible, and that feeling seeped into their music. What 
had been called cat, sepia, or race music took on a new tone. While this new 
sound borrowed from traditional Black music—gospel, blues, and sad la-
ments over slavery and racial injustice—it was diﬀ erent, much diﬀ erent. 
Music historian Ed Ward said that this bolder, more aggressive music 
“spoke to a shared experience, not just to Black (usually rural Black) life,” 
and it would become the “truly biracial popular music in this country” 
(Ward, Stokes, & Tucker, 1986, p. 83). 
 Hundreds of small independent record companies sprang up to produce this newly 
labeled rhythm and blues (R&B), music focusing on Americans’ shared experience, and sex 
and alcohol were part of life for people of all colors. With its earthy lyrics and thumping 
dance beat, R&B very quickly found an audience in the 1950s, one composed largely of 
urban Blacks (growing in number as African Americans increasingly ﬂ ed the South) and 
White teenagers. 
 The major record companies took notice, and rather than sign already successful R&B 
artists, they had their White artists cover the Black hits. The Penguins’ “Earth Angel” was 
covered by the reassuringly named Crew Cuts, who also covered the Chords’ “Sh-Boom.” 
Chuck Berry’s “Maybellene” was covered by both the Johnny Long and Ralph Marterie or-
chestras. Even Bill Haley and the Comets’ youth anthem “Shake, Rattle and Roll” was a cover 
of a Joe Turner tune. 
 But these covers actually served to introduce even more White teens to the new music, 
and these kids demanded the original versions. This did not escape the attention of Sam 
Phillips, who in 1952 founded Sun Records in an eﬀ ort to bring Black music to White kids (“If 
I could ﬁ nd a White man who had the Negro sound, I could make a billion 
dollars,” he is reported to have mused [“Why Elvis Still Lives,” 2002]). In 
1954 he found that man: Elvis Presley. 
 The situation also caught the attention of Cleveland DJ Alan Freed, 
whose nationally distributed radio (and later television) show featured 
Black R&B tunes, never covers. Freed began calling the music he played rock 
‘n’ roll (to signify that it was Black and White youth music), and by 1955, 
when Freed took his show to New York, the cover business was dead. Black 
performers were recording and releasing their own music to a national audience, and people 
of all colors were tuning in. 
 Now that the kids had a music of their own, and now that a growing number of 
radio stations were willing to program it, a youth culture began to develop, one that was 
antagonistic toward their parents’ culture. The music was central to this antagonism, 
not only because it was gritty and nasty but also because it exposed the hypocrisy of 
adult culture.  
 For young people of the mid-1950s and 1960s, the music of Little Richard, Fats Domino, 
Ray Charles, and Chuck Berry made a lie of all that their parents, teachers, and government 
leaders had said about race, the inferiority of African Americans, and Blacks’ satisfaction with 
the status quo. 
    Ralph Bass, a producer for independent R&B label Chess Records, described the evolu-
tion to historian David Szatmary. When he was touring with Chess’s R&B groups in the early 
1950s, “they didn’t let whites into the clubs. Then they got ‘white spectator tickets’ for the 
worst corner of the joint. They had to keep the white kids out, so they’d have white nights 
sometimes, or they’d put a rope across the middle of the ﬂ oor. The blacks on one side, the 
whites on the other, digging how the blacks were dancing and copying them. Then, hell, the 
rope would come down, and they’d all be dancing together. Salt and pepper all mixed to-
gether” (Szatmary, 2000, p. 21). 
 USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE 
 Rock ‘n’ Roll, Radio, and 
Race Relations 
 “R&B and rock ‘n’ roll did not end racism. But the 
music made a difference, one that would eventually 
make it possible for Americans who wanted to do so to 
free themselves from racism’s ugly hold.” 

CHAPTER 7 
Radio, Recording, and Popular Music   
167
 Trends and Convergence in Radio 
and Sound Recording  
 Emerging and changing technologies have aff ected the production and distribution 
aspects of both radio and sound recording.  
 The Impact of Television 
 We have seen how television fundamentally altered radio’s structure and relationship 
with its audiences. Television, specifi cally cable channel MTV, changed the recording 
industry, too. MTV’s introduction in 1981 helped pull the industry out of its disastrous 
1979 slump, but at a price. First, the look of concerts has changed. No longer is it suf-
fi cient to pack an artist or group into a hall or stadium with a few thousand screaming 
fans. Now a concert must be an extravagant multimedia event approximating the 
sophistication of an MTV video. Th is means that fewer acts take to the road, changing 
 R&B and rock ‘n’ roll did not end racism. But the music made a difference, one that 
would eventually make it possible for Americans who wanted to do so to free them-
selves of racism’s ugly hold. Rock music (and the radio stations that played it) would 
again nudge the nation toward its better tendencies during the antiwar and civil rights 
movements of the late 1960s. And it is against this backdrop, a history of popular 
music making as real a difference as any piece of official legislation, that contemporary 
critics lament the homogenizing of popular music. Music can and has made a differ-
ence. Can and will it ever again? they ask.  
 The music of Chuck Berry, Bo Diddley, and Little Richard may have been covered by White performers, but its passion and soul soon attracted young listeners of 
all races, making a lie of their parents’ racial intolerance. 

f
f
f

168 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
the relationship between musicians and fans. Second, the radio-recording industry 
relationship has changed. Even as MTV began to program fewer and fewer music 
videos, record companies grew even more reliant on television to introduce new 
music.  American Idol  contestants, for example, accounted for 60 Number One hits 
and 14 platinum (over a million sales) albums in the fi rst seven years after the show’s 
2002 debut. Labels now time record releases to artists’ television appearances, and 
new and old tunes alike fi nd heavy play on television shows like  Gossip Girl  and  Glee . 
“TV is the new radio,” says Leonard Richardson, vice president for music at the CW 
television network. “People say that all the time, but it’s defi nitely true” (in Littleton 
& Schneider, 2009, p. 62). It’s also true that another kind of video, Internet video, has 
become “the new radio.” YouTube served as career launching pad for pop star Justin 
Bieber, who in 2008 used a series of homemade videos of his 12-year-old self singing 
in the mirror and around his hometown to catch the eye of the star-hungry record 
industry.     
 TV is the new radio. Labels time record releases 
to tunes’ presence on shows like Glee.

CHAPTER 7 
Radio, Recording, and Popular Music   
169
 Satellite and Cable 
 Th e convergence of radio and satellite has aided the rebirth of the radio networks. 
Music and other forms of radio content can be distributed quite inexpensively to 
thousands of stations. As a result, one “network” can provide very diff erent services to 
its very diff erent affi  liates. Citadel, for example, maintains the Rick Dees Weekly Top 40 
and ESPN networks. Westwood One, through its  syndication  operations, delivers its 
more than 300 varied network and program syndication services to almost every 
 commercial station in the country. Th e low cost of producing radio programming, 
however, makes the establishment of other, even more specialized networks possible. 
Satellites, too, make access to syndicated content and formats aff ordable for many sta-
tions. Syndicators can deliver news, top 10 shows, and other content to stations on a 
market-by-market basis. Th ey can also provide entire formats, requiring local stations, 
if they wish, to do little more than insert commercials into what appears to listeners 
to be a local broadcast. 
 Satellite has another application as well. Many listeners now receive “radio” 
through their cable televisions in the form of satellite-delivered    DMX (Digital Music 
Express)   . Direct satellite home, offi  ce, and automobile delivery of audio by    digital 
audio radio service (DARS)    brings Sirius XM Radio to more than 22 million sub-
scribers (32 million total listeners) by off ering hundreds of commercial channels—
primarily talk, sports, and traffi  c—and commercial-free channels—primarily music  . 
Th ose numbers will likely grow because the company has arrangements with every 
major carmaker in the country to off er its receivers as a factory-installed option 
(Yao, 2010).  
 Satellite radio’s true impact on the radio and recording industries, however, may be 
more than simply off ering a greater variety of listening options. Because despite the 
fact that traditional radio station operators continue to dismiss satellite radio for its 
relatively small audience, those same operators have begun to change the sound of 
their stations in response to the new technology. Th ey are reducing the number of 
commercials they air, adding hundreds of new songs and artists to their playlists, and 
introducing new formats. Many are also beefi ng up their local news operations. Both 
radio and popular music should be better for the change.   
 Terrestrial Digital Radio 
 Since late 2002, thousands of radio stations have begun broadcasting    terrestrial
(land-based)  digital radio   . Relying on digital compression technology called    in-
band-on-channel (IBOC) , terrestrial digital radio allows broadcasters to transmit 
not only their usual analog signal, but one or more digital signals using their existing 
 These artists (from left to right)—the Pussycat 
Dolls, Arcade Fire, Aimee Mann, and My Chemical 
Romance—are ﬁ nding new ways to prosper in 
a rapidly changing music industry while still 
engaging fans. 

170 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
spectrum space. And although IBOC also improves sound fidelity, making possi-
ble high-definition radio, most stations using the technology see its greatest value 
in pay services—for example, subscription data delivery. IBOC proponents opti-
mistically predict that terrestrial digital radio will completely replace analog radio 
by 2017.   
 Web Radio and Podcasting 
 Radio’s convergence with digital technologies is nowhere more pronounced and 
potentially profound than in    Web radio   , the delivery of “radio” directly to individual 
listeners over the Internet, and in    podcasting   , recording and downloading of audio 
fi les stored on servers, or, in the words of  Fortune  technology writer Peter Lewis (2005), 
“Simultaneously a rebellion against the blandness of commercial radio, a demonstra-
tion of time shifting for radio, just as TiVo allows time shifting for television, and a 
celebration of the Internet’s power to let individuals off er their own voices to a global 
audience” (p. 204). 
 First, Web radio. Tens of thousands of “radio stations” exist on the Web in one of 
two forms.  Radio simulcasts  are traditional, over-the-air stations transmitting their sig-
nals online. Some simply re-create their original broadcasts, but more often, the simul-
cast includes additional information, such as song lyrics or artists’ biographical 
information and concert dates. 
 Bitcasters   , Web-only radio stations, can be accessed only online. Th ere are narrowly 
targeted bitcasts, such as Indie 103.1, a Los Angeles alternative rock station, and 
 allworship.com , a Christian station Webcasting from Birmingham, Alabama. But the 
most dramatic evidence of the popularity of bitcasting exists in the success of two 
 streaming  services that allow the simultaneous downloading and accessing of music. 
Pandora is platform agnostic, available on virtually every new digital device, not only 
the obvious like smartphones, televisions, and car radios, but also the less-so, for 
example WiFi-enabled refrigerators. Listeners, who log more than 1 billion hours a 
month (Walsh, 2012d), can pay a small monthly fee to hear the service absent com-
mercials, but the vast majority of its 75 million subscribers tune in for free and hear 
demographically and taste-specifi c commercials. Pandora accomplishes this ad speci-
fi city by coupling it with its Music Genome Project. After listeners tell Pandora what 
artists they like, the Genome Project, according to the company, “will quickly scan its 
entire world of analyzed music, almost a century of popular recordings—new and old, 
well known and completely obscure—to fi nd songs with interesting musical similari-
ties to your choice.” Listeners can create up to 100 unique “stations,” personally refi n-
ing them even more if they wish, and at any time, they can purchase the tune they are 
hearing with a simple click. 
 With more than 10 million subscribers worldwide, Spotify came to the U. S. in 2011. 
Using a “freemium model,” it off ers listeners more than 15 million songs. Th ey can 
listen for free, hearing commercials and living with limits on how much music they 
can stream, or they can pay a small monthly fee for premium limitless, commercial-
free listening. Including other streaming services such as Slacker and Yahoo Music, 
online radio is the fastest-growing way to listen to music in the United States; 43% of 
American Web users listen this way, a 9% leap from 2010 to 2011 (Walsh, 2012c). 
 Podcasts, however, because they are posted online, do not require streaming 
software. Th ey can be downloaded, either on demand or automatically (typically by 
subscription), to any digital device that has an MP3 player, including PCs, laptops, and 
smartphones. Nearly 27,000 podcasters are now online, and they cover every conceiv-
able topic on which an individual or organization cares to comment. And while pod-
casting was begun in earnest in 2004 by individual techies, audio bloggers, and 
DJ-wannabes, within a year they were joined by “professional” podcasters such as 
record companies, commercial and public radio stations, and big media companies 
like ESPN, CNN, Bravo, and Disney. Listenership has also exploded as iPods and other 
MP3 devices have become ubiquitous and as more people have broadband Internet 
access. Twenty-fi ve percent of Americans listen to podcasts, more than double the 

CHAPTER 7 
Radio, Recording, and Popular Music   
171
proportion who listened in 2006. In fact, including 
all forms, more than 56% of Americans 12 and older 
listen to Internet radio, averaging nearly 10 hours of 
listening a week (Edison Research, 2011).   
 Smartphones, Tablets, and Social 
Networking Sites 
 One of radio’s distinguishing characteristics, as we’ve 
seen, is its portability. Smartphones and tablets rein-
force that benefi t. For example, more than half of all 
Pandora listening is mobile, and it is the leading 
audio app on the iPhone and iPad. Eleven percent of 
smartphone owners listen to streamed music while 
driving by connecting their devices to their cars’ 
sound systems, and 19% download music from other 
devices to their smartphones for listening-on-the-go 
(Santhanam, Mitchell, & Rosenstiel, 2012). 
 Much smartphone and tablet listening occurs via 
social networking sites’ streaming services such as 
MySpaceMusic and Facebook’s free music links to 
sites such as Spotify, Pandora, and turntable.fm. 
Digital technology, so much a threat to the tradi-
tional recording industry business model, has also 
helped the labels’ balance sheets in an unlikely 
manner—the sale of music to mobile phones. Ring-
tone downloads, people downloading recorded 
music to serve as the alerting sound on their phones, 
is already a global $10 billion business. For the 
record labels, this income is equivalent to “found 
money,” as it is generated from fragments of already 
existing recordings (see Figure 7.4) . 
 Digital Technology 
 In the 1970s the basis of both the recording and radio industries changed from analog 
to  digital recording . Th at is, sound went from being preserved as waves, whether 
physically on a disc or tape or through the air, to conversion into 1s and 0s logged in 
millisecond intervals in a computerized translation process. When replayed at the 
proper speed, the resulting sound was not only continuous but pristine—no hum, no 
hiss. Th e CD, or compact disc, was introduced in 1983 using digital coding on a 
4.7-inch disc read by a laser beam. In 1986  Brothers in Arms  by Dire Straits became 
the fi rst million-selling CD. In 1988 the sale of CDs surpassed that of vinyl discs for the 
fi rst time, and today CDs account for 13.1% of all music sales.      
 Convergence with computers and the Internet off ers other challenges and opportu-
nities to the radio and recording industries. Th e way the recording industry operates 
has been dramatically altered by the Internet. Traditionally, a record company signs an 
artist, produces the artist’s music, and promotes the artist and music through a variety 
of outlets but primarily through the distribution of music to radio stations. Th en listen-
ers, learning about the artist and music through radio, go to a record store and buy the 
music. But this has changed. Music fans are now “in a new century and fl oating free 
with more sounds than ever,” writes music critic Gabriel Boylan (2010, p. 34). Head of 
Country Music Television, Brian Philips, explains, “Th e old logic of just get something 
played a lot on the radio and it will sell seems less and less to be predictably true. . . . 
Th e winners these days are people who can imagine beyond the narrow limitations of 
the old system” (in Klaassen, 2005b, p. 12). Th ose “narrow limitations” are indeed being 
overcome, as you can read in the essay, “Th e Future of the Music Business?” 
 67.6%
13.1%
12.8%
4.8%
4.8%
4.8%
1.1%
1.1%
1.1%
Album 
downloads
0.1%
0.1%
0.1%
DVD 
music 
videos
Digital 
music 
videos
Mobile
phone
downloads
CDs 
Single 
downloads
Percentage 
of units
  Figure 7.4 Units of Recorded Music 
Shipped by Major Format, 2010. 
 Source: Adapted from Record Industry Association of America 
( www.riaa.com ). 

172 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 Artists themselves are using the Internet for their own production, promotion, and 
distribution, bypassing radio and the recording companies altogether. Musicians are 
using their own sites, social networking sites, and sites designed specifi cally to fea-
ture new artists, such as  purevolume.com , to connect directly with listeners. Fans 
can hear (and in some cases, even download) new tunes for free, buy music down-
loads, CDs, and merchandise, get concert information and tickets, and chat with 
artists and other fans. You may never have heard of the bands Hawthorne Heights, 
Pomplamoose, or Nicki Bluhm and the Gamblers, but using the Internet they have 
created “a new middle class of popular music: acts that can make a full-time living 
selling only a modest number of discs, on the order of 50,000 to 500,000 per release” 
(Howe, 2005a, p. 203). Big-name artists, too, are gravitating to the Web. Public Enemy 
released  Th ere’s a Poison Going On  exclusively online; Lady Gaga made her 2011 
album  Born Th is Way  available for streaming a week in advance of its hard copy 
release, and she and artists like Kanye West and Jay-Z have exclusive deals with dig-
ital stores like Amazon and iTunes.  
 The Internet and the Future of the 
Recording Industry  
 Th e Internet music revolution began with the development of    MP3 (for MPEG-1, Audio 
Layer 3), compression software that shrinks audio fi les to less than a tenth of their 
original size. Originally developed in 1987 in Germany by computer scientist Dieter 
Seitzer, it began to take off  in the early 1990s as more users began to hook up to the 
Net with increasingly faster    modems . Th is  open source software , or freely down-
loaded software, permits users to download recorded music. Today, half of all American 
homes have at least one MP3 player (Edison Research, 2011). 
 Th e crux of the problem for recording companies was that they sold music “in its 
physical form,” whereas MP3 permitted music’s distribution in a nonphysical form. 
First discussed as “merely” a means of allowing independent bands and musicians 
to post their music online where it might attract a following, MP3 became a head-
ache for the recording industry when music from the name artists they controlled 
began appearing on MP3 sites, making  piracy , the illegal recording and sale of 
  Even the stars are bypassing the big labels. 
Kanye West and Jay-Z, pictured here, have exclusive 
distribution deals with Amazon and iTunes.

CHAPTER 7 
Radio, Recording, and Popular Music   
173
copyrighted material and high-quality recordings, a relatively simple task. Not only 
could users listen to their downloaded music from their hard drives, but they could 
make their own CDs from MP3 fi les and play those discs wherever and whenever 
they wished. 
 Rather than embrace MP3, the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), 
representing all of the United States’ major labels, responded to the threat by develop-
ing their own “secure” Internet technology, but by the time it was available for release 
it was too late: MP3, driven by its availability and ease of use, had become the technol-
ogy of choice for music fans already unhappy with the high cost of CDs and the neces-
sity of paying for tracks they didn’t want in order to get the ones they did. “Th e record 
labels had an opportunity to create a digital ecosystem and infrastructure to sell music 
online, but they kept looking at the small picture instead of the big one,” explained 
one-time EMI and Warner music executive Ted Cohen. “Th ey wouldn’t let go of CDs” 
(in Mnookin, 2007, pp. 209–210). But the CD is quickly going the way of the vinyl 
record. It has been replaced by the download. Downloading occurs in two forms: 
industry-approved and    P2P (peer-to-peer). 
 Industry-Approved Downloading 
 Illegal fi le sharing proved the popularity of downloading music from the Internet. So 
the four major labels combined to off er “approved” music download sites. None did 
well. Th ey off ered downloads by subscription, that is, so many downloads per month 
for a set fee. In addition, they placed encrypted messages in the tunes that limited 
how long the song would be playable and where the download could be used and 
copied. As a result, illegal fi le sharing continued. But it was Apple’s 2003 introduction 
of its iPod and iTunes Music Store that suggested a better strategy. Fans could simply 
buy and own albums and individual songs for as little as 99 cents. Apple controlled 
only 5% of the PC market, yet it sold over a million tunes in its fi rst week of opera-
tion. Th is activity led Warner Brothers CEO Tom Whalley to enthuse, “Th is is what 
the people who are willing to pay for music have been looking for all along” (quoted 
in Oppelaar, 2003, p. 42). For many observers, CEO Whalley’s comments signaled the 
industry’s recognition of the inevitability of the cyber revolution. Still, the major 
labels insisted that their music be downloaded with copy protection built in. But 
when Sony became the last of the major labels to relent, announcing in 2008 that it 
would allow the sale of much of its catalog free of copy protection, the distribution 
and sale of music by Internet became standard, aided by the 2009 announcement 
from the world’s leading music retailer, iTunes (it sold its 10 billionth download in 
February 2010; Plambeck, 2010), that it would sell downloads from its 10-million-
title catalog without antipiracy restrictions. Th ere are now hundreds of legally 
licensed music sites on the Net selling tens of millions of diff erent music tracks. 
Digital music sales surpassed physical sales for the fi rst time in 2011, and the CD’s 
13% share of sales is a far cry from its dominance of 60 to 70% of all sales just a few 
years ago (Knopper, 2012). Th is rise in downloading has also been fueled by    cloud-
music services   , subscription sites that allow users to store their digital music online 
and stream it to any computer or digital device anywhere. Amazon Cloud, iTunes 
Match, and Google Music off er this service, sometimes called  digital lockers . Not 
coincidently, the number of brick-and-mortar record stores in America has been 
halved since 2003, their function—that which hasn’t been displaced by the Internet—
taken over by retail giants like Wal-Mart and Target that account for a majority of all 
physical music retail sales (Hogan, 2011).   
 P2P Downloading 
 Illegal downloading still occurs. Illegal downloads account for 95% of all music 
pulled from the Internet (Morrissey, 2011). Th e vast majority of the 1.1 billion songs 
downloaded from fi le-sharing sites every month are shared illegally, but ironically 

174 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
it is illegal fi le sharers who spend the most money on legal downloads (Shields, 
2009). Sites such as Gnutella, Freenet, LimeWire, Morpheus, and BearShare use P2P 
technologies, that is, peer-to-peer software that permits direct Internet-based com-
munication or collaboration between two or more personal com-
puters while bypassing centralized servers. P2P allows users to 
visit a constantly and infi nitely changing network of machines 
through which fi le sharing can occur. Th e record companies (and 
movie studios) challenged P2P by suing the makers of its soft-
ware. In 2005, the Supreme Court, in  MGM v. Grokster , unani-
mously supported industry arguments that P2P software, because 
it “encouraged” copyright infringement, rendered its makers 
liable for that illegal act. Th e industry’s next challenge, then, is 
 BitTorrent , fi le-sharing software that allows anonymous users to 
create “swarms” of data as they simultaneously download and 
upload “bits” of a given piece of content from countless, untrace-
able servers. BitTorrent now accounts for 20 to 40% of all data sent 
across the Net and has more than 150 million monthly users (Bit-
Torrent, 2012). Its critics accuse it of facilitating more than half of 
the world’s illegal fi le-sharing.     
 No matter what model of music production and distribution 
eventually results from this technological and fi nancial tumult, seri-
ous questions about the Net’s impact on  copyright  (protecting con-
tent creators’ fi nancial interest in their product) will remain. Th ere 
is much more on copyright in Chapter 14.     
  
 freed from the tyranny of the hit CD, will ostensibly take a long-term per-
spective in its artists’ careers. The Pussycat Dolls have a 360 deal with In-
terscope Records. Madonna left Warner after 25 years with that label to 
sign a $120 million 360 deal with concert promoter Live Nation.  
 2. 
 The standard distribution deal is how the music business operated 
for decades. The label underwrites the recording, manufacturing, 
distribution, and promotion of its artists’ music. The label owns the 
copyright to the music and artists earn their percentage of proﬁ ts only 
  after all the recording, manufacturing, distribution, and promotion costs have been 
recouped by the label.  
  3.  The license deal is the same as a standard distribution arrangement except that art-
ists retain the copyright to their music and ownership of the master recordings, 
granting the rights to both to a label for a speciﬁ ed period of time, usually seven 
years. After that, artists are free to do with their music what they wish. Canadian 
rockers Arcade Fire have such an arrangement with indie label Merge Records.  
  4.  The proﬁ t-sharing deal  calls for a minimal advance from a label, and as such, it agrees 
to split all proﬁ ts with the artist before deducting its costs. Artists maintain ownership 
of the music, but because the label invests less in them than it might otherwise, they 
may sell fewer records. Both sides beneﬁ t, however. The label takes a smaller risk; the 
artist receives a greater share of the income. Byrne’s Talking Heads has a proﬁ t-sharing 
arrangement with label Thrill Jockey for its album  Lead Us Not Into Temptation .  
 The recording industry has seen a $55 billion decline in revenue in the last decade (Pollack, 
2011); that is a fact. But how it, artists, and fans will shape the future of the music business 
is less certain. Legendary recording executive David Geﬀ en explained, “The music business, 
as a whole, has lost its faith in content. Only 10 years ago, companies wanted to make re-
cords, presumably good records, and see if they sold. But panic has set in, and now it’s no 
longer about making music, it’s all about how to sell music. And there’s no clear answer 
about how to ﬁ x that problem.” Columbia Records head Rick Rubin added, “Fear is making 
the record companies less arrogant. They’re more open to ideas” (both in 
Hirschberg, 2007, pp. 28–29). There is, in fact, no shortage of ideas, and 
they are being debated in the cultural forum. 
 Talking Heads leader David Byrne (2008a) wrote, “What is called the 
music business today is not the business of producing music. At some point 
it became the business of selling CDs in plastic cases, and that business will 
soon be over. But that’s not bad news for music, and it’s certainly not bad news for musicians” 
(p. 126). He detailed six ideas for reshaping the relationship between the recording industry, 
musical artists, and fans: 
  1.  The 360 deal (sometimes called an equity or multiple rights deal) renders artists brands. 
Every aspect of their careers—recording, merchandising, marketing,  touring—is han-
dled by the label. Because artists and their music are “owned” by the label, that company, 
 CULTURAL FORUM 
 The Future of the Music Business? 
 “Fear is making the record companies less 
arrogant. They’re more open to ideas.”
  Apple had one answer to piracy: cheap, 
permanent, go-anywhere downloads.

CHAPTER 7 
Radio, Recording, and Popular Music   
175
  5.  A manufacturing and distribution deal requires artists to undertake every aspect of the 
process except manufacturing and distribution. They retain ownership and rights to 
their music, but assume all other costs, for example, recording, marketing, and touring. 
Big labels avoid these deals because there is little proﬁ t in it for them. Smaller labels 
beneﬁ t from association with well-known artists, such as Aimee Mann, and artists have 
the beneﬁ t of artistic freedom and greater income (although they take on greater risk).  
  6.  The self-distribution model  grants artists the greatest freedom. They play, produce, 
market, promote, and distribute the music themselves. Byrne (2008a) calls this “free-
dom without resources—a pretty abstract sort of independence” (p. 129), but many 
artists big and small, aided by the Internet, have opted for this model. Musicians are 
using their own sites, social networking sites, and sites designed speciﬁ cally to feature 
new artists to connect directly with listeners. Fans can hear and download new tunes 
for free; buy downloads, CDs, and merchandise; get concert information and tickets; 
and chat with artists and other fans. My Chemical Romance is one of the thousands of 
musical artists using the Internet to self-distribute and connect with fans.    
 Enter your voice. After all, the success of any or all of these diﬀ erent ideas depends on your 
willingness to buy the music that they produce. Which of these models do you think will dominate 
music’s future, if any? The ﬁ rst, a 360 deal, gives musicians the least artistic freedom, but the great-
est guarantee of success. The last, self-distribution, grants the greatest freedom, but the smallest 
guarantee of success. Which, including those in between, would you choose? Why? Might diﬀ er-
ent models work better for diﬀ erent kinds of acts or for artists at diﬀ erent levels of notoriety? In 
which form would you be most comfortable buying your favorite music? If it were “up to you,” 
what would you pay for a download of your favorite artist’s latest release? Why? Byrne thinks the 
upheaval  in the music business is “not bad news for music, and it’s certainly not bad news for 
musicians.” Do you agree? Will independence from the big labels and their demand for proﬁ table 
hits free artists to make the music they want? Will there be more or less music of interest to you?  
  Madonna is one of the many big-name artists experimenting with new models 
of artist/recording industry relationships.
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS   
 Listening to Shock Jocks 
 Th e proliferation of shock jocks—outrageous, rude, crude radio personalities—off ers an 
example of the importance of media literacy that may not be immediately apparent. Yet 
it involves four diff erent elements of media literacy: development of an awareness of 
media’s impact, cultivation of an understanding of media content as a text that provides 
insight into our culture and our lives, awareness of the process of mass communication, 
and an understanding of the ethical demands under which media professionals operate 
(Chapter 1). Diff erent media-literate radio listeners judge the shock jocks diff erently, but 
they all take time to examine jocks’ work and their role in the culture. 
 Th e literate listener asks this question of shock jocks and the stations that air them: “At 
what cost to the culture as a whole, and to individuals living in it, should a radio station 
program an off ensive, vulgar personality to attract listeners and, therefore, profi t?” Ours is 
a free society, and freedom of expression is one of our dearest rights. Citing their First 
Amendment rights, as well as strong listener interest, radio stations have made Howard 
Stern and other shock jocks like Rush Limbaugh and Don Imus the fashion of the day. 
Stern, for example, took poorly rated WXRX in New York to Number One, and, as Infi nity 
Broadcasting’s top attraction, he was syndicated throughout the country where he was free 
to pray for cancer to kill public offi  cials he did not like, joke constantly about sexual and 
other bodily functions, make sexist, homophobic, and misogynistic comments, and insult 
guests and callers. But when Infi nity began pulling Stern from the air in response to an 
FCC anti-indecency crusade, Stern moved his show to satellite radio provider SiriusXM. 

176 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 Self-proclaimed inventor of the shock jock, Don Imus, created a well-known ruckus. 
On the air for 30 years,  Imus in the Morning  was cancelled in April 2007 by CBS Radio. 
Host Imus had referred to the Rutgers University women’s basketball team, then play-
ing for a national championship against the University of Tennessee, as a bunch of 
“nappy-headed hos,” a term Gwen Ifi ll (2007) called “a shockingly concise sexual and 
racial insult” (p. A21). Ifi ll, an African American who before moving to public television 
had covered the White House for the  New York Times  and Capitol Hill for NBC, had 
herself been called a “cleaning lady” by Imus in 1993. Th at racist slur passed, but the 
insult to the Rutgers women did not. Imus was fi red. 
 But it is Rush Limbaugh’s 2012 attack on Georgetown University law student Sandra 
Fluke that recently energized the media literacy discussion about shock jocks’ value. 
After she testifi ed before Congress on the need for employers’ insurance plans to off er 
coverage for women’s contraception for both reproductive and broader medical rea-
sons, Limbaugh attacked the 30-year-old by name 46 times over three straight days, 
off ering commentary such as “Can you imagine if you were her parents how proud . . . 
you would be? Your daughter . . . testifi es she’s having so much sex she can’t aff ord her 
own birth control pills . . . What does that make her? It makes her a slut, right? It makes 
her a prostitute. She wants to be paid to have sex . . . She wants you and me and the 
taxpayers to pay her to have sex . . . [Ms. Fluke] is having so much sex, it’s amazing she 
can still walk . . . [Fluke] is a woman who is happily presenting herself as an immoral, 
baseless, no-purpose-to-her life woman. She wants all the sex in the world whenever 
she wants it, all the time, no consequences. No responsibility for her behavior.” 
 Public reaction was immediate and fi erce. Not only had Limbaugh misrepresented 
Ms. Fluke’s testimony (for example, employees and their employers, not taxpayers, pay 
for insurance and Mr. Limbaugh seemed not to understand how the pill works), but 
he was seen to have attacked a private citizen doing nothing more than exercising her 
right as a citizen to comment on an important issue of the day. More than 50 sponsors 
quickly pulled their spots from Limbaugh’s show; within a week it was practically 
devoid of paid advertisements (Mirkinson, 2012), and Premiere Networks, which dis-
tributes the program, sent an e-mail to stations listing 98 corporations that had 
requested their ads appear only on “programs free of content that you know are 
deemed to be off ensive or controversial” (in Avlon, 2012). 
 “Censorship,” cried Limbaugh’s supporters. “Th is is not censorship,” replied his crit-
ics, “Th e government is not involved; in fact, it is the market at work. Advertisers lis-
tened to their customers.” As journalist Hank Kalet said at the time of the Imus aff air, 
  Rush Limbaugh’s attacks on law student 
Sandra Fluke tested people’s media-literate 
listening skills.

CHAPTER 7 
Radio, Recording, and Popular Music   
177
this was an example of “repugnant speech being met with more speech . . . It was the 
powerful . . . a host who has been rubbing shoulders with presidential candidates and 
power-brokers, a host who has made his reputation by shocking for shock’s sake and 
belittling the powerless in the process—being held to account” (2007, p. 21).       
 But it’s all in fun, say shock jock defenders. Can’t you take a joke; what are you, the 
thought police? Why not just turn the dial? Th ese questions do indeed pose a problem 
for media-literate listeners. Literacy demands an understanding of the importance of 
freedom not only to the operation of our media system but to the functioning of our 
democracy. Yet literacy also means that we can’t discount the impact of the shock 
jocks. Nor can we assume that their expression does not represent a distasteful side of 
our culture and ourselves. 
 Media-literate listeners also know that Imus, Stern, Limbaugh, and the other shock 
jocks exist because people listen to them. All three are on the air—radio and television—
and enjoy large followings. Are their shows merely a place in which the culture is 
contested (Chapter 1)? Are they a safe place for the discussion of the forbidden, for 
testing cultural limits? In fact, a literate listener can make the argument, as do shock 
jocks’ fans, that they serve the important cultural function of “hypocrisy-buster . . . 
truth-teller . . . scatological sage” (Cox, 2005, p. 101).   
 Find a local shock jock. Most major markets have at least one or more. Why did you put him (it’s almost always a man) in that 
category? If you can’t ﬁ nd a local jock in your radio market, use syndicated Don Imus or Sirius XM Howard Stern for this challenge. 
After listening, answer these questions. What did you hear that some people might ﬁ nd shocking? Do you think the jock is 
absolutely serious about believing all of these statements or are some of them uttered to provoke listeners? What inﬂ uence do 
these statements really have? Do the listeners respond blindly to the host’s leading? As a media-literate radio listener you should 
develop an understanding of the ethical and moral obligations of those who produce the material you listen to ; therefore, do you 
think it ethical for the station to allow these statements on the air? If not, are there other voices on the air who present the 
opposing views, and is this a suﬃ  cient remedy? Does the text from these “shock jocks”  provide context and insight into our culture ? 
How? Having  heightened expectations of media content , will you continue to listen? Why or why not? 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE 
 Listening to Shock Jocks with a 
Media-Literate Ear 

 Outline the history and development of the radio and 
sound recording industries and radio and sound record-
ing themselves as media. 
  Guglielmo Marconi’s radio allowed long-distance wire-
less communication; Reginald Fessenden’s liquid bar-
retter made possible the transmission of voices; Lee 
DeForest’s audion tube permitted the reliable transmis-
sion of voices and music broadcasting. 
  Th omas Edison developed the fi rst sound-recording de-
vice, a fact now in debate; Emile Berliner’s gramophone 
improved on it as it permitted multiple copies to be 
made from a master recording. 
   Describe the importance of early fi nancing and regula-
tory decisions regarding radio and how they have shaped 
the nature of contemporary broadcasting. 
  Th e Radio Acts of 1910, 1912, and 1927 and the Commu-
nications Act of 1934 eventually resulted in the FCC and 
the trustee model of broadcast regulation. 
 Resources for Review and Discussion  
 REVIEW POINTS: TYING CONTENT TO LEARNING OUTCOMES 

178 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
  Advertising and the network structure of broadcasting 
came to radio in the 1920s, producing the medium’s golden 
age, one drawn to a close by the coming of television. 
   Explain how the organizational and economic natures of 
the contemporary radio and sound recording industries 
shape the content of both media. 
  Radio stations are classifi ed as commercial and non-
commercial, AM and FM. 
  Radio is local, fragmented, specialized, personal, 
and mobile. 
  Deregulation has allowed concentration of ownership 
of radio into the hands of a relatively small number 
of companies. 
  Th ree major recording companies control 59% of the 
world’s recorded music market. 
   Identify new and converging radio and recording tech-
nologies and their potential impact on music, the indus-
tries themselves, and listeners. 
  Convergence has come to radio in the form of satellite 
and cable delivery of radio, terrestrial digital radio, Web 
radio, podcasting, and music streaming from a number 
of diff erent types of sites. 
  Digital technology, in the form of Internet creation, 
 promotion, and distribution of music, legal and illegal 
downloading from the Internet, and mobile phone 
downloading, promises to reshape the nature of the 
 recording industry. 
  Personal technologies such as smartphones and tablets 
reinforce radio’s mobility and expand its audience. 
   Apply key radio-listening media literacy skills, especially 
in assessing the cultural value of shock jocks. 
  Shock jocks pose a vexing problem for media-literate 
 listeners—are they signs of our culture’s coarseness or a 
forum for the contesting of culture?    
 KEY TERMS 
liquid barretter, 154 
 audion tube, 154 
 trustee model, 157 
 spectrum scarcity, 157 
 affi  liates, 158  
 O&O,  158 
 Low Power FM (LPFM),  160 
  format,  161  
 secondary services,  161 
 playlist,  162 
 billings,  163 
 ratings, 163 
 deregulation,  163 
 duopoly,  163 
 cover,  164 
 catalogue albums,  165 
 recent catalogue albums,  165 
 syndication,  169 
 DMX (Digital Music Express),  169 
 digital audio radio service (DARS),  169   
 terrestrial digital radio, 169 
 in-band-on-channel (IBOC), 169 
 Web radio, 170 
 podcasting, 170 
 bitcasters, 170 
 streaming, 170 
 digital recording, 171 
 MP3, 172 
 modem, 172 
 open source software, 172 
 piracy, 172 
 P2P, 173 
 cloud-music service, 173 
 BitTorrent, 174 
 copyright, 174 
 QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW 
 1.  Who were Guglielmo Marconi, Nikola Tesla, Reginald Fes-
senden, and Lee DeForest? 
 2.  How do the Radio Acts of 1910, 1912, and 1927 relate to the 
Communications Act of 1934? 
 3.  What were the fi ve defi ning characteristics of the American 
broadcasting system as it entered the golden age of radio?  
 4.  How did World War II and the introduction of television 
change radio and recorded music? 
 5.  What does it mean to say that radio is local, fragmented, 
specialized, personal, and mobile? 
 6.  What are catalogue albums? Recent catalogue albums? 
 7.  How have cable and satellite aff ected the radio and record-
ing industries? Computers and digitization? 
 8.  Is the size of radio’s audience in ascendance or in 
decline? Why? 
 9.  What is streaming audio? 
 10.  What is P2P technology? 
For further review, go to the LearnSmart study module for 
this chapter. 

CHAPTER 7 
Radio, Recording, and Popular Music   
179
 QUESTIONS FOR CRITICAL THINKING AND DISCUSSION 
 1.  Would you have favored a noncommercial basis for our 
broadcasting system? Why or why not? 
 2.  What do you think of the argument that control of the re-
cording industry by a few multinational conglomerates in-
evitably leads to cultural homogenization and the 
ascendance of profi t over music?  
    3.  How much regulation do you believe is necessary in U.S. 
broadcasting? If the airwaves belong to the people, how 
can we best ensure that license holders perform their pub-
lic service functions? 


 
181
 Learning Objectives 
 No one is neutral about television. We either love it or hate it. Many of us do both. The 
reason is that it is our most ubiquitous and socially and culturally powerful mass medium. 
Recent and on-the-horizon technological advances promise to make it even more so. After 
studying this chapter you should be able to
 Outline the history and development of the television and cable television industries 
and television itself as a medium. 
 Describe how the organizational and economic nature of the contemporary television 
and cable industries shapes the content of television. 
 Explain the relationship between television in all its forms and its viewers. 
 Identify new and converging video technologies and their potential impact on the 
television industry and its audience. 
 Describe the digital and mobile television revolution. 
 Apply key television-viewing media literacy skills. 
 Television, 
Cable, and 
Mobile Video  8
 Showtime’s Weeds. Innovative, challenging cable 
programming helps improve the quality of 
all television. 

 “W HAT ARE YOU WATCHING? Is that  Th e Sopranos ? Boy, I love old shows on Hulu; TV on the 
Internet is the best!” 
 “Slow down. Yes, it’s the Net; it’s Netfl ix, but not  Th e Sopranos .” 
 “But that’s Silvio Dante, Steven Van Zandt,  Sopranos .” 
 “Yes, it’s Steven Van Zandt, but this is  Lilyhammer . Van Zandt’s still a mobster, but 
he ends up in the witness protection program and goes to Norway and because he 
can’t make it as an unemployed immigrant, he returns to a life of crime.” 
 “I don’t remember  Lilyhammer . Is it really old or something?” 
 “Nope, brand new. Netfl ix’s doing it as an original series.” 
 “Netfl ix, the Internet movie site? You’re kidding?” 
 “Again, nope. And later I’m going to watch another new series, Kevin Spacey 
in  House of Cards , and then I’ll go to Hulu for  Battleground  . . . yes, Hulu, and yes, like 
I said, Netfl ix.” 
 “No way.” 
 “Way. Television is changing, my friend, more than you realize.” 
 Indeed it is. Netfl ix outbid established video giants HBO and AMC for  House of 
Cards , ordering two seasons, 26 episodes, for over $100 million. In early 2011, You-
Tube committed $100 million to commission original programming designed exclu-
sively for its planned 20 new channels. Machinima, its video gaming channel, gets 
more than a billion views a month (Whitney, 2012). A few years before these develop-
ments, in 2007, the fi rst television series produced specifi cally for smartphones 
debuted simultaneously on those devices and the Internet. Each of  Afterworld ’s 130 
episodes ran just over two minutes. Producer Stan Rogow explained why he resisted 
the SciFi Channel’s request that he produce it as a traditional series television show, 
opting for phones and the Web: “I think this is where the TV industry is heading, and 
I also think that at the end of the day it will not necessarily be the end of network 
television, but I think it’s going to be a diff erent form of network television that will 
off er the experience on multiple platforms” (in Moses, 2007). Mr. Rogow was pre-
scient. Today, 180 million people a month will watch television online, averaging 200 
videos per person, much of it short clips, but more than 8% is  premium video , or “real” 
1900
1925
1884   ▲ Nipkow invents his disc
1927   Farnsworth demonstrates electronically scanned television images
1928   ▲ Baird transmits mechanical video image across Atlantic
1939   Sarnoﬀ introduces regular television broadcasting at World’s Fair 
1941   First two commercial stations approved
1948   Television freeze; Walson begins CATV
1923   ▲ Zworykin demonstrates electronic iconoscope tube
182 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences

television shows (Friedman, 2011). Yes, television is 
changing, and this chapter details that change, from early 
experiments with mechanical scanning to the electronic 
marvel that sits in our homes to the mobile video screens 
we carry in our pockets. We trace the rapid transforma-
tion of television into a mature medium after World War 
II and examine how the medium, the entire television 
industry, in fact, was altered by the emergence and suc-
cess of cable and satellite television. But signifi cant 
change is once again remaking what we currently know 
as television. Th e changes just mentioned refl ect only a 
small part of the coming transformation.    Nonlinear 
TV   —watching television on our own schedules, not on 
some cable or broadcast programmer’s—is here right 
now. Even more dramatic evolution is in the offi  ng. 
 Th e remarkable reach of television—in all its forms—
accounts for its attractiveness as an advertising medium. 
We discuss this reach, and we explore the structure, programming, and economics of 
the television and cable industries. We consider new technologies and their conver-
gence with television and how they promise to change the interaction between the 
medium and its audiences. Finally, we discuss media literacy in terms of the practice 
of recognizing news staging.  
 A Short History of Television  
 Television has changed the way teachers teach, governments govern, religious leaders 
preach and the way we organize the furniture in our homes. Television has changed 
the nature, operation, and relationship to their audiences of books, magazines, movies, 
and radio. Th e Internet, with its networking abilities, may eventually overtake television 
1950
1975
2000
2002   FCC mandates digital receivers by 2007
2004   Cable content and pricing face government scrutiny
2005   Networks begin selling program downloads; Brand X decision
2007   Afterworld
2009   All TV stations are digital
2010   Comcast v. FCC; Hulu premieres ﬁrst original show; Mobile
 
digital television
2011   ▲ Netﬂix, Hulu, and YouTube begin original programming
2012   Online movie transactions exceed discs 
1950   Red Channels; Nielsen ratings
1951   U.S. wired coast-to-coast; ▲ I Love Lucy
1954   Army–McCarthy Hearings telecast
1959   Quiz show scandal
1962   All-channel legislation
1963   FCC begins regulation of cable
1975   HBO begins national distribution
1976   VCR introduced
1996   DVD introduced; Telecommunications Act
1998   First digital TV broadcast
1999   ▲ DVR introduced
  Political thriller  Battleground  is an early entry in 
Hulu’s push into original programming. 
CHAPTER 8 
Television, Cable, and Mobile Video 
183

184 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
as a medium of mass communication, but television defi nes even its future. Will the 
promise of the Web be drowned in a sea of commercials? Can online information 
services deliver faster and better information than television? Even the computer 
screens we use look like television screens, and we sign up for Internet video, online 
video conferencing, and the new and improved online video game. Before we delve 
deeper into the nature of this powerful medium and its relationship with its audience, 
let’s examine how television developed as it did.  
 Mechanical and Electronic Scanning 
 In 1884 Paul Nipkow, a Russian scientist living in Berlin, developed the fi rst workable 
device for generating electrical signals suitable for the transmission of a scene that 
people could see. His    Nipkow disc consisted of a rotating scanning disc spinning in 
front of a photoelectric cell. It produced 4,000    pixels    (picture dots) per second, produc-
ing a picture composed of 18 parallel lines. Although his mechanical system proved 
too limiting, Nipkow demonstrated the possibility of using a scanning system to divide 
a scene into an orderly pattern of transmittable picture elements that could be recom-
posed as a visual image. British inventor John Logie Baird was able to transmit moving 
images using a mechanical disc as early as 1925, and in 1928 he successfully sent a 
television picture from London to Hartsdale, New York.      
    Electronic scanning came either from another Russian or from a U.S. farm boy; 
historians disagree. Vladimir Zworykin, an immigrant living near Pittsburgh and work-
ing for Westinghouse, demonstrated his    iconoscope tube , the fi rst practical television 
camera tube, in 1923. In 1929 David Sarnoff  lured him to RCA to head its electronics 
research lab, and it was there that Zworykin developed the  kinescope , an improved 
picture tube. At the same time, young Philo Farnsworth had moved from Idaho to San 
Francisco to perfect an electronic television system, the design for which he had shown 
his high school science teacher when he was 15 years old. In 1927, at the age of 20, he 
made his fi rst public demonstration—fi lm clips of a prize fi ght, scenes from a Mary 
Pickford movie, and other graphic images. Th e “Boy Wonder” and Zworykin’s RCA 
spent the next decade fi ghting fi erce patent battles in court. In 1939 RCA capitulated, 
agreeing to pay Farnsworth royalties for the use of his patents. 
 In April of that year, at the World’s Fair in New York, RCA made the fi rst true 
public demonstration of television in the form of regularly scheduled two-hour NBC 
broadcasts. Th ese black-and-white telecasts consisted of cooking demonstrations, 
 A Nipkow disc.

CHAPTER 8 
Television, Cable, and Mobile Video 
185
singers, jugglers, comedians, puppets—just about anything that could fi t in a hot, 
brightly lit studio and demonstrate motion. People could buy television sets at 
the RCA Pavilion at prices ranging from $200 for the 5-inch screen to $600 for the 
deluxe 12-inch-screen model. Th e FCC granted construction permits to the fi rst two 
commercial stations in 1941, but World War II intervened. But as was the case with 
radio during World War I, technical development and improvement of the new 
medium continued.   
 The 1950s 
 In 1952, 108 stations were broadcasting to 17 million television homes. By the end of 
the decade, there were 559 stations, and nearly 90% of U.S. households had televisions. 
In the 1950s more television sets were sold in the United States (70 million) than there 
were children born (40.5 million) (Kuralt, 1977). Th e technical standards were fi xed, 
stations proliferated and fl ourished, the public tuned in, and advertisers were enthu-
siastic. Th e content and character of the medium were set in this decade as well: 
 • Carried over from the radio networks, television genres included variety shows, 
situation comedies, dramas (including Westerns and cop shows), soap operas, and 
quiz shows.  
 • Two new formats appeared: feature fi lms and talk shows. Talk shows were instru-
mental in introducing radio personalities to the television audience, which could 
see its favorites for the fi rst time.  
 • Television news and documentary remade broadcast journalism as a powerful force 
in its own right, led by CBS’s Edward R. Murrow ( See It Now , 1951) and NBC’s David 
Brinkley and Chet Huntley. Huntley and Brinkley’s 1956 coverage of the major polit-
ical conventions gave audiences an early glimpse of the power of television to cover 
news and history in the making.  
 • AT&T completed its national    coaxial cable and  microwave relay network for the 
distribution of television programming in the summer of 1951. Th e entire United 
States was now within the reach of the major television networks, and they came to 
dominate the medium. 
 Philo Farnsworth and Vladimir Zworykin, 
pioneers in the development of television. 

186 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 Four other events from the 1950s would permanently shape how television oper-
ated: the quiz show scandal, the appearance of  I Love Lucy , McCarthyism, and the 
establishment of the ratings system. Another, in 1948, would permanently  reshape the 
television industry. Th at development, as you’ll soon see, was cable television.  
 THE QUIZ SHOW SCANDAL AND CHANGES IN SPONSORSHIP  Th roughout the 1950s the networks served 
primarily as time brokers, off ering airtime and distribution (their affi  liates) and accept-
ing payment for access to both. Except for their own news and sports coverage, the 
networks relied on outside agencies to provide programs. An advertising agency, for 
example, would hire a production company to produce a program for its client. Th at 
client would then be the show’s sponsor— Th e Kraft Television Th eatre  and  Westing-
house Studio One  are two examples. Th e agency would then pay a network to air the 
program over its national collection of stations. Th is system had enriched the networks 
during the heyday of radio, and they saw no reason to change. 
 Running from 1947 until 1958, NBC’s  Kraft 
Television Theatre aired some of the golden age’s 
most respected live anthology dramas.  Top left , 
Richard Kiley and Everett Sloane;  lower left , Ossie 
Davis;  lower right , Walter Matthau and Nancy 
Walker.

CHAPTER 8 
Television, Cable, and Mobile Video 
187
 But in 1959 the quiz show scandal, enveloping independently produced, single-
advertiser-sponsored programs, changed the way the networks did business. When it 
was discovered that popular shows like  Th e $64,000 Question  had been fi xed by adver-
tisers and producers to ensure desired outcomes, the networks, mindful of their repu-
tations, were determined to take control of their schedules. Th ey, themselves, began 
commissioning or buying the entertainment fare that fi lled their broadcast days and 
nights. Now, rather than selling blocks of time to ad agencies and sponsors, the net-
works paid for the content they aired through    spot commercial sales (selling indi-
vidual 60-second spots on a given program to a wide variety of advertisers). 
    As a result, the content of television was altered. Some critics argue that this change 
to spot sales put an end to the golden age of television. When sponsors agreed to attach 
their names to programs,  Alcoa Presents  or the  Texaco Star Th eater , for example, they 
had an incentive to demand high-quality programming. Spot sales, with network sales-
people off ering small bits of time to a number of diff erent sponsors, reduced the 
demand for quality. Because individual sponsors were not identifi ed with a given 
show, they had no stake in how well it was made—only in how many viewers it 
attracted. Spot sales also reduced the willingness of the networks to try innovative or 
diff erent types of content. Familiarity and predictability attracted more viewers and, 
therefore, more advertisers. 
 I Love Lucy was signiﬁ cant for far more than its 
comedy. Thanks to Lucille Ball’s shrewd business 
sense, it became the foundation for the huge oﬀ -
network syndicated television industry.

188 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 Th ere is a counterargument, however. Once the fi nancial well-being of the networks 
became dependent on the programming they aired, the networks themselves became 
more concerned with program quality, lifting television from its dull infancy (remem-
bered now as the golden age only by those small, early audiences committed to serious 
character-driven televised drama). Diff erent historians and critics off er arguments for 
both views. 
 I LOVE LUCY AND MORE CHANGES  In 1951 CBS asked Lucille Ball to move her hit radio program, 
 My Favorite Husband , to television. Lucy was willing but wanted her real-life husband, 
Desi Arnaz, to play the part of her video spouse. Th e network refused (some historians 
say the network objected to the prime-time presentation of an interracial marriage—
Desi Arnaz was Cuban—but CBS denies this). But Lucy made additional demands. 
Television at the time was live: Images were typically captured by three large television 
cameras, with a director in a booth choosing among the three available images. Lucy 
wanted her program produced in the same manner—in front of a live audience with 
three simultaneously running cameras—but these cameras would be  fi lm cameras. 
Editors could then review the three sets of fi lm and edit them together to give the best 
combination of action and reaction shots. Lucy also wanted the production to take 
place in Hollywood, the nation’s fi lm capital, instead of New York, the television center 
at the time. CBS was uncertain about this departure from how television was typically 
produced and refused these requests as well.       
     Lucy and Desi borrowed the necessary money and produced  I Love Lucy  on their 
own, selling the broadcast rights to CBS. In doing so, the woman now best remembered 
as “that zany redhead” transformed the business and look of television: 
 • Filmed reruns were now possible, something that had been impossible with live 
television, and this, in turn, created the off -network syndication industry.  
 • Th e television industry moved from New York, with its stage drama orientation, to 
Hollywood, with its entertainment fi lm mind-set. More action, more fl ash came to 
the screen.  
 • Weekly series could now be produced relatively quickly and inexpensively. A 
39-week series could be completed in 20 or 24 weeks, saving money on actors, crew, 
equipment, and facilities. In addition the same stock shots—for example, certain 
exterior views—could be used in diff erent episodes. 
 MCCARTHYISM: THE GROWING POWER OF TELEVISION  Th e Red Scare that cowed the movie business 
also touched television, aided by the publication in 1950 of  Red Channels: Th e Report 
of Communist Infl uence in Radio and Television , the work of three former FBI agents 
operating a company called American Business Consultants. Its 200 pages detailed 
the alleged pro-Communist sympathies of 151 broadcast personalities, including 
Orson Welles and journalist Howard K. Smith. Advertisers were encouraged to avoid 
buying time from broadcasters who employed these “Red sympathizers.” Like the 
movie studios, the television industry caved in. Th e networks employed security 
checkers to look into people’s backgrounds, refused to hire suspect talent, and 
demanded loyalty oaths from performers. In its infancy television had taken the safe 
path. Many gifted artists were denied not only a paycheck but also the opportunity to 
shape the medium’s content.      
    Ironically, it was this same Red Scare that allowed television to demonstrate its 
enormous power as a vehicle of democracy and freedom. Joseph McCarthy, the Repub-
lican junior senator from Wisconsin whose tactics gave this era its name, was seen by 
millions of viewers as his investigation of Reds in the U.S. Army was broadcast by all 
the networks for 36 days in 1954. Daytime ratings increased 50% (Sterling & Kittross, 
1990). At the same time, Edward R. Murrow used his  See It Now  to expose the senator’s 
lies and hypocrisy. As a consequence of the two broadcasts, McCarthy was ruined; he 
was censured by his Senate colleagues and later died a lonely alcoholic’s death. Televi-
sion had given the people eyes and ears—and power—where before they had had 
little. Th e Army–McCarthy Hearings and Murrow’s challenge to McCarthyism are still 
regarded as two of television’s fi nest moments. 

CHAPTER 8 
Television, Cable, and Mobile Video 
189
 THE NIELSEN RATINGS  Th e concept of computing ratings was carried over from radio (see 
Chapter 7) to television, but the ratings as we know them today are far more sophisti-
cated. Th e A. C. Nielsen Company began in 1923 as a product-testing company, but 
soon branched into market research. In 1936 Nielsen started reporting radio ratings 
and was doing the same for television by 1950. 
 To produce the ratings today, Nielsen selects 37,000 households thought to be rep-
resentative of the entire U.S. viewing audience. To record data on what people in those 
TV households are watching, Nielsen employs the    personal peoplemeter . It requires 
each member of a television home to press buttons to record his or her individual 
viewing. Th e information recorded is sent to Nielsen by telephone lines, and the com-
pany can then determine the program watched, who was watching it, and the amount 
of time each viewer spent with it. But convergence is changing how ratings data will 
be gathered and computed. Th e company now reports the    Total Audience Measure-
ment Index (TAMi)   , a measure of all viewing of a single television episode across all 
platforms—television, DVR, Internet, and mobile video. Using this metric, a program 
like  Gossip Girl , whose approximately 2.4 million viewers an episode make it roughly 
the 100th rated network television show, can rise as high as 15th when TAMi is com-
puted (Hampp, 2009). 
 To draw a more complete picture of the viewing situation and to measure local tele-
vision viewing, Nielsen conducts diary surveys of viewing patterns four times a year. 
Th ese  sweeps periods    are in February, May, July, and November. During sweeps, dia-
ries are distributed to thousands of sample households in selected markets. Viewers are 
asked to write down what they’re watching and who is watching it. Th e diary data are 
then combined with the peoplemeter data to help stations set their advertising rates for 
the next three months. Th e company announced in June 2006, however, that it would 
eventually abandon paper diaries and move to completely electronic measurement. 
 Sweeps, too, may soon be a thing of the past. Th ese quarterly extravaganzas of heav-
ily promoted network programming and titillating local news (High School Binge 
Drinking? Story and Shocking Video at 6!) are likely to disappear for two reasons. First, 
the rhythm of broadcast television scheduling is changing because of competition with 
cable. Cable introduces new shows and big movies throughout the year, rendering such 
concepts as “Th e Fall Season” and “Premiere Week” obsolete. Fox has long had year-
round premieres, and NBC announced in 2008 that it would follow suit. CBS’s  Survivor 
  The Army-McCarthy Hearings. Wisconsin’s 
junior Republican senator, Joseph McCarthy, was 
called in 1954 to give testimony before his fellow 
senators regarding his claims that the army was rife 
with Communists, Reds, and “fellow travelers.” 
Network coverage of the senator’s erratic behavior 
helped bring the despot into disrepute. 

190 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
and NBC’s  Fear Factor both debuted in summer, formerly 
network television’s programming graveyard. With the basic 
structure of the programming year disrupted, broadcasters 
can no longer aff ord to save their best or biggest program-
ming for sweeps weeks. Second, the personal peoplemeter 
delivers detailed viewing and demographic data every day of 
the year, making the four-times-a-year, data-intensive ratings 
periods unnecessary. 
 A second, more important measure of television’s audi-
ence is its    share   , which is a direct refl ection of a particular 
show’s competitive performance. Share doesn’t measure 
viewers as a percentage of  all  television households (as do 
the ratings). Instead, the share measures a program audience 
as a percentage of the  television sets in use  at the time it airs. 
It tells us what proportion of the  actual  audience a program 
attracts, indicating how well a particular program is doing on its 
given night, in its time slot, against its competition ( Figure 8.1 ). 
For example,  Late Show with David Letterman  normally gets a 
rating of around 4—terrible by prime-time standards—but 
because it’s on when fewer homes are tuned in, its share of 15 
(15% of the homes with sets in use) is very high.
 Th ere is a third audience measure, the    C3 rating , but it is 
not a program rating. Because people might view a specifi c 
program on a number of platforms, Nielsen counts audi-
ences on three screens—TV (original airing plus DVR), Inter-
net, and mobile video. Th e “3” represents not screens, but the 
viewing of the  commercials  that appear in that specifi c pro-
gram  within three days  of its premiere telecast in order to 
capture DVR playback and Internet viewing. In 2012, in an 
attempt to mollify advertisers still dissatisfi ed with audience 
metrics in a multiscreen, time-shifting television world, 
Nielsen off ered to boost C3 to C7, measuring an entire week’s 
viewing. Th e ad industry, wanting more precision, not more 
time, was unimpressed (see Chapter 12).    
 The Coming of Cable 
 Mahanoy City, Pennsylvania, appliance sales representative 
John Walson was having trouble selling televisions in 1948. 
Th e Pocono Mountains sat between his town and Philadel-
phia’s three new stations. But Walson was also a powerline 
worker, so he convinced his bosses to let him run a wire from 
a tower he erected on New Boston Mountain to his store. As more and more people 
became aware of his system, he began wiring the homes of customers who bought his 
sets. In June of that year, Walson had 727 subscribers for his    community antenna 
television (CATV)    system (Chin, 1978). Although no one calls it CATV anymore, cable 
television was born. 
 Th e cable Walson used was a twin-lead wire, much like the cord that connects a 
lamp to an outlet. To attract even more subscribers, he had to off er improved picture 
quality. He accomplished this by using  coaxial cable  and self-manufactured boosters 
(or amplifi ers). Coaxial cable—copper-clad aluminum wire encased in plastic foam 
insulation, covered by an aluminum outer conductor, and then sheathed in plastic—
had more bandwidth than did twin-lead wire. As a result, it allowed more of the orig-
inal signal to pass and even permitted Walson to carry a greater number of channels. 
 As Walson continued to expand his CATV business, Milton Jerrold Shapp, later to 
become Pennsylvania’s governor, noticed thousands of antennas cluttering the roofs of 
department stores and apartment buildings. Seeing Walson’s success, he set up master 
Households tuned in to a given program
All households with television
Households tuned in to a given program
All households tuned in to television at that time
Share =   400,000   = .50, or a share of 50.
               800,000 
Ratings and shares can be computed using these formulas:
Rating =
Share =
 
Here's an example. Your talk show is aired in a market
that has 1 million television households; 400,000 are
tuned in to you. Therefore,     
At the time your show airs, however, there are only
800,000  households using television. Therefore, your
share of the available audience is
If you can explain why a speciﬁc program's share is always
higher than its rating, then you understand the difference
between the two.
= .40, or a rating of 40.
400,000
1,000,000
  Figure 8.1 Computing Ratings and Shares.

CHAPTER 8 
Television, Cable, and Mobile Video 
191
antennas and connected the sets in these buildings to them, employing a signal booster 
he had developed. Th is was the start of    master antenna television (MATV) . 
 With expanded bandwidth and the new, powerful Jerrold boosters, these systems 
began experimenting with the    importation of distant signals   , using wires not only to 
provide improved reception but also to off er a wider variety of programming. Th ey 
began delivering independent stations from as far away as New York to fi ll their then-
amazing 7 to 10 channels. By 1962, 800 systems were providing cable television to more 
than 850,000 homes. 
 Th e industry today is composed of 7,143 individual cable systems serving 59.8 mil-
lion homes subscribing to at least basic cable; 78.4% receive digital cable. Th e industry 
generates revenues of $97.6 billion, with $27.2 billion of that amount earned through 
advertising (NCTA, 2012). 
 Television and Its Audiences  
 Th e 1960s saw some refi nement in the technical structure of television, which infl uenced 
its organization and audience. In 1962 Congress passed    all-channel legislation , which 
required that all sets imported into or manufactured in the United States be equipped 
with both VHF and UHF receivers. Th is had little immediate impact; U.S. viewers were 
now hooked on the three national networks and their VHF affi  liates. Still, UHF indepen-
dents and educational stations were able to at least attract some semblance of an audi-
ence. Th e UHF independents would have to wait for the coming of cable to give them 
clout. Now that the educational stations were attracting more viewers, they began to look 
less educational in the strictest sense of the word and began programming more enter-
taining cultural fare (see the essay “Th e Creation of  Sesame Street ”). Th e Public Broad-
casting Act of 1967 united the educational stations into an important network, the 
Public Broadcasting Service (PBS), which today has nearly 400 member stations. 
 Th e 1960s also witnessed the immense social and political power of the new medium 
to force profound alterations in the country’s consciousness and behavior. Particularly 
infl uential were the Nixon–Kennedy campaign debates of 1960, broadcasts of the after-
math of Kennedy’s assassination and funeral in 1963, the 1969 transmission of Neil 
Armstrong’s walk on the moon, and the use of television at the end of the decade by 
civil rights and anti–Vietnam War leaders. 
 Th e 1960s also gave rise to a descriptive expression often used today when television 
is discussed. Speaking to the 1961 convention of the National Association of Broadcast-
ers, John F. Kennedy’s new FCC chair, Newton Minow, invited broadcasters to 
 sit down in front of your television set when your station goes on the air and stay there 
without a book, magazine, newspaper, profi t and loss sheet, or ratings book to distract 
you, and keep your eyes glued to that set until the station signs off . I can assure you that 
you will observe a    vast wasteland . 
 Whether or not one agrees with Minow’s assessment of television, then or now, 
there is no doubt that audiences continue to watch: 
 • Th ere are 114.7 million television households in the United States, 97% of all 
U. S. homes.  
 • A television is on for an average of 59 hours 28 minutes a week in each of 
those households.  
 • Th e average American watches 34 hours 12 minutes a week.  
 • Television reaches more adults each day than any other medium, and those people 
spend more time with television than with any other medium.  
 • Even among regular Internet users, 71% say that watching television is their “favor-
ite media-related activity.”  
 • Television provides 31.1% of Americans’ news and information; 71% say it’s their 
leading source for national and international news and 64% say the same for local 
news (Nielsen, 2011; eMarketer, 2010).    
 John Walson.

192 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 In 1968 a public aﬀ airs program producer for Channel 13 in New York City identiﬁ ed a number 
of related problems that she believed could be addressed by a well-conceived, well-produced 
television show. 
 Joan Ganz Cooney saw that 80% of 3- and 4-year-olds and 25% of 5-year-olds in the 
United States did not attend any form of preschool. Children from ﬁ nancially disadvantaged 
homes were far less likely to attend preschool at these ages than their 
 better-oﬀ  peers. Children in these age groups who did go to preschool re-
ceived little academic instruction; preschool was the equivalent of orga-
nized recess. Large numbers of U.S. children, then, entered ﬁ rst grade with 
no formal schooling, even though education experts had long argued that 
preschool years were crucial in children’s intellectual and academic devel-
opment. In addition, the disparity in academic preparedness between poor 
and other children was a national disgrace. 
 What did these children do instead of going to preschool? Cooney knew that 
they watched television. But she also knew that “existing shows for 3- through 5-year-old 
children . . . did not have education as a primary goal” (Ball & Bogatz, 
1970, p. 2). Her idea was to use an interesting, exciting, visually and aurally 
stimulating television show as an explicitly educational tool “to promote 
the intellectual and cultural growth of preschoolers, particularly disadvan-
taged preschoolers,” and to “teach children how to think as well as what to 
think” (Cook et al., 1975, p. 7). 
 Cooney established a nonproﬁ t organization, the Children’s Television 
Workshop (CTW), and sought funding for her program. Several federal 
agencies, primarily the Oﬃ  ce of Education, a number of private foundations including Carn-
egie and Ford, and public broadcasters contributed $13.7 million for CTW’s ﬁ rst four years. 
 After much research into producing a quality children’s television show and studying the 
best instructional methods for teaching preschool audiences, CTW unveiled  Sesame Street  
during the 1969 television season. It was an instant hit with children and parents. The  New 
Republic said, “Judged by the standards of most other programs for preschoolers, it is 
imaginative, tasteful, and witty” (cited in Ball & Bogatz, 1970, p. 3). Originally scheduled for 
one hour a day during the school week, within months of its debut  Sesame Street  was 
being programmed twice a day on many public television stations, and many ran the entire 
week’s schedule on Saturdays and Sundays. Today, nearly 45 years after its debut,  Sesame 
Street still airs 26 new episodes a year. 
 Did Cooney and her show make a diﬀ erence? Several national studies demonstrated 
that academic performance in early grades was directly and strongly correlated with regu-
lar viewing of  Sesame Street . The commercial networks began to introduce educational fare 
into their Saturday morning schedules. ABC’s  Grammar Rock ,  America Rock  (on U.S. his-
tory), and  Multiplication Rock were critical and educational successes at the time, and a 
traditional children’s favorite, CBS’s  Captain Kangaroo , started airing short ﬁ lms inﬂ uenced 
by  Sesame Street  on a wide variety of social and personal skills. By the time of its 40th 
birthday in 2009,  Sesame Street  had won 122 Emmy Awards and had been adapted for 120 
countries around the world, including troubled lands like Kosovo and the Palestinian terri-
tories (Gardner, 2009).    
  USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE 
 The Creation of  Sesame Street  
 “Did Cooney and her show make a difference? Several 
national studies demonstrated that academic 
performance in early grades was directly and strongly 
correlated with regular viewing of  Sesame Street .” 
   The  Sesame Street gang.   
 Th ere can be no doubt, either, that television is successful as an advertising medium: 
 • Total annual billings for television are around $70 billion, with approximately two-
thirds generated by broadcast and one-third by cable television. Together they col-
lected 40% of all U.S. ad spending.  
 • Th e average 30-second prime-time network television spot costs $100,000 (on  Amer-
ican Idol  ads have gone as high as $705,000, and the 2010  Lost fi nale had several 
$900,000 spots).  
 • Prime ad time on the February, 2012 Giants–Patriots Super Bowl broadcast cost 
$4 million for 30 seconds.  

CHAPTER 8 
Television, Cable, and Mobile Video 
193
 • Eighty-six percent of American consumers see television as the most infl uential 
ad medium; 78%, the most persuasive; 61%, the most authoritative; and 83%, the 
most exciting.  
 • A 30-second local spot can fetch up to $30,000 on a top-rated special in a major 
market (all statistics from  www.tvb.org ). 
 Scope and Nature of the Broadcast 
Television Industry  
 Today, as it has been from the beginning, the business of broadcast television is dom-
inated by a few centralized production, distribution, and decision-making organiza-
tions. Th ese  networks link affi  liates for the purpose of delivering and selling viewers 
to advertisers. Th e large majority of the 1,390 commercial stations in the United States 
are affi  liated with a national broadcasting network: ABC, NBC, and CBS each have over 
200 affi  liates and Fox has close to that number. Many more stations are affi  liated with 
the CW Network, often referred to as a “weblet.” Although cable has introduced us to 
dozens of popular cable networks—ESPN, MTV, Comedy Central, and A&E, to name 
a few—most programs that come to mind when we think of television were either 
conceived, approved, funded, produced, or distributed by the broadcast networks. 
 Local affi  liates carry network programs (they    clear time ). Until quite recently, affi  l-
iates received direct payment for carrying a show, called compensation, and the right 
to keep all income from the sale of local commercials on that program. But loss of 
network audience and the rise of cable have altered this arrangement. Now networks 
receive  reverse compensation  , a fee paid by the local station for the right to be that 
network’s affi  liate. It is typically based on the amount of money the local cable opera-
tion pays to the station to carry its signal, called    retransmission fees . 
 The Networks and Program Content 
 Networks control what appears on the vast majority of local television stations, but they 
also control what appears on non-network television, that is, when affi  liates program 
their own content. In addition, they infl uence what appears on independent stations 
and on cable channels. Th is non-network material not only tends to be network- type 
programming but most often is programming that originally aired on the networks 
themselves (called  off -network programs). 
 Why do network and network-type content dominate television?  Availability  is one 
factor. Th ere is 65 years’ worth of already successful network content available for air-
ing on local stations. A second factor is that the  production and distribution mechanisms 
that have long served the broadcast networks are well established and serve the newer 
outlets just as well as they did NBC, CBS, and ABC. Th e fi nal reason is us, the audience. 
Th e formats we are most comfortable with—our television tastes and expectations—have 
been and continue to be developed on the networks.   
 How a Program Gets on the Air 
 Th e national broadcast networks look at about 4,000 proposals a year for new television 
series. Many, if not most, are submitted at the networks’ invitation or instigation. Of 
the 4,000, about 100 will be fi lmed as    pilots   , or trial programs, at a cost of $3 million 
for a 30-minute pilot to $7 million for an hour drama (the pilot for  Lost  cost $10 mil-
lion; Guthrie, 2010). Perhaps 20 to 30 will make it onto the air. Only 12 of these (1 in 
10) will last a full broadcast season. In a particularly good year, at most three or four 
will succeed well enough to be called hits. Th e networks spend over $500 million to 
suff er this process. For this reason, they prefer to see ideas from producers with estab-
lished track records and fi nancial and organizational stability—for example, Jerry 

194 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
Bruckheimer is the source of  CSI ,  CSI: Miami ,  CSI: NY ,  Th e Amazing Race ,  Cold Case , 
and  Without a Trace  in addition to 12 other prime time series aired in the last 10 years. 
 Th e way a program typically makes it onto the air diff ers somewhat for those who 
have been asked to submit an idea and for producers who bring their concepts to the 
networks. First, a producer has an  idea;  or a network has an idea and asks a proven 
producer to propose a show based on it (possibly off ering a  put   , a deal that guarantees 
the producer that the network will order at least a pilot or it has to pay a hefty penalty). 
Th e producer must then  shop  the idea to one of the networks; naturally, an invited 
producer submits the proposal only to the network that asked for it. In either case, if 
the network is persuaded, it  buys the option  and asks for a written  outline  in which the 
original idea is refi ned. If still interested, the network will order a full  script . 
 If the network approves that script, it will order the production of a pilot. Pilots are 
then subjected to rigorous testing by the networks’ own and independent audience 
research organizations. Based on this research, networks will often demand changes, 
such as writing out characters who tested poorly or beefi ng up 
story lines that test audiences particularly liked. 
 If the network is still interested, that is, if it believes that the 
show will be a hit, it orders a set number of episodes and sched-
ules the show. In television’s early days, an order might be for 26 
or 39 episodes. Today, however, because of escalating production 
costs, the convention is at fi rst to order six episodes. If these are 
successful, a second order of nine more is placed. Th en, if the 
show is still doing well, a fi nal nine episodes (referred to as  the 
back nine ) will be commissioned. Few shows make it that far. 
 Th e reason television program producers participate in this 
expensive enterprise is that they can make vast amounts of 
money in syndication, the sale of their programs to stations on 
a market-by-market basis. Even though the networks control 
the process from idea to scheduling and decide how long a 
show stays in their lineups, producers continue to own the 
rights to their programs. Once enough episodes are made (gen-
erally about 50, which is the product of four years on a net-
work), producers can sell the syndicated package to the highest 
bidder in each of the 210 U.S. television markets, keeping all the 
revenues for themselves. Th is is the legacy of Lucille Ball’s busi-
ness genius. Th e price of a syndicated program depends on the 
market size, the level of competition between the stations in the 
market, and the age and popularity of the program itself. Th e 
station buys the right to a specifi ed number of plays, or airings. 
 Two of syndication’s biggest winners,  The Big 
Bang Theory and  Friends .
 Dr. Phil is among the more successful ﬁ rst-run 
syndicated programs.

CHAPTER 8 
Television, Cable, and Mobile Video 
195
After that, the rights return to the producer to be sold again 
and again. A program that has survived at least four years on 
one of the networks has proven its popularity, has attracted a 
following, and has accumulated enough individual episodes 
so that local stations can off er weeks of daily scheduling with-
out too many reruns. Th e program is a moneymaker. Para-
mount has already earned more than $2 billion from its 
syndication of  Frasier ; Warner Brothers collected more than 
$5.8 million an episode from its original syndication of  F riends 
and gets $4 million an episode for  Th e Big Bang Th eory , 
although it is still in its network run. 
 So attractive is syndication’s income potential, especially 
when coupled with the promise of profi ts from digital down-
loads and sales of DVD collections of television shows, that the 
networks themselves have become their own producers (and 
therefore syndicators). In fact, the major broadcast networks 
now produce 82% of all the prime-time programming on their 
own and the top 20 cable networks (McAdams, 2010).    
    It is important to note that there is another form of syndi-
cated programming.    First-run syndication is programming 
produced specifi cally for sale into syndication on a market-by-
market basis. It is attractive to producers because they don’t 
have to run the gauntlet of the network programming process, 
and they keep 100% of the income. 
 Satellites have improved the distribution process for fi rst-run 
syndicated series, increasing the number and variety of avail-
able programs. Game and talk shows, staples of the business in 
the past, have proliferated and been joined by programs such 
as  Judge Judy  and  Judge Joe Brown , court shows distributed daily by satellite to hun-
dreds of stations. Th ey are inexpensive to make, inexpensive to distribute, and easily 
 stripped    (broadcast at the same time fi ve evenings a week). Th ey allow an inexhaust-
ible number of episodes with no repeats and are easy to promote (“Watch the case of 
the peeping landlord. Tune in at 5:30.”). 
 In whatever form, the process by which programs come to our screens is changing 
because the central position of networks in that process has been altered. In 1978 ABC, 
CBS, and NBC drew 92% of all prime-time viewers. In 1988 they collected 70%. In 2002 
their share fell “to an historic low: 47%. Not only is it a record low, but it’s the fi rst time 
the four-network share has dropped below 50%, a benchmark broadcasters dreaded to 
fall beneath” (McClellan, 2002, p. 6). In fact, the much-anticipated  Friends fi nale had 
a rating of just under 30, not even coming close to being one of the most-watched 
programs ( Figure 8.2 ). New technologies—cable, VCR, DVD, digital video recorders, 
satellite, the Internet and digitization, and even the remote control—have upset the 
long-standing relationship between medium and audience. Convergence is also 
reshaping that relationship.  
 Cable and Satellite Television  
 John Walson’s brainchild reshaped the face of modern television. During cable’s 
infancy, many over-the-air broadcasters saw it as something of a friend. It extended 
their reach, boosting both audience size and profi ts. Th en, in November 1972, Sterling 
Manhattan Cable launched a new channel called Home Box Offi  ce. Only a handful of 
homes caught the debut of what we now call HBO, but broadcasters’ mild concern over 
this development turned to outright antagonism toward cable in 1975, when new HBO 
owner Time Inc. began distributing the movie channel by satellite. Now    premium 
cable    was eating into the broadcasters’ audience by off ering high-quality, nationally 
produced and distributed content. Th e public enthusiastically embraced cable and 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Top 10 Most-Watched Nonsports Television Broadcasts
M*A*S*H  (ﬁnal episode), 1983   
Bob Hope Christmas Show, 1970   
Gone with the Wind (Part 2), 1976  
Gone with the Wind (Part 1), 1976   
Roots (Part VIII), 1977   
The Day After (movie), 1983  
The Fugitive (last episode), 1967  
Roots (Part VI), 1977   
Roots (Part V), 1977  
Dallas (”Who Shot JR?”), 1980   
60.2/77
46.6/64
47.4/64
47.7/65
51.1/71
Rating/Share
46.0/62
45.9/72
45.9/66
45.7/71
53.3/76
CBS
NBC
ABC
Rank
  Satellites like this one made national distribution 
of HBO possible in 1975. Television was then changed 
for all time.  
  Figure 8.2  Top 10 Most-Watched 
Nonsports Television Broadcasts. 
 Source: Television Bureau of Advertising ( www.tvb.org ).  

196 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
that, coupled with the widespread diff usion of    fi ber optic 
cable (the transmission of signals by light beam over glass, 
permitting the delivery of hundreds of channels), brought 
the medium to maturity. 
 Programming 
 We’ve already seen that cable’s share of the prime-time audi-
ence exceeded that of the Big Four broadcast networks for 
the fi rst time in 2002. Its total audience share has exceeded 
that of ABC, CBS, NBC, and Fox every year since. What 
attracts these viewers is programming, a fact highlighted by 
two pieces of recent industry data:  cable shows annually 
earn 50%  of all prime-time Academy Awards nominations, 
and cable viewing exceeds network viewing for every single 
American age demographic. Even home-shopping channels such as QVC (whose 
annual revenues of over $7 billion exceed those of traditional networks ABC and NBC) 
have made their mark. 
 As we’ve seen, cable operators attract viewers through a combination of basic and 
premium channels, as well as with some programming of local origin. Th ere are more 
than 560 national cable networks and scores of regional cable networks. We all know 
national networks such as CNN, Lifetime, HBO, and the History Channel. Regional 
network North-West Cable News serves Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Montana, north-
ern California, and parts of Alaska; New England Cable News serves the states that give 
it its name; and several regional sports-oriented channels serve diff erent parts of the 
country. Th e fi nancial support and targeted audiences for these program providers 
diff er, as does their place on a system’s    tiers   , groupings of channels made available to 
subscribers at varying prices.    
  BASIC CABLE PROGRAMMING  In recognition of the growing dependence of the public on cable 
delivery of broadcast service as cable penetration increased, Congress passed the 
Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992. Th is law requires 
operators to off er a truly basic service composed of the broadcast stations in their area 
and their access channels. Cable operators also off er another form of basic service, 
 expanded basic cable   , composed primarily of local broadcast stations and services 
with broad appeal such as TBS, TNT, the USA Network, and Comedy Central. Th ese 
networks off er a wide array of programming not unlike that found on the traditional, 
over-the-air broadcast networks. Th e 20 cable networks with the largest numbers of 
subscribers appear in  Figure 8.3 . All rank in the top 20, not necessarily because they 
are the most watched, but because they all sit on cable’s basic tiers. Naturally, that is 
the place to be because advertisers covet those large potential audiences. Th is is the 
dispute, for example, at the heart of the NFL Network’s long-running fi ght with the 
nation’s cable operators. Most operators want to put the network on a for-pay tier. NFL 
Network wants placement on basic cable. Sports channel MSG Network and Time War-
ner have been embroiled in a similar dispute for some time.
  Because of concentration, operators are increasingly choosing to carry a specifi c 
basic channel because their owners (who have a fi nancial stake in that channel) insist 
that they do.    Multiple system operators (MSOs)    are companies that own several cable 
franchises. Time Warner, Liberty, and Cablevision own truTV. Comcast has an interest 
in numerous prime channels. Viacom owns BET. Naturally, these networks are more 
likely to be carried by systems controlled by the MSOs that own them and less likely 
to be carried by other systems. Th is pattern also holds true for MSO-owned premium 
channels such as HBO and Showtime. 
 Th e long-standard concept of diff erent pricing for diff erent packages or tiers of 
channels is currently under attack by the FCC and some members of Congress. Con-
cerns over viewers’ accidental access to unwanted, off ensive content and rising cable 
prices (at twice the rate of infl ation) are leading to calls for    à la carte pricing —that is, 
 Revenues of cable shopping network QVC 
exceed those of traditional television networks 
ABC and NBC.

CHAPTER 8 
Television, Cable, and Mobile Video 
197
101.9
102.1
101.4
101.3
101.3
100.9
100.9
100.9
100.9
100.5
100.4
100.4
100.4
100.4
100.2
100.2
100.1
99.9
100.9
101.3
TBS
Weather Channel
Discovery
ESPN
CNN
Food Network
USA Network
TLC
ESPN2
 C-Span
HGTV
Disney Channel
MTV
Spike TV
TNT
Nickelodeon
Fox News
Comedy Central
A&E
CNBC
99.9
Cartoon Network
Lifetime Television
99.9
1
2
3
4
4
4
7
7
7
7
7
12
13
13
13
13
17
17
19
99.9
ABC Family
20
20
20
20
Rank and  network subscribers (in millions)
  Figure 8.3 Top 20 Cable Networks, 2011.
 Source: NCTA, 2012. 

198 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
paying for cable on a channel-by-channel basis. Th e industry itself 
is split on the issues, system operators versus programmers. You 
can read more about the dispute in the box entitled, “Bundle or À 
la Carte?”      
 PREMIUM CABLE  As the FCC lifted restrictions on cable’s freedom to 
import distant signals and to show current movies, HBO grew and 
was joined by a host of other satellite-delivered pay networks. 
Today, the most familiar and popular premium cable networks 
are HBO, Showtime, the Spice Channel, the Sundance Channel, 
and Cinemax. 
 In addition to freedom from regulatory constraint, two impor-
tant programming discoveries ensured the success of the new pre-
mium channels. After television’s early experiments with 
over-the-air  subscription TV    failed, many experts believed people 
simply would not pay for television. So the fi rst crucial discovery 
was that viewers would indeed pay for packages of contemporary, 
premium movies. Th ese movie packages could be sold less expen-
sively than could fi lms bought one at a time, and viewers were 
willing to be billed on a monthly basis for the whole package 
rather than pay for each viewing. 
 Th e second realization boosting the fortunes of the premium 
networks was the discovery that viewers not only did not mind 
repeats (as many did with over-the-air television) but welcomed 
them as a benefi t of paying for the provider’s slate of fi lms. Pre-
mium channel owners were delighted. Replaying content reduced 
their programming costs and solved the problem of how to fi ll all 
those hours of operation. 
 Premium services come in two forms: movie channels (HBO, 
Starz!, and Encore, for example) that off er packages of new and old 
movies along with big sports and other special events—all available for one monthly 
fee—and pay-per-view channels, through which viewers choose from a menu of off er-
ings (almost always of very new movies and very big sporting events) and pay a fee for 
the chosen viewing. 
 People enjoy premium channels in the home for their ability to present unedited 
and uninterrupted movies and other content not usually found on broadcast channels—
for example, adult fare and championship boxing and wrestling. Increasingly, however, 
that “content not usually found on broadcast channels” consists not of movies and 
sports but high-quality serial programming—content unencumbered by the need 
to attract the largest possible audience possessing a specifi c set of demographics. 
Premium cable series such as  Th e Sopranos, Game of Th rones, Curb Your Enthusiasm, 
Spartacus, Dexter, Th e Wire, Weeds , and  Girls  attract large and loyal followings. 
 Th e other dominant multichannel service is direct broadcast satellite (DBS). First 
available to the public in 1994, it has brought cable’s subscriber growth to a near stand-
still because from the viewer’s perspective, what is on a DBS-supplied screen diff ers 
little from what is on a cable-supplied screen. 
 DBS in the United States is dominated by two companies, DirecTV (owned by 
Rupert Murdoch’s News Corporation) and Dish Network (owned by EchoStar, a pub-
licly traded company). DirecTV has 19.8 million subscribers; Dish Network, 13.9 mil-
lion. And these two companies, along with Verizon’s fi ber optic FiOS-TV and its 4 
million subscribers, have recently been peeling away subscribers from cable. Look at 
the list of the 10 largest cable MSOs in  Figure 8.4 . Note that Dish, DirecTV, and FiOS 
are all among that group. Cable’s ever-increasing monthly rates encourage this move to 
DBS. But DBS providers, like other MSOs, face the troubling problem of    cord-cutting , 
viewers leaving cable and DBS altogether and relying on Internet-only television view-
ing. Eleven percent of American television homes did so in 2011, and another 11% said 
they planned to (Th arp, 2012). 
 Sports channel MSG Network’s feud with 
Time Warner Cable over carriage denied millions 
of basketball fans their chance to see Jeremy Lin’s 
spectacular 2012 entry into the NBA. 

CHAPTER 8 
Television, Cable, and Mobile Video 
199
  Viewers and critics agree that much of television’s 
most sophisticated (and enjoyable) programming is 
available on premium cable. Unafraid of oﬀ ending 
advertisers, cable networks can present challenging, 
often controversial content. Can you match the title 
with the image?  The Newsroom, Spartacus ,  Girls, 
Game of Thrones .  
19.8
22.4
13.9
12.1
4.4
3.6
3.3
2.1
4.0
4.8
Comcast
Verizon
DirecTV
Dish Network
Time Warner
Charter
Cox
AT&T
Cablevision
Bright House
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Rank and subscribers (in millions)
  Figure 8.4 Top 10 Cable MSOs, 2011. 
 Source: NCTA, 2012. 

200 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
   But, argue cable network programmers like Disney and Viacom, our costs 
have escalated dramatically as well. ESPN spends more than $5 billion a year 
on programming (up 50% from ﬁ ve years ago); TNT spends $1.1 billion 
(up 55%); the History Channel spends over $283 million (a 50% rise; 
James, 2011). Viewers have decided, say the programmers, and this expen-
sive content is what they want. In fact, they argue, à la carte would actually 
raise consumers’ costs because those expensive popular channels make 
possible the smaller, niche channels. There might be a lot of people willing 
to pay $4 for ESPN, but how many viewers would pay for C-Span, or a foreign-language 
channel, or a religious channel, and how much would they be willing to pay? À la carte 
means the menu gets much, much smaller. And besides, continues the programmers’ 
 position, people are already comfortable with bundles. Newspapers and magazines are 
bundles—we buy the whole publication, not individual stories. Subscription channels like 
HBO and Cinemax are bundles—we pay for all their programs, not just the ones we watch 
(and of course, HBO and Cinemax are themselves already available à la carte from MSOs). 
Even amusement parks are bundles—one price gets us in and we can ride all, some, 
or even none of the rides. 
 Enter your voice, à la carte or bundle? Would you be happier paying for only the 
15 channels you watch, or do you ﬁ nd value in having a lot of options, even if you don’t 
take advantage of them all the time? And what about  serendipitous viewing , running 
across something you might not have thought to watch, but it catches your eye? Isn’t 
this one of the great gifts of cable? Have you ever become a fan of something you 
inadvertently saw?      
 CULTURAL FORUM 
 Bundle or À la Carte? 
 “Would you be happier paying for only the 
15 channels you watch, or do you ﬁ nd value in 
having a lot of options, even if you don’t take 
advantage of them all the time?” 
 The debate over how to price a cable subscription has entered the cultural forum because 
of a perfect storm of concern. Many consumers are upset over rising subscription rates, 
likely to top $200 a month by 2020 (Tharp, 2012). Some politicians worry about people ac-
cidentally seeing material they ﬁ nd oﬀ ensive, and more than a few MSOs 
are chaﬁ ng under big hikes in what they have to pay for the channels they 
carry. For them, programming costs have escalated between 6% and 10% 
a year for the last decade, and for popular channels like ESPN, for example, 
MSOs must pay $4.69 for each of their cable households (Schechner & 
Peers, 2011). The solution to meeting these diﬀ erent concerns is to let the 
market (meaning viewers) decide, that is, à la carte pricing. That way, con-
sumers wouldn’t have to pay for unwatched channels (92% of cable sub-
scribers would prefer à la carte; Wallenstein, 2012); there would be reduced risk of exposure 
to unwanted content; and MSOs wouldn’t have to pay programming costs for all its subscrib-
ing households, just for those deciding to watch a speciﬁ c channel. 
 Rising rates help fuel the argument over à la carte pricing for cable channels. 
© Dave Granlund and politicalCartoons.com
 Trends and Convergence 
in Television and Cable  
 Th e long-standing relationship between television and its audiences is being rede-
fi ned. Nielsen’s chief technology offi  cer, Bob Luff , explained: “Radio is going on the 
Web, TV is going on cellphones, the Web is going on TV, and everything, it seems, is 
moving to video-on-demand and quite possibly the iPod and PlayStation Portable. 
Television and media will change more in the next three to fi ve years than they’ve 

CHAPTER 8 
Television, Cable, and Mobile Video 
201
changed in the past 50” (in Gertner, 2005, p. 34). Th is profound change, initially 
wrought by cable and satellite, has been and is being driven by other new technologies 
as well—VCR, DVD, DVR, the Internet, digitization, and even the smartphone.  
 VCR 
 Introduced commercially in 1976, videocassette recorders (VCRs) quickly became 
common in American homes, but they are now disappearing as newer video tech-
nologies giving people even more control over viewing choices have emerged. Still, 
their introduction further eroded the audience for traditional over-the-air television, 
as people could now watch rented and purchased videos. VCR also allowed    time-
shifting   , taping a show for later viewing, and    zipping , fast-forwarding through taped 
commercials. As a result, people became comfortable with, in fact came to expect, 
more control over when, what, and how they watched television.   
 DVD 
 In March 1996    digital video disc (DVD)    went on sale in U.S. stores. Using a DVD, 
viewers can stop images with no loss of fi delity; can subtitle a movie in a number of 
languages; can search for specifi c scenes from an on-screen picture menu; and can 
access information tracks that give background on the movie, its production, and its 
personnel. Scenes and music not used in the theatrical release of a movie are often 
included on the disc. 
 Innovations such as these made DVD at the time of its introduction the fastest-
growing consumer electronic product of all time. Sales of DVD players exceeded 
those of VCRs for the fi rst time in September 2001. Machines now sit in 85% of U.S. 
homes. Because of the many viewing options now available, DVD sales and rentals 
have fallen dramatically for the last several years (delia Cava, 2012), and in 2012, 
the number of online movie transactions (sales and rentals) exceeded the number 
of physical, that is disc, transactions for the fi rst time, 3.4 billion to 2.4 billion 
(Smith, 2012c).   
 DVR 
 In March 1999 Philips Electronics unveiled the    digital video recorder (DVR) . It con-
tains digital software that puts a signifi cant amount of control over content in viewers’ 
hands. Th ey can “rewind” and play back portions of a program while they are watching 
and recording it without losing any of that show. Th ey can digitally record programs 
by simply telling the system their titles. By designating their favorite shows, viewers 
can instruct DVR to automatically record and deliver not only those programs but all 
similar content over a specifi ed period of time. Th is application can even be used with 
the name of a favorite actor. Punch in Adam Sandler, and DVR will automatically 
record all programming in which he appears. 
 DVR does not deliver programming the way broadcasters, cablecasters, and DBS 
systems do. Rather, it is employed  in addition to  these content providers. All DBS 
providers and almost every MSO now off er low-cost DVR as part of their technology 
platform, signifi cantly hastening its diff usion into American homes. Today, about half 
of all TV households have DVR. Naturally, traditional broadcast and ad-supported 
cable networks fi nd the rapid diff usion of DVR troubling, and while it is true that DVR 
is dramatically changing television viewing as we have known it, it has not had as 
negative an eff ect on those traditional programming sources as originally anticipated. 
In DVR homes, 21% of all viewing is in DVR playback, totaling 2 hours and 9 minutes, 
often adding as many as 7.9 ratings points to prime-time viewing. In fact, DVR homes 
watch more prime-time programming than do non-DVR homes. In addition, DVR 
viewers watch 45% of all recorded advertising, and in total, DVR viewing of time-
shifted commercials increases their viewership, on average, by 16% (Nielsen, 2011; 
Loechner, 2011a).   

202 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 Video on the Internet 
 Television on the Internet was slow to take off  because of copyright and piracy con-
cerns, and because few viewers had suffi  cient  bandwidth , space on the wires bringing 
content into people’s homes. So for several years the most typical video fare on the 
Net was a variety of short specialty transmissions such as movie trailers, short inde-
pendent fi lms, music videos, and news clips. But the development of increasingly 
sophisticated video compression software and the parallel rise of homes with 
 broadband    Internet connections (66.3% of American adults have broadband at home; 
Neilsen, 2011) have changed that. Because broadband off ers greater information-
carrying capacity (that is, it increases bandwidth), watching true television on the 
Internet is now common. Much of that viewing is of content that originated on net-
work and cable television, but much is also Web-only video ( most  if the number of 
streamed videos is the measure).    
    But as we saw in this chapter’s opening, the distinction between Web-only and 
broadcast/cable programming is disappearing. Internet video sites Netfl ix, Hulu, 
and YouTube commission original content, with Netfl ix even seeking a cable  channel 
outlet for on-demand access to its programming. Among YouTube’s many channels 
are  Life and Times , focusing on musician Jay-Z’s cultural interests;  Dance On , a 
dance channel from Madonna; the  Smart Girls at the Party  channel from  Parks and 
Recreation’s  Amy Poehler; several sports channels such as  RIDE  for skateboarders 
and  KickTV  for soccer fans; and a number of news channels from print operations 
like the  Wall Street Journal  and Hearst. Th is variety is similar to what we fi nd on 
cable, and its advertising support akin to what we have come to accept from net-
work  television. 
 It’s fi tting that YouTube should be leading the evolution of Internet video from its 
short-clips era to that of long-form programming, because it was YouTube that origi-
nally made video on the Internet a success. Attracting as few as 600,000 unique monthly 
visitors in 2005, today it draws nearly 160 million unique visitors who watch 4 billion 
videos a day and upload 60 hours of new content every minute (Online Video Market, 
2011; Oreskovic, 2012). 
 Th ere are many other successful, more narrowly targeted Internet video sites. Blip
.tv, for example, is a springboard for high-quality original Web series like  Fred and 
 iJustine  that it eventually distributes across the Web, and Atom.com focuses on com-
edy and airs a cable version on Comedy Central. Th is wealth of Internet video is start-
ing to alter viewing habits, especially among young people. While overall television 
viewing is at an all-time high, there has been a steady decline among 18- to 34-year-
olds, as much as nine minutes a day (Stelter, 2012). You can see where Internet users 
watch video in Figure 8.5, but be aware; the small percentage that now watches Net 
content on home sets will soon explode, as by 2016 more than 100 million North 
 Americans and Western Europeans will own Internet-connected home televisions 
(Chmielewski, 2012). As it is today, on an average day, more than 100 million 
 Americans will watch online video, averaging 239 videos a month (comScore, 2012). Th is 
number is fueled by the massive expansion of video on Facebook. Already America’s 
 Who  has time for TV when there’s so much 
video to watch?
Hi & Lois © 2011 king features syndicate, Inc.

CHAPTER 8 
Television, Cable, and Mobile Video 
203
third-most-visited website, accounting for 
1 in every 11 visits to the Internet and 1 in 
every 5 page views (Dougherty, 2012), 
Facebookers watch nearly 200 million vid-
eos a month (Online Video Market, 2011). 
 Ultimately, the convergence of the 
Internet and television will be even more 
seamless as there are several new tech-
nologies further discouraging the distinc-
tion between the two. Slingbox, for 
example, allows users to “sling” television 
content to their computers and cell 
phones. Viewers can buy the device as a 
stand-alone, and several cable and satel-
lite companies are investigating making it 
available to their subscribers. Viewers can 
also sling video in the other direction with 
devices such as AppleTV, Boxee, and Roku 
that send Web video to home sets. In 
addition, Internet-enabled HDTVs that 
can directly stream any video available on 
the Web are currently in stores, and sales 
are expected to reach 80 million by 2013. Including video-game consoles (Chapter 9), 
one-third of all U.S. homes already have Web-to-TV connections (Poggi, 2012). 
 Interactive Television 
 Th e Internet is not the only technology that permits interactivity. Cable and satellite 
also allow viewers to “talk back” to content providers. But it is    digital cable television , 
the delivery of digital images and other information to subscribers, that off ers the tru-
est form of interactive television. Th ere are 45.7 million digital cable subscribers in the 
United States. Many digital cable subscribers also use their cable connections to access 
the Internet. Currently, there are also 46.4 million users with cable modems connect-
ing their computers to the Net via a specifi ed Internet service provider, or ISP (NCTA, 
2012). As a result, “must-carry” has taken on new meaning in the Internet age, as 
Congress and the courts debate cable’s power to grant or limit access to its wires to 
outside service and content providers and those providers’ right to demand that access. 
 Cable’s digital channels permit multiplexing, carrying two or more diff erent signals 
over the same channel. Th is, in turn, is made possible by  digital compression , which 
“squeezes” signals to permit multiple signals to be carried over one channel. Digital 
compression works by removing redundant information from the transmission of the 
signal. For example, the set behind two actors in a movie scene might not change for 
several minutes. So why transmit the information that the set is there? Simply transmit 
the digital data that indicate what has changed in the scene, not what has not. 
 Th is expanded capacity makes possible  interactive cable , that is, the ability of sub-
scribers to talk back to the system operator (extra space on the channel is used for this 
back talk). And  this  permits the following services, many of which you already use: 
 video-on-demand (VOD)   , one-click shopping (you see it, you click on it, you buy it), 
local information on demand (news, traffi  c, and weather), program interactivity 
(choose a camera angle, learn more about an actor’s career, play along with game show 
contestants), interactive program guides, and as you’ll read more about in Chapter 9, 
video games. But it is video-on-demand—the ability to access pay-per-view movies 
and other content that can be watched at any time—that best shows the economic 
advantage of putting more control into viewers’ hands. Th e VOD business earns the 
MSOs nearly $1.7 billion a year, a fi gure destined to grow as today’s 53 million VOD 
households expand to a predicted 71 million—nearly 60% of all U.S. television homes—
by 2016 (Marich, 2011; Steinberg, 2011).   
48%
54%
20%
18%
8%
11%
On a computer or laptop
Any handheld device
Video game console
Smartphone
Home television
Tablet
Where users watch
  Figure 8.5 Where Adult Internet  Users 
Watch Video. 
 Source: Online Video Business, 2012. 

204 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 Phone-over-Cable 
 Another service off ered by many MSOs is phone service over cable wires. Currently 
there are 25 million cable-delivered residential telephone subscribers (NCTA, 2012). 
Phone-over-cable off ers a special benefi t to MSOs. If telephone service can be deliv-
ered by the same cable that brings television into the home, so too can the Internet. 
And what’s more, if the cable line is broadband capable of handling digitally com-
pressed data, that Internet service can be even faster than the service provided over 
traditional phone lines. Cable, in other words, can become a one-stop communica-
tions provider: television, VOD, audio, high-speed Internet access, long-distance and 
local phone service, multiple phone lines, and fax. Th is is    bundling . 
 How valuable is a bundle-receiving subscriber to an MSO? Add together the bills 
you’re probably paying right now—basic or premium cable, your Internet service pro-
vider, and your phone bill. What does that total? Now speculate on how much pay-per-
view and VOD you might buy now that you have broadband and a superfast cable 
modem. And what would you pay for home delivery of real-time sports or fi nancial 
data? And the MSO would collect each time you accessed an interactive classifi ed or 
commercial ad. Th at’s how valuable a bundled subscriber will be.   
 Smartphones, Tablets, and TV Everywhere 
 We’ve already seen that 48% of adult Internet users watch video on mobile devices, 
and teens are its heaviest consumers, watching more than seven hours a month, even 
paying attention to the commercials (58%; Loechner, 2011b). Smartphones and tablets, 
just as they have for other media, have made television watching an anywhere, anytime 
activity. But so have two other developments. Th e fi rst is the popularity of handheld 
gaming devices like Nintendo’s Game Boy Advance and Sony’s PlayStation Portable 
and Vita, all of which can stream video and play video discs or cartridges (Chapter 9). 
Th e second is the TV Everywhere Initiative, content providers’ ongoing eff orts to make 
digital on-demand programming available to all mobile devices. Slowed by concerns 
over pricing, advertising models, audience measurement, and release-of-content strat-
egies, its participants include MSOs like Comcast, Dish, and Verizon and broadcast 
networks like Fox and CBS. In addition, 900 over-the-air commercial and public broad-
casters, through the Open Mobile Video Coalition, are working to bring their signals 
to TV Everywhere. At of the start of 2012, more than 120 stations were providing mobile 
digital signals to their viewers, a 70% jump from a year earlier (Open Mobile, 2012). 
 Th is mobile viewing activity promises to alter the television/viewer relationship in 
a way other than mobility. Time with mobile devices is slowly replacing time with the 
television set. Already, mobile device users spend more time with those devices than 
in front of a television screen (27% of their media time vs. 22%) and 39% use their 
mobile devices while watching television (Patel, 2012). In fact, when asked if they would 
rather give up their smartphone or their television, 58% said they would eliminate 
television (Edison Research, 2011). 
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS   
 Recognizing Staged News 
 For years, studies have shown that a majority of the American public turns to television 
as the source of most of its news and that viewers rank it as the most believable news 
source. Television news can be immediate and dramatic, especially when events being 
covered lend themselves to visual images. But what if they don’t? News may be jour-
nalism, but television news is also a television  show , and as such it must attract view-
ers. Television newspeople have an obligation to truthfully and accurately inform the 
public, but they also have an obligation to attract a large number of people so their 
station or network is profi table. 

CHAPTER 8 
Television, Cable, and Mobile Video 
205
  Did Geraldo Rivera engage in permissible or 
impermissible news staging when he reported from 
“sacred ground” although he was miles from the 
actual spot?
 Even the best television journalists cannot inform a public that does not tune in, and 
the public tunes in to see pictures. Television professionals, driven to get pictures, often 
walk the fi ne ethical line of    news staging   —that is, re-creating some event that is believed 
to or could have happened. Sometimes news staging takes simple forms; for example, a 
reporter may narrate an account of an event he or she did not witness while video of 
that event is played. Th e intended impression is that the reporter is on the scene. What 
harm is there in this? It’s common practice on virtually all U.S. television news shows. 
But how much of a leap is it from that to ABC News splicing together several diff erent 
pieces of video to create the appearance of reporter Brian Ross at the wheel of an out-
of-control Toyota (Cook, 2010)? 
 Th e broadcasters’ defense is, “Th is is not staging in the sense that the  event was 
staged. What does it matter if the reporter was not actually on the spot? What was 
reported actually did happen.” If you accept this view (the event  did  happen, therefore 
it’s not news staging), how would you evaluate Fox News’s Geraldo Rivera’s 2002 report-
ing from “sacred ground,” the scene of a battle in Afghanistan in which U.S. forces suf-
fered heavy losses, even though he was miles from the actual spot? And if you accept 
digital alteration of news scenes to place network reporters at the scene, how would you 
evaluate CBS’s common practice of digitally inserting its network logo on billboards and 
buildings that appear behind its reporters and anchors? If this staging is acceptable to 
you, why not okay the digital enhancement of fi res and explosions in the news? 
 Some media-literate viewers may accept the-event-did-happen argument, but another 
form of news staging exists that is potentially more troublesome—re-creation. In 2011, a 
Rhode Island station asked golfers to re-create for its cameras the last hole of a tourna-
ment while its reporter narrated as if the play was in real time (Busbee, 2011). Here the 
defense is that the re-creation is a true representation of what had occurred. Watching 
video coverage of an Air Force bombing action in Iraq in 2003 from the relative safety of 
his hotel in Erbil, combat reporter Ashley Gilbertson was struck by the sight of a Fox News 
correspondent “crouching in front of sandbags, wearing a fl ak jacket and a helmet. He 
was supposedly on the front lines, reporting via a scratchy video phone. He had to whis-
per, he said.” But Gilbertson soon recognized the “distinctive architecture of our hotel.” 
Th e correspondent “was reporting live” from a foxhole that had been “re-created” in his 
hotel room. Th e angry Gilbertson called the Fox reporter on his in-room phone and hung 
up so all could hear that this was a staged report (in Genoways, 2007, pp. 80–81). Th is 
staging was justifi ed with the claim that it “could have happened.” 
 Where do media professionals draw the line? What happens to the public’s trust 
in its favorite news source as the distinctions between fact and fi ction, reality and 
illusion, What is and what is 
not digital, and reporting and 
re-creating disappear? 
 If you see a televised news 
story labeled as a re-creation or 
simulation, what leads you to 
trust the re-creator’s or simula-
tor’s version? Media-literate peo-
ple develop strategies to analyze 
content, deciding where  they 
draw the line and rejecting staged 
news that crosses it. Th e news 
producer must balance service to 
the public against ratings and 
profi t, but viewers must balance 
their desire for interesting, stimu-
lating visuals against confi dence 
that the news is reported rather 
than manufactured.    
    Why do broadcasters feel 
compelled to stage the news? 

206 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
Th ere are two possible explanations. One is the need to meet television audience 
demands for visuals. Th e second explanation is the assumption, widely held by televi-
sion professionals, that people are incapable of reading, accepting, interpreting, and 
understanding important issues unless they are presented in a manner that meets 
viewers’ expectations of the news. If this is accurate, media-literate viewers must 
reconsider their expectations of the medium. If this assumption about viewers is incor-
rect, media-literate people must make that clear to those who produce the news, either 
by choosing news programs that avoid staging or by protesting to those that do.     
   There is no better way to become aware of the impact of the media on you and society than to do without them. As a media-
literate individual, you can test for yourself just how free you are of the power of one speciﬁ c medium, video. See if you control 
your viewing or if your viewing controls you. To start, pick a ﬁ ve-day period and simply stop watching. No television. No videos 
on the Internet or your smartphone. No video games. Simply put: Don’t watch or even look at any video screen anywhere for ﬁ ve 
entire days. If you are adventurous, enlist one or more friends, family members, or roommates. 
 Simply changing your routine viewing behavior will not do very much for you unless you reﬂ ect on its meaning. Ask yourself 
(and any confederates you may have enlisted) these questions. How easy or diﬃ  cult is it for you to break away from all video? Why 
or why not? What did you learn about your video consumption habits? How did you use the freed-up time? Were you able to ﬁ nd 
productive activity, or did you spend your time longing for a screen? Be sure to describe how not watching aﬀ ected your other life 
habits (eating, socializing with family and friends, news gathering, and the like). Describe your interactions with other people 
during this week. Did your conversations change? That is, were there alterations in duration, depth, or subject matter? If you were 
unable to complete the week of nonviewing, describe why. How easy or diﬃ  cult was it to come to the decision to give up? Do you 
consider it a failure to have resumed watching before the ﬁ ve days were up? Why or why not? Once you resume your normal video 
habits, place yourself on a scale of 1 to 10, with 1 being I-Control-Video and 10 being Video-Controls-Me. Explain your self-rating. 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE 
 No Video for a Week 

Outline the history and development of the television 
and cable television industries and television itself 
as a medium. 
 In 1884 Paul Nipkow developed the fi rst device for trans-
mitting images. John Logie Baird soon used this mechani-
cal scanning technology to send images long distance. 
Vladimir Zworykin and Philo Farnsworth developed elec-
tronic scanning technology in the 1920s, leading to the 
public demonstration of television in 1939.  
 In the 1950s, the quiz show scandal, the business acu-
men of Lucille Ball, McCarthyism, and the ratings system 
shaped the nature of broadcast television. Cable, intro-
duced in 1948, would soon eff ect even more change.  
 Cable, designed initially for the importation of distant 
signals, became a mature medium when it began off er-
ing movies and other premium content.  
   Describe how the organizational and economic nature of 
the contemporary television and cable industries shapes 
the content of television. 
  Cable, dominated by large MSOs, off ers programming in 
tiers that include basic, expanded basic, and premium 
cable. Some favor a new pricing scheme, à la carte. 
  Direct broadcast satellite is the primary multichannel 
competitor to cable, now joined by fi ber optic systems 
like FiOS. 
   Explain the relationship between television in all its 
forms and its viewers. 
  Once described as a vast wasteland, it is the leading 
source of news for a large majority of Americans. 
  Viewers rate television as their most infl uential, persua-
sive, authoritative, and exciting ad medium. 
 Resources for Review and Discussion  
 REVIEW POINTS: TYING CONTENT TO LEARNING OUTCOMES 

CHAPTER 8 
Television, Cable, and Mobile Video 
207
   Identify new and converging video technologies and their 
potential impact on the television industry and its audience. 
  A host of technologies infl uence the television-viewer 
relationship, including VCR, DVD, DVR, video on the 
Internet, and interactive television. 
   Describe the digital and mobile television revolution. 
  Mobile video-over smartphones, tablets, and other por-
table video devices are now common, aided by the idea 
of TV Everywhere and the rise of video via social net-
working site.  
   Apply key television-viewing media literacy skills. 
  Staged news raises several questions for media-literate 
people about broadcaster integrity and respect 
for viewers.       
 KEY TERMS 
 nonlinear TV, 183 
  Nipkow disc, 184  
 pixel, 184 
 iconoscope tube, 184 
 kinescope, 184 
 coaxial cable, 185 
 microwave relay, 185 
 spot commercial sales, 187 
 personal peoplemeter, 189 
 Total Audience Measurement Index 
(TAMi), 189 
 sweeps periods, 189 
 share, 190 
 C3 rating, 190 
 community antenna television 
(CATV), 190 
 master antenna television 
(MATV), 191 
 importation of distant signals, 191 
 all-channel legislation, 191 
 vast wasteland, 191 
 network, 193 
 clear time, 193 
 reverse compensation, 193 
 retransmission fees, 193 
 off -network, 193 
 pilot, 193 
  put, 194  
 fi rst-run syndication, 195  
 stripping, 195 
 premium cable, 195 
 fi ber optics, 196 
 tiers, 196 
 expanded basic cable, 196 
 multiple system operator (MSO), 196  
  à la carte pricing, 196  
 subscription television, 198 
 cord-cutting, 198 
 time-shifting, 201 
 zipping, 201 
  digital video disc (DVD), 201 
  digital video recorder (DVR), 201 
 bandwidth, 202 
 broadband, 202 
  digital cable television, 203  
 video-on-demand (VOD), 203 
 bundling, 204 
 news staging, 205 
 QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW 
 1.  What is the importance of each of the following to the his-
tory of television: Paul Nipkow, John Logie Baird, Vladimir 
Zworykin, Philo Farnsworth, and Newton Minow?  
 2.  What was the impact on television of the quiz show scan-
dal,  I Love Lucy , McCarthyism, and the Nielsen ratings? 
 3.  How are the ratings taken? What are some complaints 
about the ratings system? 
 4.  How does a program typically make it to the air? How does 
syndication fi gure in this process? 
  5.  How have cable, VCR, DVD, DVR, and DBS aff ected 
the networks? 
 6.  What are some of the changes in television wrought 
by cable?  
 7.  Explain the diff erence between basic cable, expanded basic 
cable, premium cable, pay-per-view, and à la carte pricing.  
    8.  What are importation of distant signals, premium cable, 
and fi ber optics? How are they related? What do they have 
to do with cable’s maturity as a medium?  
 9.  In what ways can viewers access video on the Internet? Via 
mobile devices? What kinds of content are available on 
these platforms? 
 10.  What is news staging? 
For further review, go to the LearnSmart study module for 
this chapter.
 QUESTIONS FOR CRITICAL THINKING AND DISCUSSION 
 1.  As an independent producer, what kind of program would 
you develop for the networks? How immune do you think 
you could be from the pressures that exist in this process?  
 2.  Are you a cable subscriber? Why or why not? At what level? 
Would you prefer à la carte pricing? Why or why not?  
    3.  Is news staging ever permissible? If not, why not? If yes, 
under what conditions? Have you ever recognized a report 
as staged when it was not so identifi ed? Describe what 
you saw. 


 
209
 Learning Objectives 
 Video games are accelerating the ﬁ ve trends reshaping mass communication and the mass 
media industries. They are the product of a highly concentrated industry; they are luring 
people from the more traditional media (audience fragmentation); they are used as and 
ﬁ lled with advertising (hypercommercialization); they know no borders (globalization); 
and they are played on numerous technologies, from game consoles to personal computers 
to the Internet to cell phones (convergence). And even though the game industry grosses 
nearly twice as much as Hollywood does every year, mass communication experts are only 
now taking this medium seriously. After studying this chapter you should be able to
 Outline the history and development of games and the gaming industry. 
 Describe how the organizational and economic nature of the contemporary gaming 
industry shapes the content of games. 
 Explain the relationship between games and their players. 
 Identify changes in the game industry brought about by new and 
converging technologies. 
 Apply key game-playing media literacy skills. 
Video Games 9  
 The casual game  Angry Birds had 42 million 
downloads in its ﬁ rst year. 

1940
1955
1961   Russell creates Spacewar
1964   Sega formed
1966   Sega exports Periscope to United States and Europe; ﬁrst amusement
 
game export; ▲ 25 cents per play established as arcade game standard
1968   Baer patents interactive television game
1947   ▲ Flippers come to pinball
1951   Japanese playing-card company Marufuku changes its name to
 
Nintendo
1931   ▲ Baﬄe Ball, ﬁrst mass-produced arcade game
1933   Contact, ﬁrst electric pinball game
 W HY ARE YOU PLAYING VIDEO GAMES? Don’t you have homework or a paper due or something?” 
 “Th is is more important. And anyway, what are you, my mother?” 
 “Nope, I just don’t want to have to dig up another roommate, that’s all.” 
 “Glad to know you care. And anyway, it may look like I’m playing video games, but 
I’m really doing research for my global politics class. Check it out. Th is is a game that 
the U. S. Navy put out, MMOWGLI. It stands for Massively Multiplayer Online Wargame 
Leveraging the Internet, and the idea is to combat Somali pirates.” 
 “A game from the government about thwarting Somali pirates?” 
 “Th at’s this one. Th ere are others, depending on what problem the Offi  ce of Naval 
Research wants help with. Th ey created a game environment where players like us and 
experts on all kinds of issues can share new ideas and collaborate with other players. 
We earn points to win the game.” 
 “Why does the Navy care what you think?” 
 “It doesn’t, not really. But it cares about what all of us think. It’s Web-based, so 
MMOWGLI lets the Navy strategize with way more people than it could ever assemble 
face-to-face. Navy people know Navy stuff ; Africa experts know Africa stuff . Other 
people like us know other stuff . So we all go online and    crowdsource diff erent solu-
tions and unimagined possibilities, you know, let a whole network of people, the 
crowd, get involved in the process. Wanna play?”   
 “No thanks. If I’m going to play games, I’d like to kill bad guys with a vast array of 
magnifi cent weapons and be able to leap tall buildings in a single bound.” 
   In this chapter we examine games played on a variety of electronic, microprocessor-
based platforms. But before we get deeper into our discussion of the sophisticated, 
entertaining, and sometimes (as you can tell from our opening vignette) not very 
playful games that abound today, let’s look at their roots in the convergence of 
pinball machines and military simulators. Th is is fi tting, because as with other 
media, possibly even more so, converging technologies defi ne video games’ present 
and future.  
210 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences

1970
1985
2000
2000   ▲ Xbox
2001   Game Cube
2003   Second Life launched
2004   Halo 2  released; PlayStation Portable introduced
2006   Nintendo Wii 
2012   Xbox entertainment use surpasses gaming
1985   Nintendo’s NES introduced
1986   Legend of Zelda
1987   PC games introduced
1989   ▲ Game Boy
1990   Super Mario Bros. 3
1993   Doom released
1994   ESRB ratings established; Myst released
1995   PlayStation in United States
1971   ▲ Computer Space, ﬁrst arcade computer game
1972   Odyssey released; Atari formed, develops Pong
1975   Home Pong debuts; Gunﬁght, ﬁrst game to use a microprocessor
1976   Channel F, ﬁrst programmable, cartridge-based home game
1977   First handheld video game
1979   First handheld programmable game system
1980   Home Space Invaders; ﬁrst arcade game for home systems
 
Pac-Man
1981   Donkey Kong
 A Short History of Computer 
and Video Games  
 Carnival man David Gottlieb invented the fi rst mass-produced arcade game,  Baffl  e 
Ball , in 1931. A small wooden cabinet, it had only one moving part, a plunger. Players 
would launch a ball into the playing fi eld, a slanted surface with metal “pins” sur-
rounding “scoring holes.” Th e object was to get the ball into one of the holes. Gottlieb 
was soon manufacturing 400 cabinets a day. Just as quickly, he had many imitators. 
One, Harry Williams, invented  Contact , the fi rst electric pinball game. Williams was an 
engineer, and his 1933 gaming innovations were electronic scoring ( Baffl  e Ball players 
had to keep their scores in their heads) and scoring holes, or pockets, that threw the 
ball back into the playing fi eld (in  Baffl  e Ball , when a ball dropped into a hole, it 
dropped into a hole). Th e popularity of arcade games exploded, and players’ enthusi-
asm was fueled even more when slot-machine makers entered the fi eld, producing 
games with cash payouts. With the Depression in full force in the 1930s, however, civic 
leaders were not much in favor of this development, and several locales, most notably 
New York City, banned the games. Pinball was considered gambling. 
 David Gottlieb had the answer. Games of skill were not gambling. And games that 
paid off  in additional games rather than cash were not gambling. In 1947, he intro-
duced  Humpty Dumpty , a six-fl ipper game that rewarded high-scorers with replays. 
Bans were lifted, pinball returned to the arcades, even more players were attracted to 
the skills-based electronic games, and the stage was set for what we know today as 
video and computer games. As Steven Baxter of the  CNN Computer Connection wrote, 
“You can’t say that video games grew out of pinball, but you can assume that video 
games wouldn’t have happened without it. It’s like bicycles and the automobile. One 
industry leads to the other and then they exist side-by-side. But you had to have bicy-
cles to one day have motor cars.” Games writer Steven Kent adds, “New technologies 
CHAPTER 9 
Video Games 
211

212 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
do not simply spring out of thin air. Th ey need to be associated with familiar industries 
or ideas. People may have jokingly referred to the fi rst automobiles as ‘horseless car-
riages,’ but the name also helped defi ne them. Th e name changed them from nebulous, 
unexplainable machines to an extension of an already accepted mode of transporta-
tion” (both quotes from Kent, 2001, pp. 1–2). 
 Today’s Games Emerge 
 Th roughout the late 1950s and 1960s, computers were hulking giants, fi lling entire rooms 
(see Chapter 10). Most displayed their output on paper in the form of teletype. But the 
very best, most advanced computers, those designed for military research and analysis, 
were a bit sleeker and had monitors for output display. Only three universities—MIT, the 
University of Utah, and Stanford—and a few dedicated research installations had these 
machines. At MIT, a group of self-described nerds, the Tech Model Railroad Club (TMRC), 
began writing programs for fun for a military computer. Club members would leave their 
work next to the computer so others could build on what had come before. One member, 
Steve Russell, decided to write the ultimate program, an interactive game. It took him 
200 hours over six months to produce the fi rst interactive computer game,  Spacewar , 
completed in 1961. Th is version featured toggle switches that controlled the speed and 
direction of two spaceships and the torpedoes they fi red at each other. His fi nal version, 
completed the next year, had an accurate map of the stars in the 
background and a sun with a mathematically precise gravitational 
fi eld that infl uenced play. Russell and his club-mates even built 
remote control units with switches for every game function, the 
fi rst game pad. “We thought about trying to make money off  it for 
two or three days but concluded that there wasn’t a way that it 
could be done,” said Russell (quoted in Kent, 2001, p. 20).      
    But another college student, Nolan Bushnell, thought diff er-
ently (DeMaria & Wilson, 2004, p. 16). For two years after the 
completion of Russell’s game, the TMRC distributed it to other 
schools for free. Bushnell, who worked in an arcade to pay for 
his engineering studies at the University of Utah, played  Space-
war  incessantly. After graduation he dedicated himself to devel-
oping a coin-operated version of the game that had consumed 
so much of his time. He knew that to make money, it would 
have to attract more than computer enthusiasts, so he designed 
 Gottlieb’s  Baﬄ  e Ball  and  Humpty Dumpty .
 This is the universe navigated by Spacewar 
gamers, simple by today’s standards, but a dramatic 
beginning for the medium.

CHAPTER 9 
Video Games 
213
a futuristic-looking fi berglass cabinet. Th e result,  Computer Space , released in 1971, 
was a dismal failure. It was far too complicated for casual play, doing good business 
near college campuses but bombing in bowling alleys and beer halls. Yet Bushnell 
was undeterred. With two friends and investments of $250 each, he quit his engi-
neering job and incorporated Atari in 1972.    
    Long before this, in 1951, Ralph Baer, an engineer for a military contractor charged 
with developing “the best TV set in the world,” decided a good set should do more 
than receive a few channels (remember, this was before cable’s rise). He suggested 
building games into the receivers. His bosses were unimpressed. Fifteen years later 
Baer was working for another defense contractor when he drafted the complete sche-
matics for a video-game console that would sell for about $20. He patented it in 1968 
and licensed his device to Magnavox, which, in 1972, marketed the fi rst home video-
game system as  Odyssey  and sold it for $100.    
    Odyssey  was a simple game off ering two square spots to represent two players (or 
paddles), a ball, and a center line. It had six plug-in cartridges and transparent, colored 
screen overlays producing 12 games, all very rudimentary. Its high cost and Mag-
navox’s decision to sell it through its television set dealers—
leading to the incorrect perception that it could be played only 
on Magnavox sets—limited its success. Only 100,000 units were 
sold. But with  Odyssey  and Atari, 
 the stage was set for the introduction of a new art form, and a new 
industry. Th e technological foundation was built. Th e earliest pio-
neers had seen farther than any others and had made their tenta-
tive steps along the path. Th e world was in fl ux, as new politics, 
new music, and new social consciousness began to spread through-
out the United States and Europe. Th e 60s were over. A generation 
of young people dreamed new dreams and broke down the status 
quo. It was into that world that fi rst Ralph Baer and then Nolan 
Bushnell made their humble off erings, and changed the world in 
ways no one could have foreseen. (DeMaria & Wilson, 2004, p. 17)   
 Th e spark that set off  the game revolution was  Pong , Atari’s 
arcade ping-pong game, introduced in 1972. Bushnell had seen 
 Odyssey  at an electronics show and set his people to creating a 
coin-operated version (Atari later agreed to pay a licensing fee 
  Nolan Bushnell and a few of his toys. 
 Original  Pong .

214 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
to Magnavox). Th e two-player game was an overnight hit, sell-
ing 100,000 units in its fi rst year—and twice as many knockoff s 
(Burnham, 2001, p. 61). Players poured quarters into games 
looking remarkably like  Pong , including Harry Williams’s 
Paddle-Ball , Rally’s  For-Play , and then in an eff ort to head off  
what Nolan Bushnell called “the jackals,” Atari’s own  Pong Dou-
bles, Super Pong , and  Quadrapong  (Sellers, 2001).  
 Rapid-Fire Developments 
 What followed, partly as a result of the swift advance of the 
microchip and computer industries (and a healthy dose of tech-
nological genius from a thriving game industry in Japan), was a 
rapid-fi re succession of innovation and development. In 1975 
Atari, by marketing  Home Pong  through Sears, made its fi rst steps 
toward bringing arcade games into the home. Its 1980 release of 
home  Space Invaders cemented the trend. Also in 1975, Midway 
began importing  Gunfi ght  from Japanese manufacturer Taito.  Gunfi ght  was signifi cant 
for two reasons. Although Sega, with  Periscope , began importing arcade games into the 
United States in 1966,  Gunfi ght  was the fi rst imported video game, and in fact, it was the 
fi rst game to use a computer microprocessor. In 1976, Fairchild Camera and Instrument 
introduced  Channel F , the fi rst programmable, cartridge-based home game. Mattel Toys 
brought true electronic games to handheld devices in 1977, with titles like  Missile Attack, 
Auto Race , and  Football  played on handheld, calculator-sized    LED , or  light-emitting 
diode , and  LCD , or  liquid crystal display   , screens. In 1979 Milton Bradley released 
Microvision, the fi rst programmable handheld game system. Two Japanese arcade 
imports, Namco’s  Pac-Man  in 1980 and Nintendo’s  Donkey Kong  in 1981, become instant 
classics, all-time best sellers, and with the introduction of Nintendo’s groundbreaking 
game console NES in 1985, home-version successes. Th e Japanese company further 
advanced gaming with its 1986 release of home console game  Legend of Zelda , revolu-
tionary because it introduced open structure play—that is, players could go wherever 
they wanted and there were multiple routes to winning, now standard in modern games.        
    Arcade games, handheld systems, and home game consoles were joined by per-
sonal computer games, beginning with the 1987 release of NEC’s hybrid PC/console 
in Japan. Now, with games being played on microprocessor-based consoles, produc-
ing them for microprocessor-based PCs was a simple matter. By the early 1990s, CD-
ROM-based computer games were common and successful.  Doom  (1993) and  Myst
  Legend of Zelda , 1986, introduced open 
structure play, now standard in modern games. 
 All-time classics  Pac-Man and  Donkey Kong .

CHAPTER 9 
Video Games 
215
(1994) were among the fi rst big personal computer game hits.  Doom  hinted at a devel-
opment soon to come in games because it could be played over    LANs , or  local area
computer  networks   , typically in a single building; that is, it was an interactive game 
played by several people over a computer network. It was also the fi rst  fi rst-person 
perspective shooting  game   ; gamers “carried” the weapon, and all action in the game 
was seen through their eyes.        
 Games and Their Players  
 Seventy-two percent of American homes play video games (Entertainment Software 
Association, 2012). But before we look at these people a bit more closely, we need to 
defi ne exactly what constitutes a video game.  
 Two of the ﬁ rst interactive games,  Doom 
and  Myst .
  Regardless of the platform, a game 
is a video game if the action takes place 
interactively on-screen. 

216 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 The video-game industry has reached a level of legitimacy and respectability equal to 
that of other mass media. Now it is being asked the same questions regarding content 
as they are: What is the impact on kids? What regulations should be imposed? How 
is the medium used? And just as important, how can we use the medium to make a 
positive diﬀ erence? 
 Game industry professionals, social scientists, educators, and parents regularly exam-
ine this last question. Their eﬀ orts focus on the use of games for policy change, training, 
and learning. Their products include initiatives such as Cisco Systems’ 
 Peter Packet Game and Challenge , designed to confront poverty, and the 
work of nonproﬁ t Global Kids Inc., which has teamed with organizations 
such as Lego, Microsoft, and PBS in an eﬀ ort to encourage kids to create 
their own educational video games. Persuasive Games is yet another 
example of a provider building electronic games designed for instruction 
and activism, as is P.O.V. Interactive, which uses interactive games in co-
ordination with PBS documentaries to explore environmental and other 
issues. The National Academy of Sciences is funding game development 
by the Federation of American Scientists, designed to build enthusiasm 
for science as a discipline and a career. 
   One of the most successful games-for-good eﬀ orts is Games for Health, 
a community of game developers, researchers, and health care and med ical 
professionals who maintain an ongoing “best practices” conversation—
online and in annual conferences—to share information about the impact 
existing and original games can have on health care and policy. Japanese 
game maker Konami’s  Dance Dance   Revolution , for example, is an existing 
 exergame    that invites people to exercise while they play. Players follow 
cascading arrows on a video screen, mimicking their movements on a large 
footpad attached by a cable to a game console. Sony and Nike teamed up to produce another 
beneﬁ cial exergame,  EyeToy Kinetic , that encourages users to kickbox, practice yoga, or en-
gage in a number of other physical activities in a variety of simulated environments. Other 
existing games—just about anything played on a handheld console—are frequently used 
to reduce children’s anxiety before anesthesia, dialysis, or chemotherapy. Research has 
shown that time on a portable game relaxes preoperative children even more than do 
their parents. 
 New games, too, are developed speciﬁ cally to meet people’s health needs. Nintendo 
developed  GlucoBoy , an original game to help children manage their diabetes, and 
 Dr. Mario , to aid patients in managing their own diabetic needs. We saw in the chapter 
opener that the Navy developed MMOWGLI, but it also created a virtual reality game to 
help soldiers returning from the Middle East deal with post-traumatic stress disorder. A 
therapist controls the game to re-create troubling events, helping the player/patient 
slowly revisit the scene of the trauma. And it should come as no surprise, but Atari 
founder Nolan Bushnell has also tried his hand at games-for-good. His  Anti-Aging Games 
website oﬀ ers older folks several games intended to improve short-term memory, focus, 
and concentration.   
 These eﬀ orts are examples of the    gamiﬁ cation    of society, using video game skills and 
conventions to solve real-world problems in medicine, health, policy, personal responsibility, 
in fact, any issue that humans face. In this sense, gamiﬁ cation is the ultimate use of games 
for good. 
  USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE 
 Using Games for Good 
“ These efforts are examples of the gamiﬁ cation of 
society, using video game skills and conventions to 
solve real-world problems in medicine, health, public 
policy, personal responsibility, in fact, any issue that 
humans face. ”
 Nolan Bushnell’s Anti-Aging Games oﬀ ers seniors several games designed to improve short-term 
memory, focus, and concentration.
© 2010–2011 Anti-Aging Games, LLC. Anti-Aging Games® is a trademark of Anti-Aging Games, LLC. Reprinted by permission.
 What Is a Video Game? 
 As technologies converge, the same game can be played on an increasing number of 
platforms.  Myst , for example, was originally a computer game written for Macintosh 
computers, then IBM PCs, then external CD-ROM drives, then video-game consoles 
such as PlayStation. Now it can be played online. Versions of  Donkey Kong  can be 
played in arcades and on consoles, on the Internet, on Macs and PCs, and on handheld 
players.  Q*bert  can be played on arcade machines and on collectable Nelsonic wrist-
watch gameplayers. Th ousands of games can be played on smartphones and tablets. 
For our purposes, then, a game is a    video game    when the action of the game takes 
place interactively on-screen. By this defi nition, an online text-based game such as a 

CHAPTER 9 
Video Games 
217
 MUD , or  multiuser dimension   , which has no moving images, is a video game, but the 
home version of  Trivial Pursuit , employing a DVD to off er video hints to those playing 
the board game, is not. 
 Th at takes care of the technologically based half of the word ( video ), but what is a 
 game ? For our purposes, a video game is a game when a player has direct involvement 
in the on-screen action to produce some desired outcome. In a MUD, for example, 
players use text—words—to create personalities, environments, even worlds in which 
they interact with others toward some specifi c end. Th at’s a game. But what about 
 Mario Teaches Typing , a cartridge-based learning aid? Even though its goal is teaching, 
because it has gamelike features (in this case, the famous Super Mario and the manip-
ulation of on-screen action to meet a particular end), it’s a game. Th e essay titled 
“Using Games for Good” looks at games that function as more than entertainment.   
 Who Is Playing?   
    What do we know about the 135 million regular American video-game players? For 
one thing, they are not necessarily the stereotypical teenage boys gaming away in their 
parents’ basements, as you can see in  Figure 9.1 . 
 • Th e average game player is 37 years old; 29% of Americans over 50 play.  
 •  Adult women represent a larger proportion of the game-playing population (37%) 
than boys under 18 (13%).  
 • Th e number of players in the U.S. has doubled from 56 million in 2008 to 135 million 
in 2011.  
82%
18%
58%
42%
Age
Gender
18 years and over 
17 years 
and younger
Male 
Female
 Figure 9.1 Game Players’ Demographics, 
2011.
 Source: Entertainment Software Association, 2012. 
 The skinny, sun-deprived teen boy gamer stereotype may persist, but it doesn’t reﬂ ect the reality.
 GET FUZZY: © Darby Conley/Distributed by United Feature Syndicate, Inc. 

218 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 • Th e global gamer population has exploded from 250 million to 1.5 billion in 
that same time (Masnick & Ho, 2012).  
 • Forty-fi ve percent of parents of gamers play weekly with their children; 80% 
say this brings their families closer together.    
Percentage company growth, 2009–2010 
 
 
116%
Facebook 
(social network 
website) 
Ubisoft 
(video game 
developer & 
publisher)
39% 
Take-Two
(video game
developer &
publisher)
37%  
28%
Gray Television 
(owner of local 
TV stations)
355%
Zynga 
(social network 
game developer) 
  Figure 9.2  Fastest-Growing Media 
Companies, 2010. 
 Source: Johnson, 2011a. 
  
  Scope and Nature of the 
Video-Game Industry  
 Th e United States accounts for about half of the approximately $72 billion 
worldwide video-game industry market. Half of this total is spent on software 
(in 2008 surpassing for the fi rst time the annual amount expended on DVDs), 
more than 3 billion individual game purchases (Masnick & Ho, 2012). Note in 
Figure 9.2 that three of the fastest-growing media companies in the world are 
video game businesses. Th e 2011 release of  Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 3 
made over $400 million in its fi rst 24 hours, and its $1 billion in 16 days topped 
by one day the movie  Avatar’s  record of fastest popular culture title to a billion 
dollars (Masnick & Ho, 2012). 
 As is the case with every media industry we’ve studied so far, concentration 
and globalization are the rule in gaming. Game console sales are the sole prov-
ince of three companies—the United States’ Microsoft, best known for Xbox and 
Kinect, and two Japanese companies, Nintendo (Wii) and Sony (PlayStation). 
Versions of PlayStation and Xbox have long dominated sales and time-of-play. 
But Wii, introduced in 2006 to appeal specifi cally to new, nontraditional 
gamers, has gained signifi cant popularity, primarily because it permits full-
body, interactive play using a variety of control wands rather than the typical 
game’s button-laden controller. In 2010 Microsoft met Wii’s challenge with 
Kinect, a motion-sensitive game that reads players’ body movements without 
controllers or wands of any kind. Equipped with facial- and voice-recognition 
capabilities, Kinect is the fastest-selling consumer electronics device in history, 
selling 8 million units in its fi rst 60 days of availability (besting former champs 
iPhone and iPad; Kato, 2012). 
 Nintendo’s Game Boy Advance dominates the handheld gaming device busi-
ness. Relatively inexpensive, it plays relatively inexpensive cartridge games. Sony’s 
challenge to this dominance is PSP (PlayStation Portable), a handheld device that 
not only has graphics similar in quality to those of its console version, but is also 
Wi-Fi capable for Internet access and multiplayer gaming. And rather than employ 
cartridges, it uses small, specially designed CDs, becoming a music and movie 
player as well. To counter PSP, Nintendo introduced its Internet-capable, multi-
media DSi in late 2009, but its 2011 introduction of 3DS, a glasses-free, Internet-
capable 3-D handheld device, is revolutionizing portable gaming; for example, 
players can personalize games by using the device to take 3-D pictures and insert 
them into the games they play. In 2012 Sony came back with PlayStation Vita, a 
mobile gaming system with the power and graphics of a console. Wi-Fi capable, 
it can stream movies from Netfl ix. But its challenge was not only to Nintendo’s 
Game Boy and DS handheld gamers, but to smartphones and tablets, increasingly 
the device of choice for many mobile game players. Sony’s bet was that serious 
console game players would gladly carry another device if it meant superior play. 
 Th eir success in hardware provides Microsoft, Nintendo, and Sony with more 
than sales revenue.    Th ird-party publishers   , companies that create games for exist-
ing systems, naturally want their best games on the most popular systems. And just 
as naturally, better games attract more buyers to the systems that support them. 
Th ird-party publishers produce their most popular titles for all systems. For exam-
ple, Activision’s  Call of Duty  is available for all consoles and Mac and PC; the hugely 
popular  Madden NFL , which sells more than 5 million copies a year, and the  MVP 
Baseball  series come from EA Sports;  Metal Gear  is from Konami,  Tony Hawk from 

CHAPTER 9 
Video Games 
219
Activision,  Elder Scrolls  is from Bethesda Softworks, and 
 Batman  from Warner Bros. Interactive. Conversely, Code-
master’s  MTV Music Generator  is available only for Play-
Station and Xbox, and several third-party publishers 
produce Wii-only software—for example, Ubisoft and EA’s 
Headgate division. Console makers do produce their own 
titles. Nintendo has the  Pokémon, Super Mario , and  Pik-
min  series. Sony publishes the  Gran Turismo  line, and 
Microsoft off ers titles such as  XNS Sports  and  Halo . Con-
centration exists in the game software business just as it 
does on the hardware side. Atari owns several game mak-
ers, including Infogrames, and EA controls nearly 50% of 
all video game sales. In mid-2011 EA further increased its 
dominance of the content side of the industry with its pur-
chase of casual game developer PopCap, source of some of the most popular free 
online games such as  Bejeweled  and  Plants vs. Zombies . In an eff ort to counter this 
trend, however, a number of websites for independent game designers has sprung 
up. Most notable is Humble Indie Bundle. Small developers who cannot aff ord to 
distribute and market their games on the scale of the big companies upload their 
games to its website, free of copy- and other theft-protection. Games are designed 
for all platforms and, once bundled with other games, are for sale at whatever price 
a player wishes to pay, with a portion of the proceeds going to charity. In its fi rst 
two years of operation it earned more than $11 million for the site operators, game 
designers, and charity, and  PC Gamer  magazine named the Humble Indie Bundle 
its 2011 community heroes for its support of the indie game development market 
(Francis, 2011). 
 A serious problem faced by third-party game creators is that, as in the more tradi-
tional media, especially fi lm, production and marketing costs are skyrocketing. Not 
only has the production technology itself become more sophisticated and therefore 
expensive, but games, like movie stars, build followings. Given that, the creative forces 
behind them can demand more recognition and compensation. In 2001, the average 
game cost $5 million to produce and $2 million to promote. Today, the cost of develop-
ment  alone  is between $15 and $25 million, and a blockbuster like  Grand Th eft Auto 
IV  costs $100 million to produce and tens of millions more to promote. Again, as with 
fi lm, industry insiders and fans are expressing concern over the industry’s reliance on 
sequels of franchises and licensed content, including movie- and television-based 
games. For example, there are over 65 diff erent  Mario  games, and money is increas-
ingly diverted to paying to license properties like  James Bond 007  and  Spider-Man .  And 
while industry research indicates that a majority of players want game makers to rely 
less on licensed content and sequels, those wants are in confl ict with three important 
realities of the contemporary game industry—production, promotion, and distribution 
costs are soaring; 50% of all games introduced to the market fail; and every one of the 
  Will video game players carry a handheld 
system, even one as powerful as the PlayStation 
Vita, in addition to a smartphone? 
  Two very popular titles from third-party publishers, Madden NFL and 360 Call of Duty. 

220 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
top 10 best-selling games in 2011 was either a sequel to a franchise or a licensed title. 
Buff eted by diffi  cult economic times like other media, the game industry wants to 
mitigate its risks, and when franchise titles such as  Call of Duty and  Grand Th eft Auto
can top $500 million in sales in their fi rst few days of availability, insiders see sequels 
a reasonable strategy.  
 Trends and Convergence in 
the Video-Game Industry  
 Like every media industry we’ve studied, the game industry is experiencing signifi cant 
change, most of it driven by convergence and hypercommercialism.  
 Convergence Everywhere 
 Cable television giants Comcast and Cox each off er fee-based game services for their 
broadband customers; both DBS providers also off er interactive game services. Most 
Internet service providers (see Chapter 10) provide some form of online interactive 
game playing. AOL Game, for example, off ers scores of games from designers such as 
EA Sports, TryMedia, and Funkitron. Th e service is free for AOL subscribers, and its 
  As with every medium that has come before, video games have been accused of fostering an addiction. 
 Foxtrot © 2004 Bill Amend. Reprinted with permission of Universal Uclick. All rights reserved. 
  Social networking site games like  Happy 
Aquariums and  Farmville attract tens of millions of 
daily, primarily female, players. 

CHAPTER 9 
Video Games 
221
goal is to keep existing broadband users while attracting new ones. Th e game site of 
another ISP, Yahoo!, draws nearly 5 million unique monthly visitors. Many game mak-
ers, too, off er online interactive gaming. EA’s  Pogo.com  has 9 million subscribers com-
peting in board, puzzle, word, casino, sports, and card games, some for free and some 
for a fee. 
 We’ve already seen that the new generation of handheld game devices is Internet 
capable. And in an obvious bow to convergence, all three consoles are designed to 
perform a wide range of game and nongame functions, including playing DVDs, 
burning music CDs, and providing Internet access with music and video streaming 
capability, all in widescreen HDTV and digital multichannel sound. For example, 
Clear Channel’s iHeart Radio brings more than 800 live concert broadcast and 
digital-only radio stations to Xbox users who, if they have Kinect, can control their 
listening through voice and body movements. Xbox users can also access Slacker’s 
personal radio service and its tens-of-millions of music tracks, and if they subscribe 
to Microsoft’s SmartGlass service, they can stream any and all content from their 
smartphones and tablets to their televisions through their gaming consoles. Manu-
facturer Samsung sells television sets that  connect viewers directly to its cache of 
games housed on its distant, dedicated servers (see  cloud computing  in Chapter 10). 
Cable companies Verizon and Comcast and program providers like HBO, Epix, Net-
fl ix, and Hulu stream content via game consoles. In fact, 12% of U.S. households 
already make regular use of game consoles for accessing video content (Poggi, 2012), 
and in 2012, for the fi rst time, entertainment usage passed multiplayer game usage 
on the Xbox, that is, users spent more time with online video and music than playing 
games (Tsukayama, 2012b). 
 Home computer users, able to interact with other gamers for decades via MUDs, 
have been joined by console players in fl ocking to    massively multiplayer online role-
playing games ( MMO ) such as  Ultima Online, World of Warcraft, EverQuest , and  Sec-
ond Life . Th irty million people worldwide play more than 80    virtual worlds games , 
and one, the hugely popular  World of Warcraft , earns close to $1 billion a year in 
monthly subscriptions and other revenues (Dibbell, 2007). 
 Technology and players’ comfort with it are two reasons for this wave of convergence—
games can be played on cable television, on a dedicated console, on a handheld gamer, 
online through an ISP or social networking site, online from a game developer’s web-
site, online through a game console, online through a tablet or smartphone, and online 
through a home or offi  ce personal computer.  
 TECHNOLOGY  As smaller, faster, more powerful microprocessors were developed and 
found their way into game consoles, the distinction between games and personal com-
puters began to disappear. A game console with high-speed microprocessors attached 
to a television set is, for all intents and purposes, a computer and monitor.   
 COMFORT WITH TECHNOLOGY  As the distinction between the technologies on which games 
are played has diminished, players’ willingness to play games on diff erent platforms 
has grown. Demographics help account for this trend. Speaking at the 10th E 3 , the 
game industry’s annual trade show, Entertainment Software Association president 
Douglas Lowenstein (2005) explained, “Looking ahead, a child born in 1995, E 3 ’s 
inaugural year, will be 19 years old in 2014. And according to Census Bureau data, 
by the year 2020, there will be 174 million Americans between the ages of 5 and 44. 
Th at’s 174 million Americans who will have grown up with PlayStations, Xboxes, and 
GameCubes from their early childhood and teenage years. . . . What this means is 
that the average gamer will be both older and, given their lifetime familiarity with 
playing interactive games, more sophisticated and discriminating about the games 
they play” (p. 4). 
 No better evidence of people’s comfort with playing games across a variety of 
technologies exists than that which resides in the smartphone you most probably 
already use.  

222 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 Smartphones, Tablets, and Social Networking Sites 
 Smartphones and tablets are revolutionizing the video game industry. We’ve already 
seen that Sony hopes its Vita will recapture serious game players who want mobility 
but demand a high-quality game experience. Nonetheless, the truth is that 92% of 
smartphone and tablet owners play games at least once a week, 45% play daily (Baar, 
2011), and industry estimates are that by 2016, one-third of all global mobile gaming 
revenue will come from tablets alone (Walsh, 2012b). Th e iPhone store alone has more 
than 90,000 game apps, a growth of 1,400% since it went online (Masnick & Ho, 2012). 
Game revenues for iOS and Android mobile devices now exceed those for the Nin-
tendo and Sony handheld game systems combined (Lovison, 2011). 
 Much, if not most, of today’s mobile gaming takes the form of    casual games —
classic games such as card games (poker, cribbage, solitaire), table games (checkers, 
pool), matching games, and word and trivia games.  Angry Bi rds , which lets players 
fl ing birds at smug pigs, was downloaded 700 million times in its fi rst three years of 
existence, and players spend 200 million minutes with the game every day (Anderson, 
2012). Casual games can be played in spurts and are easily accommodated by 
the cell phone’s small screen. To be sure, however, casual games are a hit among 
Internet players as well, with more than 100 million online casual game players 
regularly visiting sites such as  gametap.com ,  realarcade.com , and  pogo.com . Th ey 
are joined by the tens of millions of gamers, primarily female, playing at social net-
working sites such as Facebook.  Farmville , from game publisher Zynga, has more 
than 80 million active players who, with users of Zynga’s other Facebook games like 
 Mafi a Wars ,  Cityville , and  Draw Something , total 232 million regular players, 
accounting for 12% of the social networking site’s total $3.7 billion revenue in 2011, 
income made through players’ spending on virtual goods and Facebook ads sold 
alongside the games (Franzen, 2012). In fact, casual gamers spend more than half 
their time (56%) on social networking sites playing games, and 51% log in specifi -
cally to play (PopCap, 2011). You can see how casual gamers spend their social 
networking time in Figure 9.3.   
 Hypercommercialism 
 Hypercommercialism has come to all media. Advertisers’ desire to fi nd new outlets for 
their messages and avoid the advertising clutter in traditional media has combined 
with gamers’ attractive, segmented demographics to make video games particularly 
appealing vehicles for many types of commercial and other persuasive campaigns. 
Advertisers have come to think of games as much like magazines.   
 Diff erent titles attract diff erent demographics— Mortal Kombat  and  Grand Th eft 
Auto draw diff erent players than do  Spider-Man and MSN Games’  Outsmart Jennifer 
  Crazy Taxi and  Arena Football are replete with 
brands and logos. 

CHAPTER 9 
Video Games 
223
Lopez . Another reason advertisers are attracted to online games is that they are    sticky . 
Players tend to stay (stick) with a game site longer than with other websites. Visitors 
to EA’s pogo.com, for example, spend 25 million hours a month playing games on the 
site (Traffi  c Stats, 2010). Regardless of the platform, industry research indicates the 
average gamer spends two to four hours playing a single game in a single sitting. Spon-
sors use games to reach their targets in four ways—product placement, freemium 
games, advergaming, and advocacy gaming.  
 PRODUCT PLACEMENT  Advertisers like product placement for several reasons. First, a 
product used in a game is there forever—every time the game is played, the adver-
tiser’s brand not only appears but is used. Second, the placement is not only per-
manent, it’s Tivo-proof; it can’t be skipped. Th ird, a brand’s association with a game 
renders it “cool,” but equally important, games’ interactivity creates a stronger emo-
tional connection and therefore a more positive association for players to brands—
more so, for example, than simply viewing a TV spot. Fourth, players seem not to 
mind the ads and even welcome them if it means a game costs less or can be played 
online for free (Vorhaus, 2009). Fifth, they are eff ective, and that eff ectiveness can 
be measured because the response, clicking through to the sponsor, can be precisely 
measured. And fi nally, where in-game ads were once static—a billboard atop a 
building or a logo on the side of a race car—today’s ads are dynamic, that is, a 
18%
39%
14%
11%
9%
10%
7%
7%
7%
7%
7%
8%
9%
Play games with others
Post/look at photos
Play single-player games
Chat/message with friends
Post comments on friends’ wall
Read news
Read comments on friends’ wall
Watch videos
Invite/add new friends
Poke/nudge friends
Post links
Take quizzes
Update personal proﬁ
Update personal proﬁle/status
le/status
Update personal proﬁle/status
Update personal proﬁ
Update personal proﬁ
Update personal proﬁ
Percentage participating in the activity
  Figure 9.3  What Casual Gamers Do on 
Social Networking Sites. 
 Source:  PopCap, 2011. 

224 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 But, counters tech writer Dave Gilson, “Never mind that Americans 
watch nearly 29 million years of TV every single year, yet no one suggests 
our living rooms are a modern-day Olduvai Gorge [the Cradle of Mankind]” 
(2011, p. 56). And social scientists are equally skeptical of games’ purity of 
purpose. Craig Anderson and his colleagues demonstrated a causal rela-
tionship between playing violent games like  Grand Theft Auto  and both 
short- and long-term aggression (Anderson et al., 2003). Another group of 
psychologists found a causal link between more than two hours a day of 
game playing and attention disorders in kids that persist into early adulthood (Swing et al., 
2010). Still another team of researchers discovered that 8.5% of American youth who play 
video games show multiple signs of behavioral addiction, including “spending increasing 
amounts of time and money on video games to feel the same level of excitement; irritability 
or restlessness when play is scaled back; escaping problems through play; skipping chores or 
homework to spend more time at the controller; lying about the length of playing time; and 
stealing games or money to play more” (in St. George, 2009). 
 But, answers video game industry group Entertainment Software Association (2012), if 
there is a problem with game playing, it’s up to people, especially parents, to monitor their 
own play. The ESA notes that 45% of parents play games with their children at least once a 
week; 68% believe that game play provides mental stimulation or education; 57% say 
games encourage family time; and 54% think games help their kids connect with friends. 
Not only do parents seem to agree with Jane McGonigal about the beneﬁ ts of gaming, but 
industry sales data suggest that the “bad” games identiﬁ ed by those social scientists are a 
small minority of all games sold, only 17%. 
 Enter your voice. Games, good or bad? Of course, you know it’s a much more complicated 
matter than that. Games do have negative eﬀ ects on some people, and they clearly can be a 
good in people’s lives. So where do you stand, given the information provided here? Revisit 
your answer after you read the scientiﬁ c evidence demonstrating the eﬀ ects of media on atti-
tudes and behaviors in Chapter 13 and oﬃ  cials’ ability to regulate those media in Chapter 14.    
 CULTURAL FORUM 
 Are Games Good or Bad?  
 “Kids may play 100,000 hours of video games 
before they turn 21, but it’s not wasted time. 
By giving them a sense of accomplishment, 
meaning, and productivity, game play is producing 
a new generation of ‘super-empowered hopeful 
individuals.’” 
 “The single biggest misconception about games is that they’re an escapist waste of 
time. But more than a decade’s worth of scientific research shows that gaming is actu-
ally one of the most productive ways we can spend time.” With those words expressing 
the theme of her 2011 book,  Reality Is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and   How They 
Can Change the World , Jane McGonigal thrust the value of games into 
the cultural forum. Although a game developer with success in the 
games-for-good movement, McGonigal was making the argument 
that games—period—were good for humanity. Yes, kids may play 
100,000 hours of video games before they turn 21, but it’s not wasted 
time. By giving them a sense of accomplishment, meaning, and 
productivity, game play is producing a new generation of “super-
empowered hopeful individuals.” For example, networked games like 
 LittleBigPlanet teach collaboration; games with rewards like  Foursquare 
teach motivation; pro-social games like  Super Mario Sunshine  teach 
altruism. She points to the more than 6 million cumulative years people 
have spent in the  World of Warcraft , just about the same amount of time since humans 
first walked upright. These gamers, she argues, aren’t just enjoying themselves, they’re 
literally evolving in real time. 
 Critics argue that there can be little good in scenes like this from  Grand Theft Auto .
sponsor can alter them remotely and on-the-fl y, tailoring them to specifi c locations 
and times-of-day. 
 But why, beyond the cash they earn, do game designers want product placements 
in their creations, a practice begun in the 1980s when Sega put Marlboro banners in 
its arcade racing games? First, brand names add a bit of realism to the game’s virtual 
world, presumably enhancing the player’s enjoyment. Second, advertisers and game 
makers frequently engage in cross-promotion. For example, Sprite billboards high-
light Activision’s  Street Hoops  and the soda maker pushes the game on its cans and 
in its ads. Champs Sports, featured everywhere in EA’s  Arena Football , encourages 

CHAPTER 9 
Video Games 
225
shoppers in its 600 stores to play the game on specially designed kiosks in order to 
win Champs merchandise. 
 So mutually beneficial has game product placement become that placements, 
which can cost more than $1 million in a popular game, are frequently bartered 
for free; that is, the game maker and the brand advertiser exchange no money. 
The brand image is provided to the designer (for realism) and the sponsor gets 
placement (for exposure). Industry estimates are that by 2014 in-game advertis-
ing will generate $1 billion in revenues for game makers (Entertainment Software 
Association, 2012).   
 FREEMIUM GAMES     Even more deeply integrating products into games are    freemium 
games   , in which advertising serves as in-game virtual currency. Freemiums happen 
in a number of ways. In some games, in exchange for watching a commercial, players 
can obtain virtual goods, like weapons or armor, rather than work to earn the credits 
necessary to buy them (most players given this option take it). In others, choosing to 
use a brand-name product imbues players with special in-game attributes unavailable 
to players content with generic products. Online game site Outspark’s snowboarding 
game, for example, gives players opting to wear Rocawear ski apparel magical trick-
performing powers that earn them extra points.   
 ADVERGAMING   Product placement in games has proven so successful that, in many 
instances, brands have become the games themselves in    advergames . Advergaming 
typically occurs in two ways, on CD-ROM and via the Internet to either consoles or 
mobile devices; and online advergaming typically takes the form of brand-specifi c 
sites and game sites unaffi  liated with a single sponsor but off ering brand-based 
games. Th e auto industry, for example, makes good use of CD-ROM advergames. 
Chrysler distributes free games and has even set up gaming kiosks in some dealer-
ships. Its Jeep game encourages players to take a Jeep anywhere, do anything. 
Crashes are okay—a click does the necessary bodywork. Half of all recipients of 
an advergame will play it for an average of 25 minutes (Entertainment Software 
Association, 2012). 
 Brand-specifi c game websites are sometimes downloadable from the Net, some-
times played while connected. Either way, their goal is to produce an enjoyable expe-
rience for players while introducing them to the product and product information. 
Volkswagen, for example, distributes a free iPhone game app called  Real Racing GTI . 
Players compete against other drivers for a chance to win a real car and can commu-
nicate with them via Twitter. Particularly exciting laps can be uploaded to  Real Racing’ s 
YouTube channel. Payment card network Visa Inc. opts for a diff erent approach, 
  Volkswagen’s  Real Racing GTI and Visa’s 
 Financial Soccer represent two of gaming’s most 
successful advergames. 
Financial Soccer, © 2010 Visa. All rights reserved. Reprinted with 
permission. Financial Soccer is part of Practical Money Skills for 
Life, Visa’s free, award-winning, ﬁ nancial education program. 
Financial Soccer is a fast-paced, multiple-choice question video 
game, testing players’ knowledge of ﬁ nancial management 
skills as they advance down ﬁ eld, and try to score goals.

226 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
partnering with FIFA to sponsor a World Cup soccer educational video game on 
its website created specifi cally to foster fi nancial literacy. Cable television’s Hall-
mark Channel goes in even another direction, establishing its own game site,  Fun 
& Games , which off ers more than 1,000 online and downloadable games, all coin-
cidentally designed to promote its basic cable programming. 
 Unaffi  liated game sites that off er brand-specifi c games, however, have raised 
the question of fairness. Critics argue that embedding brand characters and logos 
in non-brand-specifi c games masks the true intent of those games.  Neopets.com , 
for example, calls itself “the greatest Virtual Pet Site on the Internet.” It explains to 
its primarily preteen players, “With your help, we have built a community of over 
70 million virtual pet owners across the world! Neopets has many things to off er 
including over 160 games, trading, auctions, greetings, messaging, and a tree with 
a giant brain. Best of all, it’s completely FREE!” Th e games, however, include the 
 Lucky Charms Super Search Game , the  Nestlé Ice Cream Frozen Flights  game, the 
 Pepperidge Farms Goldfi sh Sandwich Snacks  game,  McDonald’s: Meal Hunt  game, and 
visits to the Disney or General Mills theaters where points are awarded for watching 
commercials. Th e company assures parents that all sponsored content is clearly 
labeled, but critics respond that little kids don’t know the diff erence between an ad 
campaign and a game, even if it is so identifi ed. 
 ADVOCACY GAMING   Companies or organizations wanting to get their noncommercial mes-
sages out are also turning to    advocacy games   , primarily on the Web and for mobile 
devices. Many national political candidates are “supported” by advocacy games. Particu-
larly popular among college-age voters is the still-playable arcade game  Obama Race for 
the White House Game . Dr. Ian Bogost, who created the genre with his 2004 release of 
the still-playable  Howard Dean for Iowa Game , said, “I didn’t get into games because I 
wanted to reach a demographic, I did it because I think games can communicate polit-
ical concepts and processes better than other forums” (quoted in Erard, 2004, p. G1). 
 Supporters of political advocacy games see three signifi cant strengths. First, the 
games are relatively inexpensive. A good political game can be created in about three 
weeks for about $20,000, well under the cost of television time. Second, like other 
advergames, they are sticky and the message is reinforced with each play (broadcast 
ads are fl eeting). Finally, they are interactive, making them a powerful means of 
communicating with potential voters, especially younger ones. More traditional 
forms of advocacy messaging, such as radio and television ads and campaign fl iers, 
passively engage voters with their campaign rhetoric. But games encourage potential 
voters to interact with the message.       
    Not all advocacy games are about politics, however. Th ere are games advocating 
the use of energy alternatives to oil ( Oiligarchy ), religious freedom ( Faith Fighter ), a 
more fl exible application of copyright ( Th e Free Culture Game ), and improving kids’ 
nutrition ( Fatworld ). 
 Fatworld is an advocacy game exploring the 
relationships between obesity, nutrition, and 
socioeconomics in the United States.
ITVS Interactive, “Online Video Game, Fatworld”, Public 
Broadcasting Servi ce-Independent Lens, http://www.fatworld.
org. © 2006 Persuasive Games, LLC. All Rights Reserved.  
Reprinted by permission.
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS   
 Using the ESRB Ratings 
 Th e link between games and antisocial behavior has been at issue ever since there have 
been games, fi nding particular urgency after dramatic events like those in Jonesboro and 
at Columbine High. In 1998, 13-year-old Mitchell Johnson and 11-year-old Andrew 
Golden of Jonesboro, Arkansas, heavy players of the shooting game  GoldenEye 007 , set off  
fi re alarms at their middle school and shot at students and teachers as they fl ed the build-
ing. In 1999,  Doom  fans 18-year-old Eric Harris and 17-year-old Dylan Klebold killed 12 
students and one teacher and wounded 23 at Columbine High School in Colorado. In 
each instance, the teens’ “addiction” to games was prominently noted. Th e Columbine 
shooters had even created a custom  Doom  to represent the shooting of their classmates. 

CHAPTER 9 
Video Games 
227
 Congress fi rst investigated the eff ects of video games in 1993, the same year that 
 Doom  was released for home computers. In an eff ort to head off  government restric-
tions, in 1994 the industry established the Entertainment Software Ratings Board 
(ESRB) rating system. It has six ratings (a seventh, RP for Rating Pending, is the equiv-
alent of “this fi lm has not yet been rated”):
 EC 
 Early Childhood 
 ages 3 and up 
 E 
 Everyone 
 ages 6 and up 
 E10+ 
 
 ages 10 and up 
 T 
 Teen 
 ages 13 and up 
 M 
 Mature 
 ages 17 and up 
 AO 
 Adults Only 
 ages 18 and up 
 Like the movie rating system, the ESRB system requires that games off er content 
descriptors somewhere on the front or back of the game package explaining why a par-
ticular rating was assigned. Although the Federal Trade Commission has lauded the 
ESRB ratings as the most comprehensive of the three industries’ (games, recordings, 
movies), media-literate gamers (or friends and parents of gamers) should understand 
the strengths and weaknesses of this system. Depending on your perspective, this self-
regulation is either a good thing because it keeps government’s intrusive hand out of 
people’s lives and protects game makers’ First Amendment rights, or a bad thing because 
it is self-serving and rarely enforced. Th e value of the content descriptors, too, is in dis-
pute. All a game maker is required to list is  any one  of the descriptors that has led to a 
given rating—for example,  strong lyrics . For some, this is useful information. For others, 
it masks potential problems. First, according to the ESRB system, if this content is suf-
fi cient to give the game an M rating, no other content that might have contributed to 
that rating, such as  mature sexual themes  and  violence , need be listed. Second,  strong 
lyrics  might apply to song lyrics about sex, violence, alcohol, or drug use. Only when the 
game is played will the player identify the reason for the rating and descriptor. 
 An additional concern over the rating system is that it is poorly enforced. A National 
Institute on Media and the Family study showed that 87% of boys and 46% of girls 
played M-rated games. Th eir average age was 13.5 years old. More than half the parents 
did not understand the system, and the Federal Trade Commission discovered that 
69% of children under 17 who attempted to buy an M-rated game succeeded (Meehan, 
2004). One solution, in voluntary use in Canada, is the Retail Council of Canada’s 
“Commitment to Parents” program. Participating game outlets hang posters and dis-
tribute brochures explaining the ESRB ratings. Many have installed automatic cash 
register prompts that alert salespeople when M-rated games are being rented or 
bought. You can read the box entitled “Are Games Good or Bad?” to get additional 
background on why many people think rating video games is a good idea.   
   Video games may or may not create little 
monsters, but the industry does provide a ratings 
system to help parents identify titles appropriate for 
their kids. 
 David Horsey. © Tribune Media Services, Inc. All rights reserved. 
Reprinted with permission. 

228 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 Select ﬁ ve games that feature both male and female characters. For each of those people list the ﬁ rst three descriptors that come 
to mind as you look at them. Are there common traits among the men? Among the women? If so, why do you think they exist? 
How realistic are the portrayals of the men? Of the women? Can you explain your ﬁ ndings and your reactions to those ﬁ ndings 
in terms of these media literacy skills: Your  ability and willingness to pay attention to and understand video game content ; your 
 respect for the power of games’ messages ; and your  ability to distinguish emotional from reasoned reactions when playing 
video games ? 
 Media-literate game players have  an understanding of the ethical and moral obligations of those who design the games they 
play . Keep this in mind as you read what Entertainment Software Association President Douglas Lowenstein had to say about 
video game content, “It is one thing to say a product is protected speech, which it is, or that it is rated and parents need to accept 
responsibility for what their kids play, which they do. But it is quite another thing to say we have no larger responsibility for 
shaping the quality and values of the culture we live in” (2005). Given what you’ve learned in this exercise about games’ portrayal 
of men and women, can you address the question of the ethics of gender representation in video games?     
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE 
 Masculinity and Femininity in Game World 
  Outline the history and development of games and the 
gaming industry. 
  While the pinball games developed by David Gottlieb 
and Harry Williams are the precursors to video games, 
Steve Russell, Nolan Bushnell, and Ralph Baer are 
most responsible for what we now call electronic 
video games. 
  A game is a video game when a player has direct 
involvement in some on-screen action to produce 
a desired outcome. 
  Describe how the organizational and economic nature 
of the contemporary gaming industry shapes the content 
of games. 
  Games are most frequently played on game consoles 
(home and portable), PCs, and the Internet, but 
increasingly smartphones are serving as a popular 
game platform. 
  Game consoles are the sole province of Microsoft, 
Nintendo, and Sony. 
  Th ird-party publishers design games for the most 
popular systems. 
  Rising costs in the production of games have led to 
hypercommercialism and a reliance on blockbusters, 
franchises, and sequels. 
  Hypercommercialism in games takes the form of product 
placement and advertising. 
  Explain the relationship between games and 
their players. 
  Th e demographics of America’s 135 million gamers 
closely match the demographics of all Americans. 
  Adult women represent a larger proportion of the game-
playing population than boys under 18, primarily be-
cause of the growth of casual games. 

Identify changes in the game industry brought about by 
new and converging technologies. 
  Convergence, driven by more powerful technology and 
people’s comfort with it, has overtaken gaming, as 
games can be played on a host of platforms. 
  Wi-Fi-capable handheld devices, smartphones, and 
tablets have not only freed games from the console, 
but have fueled the rise of casual games and swelled 
the ranks of female and adult players. 
  Social networking sites like Facebook further encourage 
these changes. 
  Apply key game-playing media literacy skills. 
  Th e ESRB game-rating system is much admired but 
still raises important questions for media-literate game 
players; for example, how reliable are they, and whose 
obligation is it to ensure responsible game play?   
 Resources for Review and Discussion  
 REVIEW POINTS: TYING CONTENT TO LEARNING OUTCOMES 

CHAPTER 9 
Video Games 
229
 KEY TERMS 
 crowdsource, 210 
 LED (light-emitting diode), 214 
 LCD (liquid crystal display), 214 
 LAN (local area network), 215 
 fi rst-person perspective game, 215 
 exergame, 216 
 gamifi cation, 216  
 video game, 216 
 MUD (multiuser dimension), 217 
 third-party publishers, 218 
 massively multiplayer online role-
playing game (MMO), 221 
  virtual worlds game, 221  
 casual games, 222 
  sticky, 223  
 freemium games, 225 
 advergames, 225 
 advocacy games, 226 
 QUESTIONS FOR CRITICAL THINKING AND DISCUSSION 
 1.  What is your favorite game platform? Why? Do you think 
diff erent types of players gravitate toward diff erent plat-
forms? Why or why not? 
 2.  Does advergaming, especially where children are the play-
ers, bother you? Do you fi nd advergaming inherently de-
ceptive for these young players? Why or why not? 
    3.  Have you ever played an advocacy game? If so, what was 
it? Was it from a group with which you were sympathetic? 
What would it take to get you to play a game from a site 
with which you disagree? 
 QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW 
 1.  Who are David Gottlieb and Harry Williams? What were 
their contributions to the development of pinball? 
 2.  How did  Pong aff ect the development of video gaming? 
 3.  What makes a video game a  video game ? 
 4.  What are the most frequently employed platforms for 
game playing? 
 5.  What is a third-party publisher? 
 6.  What determines whether a third-party publisher creates a 
game for a given platform? 
 7.  How does product placement occur in games? 
 8.  What are the diff erent forms of advergaming? 
 9.  What is advocacy gaming? 
 10.  What are the levels of the ESRB rating system? 
For further review, go to the LearnSmart study module for 
this chapter.


 
231
 Learning Objectives 
 It is not an overstatement to say that the Internet and World Wide Web have changed 
the world, not to mention all the other mass media. In addition to being powerful 
communication media themselves, the Net and the Web sit at the center of virtually all the 
media convergence we see around us. After studying this chapter you should be able to
 Outline the history and development of the Internet and World Wide Web. 
 Explain the potential cultural value of the Internet and World Wide Web. 
 Describe how the organizational and economic nature of the contemporary Internet 
and World Wide Web industries shapes their content. 
 Identify alterations in the nature of mass communication made possible by the 
Internet, the World Wide Web, and their convergence with all media. 
 Analyze social and cultural questions posed by the Internet, World Wide Web, and 
related emerging technologies. 
 Describe the relationship between these new media and their various users 
and audiences. 
 Apply key Internet and World Wide Web media literacy skills, especially in protecting 
your privacy and reﬂ ecting on the Net’s double edge of (potentially) good and 
troublesome change. 
 10 
 The Internet was and is at the heart of the Middle 
East democracy movement. 
The Internet and 
the World Wide Web 

1940
1955
1957   ▲ Sputnik launched
1960   Licklider’s Man–Computer Symbiosis; IBM mainframe technology
1962   ARPA commissions Baran to develop computer network
1964   McLuhan’s Understanding Media
1969   ARPAnet goes online
1940s    British develop Colossus and binary code
1946   ▲ ENIAC
1950   UNIVAC
1951   Census Bureau makes ﬁrst successful commercial use of computers
1885   ▲ Babbage designs “computer”
 W ILLIAM GIBSON AND MARSHALL MCLUHAN HAVE BEEN TWO OF YOUR INTELLECTUAL HEROES EVER SINCE YOU STARTED 
COLLEGE. Gibson is called the godfather of cyberspace, originator of the term, and is the 
author of  Neuromancer  and  Johnny Mnemonic . McLuhan is the author of  Understand-
ing Media: Th e Extensions of Man  and originator of some of your favorite expressions 
such as “hot and cool media” and “the medium is the message.” But now, as you see 
it, Gibson and McLuhan are in confl ict. 
 For example, another of McLuhan’s famous expressions is “the global village.” You 
understood this to mean that as media “shrink” the world, people will become increas-
ingly involved in one another’s lives. As people come to know more about others who 
were once separated from them by distance, they will form a new, benefi cial relation-
ship, a global village. 
 Th en you saw Gibson interviewed on television. His vision of technology’s impact 
on the globe was anything but optimistic. He said, “We’re moving toward a world 
where all the consumers under a certain age will . . . identify more with their consumer 
status or with the products they consume than they would with an antiquated notion 
of nationality. We’re increasingly interchangeable” (as cited in Trench, 1990). 
   Maybe you were wrong about McLuhan’s ideas. He did his infl uential writing a long 
time ago. Where was it you read about the global village? In a magazine interview? You 
look it up at the library to confi rm that you understood him correctly. Th ere it is, just 
as you thought: “Th e human tribe can become truly one family and man’s conscious-
ness can be freed from the shackles of mechanical culture and enabled to roam the 
cosmos” (“A Candid Conversation,” 1969, p. 158). 
 McLuhan’s global village is an exciting place, a good place for people enjoying 
increased contact and increased involvement with one another aided by electronic 
technology. Gibson’s nationless world isn’t about involving ourselves in one anoth-
er’s lives and experiences. It’s about electronic technology turning us into indistin-
guishable nonindividuals, rallying around products. We are united by buyable things, 
232 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences

1970
1985
2000
2000   U.S. women pass men as users
2003   MySpace
2004   ▲ Facebook launched
2005   News Corp. buys MySpace
2006   Twitter
2007   Laptops outsell desktops; Apple app store opens
2009   Internet surpasses newspapers as news source; Social networking
 
surpasses e-mail for person-to-person communication
2010   First popular tablet computer
2012   25th billion app download from Apple app store; Facebook buys
              Instagram
1990   ▲ HTTP developed
1992   Internet society chartered
1994   Spam appears; First banner ad
1995   Classmates.com
1972   ▲ E-mail
1974   Internet emerges
1975   Gates develops PC operating system
1977   Jobs and Wozniak develop Apple II
1979   BITNET
1981   IBM PC introduced
identifying not with others who share our common culture but with those 
who share common goods. McLuhan sees the new communication tech-
nologies as expanding our experiences. Gibson sees them more negatively. 
You respect and enjoy the ideas of both thinkers. How can you reconcile 
the disagreement you have uncovered?    
    We begin this chapter with an examination of the  Internet , the “new tech-
nology” that helped bring Gibson to prominence and gave renewed life to 
Marshall McLuhan’s ideas. We study the history of the Internet, beginning 
with the development of the computer, and then we look at the Net as it 
exists today. We examine its formats and its capabilities, especially the pop-
ular World Wide Web. Th e number and nature of today’s Internet users are 
also discussed. 
 Many of the issues discussed here will be familiar to you. Given the 
fundamental role that the Internet plays in encouraging and permitting con-
vergence, concentration, audience fragmentation, globalization, and hyper-
commercialism, you should not be surprised that we’ve “met” the Internet 
and the Web before now in discussing the more traditional media. 
 Th e Web and Net are signifi cantly reshaping the operation of those 
media, and as the media with which we interact change, the role they 
play in our lives and the impact they have on us and our culture will 
likewise be altered. We will look at the new technology’s double edge (its 
ability to have both good and bad eff ects), the Internet’s ability to foster 
greater freedom of expression, eff orts to control that expression, changes in the 
meaning of and threats to personal privacy, and the promise and perils of practicing 
democracy online. 
 Finally, our discussion of improving our media literacy takes the form of an exam-
ination of the fi ve Internet freedoms. But fi rst, the Internet.  
 William Gibson.
CHAPTER 10 
The Internet and the World Wide Web 
233

234 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 A Short History of 
the Internet  
 Th ere are confl icting versions about the origins of the Internet. In the 
words of media historian Daniel J. Czitrom (2007), they involve “the 
military and the counterculture, the need for command and control and 
the impulse against hierarchy and toward decentralization” (p. 484). Th e 
more common story—the command-and-control version—is that the 
Net is a product of the Cold War. In this version, the air force in 1962, 
wanting to maintain the military’s ability to transfer information around 
the country even if a given area was destroyed in an enemy attack, com-
missioned leading computer scientists to develop the means to do so. 
But many researchers and scientists dispute this “myth that [has] gone 
unchallenged long enough to become widely accepted as fact,” that the 
Internet was initially “built to protect national security in the face of 
nuclear attack” (Hafner & Lyon, 1996, p. 10).    
    In the second version, the decentralization version, as early as 1956 
psychologist Joseph C. R. Licklider, a devotee of Marshall McLuhan’s 
thinking on the power of communication technology, foresaw linked 
computers creating a country of citizens “informed about, and interested 
in, and involved in, the process of government” (as quoted in Hafner & 
Lyon, 1996, p. 34). He foresaw “home computer consoles” and television sets con-
nected in a nationwide network. “Th e political process would essentially be a giant 
teleconference,” he wrote, “and a campaign would be a months-long series of com-
munications among candidates, propagandists, commentators, political action groups, 
and voters. Th e key,” he added, “is the self-motivating exhilaration that accompanies 
truly eff ective interaction with information through a good console and a good net-
work to a good computer” (p. 34). 
 In what many technologists now consider to be the seminal essay on the potential 
and promise of computer networks,  Man–Computer Symbiosis , Licklider, who had by 
now given up psychology and devoted himself completely to computer science, wrote 
in 1960, “Th e hope is that in not too many years, human brains and computing 
machines will be coupled . . . tightly, and the resulting partnership will think as no 
human brain has ever thought and process data in a way not approached by the infor-
mation handling machines we know today” (as quoted in Hafner & Lyon, 1996, p. 35). 
Scores of computer experts, enthused by Licklider’s vision (and many more who saw 
networked computers as a way to gain access to the powerful but otherwise expen-
sive and unavailable computers just beginning to become available), joined 
the rush toward the development of what we know today as the    Internet , a global 
network of interconnected computers that communicate freely and share and 
exchange information.    
 Development of the Computer 
 Th e title “originator of the computer” resides with Englishman Charles Babbage. 
Lack of money and unavailability of the necessary technology stymied his plan to 
build an Analytical Engine, a steam-driven computer. But in the mid-1880s, aided 
by the insights of mathematician Lady Ada Byron Lovelace, Babbage did produce 
designs for a “computer” that could conduct algebraic computations using stored 
memory and punch cards for input and output. His work provided inspiration for 
those who would follow. 
 Over the next 100 years a number of mechanical and electromechanical comput-
ers were attempted, some with success. But Colossus, developed by the British to 
break the Germans’ secret codes during World War II, was the fi rst electronic    digi-
tal computer   . It reduced information to a    binary code   —that is, a code made up of 
the digits 1 and 0. In this form information could be stored and manipulated. Th e 
 Marshall McLuhan.
 Joseph C. R. Licklider envisioned a national 
system of interconnected home computers as 
early as 1956.

CHAPTER 10 
The Internet and the World Wide Web 
235
fi rst “full-service” electronic computer, ENIAC (Electronic Numerical Integrator and 
Calculator), based on the work of Iowa State’s John V. Atanasoff , was introduced by 
scientists John Mauchly and John Presper Eckert of the Moore School of Electrical 
Engineering at the University of Pennsylvania in 1946. ENIAC hardly resembled the 
computers we know today: 18 feet tall, 80 feet long, and weighing 60,000 pounds, it 
was composed of 17,500 vacuum tubes and 500 miles of electrical wire. It could fi ll an 
auditorium and ate up 150,000 watts of electricity. Mauchly and Eckert eventually left 
the university to form their own computer company, later selling it to the Remington 
Rand Corporation in 1950. At Remington they developed UNIVAC (Universal Auto-
matic Computer), which, when bought for and used by the Census Bureau in 1951, 
became the fi rst successful commercial computer.    
    Th e commercial computer explosion was ignited by IBM. Using its already well-
entrenched organizational system of trained sales and service professionals, IBM 
helped businesses fi nd their way in the early days of the computer revolution. One of 
its innovations was to sell rather than rent computers to customers. As a result of IBM’s 
success, by 1960 the computer industry could be described as “IBM and the Seven 
Dwarfs”  —Sperry, Control Data, Honeywell, RCA, NCR, General Electric, and Bur-
roughs (Rosenberg, 1992, p. 60).   
 Military Applications 
 In 1957 the Soviet Union launched  Sputnik , Earth’s fi rst human-constructed satellite. 
Th e once-undisputed supremacy of the United States in science and technology had 
been usurped, and U.S. scientists and military offi  cials were in shock. Th e Advanced 
Research Projects Agency (ARPA) was immediately established to sponsor and coor-
dinate sophisticated defense-related research. In 1962, as part of a larger drive to pro-
mote the use of computers in national defense (and giving rise to one of the stories of 
the Net’s origins), ARPA commissioned Paul Baran of the Rand Corporation to produce 
a plan that would enable the U.S. military to maintain command over its missiles and 
planes if a nuclear attack knocked out conventional means of communication. Th e 
military thought a decentralized communication network was necessary. In that way, 
no matter where the bombing occurred, other locations would be available to launch 
 ENIAC.

236 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
a counterattack. Among Baran’s plans was one for a “packet 
switched network.” He wrote, 
 Packet switching is the breaking down of data into datagrams or 
packets that are labeled to indicate the origin and the destination of 
the information and the forwarding of these packets from one com-
puter to another computer until the information arrives at its fi nal 
destination computer. Th is (is) crucial to the realization of a com-
puter network. If packets are lost at any given point, the message 
can be resent by the originator. (As cited in Kristula, 1997, p. 1)      
 Th e genius of the system Baran envisioned is twofold: (1) 
common communication rules (called    protocols ) and common 
computer languages would enable any type of computer, run-
ning with any operating system, to communicate with another; 
and (2) destination or delivery instructions embedded in all 
information sent on the system would enable instantaneous 
“detours” or “rerouting” if a given computer on the network 
became unavailable. 
 Using Honeywell computers at Stanford University, UCLA, the 
University of California, Santa Barbara, and the University of 
Utah, the switching network, called ARPAnet, went online in 1969 
and became fully operational and reliable within one year. Other 
developments soon followed. In 1972 an engineer named Ray 
Tomlinson created the fi rst e-mail program (and gave us the ubiq-
uitous @). In 1974 Stanford University’s Vinton Cerf and the mil-
itary’s Robert Kahn coined the term “the Internet.” In 1979 a graduate student at the 
University of North Carolina, Steve Bellovin, created Usenet and, independent of Bell-
ovin, IBM created BITNET. Th ese two networking software systems enabled virtually 
anybody with access to a Unix or IBM computer to connect to others on the growing 
network. By the time the Internet Society was chartered and the World Wide Web was 
released in 1992, there were more than 1.1 million    hosts —computers linking individual 
personal computer users to the Internet. Today there is an ever-expanding number of 
 The Soviet Union’s 1-foot-in-diameter, 
184-pound  Sputnik was not only the ﬁ rst human-
made satellite to orbit Earth; it sent shudders 
throughout the American scientiﬁ c and 
military communities.
 A 1960s-vintage IBM mainframe computer. 
The personal computer in your home probably 
carries more computing power than this 
giant machine.

CHAPTER 10 
The Internet and the World Wide Web 
237
hosts, close to one hundred million and growing, serving more than 2.3 billion users 
across the globe, or 33% of the world’s population (Internet World Stats, 2012).      
 The Personal Computer 
 A crucial part of the story of the Internet is the development and diff usion of personal 
computers. IBM was fantastically successful at exciting businesses, schools and uni-
versities, and other organizations about computers. But IBM’s and other companies’ 
mainframe and  minicomputers employed  terminals   , and these stations at which 
users worked were connected to larger, centralized machines. As a result, the Internet 
at fi rst was the province of the people who worked in those settings. 
 When the semiconductor (or integrated circuit, or chip) replaced the vacuum tube 
as the essential information processor in computers, its tiny size, absence of heat, and 
low cost made possible the design and production of small, aff ordable  personal or 
microcomputers (PCs) . Th is, of course, opened the Net to anyone, anytime. Laptop 
computers, which outsold desktop models for the fi rst time in 2007, extended that 
reach to anywhere. Th e tablet computer was fi rst introduced in 2006 by Microsoft. It 
remained a niche computer favored by medical professionals. But the 2010 introduc-
tion of the iPad, with its integrated fl at screen and operated not by keyboard but by 
touch screen, not only continued the expansion of computing to anyone, anywhere, it 
made it even more convenient. Today tablet and laptop computer sales are about 
equal, but by 2015 sales of tablets will eclipse those of laptops (Indvik, 2011). 
 Th e leaders of the personal computer revolution were Bill Gates and the duo of 
Steve Jobs and Stephen Wozniak. As a fi rst-year college student in 1975, Gates saw a 
magazine story about a small, low-powered computer, the MITS Altair 8800, that could 
 The desktop computer opened the Net to 
anyone, anytime. The laptop extended that reach 
to anywhere. The tablet made anytime, anywhere 
more convenient.

238 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
be built from a kit and used to play a simple game. Sensing that the future of comput-
ing was in these personal computers and that the power of computers would reside 
not in their size but in the software that ran them, Gates dropped out of Harvard Uni-
versity and, with his friend Paul Allen, founded Microsoft Corporation. Th ey licensed 
their  operating system —the software that tells the computer how to work—to MITS. 
With this advance, people no longer had to know sophisticated operating languages to 
use computers. At nearly the same time, in 1977, Jobs and Wozniak, also college drop-
outs, perfected Apple II, a low-cost, easy-to-use microcomputer designed specifi cally 
for personal rather than business use. It was immediately and hugely successful, espe-
cially in its development of    multimedia    capabilities—advanced sound and image 
applications. IBM, stung by its failure to enter the personal computer business, con-
tracted with Microsoft to use the Microsoft operating system in its IBM PC, fi rst intro-
duced in 1981. All of the pieces were now in place for the home computer revolution. 
 The Internet Today  
 Th e Internet is most appropriately thought of as a “network of networks” that is grow-
ing at an incredibly fast rate. Th ese networks consist of LANs (local area networks), 
connecting two or more computers, usually within the same building, and  WANs (wide 
area networks)   , connecting several LANs in diff erent locations. When people access 
the Internet from a computer in a university library, they are most likely on a LAN. But 
when several universities (or businesses or other organizations) link their computer 
systems, their users are part of a WAN. 
 As the popularity of the Internet has grown, so has the number of    ISPs (Internet 
service providers) , companies that off er Internet connections at monthly rates 
depending on the kind and amount of access needed. Th ere are hundreds of ISPs 
operating in the United States, including some of the better known such as America 
Online, EarthLink, and Quest. Americans increasingly fi nd that their ISP and video 
(cable or FiOS) provider are one and the same—for example, Comcast and Verizon. 
Half of all U.S. Internet users are served by the fi ve largest ISPs. Th rough providers, 
users can avail themselves of numerous services, among them e-mail and VoIP. 
 With an Internet    e-mail account, users can communicate with anyone else online, 
any place in the world. Each person online has a unique e-mail address that works just 
like a telephone number. Th ere are even online “Yellow Pages” and “White Pages” to 
help users fi nd other people by e-mail. You may be surprised that 250 billion e-mails 
are sent each day. But if you are a regular e-mail user, you aren’t surprised to learn 
that another 200 billion unsolicited commercial e-mails, 90% of all global e-mail traffi  c, 
are also sent daily, much of this    spam originating overseas (Elias, 2010).  Instant mes-
saging , or  IM   , is the real-time version of e-mail, allowing two or more people to com-
municate instantaneously and in immediate response to one another. IM can also be 
used for downloading text, audio, and video fi les and for gaming.    
    Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) , pronounced “voyp,” is telephone whereby 
calls are transferred in digital packets over the Internet rather than on circuit-switched 
telephone wires. Th ink of it as “voice e-mail.” Th is transformative technology “means 
any corporation with a network or any individual with a $30-a-month broadband con-
nection can make calls without paying the phone company” (“Finally, 21st Century 
Phone,” 2004, p. 1). Today, one-fourth of American Internet users, 19% of the adult 
population, have made an online phone call, up from 8% in 2007 (Raine, 2011).  
 The World Wide Web 
 Another way of accessing information fi les is on the Internet via the    World Wide Web 
(usually referred to as “the Web”). Th e Web is not a physical place, or a set of fi les, or 
even a network of computers. Th e heart of the Web lies in the protocols that defi ne its 
use. Th e World Wide Web (WWW) uses hypertext transfer protocols (HTTP) to trans-
port fi les from one place to another. Hypertext transfer was developed in the early 

CHAPTER 10 
The Internet and the World Wide Web 
239
1990s by England’s Tim Berners-Lee, who was working at CERN, the international par-
ticle physics laboratory near Geneva, Switzerland. Berners-Lee gave HTTP to the world 
for free. “Th e Web is more a social creation than a technical one,” he wrote. “I designed 
it for a social eff ect—to help people work together—and not as a technical toy. Th e 
ultimate goal of the Web is to support and improve our web-like existence in the world” 
(Berners-Lee & Fischetti, 1999, p. 128).   
 Th e ease of accessing the Web is a function of a number of components: hosts, 
URLs, browsers, search engines, and home pages.  
 HOSTS COMPUTERS CONNECTED TO THE INTERNET  Most Internet activity consists of users accessing 
fi les on remote computers. To reach these fi les, users must fi rst gain access to the 
Internet through “wired-to-the-Net” hosts. Th ese hosts are often called servers. 
 The originators of the personal computing 
revolution—Bill Gates, Steve Jobs, and Stephen 
Wozniak.

240 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 Once users gain access to a host computer on the Internet, they then have to fi nd 
the exact location of the fi le they are looking for  on  the host. Each fi le or directory on 
the Internet (that is, on the host computer connected to the Internet) is designated by 
a  URL (uniform resource locator)   . A URL is, in eff ect, a site’s offi  cial address. But as 
any user of the Web knows, sites are more commonly recognized by their    domain 
names . Th e last part of a site’s address, the  .com or  .org , is its Top Level Domain Name, 
so we know that .com is a business and .org is a nonprofi t. But in 2012 the Internet 
Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, or ICANN, authorized the use of a 
virtually unlimited number of generic Top-Level Domains to include almost any word 
or name, for example  .defi brillator  or  .newyorkcity . It also permits, for the fi rst time, 
the use of non-Latin language scripts, such as Arabic, Chinese, and Cyrillic. Th e num-
ber of individual domains, or websites, changes by the minute, but in July 2008, two 
Google software engineers counted more than 1 trillion unique URLs operating on the 
Internet at the same time (Alpert & Hajaj, 2008). You can see the most heavily traffi  cked 
sites in  Figure 10.1 . 
 BROWSERS  Software programs loaded onto the user’s computer and used to download 
and view Web fi les are known as  browsers . Browsers take separate fi les (text fi les, 
image fi les, and sound fi les) and put them all together for viewing. Netscape and Inter-
net Explorer are two of the most popular Web browsers.   
 SEARCH ENGINES  Finding information on the Web is simple thanks to    search engines , 
software that allows users to navigate the Net simply by entering a search word and 
pointing and clicking at the resulting on-screen menus. Among the better known 
are Ask and Bing. Globally, users make more than 113 billion searches a month on 
scores of search engines, but the best known and most frequently used—69% of all 
searches worldwide—is Google, which produces its results with technology that 
uses the collective intelligence of the Web itself; that is, search results are presented 
and ranked based on how frequently a given site is linked to others (“Digital Fast 
Facts,” 2012).   
 HOME PAGES  Once users reach the intended website, they are greeted by a    home page —
the entryway to the site itself. It not only contains the information the site’s creators 
  Web inventor Tim Berners-Lee. 

CHAPTER 10 
The Internet and the World Wide Web 
241
160.1
185.2
149.5
99.4
90.8
77.4
64.1
62.0
60.0
59.4
59.4
56.6
54.7
54.2
53.7
52.0
50.1
78.1
94.8
Google
MSN
YouTube
Facebook
Amazon
Twitter
Yahoo
Wikipedia
WordPress
Microsoft
Answers
Ask
Blogspot
59.2
eBay
Live
Blogger
Hufﬁngton Post
Bing
eHow
LinkedIn
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Rank and monthly visitors (in millions)
    Figure 10.1  Top 20 U.S. Websites, 2012. 
 Source: Quantcast, 2012. 

242 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
want visitors to know but also provides    hyperlinks to 
other material in that site, as well as to material in 
other sites on other computers linked to the Net any-
where in the world.    
 Smartphones, Tablets, and Social 
Networking Sites 
 Smartphones make connecting to the Internet, already 
an anytime/anywhere activity thanks to laptops and tab-
lets, even more convenient. In fact, almost 8% of all Web 
page views occur on smartphones and tablets (com-
Score, 2012). As we’ve seen, this access is greatly 
enhanced by the millions of apps now available to 
smartphone and tablet users. Th e most common are 
game apps (downloaded by 67% of users), weather apps 
(65%), and Facebook apps (60%; Kulicke, 2012). Th e 
Apple app store alone surpassed the 25 billion download 
mark in March 2012, less than fi ve years after it opened 
(Smith, 2012b). Figure 10.2 shows how the typical mobile 
user takes advantage of the technologies’ convenience. 
Spammers, too, are taking advantage of smartphones’ 
mobility, catching users away from their home and offi  ce 
computers. Th e number of mobile spam messages has 
doubled since 2009, to 4.5 billion and growing, fueled by 
unlimited texting plans and mobile carriers’ relatively 
weak spam fi lters (Oremus, 2012). 
 Of course, much mobile use is devoted to social 
networking. Where e-mail was long the Net’s most 
common and fastest-growing use, it was surpassed in 2009 by    social networking 
sites   , websites that function as online communities of users. Th ese communities are 
often defi ned by common interests such as hobbies, professions, or schools, but as 
the name suggests, users usually visit them to socialize; once there, however, people 
can gravitate toward groups, more specifi c categories of interest-bound socializers. 
Nearly 17% of all online minutes across all platforms is devoted to social networking 
sites (comScore, 2012), and it was Facebook’s specifi c desire to make itself even more 
attractive to mobile users that drove the company in 2012 to buy two-year-old, purely 
mobile photo start-up Instagram for $1 billion.  Classmates.com ’s 1995 launch began 
the social networking movement, and it was soon followed by similar sites, most 
notably Friendster in 2002 and LinkedIn in 2003. MySpace, launched in 2003 and 
hipper and more feature-fi lled than these earlier eff orts, became a favorite of young 
people around the world until it was unseated by Facebook, Harvard University–
specifi c at birth in 2004, becoming global in 2006. By 2012 the number of Facebook-
ers was 845 billion, more than one-third of the world’s Internet population, 
socializing in over 40 languages and racking up more than 1 trillion page views a 
month (Marche, 2012). Fourteen percent of all U.S. Internet searches are for “Face-
book,” making it the country’s most searched term, and American Facebook users 
average 20 minutes a visit (Dougherty, 2012). 
 Th ese “old line” sites were joined in 2006 by Twitter, a social networking site designed 
for “micro-blogging,” posts of up to 140 characters (called  tweets ) displayed on a send-
er’s profi le page and delivered to her or his subscribers ( followers ). Delivery can be 
restricted to a specifi c circle of followers or, by default, it can be open access. More 
than 300 million Internet users are on Twitter, and while much of the activity is innoc-
uous (actor Ashton Kutcher has more than 4 million followers, as does Britney Spears), 
much of it is serious. As he geared up for his 2012 reelection run, President Barack 
Obama had 12.8 million followers, and the fi rst—and for a long time, the only—images 
available to the world of the 2008 Mumbai massacre and the 2010 Haiti earthquake 
Lying in bed
Waiting for something
Watching TV
Commuting
Spending time with family
47%
67%
39%
25%
In the bathroom
19%
At social gatherings
15%
Shopping
15%
22%
Percent Who Use Mobile While…
  Figure 10.2 When Mobile Device Users 
Access the Internet, 2012. 
 Source: Patel, 2012. 

CHAPTER 10 
The Internet and the World Wide Web 
243
were tweets. Twitter is also at the heart of the ongoing push for democracy in the 
Middle East, as you’ll see in detail in Chapter 15.     
 The Internet and Its Users  
 We typically think of people who access a medium as audience members, but the 
Internet has  users , not audience members. At any time—or even at the same time—a 
person may be both  reading  Internet content and  creating  content. E-mail and chat 
rooms are obvious examples of online users being both audience and creators, but 
others exist as well. For example, MMOs (Chapter 9) enable entire alternative reali-
ties to be simultaneously constructed and engaged, and computer screens that have 
multiple open windows enable users to “read” one site while creating another, some-
times using the just-read material. With ease we can access the Web, link from site to 
site and page to page, and even build our own sites. As we saw in Chapter 2, the 
Internet makes us all journalists, broadcasters, commentators, critics, fi lmmakers, 
and advice columnists. 
 It is almost impossible to tell exactly how many users there are on the Internet. 
People who own computers are not necessarily linked to the Internet, and people need 
not own computers to use the Net. Some users access the Net through machines at 
school, a library, or work. Current best estimates indicate that there are at least 2.3 bil-
lion users worldwide; 78% of U.S. homes have Internet access, and 63% of these have 
broadband (“Internet World Stats,” 2012). Th e Net’s demographics have undergone a 
dramatic shift in the last few years. In 1996, for example, 62% of U.S. Internet users 
were men. In 2000, women became the Net’s majority gender for the fi rst time (Ham-
ilton, 2000). Today, women in every age group use the Internet more than do men, and 
not surprisingly, the younger a person, the greater the likelihood he or she has access 
to the Net. 
 Changes in the Mass 
Communication Process  
 In Chapter 2 we saw how concentration of ownership, globalization, audience frag-
mentation, hypercommercialism, and convergence were infl uencing the nature of the 
mass communication process. Each redefi nes the relationship between audiences and 
media industries. For example, elsewhere in this text we have discussed the impacts 
of concentration on newspaper readership; of globalization on the type and quality of 
fi lms available to moviegoers; of audience fragmentation on the variety of channel 
choices for television viewers; of convergence on the music industry’s reinvention; and 
of hypercommercialism on all media. 
 Th e Internet is diff erent from these more traditional media. Rather than changing 
the relationship between audiences and industries, the Net changes the  defi nition of 
the diff erent components of the process and, as a result, changes their relationship. As 
you read in Chapter 2, we are the people formerly known as the audience, and many—
soon to be most—of us are    digital natives   , people who have never known a world 
without the Internet. On the Net a single individual can communicate with as large an 
audience as can the giant, multinational corporation that produces a network television 
program. Th at corporation fi ts our earlier defi nition of a mass communication source—
a large, hierarchically structured organization—but the Internet user does not. Feed-
back in mass communication is traditionally described as inferential and delayed, but 
online feedback can be, and very often is, immediate and direct. It is more similar to 
feedback in interpersonal communication than to feedback in mass communication. 
 Th is Internet-induced redefi nition of the elements of the mass communication pro-
cess is refocusing attention on issues such as freedom of expression, privacy, respon-
sibility, and democracy.  

244 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 The Double Edge of Technology 
 Th e solution to the McLuhan–Gibson confl ict in the opening vignette is one of per-
spective. McLuhan was writing and thinking in the relative youth of the electronic 
media. When  Understanding Media  was published in 1964, television had just become 
a mass medium, the personal computer wasn’t even a dream, and Paul Baran was still 
envisioning ARPAnet. 
 Gibson, writing much later in the age of electronic media, was commenting from a 
more experienced position and after observing real-world evidence. McLuhan was 
optimistic because he was speculating on what electronic media  could do . Gibson was 
pessimistic because he was commenting on what he had seen electronic media  doing . 
 Still, neither visionary is completely right or completely wrong. Technology alone, even 
the powerful electronic media that fascinated both, cannot create new worlds or new ways 
of seeing them.  We  use technology to do these things. Th is is why technology is a double-
edged sword. Its power—for good and for bad—resides in us. Th e same aviation technol-
ogy that we use to visit relatives halfway around the world can also be used to destroy the 
World Trade Center. Th e same communication technologies used to create a truly global 
village can be used to dehumanize and standardize the people who live in it.   
 McLuhan’s Renaissance 
 Marshall McLuhan’s ideas are in vogue again. Th e Canadian English professor was at 
the center of the early intellectual debate over electronic media. His books—especially 
 Th e Gutenberg Galaxy  (1962),  Understanding Media: Th e Extensions of Man  (1964), and 
 Th e Medium Is the Massage  (McLuhan & Fiore, 1967)—generated heated comment and 
earned McLuhan much criticism. His ideas satisfi ed almost no one. Critics from the 
humanities castigated him for wasting his time on something as frivolous as television. 
True culture exists in “real” literature, they argued. McLuhan fared just as badly among 
mass communication theorists. Social scientists committed to the idea of limited 
media eff ects (see Chapter 13) simply disagreed with his view of powerful media tech-
nologies, however optimistic. Others who were convinced of media’s potential negative 
infl uence dismissed him as blindly in love with technology and overly speculative. 
Social scientists demanded scientifi c verifi cation of McLuhan’s ideas. Labeled the 
“High Priest of Popcult,” the “Metaphysician of Media,” the “Oracle of the Electronic 
Age,” McLuhan may simply have been ahead of his time.            
    What has returned McLuhan to the forefront of the cultural discussion surrounding 
the mass media is the Internet. (Remember, some tech historians trace the Net’s genesis 
to a McLuhan acolyte, Joseph C. R. Licklider.) McLuhan’s ideas resonate with those who 
believe the new medium can fulfi ll his optimistic vision of an involved, connected global 
village. Th ose who think the potential of the Internet, like that of television before it, will 
never fulfi ll McLuhan’s predictions are forced to explain their reasoning in terms of his 
 Technology, even one with as much potential as the Internet, is only as good as the uses we make of it.
 DILBERT: © Scott Adams/Dist. by United Feature Syndicate, Inc. 

CHAPTER 10 
The Internet and the World Wide Web 
245
ideas. McLuhan is back, and, as before, he is controversial.  Wired  magazine, the self-
proclaimed “Bible of Cyberspace,” has anointed McLuhan its patron saint. But as we saw 
in the opening vignette, not everyone in the cyberworld trusts the technology as much 
as he did. Two of his concepts, however—the global village and media as extensions of 
our bodies—are receiving renewed discussion precisely because of the Net.  
 THE GLOBAL VILLAGE   Many concepts survive McLuhan’s 1980 death and serve as his legacy. 
None is more often quoted than the    global village   , the idea that the new communica-
tion technologies will permit people to become increasingly involved in one another’s 
lives. Skeptics point out that McLuhan, with this notion, reveals his unrealistic, utopian 
infatuation with technology. But McLuhan himself never said all would be tranquil in 
the global village. Yes, he did believe electronic media would permit “the human tribe” 
to become “one family,” but he also realized that families fi ght: 
 Th ere is more diversity, less conformity under a single roof in any family than there is with 
the thousands of families in the same city. Th e more you create village conditions, the 
more discontinuity and division and diversity. Th e global village absolutely insures maxi-
mal disagreement on all points. (McLuhan & Stearn, 1967, p. 279)   
 Involvement does not mean harmony, but it does mean an exchange of ideas. As 
McLuhan said, the global village is “a world in which people encounter each other in 
depth all the time” (p. 280).   
 MEDIA AS EXTENSIONS OF OUR BODIES     Central to McLuhan’s view of how media and cultures 
interact is the idea that media do not  bring  the world to us but rather permit us to 
experience the world with a scope and depth otherwise impossible. Media, then, are 
extensions of our bodies. Just as clothes are an extension of our skin, permitting us to 
wander farther from our warm caves into the cold world; just as the automobile is an 
extension of our feet, enabling us to travel farther than we could ever walk; television 
extends our vision and hearing and computers extend our central nervous system. With 
television we can see and hear around the world, beyond the galaxy, into the future, 
and into the past. Computers process, sort, categorize, reconfi gure, and clarify. McLu-
han’s message here is not unlike Carey’s (1975) ritual view of mass communication. 
Communication technologies do not deliver or transmit information; they fundamen-
tally alter the relationship between people and their world, encouraging us to construct 
new meanings for the things we encounter with and through them. Again, McLuhan, 
“We shape our tools and afterwards our tools shape us” (in Carr, 2011, p. 10).      
 The books that put Marshall McLuhan at the center of the debate over electronic communication.

246 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 Reconceptualizing Life in an 
Interconnected World  
 What happens to people in the global village? What becomes of audiences and users 
as their senses are extended technologically? How free are we to express ourselves? 
Does greater involvement with others mean a loss of privacy? Th ese are only a few of 
the questions confronting us as we attempt to fi nd the right balance between the good 
and the bad that come from the new communication technologies.  
 The Internet and Freedom of Expression 
 By its very nature the Internet raises a number of important issues of freedom of 
expression. Th ere is no central location, no on-and-off  button for the Internet, making 
it diffi  cult for those who want to control it. For free expression advocates, however, this 
freedom from control is the medium’s primary strength. Th e anonymity of its users 
provides their expression—even the most radical, profane, and vulgar—great protec-
tion, giving voice to those who would otherwise be silenced. Th is anonymity, say advo-
cates of strengthened Internet control, is a breeding ground for abuse. But opponents 
of control counter that the Net’s aff ordability and ease of use make it our most demo-
cratic medium. Proponents of control argue that this freedom brings with it responsi-
bilities that those who create content for other media understand but are ignored by 
many online. Internet freedom-of-expression issues, then, fall into two broad catego-
ries. Th e fi rst is the Net’s potential to make the First Amendment’s freedom-of-the-
press guarantee a reality for greater numbers of people. Th e second is the problem of 
setting boundaries of control.  
  Activists at  MoveOn.org protested a war and 
rallied millions of people worldwide to their cause. 
Reprinted by permission of www.moveon.org.

CHAPTER 10 
The Internet and the World Wide Web 
247
 Freedom of the Press for Whom? 
 Veteran  New Yorker  columnist A. J. Liebling, 
author of that magazine’s “Wayward Press” 
feature and often called the “conscience of 
journalism,” frequently argued that freedom of 
the press is guaranteed only to those who own 
one. Th eoretically, anyone can own a broad-
cast outlet or cable television operation. But 
the number of outlets in any community is 
limited, and they are unavailable to all but the 
richest people and corporations. Th eoreti-
cally, anyone can own a newspaper or maga-
zine, but again the expense involved makes 
this an impossibility for most people. Newslet-
ters, like a soap-box speaker on a street cor-
ner, are limited in reach, typically of interest 
to those who already agree with the message, 
and relatively unsophisticated when compared with the larger commercial media. 
 Th e Net, however, turns every user into a potential mass communicator. Equally 
important, on the Internet every “publisher” is equal. Th e websites of the biggest gov-
ernment agency, the most powerful broadcast network, the newspaper with the high-
est circulation, the richest ad agencies and public relations fi rms, the most far-fl ung 
religion, and the lone user with an idea or cause fi guratively sit side by side. Each is 
only as powerful as its ideas. 
 In other words, the Net can give voice to those typically denied expression. Writing 
for the alternative press news service AlterNet, activist L. A. Kauff man said, “Th e Inter-
net is an agitator’s dream: fast, cheap, far-reaching. And with the planetary reach of the 
World Wide Web, activist networks are globalizing at nearly the pace of the corporate 
order they oppose” (in Cox, 2000, p. 14). AlterNet’s Brad deGraf (2004) later added, “If 
a paradigm shift from industrial- to information-age and from hierarchies to networks 
is happening, it will naturally favor those who want that shift to happen. In that sense, 
it threatens the two-party system in general, Republicans and Democrats alike, because 
they can’t control the game rules as they have in the past, and the ‘barrier to entry’ just 
went from ‘establishing a third party’ to ‘self-organizing a movement’” (p. 3). 
 Th is paradigm shift is dramatically demonstrated by    fl ash mobs (sometimes called 
 smart mobs ), “large, geographically dispersed groups connected only by thin threads of 
communications technology . . . drawn together at a moment’s notice like schools of fi sh 
to perform some collective action” (Taylor, 2003, p. 53). Th e 5-million-member  MoveOn
.org is the best-known site for the coordination of fl ash mobs and, as it has matured, 
online political action. Using e-mail and instant messaging, MoveOn led the February 
15, 2003, worldwide antiwar protest, gathering 400,000 people in New York and 10 mil-
lion more across the globe to protest the impending war in Iraq. But a website need not 
be an “activist” site to connect people moved to action. In mid-2011, anticonsumer activ-
ists at Adbusters.com sent their subscribers an e-mail suggesting a protest on Wall Street 
similar to those fueling the Middle East democracy movement. Th e idea quickly spread 
via Twitter, Facebook, and image-based Tumblr, and soon there were Occupy Wall Street 
protests in more than 900 cities around the world, sustaining a movement that had the 
support of a majority of Americans and that shaped the national political debate for the 
next year (Garofoli, 2012). “What’s really revolutionary about all these gatherings,” wrote 
 Wired  senior editor Bill Wasik, “is the way they represent a disconnected group getting 
connected, a mega-underground casting off  its invisibility to embody itself, formidably, 
in physical space” (2012, p. 112). Modern political action, he argued is “self-organizing” 
and “hyper-networked.” In other words, the best way to move people to action—to get 
them away from their computers—is through the computer. You can read about online 
organizing that unlike Occupy Wall Street, remained very successfully online in the essay 
entitled “Shutting Down the Internet to Save the Internet.” 
  OccupyWallStreet protesters were self-
organizing and hyper-networked. 

248 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 Th e Internet also off ers expanded expression through Weblogs, or blogs. Before Sep-
tember 11, 2001, blogs were typically personal online diaries. But after that horrible 
day, possibly because millions of people felt that the mainstream press had left them 
unprepared and clueless about what was really going on in the world, blogs changed. 
 Blog  now refers to regularly updated online journals of commentary, often containing 
links to their commentary. Internet research company Technocrati regularly tracks 
more than 100 million active blogs worldwide. Technology writer and conservative 
activist Andrew Sullivan argues that “blogging is changing the media world and could 
foment a revolution in how journalism functions in our culture,” not only because 
individual bloggers have earned their readers’ respect, but because their “personal 
touch is much more in tune with our current sensibilities than (are) the opinionated 
magazines and newspapers of old. Readers increasingly doubt the authority of the 
 Washington Post  or  National Review ” (Sullivan, 2002, p. 43). 
 Sullivan, former editor of the  New Republic , says this “means the universe of permis-
sible opinions will expand, unconstrained by the prejudices, tastes or interests of the 
old-media elite” (quoted in Seipp, 2002, p. 43). In other words, because bloggers in eff ect 
own their own presses, they have freedom of the press. And people are taking advantage 
of that freedom. Revisit Figure 10.1 and you’ll see that the 9th, 12th,   and 16th most visited 
U.S. websites exist specifi cally to house and/or facilitate blogging. Blogs can also be more 
agile than the traditional media. More so than these older, more cumbersome media 
they encourage citizen action in a newly  see-through society . For example, millions of 
bloggers constantly and in real time fact-check candidates. Some track the fl ow of money 
to politicians, connecting it to how they vote on important public issues. Th ey remind 
the powerful that “little brother” is watching. Images caught by chance on a video-capable 
cell phone, arcane public data that goes otherwise unexamined, citizen video taken at 
offi  cial events, all make their way to the Internet and to the people. Whistle-blowers 
distrustful of mainstream outlets can distribute secret or confi dential content on 
 Wikileaks.org  with total assurance of anonymity. As Web activist Micah Sifry explained, 
“Even without central direction, the crowd is sourcing the world for interesting news and 
  The Internet’s freedom may give lies great 
reach. But the Net has a way of dealing with them. 
Snopes, the self-proclaimed “deﬁ nitive Internet 
reference source for urban legends, folklore, myths, 
rumors, and misinformation,” is one of the best.  
Reprinted by permission of Snopes.com

CHAPTER 10 
The Internet and the World Wide Web 
249
 On January 18, 2012, more than 13 million people joined an online protest 
that included 115,000 websites going dark or otherwise altering their home-
pages in support. Wikipedia, for example, blocked access to all its English-
language pages, greeting 162 million visitors with the message, “Imagine a 
World Without Free Knowledge.” Google, too, did its part, placing a censor’s 
black bar over its logo and advising users to call their representatives. 
 What had inspired Internet users to shut down the Internet were two 
pieces of legislation—the Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA) and the Protect 
Intellectual Property Act (PIPA)—that the movie, television, and music industries said 
were essential to combating illegal downloading. So important were these bills that those 
industries had 241 lobbyists working the halls of Congress on their behalf, spending more 
than $280 million on the eﬀ ort (Aguilar, 2012; Scola, 2011). 
 Opponents, however, saw something much more sinister in these two bills that would 
have, upon a single complaint from a content owner, empowered the U.S. Justice Department, 
without a court order, to demand that American search engines, ISPs, advertising networks, and 
payment services block foreign-based websites suspected of copyright infringement. The prob-
lem, explained the Electronic Frontier Foundation, is that “the legislation 
would grant the government and private parties unprecedented power to in-
terfere with the Internet’s underlying infrastructure. The government would be 
able to force ISPs and search engines to block users’ attempts to reach certain 
websites’ URLs . . . Broad immunity provisions (combined with a threat of 
 litigation) would encourage service providers to overblock innocent users or 
even block websites voluntarily. This gives content companies every incentive 
to create unoﬃ  cial blacklists of websites, which service providers would be under pressure to 
block without regard to the First Amendment” (Electronic Frontier Foundation, 2012). 
   Did the “collective ﬂ exing of Internet muscle” make a diﬀ erence? Anti-SOPA/PIPA orga-
nization Fight for the Future had an answer, “Tech companies and users teamed up. Geeks 
took to the streets. Tens of millions of people who make the Internet what it is joined to-
gether to defend their freedoms. The network defended itself. Whatever you call it, we 
changed the politics of interfering with the Internet forever—there’s no going back” (in 
Forbes, 2012). And to what extent did the protest change the politics? Three representatives 
who had co-sponsored SOPA withdrew their support; seven senators who had cosponsored 
PIPA did the same, and 19 more publicly repudiated it. Both chambers of Congress tabled 
the legislation. Even the Obama White House was moved to comment, saying it supports 
action to ﬁ ght online piracy, but “does not support legislation that reduces freedom of 
expression . . . or undermines the  dynamic, innovative global Internet” (in Tsukayama, 2012a).  
 USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE 
 Shutting Down the Internet to 
Save the Internet 
 “Tens of millions of people who make the Internet 
what it is joined together to defend their freedoms. 
The network defended itself.” 
 Thousands of people in the street and millions more online shut down the Internet to save it.
sharing tidbits constantly” (in Melber, 2008). Th is is no small matter as the Internet has 
surpassed newspapers as Americans’ primary news source (Mindlin, 2009). 
 Blogs are not without their critics.  Advertising Age  media writer Simon Dumenco 
(2006) calls them little more than writers “with a cooler name,” referring to membership 
in the ranks of bloggers of voices from just about every mainstream media outlet and 
 Fortune  500 company (p. 18). Whole Foods CEO John Mackey, for example, was outed 
as the author of a blog he maintained under a pseudonym in which he boosted his 
supermarket chain as well as himself, and there are companies such as PayPerPost that 
pay bloggers for mentioning their clients whether they use those clients’ products and 
services or not. All a blogger has to do is log on to view the available “opportunities.” A 
blogger, in other words, is just as likely to be an “insider” as an “outsider.” More troubling 
to blogs’ detractors is that bloggers are responsible to no one. Media critic Eric Alterman 
(2005) says that for political blogs, “Th e very act of weighing evidence, or even presenting 
any, is suspect. Th e modus operandi is accuse, accuse, accuse and see what sticks” 
(p. 10). Additionally, argue critics, corporate bloggers are often little more than fronts set 
up to attack competitors. “Bloggers are more of a threat than people realize, and they 
are only going to get more toxic. Th is is the new reality,” explains Peter Blackshaw, chief 
marketing offi  cer of a company that polices blogs for commercial clients such as Procter 
& Gamble and Ford. He estimates that 50% to 60% of the online attacks his clients endure 
come not from independent bloggers but from competitors (in Lyons, 2005, p. 130). 

250 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
 Controlling Internet Expression 
 Abuses of the Net’s freedom such as these are behind the argument for greater control 
of the Internet. Th e very same medium that can empower users who wish to challenge 
those more powerful than themselves can also be used to lie and cheat. Th e Internet 
does not distinguish between true and false, biased and objective, trivial and impor-
tant. Once misinformation has been loosed on the Net, it is almost impossible to catch 
and correct it. 
 Th e  smear forward  has plagued countless people and organizations. Procter & Gam-
ble was victimized by stories that its cleaners killed pets. Starbucks was falsely accused 
of refusing to provide coff ee to Marines serving in Iraq. Other Internet-sustained false-
hoods can have far more damaging real-world eff ects, such as the scientifi cally dis-
credited belief that vaccines cause autism, leading many parents to deny their children 
potentially life-saving vaccinations. Actress Jenny McCarthy, who “has become the 
public face of the anti-vaccination movement, boasts that much of her knowledge 
about the harms of vaccination comes from ‘the University of Google.’ She regularly 
shares her ‘knowledge’ about vaccination with her nearly half-million Twitter follow-
ers” (Morozov, 2012). 
 Lies have always been part of human interaction; the Internet only gives them 
greater reach. “Never has there been a medium as perfectly suited to the widespread 
anonymous diff usion of misinformation as e-mail,” commented  In Th ese Times editor 
Christopher Hayes (2007, p. 12). But there is little that government can do to control 
this abuse. Legal remedies already exist in the form of libel laws and prosecution for 
fraud. Users can help by teaching themselves to be more attentive to return addresses 
and by ignoring messages that are sent anonymously or that have suspicious origins. 
Th ere is an Internet-based solution as well. Hoaxbusters.org maintains an exhaustive, 
alphabetically organized list and debunking of the Internet’s biggest lies. Also of value 
is  Snopes.com , the self-proclaimed “defi nitive Internet reference source for urban leg-
ends, folklore, myths, rumors, and misinformation.”   
 Pornography on the World Wide Web 
 Most eff orts at controlling the Internet are aimed at indecent or pornographic Web 
content. We will see in Chapter 14 that indecent and pornographic expression is pro-
tected. Th e particular concern with the Internet, therefore, is shielding children. 
 Th e Child Pornography Prevention Act of 1996 forbade online transmission of any 
image that “appears to be of a minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct.” Proponents 
argued that the impact of child porn on the children involved, as well as on society, 
warranted this legislation. Opponents argued that child pornography per se was 
already illegal, regardless of the medium. Th erefore they saw this law as an unneces-
sary and overly broad intrusion into freedom of expression on the Net. In April 2002 
the Supreme Court sided with the act’s opponents. Its eff ect would be too damaging 
to freedom of expression. “Few legitimate movie producers or book publishers, or few 
other speakers in any capacity, would risk distributing images in or near the uncertain 
reach of this law,” wrote Justice Anthony Kennedy. “Th e Constitution gives signifi cant 
protection from over-broad laws that chill speech within the First Amendment’s vast 
and privileged sphere” (in “Justices Scrap,” 2002, p. A3). Kennedy cited the antidrug 
fi lm  Traffi  c , Academy Award–winning  American Beauty , and Shakespeare’s  Romeo and 
Juliet , all works containing scenes of minors engaged in sexual activity, as examples of 
expression that would disappear from the Net. 
 Th e primary battleground, then, became protecting children from otherwise legal 
content. Th e Net, by virtue of its openness and accessibility, raises particular con-
cerns. Children’s viewing of sexually explicit material on cable television can theo-
retically be controlled by parents. Moreover, viewers must specifi cally order this 
content and typically pay an additional fee for it. Th e purchase of sexually explicit 
videos, books, and magazines is controlled by laws regulating vendors. But comput-
ers sit in homes, schools, and libraries. Children are encouraged to explore their 

CHAPTER 10 
The Internet and the World Wide Web 
251
possibilities. A search for the novel  Little Women , for example, might turn up any 
number of pornographic sites. 
 Proponents of stricter control of the Net liken the availability of smut on the Internet 
to a bookstore or library that allows porn to sit side by side with books that children 
 should  be reading. In actual, real-world bookstores and libraries, professionals, whether 
book retailers or librarians, apply their judgment in selecting and locating material, 
ideally striving for appropriateness and balance. Children are the benefi ciaries of their 
professional judgment. No such selection or evaluation is applied to the Internet. 
Opponents of control accept the bookstore/library analogy but argue that, as troubling 
as the online proximity of all types of content may be, it is a true example of the free-
dom guaranteed by the First Amendment. 
 Th e solution seems to be in technology. Filtering software, such as Net Nanny, can 
be set to block access to websites by title and by the presence of specifi c words and 
images. Few free speech advocates are troubled by fi lters on home computers, but they 
do see them as problematic when used on more public machines—for example, in 
schools and libraries. Th ey argue that software that can fi lter sexual content can also 
be set to screen out birth control information, religious sites, and discussions of racism. 
Virtually any content can be blocked. Th is, they claim, denies other users—adults and 
mature teenagers, for example—their freedoms. 
 Congress weighed in on the fi ltering debate, passing the Children’s Internet Protec-
tion Act in 2000, requiring schools and libraries to install fi ltering software. But First 
Amendment concerns invalidated this act as well. A federal appeals court ruled in 
June 2002 that requiring these institutions to install fi lters changes their nature from 
places that provide information to places that unconstitutionally restrict it. Nonethe-
less, in June 2003 a sharply divided Supreme Court upheld the Children’s Internet 
Protection Act, declaring that Congress did indeed have the power to require libraries 
to install fi lters.   
 Copyright (Intellectual Property Ownership) 
 Another freedom-of-expression issue that takes on a special nature on the Internet 
is copyright. Copyright protection is designed to ensure that those who create con-
tent are fi nancially compensated for their work (see Chapter 14). Th e assumption is 
that more “authors” will create more content if assured of monetary compensation 
from those who use it. When the content is tangible (books, movies, videotapes, 
magazines, CDs), authorship and use are relatively easy to identify. But in the cyber-
world, things become a bit more complex. John Perry Barlow (1996), a cofounder of 
the Electronic Frontier Foundation, explained the situation relatively early in the life 
of the Internet: 
 Th e riddle is this: If our property can be infi nitely reproduced and instantaneously distrib-
uted all over the planet without cost, without our knowledge, without its even leaving our 
possession, how can we protect it? How are we going to get paid for the work we do with 
our minds? And, if we can’t get paid, what will assure the continued creation and distribu-
tion of such work? (p. 148)   
 Technically, copyright rules apply to the Internet as they do to other media. Material 
on the Net, even on electronic bulletin boards, belongs to the author, so its use, other 
than fair use, requires permission and possibly payment. But because material on the 
Internet is not tangible, it is easily, freely, and privately copied. Th is renders it diffi  cult, 
if not impossible, to police those who do copy. 
 Another confounding issue is that new and existing material is often combined with 
other existing material to create even “newer” content. Th is makes it diffi  cult to assign 
authorship. If a user borrows some text from one source, combines it with images from 
a second, surrounds both with a background graphic from a third, and adds music 
sampled from many others, where does authorship reside? 
 To deal with these thorny issues, in 1998 the U.S. Congress passed the Digital Mil-
lennium Copyright Act. Its primary goal was to bring U.S. copyright law into compliance 

252 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
with that of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), headquartered in 
Geneva, Switzerland. Th e act does the following: 
 •  Makes it a crime to circumvent antipiracy measures built into commercial software  
 •  Outlaws the manufacture, sale, or distribution of code-breaking devices used to ille-
gally copy software  
 •  Permits breaking of copyright protection devices to conduct encryption research 
and to test computer security systems  
 •  Provides copyright exemptions for nonprofi t libraries, archives, and educational 
institutions under certain circumstances  
 •  Limits the copyright infringement liability of Internet service providers for simply 
transmitting information over the Internet, but ISPs are required to remove material 
from users’ websites that appears to constitute copyright infringement  
 • Requires webcasters (Chapter 7) to pay licensing fees to record companies  
 •  States explicitly that    fair use   —instances in which copyrighted material may be used 
without permission or payment, such as taking brief quotes from a book (see Chap-
ter 14)—applies to the Internet    
 What the debate over Internet copyright represents—like concern about control-
ling content that children can access and eff orts to limit troublesome or challenging 
expression—is a clash of fundamental values that has taken on added nuance with 
the coming of computer networks. Copyright on the Internet is discussed more fully 
in Chapter 14.   
 Privacy 
 Th e issue of privacy in mass communication has traditionally been concerned with 
individuals’ rights to protect their privacy from invasive, intrusive media (see Chapter 
14). For example, should newspapers publish the names of rape victims and juvenile 
off enders? When does a person become a public fi gure and forfeit some degree of 
privacy? In the global village, however, the issue takes on a new character. Whereas 
Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis could once argue that privacy is “the right to be 
left alone,” today privacy is just as likely to mean “the right to maintain control over 
our own data.” Privacy in the global village has two facets. Th e fi rst is protecting the 
privacy of communication we wish to keep private. Th e second is the use (and misuse) 
of private, personal information willingly given online.  
 PROTECTING PRIVACY IN COMMUNICATION  Th e 1986 Electronic Communication Privacy Act guar-
antees the privacy of our e-mail. It is a criminal off ense to either “intentionally [access] 
without authorization a facility through which an electronic communication service 
is provided; or intentionally [exceed] an authorization to access that facility.” In addi-
tion, the law “prohibits an electronic communications service provider from know-
ingly divulging the contents of any stored electronic communication.” Th e goal of this 
legislation is to protect private citizens from offi  cial abuse; it gives e-mail “conversa-
tions” the same protection that phone conversations enjoy. If a government agency 
wants to listen in, it must secure permission, just as it must get a court order for a 
telephone wiretap. 
 If a person or company feels that more direct protection of communication is nec-
essary, encryption is one solution, but it is controversial.    Encryption  is the electronic 
coding or masking of information that can be deciphered only by a recipient with the 
decrypting key. According to the FBI and many other government offi  cials, however, 
this total privacy is an invitation for terrorists, drug lords, and mobsters to use the Net 
to threaten national security. As such, in early January 2000 the Clinton administration 
proposed “relaxed” rules—relaxed from initial plans to allow the government to hold 
the key to  all  encryption technologies. Th e new rules require makers of encryption 
software to turn over a copy of their code to a designated third party. Th e government 
may access it only with a court order. 

CHAPTER 10 
The Internet and the World Wide Web 
253
 “Authorized” interception of messages is another problem for privacy. Courts have 
consistently upheld employers’ rights to intercept and read their employees’ e-mail. 
Employers must be able to guarantee that their computer systems are not abused by 
the people who work for them. Th oughtful companies solve the problem by issuing 
clear and fair guidelines on the use of computer networks. Th erefore, when they do 
make unannounced checks of employees’ electronic communication, the employee 
understands that these checks do occur, why they occur, and under what circum-
stances they can lead to problems.   
 PROTECTING PRIVACY OF PERSONAL INFORMATION     Every online act leaves a “digital trail,” making 
possible easy    dataveillance   —the massive collection and distillation of consumer data. 
Ironically, we participate in this intrusion into our privacy. Because of computer stor-
age, networking, and cross-referencing power, the information we give to one entity is 
easily and cheaply given to countless, unknown others. 
 One form of dataveillance is distributing and sharing personal, private information 
among organizations other than the one for whom it was originally intended. Informa-
tion from every credit card transaction (online or at a store), credit application, phone 
call, supermarket or other purchase made without cash (for example, with a check, 
debit card, or “club” card), newspaper and magazine subscription, and cable television 
subscribership is digitally recorded, stored, and most likely sold to others. Th e increased 
computerization of medical fi les, banking information, job applications, and school 
records produces even more salable data. Eventually, anyone who wants to know 
something about a person can simply buy the necessary information—without that 
person’s permission or even knowledge. Th ese data can then be used to further invade 
people’s privacy. Employers can withhold jobs for reasons unknown to applicants. 
Insurance companies can selectively deny coverage to people based on data about 
their grocery choices. According to the international human rights group Privacy Inter-
national’s Global Privacy Index, the United States ranks in the lowest category, 
“endemic surveillance societies.” Considering such factors as lack of legal protection, 
degree of enforcement, amount of data sharing, frequency of use of biometrics, and 
ubiquity of closed-circuit cameras, among America’s neighbors in the endemic surveil-
lance societies were Malaysia, Russia, and China (Lawless, 2008). 
 Recognizing the scope of data collection and the potential problems that it raises, 
Congress passed the 1974 Federal Privacy Act, restricting  governments’  ability to collect 
and distribute information about citizens. Th e act, however, expressly exempted busi-
nesses and other nongovernmental organizations from control. As a result, the average 
Internet user has 736 pieces of personal data collected every day, and companies retain 
this information for as long as they like. Th is is like “a third party owning nearly four 
years of your life” (Popova, 2012). And people are starting to notice. Seventy-one per-
cent of Americans have concerns about companies distributing their information with-
out permission, and 56% say they have similar concerns about companies that hold 
onto data “even when the companies don’t need it anymore.” Smartphone users are 
concerned as well; 65% say they worry about apps that can access their contacts, pho-
tos, location, and other data (Tsukayama, 2012c). A recent ad industry study discovered 
that people “are more worried about loss of personal privacy than they are about most 
other issues, including rising terrorism, climate change and the growing number of 
pandemics” (McClellan, 2011). 
 Th e Internet industry and the federal government have responded in 2012 with a 
“Consumer Privacy Bill of Rights,” voluntary guidelines asking sites to place a “do not 
track” button on their Web pages. Critics contend that these guidelines are insuffi  cient 
protection, as not all sites will comply, and even those with the button may still collect 
and hold users’ personal data for their own market research. Th ey object to the idea 
that websites should provide us that security only if we specifi cally ask for it, called 
 opt-out . But, asks  Vanity Fair  editor Henry Alford, “When did privacy become a choice 
rather than a given?” and why does “fi guring out how to activate a site’s privacy control 
settings sometimes feel as if it requires a graduate degree in tiny print” (2012, p. ST2). 
Instead, sites should have to get our permission before they collect and disseminate 

254 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
our personal data, that is, we should 
be able to    opt in   , as is the case in 
Europe. European Union privacy 
law not only requires Internet com-
panies to get explicit user consent 
before using their data, it also grants 
all citizens the “right to be forgot-
ten,” that is, the right to ask to have 
all their collected personal data 
deleted forever. Privacy advocates 
ask the question, “If we have legisla-
tion to bring our copyright laws into 
compliance with those of other 
nations, why shouldn’t we do the 
same with our privacy laws?” You 
can read about Facebook’s fi ght 
with privacy advocates in the box 
entitled, “My 873 Friends and I 
Would Like to Be Alone, Please: 
Facebook & Privacy.”      
 Three 
new 
technological 
advances— radio frequency iden-
tifi cation (RFID) chip ,  augmented reality (AR) , and  cloud computing —pose addi-
tional privacy problems. RFID, already used by many retailers, is a grain-of-sand-sized 
microchip and antenna embedded in consumer products that transmits a radio sig-
nal. Th e advantage to retailers is greater inventory control and lower labor costs. Th e 
retailer has an absolute, up-to-the-minute accounting of how many boxes of widgets 
are on the shelf, and consumers simply walk out the door with their boxes while the 
RFID sends a signal charging the correct amount to the proper credit card; no check-
out personnel needed. Th e fear of privacy advocates should be clear. Th at signal keeps 
on sending. Now marketers, the government, and others will know where you and 
your box of widgets are at all times, how quickly you go through your box of widgets, 
and where you are when you run out of widgets. How soon until the phone starts 
ringing with off ers of widgets on sale? What if a burglar could use an RFID reader 
from outside your house to preview its contents? What happens when these data are 
networked with all your other personal information? What if you buy a case of beer 
rather than a box of widgets? Will your employer know? What if your tastes run to 
sugared snacks? Should your insurance company know? 
 Introduced in 2009 and available in smartphones containing the program Layar, 
augmented reality (AR) permits users to point their phones at a real-world location, 
person, or scene and be instantly linked to hundreds of websites containing infor-
mation about those things, superimposed over the screen image. Very cool, say 
proponents—instant restaurant reviews, nearby fl u-shot locations, related Flickr 
photos, and the names of relatives you might know in the area. Very scary, say pri-
vacy advocates: “Fold in facial-recognition [already extant] and you could point 
your phone at Bob from accounting, whose visage is now ‘augmented’ with the 
information that he has a gay son and drinks Hoegaarden” (Walker, 2009, p. 32). In 
other words, everything that exists on the Internet is linkable. When anyone and 
everyone can access these data by simply pointing a phone at someone, privacy, 
already on life support, dies. 
 Th e third advance worrying privacy advocates is the growing use of cloud comput-
ing, the storage of computer data, including personal information and system-operating 
software, on off -site, third-party environments that off er on-demand access. Google, 
Microsoft, and several independent providers off er cloud computing, and advocates 
tout the increased power and memory of the cloud, arguing that even if your laptop is 
lost or destroyed, you lose nothing. But privacy advocates counter that “data stored 
online has less privacy protection both in practice and under the law. . . . Before, the 
 In spite of his look of surprise, this consumer willingly gave away the personal information that is now stored 
and distributed by computers.
 Signe Wilkinson Editorial Cartoon used with the permission of Signe Wilkinson, the Washington Post Writers Group and the Cartoonist Group. All rights reserved. 

CHAPTER 10 
The Internet and the World Wide Web 
255
bad guys usually needed to get their hands on people’s computers to see their secrets; 
in today’s cloud all you need is a password.” Rented or purchased music downloads or 
e-books are at risk of reclamation should the vendor go out of business or unilaterally 
change the terms of service, as happened in 2009 when Amazon erased e-versions of 
 1984  from users’ readers because of a copyright dispute. Harvard’s Jonathan Zittrain 
sums up these worries: “If you entrust your data to others, they can let you down or 
outright betray you” (2009, p. A19). 
 Another form of dataveillance is the electronic tracking of the choices we make when 
we are on the Web, called our    click stream   . Despite the anonymity online users think 
they enjoy, every click of a key can be, and often is, recorded and stored. Th is happens 
whether or not the user actually enters information—for example, a credit card number 
to make a purchase or a Social Security number to verify identity. Th is tracking is made 
possible by    cookies   , an identifying code added to a computer’s hard drive by a visited 
website. Normally, only the site that has sent the cookie can read it—the next time you 
visit that site it “remembers” you. But some sites bring “third-party” cookies to your 
computer. Maintained by big Internet advertising networks like DoubleClick and 
Engage, these cookies can be read by any of the thousands of websites also belonging 
to that network, whether you’ve visited them or not, and without your knowledge. As a 
result, this software is more commonly referred to as    spyware , identifying code placed 
on a computer by a website without permission or notifi cation. Spyware not only facil-
itates tracking by sites and/or people unknown (those “third parties”), but opens a com-
puter to unwanted pop-up ads and other commercial messages. 
 At any given time, a regular Web user will have dozens of cookies on his or her hard 
drive, but most commercial browsers come equipped with the capacity to block or 
erase them. Th e Anti-Spyware Coalition off ers information and assistance on how to 
deal with cookies and spyware. In addition, users can purchase cookie-scrubbing soft-
ware. Commercial fi rms such as Anonymizer sell programs that not only block and 
erase spyware but also allow users to surf the Web in anonymity. 
 Virtual Democracy 
 Th e Internet is characterized by freedom and self-governance, which are also the hall-
marks of true democracy. It is no surprise, then, that computer technology is often 
trumpeted as the newest and best tool for increased democratic involvement and par-
ticipation. Since the 2008 presidential election, all major and even minor candidates 
have made extensive use of the Internet. In fact, experts attribute increases in voter 
registration and voting among Americans under 30 in that contest to the Internet. 
Political scientist Daniel Shea says “young voters are paying attention. Th ey’re online. 
Th ey’re blogging. Th ey’re talking about the election” (in Mieszkowski, 2008). 
 Th is enthusiasm for a technological solution to what many see as increased dis-
enchantment with politics and the political process mirrors that which followed the 
introduction of radio and television. A September 3, 1924,  New Republic  article, for 
example, argued that the high level of public interest in the radio broadcast of the 
1924 political party conventions brought “dismay” to “the most hardened political 
cynic” (in Davis, 1976, p. 351). In 1940 NBC founder and chairman David Sarnoff  
predicted that television would enrich democracy because it was “destined to pro-
vide greater knowledge to larger numbers of people, truer perception of the meaning 
of current events, more accurate appraisals of men in public life, and a broader 
understanding of the needs and aspirations of our fellow human beings” (in Shenk, 
1997, p. 60). 
 Some critics argue that the Internet will be no more of an asset to democracy than 
have been radio and television because the same economic and commercial forces 
that have shaped the content and operation of those more traditional media will con-
strain just as rigidly the new. Th ey point to the endless battles to keep the Internet 
open and free. Recall the fi ght over SOPA and PIPA. And there are the ongoing legal 
and legislative battles over    network neutrality   , the requirement that all ISPs, including 
cable MSOs, allow the free and equal fl ow of all Web traffi  c. Th eir pessimism also 

256 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
resides in part in concentration and conglomeration of the Internet—2005’s News 
Corp. purchase of hugely popular (and democratic) MySpace; 2006’s Google acquisi-
tion of hugely popular (and democratic) YouTube; Microsoft’s 2011 purchase of Inter-
net video phone company Skype; the 2012 Facebook purchase of Instagram; and 
common inter-giant fi nancial arrangements such as Yahoo’s ad-selling partnership 
with AOL and Microsoft.  
 THE TECHNOLOGY GAP  An important principle of democracy is “one person, one vote.” But if 
democracy is increasingly practiced online, those lacking the necessary technology 
and skill will be denied their vote. Th is is the    technology gap —the widening disparity 
between the communication technology haves and have-nots. Even with its rapid dif-
fusion, 20% of the people in the United States do not use the Internet. Th e “democra-
tization” of the Net still favors those who have the money to buy the hardware and 
software needed to access the Net as well as to pay for that connection. Th is leaves out 
many U.S. citizens—those on the wrong side of the    digital divide . 
 Th e digital divide describes the lack of technological access among specifi c groups 
of Americans. And it is controversial. When asked in 2001 about his plans to bridge 
the divide, then-FCC chair Michael Powell told reporters that the expression itself is 
“dangerous in the sense that it suggests that the minute a new and innovative technol-
ogy is introduced in the market, there is a divide among every part of society, and that 
is just an unreal understanding of an Amer-
ican capitalistic system. . . . I’m not meaning 
to be completely fl ip about this—I think it’s 
an important social issue—but it shouldn’t 
be used to justify the notion of, essentially, 
the socialization of deployment of the infra-
structure. . . . You know, I think there’s a 
Mercedes divide. I’d like to have one; I can’t 
aff ord one” (in Jackson, 2001, p. 9). Critics 
pointed out that as the Internet becomes 
increasingly essential for full membership in 
America’s economic and cultural life, those 
on the wrong side of the divide will be fur-
ther disenfranchised. And, in the event that 
the Net becomes even more essential to the 
practice of democracy than it already may 
be, say, through widespread online voting, 
those on the wrong side of the divide will be 
denied their basic democratic rights.
  How real is the digital divide? Although 
80% of all Americans regularly access the 
Internet, usage rates lag for the less edu-
cated, people with disabilities, lower-income 
and rural homes, and Hispanic and African 
American households (Zickuhr & Smith, 
2012). You can see the divide represented 
graphically in  Figure 10.3 . Th ese data led the 
Knight Commission on the Information 
Needs of Communities in a Democracy to 
declare that there are two Americas, one 
wired, one not very well, producing dispari-
ties in literacy, political knowledge, and 
social participation (Tessler, 2010).  
 THE INFORMATION GAP  Another important princi-
ple of democracy is that self-governing peo-
ple govern best with full access to information. 
Th is is the reason our culture is so suspicious 
76%
94%
59%
55%
78%
60%
94%
87%
63%
74%
77%
70%
39%
83%
White, non-Hispanic
Internet Users
Race
Annual household income
Educational attainment
$30,000–$49,000
Black, non-Hispanic
Hispanic (English and Spanish speakers)
$75,000 +
College +
Under $30,000
Community type
Urban
Suburban
Rural
$50,000–$74,999
Some college
High school
Less than high school
  Figure 10.3  The Digital Divide, 2010. 
 Source: Pew Internet and American Life Project , Raine, 2010. 

CHAPTER 10 
The Internet and the World Wide Web 
257
information they found online. Moreover, 93% of Americans favor the right to opt-in before 
an online company can use their personal data, and 69% want the federal government to 
adopt a law giving them the right to learn everything a website knows about them (An-
drews, 2012). Now read Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg’s explanation of why you should 
welcome tracking, “We help you share information, and when you do that, you’re more 
 engaged on the site, and then there are ads on the side of the page. The more you’re sharing, 
the more—the model all just works out” (in Bazelon, 2011, p. 16). 
 Enter your voice. The sharing of your personal information may work for Facebook—it 
makes over $2 billion a year in ad revenues—but does it work for college-age users like 
you—94% of whom report having shared personal information that they had not intended 
to make public (in Bazelon, 2011)? 
 CULTURAL FORUM 
 My 873 Friends and I Would Like to Be 
Alone, Please: Facebook & Privacy 
 As 2011 came to a close, Facebook found itself uncomfortably in the news, 
and as a result, the issue of the privacy of our personal information was 
thrust firmly into the cultural forum. First, Austrian law student Max 
Schrems requested that Facebook turn over all the personal data it had on 
him from his three years using the site. According to European Union law 
the company had to comply, and it did—it sent him a CD containing 1,222 
pages of data, including chats he had deleted more than a year earlier, 
“pokes” (friends saying “hello”) dating back to 2008, invitations to which he 
had never responded, and hundreds of other details; most of these data were held in viola-
tion of European privacy laws (Eddy, 2011). The story, naturally, sped around the world on 
the Internet. 
 Then came news of trouble with the Federal Trade Commission. In spite of Facebook’s 
assurances that it “does not provide advertisers with information about its users,” the FTC 
found that, “in truth and in fact . . . 
Facebook has provided advertisers 
with information about its users.” 
That information was so speciﬁ c, 
ruled the FTC, that it included data 
that could be used to determine a 
user’s real name. Facebook advertis-
ers, the FTC said, could then “com-
bine the user’s real name with any targeted traits used for the ad the user clicked” (in 
Dumenco, 2011). Facebook was censured, but paid no other penalty. 
 What is the real controversy here? Is it that Facebook says one thing and does another, or 
is it the mere fact that this kind of dataveillance happens at all? Before you enter your voice 
in the Facebook vs. users’ privacy debate, consider these data: Eleven percent of social net-
work site users have posted content they later regret (Madden, 2012) and 70% of U.S. 
 recruiters and human resources professionals admit having rejected job candidates based on 
 “Seventy percent of U.S. recruiters and human resources 
professionals admit having rejected job candidates based on 
information they found online.” 
 Matt Davies. © Tribune Media Services, Inc. All Rights 
Reserved. Reprinted with permission.

258 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences
of censorship. Th e technology gap feeds a second impediment to virtual democracy, 
the  information gap . Th ose without the requisite technology will have diminished 
access to the information it makes available. In other words, they will suff er from a 
form of technologically imposed censorship. 
 Critics of the information gap point to troubling examples of other media failures 
to deliver important information to all citizens. Cable television subscribership is low-
est among urban working-class and poor people. Many newspapers, uninterested in 
these same people because they do not possess the demographic profi le coveted by 
advertisers, do not promote their papers in the neighborhoods in which they live and, 
in some large cities, do not even deliver there. For the same reason, there are precious 
few consumer magazines aimed at less well-off  people. If the computer technology gap 
creates an even wider information gap than already exists between these audiences 
and other citizens, democracy will surely suff er from what social scientists call the 
 knowledge gap , growing diff erences in knowledge, civic activity, and literacy between 
better-informed and less-informed Americans. 
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS 
 The Five Internet Freedoms  
 At a talk he gave in 2004 to telecommunication industry professionals, then-FCC Chair 
Michael Powell spelled out the Four Internet Freedoms. He called his speech “Preserv-
ing Internet Freedom: Guiding Principles for the Industry.” Th e Four Freedoms, he 
said, were: 
 •  Freedom to Access Content . First, consumers should have access to their choice of 
legal content. Consumers have come to expect to be able to go where they want on 
high-speed connections.  
 •  Freedom to Use Applications . Consumers should be able to run applications of their 
choice. As with access to content, consumers have come to expect that they can 
generally run whatever applications they want.  
 •  Freedom to Attach Personal Devices . Consumers should be permitted to attach any 
devices they choose to the connection in their homes. Because devices give con-
sumers more choice, value, and personalization with respect to how they use their 
high-speed connections, they are critical to the future of broadband.  
 •  Freedom to Obtain Service Plan Information . Consumers should receive meaningful 
information regarding their service plans. . . . Providers have every right to off er a 
variety of service tiers with varying bandwidth and feature options. Consumers 
need to know about these choices as well as whether and how their service plans 
protect them against spam, spyware, and other potential invasions of privacy.    
 In 2009, recognizing that even if the Internet industry committed itself to these four 
freedoms it would mean little if they could control the fl ow of content, new FCC Com-
missioner Michael Copps proposed a fi fth freedom,  nondiscrimination , which in fact 
was a reaffi  rmation of the principle of network neutrality (which Chair Powell opposed 
during his tenure at the FCC). Service providers, Copps said, could not prioritize, priv-
ilege, or degrade content carried over their lines (Eggerton, 2009). 
 Th ese fi ve freedoms are important. As media-literate Internet users, we should 
know what freedoms we should enjoy when dealing with our service providers. But we 
should also recognize that there are two very important aspects of the Internet–user 
relationship that are absent, even with Commissioner Copps’s addendum. Th e fi rst is 
that these are promises that the industry makes to us as consumers, not as citizens. If 
the Internet is a necessity, a life-sustaining utility, shouldn’t we hold expectations that 
rise to a level somewhat above those of a business’s customers? 

CHAPTER 10 
The Internet and the World Wide Web 
259
 But the more glaring absence is that of  our promise . If we are guaranteed unfettered 
access to this most powerful communication tool, what promises do we make? What 
are our obligations as media-literate Internet users? Heather Havrilesky of  Salon , one 
of the fi rst online ventures, undertaken when hopes for the Internet were at their high-
est and risk the greatest, writes that we have already failed: “Let’s see, so the digital 
revolution led us all to this: a gigantic, commercial, high school reunion/mall fi lthy 
with insipid tabloid trivia, populated by perpetually distracted, texting, tweeting demi-
humans. Yes, the information age truly is every bit as glorious and special as everyone 
predicted it would be!” (2010). 
 But technology expert Clay Shirky argues that it is not too late, that we hold the 
power to make the Internet what we want it to be. Th e decision is ours. “Given what 
we have today,” he wrote, “the Internet could easily become Invisible High School, with 
a modicum of educational material in an ocean of narcissism and social obsessions. 
We could, however, also use it as an Invisible College, the communicative backbone 
of real intellectual and civic change, but to do this will require more than technology. 
It will require that we adopt norms of open sharing and participation” (2010). It will 
require, in other words, our commitment to meet the industry’s promises of accessibil-
ity with our own promise of responsibility. 
 It is important to remember that culture is neither innate nor inviolate.  We construct 
culture—both dominant and bounded. Increasingly, we do so through mass commu-
nication, and the Internet has given us voice once unimaginable. So before we can 
enter the forum in which those cultures are constructed and maintained, we must 
understand where we stand and what we believe. We must be able to defend our posi-
tions. Th e hallmarks of a media-literate individual are analysis and self-refl ection. 
Reread the fi ve promises. Does your provider meet them? Were you aware that several 
ISPs, notably Comcast, Frontier Communications, and Time Warner Cable, have either 
tried or announced they would begin    metering    of Internet use? Th at is, they would 
begin charging users “by the byte”—heavier users would pay more, more modest users 
pay less. Is this consistent with the promise of full access? Reread the Havrilesky and 
Shirky quotes. Who’s correct? If it’s too late, what was your contribution to the Inter-
net’s failure to meet its potential? If it’s not, what will you do to make better, more 
meaningful, more enjoyable use of the Internet?  
 Novelist Jonathan Franzen oﬀ ered this opinion of Twitter to the audience at one of his book readings: “Twitter is unspeakably irritat-
ing. Twitter stands for everything I oppose . . . it’s hard to cite facts or create an argument in 140 characters . . . it’s like if Kafka had 
decided to make a video semaphoring  The Metamorphosis . Or it’s like writing a novel without the letter ‘P’ . . . It’s the ultimate irre-
sponsible medium. People I care about are readers . . . these are my people. And we do not like to yak about ourselves” (in Attenberg, 
2012). Mr. Franzen may not care for Twitter, but as a media-literate Internet user you should  be aware of its impact on individuals and 
society  and, like it or not, you know that Twitter  content is a text providing insight into contemporary culture . So undertake this challenge 
to your media literacy with the award-winning writer’s critique in mind. Survey three non-college-student adults about their Twitter 
use. Ask them how many Tweets they get and send each day. Ask them what percentage of those Tweets (both sent and received) 
they consider important. Ask them how much time they spend on Twitter. Ask them any other questions you consider important. Do 
the same with three college students. Then, based on the responses from your survey and your own experience, answer these questions 
in either a short essay or a brief oral presentation: Is Twitter just people “yakking” about themselves? In what ways has Twitter 
improved people’s ability to communicate and receive information? What trade-oﬀ s, if any, are required in terms of the negative 
aspects of Twitter in order to get these beneﬁ ts? 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE 
 A Cost/Beneﬁ t Analysis of Twitter 

260 
PART 2 
Media, Media Industries, and Media Audiences

Outline the history and development of the Internet and 
World Wide Web. 
  Th e idea for the Internet came either from technological 
optimists like Joseph C. R. Licklider or from the military, 
hoping to maintain communication networks in time of 
enemy attack—or from both. 
  Paul Baran devised a packet-switching network, the 
technological basis for the Internet, to be used on pow-
erful computers developed by John V. Atanasoff , John 
Mauchly, and John Presper Eckert. 
 Th e personal computer was developed by Bill Gates and 
the team of Steve Jobs and Stephen Wozniak. 

Explain the potential cultural value of the Internet and 
World Wide Web. 
  Questions about the double edge of Internet technology 
have given rise to renewed interest in Marshall McLuhan, 
creator of concepts such as the global village and media 
as extensions of our bodies. 
  Describe how the organizational and economic natures 
of the contemporary Internet and World Wide Web in-
dustries shape their content. 
  Th e Internet facilitates e-mail, VoIP, social networking, 
and the World Wide Web, all greatly facilitated by the 
rapid diff usion of smartphones and tablets. 
  Th e Web relies on a system of hosts, browsers, and 
search engines to bring users to websites, characterized 
by URLs and home pages. 

Identify alterations in the nature of mass communication 
made possible by the Internet, the World Wide Web, and 
their convergence with all media. 
   Analyze social and cultural questions posed by the 
Internet, World Wide Web, and related emerging 
technologies. 
  Th e Internet makes freedom of expression a reality for 
anyone linked to it. But abuse of that freedom has led 
to calls for greater control. 
  Restrictions on access to pornography, protection of 
copyright, and threats to identity are primary battle-
grounds for opponents and proponents of control. 
   Describe the relationship between these new media and 
their various users and audiences. 
  Th e Internet’s potential contributions to participatory 
democracy are also in debate, as problems such as the 
technology and information gaps and the digital divide 
have yet to be resolved.  
   Apply key Internet and World Wide Web media literacy 
skills, especially in protecting your privacy and refl ecting 
on the Net’s double edge of (potentially) good and trou-
blesome change. 
  Th e Internet and Web, especially with their power to 
reshape all the mass media, raise multiple issues for 
media-literate users hoping to eff ectively make their 
way in an interconnected world, guidance for which 
can be found in the fi ve Internet freedoms: 
  Freedom to Access Content 
  Freedom to Use Applications 
  Freedom to Attach Personal Devices 
  Freedom to Obtain Service Plan Information 
  From discrimination, that is, network neutrality 
 Resources for Review and Discussion  
 REVIEW POINTS: TYING CONTENT TO LEARNING OUTCOMES 
 KEY TERMS 
 Internet, 233 
 digital computer, 234 
 binary code, 234 
 protocols, 236 
 hosts, 236 
 mainframe computer, 237 
 minicomputer, 237 
 terminals, 237 
 personal or microcomputer (PC), 237 
 operating system, 238 
 multimedia, 238 
 WAN (wide area network), 238 
 ISP (Internet service provider), 238 
 e-mail, 238 
  spam, 238  
 instant messaging (IM), 238 
 Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP), 238 
 World Wide Web, 238 
 URL (uniform resource locator), 240 
 domain name, 240 
 browsers, 240 
 search engines, 240 
 home page, 240 
 hyperlink, 242 
 social networking, 242 
 digital natives, 243 
 global village, 245 
 fl ash mobs (smart mobs), 247  
 fair use, 252 
 encryption, 252 
 dataveillance, 253 
 opt-in/opt-out, 253, 254 
 radio frequency identifi cation (RFID) 
chip, 254 
 augmented reality (AR), 254  
 cloud computing, 254 
 click stream, 255 
 cookies, 255 
 spyware, 255 
 network neutrality, 255 
 technology gap, 256 
 digital divide, 256 
 information gap, 258 
 knowledge gap, 258 
 metering, 259 

CHAPTER 10 
The Internet and the World Wide Web 
261
 QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW 
 1.  What is the importance of each of these people to the de-
velopment of the computer: Charles Babbage, John 
Atanasoff , John Mauchly, and John Presper Eckert? 
 2.  What were the contributions of Joseph C. R. Licklider, Paul 
Baran, Bill Gates, Steve Jobs, and Stephen Wozniak to the 
development and popularization of the Internet?  
 3.  What are digital computers, microcomputers, and main-
frame computers? 
 4.  What factors have led to the popularity of the World 
Wide Web? 
 5.  What are the diff ering positions on Internet copyright? 
 6.  Why is there renewed interest in Marshall McLuhan? What 
does he mean by the global village and media as exten-
sions of our bodies? 
 7.  What are the two primary privacy issues for online commu-
nication? What are some of the new technological threats?  
    8.  What is a blog? How might blogs alter journalism? 
 9.  What are some of the arguments supporting the idea that 
the Internet will be a boost to participatory democracy? 
What are some of the counterarguments?  
 10.  What are the technology and information gaps? What do 
they have to do with virtual democracy or cyberdemoc-
racy? What is the digital divide?  
For further review, go to the LearnSmart study module for 
this chapter.
 QUESTIONS FOR CRITICAL THINKING AND DISCUSSION 
 1.  What controls should be placed on blogs, if any? Do you 
see them as a way of distributing power in the culture be-
tween traditional media outlets and ordinary individuals? 
Why or why not? 
 2.  Do you ever make personal information available online? 
If so, how confi dent are you of its security? Do you take 
steps to protect your privacy? 
    3.  Do you believe the new communication technologies 
will improve or damage participatory democracy? 
Why? Can you relate a personal experience of how 
the Net increased or limited your involvement in 
the political process?  


 
263
 Learning Objectives 
 It is no small irony that PR has such poor PR. We criticize the ﬂ acks who try to spin the truth 
because PR is most obvious when used to reclaim the reputation of someone or some 
organization in need of such help. But public relations is essential for maintaining 
relationships between organizations and their publics. In fact, much PR is used for good. 
After studying this chapter you should be able to
 Outline the history and development of the public relations industry. 
 Describe how the organizational and economic nature of the contemporary public 
relations industry shapes the messages with which publics interact, especially in an 
increasingly converged media environment. 
 Identify diﬀ erent types of public relations and the diﬀ erent publics each is designed 
to serve. 
 Explain the relationship between public relations and its various publics. 
 Apply key media literacy skills when consuming public relations messages, especially 
video news releases. 
Apps like Gripe enrich the relationship between 
organizations and their publics.
Reprinted by permission of Gri.pe
 11
 Public Relations 

 “ W HAT’S WITH THE SNICKERS? I thought you were on a diet.” 
 “I am.” 
 “O.K., but why are you watching TV? I thought you had a term paper due tomorrow.” 
 “Well, my babysitter, if you must know I’m helping fi ght hunger. Snickers provides 
food to people who don’t have enough to eat. I just have to type the code on the wrap-
per and the company will donate two meals to a family in need. Th e more candy I eat, 
the more people get fed. Snickers wants to ‘bar hunger,’ get it?” 
 “I do. And TV?” 
 “I’m watching the races. See car 18, that’s Kyle Busch, and see the logo . . . Bar 
Hunger. He’s supporting the eff ort, so I’m supporting him. You sure you get the bar 
hunger pun?” 
 “Yes, I get it. But I still don’t get you.” 
 More than likely what your curious friend doesn’t get is the relationship between 
auto racing, candy bars, and alleviating hunger. You, however, know that Mars Choco-
late, the makers of Snickers, like thousands of other companies, has teamed up with a 
public service organization to do good for the community while burnishing its corpo-
rate image, not unimportant at a time when confi dence in the corporate world is a bit 
shaky. Hoping to reduce the suff ering of at least some of the nearly 40 million Ameri-
cans who go to bed hungry every night, Mars assembled celebrities like actor David 
Arquette and rockers Benji and Joel Madden from Good Charlotte, magazines like  GQ 
and  Rolling Stone,  and athletes like Mr. Busch; used Facebook, Twitter, and a dedicated 
Web page; and teamed up with Feeding America, the nation’s largest hunger-relief 
charity with more than 200 individual food banks across the country. Th e Bar Hunger 
campaign is the company’s quite visible public participation public relations eff ort. 
    In this chapter we investigate the public relations industry and its relationship with 
mass media and their audiences. We fi rst defi ne public relations. Th en we study its 
history and development as the profession matured from its beginnings in hucksterism 
to a full-fl edged, communication-based industry. We see how the needs and interests 
1800
1850
1896   ▲ William Jennings Bryan and William McKinley launch first national
 
political campaigns
1889   Westinghouse establishes first corporate public relations department
1833   ▲ Andrew Jackson hires Amos Kendall, first presidential press
 
secretary
1773   ▲ Boston Tea Party 
264 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries

of the profession’s various publics became part of the public relations process. We also 
defi ne exactly who those publics are. Th e scope and nature of the industry are detailed. 
Types of public relations activities and the organization of a typical public relations 
operation are described. We study trends such as globalization and specialization, as 
well as the impact of new, converging communication technologies on the industry. 
Finally, we discuss trust in public relations. As our media literacy skill, we learn how 
to recognize video news releases.  
 Deﬁ ning Public Relations  
 Feeding America, like Mothers Against Drunk Driving, Save Venice, Handgun Control 
Incorporated, the National Environmental Trust, and countless other nonprofi t orga-
nizations, is an interest group that uses a variety of public relations tools and strategies 
to serve a variety of publics. It wants to use public relations to do good. Th e companies 
that sponsor its activities also want to do good—do good for their communities  and 
for themselves. Even the most cynical person must applaud their eff orts on behalf of 
feeding people in need. 
 But for many people, eff orts such as these serve to demonstrate one of the ironies 
of public relations, both as an activity and as an industry: Public relations has terrible 
public relations. We dismiss information as “just PR.” Public relations professionals are 
frequently equated with snake oil salespeople, hucksters, and other willful deceivers. 
Th ey are referred to both inside and outside the media industries as    fl acks . Yet virtually 
every organization and institution—big and small, public and private, for-profi t and 
volunteer—uses public relations as a regular part of its operation. Many have their own 
public relations departments. Th e term “public relations” carries such a negative con-
notation that most independent companies and company departments now go by the 
name “public aff airs,” “corporate aff airs,” or “public communications.” 
1900
1950
2000
2005   VNR controversy
2007   Rise of the transparentists
2010   ▲ Toyota crisis
2011   Facebook's stealth attack on Google
1954   PRSA Code of Ethics
1962   PRSA accreditation program
1980   ▲ MADD
1906   The Publicity Bureau, first publicity company
1913   Lee’s Declaration of Principles
1915   Cadillac’s Penalty of Leadership
1917   ▲ President Wilson establishes Committee on Public Information
1929   Torches of Liberty
1938   Foreign Agents Registration Act
1941   Office of War Information
1946   Federal Regulation of Lobbying Act
1947   Public Relations Society of America (PRSA); The Hucksters 
CHAPTER 11 
Public Relations 
265

266 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
 Th e problem rests, in part, on confusion 
over what public relations actually is. Th ere is 
no universally accepted defi nition of public 
relations because it can be and is many 
things—publicity, research, public affairs, 
media relations, promotion, merchandising, 
and more. Much of the contact media con-
sumers have with public relations occurs 
when the industry defends people and com-
panies who have somehow run afoul of the 
public. China sought help from Ogilvy Public 
Relations when it was discovered that the toys 
it was exporting to the United States were 
coated with dangerous lead paint and the 
toothpaste it was sending here was tainted with diethylene glycol, a toxin. Washington 
PR giant Qorvis’s representation of repressive Middle Eastern regimes Yemen and Bah-
rain led to a much-publicized walk-out by a third of its partners. At the height of the 
recent tumultuous debate over reforming the American health care system, Get Health 
Reform Right was caught paying online gamers virtual currency (Chapter 9) to send 
prewritten, antireform e-mails to Congress. Th e group was actually an    astroturf (a fake 
grassroots organization) public relations outfi t funded by 10 of the country’s largest 
insurers. In summer 2011 Facebook was caught red-handed hiring PR giant Burson-
Marsteller to plant stories critical of Google’s privacy practices in leading mainstream 
and Internet news outlets. 
 Yet when seven people died from cyanide poisoning after taking tainted Tylenol 
capsules in 1982, a skilled and honest public relations campaign by Johnson & Johnson 
(makers of Tylenol) and its public relations fi rm, Burson-Marsteller, saved the brand 
and restored trust in the product. In 2010 when Toyota, famed for its safety record, 
was struck by a series of recalls surrounding sudden involuntary acceleration in 
several of its models, its direct and aggressive campaign to identify and eliminate 
the problem, going so far as to close down several manufacturing plants, helped 
save the brand and thousands of jobs. Th e public relations campaign by Mothers 
Against Drunk Driving (MADD) led directly to passage of tougher standards in 
virtually every state to remove drunk drivers from the road and to provide stiff er 
sentences for those convicted of driving under the infl uence. Dramatic reductions 
in the number of alcohol-related traffi  c accidents resulted from this eff ort (see the 
essay, “Th e MADD Campaign”).    
    “P.R. has a P.R. problem,” says Syracuse University public relations professor 
Brenda Wrigley. “We have to get our own house in order. . . . We are advocates and 
there’s no shame in that as long as it’s grounded in ethics and values.” Public Relations 
Society of America president Judy Phair adds, “For public relations to be eff ective, 
it has to be built on public trust” (both in O’Brien, 2005, p. 3.1). Accepting, there-
fore, that public relations should be honest and ethical, our defi nition of public 
relations is drawn from the Public Relations Society of America’s “widely accepted” 
defi nition: 
 “Public relations is a strategic communication process that builds mutually benefi cial 
relationships between organizations and their publics” (PRSA, 2012b).      
 A Short History of 
Public Relations  
 Th e history of this complex fi eld can be divided into four stages: early public relations, 
the propaganda–publicity stage, early two-way communication, and advanced two-way 
communication. Th ese stages have combined to shape the character of this industry.    
 Snickers and racecar driver Kyle Busch team up 
with Feeding America to help alleviate hunger for 
millions of Americans.

CHAPTER 11 
Public Relations 
267
 Early Public Relations 
 Archaeologists in Iraq have uncovered a tablet dating from 1800 B.C.E. that today we 
would call a public information bulletin. It provided farmers with information on sow-
ing, irrigating, and harvesting their crops. Julius Caesar fed the people of the Roman 
Empire constant reports of his achievements to maintain morale and to solidify his 
reputation and position of power. Genghis Khan would send “advance men” to tell 
stories of his might, hoping to frighten his enemies into surrendering. 
 Public relations campaigns abounded in colonial America and helped create the 
Colonies. Merchants, farmers, and others who saw their own advantage in a growing 
colonial population used overstatement, half-truths, and lies to entice settlers to the 
New World.  A Brief and True Report of the New Found Land of Virginia , by John White, 
was published in 1588 to lure European settlers. Th e Boston Tea Party was a well-
planned media event organized to attract public attention for a vital cause. Today we’d 
call it a    pseudo-event   , an event staged specifi cally to attract public attention. Benjamin 
 After her child was killed in a drunk-driving accident in 1980, Candy 
Lightner sought out others like herself, mothers who had lost children to 
the volatile mix of cars and alcohol. She hoped they could provide one 
another with emotional support and campaign to ensure that other par-
ents would never know their grief. Thus, Mothers Against Drunk Driving 
(MADD) was born. 
 Among MADD’s publics are teenagers. With its parallel organization, 
Students Against Destructive Decisions (SADD), MADD targets this high-
risk group through various educational campaigns and in the media that attract teen 
audiences. The organization also conducts public information campaigns aimed at adult 
drivers and repeat drunk drivers, often in conjunction with state and other authorities. It 
also assists legislators in their eﬀ orts to pass drunk-driving legislation. Two more of 
MADD’s publics are public servants such as police and paramedics who must deal with 
the eﬀ ects of drunk driving, and the families and friends who have lost loved ones in 
alcohol- or drug-related driving accidents. 
 Has MADD made a diﬀ erence? Since 1988, numerous prime-time television programs 
have featured episodes about the dangers of drunk driving. MADD’s professional staﬀ  has 
served as script advisors to these programs. MADD was instrumental in passage of the fed-
eral Drunk Driving Prevention Act of 1988, oﬀ ering states ﬁ nancial incentives to set up pro-
grams that would reduce alcohol- and drug-related automobile fatalities. This legislation 
also made 21 the national minimum legal drinking age. MADD successfully campaigned for 
the Victim’s Crime Act of 1984, making compensation from drunk drivers to victims and their 
families federal law. 
 There are two even more dramatic examples of how successful Light-
ner’s group has been. According to the U. S. Department of Transportation, 
the number of alcohol-related auto fatalities in the 30 years following 
MADD’s founding has fallen to record low levels (Phillips, 2010).   But 
MADD’s cultural impact shows most strongly in the way people treat 
drunk drivers. It is no longer cool to talk about how smashed we got at the 
party, or how we can’t believe we made it home. Almost every evening 
out with a group of friends includes a designated driver. Drunk drivers are 
considered nearly as despicable as child molesters. Many in public rela-
tions, traﬃ  c safety, and law enforcement credit MADD’s public relations 
eﬀ orts with this change.  
  MADD reaches its various publics in a variety of ways. 
 USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE 
 The MADD Campaign 
 “MADD’s cultural impact shows most strongly in the 
way people treat drunk drivers. It is no longer cool to 
talk about how smashed we got at the party, or how 
we can’t believe we made it home. Almost every 
evening out with a group of friends includes a 
designated driver. Drunk drivers are considered nearly 
as despicable as child molesters.” 

268 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
Franklin organized a sophisticated campaign to thwart the 
Stamp Act, the Crown’s attempt to limit colonial press free-
dom (Chapter 3), using his publications and the oratory skills 
of criers.  Th e Federalist Papers  of John Jay, James Madison, 
and Alexander Hamilton were originally a series of 85 letters 
published between 1787 and 1789, which were designed to 
sway public opinion in the newly independent United States 
toward support and passage of the new Constitution, an early 
eff ort at issue management. In all these examples, people or 
organizations were using communication to inform, to build 
an image, and to infl uence public opinion.   
 The Propaganda–Publicity Stage 
 Mass circulation newspapers and the fi rst successful con-
sumer magazines appeared in the 1830s, expanding the abil-
ity of people and organizations to communicate with the 
public. In 1833, for example, Andrew Jackson hired former 
newspaper journalist Amos Kendall as his publicist and the 
country’s fi rst presidential press secretary in an eff ort to 
combat the aristocrats who saw Jackson as too common to 
be president. 
 Abolitionists sought an end to slavery. Industrialists 
needed to attract workers, entice customers, and enthuse 
investors. P. T. Barnum, convinced that “there’s a sucker born 
every minute,” worked to lure them into his shows. All used 
the newspaper and the magazine to serve their causes.    
    Politicians recognized that the expanding press meant that 
a new way of campaigning was necessary. In 1896 presidential 
contenders William Jennings Bryan and William McKinley 
both established campaign headquarters in Chicago from 
which they issued news releases, position papers, and pamphlets. Th e modern national 
political campaign was born. 
 It was during this era that public relations began to acquire its deceitful, huckster 
image. PR was associated more with propaganda than with useful information. A dis-
regard for the public and the willingness of public relations experts to serve the pow-
erful fueled this view, but public relations began to establish itself as a profession 
 The December 16, 1773, Boston Tea Party was 
one of the ﬁ rst successful pseudo-events in the new 
land. Had cameras been around at the time, it would 
also have been a ﬁ ne photo op.
 Toyota’s powerful public relations campaign, 
going as far as to close down manufacturing plants, 
helped save the brand’s reputation and thousands of 
its employees’ jobs.

CHAPTER 11 
Public Relations 
269
during this time. Th e burgeoning press was its outlet, but westward expansion and 
rapid urbanization and industrialization in the United States were its driving forces. As 
the railroad expanded to unite the new nation, cities exploded with new people and 
new life. Markets, once small and local, became large and national. 
 As the political and fi nancial stakes grew, business and government became increas-
ingly corrupt and selfi sh—“Th e public be damned” was William Vanderbilt’s offi  cial 
comment when asked in 1882 about the eff ects of changing the schedule of his New 
York Central Railroad. Th e muckrakers’ revelations badly tarnished the images of 
industry and politics. Massive and lengthy coal strikes led to violence and more anti-
business feeling. In the heyday of the journalistic exposé and the Progressive move-
ment (Chapter 5), government and business both required some good public relations. 
 In 1889 Westinghouse Electric established the fi rst corporate public relations depart-
ment, hiring a former newspaper writer to engage the press and ensure that company 
positions were always clear and in the public eye. Advertising agencies, including N. W. 
Ayer & Sons and Lord and Th omas, began to off er public relations services to their 
clients. Th e fi rst publicity company, Th e Publicity Bureau, opened in Boston in 1906 and 
later expanded to New York, Chicago, Washington, St. Louis, and Topeka to help the 
railroad industry challenge federal regulations that it opposed. 
 Th e railroads also had other problems, and they turned to  New York World reporter 
Ivy Lee for help. Beset by accidents and strikes, the Pennsylvania Railroad usually 
responded by suppressing information. Lee recognized, however, that this was danger-
ous and counterproductive in a time when the public was already suspicious of big 
business, including the railroads. Lee escorted reporters to the scene of trouble, estab-
lished press centers, distributed press releases, and assisted reporters in obtaining 
additional information and photographs. 
 When a Colorado coal mine strike erupted in violence in 1913, the press attacked 
the mine’s principal stockholder, New York’s John D. Rockefeller, Jr., blaming him for 
the shooting deaths of several miners and their wives and children. Lee handled press 
relations and convinced Rockefeller to visit the scene to talk (and be photographed) 
with the strikers. Th e strike ended, and Rockefeller was soon being praised for his 
sensitive intervention. Eventually Lee issued his  Declaration of Principles , arguing 
that public relations practitioners should be providers of information, not purveyors 
of publicity.    
    Not all public relations at this time was damage control. Henry Ford began using 
staged events such as auto races to build interest in his cars, started  Ford Times (an 
in-house employee publication), and made heavy use of image advertising. 
 Public relations in this stage was typically one-way, from organization to public. 
Still, by the outbreak of World War I, most of the elements of today’s large-scale, mul-
tifunction public relations agency were in place.   
 Early Two-Way Communication 
 Because the U.S. public was not particularly enthusiastic about the nation’s entry into 
World War I, President Woodrow Wilson recognized the need for public relations in 
support of the war eff ort (Zinn, 1995, pp. 355–357). In 1917 he placed former newspa-
per journalist George Creel at the head of the newly formed Committee on Public 
Information (CPI). Creel assembled opinion leaders from around the country to advise 
the government on its public relations eff orts and to help shape public opinion. Th e 
committee sold Liberty Bonds and helped increase membership in the Red Cross. It 
engaged in public relations on a scale never before seen, using movies, public speak-
ers, articles in newspapers and magazines, and posters. 
 About this time public relations pioneer Edward Bernays began emphasizing the 
value of assessing the public’s feelings toward an organization. He would then use 
this knowledge as the basis for the development of the public relations eff ort. 
Together with Creel’s committee, Bernays’s work was the beginning of two-way com-
munication in public relations—that is, public relations talking to people and, in 
return, listening to them when they talked back. Public relations professionals began 
 1906 Car of High Degree Cadillac. This 
campaign was an early but quite successful example 
of image advertising—using paid ads to build 
goodwill for a product.

270 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
representing their various publics to their clients, just as 
they represented their clients to those publics. 
 Th ere were other advances in public relations during this 
stage. During the 1930s, President Franklin D. Roosevelt, 
guided by advisor Louis McHenry Howe, embarked on a 
sophisticated public relations campaign to win support for 
his then-radical New Deal policies. Central to Roosevelt’s 
eff ort was the new medium of radio. Th e Great Depression 
that plagued the country throughout this decade once again 
turned public opinion against business and industry. To 
counter people’s distrust, many more corporations estab-
lished in-house public relations departments; General 
Motors opened its PR operation in 1931. Public relations 
professionals turned increasingly to the newly emerging 
polling industry, founded by George Gallup and Elmo 
Roper, to better gauge public opinion as they constructed 
public relations campaigns and to gather feedback on the 
eff ectiveness of those campaigns. Gallup and Roper suc-
cessfully applied newly refi ned social science research 
methods—advances in sampling, questionnaire design, and 
interviewing—to meet the business needs of clients and 
their publics.    
 Th e growth of the industry was great enough and its rep-
utation suffi  ciently fragile that the National Association of 
Accredited Publicity Directors was founded in 1936. Th e 
American Council on Public Relations was established three 
years later. Th ey merged in 1947, creating the Public Rela-
tions Society of America (PRSA), the principal professional 
group for today’s public relations professionals. 
 World War II saw the government undertake another massive campaign to bolster 
support for the war eff ort, this time through the Offi  ce of War Information (OWI). 
Employing techniques that had proven successful during World War I, the OWI had 
the additional advantage of public opinion polling, fully established and powerful 
radio networks and their stars, and a Hollywood eager to help. Singer Kate Smith’s war 
bond radio telethon raised millions, and director Frank Capra produced the  Why We 
Fight fi lm series for the OWI. 
 During this era both public relations and Ivy Lee suff ered a serious blow to their 
reputations. Lee was the American public relations spokesman for Germany and its 
leader, Adolf Hitler. In 1934 Lee was required to testify before Congress to defend him-
self against the charge that he was a Nazi sympathizer. He was successful, but the 
damage had been done. As a result of Lee’s ties with Germany, Congress passed the 
Foreign Agents Registration Act in 1938, requiring anyone who engages in political 
activities in the United States on behalf of a foreign power to register as an agent of 
that power with the Justice Department.   
 Advanced Two-Way Communication 
 Post–World War II U.S. society was confronted by profound social change and expansion 
of the consumer culture. It became increasingly important for organizations to know 
what their clients were thinking, what they liked and disliked, and what concerned and 
satisfi ed them. As a result, public relations turned even more decidedly toward inte-
grated two-way communication, employing research, advertising, and promotion. 
 As the public relations industry became more visible, it opened itself to closer scru-
tiny. Best-selling novels such as  Th e Hucksters  and  Th e Man in the Gray Flannel Suit 
(and the hit movies made from them) painted a disturbingly negative picture of the 
industry and those who worked in it. Vance Packard’s best-selling book  Th e Hidden 
Persuaders , dealing with both public relations and advertising, further eroded PR 
 World War I brought government into 
large-scale public relations. Even today, the CPI’s 
posters—like this one encouraging citizens to 
support the war eﬀ ort through war bonds—are 
recognized.

CHAPTER 11 
Public Relations 
271
esteem. As a result of public distrust of the 
profession, Congress passed the Federal 
Regulation of Lobbying Act in 1946, requir-
ing, among other things, that those who 
deal with federal employees on behalf of 
private clients disclose those relationships. 
And as the industry’s conduct and ethics 
came under increasing attack, the PRSA 
responded with a code of ethics in 1954 
and an accreditation program in 1962. 
Both, with modifi cation and improvement, 
stand today.    
    Th e modern era of public relations is 
characterized by other events as well. More 
people buying more products meant that 
greater numbers of people were coming 
into contact with a growing number of busi-
nesses. As consumer markets grew in size, 
the basis for competition changed. Texaco, 
for example, used advertising to sell its gas-
oline. But because its products were not all 
that diff erent from those of other oil companies, it also sold its gasoline using its good 
name and reputation. Increasingly, then, advertising agencies began to add public rela-
tions divisions. Th is change served to blur the distinction between advertising and PR. 
 Women, who had proved their capabilities in all professional settings during World 
War II, became prominent in the industry. Anne Williams Wheaton was associate press 
secretary to President Eisenhower; Leone Baxter was president of the powerful public 
relations fi rm Whitaker and Baxter. Companies and their executives and politicians 
increasingly turned to television to burnish their images and shape public opinion. 
Nonprofi t, charitable, and social activist groups also mastered the art of public rela-
tions. Th e latter used public relations especially eff ectively to challenge the PR power 
of targeted businesses. Environmentalist, civil rights, and women’s rights groups and 
safety and consumer advocate organizations were successful in moving the public 
toward their positions and, in many cases, toward action.   
 Shaping the Character of Public Relations 
 Th roughout these four stages in the development of public relations, several factors 
combined to shape the identity of public relations, infl uence the way the industry does 
its job, and clarify the necessity for PR in the business and political world. 
 Advances in technology . Advances in industrial technology made possible mass pro-
duction, distribution, and marketing of goods. Advances in communication tech-
nology (and their proliferation) made it possible to communicate more effi  ciently 
and eff ectively with ever-larger and more specifi c audiences.  
 Growth of the middle class . A growing middle class, better educated and more aware 
of the world around it, required information about people and organizations.  
 Growth of organizations . As business, organized labor, and government grew bigger 
after World War II, the public saw them as more powerful and more remote. As 
a result, people were naturally curious and suspicious about these forces that 
seemed to be infl uencing all aspects of their lives.  
 Better research tools . Th e development of sophisticated research methodologies and 
statistical techniques allowed the industry to know its audiences better and to 
better judge the eff ectiveness of public relations campaigns.  
 Professionalization . Numerous national and international public relations organiza-
tions helped professionalize the industry and clean up its reputation. 
 Better known for hits such as  Mr. Smith Goes to 
Washington and  It’s a Wonderful Life , director Frank 
Capra brought his moviemaking talents to the 
government’s eﬀ orts to explain U.S. involvement in 
World War II and to overcome U.S. isolationism. His 
 Why We Fight  documentary series still stands as a 
classic of the form.

272 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
 Public Relations and Its Audiences  
 Virtually all of us consume public relations messages on a daily basis. Increasingly, the 
video clips we see on the local evening news are provided by a public relations fi rm 
or the PR department of some company or organization. Th e content of many of the 
stories we read online or hear on local radio news comes directly from PR-provided 
press releases. As one media relations fi rm explained in a promotional piece sent to 
prospective clients, “Th e media are separated into two categories. One is content and 
the other is advertising. Th ey’re both for sale. Advertising can be purchased directly 
from the publication or through an ad agency, and the content space you purchase 
from PR fi rms” (quoted in Jackson & Hart, 2002, p. 24). In addition, the feed-the-
hungry campaign we support, the poster encouraging us toward safer sex, and the 
corporation-sponsored art exhibit we attend are all someone’s public relations eff ort. 
Public relations professionals interact with seven categories of publics, and a    public is 
any group of people with a stake in an organization, issue, or idea: 
 Employees . An organization’s employees are its lifeblood, its family. Good public 
relations begins at home with company newsletters, social events, and internal 
and external recognition of superior performance.  
 Stockholders . Stockholders own the organization (if it is a public corporation). Th ey 
are “family” as well, and their goodwill is necessary for the business to operate. 
Annual reports and stockholder meetings provide a sense of belonging as well 
as information.  
 Communities . An organization has neighbors where it operates. Courtesy, as well as 
good business sense, requires that an organization’s neighbors be treated with 
friendship and support. Information meetings, company-sponsored safety and food 
drives, and open houses strengthen ties between organizations and their neighbors.  
 Media . Very little communication with an organization’s various publics can occur 
without the trust and goodwill of professionals in the mass media. Press packets, 
briefi ngs, and facilitating access to organization newsmakers build that trust and 
goodwill. 
 Government . Government is “the voice of the people” and, as such, deserves the 
attention of any organization that deals with the public. From a practical per-
spective, governments have the power to tax, regulate, and zone. Organizations 
 Criticism of public relations found its way into 
popular culture through a number of popular ﬁ lms 
and books. This scene is from the movie  The 
Hucksters .

CHAPTER 11 
Public Relations 
273
must earn and maintain the goodwill and trust of the government. Providing 
information and access through reports, position papers, and meetings with per-
sonnel keeps government informed and builds its trust in an organization. Th e 
government is also the target of many PR eff orts, as organizations and their lob-
byists seek favorable legislation and other action.  
 Investment community . Corporations are under the constant scrutiny of those who 
invest their own money, invest the money of others, or make recommendations 
on investment. Th e value of a business and its ability to grow are functions of the 
investment community’s respect for and trust in it. As a result, all PR eff orts that 
build an organization’s good image speak to that community.  
 Customers . Consumers pay the bills for companies through their purchase of prod-
ucts or services. Th eir goodwill is invaluable. Th at makes good PR, in all its forms, 
invaluable. 
 Scope and Structure of the 
Public Relations Industry  
 Today some 275,200 people identify themselves as working in public relations, and 
virtually every major U.S. company has a public relations department, some housing 
as many as 400 employees. Th ere are over 7,000 public relations fi rms in the United 
States, the largest employing as many as 2,000 people. Most, however, have fewer, some 
as few as four employees. American PR fi rms had $5.7 billion in revenue in 2010, a 
sum expected to reach nearly $11 billion in 2015 (PRSA, 2012a).  Figure 11.1  shows the 
10 largest public relations fi rms in the United States. 
  Figure 11.1  10 Largest PR Firms in the United States, 2011.
 Source: Agency Report, 2012b.   
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Net fees in millions of dollars by ﬁrm rank and headquarters 
Edelman, Chicago
Ketchum, New York
Hill & Knowlton Strategies, New York
Fleischman-Hillard, St Louis
Weber Shandwick, New York
Burson-Marsteller, New York
MSL Group, Paris
Waggener Edstrom Worldwide, Bellevue, WA
GolinHarris, Chicago
Ogilvy PR Worldwide, New York
$354
$383
$352
$218
$182
$125
$101
$98
$154
$212

274 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
 Th ere are full-service public relations fi rms and those that provide only special ser-
vices. Media specialists for company CEOs, Web commentary monitoring services, and 
makers of video news releases are special service providers. Public relations fi rms bill 
for their services in a number of ways. Th ey may charge an hourly rate for services 
rendered, or they may be on call, charging clients a monthly fee to act as their public 
relations counsel. Hill and Knowlton, for example, charges a minimum fee of several 
thousand dollars a month. Th ird are    fi xed-fee arrangements , wherein the fi rm per-
forms a specifi c set of services for a client for a specifi c and prearranged fee. Finally, 
many fi rms bill for    collateral materials   , adding a surcharge as high as 17.65% for 
handling printing, research, and photographs. For example, if it costs $3,000 to have a 
poster printed, the fi rm charges the client $3,529.50 ($3,000  [$3,000  .1765]  
$3,000  $529.50).  
 Public Relations Activities 
 Regardless of the way public relations fi rms bill their clients, they earn their fees by 
off ering all or some of these 14 interrelated services: 
 
 1.  Community relations . Th is type of public aff airs work focuses on the communi-
ties in which the organization exists. If a city wants to build a new airport, for example, 
those whose property will be taken or devalued must be satisfi ed. If they are not, wide-
spread community opposition to the project may develop.  
 
 2.  Counseling . Public relations professionals routinely off er advice to an organiza-
tion’s management concerning policies, relationships, and communication with its 
various publics. Management must tell its publics “what we do.” Public relations helps 
in the creation, refi nement, and presentation of that message.  
 
 3.  Development/fund-raising . All organizations, commercial and nonprofi t, sur-
vive through the voluntary contributions in time and money of their members, 
friends, employees, supporters, and others. Public relations helps demonstrate the 
need for those contributions. Th ese activities sometimes take the form of    cause 
marketing   —work in support of social issues and causes—and their importance to 
clients is evidenced by data indicating that 83% of Americans believe that “compa-
nies need to do more good, not just less bad” and 77% say that “brands and corpo-
rations have a responsibility to improve the local communities in which they do 
business” (Greenberg, 2011). Figure 11.2 off ers a deeper look at the value of inform-
ing the public about clients’ eff orts at cause marketing and other forms of corporate 
social responsibility.  
 
 4.  Employee/member relations . Similar to the development function in that the 
target public is employees and members, this form of public relations responds spe-
cifi cally to the concerns of an organization’s employees or members and its retirees 
and their families. Th e goal is maintenance of high morale and motivation.  
 
 5.  Financial relations . Practiced primarily by corporate organizations, fi nancial PR 
is the enhancement of communication between investor-owned companies and their 
shareholders, the fi nancial community (for example, banks, annuity groups, and 
investment fi rms), and the public. Much corporate strategy, such as expansion into 
new markets and acquisition of other companies, is dependent upon good fi nancial 
public relations.  
 
 6.  Government aff airs . Th is type of public aff airs work focuses on government 
agencies.  Lobbying —directly interacting to infl uence elected offi  cials or government 
regulators and agents—is often a central activity.  
 
 7.  Industry relations . Companies must interact not only with their own custom-
ers and stockholders but also with other companies in their line of business, both 
competitors and suppliers. In addition, they must also stand as a single voice in 
dealing with various state and federal regulators. For example, groups as disparate 
as the Texas Restaurant Association, the American Petroleum Institute, and the 
National Association of Manufacturers all require public relations in dealing with 

CHAPTER 11 
Public Relations 
275
their various publics. Th e goal is the maintenance and prosperity of the industry as 
a whole.  
 
 8.  Issues management . Often an organization is as interested in infl uencing public 
opinion about some larger issue that will eventually infl uence its operation as it is in 
the improvement of its own image. Issues management typically uses a large-scale 
public relations campaign designed to move or shape opinion on a specifi c issue. Usu-
ally the issue is an important one that generates deep feelings. Death penalty activists, 
for example, employ a full range of communication techniques to sway people to their 
side. ExxonMobil frequently runs advertorials that address environmentalism and 
public transportation—important issues in and of themselves, but also important to 
the future of a leading manufacturer of gasoline.  
 
 9.  Media relations . As the number of media outlets grows and as advances in 
technology increase the complexity of dealing with them, public relations clients 
require help in understanding the various media, in preparing and organizing mate-
rials for them, and in placing those materials. In addition, media relations requires 
that the public relations professional maintain good relationships with profession-
als in the media, understand their deadlines and other constraints, and earn their 
trust.  
 
 10.  Marketing communication . Th is is a combination of activities designed to sell 
a product, service, or idea. It can include the creation of advertising; generation of 
publicity and promotion; design of packaging, point-of-sale displays, and trade show 
presentations; and design and execution of special events. It is important to note that 
PR professionals often use advertising but that the two are not the same. Th e diff er-
ence is one of control. Advertising is controlled communication—advertisers pay for 
ads to appear in specifi c media exactly as they want. PR tends to be less controlled. 
Th e PR fi rm cannot control how or when its press release is used by the local paper. 
It cannot control how the media react to Nike’s ongoing insistence that it has rectifi ed 
reported worker abuses in its overseas shops. Advertising becomes a public relations 
function when its goal is to build an image or to motivate action, as opposed to the 
  Figure 11.2  Global Consumers’ Attitudes 
toward Corporate Social Responsibility, 2011.
Source: Kerkian, 2011. 
Companies must analyze and evolve their business practices to make 
their impact as positive as possible.
Companies must go beyond legal compliance to operate responsibly.
It’s OK if a company is not perfect, as long as it is honest about its efforts.
I would buy a product that has environmental beneﬁts.
I would buy a product associated with a cause.
93%
94%
88%
94%
I would boycott a company for irresponsibility.
93%
I have researched a company’s business practices or support of issues.
34.5%
93%
Percentage of consumers who agree

276 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
usual function of selling products. Th e Smokey the Bear forest fi re prevention cam-
paign is a well-known successful public relations advertising campaign. 
  
Advertising and public relations obviously overlap even for manufacturers of con-
sumer products. Chevrolet must sell cars, but it must communicate with its various 
publics as well. Toyota, too, must sell cars. But in the wake of the involuntary accel-
eration recall, it needed serious public relations help. One result of the overlap of 
advertising and public relations is that advertising agencies increasingly own their own 
public relations departments or fi rms or associate closely with a PR company. For a 
close look at brand marketing in the Internet age, see the box, “Big but Silent No More: 
Protecting a Company’s Good Name in the Era of Social Media.” 
 
 Another way that advertising and public relations diff er is that advertising people 
typically do not set policy for an organization. Advertising people  implement policy 
after organization leaders set it. In contrast, public relations professionals usually are 
part of the policy decision process because they are the liaison between the organiza-
tion and its publics. Eff ective organizations have come to understand that even in 
routine decisions the impact on public opinion and subsequent consequences can be 
of tremendous importance. As a result, public relations has become a management 
function, and a public relations professional typically sits as a member of a company’s 
highest level of management. You’ll soon read more about this.  
 
 11.  Minority relations/multicultural aff airs . Public aff airs activities are directed 
toward specifi c racial minorities in this type of work. When the Denny’s restaurant 
chain was beset by numerous complaints of racial discrimination during the 1990s, it 
undertook an aggressive campaign to speak to those who felt disenfranchised by the 
events. A secondary goal of its eff orts, which were aimed largely at the African Ameri-
can community, was to send a message to its own employees and the larger public 
that this was the company line, that discrimination was wrong, that everybody was 
welcome in Denny’s.  
 
 12.  Public aff airs . Th e public aff airs function includes interacting with offi  cials and 
leaders of the various power centers with whom a client must deal. Community and 
government offi  cials and leaders of pressure groups are likely targets of this form of 
public relations. Public aff airs emphasizes social responsibility and building goodwill, 
such as when a company donates money for a computer lab to the local high school.  
 
 13.  Special events and public participation . Public relations can be used to stimu-
late interest in an organization, person, or product through a well-planned, focused 
“happening,” an activity designed to facilitate interaction between an organization and 
its publics.  
 
 14.  Research . Organizations often must determine the attitudes and behaviors of 
their various publics in order to plan and implement the activities necessary to infl u-
ence or change those attitudes and behaviors.    
  The ﬁ ctitious Acme Fishhook Research Council in this Robotman & Monty cartoon is a good example of an organization that engages in industry relations activities. 
 MONTY: © Jim Meddick/Dist. by United Feature Syndicate, Inc. 

CHAPTER 11 
Public Relations 
277
buckle the belt as well)? 1) You admit you lied. 2) Change your policy, or at least re-train 
your staﬀ  to be a lot more human & a lot less corporate” (Hall, 2009). The airline never ac-
cepted the challenge.   
 This event occurred against a new reality for public relations professionals working to 
protect their brands’ reputations—instant, immediate, unﬁ ltered consumer commentary. 
“In 1985,” wrote PR executive Howard Bragman, “it took ﬁ ve television commercials to get 
85% penetration of the TV-viewing households. [Now], it takes 1,292 to achieve the same 
penetration” (2009, p. 28). But Mister Smith turned worldwide attention on Southwest with 
 zero  commercials. As a result, writes another industry professional, Len Stein, “Consumers 
(we the people) are becoming more demanding and discerning of corporate and product 
values. No longer does oﬀ ering ‘high-quality products and services’ and displaying ‘transpar-
ent and honest business practices’ merit our trust. In increasing numbers, people want to 
know just what kind of behavior to expect from companies and how they are aligned with 
the greater good.” 
 This is good news for consumers, argues Mr. Stein, because companies will have to 
react to this new situation by actually becoming better. “The public relations profession will 
have to take a stand with ‘we the people’ and counsel their clients as to how to better align 
their practices to foster the greater good of society” (2010). One way to make this happen, 
says Mike Swenson of PR ﬁ rm Barklay, is to use the same new media “to engage in conver-
sations directly with individual consumers. There are no ﬁ lters and no buﬀ ers between 
brands and consumers in social media conversations. It’s a two-way street that levels the 
playing ﬁ eld between brands and consumers” (in “PR in the Driver’s Seat,” 2009, p. S6). 
Adds another industry pro, Roxanne Taylor of Accenture, “I don’t believe in PR. By this, 
I mean I don’t believe in hype or spin. However, I believe in authentic communication” (in 
“Why I Believe in PR,” 2009, p. S12). 
 Enter your voice. Are we seeing the end of    spin   , outright lying or obfuscation, as new, 
instant consumer media enforce candor? Do you think that companies will more openly 
engage their consumers in authentic communication about expectations, reputation, and 
service? If it took public battering at the hands of Twitter to involve Southwest in this dis-
cussion to better service, will that embarrassment always have to come ﬁ rst, or will the 
mere existence of social media encourage companies to proactively improve their products 
and services?  
   Kevin Smith: Southwest Airline’s big fat PR problem.   
 CULTURAL FORUM 
 Big but Silent No More: Protecting a 
Company’s Good Name in the Era of 
Social Media 
 An unfortunate incident between an airline and a celebrity thrust the issue 
of public relations in the Internet age into the cultural forum. 
 In February 2009, ﬁ lm director and self-admitted fat man Kevin 
Smith, after being seated on a Southwest Airlines ﬂ ight, was asked to 
leave because he was too big. Known as Silent Bob in his screen roles, 
Smith was anything but quiet as he immediately began tweeting to his 
1.6 million followers: “You [messed] with the wrong sedentary processed-
foods eater! … I broke no regulation, oﬀ ered no ‘safety risk’ (what, was 
I gonna roll on a fellow passenger?) … I saw someone bigger than me on THAT ﬂ ight! But 
I wasn’t about to throw a fellow Fatty under the plane as I’m being proﬁ led. But he & I made 
eye contact, & he was like ‘Please don’t tell …’” (Meadows, 2009). 
 What quickly became known as “Fatgate” went global, but Smith refused all inter-
views, choosing to use social networking websites, podcasts, and his blog to turn his 
personal embarrassment into a 
discussion of society’s alleged mis-
treatment of overweight people. 
Southwest responded in kind, 
tweeting and blogging an apology 
to Mr. Smith, but reiterating its 
policy on overweight passengers. 
Then Smith appeared on  The Daily 
Show  from where he tweeted, “Hey 
@SouthwestAir: you bring that same row of seats to the DailyShow, and I’ll sit in ‘em for all 
to see on TV. If I don’t ﬁ t, I’ll donate $10k to charity of your choice” and “But when I do (& 
 “The public relations profession will have to take a stand 
with ‘we the people’ and counsel their clients as to how to 
better align their practices to foster the greater good of 
society.” 

278 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
 Public Relations’ Management Function 
 We saw earlier that public relations people help  establish communication strategies 
and advertising people  implement  them. Th is is public relations’ management func-
tion, and it is critical to any organization’s success. According to the Public Relations 
Society of America, this function encompasses the following: 
   •  Anticipating, analyzing and interpreting public opinion, attitudes and issues that 
might impact, for good or ill, the operations and plans of the organization.  
   •  Counseling management at all levels in the organization on policy decisions and 
courses of action and communication, taking into account their public ramifi ca-
tions and the organization’s social or citizenship responsibilities.  
   •  Researching, conducting and evaluating, on a continuing basis, programs of action 
and communication to achieve the informed public understanding necessary to the 
success of an organization’s aims.  
   •  Planning and implementing the organization’s eff orts to infl uence or change public 
policy. 
   •  Setting objectives, planning, budgeting, recruiting and training staff , and developing 
facilities, in other words, managing the resources needed to perform all of the above 
(PRSA, 2012b). 
 Organization of a Public Relations Operation 
 Public relations operations come in all sizes. Regardless of size, however, the typical 
PR fi rm or department will have these types of positions (but not necessarily these 
titles): 
 Executive . Th is is the chief executive offi  cer who, sometimes with a staff , sometimes 
alone, sets policy and serves as the spokesperson for the operation.  
 Account executives . Each account has its own executive who provides advice to the 
client, defi nes problems and situations, assesses the needs and demands of the 
client’s publics, recommends a communication plan or campaign, and gathers 
the PR fi rm’s resources in support of the client.  
 Creative specialists . Th ese are the writers, graphic designers, artists, video and audio 
producers, and photographers—anybody necessary to meet the communication 
needs of the client.  
 Media specialists . Media specialists are aware of the requirements, preferences, 
limitations, and strengths of the various media used to serve the client. Th ey fi nd 
the right media for clients’ messages. 
 The best public relations can serve both the 
client and the public, as demonstrated by the Ronald 
McDonald CareMobile program.
 Larger public relations operations may also have these 
positions as need demands: 
 Research . Th e key to two-way public relations communi-
cation rests in research—assessing the needs of a cli-
ent’s various publics and the eff ectiveness of the eff orts 
aimed at them. Polling, one-on-one interviews, and 
 focus groups   , in which small groups of a targeted pub-
lic are interviewed, provide the PR operation and its 
client with feedback.  
 Government relations . Depending on the client’s needs, 
lobbying or other direct communication with govern-
ment offi  cials may be necessary.  
 Financial services . Very specifi c and sophisticated knowl-
edge of economics, fi nance, and business or corporate 
law is required to provide clients with dependable 
fi nancial public relations. 

CHAPTER 11 
Public Relations 
279
 Trends and Convergence 
in Public Relations  
 Globalization, Concentration, and Specialization 
 As they have in the media industries themselves, globalization and concentration have 
come to public relations in the form of foreign ownership, reach of PR fi rms’ operations 
into foreign countries, and the collection of several diff erent companies into giant mar-
keting organizations. For example, three of the world’s top-10-earning PR fi rms, despite 
their U.S. roots, are owned by London-based WPP: Hill and Knowlton, Burson-
Marsteller, and Ogilvy PR Worldwide. Hill and Knowlton alone has 2,000 employees 
working in 79 offi  ces in 44 countries. New York–based independent Edelman PR has 
3,100 employees in 51 offi  ces around the world. Marketing giant Omnicom Group, also 
headquartered in New York, operates in 100 countries, has over 112,262 employees, 
and serves more than 5,000 clients. It accomplishes this with three of the world’s 
top-seven-earning PR fi rms (Fleishman-Hillard, Ketchum, and Porter Novelli) and 
several specialty PR shops (for example, Brodeur Worldwide, Clark & Weinstock, Gavin 
Anderson & Company, and Cone). But Omnicom is also parent to several national and 
international advertising agencies, including three of the top 10 global earners (BBDO 
Worldwide, DDB Worldwide, and TBWA Worldwide); several media planning and buy-
ing companies; event branding and planning companies; outdoor, direct marketing, 
and online advertising specialty shops; and the global marketing company Diversifi ed 
Agency Services, which itself is home to more than 160 companies off ering services 
through its 700 offi  ces in 71 countries. You can see the world’s 10 largest marketing 
organizations in  Figure 11.3 . 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
8
10
Y & R Group, New York
Dentsu, Tokyo
Publicis Worldwide, Paris
DDB Worldwide, New York
Ogilvy & Mather, New York
TBWA Worldwide, New York
BBDO Worldwide, New York
McCann Worldgroup, New York
DraftFCB, Chicago/New York
Euro RSCG Worldwide, Suresne, France
Net fees in millions of dollars by ﬁrm rank and headquarters 
$2,600
$2,920
$1,700
$2,340
$2,320
$1,400
$1,330
$1,400
$3,410
$3,280
   Figure 11.3  World’s 10 Largest Marketing Companies, 2010. 
 Source: Agency Report, 2011.   

280 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
 Another trend in public relations is specialization. We’ve seen the 14 activities of 
public relations professionals, but specialization can expand that list. Th is specializa-
tion takes two forms. Th e fi rst is defi ned by issue. Environmental public relations is 
attracting ever-larger numbers of people, both environmentalists and industrialists. 
E. Bruce Harrison Consulting attracts corporate clients in part because of its reputation 
as a fi rm with superior    greenwashing skills. Th at is, Harrison is particularly adept at 
countering the public relations eff orts aimed at its clients by environmentalists. Health 
care and pharmaceuticals has also recently emerged as a signifi cant public relations 
specialty. 
 Convergence 
 Th e second impetus driving specialization has to do with the increasing number of 
media outlets used in public relations campaigns that rely on new and converging 
technologies. Online information and advertising are a growing part of the total public 
relations media mix, as are    video news releases ( VNRs —preproduced reports about 
a client or its products distributed free of charge to television stations) and videocon-
ferencing. We’ll revisit video news releases near the end of this chapter. Television, in 
the form of the    satellite-delivered media tour , in which spokespeople can be simul-
taneously interviewed by a worldwide audience connected to the on-screen inter-
viewee via telephone, has further extended the reach of public relations. In addition, 
Web publishing has greatly expanded the number and type of available media outlets. 
All require professionals with quite specifi c skills. 
 Th e public relations industry is responding to the convergence of traditional media 
with the Internet in other ways as well. One is the development of    integrated market-
ing communications (IMC)   . We saw earlier how advertising and PR often overlap, but 
in IMC, fi rms actively combine public relations, marketing, advertising, and promotion 
functions into a more or less seamless communication campaign that is as at home on 
the Web as it is on the television screen and magazine page. Th e goal of this integration 
is to provide the client and agency with greater control over 
communication (and its interpretation) in an increasingly frag-
mented but synergized media environment. For example, a 
common IMC tactic is to employ    viral marketing , a strategy 
that relies on targeting specifi c Internet users with a given com-
munication and relying on them to spread the word through the 
communication channels with which they are most comfort-
able. Th is is IMC, and it is inexpensive and eff ective. 
 Th e industry has had to respond to the Internet in another 
way. Th e Net has provided various publics with a new, powerful 
way to counter even the best public relations eff ort, as we saw 
in Southwest Airlines’ social media dust-up. Tony Juniper of the 
British environmental group Friends of the Earth calls the Inter-
net “the most potent weapon in the toolbox of resistance.” As 
Peter Verhille of PR giant Entente International explains, “One 
of the major strengths of pressure groups—in fact the leveling 
factor in their confrontation with powerful companies—is their 
ability to exploit the instruments of the telecommunication 
revolution. Th eir agile use of global tools such as the Internet 
reduces the advantages that corporate budgets once provided” 
(both quotes from Klein, 1999, pp. 395–396). For example, the 
Internet is central to United Students Against Sweatshops’ 
ongoing eff orts to monitor the child labor, safety, and working 
conditions of U.S. apparel and shoe manufacturers’ overseas 
operations. USAS used the Net to build a nationwide network 
of students that organized protests and boycotts, resulting in 
several “victories”—for example, forcing Nike and Reebok to 
allow workers at one of its Mexican factories to unionize. Public 
  This is a very successful, long-running 
advertising campaign. It is also a very successful, 
long-running public relations campaign. 

CHAPTER 11 
Public Relations 
281
relations agencies and in-house PR departments have responded in a number of ways. 
One is IMC. Another is the hiring of in-house Web monitors; a third is the growth of 
specialty fi rms such as eWatch, whose function is to alert clients to negative references 
on the Web and suggest eff ective countermeasures. 
 Smartphones, Tablets, and Social Networking Sites 
 We’ve already seen in this chapter how the Internet and social media are changing the 
PR landscape; industry professionals have also taken note. “Th e long-suff ering, much-
maligned press release, I’d argue, fi nally died,” wrote  Advertising Age’s  Simon Dumenco, 
thanks to Twitter (2010, p. 28). Publics can Tweet, as did Kevin Smith, and so can 
agencies and their clients, making the press release, a PR staple since 1906, obsolete. 
“Welcome to a new wired world of empowered consumers,” says Cone Communica-
tions’ chief reputation offi  cer Mike Lawrence (in Kerkian, 2011). Smartphones and 
tablets give PR’s publics instant, on-the-spot opportunities to pan or praise its clients; 
that’s obvious. But more important, they give people, especially young people, a greater 
sense of involvement with a company or organization. “Millennials demand fairness, 
transparency and clear, consistent rules in every aspect of life,” writes Nick Shore, vice 
president of MTV’s research group, “As consumers they feel comfortable leveraging 
their power (individually and collectively) to ‘level the playing fi eld.’” He off ered a 
well-known example, “Th ey more or less took down the record industry, demanding 
the right to buy and download single songs versus entire CDs” (in Goetzl, 2011). 
 Mobile technology and social networking also combine to grant publics “free mega-
phones that carry a customer’s complaint around the world,” writes  New York Times’ 
technology writer Randall Stross (2011, p. BU3). Gripe, for example, is a mobile app 
for smartphones and tablets that allows the instantaneous posting of a complaint or 
praise to people’s Facebook friends and Twitter followers as well as to the named orga-
nization’s customer service department. Naturally, some industry professionals worry 
about “social bullying” because a small number of critical customers, once connected 
to their friends and followers, can exert disproportionate infl uence. But Gripe’s Farhad 
Mohit counters that because many others see the comments, it is unlikely that Face-
book and Twitter will be abused. “You don’t want to be viewed as a jerk by your friends 
and family” (in Stross, 2011, p. BU3).   
 Trust in Public Relations 
 We began our discussion of public relations with the industry’s self-admission that the 
profession sometimes bears a negative reputation. Edward Bernays’s call for greater 
sensitivity to the wants and needs of the various publics and Ivy Lee’s insistence that 
public relations be open and honest were the industry’s fi rst steps away from its huck-
ster roots. Th e post–World War II code of ethics and accreditation programs were a 
second and more important step. Yet Bernays himself was dissatisfi ed with the profes-
sion’s progress. Th e father of public relations died in 1995 at the age of 103. He spent 
the greater part of his last years demanding that the industry, especially the PRSA, 
police itself. In 1986 Bernays wrote, 
 Under present conditions, an unethical person can sign the code of the PRSA, become a 
member, practice unethically—untouched by any legal sanctions. In law and medicine, 
such an individual is subject to disbarment from the profession. . . . Th ere are no stan-
dards. . . . Th is sad situation makes it possible for anyone, regardless of education or ethics, 
to use the term “public relations” to describe his or her function. (p. 11)   
 Many people in the profession share Bernays’s concern, especially when the indus-
try’s own research shows that 85% of the American public thinks that PR practitioners 
“sometimes take advantage of the media to present misleading information that is 
favorable to their clients.” Th at same Public Relations Society of America poll revealed 
that 79% of the general public believes that PR people “are only interested in dissemi-
nating information that helps their clients make money” (Burton, 2005). As a result, 

282 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
Burson-Marsteller senior counselor Fraser Seitel (2004) is ada-
mant about restoring trust in PR: 
 Th e heart of public relations counsel is “to do the right thing.” Th e 
cardinal rule of public relations is to “never lie.” Nonetheless, in 
one bridling survey of 1,700 public relations executives, it was 
revealed that 25 percent of those interviewed admitted they had 
“lied on the job,” 39 percent said they had exaggerated the truth, 
and another 44 percent said they had felt “uncertain” about the 
ethics of what they did. (p. 132)      
    Trust, too, is important to Fleishman-Hillard’s executive vice 
president, John Saunders, who called on his colleagues to debate 
what their industry stands for. He told the 2005 annual meeting 
of the International Communications Consultancy Organisation, 
 Th is is no longer the golden age of PR. We will need to change to 
get to where we want to be in the future. . . . We need to devote 
more energy to ethics. If we are to advise on reputation manage-
ment, we must be above reproach. . . . We need to impose more 
rigorous standards on ourselves. (in Marriott, 2005)   
 The father of public relations, Edward Bernays, 
used the last years of his long career and life to 
campaign for improved industry ethics.
 Today in the United States there is nearly one person employed in PR for every 
100,000 Americans, compared to .25 journalists for that same number of citizens, a 
“ratio of better than three-to-one, better equipped, better fi nanced” (Sullivan, 2011). 
Estimates from both inside and outside the industry claim that from 50% to 90% of the 
stories we read in the paper or see on television originate entirely or in part from a 
public relations operation in the form of either a printed or a video news release. Crit-
ics further contend that 40% of what we read and see appears virtually unedited, lead-
ing PR professionals to boast that “the best PR is invisible” and “the best PR ends up 
looking like news” (Stauber & Rampton, 1995, p. 2). 
 But not all public relations professionals fi nd comfort in the invisibility of their work 
or in the public’s inability to distinguish between news and PR. In 2007, after Wal-
Mart’s and Sony’s PR operations were discovered paying fake bloggers (   fl ogs ) to pro-
mote their brands (and attack competitors’), there were calls from  transparentists 
who, according to PR executive Eric Webber (2007), demanded that the industry “adopt 
a position of full and total disclosure, driven by the innate openness and accessibility 
to information available on the Internet.” If public relations is to hold consumer (and 
client) trust, he argued, its professionals must recognize that “it’s too easy now for 
journalists, pro and amateur alike, to fi gure out when companies and their PR people 
lie, so we’d better tell the truth” (p. 8). 
 But if people  are  lied to by public relations, the cultural implications could not be 
more profound. What becomes of the negotiation function of culture, wherein we 
debate and discuss our values and interests in the cultural forum, if public relations 
gives some voices advantages not available to others? Th e remedy for this potential 
problem: Consumers must make themselves aware of the sources of information and 
the process by which it is produced. As we’ve seen throughout this book, we would 
expect nothing less of a media-literate person.       
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS   
 Recognizing Video News Releases 
 Th e calls from PR professionals for ethics, accountability, and honesty were the 
result of the abuses noted earlier in this chapter. But another that caught the atten-
tion of the public and industry alike was the recent revelation that government 
agencies were making frequent use of video news releases (VNRs), presenting their 

CHAPTER 11 
Public Relations 
283
favored public policy positions as actual news reports. In the uproar that followed, 
VNRs themselves became controversial. Congress’s own General Accountability 
Offi  ce deemed their use by governmental agencies illegal. Th e FCC vowed to 
strengthen its rules on disclosure of the sources of VNRs and raised the maximum 
fi ne it could level at an off ending station. Th e broadcast industry’s Radio–Television 
News Directors Association clarifi ed and strengthened its rules on VNR identifi cation 
and disclosure. 
 But VNRs are still used in 90% of all American television newsrooms, primarily 
because even though many local stations have increased the amount of airtime they 
devote to news programming, few have the time or resources to produce a suffi  cient 
amount of original content to fi ll it. Moreover, despite the stricter FCC and industry-
mandated disclosure rules, a recent Center for Media and Democracy study of 
69 stations with a total audience of half the country found that while all made use 
of VNRs, not a single station identifi ed them as such (Barstow, 2006) and a quarter 
of U.S. television news executives admit “a blurring of lines between advertising and 
news” (Farhi, 2012). So where the problem for broadcasters is identifi cation and dis-
closure, the problem for media-literate viewers is recognizing VNRs, a somewhat 
diffi  cult task because VNRs typically 
 •  Look exactly like genuine news reports, employing the visual and aural conventions 
we typically associate with television news.  
   •  Are narrated by a speaker whose voice, intonation, and delivery match those of a 
bona fi de television news reporter.  
   •  Carry the voice-over on a separate audio channel so the station can delete the orig-
inal narration and have its own anchor or reporter narrate to give the appearance 
that the report originated locally.  
 •  Are accompanied by a script in the event the local station wants its own personnel 
to do the narration but needs help in writing it.  
 • Come free of titles or other graphics because local stations have their own logos and 
video character typefaces.    
 VNRs can be used in their entirety or in part, and the companies that produce 
them consider even a fi ve-second excerpt aired on a local news show a success. 
Many stations follow federal rules and industry ethics on disclosure, but often they 
do so in the “fi lm and video provided by” scroll that fl ies by at the end of the broad-
cast, making the matching of source to content diffi  cult. In the end, then, viewers 
must often depend on their own media literacy skills when confronting VNRs, 
although the FCC is trying to help, proposing new rules in 2012 that would require 
all commercial television stations to disclose on their websites any corporate interests 
behind the news they air. 
 In instances when a reporter or anchor acknowledges the outside source of a report 
while it airs, viewers must determine what level of trust they want to give the story. 
Not all VNRs are false or misleading. If we accept that they are created to further a 
particular individual’s or organization’s interests, they can provide useful information. 
In those cases where the source is not identifi ed or is identifi ed apart from the report, 
media-literate people should question not only the report but the value of a news 
operation that has such limited regard for its viewers. 
 Th e question remains, though, of how to identify a VNR when the station fails to do 
so. We are watching a VNR when 
 •  Th e report is accompanied by visuals that are not from the station’s broadcast area.  
   •  No local station personnel appear in the report.  
 • Th ere is no verbal or visual attribution (for example, “Th ese scenes are from our 
sister station in Memphis” or a network logo in the corner of the screen).  
 • Th e report appears in the part of the newscast typically reserved for soft or feature 
stories. 

284 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
 An important component of media literacy is  possessing critical thinking skills that enable a person to develop independent judg-
ments about media content . Naturally, this encompasses  the ability to recognize when genre conventions are mixed , in this case, 
public relations promotional material and television news. Challenge your media literacy skills, then, by watching one day’s early 
and late editions of the local news from your favorite television station. Count the number of individual news reports, excluding 
weather and sports. How many of those reports were provided by a source other than the station itself? What were your clues? 
Did local station personnel appear as part of any of the stories? Was there verbal or visual attribution? Did the stories appear in 
the “soft news” segment of the news? Did the station acknowledge the outside source? If it did not, do you consider this decep-
tive? Why or why not? Can you explain your results and your reaction to those results in terms of your  expectations of local 
television news , your  knowledge of local news and public relations genre conventions , and your  ability to think critically about media 
messages, no matter how credible their sources ? You can take this challenge as either an opportunity for personal reﬂ ection, com-
mitting your thoughts to paper, or you can duel with classmates to see who can ﬁ nd the greatest number of VNRs or possibly 
the most egregious example of deception in the chosen broadcasts.       
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE 
 Finding VNRs 
  Outline the history and development of the public 
relations industry. 
 Th e history of public relations can be divided into four 
stages: early public relations, the propaganda–publicity 
stage, early two-way communication, and advanced 
two-way communication. 
 Th e evolution of public relations has been shaped by 
advances in technology, the growth of the middle class, 
growth of organizations, better research tools, and 
professionalization. 
  Describe how the organizational and economic nature of 
the contemporary public relations industry shapes the 
messages with which publics interact, especially in an 
increasingly converged media environment. 
  Public relations tells an organization’s “story” to its pub-
lics (communication) and helps shape the organization 
and the way it performs (management). 
  Advertising executes an organization’s communication 
strategy; public relations provides several important 
management functions. 
  Firms typically are organized around an executive, ac-
count executives, creative specialists, and media special-
ists. Larger fi rms typically include research, government 
relations, and fi nancial service professionals. 

Identify diff erent types of public relations and the diff er-
ent publics each is designed to serve. 
  Th e publics served by the industry include employees, 
stockholders, communities, media, government, invest-
ment communities, and customers. 
  Public relations fi rms provide all or some of these 
14 services: community relations, counseling, develop-
ment and fundraising, employee/member relations, 
fi nancial relations, government aff airs, industry rela-
tions, issues management, media relations, marketing 
communication, minority relations and multicultural 
aff airs, public aff airs, special events, and public partici-
pation and research. 

Explain the relationship between public relations and its 
various publics. 
  Globalization, specialization, and convergence—in the 
form of video news releases, satellite-delivered media 
tours, integrated marketing communications, and viral 
marketing—are reshaping contemporary PR’s relation-
ships with its clients and its publics. 
  Trust in public relations is essential if the industry is to 
perform its role for its clients and publics. 

Apply key media literacy skills when consuming public 
relations messages, especially video news releases. 
  Recognizing video news releases is diffi  cult, but media-
literate viewers look for visuals from outside the station’s 
area and the absence of station personnel, a lack of 
attribution, and the suspected VNR’s presence in the soft 
news portion of the newscast.   
 Resources for Review and Discussion 
 REVIEW POINTS: TYING CONTENT TO LEARNING OUTCOMES 

CHAPTER 11 
Public Relations 
285
 KEY TERMS 
 fl ack,  265 
 astroturf, 266 
 pseudo-event, 267 
 public, 272 
 fi xed-fee arrangement, 274 
 collateral materials, 274 
 cause marketing, 274 
 lobbying, 274 
 spin, 277 
 focus groups, 278 
 greenwashing, 280 
  video news release (VNR), 280  
 satellite-delivered media tour, 280 
 integrated marketing communications 
(IMC), 280  
 viral marketing, 280 
 fl og, 282  
 transparentists, 282 
 QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW 
 1.  What elements are essential to a good defi nition of public 
relations? 
 2.  What are the four stages in the development of the public 
relations industry? 
 3.  Who were Ivy Lee, George Creel, and Edward Bernays? 
 4.  What is the diff erence between public relations and 
advertising? 
 5.  What are some specifi c divisions of public relations’ public 
aff airs activities?  
 6.  Who are public relations’ publics? What are their 
characteristics? 
 7.  What positions typically exist in a public relations operation?  
    8.  How have new communication technologies infl uenced 
the public relations industry?  
    9.  What is integrated marketing communications? What is its 
goal? 
 10.  What is viral marketing? How does it work? 
 For further review, go to the LearnSmart study module for 
this chapter. 
 QUESTIONS FOR CRITICAL THINKING AND DISCUSSION 
 1.  Are you familiar with Mars Chocolate, the candy company 
in the opening vignette? What was your opinion of it before 
you read of its support for the fi ght against hunger in 
America? What is your opinion now? Does community re-
lations such as this really work, or do most people see it as 
self-serving? Do you agree or disagree that a company’s 
precrisis reputation can help it weather a crisis should one 
occur? Why or why not? 
 2.  Have you ever been part of an Internet-fueled movement 
against the activities of an organization or in support of 
some good cause? If you were, you were engaged in public 
relations. Measure your experience against the lessons in 
this chapter. What kinds of public relations activities did 
you undertake? Who were your publics? Were you success-
ful? Why or why not? 
    3.  Were you aware of the Kevin Smith imbroglio? If so, how 
did you fi nd out about it? Did you use the Internet to dig 
deeper into the story? Did your opinion of Southwest Air-
lines change as a result of the eff orts of Mr. Smith? Were 
you satisfi ed with the company’s response? 


 
287
 Learning Objectives 
 Advertising is everywhere. As it becomes more ubiquitous, we tend to ignore it. But as we 
tend to ignore it, advertisers ﬁ nd new ways to make it more ubiquitous. As a result, and as 
with television, no one is neutral about advertising. We love it or we hate it. Many of us do 
both. After studying this chapter you should be able to
 Outline the history and development of the advertising industry. 
 Evaluate contemporary criticisms and defenses of advertising. 
 Describe how the organizational and economic nature of the contemporary 
advertising industry shapes the content of advertising, especially in an increasingly 
converged media environment. 
 Identify diﬀ erent types of advertising and their goals. 
 Explain the relationship between advertising content and its consumers. 
 Apply key media literacy skills when consuming advertising, especially when 
interpreting intentional imprecision. 
 12
Does ambient advertising cut through the clutter 
or add to it?
 Advertising 

1800
1850
1869   Ayer begins ﬁrst full-service ad agency
1880s   ▲ Brands appear
1841   ▲ Palmer begins ﬁrst ad agency
1625   ▲ First newsbooks with ads
1735   Ben Franklin sells ad space in Pennsylvania Gazette
  Y OUR ROOMMATES, BOTH ADVERTISING MAJORS, CHALLENGE YOU: “We bet you $10 that you can’t go all 
of tomorrow without seeing an ad.” You think, “I’ll just stay away from radio and 
television—no problem, considering I have an MP3 player in my car and tons of home-
work to do.” Th at leaves newspapers and magazines, but you can avoid their ads 
simply by not reading either for 24 hours. Online ads? You’ll simply stay unlinked. 
Facebook and Twitter. You can survive a day friendless and unfollowed. “What about 
billboards?” you counter. 
 “We won’t count them,” your roomies graciously concede, “but everything else 
is in.” 
 You shake hands and go to bed planning your strategy. Th is means no cereal in the 
morning—the Cheerios box has a McDonald’s ad on it. Th ere’ll be no bus to school. 
Not only are the insides packed with ads, but a lot of buses are now covered in vinyl 
wrap ads that let riders see out the windows but turn buses into gigantic rolling com-
mercials. Can’t walk either. Th ere are at least two ad kiosks on the way. It’ll cost you 
more than $10 to take a cab, but this is about winning the bet, not about money. Cab 
it will be! You sleep well, confi dent victory will be yours. 
 Th e next evening, over pizza, you hand over your $10. 
 “What was it?” gloats one of your companions. “Sneak a peek at TV?”   
 “No,” you say, and then you begin the list: Th e cab had an ad for a radio station on 
its trunk and a three-sided sign on its roof touting the pizza joint you’re sitting in, a 
chiropractor, and Southwest Airlines. Inside, it had an electronic digital display hang-
ing from the ceiling, pushing the lottery. Th e sidewalk near campus had the message 
“From here it looks like you could use some new underwear—Bamboo Lingerie” sten-
ciled on it in water-soluble iridescent red paint. Th e restrooms on campus have Volks-
wagen ads pasted on their walls. Your ATM receipt carried an ad for a brokerage fi rm. 
You encountered a Domino’s Pizza ad on the back of the cash register receipt you got 
at the grocery store; the kiwi you bought there had a sticker on it reminding you to buy 
Snapple. Th e shopping basket had a realtor’s pitch pasted to the side; even the little 
288 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries

1900
1950
2000
2004   Adbusters Unbrand America
2005   MI4 initiated; chaos scenario
2008   Internet ad spending exceeds radio’s
2009   Internet ad spending exceeds magazines’
2012   ▲ Internet ad spending exceeds all print advertising
1957   Packard’s The Hidden Persuaders
1959   Quiz show scandal
1971   National Advertising Review Board established; TV cigarette
              commercial ban
1980   ▲ Foreign ad spending ﬁrst exceeds U.S. ad outlay
1994   First banner ad; spam appears
1914   Federal Trade Commission established
1922   First radio commercial
1923   The Eveready Hour, ﬁrst regularly broadcast sponsored series
1936   Consumers Union established
1938   Wheeler-Lea Act
1941   ▲ War Advertising Council (Ad Council) founded
1948   Television to the public
rubber bar you used to separate your kiwi and mineral water 
from the groceries of the shopper in front of you had an ad on 
each of its four sides. 
 “Easiest $10 we ever made,” smile your roommates. 
 In this chapter we examine the history of advertising, 
focusing on its maturation with the coming of industrializa-
tion and the Civil War. Th e development of the advertising 
agency and the rise of professionalism within its ranks are 
detailed, as is the impact of magazines, radio, World War II, 
and television. 
 We discuss the relationship between consumers and con-
temporary advertising in terms of how advertising agencies are 
structured, how various types of advertising are aimed at dif-
ferent audiences, and which trends—converging technologies, audience segmenta-
tion, globalization—promise to alter those relationships. 
 We study the controversies that surround the industry. Critics charge that advertising 
is intrusive, deceptive, inherently unethical when aimed at children, and corrupting of 
the culture. We look at industry defenses, too. 
 Finally, in the media literacy skills section, we discuss advertisers’ use of intentional 
imprecision and how to identify and interpret it.  
 A Short History of Advertising  
 Your roommates had the advantage. Th ey know that U.S. advertisers and marketers 
spend nearly $500 billion a year—half the world’s total—trying to get your attention 
and infl uence your decisions. Th ey also know that you typically encounter 5,000 com-
mercial messages a day—as opposed to 560 a day in 1971 (Johnson, 2009). Th ere are 
  Even in death, it’s diﬃ  cult to avoid advertising. 
CHAPTER 12 
Advertising 
289

290 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
a lot of ads and a lot of advertisers. Almost everyone in the ad 
business complains about what has become commercial clut-
ter, yet, in the words of  Advertising Age  writer Matthew 
Creamer (2007), “Like a fl y repeatedly bouncing off  a closed 
window, the ad industry is trying to fi x the problem by doing 
more of the same. Th at is, by creating more ads” (p. 1). Some 
label it    ambient advertising , others  360 marketing , and by 
whatever name, these ads are showing up in some fairly non-
traditional settings. Th is is because advertisers believe that 
“our susceptibility to marketing arises from our ignorance of its 
pervasiveness,” what they call    murketing    (Manjoo, 2008, p. 7). 
Kentucky Fried Chicken paints municipal fi re hydrants and 
other safety equipment in exchange for the right to display its 
logo; Sony hired graffi  ti artists in major cities to spray-paint 
commercials for its PlayStation Portable on walls and build-
ings. Offi  cials in Brooklawn, New Jersey, sell naming rights to 
school facilities—the gym at the Alice Costello Elementary 
School is now the ShopRite of Brooklawn Center. Ad company 
GreenGraffi  ti “cleans” Domino Pizza logos into dirty side-
walks; InChairTV inserts commercials into specially licensed 
Disney/ABC programming for play on digital screens sus-
pended above dental patients’ heads; radio, concert promo-
tion, and outdoor ad company Clear Channel maintains a 
separate Branded Cities division whose function is to “trans-
form locations into destinations—places where consumers go 
for entertainment, dining, shopping, to work, and to live . . . 
and where brands are an integral part of that experience.” 
Sony Ericsson hires actors to pose as tourists, walk up to peo-
ple, and ask them to photograph them with its new line of 
smartphone cameras. We see ads on door hangers, on urinal deodorant cakes, in the 
mail, behind the batter at a baseball game, on basketball backboards in city parks. We 
hear  blinks   , one-second commercials between songs on the radio. Th ey’ve come to 
television, too, with Miller Beer’s much discussed 2009 Super Bowl blink. It wasn’t 
always like this, but advertising itself has been with us for a long time.  
  This narrow street in Salzburg, Austria, still 
exhibits evidence of early European advertising, 
which often took the form of artistically designed 
signs announcing the nature of the business below. 
  Advertising everywhere—Sony hired graﬃ  ti 
artists in several major American cities to spray-
paint commercials for its PlayStation Portable on 
walls and buildings. 

CHAPTER 12 
Advertising 
291
 Early Advertising 
 Babylonian merchants were hiring barkers to shout out goods and prices at passersby 
in 3000 B.C.E. Th e Romans wrote announcements on city walls. Th is ad was discovered 
in the ruins of Pompeii: 
 Th e Troop of Gladiators of the Aedil 
 Will fi ght on the 31st of May 
 Th ere will be fi ghts with wild animals 
 And an Awning to keep off  the sun. (Berkman & Gilson, 1987, p. 32)    
 By the 15th century, ads as we know them now were abundant in Europe.    Siquis —
pinup want ads for all sorts of products and services—were common. Tradespeople 
promoted themselves with    shopbills   —attractive, artful business cards. Taverners and 
other merchants were hanging eye-catching signs above their businesses. In 1625 the 
fi rst  newsbook containing ads,  Th e Weekly News , was printed in England. From the 
beginning, those who had products and services to off er used advertising. 
 Advertising came to the Colonies via England. British advertising was already lean-
ing toward exaggeration and hyperbole, but colonial advertising was more straightfor-
ward. We saw in Chapter 4 that Ben Franklin was selling advertising space in his 
 Pennsylvania Gazette . Th is 1735 ad is typical: 
 A Plantation containing 300 acres of good Land, 30 cleared, 10 or 12 Meadow and in good 
English Grass, a house and barn & c. [creek] lying in Nantmel Township, upon French-
Creek, about 30 miles from Philadelphia. Inquire of Simon Meredith now living on the 
said place. (Sandage, Fryburger, & Rotzoll, 1989, p. 21)   
 Advertising, however, was a small business before the Civil War. Th e United States 
was primarily an agricultural country at that time, with 90% of the population living in 
self-suffi  ciency on farms. Advertising was used by local 
retailers primarily to encourage area residents to come to 
their businesses. Th e local newspaper was the major adver-
tising medium. 
 Industrialization and the Civil War 
 Th e Industrial Revolution and the Civil War altered the 
social and cultural landscape and brought about the 
expansion of advertising. By the 1840s the telegraph made 
communication over long distances possible. Railroads 
linked cities and states. Huge numbers of immigrants 
were welcomed to the United States to provide labor for 
the expanding factories. Manufacturers wanted access to 
larger markets for their goods. Advertising copywriter 
Volney B. Palmer recognized in 1841 that merchants 
needed to reach consumers beyond their local newspaper 
readership. He contacted several Philadelphia newspa-
pers and agreed to broker the sale of space between them 
and interested advertisers. Within four years Palmer had 
expanded his business to Boston, and in 1849, he opened 
a branch in New York. Th e advertising agency had been 
invented. 
 Th e Civil War sped industrialization. More factories 
were needed to produce war material, and roads and rail-
roads were expanded to move that material as well as 
troops. As farmworkers went to war or to work in the new 
factories, more farm machinery was needed to compensate 
for their departure. Th at meant that more factories were 
needed to make more machinery, and the cycle repeated. 
  This early-18th-century tobacco label shows that the British had already mastered the use of 
celebrities in their advertising. 

292 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
 By the early 1880s the telephone and the electric light had been invented. Th at 
decade saw numerous innovations in manufacturing as well as an explosion in the 
type and availability of products. In the year 1880 alone, there were applications for 
more than 13,000 U.S. copyrights and patents. Over 70,000 miles of new railroad track 
were laid in the 1880s, linking cities and towns of all sizes. With more producers chas-
ing the growing purchasing power of more consumers, manufacturers were forced to 
diff erentiate their products—to literally and fi guratively take the pickle out of the bar-
rel and put it in its own recognizable package. Brands were born: Quaker Oats, Ivory 
Soap, Royal Baking Powder, and many more. What advertisers now needed was a 
medium in which to tell people about these brands.    
 Magazine Advertising 
 We’ve seen in Chapter 5 how expansion of the railroads, the rise in literacy, and advanta-
geous postal rates fueled the explosive growth of the popular magazine just before the end 
of the 19th century. Th e marriage of magazines and advertising was a natural. Cyrus H. K. 
Curtis, who founded the  Ladies’ Home Journal  in 1883, told a group of manufacturers: 
 Th e editor of the Ladies’ Home Journal thinks we publish it for the benefi t of American 
women. Th is is an illusion, but a very proper one for him to have. Th e real reason, the pub-
lisher’s [Curtis’s] reason, is to give you who manufacture things American women want, a 
chance to tell them about your product. (Sandage et al., 1989, p. 32)     
By the turn of the century, magazines were fi nancially supported primarily by their 
advertisers rather than by their readers, and aspects of advertising we fi nd common 
today—creativity in look and language, mail-order ads, seasonal ads, and placement 
of ads in proximity to content of related interest—were already in use.
 The Advertising Agency and Professionalism 
 In the years between the Civil War and World War I, advertising had rapidly become 
more complex, more creative, and more expensive, and it was conducted on a larger 
scale. Advertising agencies had to expand their operations to keep up with demand. 
Where Palmer off ered merely to broker the sale of newspaper space, F. Wayland Ayer 
began his “full service” advertising agency in 1869. He named his fi rm N. W. Ayer and 
Sons after his father because, at only 20 years old, he felt that clients would not trust him 
with their business. Ayer (the son) provided clients with ad campaign planning, created 
and produced ads with his staff  of artists and writers, and placed them in the most 
appropriate media. Several big agencies still operating today started at this time, includ-
ing J. Walter Th ompson, William Esty, and Lord & Th omas. 
 Magazines provided the ﬁ rst national medium 
for advertisers. Here is an imaginative ad for the 
famous Milton Bradley game company.

CHAPTER 12 
Advertising 
293
 During this period, three factors combined to move the advertising 
industry to establish professional standards and to regulate itself. First 
was the reaction of the public and the medical profession to the abuses 
of patent medicine advertisers. Th ese charlatans used fake claims and 
medical data in their ads to sell tonics that at best were useless and, at 
worst, deadly. Th e second was the critical examination of most of the 
country’s important institutions, led by the muckrakers (Chapter 5). Th e 
third factor was the establishment in 1914 of the Federal Trade Commis-
sion (FTC), which had among its duties monitoring and regulating adver-
tising. A number of leading advertising agencies and publishers mounted 
a crusade against gross exaggeration, false testimonials, and other mis-
leading forms of advertising. Th e Audit Bureau of Circulations was estab-
lished to verify circulation claims. Th e Advertising Federation of America 
(now the American Advertising Federation), the American Association of 
Advertising Agencies, the Association of National Advertisers, and the 
Outdoor Advertising Association all began operation at this time.   
 Advertising and Radio 
 Th e fi rst radio ad, as we’ve seen in Chapter 7, was broadcast on WEAF 
in 1922 (the cost was $50 for a 10-minute spot). Radio was important to 
advertising in three major ways. First, although people both inside and 
outside government were opposed to commercial support for the new medium, the 
general public had no great opposition to radio ads. In fact, in the prosperous Roaring 
Twenties, many welcomed them; advertising seemed a natural way to keep radio “free.” 
Second, advertising agencies virtually took over broadcasting, producing the shows in 
which their commercials appeared. Th e ad business became show business. Th e 1923 
variety show  Th e Eveready Hour , sponsored by a battery maker, was the fi rst regularly 
broadcast sponsored series. Ad agency Blackett-Sample-Hummert even developed a 
new genre for its client Procter & Gamble—the radio soap opera. Th ird, money now 
poured into the industry. Th at income was used to expand research and marketing on 
a national scale, allowing advertisers access to sophisticated nationwide consumer and 
market information for the fi rst time. Th e wealth that the advertising industry accrued 
from radio permitted it to survive during the Depression. 
 Th e Depression did have its eff ect on advertising, however. Th e 
stock market crashed in 1929, and by 1933 advertising had lost nearly 
two-thirds of its revenues. Among the responses were the hard sell—
making direct claims about why a consumer  needed  a product—and a 
tendency away from honesty. At the same time, widespread unemploy-
ment and poverty bred a powerful consumer movement. Th e Consum-
ers Union, which still publishes  Consumer Reports , was founded in 
1936 to protect people from unscrupulous manufacturers and advertis-
ers. And in 1938 Congress passed the Wheeler-Lea Act, granting the 
FTC extended powers to regulate advertising.   
 World War II 
 Th e Second World War, so important in the development of all the 
mass media, had its impact on advertising as well. Production of con-
sumer products came to a near halt during the war (1941–1945), and 
traditional advertising was limited. Th e advertising industry turned its 
collective skills toward the war eff ort, and the limited product advertis-
ing typically adopted a patriotic theme. 
 In 1941 several national advertising and media associations joined 
to develop the War Advertising Council. Th e council used its expertise 
to promote numerous government programs. Its best-known cam-
paign, however, was on behalf of the sale of war bonds. Th e largest 
  Reaction to the deception and outright lies of 
patent medicine advertising—such as this 1880 
piece for Pratts Healing Ointment—led to 
important eﬀ orts to professionalize the industry. 
  A Plymouth hard-sell ad from 1931. The 
hard sell made its debut during the Depression as 
advertisers worked to attract the little consumer 
money that was available. 

294 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
 Advertising can often lead people to do good, and there is no better example of this than 
the work of the Ad Council. In fact, its mission is “Eﬀ ecting Positive Social Change.” Has it 
succeeded in making a diﬀ erence? Who are Smokey Bear, Rosie the Riveter, McGruﬀ  the 
Crime Dog, the Crash Test Dummies, and the Crying Indian (Chief Iron Eyes 
Cody)? All are creations of the Ad Council. And with how many of these 
slogans are you familiar? 
 • 
Friends don’t let friends drive drunk 
 • 
Only you can prevent forest ﬁ res 
 • 
A mind is a terrible thing to waste 
 • 
Just say no  
 • 
I am an American 
   All are from Ad Council campaigns. Can the ability of the Ad Council to 
make a diﬀ erence be quantiﬁ ed? Consider the following: 
 •  Applications for mentors rose from 90,000 a year to 620,000 in the ﬁ rst 
nine months after the start of its campaign for Big Brothers/Big Sisters.  
 •  Sixty-eight percent of Americans say that they have personally 
stopped someone who had been drinking from driving. The old say-
ing, “One More for the Road” has been replaced with “Friends Don’t Let 
Friends Drive Drunk.” 
 • 
 The amount of waste Americans recycle has increased 385% since the start of the En-
vironmental Defense campaign in the 1980s ( www.adcouncil.org ). 
 The Ad Council currently has more than 50 diﬀ erent public service campaigns on its 
docket, and it is able to secure about $2 billion a year in donated time and space from 28,000 
diﬀ erent media outlets. Its primary focus today is kids’ issues, devoting 80% of its resources to 
its 10-Year Commitment to Children: Helping Parents Help Kids campaign. But the Ad Council 
does not shy away from controversial issues. In the 1970s it took on sexually transmitted dis-
ease with its “VD Is for Everyone” campaign, an eﬀ ort attacked by many religious groups, and 
many broadcasters refused to air its “Help Stop AIDS. Use a Condom” spots in 1987. 
 The Ad Council is able to make a diﬀ erence because dozens of ad agencies, big and 
small, donate their time, energy, and creativity.  
  USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE 
 Effecting Positive Social Change 
 “The Ad Council currently has more than 50 different 
public service campaigns on its docket, and it is able 
to secure about $2 billion a year in donated time and 
space from 28,000 different media outlets.” 
  The Ad Council has been using the skill of industry pros to eﬀ ect positive social change for decades. Do you recognize either of these campaigns?  
campaign to date for a single item, the war bond program helped sell 800 million 
bonds, totaling $45 billion. When the war ended, the group, now called the Advertising 
Council, directed its eff orts toward a host of public service campaigns on behalf of 
countless nonprofi t organizations (see the essay, “Eff ecting Positive Social Change”). 
Most of us have read or heard, “Th is message is brought to you by the Ad Council.” 
 Th e impact of World War II on the size and structure of the advertising industry was 
signifi cant. A high excess-profi ts tax was levied on manufacturers’ wartime profi ts that 

CHAPTER 12 
Advertising 
295
exceeded prewar levels. Th e goal was to limit war profi teering and ensure that compa-
nies did not benefi t too greatly from the death and destruction of war. Rather than pay 
the heavy tariff , manufacturers reduced their profi t levels by putting income back into 
their businesses. Because the lack of raw materials made expansion or recapitalization 
diffi  cult, many companies invested in corporate image advertising. Th ey may not have 
had products to sell to the public, but they knew that the war would end someday and 
that stored-up goodwill would be important. One result, therefore, was an expansion 
in the number and size of manufacturers’ advertising departments and of advertising 
agencies. A second result was a public primed by that advertising anticipating the 
return of consumer goods.   
 Advertising and Television 
 Th ere was no shortage of consumer products when the war ended. Th e nation’s man-
ufacturing capacity had been greatly expanded to meet the needs of war, and now that 
manufacturing capability was turned toward the production of consumer products for 
people who found themselves with more leisure and more money (Chapter 1). People 
were also having more children and, thanks to the GI Bill, were able to think realisti-
cally about owning their own homes. Th ey wanted products to enhance their leisure, 
please their children, and fi ll their houses. 
  Consumer products go to war. Advertisers and 
manufacturers joined the war eﬀ ort. These Gls are 
enjoying a Coke on Leyte Island in the Paciﬁ c in a 
1945  Collier’s ad. 

296 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
 Advertising was well positioned to put products and people together, not only 
because agencies had expanded during the war but also because of television. 
Radio’s formats, stars, and network structure had moved wholesale to the new 
medium. Television soon became the primary national advertising medium. Adver-
tisers bought $12 million in television time in 1949; two years later they spent 
$128 million. 
 Television commercials, by virtue of the fact that consumers could see and hear the 
product in action, were diff erent from the advertising of all other media. Th e ability to 
demonstrate the product—to do the torture test for Timex watches, to smoothly shave 
sandpaper with Gillette Foamy—led to the    unique selling proposition (USP) : that is, 
highlighting the aspect of a product that sets it apart from other brands in the same 
product category. Once an advertiser discovered a product’s USP, it could drive it home 
in repeated demonstration commercials. Inasmuch as most brands in a given product 
category are essentially the same—that is, they are    parity products   —advertisers were 
often forced to create a product’s USP. Candy is candy, for example, but M&Ms are 
unique: Th ey melt in your mouth, not in your hand. 
 Some observers were troubled by this development. Increasingly, products were 
being sold not by touting their value or quality but by emphasizing their unique selling 
propositions. Ads were off ering little information about the product, yet people were 
increasing their spending. Th is led to growing criticism of advertising and its contribu-
tion to the consumer culture (more on this controversy later in the chapter). Th e 
immediate impact was the creation of an important vehicle of industry self-regulation. 
In response to mounting criticism in books such as  Th e Hidden Persuaders (Packard, 
1957), and concern over increasing scrutiny from the FTC, the industry in 1971 estab-
lished the National Advertising Review Board (NARB) to monitor potentially deceptive 
advertising. Th e NARB, the industry’s most important self-regulatory body, investigates 
consumer complaints as well as complaints made by an advertiser’s competitors. 
 Advertising and Its Audiences  
 Th e typical individual living in the United States will spend more than one year of his 
or her life just watching television commercials. It is a rare moment when we are not 
in the audience of some ad or commercial. Th is is one of the many reasons advertisers 
have begun to place their messages in many venues beyond the traditional commercial 
media, as we saw earlier, hoping to draw our attention. We confront so many ads every 
day that we overlook them, and they become invisible. As a result, many people 
become aware of advertising only when it somehow off ends them.  
 Criticisms and Defenses of Advertising 
 Advertising does sometimes off end, and it is often the focus of criticism. But industry 
defenders argue the following: 
   •  Advertising supports our economic system; without it new products could not be 
introduced and developments in others could not be announced. Competitive 
advertising of new products and businesses powers the engine of our economy, 
fostering economic growth and creating jobs in many industries.  
   •  People use advertising to gather information before making buying decisions.  
   •  Ad revenues make possible the “free” mass media we use not only for entertainment 
but also for the maintenance of our democracy.  
   •  By showing us the bounty of our capitalistic, free enterprise society, advertising 
increases national productivity (as people work harder to acquire more of these 
products) and improves the standard of living (as people actually acquire more of 
these products).    
 Th e fi rst defense is a given. Ours is a capitalistic society whose economy depends 
on the exchange of goods and services. Complaints, then, have less to do with the 

CHAPTER 12 
Advertising 
297
existence of advertising than with its conduct and content, 
and they are not new. At the 1941 founding meeting of the 
Advertising Council, J. Walter Th ompson executive James 
Webb Young argued that such a public service commitment 
would go far toward improving the public’s attitude toward 
his industry, one “rooted very deep. It is a sort of repugnance 
for the manifestations of advertising—or its banality, its bad 
taste, its moronic appeals, and its clamor” (quoted in “Story 
of the Ad Council,” 2001). Th e second defense assumes that 
advertising provides information. But much—critics would 
say most—advertising is devoid of useful information about 
the product. Grant Leach, managing director of the ad agency 
Th e Revo Group, declares, “Consumers no longer buy prod-
ucts but rather lifestyles and the stories, experiences, and 
emotions products convey” (quoted in Williams, 2002, p. 17). 
Th e third defense assumes that the only way media can exist 
is through commercial support, but many nations around the 
world have built fi ne media systems without heavy advertiser 
support (see Chapter 15). To critics of advertising, the fourth 
defense—that people work hard only to acquire more things 
and that our standard of living is measured by what material 
things we have—draws an unfl attering picture of human nature.   
 Speciﬁ c Complaints 
 Specifi c complaints about advertising are that it is often intrusive, 
deceptive, and, in the case of children’s advertising, inherently unethical. Advertising is 
said to demean or corrupt the culture.  
 ADVERTISING IS INTRUSIVE     Many critics fault advertising for its intrusiveness. Advertising is 
everywhere, and it interferes with and alters our experience. Giant wall advertisements 
change the look of cities. Ads beamed by laser light onto night skies destroy evening 
stargazing. School learning aids provided by candy makers that ask students to “count 
the Tootsie Rolls” alter education. Many 
Internet users complain about the com-
mercialization of the new medium and 
fear advertising will alter its free, open, 
and freewheeling nature. Nearly 16% of 
online viewers, for example, will click 
away from a video site rather than watch a 
15- or 30-second ad preceding the content 
they had initially selected (Learmonth, 
2010b), and 67% of Americans fi nd it 
unacceptable to receive unwanted adver-
tising on their smartphones and tablets 
(Barron & Chowdhury, 2012). An Associ-
ated Press study of advertising and con-
sumers demonstrated that although most 
“were eager to receive information that 
met their needs and just as eager to pass 
that information along to their personal 
networks . . . they were tired, even annoyed, 
by the current experience of advertising. 
And they lacked trust in most commercial 
messaging” (2010, p. 47). As for digital 
advertising, you can see how much users 
value them in  Figure 12.1 .
Do not wish to be targeted more than once a month
Would unsubscribe from a brand’s
promotions if messages were too frequent 
Would respond negatively to future
messages from that brand
Would stop using the
brand’s product or service 
Would protest the brand
on social media sites  
66%
55%
20%
11%
Percentage responding “yes” 
28%
  Figure 12.1  Americans’ Responses to Digital Advertising Overload, 2012.
 Source:  Barron & Chowdhury, 2012   
  Among the earliest demonstration ads, Timex 
took many a licking but kept on ticking. 

298 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
 ADVERTISING IS DECEPTIVE     Many critics say that much advertising is inherently deceptive in 
that it implicitly and sometimes explicitly promises to improve people’s lives through 
the consumption or purchase of a sponsor’s products. Jamieson and Campbell (1997) 
described this as the “If . . . then” strategy: “A beautiful woman uses a certain brand 
of lipstick in the ad, and men follow her everywhere. Without making the argument 
explicit, the ad implies that if you use this product you will be beautiful, and if you are 
beautiful (or use this product), you will be more attractive to men” (p. 242). Th ey called 
the opposite strategy “If not . . . then not.” When Hallmark says “When you care enough 
to send the very best,” the implication is that when you do not send Hallmark, you 
simply do not care. 
 Advertising promises health, long life, sexual success, fi nancial success, compan-
ionship, popularity, and acceptance. Industry defenders argue that people under-
stand and accept these as allowable exaggerations, not as deception. Yet in 2012 
fewer than half (47%) of consumers said they trust paid television, magazine, and 
newspaper ads, declines in confi dence of 24%, 20%, and 25% respectively from three 
years earlier (Grimes, 2012).   
 ADVERTISING EXPLOITS CHILDREN  Th e average American child, aged 2 to 11, is exposed to 
25,600 television commercials, or 10,700 minutes of ads, a year; American kids see a 
quarter of a million television ads before their 13th birthday 
(Coates, 2009). Countries like Norway and Sweden, on the other 
hand, ban completely television ads aimed at kids, as does the 
Canadian province of Quebec. Ads and commercialism are 
increasingly invading the schools—the amount of sponsored 
educational material used in American schools rose 1,800% in 
the 1990s alone. Companies spend $17 billion a year marketing 
products to children, up from $100 million 20 years ago, and 
not only can a typical fi rst grader recognize 200 logos, but kids 
from 3 to 5 show recognition rates as high as 92% for 50 diff er-
ent brands in 16 product categories—McDonald’s was most 
recognizable—demonstrating that children as young as 3 can 
readily recognize the brands they see advertised (Skenazy, 2008; 
Andronikidis, & Lambrianidou, 2010). Even 61% of youth mar-
keters polled in a 2004 survey felt that “advertising to children 
starts too young” (Fonda, 2004, p. 52).    
    Critics contend that children are simply not intellectually 
capable of interpreting the intent of these ads, nor are they able 
before the age of 7 or 8 to rationally judge the worth of the 
advertising claims. Th is makes children’s advertising inher-
ently unethical. Television advertising to kids is especially 
questionable because children consume it in the home—with 
implicit parental approval, and most often without parental 
supervision. Th e question ad critics ask is, “If parents would 
never allow living salespeople to enter their homes to sell their 
children products, why do they allow the most sophisticated 
salespeople of all to do it for 20 minutes every hour every 
Saturday morning?” Rowan Williams, upon his installation as 
Britain’s Archbishop of Canterbury in 2002, spoke not of the 
ethics of advertising to kids but of the morality. “If a child is a 
consumer, the child is an economic subject. And what eco-
nomic subjects do is commit their capital, limit their options 
by doing so, take risks for profi t or gratifi cation.” His argument, 
according to education writer Laura Barton (2002), is that “at a 
time in our lives when the future should be wide open (that is, 
childhood), we are increasingly encouraged to hem ourselves 
in, to defi ne ourselves by the trainers [sneakers] we wear and 
the yogurts we eat. As such, advertising campaigns aimed 
  Advertising in schools and on educational material is now common—and quite 
controversial. It took a parent uprising to end this practice of placing McDonald’s ads on report 
cards in the Seminole County, Florida, schools. 

CHAPTER 12 
Advertising 
299
 Advertisers and the fast food industry argue that they are entitled to First Amendment 
protection, so self-regulation is more than enough. Critics say the First Amendment oﬀ ers no 
protection to advertising aimed at kids because children do not possess the ability to tell good 
messages from bad—the bedrock assumption of the First Amendment. Enter your voice.  
 CULTURAL FORUM 
 Kids’ Advertising: Is 
Self-Regulation Enough? 
 “One in six children and teens is obese, up threefold from a 
generation ago, leading the Federal Trade Commission to call 
childhood obesity the ‘most serious health crisis facing 
today’s youth.’”  
 There is no shortage of critics of advertising to children, especially advertis-
ing that promotes unhealthy diets. In 1983, companies spent $100 million 
on child-focused advertising; today they annually spend $17 billion, and 
the bulk of that money is for fast food, cereal, and snacks (Sirota, 2011). 
Opponents of advertising to kids point to social science evidence demon-
strating a strong correlation between exposure to advertising and child-
hood obesity. One in six children and teens is obese, up threefold from a 
generation ago, leading the Federal Trade Commission to call childhood 
obesity the “most serious health crisis facing today’s youth.” The 65,000-member American 
Academy of Pediatrics has called for a ban on fast food commercials on kids’ television shows 
(which the Disney Company agreed in 2012 to do). The U.S. Government Accountability Of-
ﬁ ce has demanded greater FCC oversight of kids’ television advertising. 
 The advertising and fast food 
industries have responded with a 
number of plans that they hope will 
help protect kids while maintaining 
their own freedom of expression. 
Television sponsors have promised 
to strictly adhere to commercial 
time limits set by the 1990 Chil-
dren’s Television Act, and the Better 
Business Bureau’s Children’s Food and Beverage Advertising Initiate said it would enforce 
voluntary nutritional standards among its member companies. The National Restaurant As-
sociation launched an initiative among its members, including companies such as Burger 
King and Denny’s, to oﬀ er and promote healthful kids’ meals (Neuman, 2011). The question 
in the cultural forum, however, is how to ﬁ nd the correct balance between freedom of com-
mercial speech and the protection of children. 
  The ad and food industries have First Amendment protection. Who should protect kids like this 
from the ad and food industries? 
directly at children amount to a perversion of innocence” (p. 2). Th e particular issue 
of fast-food and snack advertising to children is the subject of the essay, “Kids’ Adver-
tising: Is Self-Regulation Enough?”   
 ADVERTISING DEMEANS AND CORRUPTS CULTURE  In our culture we value beauty, kindness, prestige, 
family, love, and success. As human beings we need food, shelter, and the maintenance 
of the species, in other words, sex. Advertising succeeds by appealing to these values 
and needs. Th e basis for this persuasive strategy is the    AIDA approach —to persuade 
consumers, advertising must attract  attention , create  interest , stimulate  desire , and pro-
mote  action . According to industry critics, however, problems arise when important 
aspects of human existence are reduced to the consumption of brand-name consumer 
products. Freedom is choosing between a Big Gulp and a canned soda at 7-Eleven. 
Being a good mother is as simple as buying a bottle of Downy Fabric Softener. Success 
is drinking Chivas Regal. Love is giving your husband a shirt without ring-around-the-
collar or your fi ancée a diamond worth two months’ salary. 
 Critics argue that ours has become a    consumer culture   —a culture in which personal 
worth and identity reside not in ourselves but in the products with which we surround 
ourselves. Th e consumer culture is corrupting because it imposes new defi nitions that 

300 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
serve the advertiser and not the culture on traditionally important aspects of our 
lives. If love, for example, can be bought rather than being something that has to be 
nurtured, how important can it be? If success is not something an individual values 
for the personal sense of accomplishment but rather is something chased for the mate-
rial things associated with it, how does the culture evaluate success? Name the fi ve 
most successful people you know. How many teachers did you name? How many 
social workers? How many wealthy or famous people did you name? 
 Critics further contend that the consumer culture also demeans the individuals who 
live in it. A common advertising strategy for stimulating desire and suggesting action is 
to imply that we are inadequate and should not be satisfi ed with ourselves as we are. 
We are too fat or too thin, our hair is in need of improvement, our clothes are all wrong, 
and our spouses don’t respect us. Personal improvement is only a purchase away. 
 Th e ad-created consumer culture, according to former Wieden + Kennedy and Martin 
Agency executive Jelly Helm (his clients included Nike, Coke, and Microsoft), has pro-
duced an America that is “sick. . . . We work too hard so that we can buy things we 
don’t need, made by factory workers who are paid too little, and produced in ways that 
threaten the very survival of the earth.” It has produced an America that “will be 
remembered as the greatest wealth-producer ever. It will be a culture remembered for 
its promise and might and its tremendous achievements in technology and health. It 
also will be remembered as a culture of hedonism to rival any culture that has ever 
existed, a culture of materialism and workaholism and individualism, a culture of 
superfi ciality and disposability, of poverty and pollution and vanity and violence, a 
culture denuded of its spiritual wisdom” (Helm, 2002).      
  Large advertisers such as Nike have come under much criticism for their intrusion into virtually all aspects of people’s lives. Here Garry Trudeau ponders life on Planet Nike. 
 DOONESBURY © 1997 G. B. Trudeau. Reprinted with permission of Universal Uclick. All rights reserved. 

CHAPTER 12 
Advertising 
301
 Scope and Nature of the 
Advertising Industry  
 Th e proliferation of the diff erent types of sales pitches described in the opening vignette 
is the product of an avalanche of advertising. Advertisers are exploring new ways to be 
seen and heard, to stand out, to be remembered, and to be eff ective. With so many 
kinds of commercial messages, the defi nition of advertising must be very broad. For 
our purposes, advertising is mediated messages paid for by and identifi ed with a busi-
ness or institution seeking to increase the likelihood that those who consume those 
messages will act or think as the advertiser wishes. 
 Th e American advertising industry annually spends more than $360 billion to 
place commercial messages before the public. Th is amount does not include the 
billions of dollars spent in the planning, production, and distribution of those ads. 
An overwhelming proportion of all this activity is conducted through and by adver-
tising agencies.  
 The Advertising Agency 
 Th ere are approximately 6,000 ad agencies operating in the United States, employing 
roughly 500,000 people (Figure 12.2). Fewer than 500 agencies annually earn more 
than $1 million. Many agencies also produce the ads they develop, and virtually all buy 
time and space in various media for their clients. Production is billed at an agreed-
upon price called a  retainer ; placement of advertising in media is compensated 
through  commissions   , typically 15% of the cost of the time or space. Commissions 
account for as much as 75% of the income of larger agencies. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
U.S. revenues in millions of dollars by agency rank, parent company, and headquarters
Saatchi & Saatchi* (Publicis), New York
Y&R* (WPP), New York
BBDO Worldwide (Omnicom), New York
McCann Erickson (Interpublic), New York
Leo Burnett Worldwide/Arc* (Publicis), New York
TBWA Worldwide (Omnicom), New York
Grey* (WPP), New York
JWT* (WPP), New York
*Denotes non-U.S. ownership
DDB Worldwide (Omnicom), New York
DraftFCB (Interpublic), Chicago/New York
$450
$495
$370
$358
$297
$260
$236
$230
$279
$311
  Figure 12.2  Largest U.S. Ad Agencies, 2011.
 Source: Agency Report, 2012a.   

302 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
 Ad agencies are usually divided into departments, the number determined by the 
size and services of the operation. Smaller agencies might contract with outside com-
panies for the services of these typical ad agency departments: 
 •  Administration  is the agency’s management and accounting operations.  
 •   Account management  is typically handled by an account executive who serves as 
liaison between agency and client, keeping communication fl owing between the 
two and heading the team of specialists assigned by the agency to the client.  
 • Th e  creative department  is where the advertising is developed from idea to ad. It 
involves copywriting, graphic design, and often the actual production of the piece—
for example, radio, television, and Web spots.  
 • Th e  media department  makes the decisions about where and when to place ads and 
then buys the appropriate time or space ( Figure 12.3 ). Th e eff ectiveness of a given 
placement is judged by its    cost per thousand (CPM)   , the cost of reaching 1,000 
audience members. For example, an ad that costs $20,000 to place in a major news-
paper and is read by 1 million people has a CPM of $20.  
 •  Market research  tests product viability in the market, the best venues for commercial 
messages, the nature and characteristics of potential buyers, and sometimes the 
eff ectiveness of the ads.  
   •  As we saw in Chapter 11, many larger agencies have  public relations departments 
as well.  
 Types of Advertising 
 Th e advertising produced and placed by ad agencies can be classifi ed according to the 
purpose of the advertising and the target market. You may be familiar with the follow-
ing types of advertising: 
 Institutional or corporate advertising . Companies do more than just sell products; 
companies also promote their names and reputations. If a company name 
inspires confi dence, selling its products is easier. Some institutional or corporate 
advertising promotes only the organization’s image, such as “FTD Florists sup-
port the U.S. Olympic Team.” But some advertising sells the image at the same 
time it sells the product: “You can be sure if it’s Westinghouse.”  
 Trade or professional advertising . Typically found in trade and professional pub-
lications, messages aimed at retailers do not necessarily push the product 
or brand but rather promote product issues of importance to the retailer—
volume, marketing support, profi t potential, distribution plans, and promo-
tional opportunities.  
Television
Newspaper
Radio
Magazines
Internet
Mobile
85.7%
3.1%
3.8%
2.0%4.5%0.9%
5.1%
15.4%
6.0%
2.5%
3.2%
8.6%
6.1%
3.9% 0.9%
10.8%
4.4% 0.1%
4.5%
6.0% 0.4%
Most inﬂuential
Most persuasive
Most authoritative
Most exciting
78.1%
60.8%
83.4%
  Figure 12.3  Image of Advertising in Major Media. How do consumers rate the diﬀ erent advertising media in terms of their inﬂ uence, persuasiveness, authority, and excitement? 
 Source: Adapted from Media Trends Track 2011, Television Bureau of Advertising Media Comparisons Study. Used by permission. Reprinted by permission of the Television Bureau of Advertising, Inc. 

CHAPTER 12 
Advertising 
303
 Retail advertising . A large part of the advertising we see every day focuses on prod-
ucts sold by retailers like Sears and Macy’s. Ads are typically local, reaching con-
sumers where they live and shop.  
 Promotional retail advertising . Typically placed by retailers, promotional advertising 
focuses not on a product but on a promotion, a special event held by a retailer. 
“Midnight Madness Sale” and “Back to School Sale” are two promotions that 
often benefi t from heavy advertising, particularly in newspapers.  
 Industrial advertising . Advertising of products and services directed toward a par-
ticular industry is usually found in industry trade publications. For example, 
 Broadcasting & Cable , the primary trade magazine for the television industry, 
runs ads from program syndicators hoping to sell their shows to stations. It also 
runs ads from transmitter and camera manufacturers.  
 National consumer advertising . National consumer advertising constitutes the majority 
of what we see in popular magazines and on television. It is usually product 
advertising, commissioned by the manufacturer—McDonald’s, Honda, Cheerios, 
Sony, Nike—aimed at potential buyers.  
 Direct market advertising . Product or service advertising aimed at likely buyers 
rather than at all consumers is called direct market advertising. These tar-
geted consumers are reached through direct mail, catalogs, and telemarket-
ing. This advertising can be personalized—“Yes, BRUCE FRIEDBERG, you can 
drive a Lexus for less than you think”—and customized. Computer data from 
credit card and other purchases, zip codes, telephone numbers, and organi-
zational memberships are a few of the ways consumers are identified. Direct 
marketing accounted for 54.2% of all U.S. ad spending in 2010 and directly 
employed 1.4 million people (Direct Marketing Association, 2011).  
 Out-of-Home Advertising . As we saw in the opening 
vignette, advertising is inescapable. One reason is 
that we are exposed to advertising even when we 
away from home and otherwise not actually engaged 
in media consumption. Out-of-home advertising, 
which accounts for more than $6.4 billion in annual 
spending, can include ads on billboards, street furni-
ture, transit vehicles, and the digital screens we 
encounter everywhere from the gas pump to the 
DMV offi  ce (Hayes, 2012).  
 Public service advertising . Advertising that does not sell 
commercial products or services but promotes orga-
nizations and themes of importance to the public is 
public service advertising. Th e Heart Fund, the 
United Negro College Fund, and ads for MADD are 
typical of this form. Th ey are usually carried free of 
charge by the medium that houses them.      
 The Regulation of Advertising 
 Th e FTC is the primary federal agency for the regulation of 
advertising. Th e FCC regulates the commercial practices of 
the broadcasting industry, and individual states can police 
deceptive advertising through their own regulatory and 
criminal bureaucracies. In the deregulation movement of 
1980, oversight by the FTC changed from regulating unfair 
and deceptive advertising to regulating and enforcing com-
plaints  against  deceptive advertising. 
 Th e FTC has several options for enforcement when it 
determines that an advertiser is guilty of deceptive prac-
tices. It can issue a    cease-and-desist order demanding 
  Through this industrial ad appearing in  Variety , 
Xpand hopes to attract movie theater owners to its 
brand of 3-D glasses.   

304 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
that the practice be stopped. It can impose fi nes. It can order the creation and distribu-
tion of    corrective advertising . Th at is, a new set of ads must be produced by the 
off ender that corrects the original misleading eff ort. Off enders can challenge FTC deci-
sions in court, and they are innocent until proven guilty. Meanwhile, the potentially 
unethical advertising remains in the marketplace. 
 One of the greatest diffi  culties for the FTC is fi nding the line between false or 
deceptive advertising and    puff ery   —that little lie that makes advertising more enter-
taining than it might otherwise be. “Whiter than white” and “stronger than dirt” are 
just two examples of puff ery. On the assumption that the public does not read com-
mercials literally—the Jolly Green Giant does not exist; we know that—the courts and 
the FTC allow a certain amount of exaggeration. Puff ery may be allowed, but many 
in the ad industry dislike its slippery slope; puff ery, says Keller & Heckman’s Richard 
Leighton, means “never having to say you’re sorry for untruths or exaggerated claims” 
(in Greenberg, 2009). 
 Th e FTC and courts, however, do recognize that an advertisement can be false in a 
number of ways. An advertisement is false if it does the following: 
 •  Lies outright. Reebok claimed its EasyTone shoes produced 11% greater strength 
and tone in hamstring muscles than did regular walking shoes. Th e FTC said prove 
it. Reebok couldn’t. Ads for POM Wonderful said its pomegranate juice is “backed 
Join BaZinga in exploring tomorrow’s technology, TODAY!
STANLEY BARAN
Please enjoy a free copy of BaZinga, on us.
Dear Stanley Baran,
Technology moves at a lightning pace today.  It is easy to get le behind in the cosmic dust of 
our ever evolving digital society.  At BaZinga we work relessly to bring our readers the most 
up-to-date informaon even before technology updates hit the market.  BaZinga was the ﬁrst 
magazine to break the news that in 2016 Apple will be coming out with a budget priced line of 
computers under the Pear label.  We were also the ﬁrst magazine to report the news that the 
Large Hadron Collider will be hosng next year’s Tour de’ France.
With BaZinga, the line “queson everything” is not just a catch phrase; it is the key to reading 
our magazine; it is the key to life itself.  And BaZinga can bring you that key!
Readers of BaZinga enjoy many monthly favorites such as “The Physicist’s Conundrum”, where 
leading physicists explore whether maer truly maers.  “The IT is IN” answers quesons from 
readers on why their help desk should be renamed the helpless desk.  And who doesn’t love 
“Can you DIG it?” where our team of archeologists share all the dirt?
Why are you hesitang?  Return the form today with the box marked “YES” and we will rush 
you your FREE COPY of BaZinga, where we explore tomorrow’s technology, TODAY!
Sincerely,
Crystal O’Graphy
Editor-in-Chief
P.S.  To receive your free copy of BaZinga check the “Yes” box and return your postcard today!  You never know when 
that next issue of BaZinga might report on the next big meteorite headed towards Earth, or worse yet, who might be 
riding that meteorite!
STANLEY BARAN
Send for your FREE issue of 
BaZinga TODAY!
  In this direct marketing piece, the advertiser 
has not only personalized the pitch—Dear Stanley 
Baran—but has also targeted this consumer’s 
particular interests in the environment and 
technology based on its knowledge of his magazine 
subscriptions. 

CHAPTER 12 
Advertising 
305
by $25 million in medical research” and is “proven to fi ght for cardiovascular, pros-
tate, and erectile health.” Not so, said the FTC.  
   •  Does not tell the whole truth. Miller Lite’s “new taste protector cap” does indeed 
better preserve the taste of the beer. But ads touting this feature do not tell the whole 
truth because Miller Lite’s bottle caps are exactly the same as all other bottled beers’ 
and have no taste-protecting characteristics beyond those of ordinary cans and 
bottles. 
 • Lies by implication, using words, design, production device, sound, or a combina-
tion of these. Television commercials for children’s toys now end with the product 
shown in actual size against a neutral background (a shot called an    island ). Th is is 
done because production techniques such as low camera angles and close-ups can 
make these toys seem larger or better than they actually are.      
 Measuring the Eﬀ ectiveness of Advertising 
 It might seem reasonable to judge the eff ectiveness of an ad campaign by a subse-
quent increase in sales. But many factors other than advertising infl uence how well 
a product fares, including changes in the economy, product quality, breadth of dis-
tribution, and competitors’ pricing and promotion strategies. Department store mag-
nate John Wanamaker is said to have complained in the late 1880s, “I know that 
fi fty-percent of my advertising is wasted. I just don’t know which fi fty-percent.” 
Today’s advertisers feel much the same way, and as you might imagine, they fi nd this 
a less-than-comforting situation. Agencies, therefore, turn to research to provide 
greater certainty. 
 A number of techniques may be used before an ad or ad campaign is released.    Copy 
testing —measuring the eff ectiveness of advertising messages by showing them to 
consumers—is used for all forms of advertising. It is sometimes conducted with focus 
groups, collections of people brought together to see the advertising and discuss it with 
agency and client personnel. Sometimes copy testing employs  consumer juries . Th ese 
people, considered to be representative of the target market, review a number of 
approaches or variations of a campaign or ad.    Forced exposure , used primarily for 
television advertising, requires advertisers to bring consumers to a theater or other 
facility (typically with the promise of a gift or other payment), where they see a televi-
sion program, complete with the new commercials. People are asked their brand pref-
erences before the show, and then after. In this way, the eff ectiveness of the 
commercials can be gauged. 
 Once the campaign or ad is before the public, a number of diff erent tests can be 
employed to evaluate the eff ectiveness of the ad. In    recognition tests people who have 
seen a given publication are asked, in person or by phone, whether they remember 
  Public service advertising allows advertisers to 
use their skills to serve society. Here is a still from a 
spot for the National Sexual Violence Resource Center.   

306 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
seeing specifi c ads. In    recall testing    consumers are asked, again in person or by phone, 
to identify which print or broadcast ads they most easily remember. Th is recall can be 
unaided, that is, the researcher off ers no hints (“Have you seen any interesting com-
mercials or ads lately?”), or aided, that is, the researcher identifi es a specifi c class of 
products (“Have you seen any interesting pizza commercials lately?”). In recall testing, 
the advertisers assume that an easily recalled ad is an eff ective ad.    Awareness tests 
make this same assumption, but they are not aimed at specifi c ads. Th eir goal is to 
measure the cumulative eff ect of a campaign in terms of “consumer consciousness” of 
a product. A likely question in an awareness test, usually made by telephone, is “What 
brands of laundry detergent can you name?” 
 What these research techniques lack is the ability to demonstrate the link that is of 
most interest to the client—did the ad move the consumer to buy the product? Th e 
industry hopes that that all-important connection can be better discovered using 
 neuromarketing research   —biometric measures such as brainwaves, facial expres-
sions, eye-tracking, sweating, and heart rate monitoring. Because the unconscious 
accounts for the vast majority of the way peoples’ brains process information, these 
methods tap consumers’ subconscious reactions to marketing and advertising. Th is 
research is not without its critics, however, who argue that because neuromarketing 
appeals to the base level of human consciousness, it exploits consumers’ nonreasoned, 
instinctual responses. Still, industry dissatisfaction with more traditional research 
methods continues to fuel work on neuromarketing research.     
 Trends and Convergence 
in Advertising  
 In the summer of 2005, the world’s largest advertiser, Procter & Gamble, announced 
that it would cut $300 million from its television ad expenditures, a 15% drop from its 
typical annual spending on that medium. Said Jim Stengel, head of global marketing 
for the company, “I believe today’s marketing model is broken. We’re applying anti-
quated thinking and work systems to a new world of possibilities” (in Auletta, 2005, 
pp. 35–36). When the country’s second-largest advertiser, General Motors, followed 
suit a year later, slashing its 2006 ad budget by $600 million to shift its marketing 
resources toward “channels such as direct marketing, websites, online video, event 
marketing, branded entertainment, and internet advertising,”  Advertising Age ’s Jean 
Halliday (2007) called it “a drop so stunning it should convince even the staunchest 
doubters that the age of mass-media marketing is going the way of the horse and 
buggy” (p. 1). Th ese public rebukes of the traditional advertising model demonstrated 
what most industry professionals already knew—their industry was in need of change 
in, some even said reinvention of, its  economics, creativity , and  relationship with con-
sumers . Th e advertising business is facing its “chaos scenario,” as media writer Bob 
Garfi eld called it, “a jarring media universe in which traditional forms of mass enter-
tainment swiftly disappear and advertisers are left in the lurch” (in Klosterman, 2005, 
p. 63). Th is new, jarring media universe is forged by the interaction of converging tech-
nologies and the changes they drive in how, when, and why people consume them 
(and the ads they contain).  
 New and Converging Technologies 
 Th e production of advertising has inevitably been altered by computers. Computer 
graphics, morphing (digitally combining and transforming images), and other spe-
cial eff ects are now common in national retail television advertising. And the same 
technology used to change the ads behind the batter in a televised baseball game is 
now employed to insert product placements into programs where no placement 

CHAPTER 12 
Advertising 
307
originally existed—a character who was once eating an unbranded cookie can now 
munch an Oreo. 
 Computer databases and computerized printing have fueled the rapid growth of 
direct market advertising, and we saw in Chapter 5 that computerized printing has 
made possible zoned and other specialized editions of national magazines. But it is 
digital advertising, the convergence of all traditional forms of advertising with new 
digital technologies, that is attracting the most industry interest. In 2007 U.S. online ad 
spending was $19.5 billion; in 2012 it was $39.5 billion ( Figure 12.4 ). Internet advertis-
ing exceeds that of radio, and in 2012 it surpassed that of magazines and newspapers 
combined (Ives, 2012). 
 Web advertising has matured since the fi rst  banners , static online billboards 
placed conspicuously somewhere on a Web page, appeared in May 1994 (D’angelo, 
2009). Other forms are    search marketing   , advertising sold next to or in search results 
produced by users’ keyword searches;    lead generation , using Internet-created data-
bases to collect names, addresses, e-mail addresses, and other information about 
likely clients or customers (Chapter 10);    rich media , sophisticated, interactive Web 
advertising, usually employing sound and video; and    sponsorships , Web pages 
“brought to you by,” typically including a number of ad placements, advertorials, and 
other co-branded sections.   
 Smartphones, Tablets, and Social Networking Sites 
 Boosting all forms of digital advertising is their movement to mobile technologies like 
smartphones and tablets and the expansion of social networking sites. Mobile ad 
spending exceeded $2.6 billion in 2012 and is expected to grow to more than $10 bil-
lion by 2016, driven primarily by search and social network messaging (Olmstead, 
Sasseen, Mitchell, & Rosenstiel, 2012). 
 Industry data indicate that smartphone and tablet advertising encourages 
 e-commerce   , buying products and services online. Shopping with a smartphone or 
tablet in hand encourages impulse, on-the-spot buying, and 76% of mobile technology 
owners say they use their devices to conduct e-commerce (Patel, 2012). Th at’s the good 
news for advertisers. Th e bad news is that because the smartphone is a “deeply per-
sonal medium,” users are much less likely to welcome advertising that they would 
otherwise accept on a tablet, PC, or laptop; 66% say they are “turned off ” by unwanted 
advertising on their phones (Barron & Chowdhury, 2012). 
Video $3.12 
Classiﬁeds $2.53 
Dollars in billions
Total, $39.5 billion
12
2.53
D ll
i
billi
Search $19.51 
Banner $9.24 
7.9%
Lead Generation $1.94 
Rich Media $1.64
4.2%
Sponsorships $1.38
3.5%
E-mail $ 0.14  
.004%
49.4%
23.4%
6.4%
4.9%
  Figure 12.4  U.S. Online Advertising, by 
Format, 2012.
 Source: DigitalFastFacts, 2012. 

308 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
 Social networking sites are clearly a boon to advertisers, as they can direct very 
specifi c messages to very specifi c users based on their freely provided information, a 
fact that does not make everyone happy as we saw in Chapter 10’s discussion of pri-
vacy. Advertisers also take advantage of sites’ interactivity, and virtually every company 
of any size has at the very least a Facebook and Twitter presence. In 2012, Facebook, 
already earning more than $5.7 billion a year in advertising revenue, added another 
$1.2 billion from mobile advertising alone (Whittaker, 2012; Lunden, 2012b). Th e 
annual fi gures for Twitter, $260 million, and LinkedIn, $226 million, are small by com-
parison, but they are growing at a rapid rate, 80% a year for Twitter and 46% a year for 
LinkedIn (Lunden, 2012a). Digital advertising in all its forms sits fi rmly at the center 
of the change buff eting today’s ad industry because of its low cost (relative to tradi-
tional media), great reach, and, most important, interactivity, which gives it an account-
ability unparalleled in the traditional media.  
 NEW ECONOMICS  Consumers are increasingly dissatisfi ed with hypercommercialism in 
other media and the lack of relevancy that much advertising has for them. Th ey are 
becoming resistant to and resentful of much of the marketing they encounter, as you 
saw earlier in this chapter. As a result, many advertisers are now less interested in 
CPM, focusing instead on    return on investment (ROI) , an accountability-based mea-
surement of advertising success. After all, who cares how many thousands you are 
reaching if they reject your message? Industry professionals look at Internet and Web 
advertising and see that it is ideally suited for increased ROI, and have begun asking 
why all media can’t off er some of that benefi t. “As technology increasingly enables 
fi ne targeting and interaction between marketer and consumer,” Garfi eld (2005) 
argued, “the old measurement and deployment standards are primitive almost to the 
point of absurdity” (p. 58). 
 Rather than simple brand exposure, measured by CPM, advertisers have begun to 
demand accountability. As such, the Web’s    performance-based advertising   , for 
example, provides the ideal. Th e website carrying the ad gets paid only when the 
consumer takes some specifi c action, making a purchase or linking to the sponsor’s 
site. Th is Web-inspired demand for accountability led to a 2005 call for the develop-
ment of a new measure of the  eff ectiveness of all advertising — engagement . Th e Asso-
ciation of National Advertisers, the American Association of Advertising Agencies, 
and the Advertising Research Foundation joined in a movement, dubbed MI4, to 
defi ne exactly the psychological and behavioral aspects of engagement and how to 
measure it. Beyond moving advertising dollars to platforms promising greater 
engagement, demands for accountability can be seen in a number of innovations that 
threaten the traditional agency–brand relationship described earlier in this chapter: 
Clients are increasingly demanding from agencies—and receiving—agreements on 
campaign-specifi c outcomes and consensus on    accountability metrics —that is, how 
the eff ectiveness of a specifi c ad or campaign will be judged. Some agencies now 
off er money-back guarantees if they cannot improve a brand’s ROI and the introduc-
tion of    value-compensation programs    in which “all or at least a signifi cant part” of 
the payment of an agency’s fees “is predicated on meeting pre-established goals” 
(Fajen, 2008, p. 17).   
 NEW CREATIVITY  “Th e traditional creative agencies have absolutely lost their way and their 
relevance,” claims Joseph Jaff e, former ad agency executive (in Gross, 2005). Many 
have, but many others understand that the Internet-fueled fragmentation and democ-
ratization of media require a new type of appeal to consumers. If people are increas-
ingly rejecting traditional  mass  media and the commercial messages they carry, the 
industry must become more creative in its messages and how it gets them to desired 
consumers. We’ve already seen many examples—product placement in all media; spe-
cially designed and targeted commercials delivered through cable or called up by DVR; 
online advergames; the sometimes annoying examples of ambient advertising that 
opened this chapter. 
 But the Internet has had its impact here as well. Much of advertising’s creative com-
munity has learned to distinguish between typical, often unappreciated contextual 

CHAPTER 12 
Advertising 
309
advertising on the Web and imaginative video advertising delivered by the Web, smart-
phones and tablets, MP3 players and iPods, and portable game devices. For example, 
traditional big-time television advertisers like BMW, IKEA, Lincoln-Mercury, Hidden 
Valley Ranch, and Burger King have moved signifi cant amounts of their advertising 
dollars to the creation and distribution of short online fi lms, sometimes episodic, often 
featuring well-known actors, to tout their products. Pen-maker Sharpie “took over” 
YouTube’s homepage with an interactive mosaic made up of user-generated art. Th e 
page produced more than 62 million impressions in one day, leading to more than 
72,000 visits to the company’s website and 2 million new fans on its Facebook page 
(Sullivan, 2011). 
 NEW RELATIONSHIP WITH CONSUMERS  Th e Internet, as we’ve seen throughout this text, makes 
mass communication less of a monologue and more of a conversation. Today’s con-
sumers are no longer passive media  receivers , taking whatever the television networks 
and movie studios insist they should. Instead, they are empowered media  users , 
increasingly free to control and shape the content they receive. “As all media becomes 
addressable, all media becomes refusable,” said Ogilvy & Mather’s vice chair, Steve 
Hayden. He argues that because the consumer now has the power to accept or reject 
content, an advertiser has to enter into a transaction with him or her, saying, “‘I’ll give 
you this content in exchange for your attention,’ which has always been the model of 
mass advertising. But now, I’ve got to make that deal on a person-to-person basis” (in 
Kirsner, 2005). 
 Th is new    permission marketing   , of necessity, has led to a rethinking of the relation-
ship between advertiser and consumer, one in which they act like partners, sharing 
information for mutual benefi t. Th e new model of advertising will, as Hayden suggests, 
be a conversation between marketers and    prosumers   , proactive consumers who reject 
most traditional advertising and use multiple sources—traditional media, the Internet, 
product-rating magazines, recommendations from friends in the know—not only to 
research a product but also to negotiate price and other benefi ts. Economists call this 
 expressing disapproval . Consumers now have two choices:  exit  (they simply do not buy 
the product) or  voice  (they explain exactly why they are dissatisfi ed and what they’d 
like instead). Active media users, who are at the same time skilled prosumers, who 
   Sharpie took over YouTube’s homepage and 
captured 62 million impressions in one day.
Reprinted by permission of Newell Rubbermaid, Inc. 

310 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
have access to interactive technologies, ensure that voice will, indeed, replace exit as 
the measure of advertisers’ success.    
 Increased Audience Segmentation 
 Advertisers face other challenges as well. As the number of media outlets for adver-
tising grows, and as audiences for traditional media are increasingly fragmented, 
advertisers have been forced to refi ne their ability to reach and speak to ever-
narrower audience segments. Digital technology facilitates this practice, but segmen-
tation exists apart from the new technologies. Th e ethnic composition of the United 
States is changing, and advertising is keeping pace. African Americans constitute just 
over 12% of the total U.S. population, and Hispanics, now the nation’s largest minor-
ity, make up 18% (23% of all American kids are Hispanic). Th e Census Bureau reports 
that middle- and upper-income African Americans and Hispanics are indistinguish-
able from Whites in terms of such economic indicators as home ownership and con-
sumer purchasing. In fact, by 2014, African Americans will account for 8.7% of all 
U.S. buying power; Hispanics will account for 10.2%, and Asians will account for 5.3% 
(Ethnic Buying, 2011); by 2015, Hispanic households alone will wield $1.5 trillion in 
buying power (Sass, 2012).  
 Psychographics 
 Demographic segmentation   —the practice of appealing to audiences defi ned by vary-
ing personal and social characteristics such as race/ethnicity, gender, and economic 
level—has long been part of advertisers’ strategy. But advertisers are making increased 
use of    psychographic segmentation   —that is, appealing to consumer groups with 
similar lifestyles, attitudes, values, and behavior patterns. 
 Psychographics entered advertising in the 1970s and is receiving growing atten-
tion as advertisers work to reach increasingly disparate consumers in increasingly 
segmented media.    VALS   , a psychographic segmentation strategy that classifi es con-
sumers according to values and lifestyles, is indicative of this lifestyle segmentation. 
Developed by SRI Consulting (2008), a California consulting company, VALS II 
divides consumers into eight VALS segments. Each segment is characterized by spe-
cifi c values and lifestyles, demographics, and, of greatest importance to advertisers, 
  The growing U.S. Hispanic population is 
increasingly targeted by advertisers, in both English 
and Spanish. Here is an example from carmaker 
Nissan. 

CHAPTER 12 
Advertising 
311
buying patterns. Th e segments, including some of their key demographic identifi ers, 
are listed here: 
 Innovators:  Successful, sophisticated, high self-esteem. Have abundant resources. 
Are change leaders and receptive to new ideas and technologies.  
 Th inkers:  Motivated by ideals. Mature, satisfi ed, comfortable, refl ective; value order, 
knowledge, and responsibility. Well educated, actively seek out information.  
 Achievers:  Have goal-oriented lifestyles and deep commitment to career and family. 
Social lives structured around family, place of worship, and work.  
 Experiencers:  Motivated by self-expression. Young and impulsive consumers; quickly 
become enthusiastic about new possibilities but equally quick to cool. Seek vari-
ety and excitement.  
 Believers: Motivated by ideals. Conservative, conventional, with concrete beliefs 
based on traditional, established codes: family, religion, community, and nation. 
 Strivers:  Trendy, fun loving. Motivated by achievement; concerned about opinions 
and approval of others. Money defi nes success, but don’t have enough to meet 
their desires. Favor stylish products.  
 Makers:  Motivated by self-expression. Express themselves through work/projects. 
Practical, have constructive skills, and value self-suffi  ciency.  
 Survivors:  Live narrowly focused lives. Have few resources. Comfortable with the 
familiar, primarily concerned with safety and security. Focus on meeting needs 
rather than fulfi lling desires.  
 Globalization 
 As media and national economies have globalized, advertising has adapted. U.S. agen-
cies are increasingly merging with, acquiring, or affi  liating with agencies from other 
parts of the world. Revisit Figure 12.2. You’ll see that fi ve of the top 10 U.S. agencies 
are owned by foreign companies. In addition to the globalization of media and econo-
mies, a second force driving this trend is the demographic fact that today 80% of the 
world’s population lives in developing countries, and by 2014 two-thirds of all the 
people in the world will live in Asia alone. Th e industry is already putting its clients in 
touch with these consumers. Foreign ad spending fi rst exceeded U.S. totals in 1980, 
and today major media ad spending in America accounts for 33% of the world’s total, 
down from 44% in 1986 (Johnson, 2011b). Ad spending in  developing  nations is grow-
ing at a faster rate than it is in the developed world. In fact, spending in the Asia-Pacifi c 
region will surpass North America as the world’s biggest advertising market soon after 
2014, and in 2012 60% of global marketers said they planned to shift their ad budgets 
to focus on emerging markets such as South Africa, Argentina, the “BRICS” (Brazil, 
Russia, India, China), and the “MIST” (Mexico, Indonesia, South Korea, Turkey; 
McClellan, 2012).  Figure 12.5  shows the world’s 10 biggest global advertisers. 
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS 
 Interpreting Intentional Imprecision 
 Advertisers often use intentional imprecision in words and phrases to say something 
other than the precise truth, and they do so in all forms of advertising—profi t and 
nonprofi t, scrupulously honest and less so. Th ere are three categories of intentional 
imprecision: unfi nished statements, qualifi ers, and connotatively loaded words and 
expressions. 
 We are all familiar with  unfi nished statements , such as the one for the battery that 
“lasts twice as long.” Others include “You can be sure if it’s Westinghouse,” “Magnavox 

312 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries
gives you more,” and “Easy-Off  makes oven cleaning easier.” A literate advertising con-
sumer should ask, “Twice as long as  what ?” “Of  what  can I be sure?” “Gives me more 
of  what ?” “Easier than  what ?” Better, more, stronger, whiter, faster—all are compara-
tive adjectives whose true purpose is to create a comparison between two or more 
things. When the other half of the comparison is not identifi ed, intentional imprecision 
is being used to create the illusion of comparison. 
 Qualifi ers  are words that limit a claim. A product  helps  relieve stress, for instance. 
It may not relieve stress as well as rest and better planning and organization. But once 
the qualifi er “helps” appears, an advertiser is free to make just about any claim for the 
product because all the ad really says is that it helps, not that it does anything in and 
of itself. It’s the consumer’s fault for misreading. A product may  fi ght  grime, but there 
is no promise that it will win. In the statement “Texaco’s coal gasifi cation process could 
mean you won’t have to worry about how it aff ects the environment,” “could” relieves 
the advertiser of all responsibility. “Could” does not mean “will.” Moreover, the fact 
that you  could stop worrying about the environment  does not mean the product does 
not harm the environment—only that you could stop worrying about it.   
   Some qualifi ers are more apparent. “Taxes not included,” “limited time only,” “only 
at participating locations,” “prices may vary,” “some assembly required,” “additional 
charges may apply,” and “batteries not included” are qualifi ers presented after the pri-
mary claims have been made. Often these words are spoken quickly at the end of radio 
and television commercials, or they appear in small print on the screen or at the bot-
tom of a newspaper or magazine ad. 
 Other qualifi ers are part of the product’s advertising slogan. Boodles gin is “the ultra-
refi ned British gin that only the world’s costliest methods could produce. Boodles. Th e 
world’s costliest British gin.” After intimating that the costliest methods are somehow 
necessary to make the best gin, this advertiser qualifi es its product as the costliest 
“British” gin. Th ere may be costlier, and possibly better, Irish, U.S., Russian, and Canadian 
gins. Many sugared children’s cereals employ the tactic of displaying the cereal on a 
$6.62
$11.43
$4.98
$3.59
$2.86
$2.43
$2.34
$2.32
$2.46
$3.19
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Global advertising spending in billions of dollars by company rank and headquarters
Proctor & Gamble, Cincinnati, OH
Coca-Cola, Atlanta, GA
Unilever, London, UK and Rotterdam, Netherlands
L’Oréal, Paris
General Motors, Detroit, MI
Toyota, Toyota City, Japan
Nestlé, Vevey, Switzerland
Reckitt Benckiser, Slough, UK
Kraft Foods, Northﬁeld, IL
Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, NJ
  Figure 12.5  World’s 10 Biggest Global 
Advertisers, 2010. 
 Source: 100 Global Marketers, 2011 . 

CHAPTER 12 
Advertising 
313
table with fruit, milk, and toast. Th e announcer says or the copy reads, “Coco Yummies 
are  a part of  this complete breakfast”—so is the tablecloth. But the cereal, in and of 
itself, adds little to the nutritional completeness of the meal. It is “a part of” it. In 
December 2003, in order to forestall FTC action, KFC pulled television commercials 
claiming that its fried chicken was “part of” a healthy diet, a campaign characterized as 
“desperate and sleazy” by  Advertising Age  (MacArthur, 2003). 
 Advertising is full of words that are  connotatively loaded. Best-selling  may say more 
about a product’s advertising and distribution system than its quality.  More of the 
pain-relieving medicine doctors prescribe most  means aspirin.  Cherry - fl avored prod-
ucts have no cherries in them. On the ecolabeling front,  no additives  is meaningless; 
the manufacturer decides what is and is not an additive.  Cruelty free;  again, the com-
pany decides. Other connotatively loaded ecolabels are  hypoallergenic (advertiser-
created, scientifi c-sounding, and meaningless),  fragrance free  (you can’t smell the 
scent because of the chemicals used to hide it),  nontoxic  (won’t kill you, but could 
cause other health problems), and  earth smart ,  green , and  nature’s friend —all mean-
ingless. Advertisers want consumers to focus on the connotation, not the actual 
meaning of these words. 
 Intentional imprecision is puff ery. It is not illegal; neither is it suffi  ciently troubling 
to the advertising industry to warrant self-regulatory limits. But puff ery is neither true 
nor accurate, and its purpose is to deceive. Th is means that the responsibility for cor-
rectly and accurately reading advertising that is intentionally imprecise rests with the 
media-literate consumer. 
   Finding intentional imprecision—those little white lies—in contemporary advertising can be a challenge, but one that a media-
literate consumer should welcome. So, record all the commercials during one hour of either TV watching or radio listening. Then 
go through them carefully and identify ways in which they might have been intentionally imprecise. Did you ﬁ nd any  unﬁ nished 
statements  like “It lasts twice as long”? List them and the questions you were left to ponder (Twice as long as what?). How many 
 qualiﬁ ers  like “helps relieve stress” or “this could be the last car you’ll ever own” did you ﬁ nd? Were there examples of  connotatively 
loaded  words like “Coco Yummies are part of a complete breakfast”? How easy were these imprecisions to identify? Do you 
consider them deceptive or harmless? Why? Can you explain your results and your reaction to those results in terms of media 
literacy skills such as your  willingness to make an eﬀ ort to understand ad content and ﬁ lter out noise  and your  understanding of 
and respect for the power of commercial messages ?  
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE 
 Finding Those Little White Lies 
 We regularly encounter intentional imprecision in advertising, although maybe not as bad as practiced by Dogbert.
 DILBERT: © Scott Adams/Dist. by United Feature Syndicate, Inc. 

314 
PART 3 
Strategic Communication Industries

Outline the history and development of the advertising 
industry. 
  Advertising has been a part of commerce for centuries, 
but it became an industry in its own right with the com-
ing of industrialization and the American Civil War. 

Evaluate contemporary criticisms and defenses of 
advertising. 
  Advertising suff ers from a number of criticisms—it is 
intrusive, it is deceptive, it exploits children, it demeans 
and corrupts culture. 
  Advertising is also considered benefi cial—it supports 
our economic system, it provides information to assist 
buying decisions, it supports our media system, it im-
proves our standard of living. 

Describe how the organizational and economic nature 
of the contemporary advertising industry shapes the 
content of advertising, especially in an increasingly 
converged media environment. 
  Advertising agencies typically have these departments: 
administration, account management, creative, media, 
market research, and public relations. 
  Th ere are several ways to measure an ad’s eff ectiveness: 
copy testing, consumer juries, forced exposure, recogni-
tion tests, recall testing, awareness tests, and neuromar-
keting research. 
  Th e interaction of converging technologies and the 
changes they drive in how, when, and why people con-
sume them (and the ads they contain) is reshaping the 
economics and creativity of the advertising industry as 
well as its relationship with consumers. 
  Reshaping of the industry has led to calls for better 
measures of eff ectiveness, such as engagement, return on 
investment (ROI), and performance-based advertising. 
   Identify diff erent types of advertising and their goals. 
  Th ere are diff erent types of advertising: institutional or 
corporate, trade or professional, retail, promotional 
retail, industrial, national consumer, direct marketing, 
out-of-home, and public service. 
  Advertisers must deal with consumers increasingly seg-
mented not only by their media choices but also along 
demographic and psychographic lines. 
  As with the media it supports, the advertising industry is 
increasingly globalized. 
   Explain the relationship between advertising content 
and its consumers. 
  Regulation of advertising content is the responsibility of 
the Federal Trade Commission, which recognizes that 
an ad can be false if it lies outright, does not tell the 
whole truth, or lies by implication. Puff ery, the enter-
taining “little lie,” is permissible. 
  Largely because of the Internet, people have become 
proactive consumers who now have two options when 
dealing with marketers, exit and voice. 
   Apply key media literacy skills when consuming 
advertising. 
  Interpreting advertisers’ intentional imprecision—
unfi nished statements, qualifi ers, and connotatively 
loaded words—tests consumers’ media literacy skills. 
 Resources for Review and Discussion  
 REVIEW POINTS: TYING CONTENT TO LEARNING OUTCOMES 
 KEY TERMS   
 ambient advertising, 290 
 360 marketing, 290 
 murketing, 290 
 blinks, 290 
 siquis, 291 
 shopbills, 291 
 newsbook, 291 
 unique selling proposition (USP), 296 
 parity products, 296 
 AIDA approach, 299 
 consumer culture, 299 
 retainer, 301 
 commissions, 301 
 cost per thousand (CPM), 302 
 cease-and-desist order, 303 
 corrective advertising, 304 
 puff ery, 304  
 island, 305 
 copy testing, 305 
 consumer juries, 305 
 forced exposure, 305 
 recognition tests, 305 
 recall testing, 306 
 awareness tests, 306 
 neuromarketing research, 306 
 banners, 307 
 search marketing, 307 
 lead generation, 307 
 rich media, 307 
 sponsorships, 307 
 e-commerce, 307 
 return on investment 
(ROI), 308 
 performance-based advertising, 308 
 engagement, 308 
 accountability metrics, 308 
 value-compensation program, 308 
 permission marketing, 309 
 prosumer, 309 
 demographic segmentation, 310 
 psychographic segmentation, 310 
 VALS, 310 

CHAPTER 12 
Advertising 
315
 QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW 
  1.  Why are we seeing so many ads in so many new and diff er-
ent places? 
  2.  Why do some people consider advertising to children 
unethical? Immoral? 
  3.  In what ways can an ad be false? 
  4.  What are the departments in a typical advertising agency? 
What does each do? 
  5.  What are the diff erent categories of advertising and the 
goal of each? 
  6.  What is a cease-and-desist order? Corrective advertising? 
Puff ery?  
  7.  What are copy testing, consumer juries, forced exposure, 
recognition tests, recall testing, and awareness tests? How 
do they diff er?  
  8.  What is a prosumer? How do prosumers change 
the relationship between advertisers and their 
audience? 
    9.  In what two ways do consumers express dissatisfaction? 
How does this aff ect contemporary advertising? 
 10.  What are demographic and psychographic 
segmentation? 
For further review, go to the LearnSmart study module for 
this chapter.
 QUESTIONS FOR CRITICAL THINKING AND DISCUSSION 
  1.  If you owned an advertising agency, would you produce 
advertising aimed at children? Why or why not?  
  2.  If you were an FTC regulator, to what extent would you 
allow puff ery? Where would you draw the line between 
deception and puff ery? Give examples.  
  3.  What do you think of the exit–voice dichotomy of 
consumer behavior? Can you relate it to your own use 
of advertising? If so, how? 


 
317
 Learning Objectives 
 Media have eﬀ ects. People may disagree about what those eﬀ ects might be, but media do 
have eﬀ ects. Advertisers would not spend billions of dollars a year to place their messages 
in the media if they did not have eﬀ ects, nor would our Constitution, in the form of the 
First Amendment, seek to protect the freedoms of the media if the media did not have 
important consequences. We attempt to understand and explain these eﬀ ects through 
mass communication theory. After studying this chapter you should be able to
 Outline the history and development of mass communication theory. 
 Explain what is meant by theory, why it is important, and how it is used. 
 Describe inﬂ uential traditional and contemporary mass communication theories. 
 Analyze controversial eﬀ ects issues, such as violence, media’s impact on drug and 
alcohol consumption, and media’s contribution to racial and gender stereotyping. 
 Apply mass communication theory to your own use of media.  13
 The potential of powerful media eﬀ ects provides a 
strong argument for increased media literacy. 
 Theories and 
Effects of Mass 
Communication 

318 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
1920
1940
1900
1941   ▲ Oﬃce of War Information; persuasion studies
1945   Allport and Postman rumor study
1955   Two-step ﬂow
~1930s   The Frankfurt School
1938     ▲ Welles’s War of the Worlds
▲~1900–1938 Era of mass society theory
~1938–1960 Era of limited eﬀects theories
  “I  KNOW THIS ISN’T LISTED ON THE SYLLABUS. But let’s call it a pop quiz.” Your instructor has sur-
prised you. “Will this count in our fi nal grade?” you ask. You are seared by the profes-
sor’s stare. 
 “Put everything away except a piece of paper and a pen.” 
 You do as instructed. 
 “Number your paper from 1 to 5. Items 1 through 3 are true–false. One. Most people 
are just looking out for themselves. Two. You can’t be too careful in dealing with peo-
ple. Th ree. Most people would take advantage of you if they got the chance. Now, 
number four. How much television do you watch each week?” 
 Not too tough, you think, you can handle this. 
 “Finally, number 5. Draw the outline of a dime as close to actual size as possible.” 
   In this chapter we examine mass communication theory. After we defi ne theory and 
discuss why it is important, we see how the various theories of mass communication 
that are prevalent today developed. We then study several of the most infl uential con-
temporary theories before we discuss the relationship between media literacy and 
mass communication theory. Th ese theories and their application form the basis of 
our understanding of how media and culture aff ect one another, the eff ects of mass 
communication. 
 The Effects Debate  
 Whether the issue is online hate groups, televised violence, the absence of minority 
characters in prime-time television programming, or a decline in the quality of politi-
cal discourse, the topic of the eff ects of mass communication is—and has always 
been—hotly debated. Later in this chapter we will take detailed looks at such eff ects 
issues as media’s impact on violence, the use of drugs and alcohol, and stereotyping. 
But before we can examine specifi c eff ects issues, we must understand that there exists 
fundamental disagreement about the presence, strength, and operation of eff ects. 
318 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age

1960
1980
2000
2012   ▲ New questions emerge: Does Facebook change the meaning
              of friendship? Is there a Will and Grace eﬀect?
1960   Klapper’s The Eﬀects of Mass Communication/reinforcement theory
~1960s ▲ Social cognitive theory; symbolic  interaction; social construction
              of reality; British cultural studies
~1970s  Cultivation analysis  
1972   Agenda setting; Surgeon General’s Report on Television and
           Social Behavior
1975   Uses and gratiﬁcations; dependency theory
▲1975–today Era of the meaning-making perspective
~1960–1975 Era of cultural theory
Many people still hold to the position that media have limited or minimal eff ects. Here 
are their arguments, accompanied by their counterarguments. 
 
 1.  Media content has limited impact on audiences because it’s only make-believe; 
people know it isn’t real . 
 
 Th e counterarguments: (a) News is not make-believe (at least it’s not supposed to 
be), and we are supposed to take it seriously. (b) Most fi lm and television dramas (for 
example,  CSI: Crime Scene Investigation  and  Modern Family ) are intentionally pro-
duced to seem real to viewers, with documentary-like production techniques such as 
handheld cameras and uneven lighting. (c) Much contemporary television is expressly 
 real —reality shows such as  Cops  and  Jersey Shore  and talk shows such as  Th e Jerry 
Springer Show  purport to present real people. (d) Advertising is supposed to tell the 
truth. (e) Before they develop the intellectual and critical capacity to know what is not 
real, children confront the world in all its splendor and vulgarity through television, 
what television eff ects researchers call the    early window   . To kids, what they see is real. 
(f) To enjoy what we consume, we    willingly suspend disbelief   ; that is, we willingly 
accept as real what is put before us.  
 
 2.  Media content has limited impact on audiences because it is only play or just 
entertainment  
 
 Th e counterarguments: (a) News is not play or entertainment (at least it’s not sup-
posed to be). (b) Even if media content is only play, play is very important to the way 
we develop our knowledge of ourselves and our world. When we play organized sports, 
we learn teamwork, cooperation, the value of hard work, obedience to authority, and 
respect for the rules. Why should play be any less infl uential if we do it on the Internet 
or at the movies?  
 
 3.  If media have any eff ects at all, they are not the media’s fault; media simply hold a 
mirror to society and refl ect the status quo, showing us and our world as they already are . 
 
 Th e counterargument: Media hold a very selective mirror. Th e whole world, in all 
its vastness and complexity, cannot possibly be represented, so media practitioners 
CHAPTER 13 
Theories and Eﬀ ects of Mass Communication 
319

320 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
must make choices. For example, in all the television shows and 
movies you’ve seen in your entire life, how many interracial mar-
riages do you remember? Probably not very many. But in the real 
world, 7.4% of American marriages are interracial, and beginning 
in 2008, about 15% of new marriages were so (Izadi, 2011). And 
when was the last time you saw a car explode in an accident or 
police shoot it out with the bad guys on a city street? At best, 
media hold a fun-house mirror to society and distort what they 
refl ect. Some things are overrepresented, others underrepre-
sented, and still others disappear altogether.  
 
 4.  If media have any eff ect at all, it is only to reinforce preex-
isting values and beliefs. Family, church, school, and other social-
izing agents have much more infl uence . 
 
 Th e counterarguments: (a) Th e traditional socializing agents 
have lost much of their power to infl uence in our complicated and 
fast-paced world. (b) Moreover,  reinforcement  is not the same as 
having no eff ects. If media can reinforce the good in our culture, 
media can just as easily reinforce the bad. Is racism eradicated yet? 
Sexism? Disrespect for others? If our media are doing no more 
than reinforcing the values and beliefs that already exist, then they 
are as empty as many critics contend. Former Federal Communi-
cations Commission member Nicholas Johnson has long argued 
of television in particular that the real crime is not what television 
is doing  to  us but what it could be doing  for  us, but isn’t.  
 
 5.  If media have any eff ects at all, they are only on the unim-
portant things in our lives, such as fads and fashions 
 
 Th e counterarguments: (a) Fads and fashions are not unimportant to us. Th e car 
we drive, the clothes we wear, and the way we look help defi ne us; they characterize 
us to others. In fact, it is media that have helped make fads and fashions so central to 
our self-defi nition and happiness. Kids don’t kill other kids for their $150 basketball 
shoes because their mothers told them that Air Jordans were cool. (b) If media infl u-
ence only the unimportant things in our lives, why are billions of dollars spent on 
media eff orts to sway opinion about social issues such as universal health care, nuclear 
power, and global warming (Chapter 11)?       
    One reason these arguments about media power and eff ects continue to rage is that 
people often come to the issues from completely diff erent perspectives. In their most 
general form, the debates over media infl uence have been shaped by three closely 
related dichotomies.  
 Micro- versus Macro-Level Eﬀ ects 
 People are concerned about the eff ects of media. Does television cause violence? Do 
beer ads cause increased alcohol consumption? Does pornography cause rape? Th e 
diffi  culty here is with the word  cause.  Although there is much scientifi c evidence that 
media cause many behaviors, there is also much evidence that they do not. 
 As long as we debate the eff ects of media only on individuals, we risk remaining 
blind to what many believe is media’s more powerful infl uence (both positive and 
negative) on the way we live. For example, when the shootings at the Littleton, Colo-
rado, Columbine High School in 1999 once again brought public debate on the issue 
of media eff ects, USA Network copresident Steve Brenner was forced to defend his 
industry. “Every American has seen hundreds of fi lms, hundreds of news stories, hun-
dreds of depictions, thousands of cartoons,” he said. “Millions don’t go out and shoot 
people” (as quoted in Albiniak, 1999, p. 8). 
 Who can argue with this? For most people, media have relatively few  direct eff ects 
at the personal or    micro level   . But we live in a culture in which people  have shot 
people or are willing to use violence to settle disputes, at least in part because of the 
  The mirror that media hold up to culture is like 
a fun-house mirror—some things appear bigger 
than they truly are, some things appear smaller, and 
some disappear altogether. 

CHAPTER 13 
Theories and Eﬀ ects of Mass Communication 
321
cultural messages embedded in our media fare. Th e hidden, but much more impor-
tant, impact of media operates at the cultural or    macro level   . Violence on television 
contributes to the cultural climate in which real-world violence becomes more 
acceptable. Sure, perhaps none of us have gone out and shot people. But do you have 
bars on the windows of your home? Are there parts of town where you would rather 
not walk alone? Do you vote for the “tough on crime” candidate over the “education” 
candidate? 
 Th e micro-level view is that televised violence has little impact because although 
some people may be directly aff ected, most people are not. Th e macro-level view is 
that televised violence has a great impact because it infl uences the cultural climate. 
You can read about a contemporary example of mass communication research on 
individuals in the box entitled “A Friend by Any Other Name: Research on Facebook 
and Relationships.” 
 Administrative versus Critical Research 
 Administrative research    asks questions about the immediate, observable infl uence of 
mass communication. Does a commercial campaign sell more cereal? Does an 
expanded Living Section increase newspaper circulation? Did  Doom  inspire the kill-
ings at Columbine High School? For decades the only proofs of media eff ects that 
science (and therefore the media industries, regulators, and audiences) would accept 
were those with direct, observable, immediate eff ects. Seventy years ago, however, Paul 
Lazarsfeld (1941), the father of social science research and possibly the most important 
mass communication researcher of all time, warned of the danger of this narrow view. 
He believed    critical research   —asking larger questions about what kind of nation we 
are building, what kind of people we are becoming—would serve our culture better. 
Writing long before the infl uence of television and information access through the 
World Wide Web, he stated, 
 Today we live in an environment where skyscrapers shoot up and elevateds (commuter 
trains) disappear overnight; where news comes like shock every few hours; where continually 
new news programs keep us from ever fi nding out details of previous news; and where 
nature is something we drive past in our cars, perceiving a few quickly changing fl ashes 
which turn the majesty of a mountain range into the impression of a motion picture. Might it 
not be that we do not build up experiences the way it was possible decades ago . . . ? (p. 12)   
  What are the eﬀ ects of televised violence? The 
debate swirls as diﬀ erent people mean diﬀ erent 
things by “eﬀ ects.” This violent scene is from 
 Supernatural . 

322 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
 Administrative research concerns itself with direct causes and eff ects; critical research 
looks at larger, possibly more signifi cant cultural questions. As the cartoon shows, 
Calvin understands the distinction well.   
 Transmissional Versus Ritual Perspective 
 Last is the debate that led Professor Carey to articulate his cultural defi nition of com-
munication (Chapter 1). Th e  transmissional perspective    sees media as senders of 
information for the purpose of control; that is, media either have eff ects on our behav-
ior or they do not. Th e  ritual perspective , Carey (1975) 
wrote, views media not as a means of transmitting “mes-
sages in space” but as central to “the maintenance of 
society in time.” Mass communication is “not the act of 
imparting information but the representation of shared 
beliefs” (p. 6). In other words, the ritual perspective is 
necessary to understand the  cultural  importance of 
mass communication. 
 Consider an ad for Skyy vodka. What message is 
being transmitted? Buy Skyy, of course. So people either 
do or do not buy Skyy. Th e message either controls or 
does not control people’s alcohol-buying behavior. Th at 
is the transmissional perspective. But what is happening 
culturally in that ad? What reality about alcohol and 
socializing is shared? Can young people really have fun 
in social settings without alcohol? What constitutes a 
good-looking man or woman? What does success look 
like in the United States? Th e ritual perspective illumi-
nates these messages—the culturally important content 
of the ad. 
 Deﬁ ning Mass 
Communication 
Theory 
 Whether you accept the limited eff ects arguments or 
their counterarguments, all the positions you just read 
are based in one or more    mass communication theories , 
explanations and predictions of social phenomena that 
  Calvin understands the diﬀ erence between administrative and critical research. 
CALVIN AND HOBBES © 1995 Watterson. Used by permission of Universal Uclick. All rights reserved. 
   The transmissional message in this liquor ad is 
obvious—buy Skyy. The ritual message is another 
thing altogether. What is it? 

CHAPTER 13 
Theories and Eﬀ ects of Mass Communication 
323
attempt to relate mass communication to various aspects of our personal and cultural 
lives or social systems. Your responses to the fi ve quiz questions that opened the chap-
ter, for example, can be explained (possibly even predicted) by diff erent mass commu-
nication theories. 
 Th e fi rst four items are a refl ection of    cultivation analysis —the idea that people’s 
ideas of themselves, their world, and their place in it are shaped and maintained 
primarily through television. People’s responses to the three true–false items can be 
fairly accurately predicted by the amount of viewing they do (question 4). Th e more 
people watch, the more likely they are to respond “true” to these unfl attering com-
ments about others. 
 Th e solution to the dime-drawing task is predicted by    attitude change theory . 
Almost everyone draws the dime too small. Because a dime is an inconsequential coin, 
we perceive it as smaller than it really is, and our perceptions guide our behavior. Even 
though every one of us has real-world experience with dimes, our attitudes toward that 
coin shape our behavior regarding it. 
 To understand mass communication theory, you should recognize these important 
ideas: 
 
 1.  As we’ve just seen,  there is no one mass communication theory. Th ere is a the-
ory, for example, that describes something as grand as how we give meaning to cul-
tural symbols and how these symbols infl uence our behavior (symbolic interaction), 
and there is a theory that explains something as individual as how media infl uence 
people in times of change or crisis (dependency theory). Mass communication theo-
rists have produced a number of    middle-range theories    that explain or predict spe-
cifi c, limited aspects of the mass communication process (Merton, 1967).  
 
 2.  Mass communication theories are often borrowed from other fi elds of science. 
Attitude change theory (the dime question), for example, comes from psychology. 
Mass communication theorists adapt these borrowed theories to questions and issues 
in communication. People’s behavior with regard to issues more important than the 
size of a dime—democracy, ethnicity, government, and gender roles, for example—is 
infl uenced by the attitudes and perceptions presented by our mass media.  
 
 3.  Mass communication theories are human constructions . People create them, 
and therefore their creation is infl uenced by human biases—the times in which we 
live, the position we occupy in the mass communication process, and a host of other 
factors. Broadcast industry researchers, for example, have developed somewhat dif-
ferent theories to explain how violence is learned from television than have university 
researchers.  
 
   4.  Because theories are human constructions and the environments in which 
they are created constantly change,  mass communication theories are dynamic; 
they undergo frequent recasting, acceptance, and rejection. For example, theories 
that were developed before television and computer networks became mass media 
outlets have to be reexamined and sometimes discarded in the face of these new 
technologies.  
 A Short History of Mass 
Communication Theory  
 Th e dynamic nature of mass communication theory can be seen in its history. All dis-
ciplines’ bodies of knowledge pass through various stages of development. Hypotheses 
are put forth, tested, and proven or rejected. Eventually a consensus develops that 
shapes a discipline’s central ideas and, as such, the kinds of questions it asks and 
answers it seeks—and expects. However, over time some answers come to challenge 
those expectations. So new questions have to be asked, new answers are produced, 

324 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
and, eventually, a new consensus emerges. Mass communication theory is particularly 
open to evolving ideas for three reasons: 
 •  Advances in technology or the introduction of new media  fundamentally alter the 
nature of mass communication. Th e coming of radio and movies, for example, 
forced rethinking of theories based on a print-oriented mass communication 
system. 
 •  Calls for control or regulation of these new technologies require, especially in a 
democracy such as ours, an objective, science-based justifi cation. 
   •  As a country committed to protecting  democracy and cultural pluralism , we ask how 
each new technology or medium can foster our pursuit of that goal.    
 Th e evolution in thinking that resulted from these factors has produced four major 
eras of mass communication theory: the era of mass society theory, the era of the 
limited eff ects perspective, the cultural theory era, and the era of the meaning-making 
perspective. Th e fi rst two may be considered early eras; the latter two best represent 
contemporary thinking.  
 The Era of Mass Society Theory 
 As we’ve seen, several important mass media appeared or fl ourished during the sec-
ond half of the 19th century and the fi rst decades of the 20th century. Mass circulation 
newspapers and magazines, movies, talkies, and radio all came to prominence at this 
time. Th is was also a time of profound change in the nature of U.S. society. Industrial-
ization and urbanization spread, African Americans and poor southern Whites 
streamed northward, and immigrants rushed across both coasts in search of opportu-
nity and dignity. People in traditional seats of power—the clergy, politicians, and 
educators—feared a disruption in the status quo. Th e country’s peaceful rural nature 
was beginning to slip further into history. In its place was a cauldron of new and dif-
ferent people with new and diff erent habits, all crammed into rapidly expanding cities. 
Crime grew, as did social and political unrest. Many cultural, political, educational, 
and religious leaders thought the United States was becoming too pluralistic. Th ey 
 Agnes Ayers swoons in Rudolph Valentino’s 
arms in the 1921 movie  The Sheik . Mass society 
theorists saw such common entertainment fare as 
debasing the culture through its direct and negative 
eﬀ ects on helpless audience members.

CHAPTER 13 
Theories and Eﬀ ects of Mass Communication 
325
charged that the mass media catered to the low tastes and limited reading and lan-
guage abilities of these newcomers by featuring simple and sensationalistic content. 
Th e media needed to be controlled to protect traditional values.    
    Th e successful use of propaganda by totalitarian governments in Europe, especially 
Germany’s National Socialist Party (the Nazis), provided further evidence of the over-
whelming power of media. Media needed to be controlled to prevent similar abuses 
at home. 
 Th e resulting theory was    mass society theory   —the idea that the media are corrupt-
ing infl uences that undermine the social order and that “average” people are defense-
less against their infl uence. To mass society theorists, “average” people were all those 
who did not hold their (the theorists’) superior tastes and values. Walter Lippmann, a 
nationally syndicated columnist for the  New York Times  and one of the country’s most 
important social commentators, was indicatively skeptical of average people’s ability 
to make sense of the confusing world around them. Political essayist Eric Alterman 
quotes and summarizes Lippmann’s thinking, expressed in his infl uential 1922 book 
 Public Opinion: 
 Writing in the early twenties, Lippmann famously compared the average citizen to a deaf 
spectator sitting in the back row. He does not know what is happening, why it is happen-
ing, what ought to happen. “He lives in a world he cannot see, does not understand and is 
unable to direct.” Journalism, with its weakness for sensationalism, made things worse. 
Governance was better left to a “specialized class of men” with inside information. No one 
expects a steel-worker to understand physics, so why should he be expected to understand 
politics? (2008, p. 10)
Th e fundamental assumption of this thinking is sometimes expressed in the 
hypodermic needle theory or the magic bullet theory. Th e symbolism of both is 
apparent—media are a dangerous drug or a killing force against which “average” 
people are defenseless.
    Mass society theory is an example of a    grand theory   , one designed to describe and 
explain all aspects of a given phenomenon. But clearly not all average people were 
mindlessly infl uenced by the evil mass media. People made consumption choices. 
Th ey interpreted media content, often in personally important ways. Media did have 
eff ects, often good ones. No single theory could encompass the wide variety of media 
eff ects claimed by mass society theorists, and the theory eventually collapsed under 
its own weight. 
 The Emergence of the Limited Eﬀ ects Perspective 
 Shifts in a discipline’s dominant thinking usually happen over a period of time, and 
this is true of the move away from mass society theory. But media researchers often 
mark the emergence of the limited eff ects perspective on mass communication as 
occurring on the eve of Halloween 1938. On that night, actor and director Orson Welles 
broadcast his dramatized version of the H. G. Wells science fi ction classic  Th e War of 
the Worlds  on the CBS radio network. Produced in what we would now call docudrama 
style, the realistic radio play in which Earth came under deadly Martian attack fright-
ened thousands. People fl ed their homes in panic. Proof of mass society theory, argued 
elite media critics, pointing to a radio play with the power to send people into the hills 
to hide from aliens. 
 Research by scientists from Princeton University demonstrated that, in fact, 1 mil-
lion people had been frightened enough by the broadcast to take some action, but the 
other 5 million people who heard the show had not, mass society theory notwithstand-
ing. More important, however, these scientists determined that diff erent factors led 
some people to be infl uenced and others not (Lowery & DeFleur, 1995). 
 Th e researchers had the benefi t of advances in survey research, polling, and other 
social scientifi c methods developed and championed by Austrian immigrant Paul 
Lazarsfeld. Th e researchers were, in fact, his students and colleagues. Lazarsfeld 
(1941) argued that mere speculation about the impact of media was insuffi  cient to 

326 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
explain the complex interactions that mass communication comprised. Instead, well-
designed, sophisticated studies of media and audiences would produce more valu-
able knowledge.  
 LIMITED EFFECTS THEORIES  Using Lazarsfeld’s work, researchers identifi ed those individual 
and social characteristics that led audience members to be infl uenced (or not) by 
media. What emerged was the view that media infl uence was limited by  individual 
diff erences  (for example, in intelligence and education),  social categories  (such as reli-
gious and political affi  liation), and  personal relationships  (such as friends and family). 
Th e theories that emerged from this era of the fi rst systematic and scientifi c study of 
media eff ects, taken together, are now called  limited eff ects theories . 
 TWOSTEP FLOW THEORY  Lazarsfeld’s own  two-step fl ow theory    of mass media and per-
sonal infl uence is a well-known product of this era and an example of a limited 
eff ects theory (Katz & Lazarsfeld, 1955). His research on the 1940 presidential elec-
tion indicated that media infl uence on people’s voting behavior was limited by    opin-
ion leaders   —people who initially consumed media content on topics of particular 
interest to them, interpreted it in light of their own values and beliefs, and then 
passed it on to    opinion followers   , people like them who had less frequent contact 
with media ( Figure 13.1 ). 
 Two-step fl ow theory has been rethought since Lazarsfeld’s time. For example, 
television, virtually unavailable in 1940, has given everyone a more or less equal 
opportunity to consume media content fi rsthand. Th ere is no doubt that opinion 
leaders still exist—we often ask friends what they’ve read or heard about a certain 
movie, book, or band—but their centrality to the mass communication process has 
diminished. 
 During and after World War II, the limited eff ects perspective and several theories 
it supported became more fully entrenched, controlling research and thinking about 
media until well into the 1960s. And as was the case with virtually all the media and 
support industries we’ve studied, the war itself was crucial to the development of mass 
communication theory during this era. 
 Memories of World War I were still very much alive, and not all Americans were 
enthused about entering another seemingly remote world confl ict. Th ose who joined 
or were drafted into the armed forces apparently knew very little about their comrades-
in-arms from diff erent regions of the country and from diff erent backgrounds. German 
propaganda seemed to prove the view of mass society theorists who claimed that mass 
media wielded remarkable power. Th e Offi  ce of War Information (OWI), therefore, set 
Step 1
Step 2
MASS
MEDIA
Newspapers
Newspapers
Radio
Radio
Magazines
Magazines
Books
Books
Movies
Movies
Messages passed on to opinion followers
Media
messages
to opinion
leaders 
  Figure 13.1  Model of Two-Step Flow of 
Media Inﬂ uence. Media inﬂ uence passes from the 
mass media through opinion leaders to opinion 
followers. Because leaders and followers share 
common personal and social characteristics, the 
potential inﬂ uence of media is limited by their 
shared assumptions, beliefs, and attitudes. 
 Source: After Katz & Lazarsfeld, 1955. 

CHAPTER 13 
Theories and Eﬀ ects of Mass Communication 
327
out to change public opinion about the wisdom of entering the war, to educate the 
military about their fellow soldiers and sailors, and to counter Nazi propaganda. 
Speeches and lectures failed. So, too, did informational pamphlets. Th e OWI then 
turned to fi lmmakers such as Frank Capra (see Chapter 11) and radio personalities 
such as Kate Smith for their audience appeal and looked to social scientists to measure 
the eff ectiveness of these new media campaigns. 
 Th e army established the Experimental Section inside its Information and Educa-
tion Division, staffi  ng it with psychologists who were expert in issues of attitude change. 
Led by Carl Hovland, these researchers tested the eff ectiveness of the government’s 
mass communication campaigns. Continuing its work at Yale University after the war, 
this group produced some of our most infl uential communication research. Th eir work 
led to development of  attitude change theory , which explains how people’s attitudes 
are formed, shaped, and changed through communication and how those attitudes 
infl uence behavior (Hovland, Lumsdaine, & Sheffi  eld, 1949).   
 ATTITUDE CHANGE THEORY   Among the most important attitude change theories are the related 
ideas of dissonance and selective processes.    Dissonance theory    argues that when con-
fronted by new or confl icting information people experience a kind of mental discom-
fort, a dissonance. As a result, we consciously and subconsciously work to limit or 
reduce that discomfort through three interrelated    selective processes . Th ese processes 
help us “select” what information we consume, remember, and interpret in personally 
important and idiosyncratic ways: 
 •  Selective exposure (or  selective attention   ) is the process by which people expose 
themselves to or attend to only those messages consistent with their preexisting 
attitudes and beliefs. How often do you read the work of an online pundit who 
occupies a diff erent place on the political spectrum from you? You’re more likely to 
read those pieces that confi rm what you already believe. It’s quite common for 
someone who buys a new car, electronic component, or other expensive item to 
suddenly start to see more of that product’s advertising. You’ve spent a lot of money; 
that creates dissonance. Th e ads confi rm the wisdom of your decision, reducing 
dissonance. 
 •  Selective retention    assumes that people remember best and longest those mes-
sages that are consistent with their preexisting attitudes and beliefs. Television view-
ers, for example, remember much more detail from the convention broadcasts of 
  Orson Welles directs  War of the Worlds . The 
1938 Halloween eve broadcast of this science ﬁ ction 
classic helped usher in the era of the scientiﬁ c study 
of mass communication. 

328 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
the political party to which they are philosophically closer than they do the broad-
casts of competing parties.  
 •  Selective perception predicts that people will interpret messages in a manner con-
sistent with their preexisting attitudes and beliefs. When your favorite politicians 
change positions on an issue, they’re fl exible and heeding the public’s will. When 
those you don’t like do so, they’re fl ip-fl opping and have no convictions.    
 Th e dominant thinking at the time of the development of dissonance theory was 
limited eff ects theory; thus, the selective processes were seen as limiting media impact 
because content is selectively fi ltered to produce as little attitude change as possible. 
Contemporary mass communication theorists accept the power of the selective pro-
cesses to limit the infl uence of media content when it is primarily informational. But 
because so much content is symbolic rather than informational, other theorists see the 
selective processes as relatively unimportant when it comes to explaining media’s con-
tribution to some important cultural eff ects. You will recognize these diff ering perspec-
tives on media’s power in the distinction made earlier in this chapter between the 
transmissional and ritual views of mass communication. 
 Here is an example of the distinction between informational and symbolic content 
and the way they relate to the selective processes. Few television stations would broad-
cast lecture programs by people who openly espouse the racist opinion that people of 
color are genetically more prone to commit crime. If we were to see such a show, 
however, the selective processes would likely kick in. We would change to another 
channel (selective exposure). If we did watch, we would interpret the ideas as loony 
or sick (selective perception); later we would quickly forget the arguments (selective 
retention). 
 Fortunately, the media rarely off er such overtly racist messages. Th e more likely 
situation in contemporary television is that the production conventions and economic 
and time demands of television news production lead to the common portrayal of 
certain people as more likely to be involved in violence and crime. It is easier and 
cheaper, for example, for stations to cover downtown violent crime—it’s handy, it’s 
visual, and it needs no signifi cant research or writing—than to cover nonviolent crime, 
even though 90% of all felonies in the United States are nonviolent. As a result of these 
largely symbolic portrayals of crime, our selective processes do not have an opportu-
  Line drawing used in the 1945 Allport and 
Postman study of rumor. Psychologists Allport and 
Postman demonstrated the operation of the 
selective processes. When groups of White 
Americans were asked to whisper from one to 
another the subject of this drawing, the razor 
invariably shifted from the left hand of the White 
aggressor to that of the African American defender. 
Can you explain this result in terms of dissonance 
theory and the selective processes? 
 From “The Basic Psychology of Rumor,” by Gordon W. Allport and 
Leo J. Postman from Transactions of the New York Academy of 
Sciences, Series II, VIII: 61–81. Reprinted by permission of 
Robert Allport. 

CHAPTER 13 
Theories and Eﬀ ects of Mass Communication 
329
nity to reshape the “information” in these news reports. Th ere is little information, only 
a variety of interesting images. 
 Cultural theorists (we’ll meet them later in this chapter) point to offi  cial government 
statistics as proof of the power of the media to shape attitudes toward race. Crime in 
the United States is committed by all races in near proportion to their presence in the 
population, yet African American males are disproportionately represented in the 
prison population and on death row. Why are Black and Hispanic drivers more likely 
to be stopped by police than are White drivers, and when stopped, why are they more 
likely to have their cars searched? Why are Black and Hispanic kids more likely to be 
suspended or expelled from school than are White kids who commit the same off enses 
(Hefl ing, 2012)? If our criminal laws and our justice and educational systems are 
racially neutral, they ask, why do these disparities exist? Does the razor still move to 
the hand of the young Black man?  
 REINFORCEMENT THEORY  Th e selective processes, however, formed the core of what is argu-
ably the most infl uential book ever published on the impact of mass communication. 
In  Th e Eff ects of Mass Communication , written in 1960 by the eminent scientist and 
eventual head of social research for CBS Broadcasting Joseph Klapper, the core of 
the limited eff ects perspective is articulated fi rmly and clearly. Klapper’s theory is 
based on social science evidence developed prior to 1960 and is often called    rein-
forcement theory   . It was very persuasive at a time when the nation’s social fabric 
had yet to feel the full impact of the cultural change brought about by the war. In 
addition, fl ush with enthusiasm and optimism for the technology and science that 
had helped the United States defeat the Axis powers, the public could see little but 
  The race of this driver will determine to a large 
degree the likelihood his car will be searched. 

330 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
good coming from the media technologies, and they trusted the work of Klapper and 
other scientists. 
 In retrospect, the value of reinforcement theory may have passed with the book’s 
1960 publication date. With rapid postwar urbanization, industrialization, and the 
increase of women in the workplace, Klapper’s “nexus of mediating factors and infl u-
ences” (church, family, and school) began to lose its traditional socializing role for 
many people. During the 1960s, a decade both revered and reviled for the social and 
cultural changes it fostered, it became increasingly diffi  cult to ignore the impact of 
media. Most important, however, all the research Klapper had studied in preparation 
for his book was conducted before 1960, the year in which it is generally accepted that 
television became a mass medium. Almost none of the science he examined in devel-
oping his reinforcement theory considered television.   
 THE USES AND GRATIFICATIONS APPROACH     Academic disciplines do not change easily. Limited 
eff ects researchers were unable to ignore obvious media eff ects such as the impact of 
advertising, the media’s role in sustaining sentiment against the war in Vietnam and 
in spreading support for civil rights and the feminist movement, and increases in real-
world crime that appeared to parallel increases in televised violence. Th ey turned their 
focus to media consumers to explain how infl uence is limited. Th e new body of thought 
that resulted, called the  uses and gratifi cations approach   , claimed that media do not 
do things  to  people; rather, people do things  with  media. In other words, the infl uence 
of media is limited to what people allow it to be. 
 Because the uses and gratifi cations approach emphasizes  audience members’ 
motives for making specifi c consumption choices and the consequences of that inten-
tional media use, it is sometimes seen as being too apologetic for the media industries. 
In other words, when negative media eff ects are seen as the product of audience mem-
bers’ media choices and use, the media industries are absolved of responsibility for 
the content they produce or carry. Media simply give people what they want. Th is 
approach is also criticized because it assumes not only that people know why they 
make the media content choices they do but also that they can clearly articulate those 
reasons to uses and gratifi cations researchers. A third criticism is that the approach 
ignores the fact that much media consumption is unintentional—when we go online 
for election news, we can’t help but see ads. When we go to an action movie, we are 
presented with various representations of gender and ethnicity that have nothing to 
do with our choice of that fi lm. A fourth criticism is that the approach ignores media’s 
cultural role in shaping people’s media choices and use. 
 Despite these criticisms, the uses and gratifi cations approach served an important 
function in the development of mass communication theory by stressing the reciprocal 
nature of the mass communication process. Th at is, scientists began to take seriously 
the idea that people are important in the process—they choose content, they make 
meaning, they act on that meaning.   
 AGENDA SETTING  During the era of limited eff ects, several important ideas were developed 
that began to cast some doubt on the assumption that media infl uence on people and 
cultures was minimal. Th ese ideas are still respected and examined even today. Among 
the most infl uential is    agenda setting   , a theory that argues that media may not tell us 
what to think, but media certainly tell us what to think  about . In 1972, based on their 
study of the media’s role in the 1968 presidential election, Maxwell McCombs and 
Donald Shaw (1972) wrote, 
 In choosing and displaying news, editors, newsroom staff , and broadcasters play an impor-
tant part in shaping political reality. Readers learn not only about a given issue, but how 
much importance to attach to that issue from the amount of information in a news story 
and its position. . . . Th e mass media may well determine the important issues—that is, 
the media may set the “agenda” of the campaign. (p. 176)   
 Th e agenda-setting power of the media resides in more than the amount of space 
or time devoted to a story and its placement in the broadcast or on the page. Also 

CHAPTER 13 
Theories and Eﬀ ects of Mass Communication 
331
important is the fact that there is great consistency between media sources across all 
media in the choice and type of coverage they give an issue or event. Th is consistency 
and repetition signal to people the importance of the issue or event. 
 Researchers Shanto Iyengar and Donald Kinder (1987) tested the application of 
agenda-setting theory to the network evening news shows in a series of experiments. 
Th eir conclusions supported McCombs and Shaw. “Americans’ views of their society 
and nation,” they wrote, “are powerfully shaped by the stories that appear on the eve-
ning news” (p. 112). But Iyengar and Kinder took agenda setting a step or two further. 
Th ey discovered that the position of a story aff ected the agenda-setting power of tele-
vision news. As you might expect, the lead story on the nightly newscast had the great-
est agenda-setting eff ect, in part because fi rst stories tend to have viewers’ full 
attention—they come before interruptions and other distractions can occur. Th e sec-
ond reason, said the researchers, is that viewers accept the broadcasters’ implicit cat-
egorization of the lead story as the most important. Iyengar and Kinder also tested the 
impact of vivid video presentations, discovering that emotionally presented, powerful 
images tended to undercut the agenda-setting power of television news because the 
images focused too much attention on the specifi c situation or person in the story 
rather than on the issue.  
 DEPENDENCY THEORY  In 1975 Melvin DeFleur and Sandra Ball-Rokeach off ered a view of 
potentially powerful mass media, tying that power to audience members’ dependence 
on media content. Th eir  dependency theory    is composed of several assertions: 
 •  Th e basis of media’s infl uence resides in the “relationship between the larger social 
system, the media’s role in that system, and audience relationships to the media” 
(p. 261).  
 • Th e degree of our dependence on media and their content is the “key variable in 
understanding when and why media messages alter audience beliefs, feelings, or 
behavior” (p. 261).  
  This Dennis the Menace cartoon demonstrates 
two criticisms of the uses and gratiﬁ cations approach. 
Someone who chooses to read the newspaper may 
not intentionally select this cartoon but will see it 
nonetheless. In addition, someone who chooses to 
read this cartoon for its humor will still be confronted 
with the idealized cultural image of women. 
 DENNIS THE MENACE® used by permission of Hank Ketcham 
Enterprises and © by North America Syndicate.   

332 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
   •  In our modern industrial society we are increasingly dependent on media (a) to 
understand the social world; (b) to act meaningfully and eff ectively in society; and 
(c) to fi nd fantasy and escape or diversion.  
   •  Our level of dependency is related to (a) “the number and centrality (importance) 
of the specifi c information-delivery functions served by a medium”; and (b) the 
degree of change and confl ict present in society (p. 263).    
 Limited eff ects theory has clearly been left behind here. Dependency theory argues 
that, especially in our complex and changing society, people become increasingly 
dependent on media and media content to understand what is going on around them, 
to learn how to behave meaningfully, and for escape. Th ink of a crisis, a natural disas-
ter, for example. We immediately turn to the mass media. We are dependent on the 
media to understand what is going on around us, to learn what to do (how to behave), 
and even sometimes for escape from the reality of the situation. Now think of other, 
more personal crises—reaching puberty, attending high school, beginning dating, or 
having a child. Dependency theory can explain or predict our media use and its impact 
in these situations as well, as it can when we rely on media for aid in making a tough 
decision, such as voting or forming a decision on a complicated issue like war or health 
care reform. 
 SOCIAL COGNITIVE THEORY     While mass communication researchers were challenging the lim-
ited eff ects perspective with ideas such as agenda setting and dependency theory, 
psychologists were expanding    social cognitive theory   —the idea that people learn 
through observation—and applying it to mass media, especially television. 
 Social cognitive theory argues that people model (copy) the behaviors they see and 
that  modeling    happens in two ways. Th e fi rst is    imitation   , the direct replication of an 
observed behavior. For example, after seeing cartoon cat Tom hit cartoon mouse Jerry 
with a stick, a child might then hit his sister with a stick. Th e second form of modeling 
is  identifi cation   , a special form of imitation in which observers do not copy exactly 
what they have seen but make a more generalized but related response. For example, 
the child might still be aggressive toward his sister but dump a pail of water on her 
head rather than hit her with a stick. 
 Th e idea of identifi cation was of particular value to mass communication theorists 
who studied television’s impact on behavior. Everyone admits that people can imitate 
what they see on television. But not all do, and when this imitation does occur in 
dramatic instances—for example, when someone beats a little girl to death after play-
ing  Mortal Kombat  (“Teens Killed Girl,” 2007)—it is so outrageous that it is considered 
an aberration. Identifi cation, although obviously harder to see and study, is the more 
likely way that television infl uences behavior. 
 Social cognitive theorists demonstrated that imitation and identifi cation are prod-
ucts of three processes: 
 Observational learning   . Observers can acquire (learn) new behaviors simply by 
seeing those behaviors performed. Many of us who have never fi red a handgun 
can do so because we’ve seen it done.  
 Inhibitory eff ects   . Seeing a model, a movie character, for example, punished for a 
behavior reduces the likelihood that the observer will perform that behavior. In 
the media we see Good Samaritans sued for trying to help someone, and it 
reduces our willingness to help in similar situations. Th at behavior is inhibited 
by what we’ve seen.  
 Disinhibitory effects   . Seeing a model rewarded for prohibited or threatening 
behavior increases the likelihood that the observer will perform that behav-
ior. This, for example, is the basis for complaints against the glorification of 
crime and drugs in movies. Behaviors that people might not otherwise make, 
those that are inhibited, now become more likely to occur. The behaviors are 
disinhibited.  

CHAPTER 13 
Theories and Eﬀ ects of Mass Communication 
333
 Cultural Theory—A Return to the Idea of Powerful Eﬀ ects 
 Th e questions asked and the answers produced by the agenda-setting, dependency, 
and social cognitive theorists were no surprise to their contemporaries, the cultural 
theorists. Th ese observers were primarily European social theorists and North Ameri-
can humanities scholars such as Marshall McLuhan and James Carey, both of whom 
we met earlier in this text. As America entered the 1960s, no one could remain unaware 
of the obvious and observable impact television was having on the culture; the 
increased sophistication of media industries and media consumers; entrenched social 
problems such as racial strife; the apparent cheapening of the political process; and 
the emergence of calls for controls on new technologies such as cable, VCR, satellite, 
and computer networks. Mass communication theorists were forced to rethink media’s 
infl uence. Clearly, the limited eff ects idea was inadequate to explain the media impact 
they saw around themselves every day. But just as clearly, mass society theory explained 
very little. 
 It’s important to remember that prominent theories never totally disappear. Joseph 
McCarthy’s eff orts to purge Hollywood of communists in the 1950s, for example, were 
based on mass society notions of evil media and malleable audiences, as were the late 
Reverend Jerry Falwell’s attacks on the children’s television show  Teletubbies  for its 
promotion of homosexuality (after all, Tinky Winky is purple—the gay color—his 
antenna is a triangle—the gay symbol—and he carries a purse), as were conservative 
groups’ 2011 protests over clothier J. Crew’s catalogue ad showing a mother spending 
weekend time with her son, whose favorite color is pink as evidenced by his painted 
toe nails: “Abandoning all trappings of gender identity . . . Blatant propaganda celebrat-
ing transgendered children” (Crary, 2011, p. B4). Social cognitive theory, limited eff ects 
and uses and gratifi cations are regularly raised in today’s debates over the regulation 
of video games (Chapter 9). 
 But the theories that have gained the most support among today’s media research-
ers and theorists are those that accept the potential for powerful media eff ects, a 
potential that is  either  enhanced or thwarted by audience members’ involvement in 
the mass communication process. Important to this perspective on audience–media 
  Denigrating religion or poking fun at the 
powerful? Controversy erupted in 2012 when Fox 
News commentator Todd Starnes publicly called 
for a federal investigation of the cartoon South Park.  

334 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
interaction are    cultural theories   . Stanley Baran and Dennis Davis (2012) wrote that 
these theories share 
 the underlying assumption that our experience of reality is an ongoing, social construction, 
not something that is only sent, delivered, or otherwise transmitted to a docile public. . . . 
Audience members don’t just passively take in and store bits of information in mental 
fi ling cabinets, they actively process this information, reshape it, and store only what 
serves culturally defi ned needs. (p. 323)   
 Th is book’s focus on media literacy is based in part on cultural theories, which say 
that meaning and, therefore, eff ects are negotiated by media and audiences as they 
interact in the culture.  
 CRITICAL CULTURAL THEORY  A major infl uence on mass communication theory came from 
European scholarship on media eff ects.  Critical cultural theory —the idea that 
media operate primarily to justify and support the status quo at the expense of 
ordinary people—is openly political and is rooted in    neo-Marxist theory . “Old-
fashioned” Marxists believed that people were oppressed by those who owned the 
factories and the land (the means of production). Th ey called the factories and land 
the  base . Modern neo-Marxist theorists believe that people are oppressed by those 
who control the culture, the  superstructure —religion, politics, art, literature, and of 
course the mass media. 
 Modern critical cultural theory encompasses a number of diff erent conceptions 
of the relationship between media and culture. But all share these identifying 
characteristics: 
 •  Th ey tend to be macroscopic in scope . Th ey examine broad, culturewide media 
eff ects. 
 •  Th ey are openly and avowedly political . Based on neo-Marxism, their orientation is 
from the political Left.  
 •  Th eir goal is at the least to instigate change in government media policies; at the most, 
to eff ect wholesale change in media and cultural systems . Critical cultural theories 
logically assume that the superstructure, which favors those in power, must be 
altered. 
    The  Teletubbies:  kids’ TV show or agent of evil? 

CHAPTER 13 
Theories and Eﬀ ects of Mass Communication 
335
 •  Th ey investigate and explain how elites use media to maintain their positions of 
privilege and power . Issues such as media ownership, government–media relations, 
and corporate media representations of labor and disenfranchised groups are typi-
cal topics of study for critical cultural theory because they center on the exercise of 
power. 
 THE FRANKFURT SCHOOL  Th e critical cultural perspective actually came to the United States 
in the 1930s when two prominent media scholars from the University of Frankfurt 
escaped Hitler’s Germany. Th eodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer were at the heart of 
what became known as the    Frankfurt School    of media theory (Arato & Gebhardt, 
1978). Th eir approach, centered in neo-Marxism, valued serious art (literature, sym-
phonic music, and theater) and saw consumption of art as a means to elevate all peo-
ple toward a better life. Typical media fare—popular music, slapstick radio and movie 
comedies, the soft news dominant in newspapers—pacifi ed ordinary people while 
assisting in their repression. 
 Adorno and Horkheimer’s infl uence on U.S. media theory was small during their 
lifetimes. Th e limited eff ects perspective was about to blossom, neo-Marxism was 
not well received, and their ideas sounded a bit too much like mass society theory 
claims of a corrupting and debasing popular media. More recently, though, the 
Frankfurt School has been “rediscovered,” and its infl uence can be seen in two fi nal 
examples of contemporary critical theory, British cultural theory and news produc-
tion research.   
 BRITISH CULTURAL THEORY  Th ere was signifi cant class tension in England after World War 
II. During the 1950s and 1960s, working-class people who had fought for their coun-
try were unwilling to return to England’s traditional notions of nobility and privi-
lege. Many saw the British media—with broadcasting dominated by graduates of the 
best upper-crust schools, and newspapers and magazines owned by the wealthy—as 
supporting long-standing class distinctions and divisions. Th is environment of class 
confl ict produced theorists such as Stuart Hall (1980), who fi rst developed the idea 
of media as a public forum (Chapter 1) in which various forces fi ght to shape per-
ceptions of everyday reality. Hall and others in British cultural studies trusted that 
the media  could  serve all people. However, because of ownership patterns, the com-
mercial orientation of the media, and sympathetic government policies toward 
media, the forum was dominated by the reigning elite. In other words, the loudest 
voice in the give-and-take of the cultural forum belonged to those already well 
entrenched in the power structure.    British cultural theory    today provides a home 
for much feminist research and research on popular culture both in Europe and in the 
United States. 
 NEWS PRODUCTION RESEARCH  Another interesting strand of critical cultural theory is    news 
production research   —the study of how economic and other infl uences on the way 
news is produced distort and bias news coverage toward those in power. W. Lance 
Bennett (1988) identifi ed four common news production conventions used by U.S. 
media that bolster the position of those in power: 
 
 1.  Personalized news . Most news stories revolve around people. If a newspaper 
wants to do a report on homelessness, for example, it will typically focus on one per-
son or family as the center of its story. Th is makes for interesting journalism (and 
increased ratings or circulation), but it reduces important social and political prob-
lems to soap opera levels. Th e two likely results are that these problems are dismissed 
by the public as specifi c to the characters in the story and that the public is not pro-
vided with the social and political contexts of the problem that might suggest avenues 
of public action.  
 
 2.  Dramatized news . News, like other forms of media content, must be attractively 
packaged. Especially on television, this packaging takes the form of dramatization. 
Stories must have a hero and a villain, a confl ict must be identifi ed, and there has 
to be a showdown. Again, one problem is that important public issues take on the 

336 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
character of a soap opera or a Western movie. But a larger concern is that political 
debate is trivialized. Fundamental alterations in tax law or defense spending or any of 
a number of important issues are reduced to environmental extremists versus greedy 
corporations or the White House versus Congress. Th is complaint is often raised about 
media coverage of campaigns. Th e issues that should be at the center of the campaign 
become lost in a sea of stories about the “horse race”—who’s ahead; how will a good 
showing in New Hampshire help Candidate X in her battle to unseat Candidate Y as 
the front-runner?  
 
 3.  Fragmented news . Th e daily time and cost demands of U.S. journalism result in 
newspapers and broadcasts composed of a large number of brief, capsulated stories. 
Th ere is little room in a given report for perspective and context. Another contributor 
to fragmented news, according to Bennett (1988), is journalists’ obsession with objec-
tivity. Putting any given day’s story in context—connecting it to other events of the time 
or the past—would require the reporter to make decisions about which links are most 
important. Of course, these choices would be subjective, and so they are avoided. 
Reporters typically get one comment from somebody on one side of the issue and a 
second comment from the other side, juxtapose them as if they were equally valid, and 
then move on to tomorrow’s assignment.  
 
 4.  Normalized news . Th e U.S. newswriting convention typically employed when 
reporting on natural or human-made disasters is to seek out and report the opinions 
and perspectives of the authorities. When an airplane crashes, for example, the report 
invariably concludes with these words: “Th e FAA was quickly on the scene. Th e cock-
pit recorder has been retrieved, and the reason for this tragedy will be determined 
soon.” In other words, what happened here is bad, but the authorities will sort it out. 
Journalists give little independent attention to investigating any of a number of angles 
that a plane crash or fl ood might suggest, angles that might produce information dif-
ferent from that of offi  cials. 
 Th e cultural eff ect of news produced according to these conventions is daily reas-
surance by the media that the system works if those in power are allowed to do their 
jobs. Any suggestions about opportunities for meaningful social action are sup-
pressed as reporters serve the powerful as “stenographers with amnesia” (Gitlin, 
2004, p. 31).  
  West Virginia Governor Joe Manchin regularly 
manned the press conference microphones during 
the search and recovery eﬀ orts at the April 2010 
Montcoal mining disaster that claimed nearly 
30 lives. Here he talks to reporters. But why was 
he there in the ﬁ rst place? He did not direct the 
eﬀ ort. He has no expertise in mine safety or rescue. 
News production researchers would argue that his 
presence was designed to normalize the news—
to remind us that the system, as it is, works. 

CHAPTER 13 
Theories and Eﬀ ects of Mass Communication 
337
 The Meaning-Making Perspective 
 A more micro-level-centered view of media infl uence, one paralleling cultural theo-
ries in its belief in the power of mass communication, is the    meaning-making 
perspective , the idea that active audience members use media content to create 
meaning, and meaningful experiences, for themselves. Naturally, this use can pro-
duce important macro-level, or cultural, eff ects as well. Cultural and meaning-
making theories, taken together, make a most powerful case for becoming media 
literate. Th ey argue that who we are and the world in which we live are in large part 
of our own making.  
 SYMBOLIC INTERACTION  Mass communication theorists borrowed    symbolic interaction 
from psychology. It is the idea that cultural symbols are learned through interac-
tion and then mediate that interaction. In other words, people give things meaning, 
and that meaning controls their behavior. The flag is a perfect example. We have 
decided that an array of red, white, and blue cloth, assembled in a particular way, 
represents not only our nation but its values and beliefs as well. The flag has mean-
ing because we have given it meaning, and that meaning now governs certain 
behavior toward the flag. We are not free to remain seated when a color guard 
carries the flag into a room. We are not free to fold it any way we choose. We are 
not free to place it on the right side of a stage in a public meeting. This is symbolic 
interaction. 
 Communication scholars Don Faules and Dennis Alexander (1978) defi ne commu-
nication as “symbolic behavior which results in various degrees of shared meaning and 
values between participants” (p. 23). In their view, symbolic interaction is an excellent 
way to explain how mass communication shapes people’s behaviors. Accepting that 
these symbolic meanings are negotiated by participants in the culture, mass commu-
nication scholars are left with these questions: What do the media contribute to these 
negotiations, and how powerful are they? 
 Symbolic interaction theory is frequently used when the infl uence of advertising is 
being studied because advertisers often succeed by encouraging the audience to per-
ceive their products as symbols that have meaning beyond the products’ actual func-
tion. Th is is called    product positioning   . For example, what does a Cadillac mean? 
Success. A Porsche? Virility. General Foods International Coff ees? Togetherness and 
intimacy. 
 SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF REALITY     If we keep in mind James Carey’s cultural defi nition of 
communication from Chapter 1—communication is a symbolic process whereby 
reality is produced, maintained, repaired, and transformed—we cannot be sur-
prised that mass communication theorists have been drawn to the ideas of sociolo-
gists Peter Berger and Th omas Luckmann. In their 1966 book,  Th e Social 
Construction of Reality , they never mention mass communication, but they off er a 
compelling theory to explain how cultures use signs and symbols to construct and 
maintain a uniform reality. 
 Social construction of reality    theory argues that people who share a culture also 
share “an ongoing correspondence” of meaning. Th ings generally mean the same to 
me as they do to you. A stop sign, for example, has just about the same meaning for 
everyone. Berger and Luckmann call these things that have “objective” meaning 
 symbols   —we routinely interpret them in the usual way. But there are other things in 
the environment to which we assign “subjective” meaning. Th ese things they call    signs . 
In social construction of reality, then, a car is a symbol of mobility, but a Cadillac or 
Mercedes Benz is a sign of wealth or success. In either case the meaning is negotiated, 
but for signs the negotiation is a bit more complex. 
 Th rough interaction in and with the culture over time, people bring together what 
they have learned about these signs and symbols to form    typifi cation schemes —
collections of meanings assigned to some phenomenon or situation. Th ese typifi cation 
schemes form a natural backdrop for people’s interpretation of and behavior in “the 
major routines of everyday life, not only the typifi cation of others . . . but typifi cations 

338 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
of all sorts of events and experiences” (Berger & Luckmann, 1966, p. 43). When you 
enter a classroom, you automatically recall the cultural meaning of its various ele-
ments: desks in rows, chalkboard or whiteboard, lectern. You recognize this as a class-
room and impose your “classroom typifi cation scheme.” You know how to behave: 
address the person standing at the front of the room with courtesy, raise your hand 
when you have a question, talk to your neighbors in whispers. Th ese “rules of behav-
ior” were not published on the classroom door. You applied them because they were 
appropriate to the “reality” of the setting in your culture. In other cultures, behaviors 
in this setting may be quite diff erent. 
 Social construction of reality is important to researchers who study the eff ects of 
advertising for the same reasons that symbolic interaction has proven valuable. But it 
is also widely applied when looking at how media, especially news, shape our political 
realities. 
 Crime off ers one example. What do politicians mean when they say they are “tough 
on crime”? What is their (and your) reality of crime? It is likely that “crime” signifi es 
(is a sign for) gangs, drugs, and violence. But the statistical (rather than the socially 
constructed) reality is that there is 10 times more white-collar crime in the United 
States than there is violent crime. Now think “welfare.” What reality is signifi ed? Is it 
big corporations seeking subsidies and tax breaks from the government? Or is it unwed, 
unemployed mothers, unwilling to work, looking for a handout? Social construction 
theorists argue that the “building blocks” for the construction of these “realities” come 
primarily from the mass media.   
 CULTIVATION ANALYSIS  Symbolic interaction and social construction of reality provide a 
strong foundation for  cultivation analysis , which says that television “cultivates” or 
constructs a reality of the world that, although possibly inaccurate, becomes meaning-
ful to us simply because we believe it to be true. We then base our judgments about 
and our actions in the world on this cultivated reality provided by television. 
 Although cultivation analysis was developed by media researcher George Gerbner 
and his colleagues out of concern over the eff ects of television violence, it has been 
applied to countless other television-cultivated realities such as beauty, sex roles, reli-
gion, the judicial process, and marriage. In all cases the assumptions are the same—
television cultivates realities, especially for heavy viewers. 
 Cultivation analysis is based on fi ve assumptions: 
 
 1.  Television is essentially and fundamentally diff erent from other mass media . 
Unlike books, newspapers, and magazines, television requires no reading ability. 
Unlike the movies, television requires no mobility or cash; it is in the home, and it is 
free. Unlike radio, television combines pictures and sound. It can be consumed from 
people’s very earliest to their last years of life.  
 
 2.  Television is the “central cultural arm” of U.S. society . Gerbner and his colleagues 
(Gerbner, Gross, Jackson-Beeck, Jeff ries-Fox, & Signorielli, 1978) wrote that television, 
as our culture’s primary storyteller, is “the chief creator of synthetic cultural patterns 
(entertainment and information) for the most heterogeneous mass publics in history, 
including large groups that have never shared in any common public message sys-
tems” (p. 178). Th e product of this sharing of messages is the    mainstreaming of real-
ity, moving individual and diff erent people toward a shared, television-created 
understanding of how things are.  
 
 3.  Th e realities cultivated by television are not necessarily specifi c attitudes and 
opinions but rather more basic assumptions about the “facts” of life . Television does not 
teach facts and fi gures; it builds general frames of reference. Return to our earlier dis-
cussion of the portrayal of crime on television. Television newscasts never say, “Most 
crime is violent, most violent crime is committed by people of color, and you should 
be wary of those people.” But by the choices news producers make, television news 
presents a broad picture of “reality” with little regard for how its “reality” matches that 
of its audience.  

CHAPTER 13 
Theories and Eﬀ ects of Mass Communication 
339
 
 4.  Th e major cultural function of television is to stabilize social patterns . Th at is, 
the existing power relationships of the culture are reinforced and maintained through 
the meaning-making television images encourage. Gerbner and his colleagues (1978) 
made this argument: 
 Th e repetitive pattern of television’s mass-produced messages and images forms the 
mainstream of the common symbolic environment that cultivates the most widely 
shared conceptions of reality. We live in terms of the stories we tell—stories about what 
things exist, stories about how things work, and stories about what to do—and television 
tells them all through news, drama, and advertising to almost everybody most of the 
time. (p. 178)   
Because the media industries have a stake in the political, social, and economic 
structures as they exist, their stories rarely challenge the system that has enriched 
them. 
 
 5.  Th e observable, measurable, independent contributions of television to the culture 
are relatively small . Th is is not a restatement of limited eff ects theory. Instead, Gerbner 
and his colleagues explained its meaning with an “ice-age analogy”: 
 Just as an average temperature shift of a few degrees can lead to an ice age . . . so too can a 
relatively small but pervasive infl uence make a crucial diff erence. Th e “size” of an eff ect is 
far less critical than the direction of its steady contribution. (Gerbner, Gross, Morgan, & 
Signorielli, 1980, p. 14)   
 In other words, even though we cannot always see media eff ects on ourselves and 
others, they do occur and eventually will change the culture, possibly in profound 
ways. 
 The Effects of Mass 
Communication—Four Questions  
 Scientists and scholars use these theories, the earliest and the most recent, to form 
conclusions about the eff ects of mass communication. You are of course familiar with 
the long-standing debate over the eff ects of television violence. But there are other 
media eff ects questions that occupy thinkers’ interest beyond that and the others high-
lighted here.  
 Does Media Violence Lead to Aggression? 
 No media eff ects issue has captured public, legislative, and industry attention as has 
the relationship between media portrayals of violence and subsequent aggressive 
behavior. Among the reasons for this focus are the facts that violence is a staple of both 
television and movies and that the United States experienced an upsurge in real vio-
lence in the 1960s, just about the time television entrenched itself as the country’s 
dominant mass medium, and that movies turned to increasingly graphic violence to 
diff erentiate themselves from and to compete with television. 
 Th e prevailing view during the 1960s was that  some  media violence aff ected  some 
people in  some  ways  some  of the time. Given the dominance of the transmissional 
perspective of communication and the limited eff ects theories, researchers believed 
that for “normal” people—that is, those who were not predisposed to violence— little 
media violence aff ected  few  people in  few  ways  little  of the time. However, increases 
in youth violence, the assassinations of Robert F. Kennedy and the Reverend Martin 
Luther King Jr., and the violent eruption of cities during the civil rights, women’s rights, 
and anti–Vietnam War movements led to creation of the Surgeon General’s Scientifi c 

340 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
Advisory Committee on Television and Social Behavior in 1969. After two years and 
$1 million worth of research, the committee (whose members had to be approved by 
the television networks) produced fi ndings that led Surgeon General Jesse L. Steinfi eld 
to report to the U.S. Senate: 
 While the . . . report is carefully phrased and qualifi ed in language acceptable to social 
scientists, it is clear to me that the causal relationship between televised violence and 
antisocial behavior is suffi  cient to warrant appropriate and immediate remedial action. Th e 
data on social phenomena such as television and violence and/or aggressive behavior will 
never be clear enough for all social scientists to agree on the formulation of a succinct 
statement of causality. But there comes a time when the data are suffi  cient to justify action. 
Th at time has come. (Ninety-Second Congress, 1972, p. 26)   
 Despite the apparent certainty of this statement, disagreement persists over the exis-
tence and extent of the media’s contribution to aggressive behavior. Few would argue 
that media violence never leads to aggressive behavior. Th e disagreement is about what 
circumstances are needed for such eff ects to occur, and to whom.  
 UNDER WHAT CIRCUMSTANCES?  A direct causal relationship between violent content and 
aggressive behavior—the    stimulation model —has been scientifi cally demonstrated in 
laboratory experiments. So has the    aggressive cues model   —the idea that media por-
trayals can suggest that certain classes of people, such as women or foreigners, are 
acceptable targets for real-world aggression, thereby increasing the likelihood that 
some people will act violently toward people in these groups. 
 Both the stimulation and aggressive cues models are based on social cognitive the-
ory. Fueled by the research of psychologists such as Albert Bandura, social cognitive 
theory has made several additional contributions to the violence debate. 
 Social cognitive theory defl ated the notion of    catharsis   , the idea that watching 
violence in the media reduces people’s innate aggressive drive. Social scientists 
were already skeptical: Viewing people eating does not reduce hunger; viewing 
  Ernest Borgnine in Sam Peckinpah’s  The Wild 
Bunch (1969). In trying to diﬀ erentiate itself from 
the television industry, the movie industry turned to 
graphic violence, fueling the debate over media 
violence and subsequent real-world aggression. 

CHAPTER 13 
Theories and Eﬀ ects of Mass Communication 
341
people making love does not reduce the drive to reproduce. But social cognitive 
theory provided a scientifi c explanation for the research that did show a reduction 
in aggression after viewing violence. Th is phenomenon was better explained not by 
some cathartic power of the media but by inhibitory eff ects. Th at is, as we saw in 
our discussion of social cognitive theory, if media aggression is portrayed as pun-
ished or prohibited, it can indeed lead to the reduced likelihood that that behavior 
will be modeled. 
 Some people, typically media industry practitioners, to this day defend catharsis 
theory. But over 40 years ago, respected media researcher and theorist Joseph Klapper, 
who at the time was the head of social research for CBS television, told the U.S. Senate, 
“I myself am unaware of any, shall we say, hard evidence that seeing violence on tele-
vision or any other medium acts in a cathartic . . . manner. Th ere have been some 
studies to that eff ect; they are grossly, greatly outweighed by studies as to the opposite 
eff ect” (Ninety-Second Congress, 1972, p. 60). 
 Social cognitive theory introduced the concept of    vicarious reinforcement   —the 
idea that observed reinforcement operates in the same manner as actual reinforce-
ment. Th is helped direct researchers’ attention to the context in which media violence 
is presented. Th eoretically, inhibitory and disinhibitory eff ects operate because of the 
presence of vicarious reinforcement. Th at is, seeing the bad guy punished is suffi  cient 
to inhibit subsequent aggression on the part of the viewer. Unfortunately, what 
researchers discovered is that in contemporary fi lm and television, when the bad guys 
are punished, they are punished by good guys who out-aggress them. Th e implication 
is that even when media portray punishment for aggressive behavior, they may in fact 
be reinforcing that very same behavior. 
 Social cognitive theory introduced the concept of    environmental incentives —the 
notion that real-world incentives can lead observers to ignore the negative vicarious 
reinforcement they have learned to associate with a given behavior. 
 In 1965 Bandura conducted a now-classic experiment in which nursery school 
children saw a video aggressor, a character named Rocky, punished for his behavior. 
Th e children subsequently showed lower levels of aggressive play than did those who 
  These scenes from Albert Bandura’s media 
violence research are typical of the laboratory 
response to portrayals of media violence that 
social learning researchers were able to elicit 
from children. 

342 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
had seen Rocky rewarded. Th is is what social cognitive theory would have predicted. 
Yet Bandura later off ered “sticker-pictures” to the children who had seen Rocky pun-
ished if they could perform the same actions they had seen him perform. Th ey all 
could. Vicarious negative reinforcement may reduce the likelihood that the punished 
behavior will be performed, but that behavior is still observationally learned. It’s just 
that, at the same time it is observed and learned, observers also learn not to make 
it. When the real world off ers suffi  cient reward, the originally learned behavior can 
be demonstrated.   
 FOR WHOM?  Th e compelling evidence of cognitive learning researchers aside, it’s clear 
that most people do not exhibit aggression after viewing fi lm or video violence. Th ere 
is also little doubt that those predisposed to violence are more likely to be infl uenced 
by media aggression. Yet viewers need not necessarily be predisposed for this link to 
 Television’s ability to serve prosocial ends is obvious in the public service messages we see 
sprinkled throughout the shows we watch. For example, NBC’s  The More You Know  series 
has been running short, clever PSAs mixed among its regular commercials for more than 
20 years. They feature the network’s biggest stars, cover issues like quit-
ting smoking, good parenting, remembering to take prescriptions, and 
good exercise, but you probably remember them from their iconic shoot-
ing star and rainbow tail. 
 
 But television writers and producers also more aggressively use their 
medium to produce prosocial eﬀ ects by embedding important cultural mes-
sages in the entertainment they create. The relationship between the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and several popular programs is 
indicative. Aware that 88% of Americans learn about health issues from television, experts at 
the CDC work with the writers of series like  House, Grey’s Anatomy, ER, Private Practice, Law & 
Order , and  Desperate Housewives  to include important health information in their scripts. If 
you watched the episodes of  24  in which Los Angeles suﬀ ered a terrorist at-
tack you learned, from this partnership, how infectious agents can be spread 
by physical contact, how to handle a government-mandated quarantine, 
and the civil liberty issues involved in such a quarantine. 
 This “prime-time activism” can be traced to Harvard professor 
Jay Winsten and his 1988 campaign to get Hollywood to push his novel 
“designated driver” idea. You know what a designated driver is—he or she 
is the person among a group of friends who is selected to remain alcohol-
free during a get-together and then to drive everyone else home. The concept, much less the 
term, did not even exist until Professor Winsten, through the intervention of CBS executive 
Frank Stanton, contacted Stanton’s friend Grant Tinker, then chair of NBC, to ask for help. 
Intrigued by Winsten’s plan to develop a new social norm, Tinker put his considerable clout 
behind the eﬀ ort, writing letters to the heads of the 13 production companies that did the 
most business with the networks. Tinker personally escorted Professor Winsten, director of 
Harvard’s Center for Health Communication, to meetings with all 13 producers. 
 In the four network television seasons that followed these meetings, 
designated drivers were part of the story lines of 160 diﬀ erent prime-time 
shows seen by hundreds of millions of viewers. Professor Winsten was suc-
cessful in placing his message in entertainment programming, but did his 
message make a diﬀ erence? Absolutely. Within one year of the introduction 
of the idea of the designated driver in these television shows, 67% of U.S. 
adults said they were aware of the concept, and by 1991, 52% of adults 
under 30 years old said they had served as a designated driver. 
  USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE 
 Television and the Designated Driver 
 “In the four network television seasons that followed 
these meetings, designated drivers were part of the 
story lines of 160 different prime-time shows seen by 
hundreds of millions of viewers.” 
  Story lines revolving around contemporary social issues are frequently embed-
ded in prime-time shows after consultation with experts. Episodes of  24 oﬀ ered 
information on how to deal with health and civil liberty issues in the event of a 
terrorist biological attack. 

CHAPTER 13 
Theories and Eﬀ ects of Mass Communication 
343
occur, because at any time anyone can become predisposed. For example, experimen-
tal research indicates that frustrating people before they view media violence can 
increase the likelihood of subsequent aggressive behavior. 
 But the question remains, who, exactly, is aff ected by mediated violence? If a 
direct causal link is necessary to establish eff ects, then it can indeed be argued that 
some media violence aff ects some people in some ways some of the time. But if the 
larger, macro-level ritual view is applied, then we all are aff ected because we live in 
a world in which there is more violence than there might be without mass media. 
We live in a world, according to cultivation analysis, in which we are less trusting 
of our neighbors and more accepting of violence in our midst. We experience 
 desensitization . Th is need not be the case. As researcher Ellen Wartella (1997) said, 
“Today, we fi nd wide consensus among experts that, of all the factors contributing 
to violence in our society, violence on television may be the easiest to control” 
(p. 4). And in a clear sign of that wide consensus, the American Medical Association, 
the American Academy of Pediatrics, the American Psychological Association, and 
the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry issued a joint report in 
summer 2000 off ering their combined view that the eff ects of violent media are 
“measurable and long lasting” and that “prolonged viewing of media violence can 
lead to emotional desensitization toward violence in real life” (as quoted in Wronge, 
2000, p. 1E).    
 Do Portrayals of Drugs and Alcohol Increase Consumption? 
 Concern about media eff ects reaches beyond the issue of violence. Th e claims and 
counterclaims surrounding media portrayals of drugs and alcohol parallel those of the 
violence debate. 
 Th e wealth of scientifi c data linking media portrayals of alcohol consumption, espe-
cially in ads, to increases in youthful drinking and alcohol abuse led the U.S. Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services’ National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and 
Alcoholism to report, “Th e preponderance of the evidence indicates that alcohol adver-
tising stimulates higher consumption of alcohol by both adults and adolescents” and 
“Th ere is suffi  cient evidence to say that alcohol advertising is likely to be a contributing 
factor to overall consumption and other alcohol-related problems in the long term” 
(Center for Science in the Public Interest, 2002, p. 2). Th e Center on Alcohol Marketing 
and Youth (2012) reports the following: 
   •  More youth in the United States drink alcohol than smoke tobacco or marijuana, 
making it the drug most used by America’s young people.  
   •  Every day, 4,750 people under 16 take their fi rst drink of alcohol.  
 • Th e average age at which young people 12 to 17 begin to drink is 13 years old.  
   •  Underage drinking is estimated to account for between 11% and 20% of the 
U.S. alcohol market. Even the lower estimate of 11% represents 3.6 billion drinks 
each year.  
   •  Youth who start drinking before the age of 15 are fi ve times more likely to develop 
alcohol dependence or abuse in their lifetimes than are those who begin drinking at 
age 21 years or later.  
   •  Programming popular with teens is fi lled with alcohol advertising. Every year since 
2001, alcohol ads have appeared on 13 or more of the 15 programs most popular 
with teens ages 12 to 17.  
 • Th e neuroscience, psychology, and marketing scientifi c literature concludes that 
adolescents, because of how the human brain develops, may be particularly 
attracted to branded products such as alcohol that are associated with risky 
behavior and that provide, in their view, immediate gratifi cation, thrills, and/or 
social status.  
 • Long-term studies have shown that youth who see, hear, and read more alcohol ads 
are more likely to drink and drink more heavily than their peers.    

344 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
 Yet there is a good deal of scientifi c research—typically from 
alcohol industry scientists—that discounts the causal link 
between media portrayals and real-world drinking. Again, 
researchers who insist on the demonstration of this direct causal 
relationship will rarely agree on media’s infl uence on behavior. 
Th e larger cultural perspective, however, suggests that media 
portrayals of alcohol, both in ads and in entertainment fare, tell 
stories of alcohol consumption that predominantly present it as 
safe, healthy, youthful, sexy, necessary for a good time, eff ective 
for dealing with stress, and essential to ceremonies and other 
rites of passage. 
 Th e same scenario exists in the debate over the relationship 
between media portrayals of nonalcohol drug use and behavior. 
Relatively little contemporary media content presents the use of 
illegal drugs in a glorifying manner. In fact, the destructive power 
of illegal drugs is often the focus of television shows such as  CSI: 
Miami  and  Breaking Bad  and a central theme in movies such as 
 Adventureland  and  Maria Full of Grace . Scientifi c concern has 
centered therefore on the impact of commercials and other media 
portrayals of legal over-the-counter drugs. Again, impressive 
amounts of experimental research suggest a causal link between 
this content and subsequent abuse of both legal and illegal drugs; 
however, there also exists research that discounts the causal link 
between media portrayals and the subsequent abuse of drugs. It 
cannot be denied, however, that media often present legal drugs 
as a cure-all for dealing with that pesky mother-in-law, those screaming kids, that abu-
sive boss, and other daily annoyances. Prescription drug advertising is enough of a 
public health issue that the Food and Drug Administration on several occasions has 
considered banning it. Nonetheless, it is illegal in every other country in the world 
except in the United States and New Zealand.   
 What Is Media’s Contribution to Gender and 
Racial/Ethnic Stereotyping? 
 Stereotyping    is the application of a standardized image or concept to members of 
certain groups, usually based on limited information. Because media cannot show all 
realities of all things, the choices media practitioners make when presenting specifi c 
people and groups may well facilitate or encourage stereotyping. 
 Numerous studies conducted over the last 70 years have demonstrated that 
women, people of color, older people, gays and lesbians—in fact, all of our nation’s 
“out-groups”—are consistently underrepresented in our mass media. Media eff ects 
research over that same period has consistently demonstrated the impact of this 
underrepresentation: 
 Media use has been determined to play a meaningful role in the development of racial/
ethnic cognitions and intergroup behaviors. Indeed, research has consistently revealed 
modest but signifi cant associations between viewing media portrayals of race/ethnicity 
and outcomes concerning outgroup members’ competence . . . socioeconomic status . . . 
group status . . . social roles . . . and judgments regarding a variety of race-based attribu-
tions and stereotypes. (Mastro, 2009, p. 325)   
 Any of a number of theories, especially cultivation analysis, symbolic interaction, 
and social construction of reality, can explain these eff ects. Th is underrepresentation 
infl uences people’s perceptions, and people’s perceptions infl uence their behaviors. 
Examine your own perceptions not only of women and people of color but of older 
people, lawyers, college athletes, and people sophisticated in the use of computers. 
What images or stereotypes come immediately to mind? 
  What does this magazine ad say about 
drinking? About attractiveness? About having fun? 
About women? Are you satisﬁ ed with these 
representations of important aspects of your life? 

CHAPTER 13 
Theories and Eﬀ ects of Mass Communication 
345
   These images (clockwise from top left) from  The L Word, Will & Grace, Queer as Folk , and  Modern Family oﬀ er samples of contemporary television’s portrayals of gay people and homosexuality. Researchers believe that 
repeated and frequent exposure to representations such as these inﬂ uence people’s perceptions of gays and issues relating to homosexuality. Some call this the  Will & Grace eﬀ ect, “the single most important indicator of one’s 
support for gay rights is whether one knows someone who is gay, [and a gay person] on TV will do” (Lithwick, 2012, p. 77). Today, having “met” many gay people in real and media life, a large majority of Americans favor gay 
rights and more than half favor gay marriage (Remnick, 2012). The question, then—as it typically is when discussing media stereotypes—is, Which came ﬁ rst, the culture’s perceptions of gay people or gay people’s 
representation in the media? Clearly, television’s presentation of gays has matured over time—from invisible to realistic and sympathetic. But was television’s “evolution” in its representation of homosexuality a  mirror of 
culture’s already changing attitudes, or did the medium  lead that change? 
 Sure, maybe you were a bit surprised at the data on race and school discipline 
described earlier; still, you’re skeptical. You’re a smart, modern, college-educated 
individual. Use the following quiz to test yourself on your stereotypes of crime, mar-
riage, and family: 
    1.  Which of these states has the highest divorce rate: Arkansas, Oklahoma, or 
Massachusetts? 
  2.  Which category of Americans—White, Hispanic, or African American—has the 
highest rate of substance abuse?  
    3.  Which two states have the higher rates of teenage pregnancy: New Hampshire, 
Mississippi, or Texas?  
    4.  Rank these cities in order of their crime rates, highest to lowest: Atlanta, New York, 
Memphis. 

346 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
 Are you surprised to learn that the divorce rate is lowest in liberal, northeast Massa-
chusetts (2.2 out of every 1,000 marriages), far lower than heartland states Arkansas 
(5.7 per 1,000) and Oklahoma (4.9 per 1,000; U.S. Census Bureau, 2012)? Drug users? 
Substance abusers? African Americans have a lower rate of drug abuse (5%) than do 
White (9%) and Hispanic (7.7%) Americans (Szalavitz, 2011). Teenage pregnancy rates are 
higher in Texas (88 per 1,000 teenage girls) and Mississippi (85 per 1,000), again regions 
typically viewed as socially conservative. New Hampshire (33/1,000) has the lowest, 
joined by two other New England states, Vermont (40/1,000) and Maine (43/1,000), with 
teen pregnancy rates well below the national average of 70 births per 1,000 teen women 
   Is a Facebook friend really a friend?   
societies put less value on their real world identities” (in “Facebook 
Generation,” 2008). 
 Yet researchers Hampton, Goulet, Rainie, & Purcell (2011) found that 
Facebook users not only use the social networking site to keep up with 
close social ties, but compared to non-Facebookers, they are more likely to 
be trusting of others and have more “core ties” among their real-world 
social networks. As for the nature of friendship, Facebookers get more so-
cial and emotional support as well as more companionship from others 
than do non-Facebookers: “For Facebook users, the additional boost is equivalent to about 
half the total support that the average American receives as a result of being married.” Their 
conclusion is that “contrary to studies done earlier in the decade, the Internet is not linked 
to social isolation. Rather, it can lead to larger, more diverse social networks.” 
 Enter your voice. Are you on Facebook? What is your deﬁ nition of friendship? What do 
you think is lost and gained as a result of your use of the social networking site? What do you 
make of the fact that the number of users who are “unfriending” others grows every year, up 
to 63% in 2011 (Madden, 2012). Does this mean that they ﬁ nd these friendships unsatisfy-
ing, or does it suggest that users are reﬁ ning and redeﬁ ning for themselves just what a friend 
really is? Is this the kind of question that mass communication researchers can answer to 
your satisfaction? Why or why not? 
 CULTURAL FORUM 
 A Friend by Any Other Name: Research 
on Facebook and Relationships 
 “Contrary to studies done earlier in the decade, 
the Internet is not linked to social isolation. 
Rather, it can lead to larger, more diverse social 
networks.” 
 Mass communication researchers often examine issues in the cultural forum, for example, 
the fast food advertising/childhood obesity link or the eﬀ ects of violent video games. But 
sometimes their work fuels discussion in the cultural forum. That’s the case 
with media researchers’ examination of people’s use of Facebook. They 
want to know if social network sites are changing the nature of friendship. 
Does social networking allow people to become more connected to and 
supportive of their friends, or does it diminish friendship because it lacks 
the intimacy of face-to-face contact? In exchange for more and a wider 
network of friends, do people give up the kind of personal relationships 
that fuel the development of empathy and understanding of emotional 
nuance that comes from “reading” others’ faces and bodies when communicating? Explains 
media researcher Julian Kiker, “Our notion of what a ‘friend’ is is shifting, and I think if you talk 
to people of diﬀ erent demographics—particularly diﬀ erent ages—you’ll ﬁ nd, if you ask 
them the deﬁ nition of ‘friend,’ they have very diﬀ erent notions of that” (in Przybys, 2011). 
 British psychiatrist Himanshu Tyagi offers the view that in the social networking 
world “everything moves fast and changes all the time . . .  Relationships are quickly 
disposed at the click of a mouse . . . You can delete your profile if you don’t like it and 
swap an unacceptable identity in the blink of an eye for one that is more acceptable . . . 
It may be possible that young people who have no experience of a world without online 

CHAPTER 13 
Theories and Eﬀ ects of Mass Communication 
347
(Guttmacher Institute, 2010). New York City, “Gomorrah of the North,” is the safest big 
city in America, with a per capita crime rate of 4.2%, compared to Memphis (18%) and 
Atlanta (16%; Ott, 2009). How did you develop your stereotypes of these people and 
places? Where did you fi nd the building blocks to construct your realities of their lives?   
 Do Media Have Prosocial Eﬀ ects? 
 Virtually every argument that can be made for the harmful or negative eff ects of media 
can also be applied to the ability of media to do good. A sizable body of science exists 
that clearly demonstrates that people, especially children, can and will model the good 
or prosocial behaviors they see in the media, often to a greater extent than they will the 
negative behaviors. Research on the impact of media portrayals of cooperation and 
constructive problem solving (Baran, Chase, & Courtright, 1979) and other “good” 
behaviors indicates that much more than negative behavior can be socially learned 
from the media (see the essay, “Television and the Designated Driver”).     
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS   
 Applying Mass 
Communication Theory 
 Th ere are many more theories of mass communication and eff ects issues than we’ve 
covered here. Some apply to the operation of media as part of specifi c social systems. 
Some examine mass communication at the most micro level; for example, How do 
viewers process individual television scenes? Th is chapter has focused on a relatively 
small number of theories and eff ects that might prove useful to people trying to develop 
their media literacy skills. Remember Art Silverblatt’s (2008) elements of media literacy 
in Chapter 1. Among them were understanding the process of mass communication 
and accepting media content as a “text” providing insight into ourselves and our cul-
ture. Among the media literacy skills we identifi ed was an understanding of and respect 
for the power of media messages. Good mass communication theory speaks to these 
elements and skills. Good mass communication theorists understand media eff ects. 
Media-literate people, then, are actually good mass communication theorists. Th ey 
apply the available conceptions of media use and impact to their own content con-
sumption and the way they live their lives.   
  An awareness of the impact of media on individuals and society  is an important component of media literacy, and as you’ve read, 
news production research suggests that media do indeed have a powerful eﬀ ect on people and culture. This work examines 
economic and other inﬂ uences on the way news is produced and how these inﬂ uences distort coverage in favor of society’s elites. 
Like much of critical cultural theory, this is a controversial perspective, but your challenge is to test its validity for yourself. First, 
choose one of the following media outlets (or if you want to compete against your classmates, divide them between yourselves): 
a daily newspaper, a local television news broadcast, a national news magazine, and a network television news broadcast. Then, 
identify as many examples of the four common news production conventions as you can ﬁ nd—personalized, dramatized, frag-
mented, and normalized news—and discuss their “slant.” Once you’ve completed this exercise, explain why you are more or less 
likely to accept the arguments of the news production research perspective. 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE 
 Be a News Production Researcher 

348 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
  Outline the history and development of mass communi-
cation theory. 
  Developments in mass communication theory are 
driven by advances in technology or the introduction of 
new media, calls for their control, and questions about 
their democratic and pluralistic use. 

Explain what is meant by theory, why it is important, and 
how it is used. 
 In understanding mass communication theory we must 
recognize that: 
  Th ere is no one mass communication theory. 
  Th eories are often borrowed from other fi elds of 
science. 
  Th eories are human constructions and they are 
dynamic. 
 Th ree dichotomies characterize the diff erent sides in the 
eff ects debate: 
  Micro- versus macro-level eff ects. 
  Administrative versus critical research. 
  Transmissional versus ritual perspective on 
communication. 
 In the media eff ects debate, these arguments for limited 
media infl uence have logical counters: 
  Media content is make-believe; people know it’s 
not real. 
  Media content is only play or entertainment. 
  Media simply hold a mirror to society. 
  If media have any infl uence, it is only in reinforcing 
preexisting values and beliefs. 
  Media infl uence only the unimportant things like fads 
and fashions. 
   Describe infl uential traditional and contemporary mass 
communication theories. 
  Th e four major eras of mass communication theory 
are mass society theory, limited eff ects theory, cultural 
theory, and the meaning-making perspective. Th e latter 
two mark a return to the idea of powerful media eff ects.   
   Analyze controversial eff ects issues. 
  Despite lingering debate, the media violence/viewer ag-
gression link is scientifi cally well established. 
  Th e same holds true for the relationship between media 
portrayals of drug and alcohol use and their real-world 
consumption. 
  Th e stories carried in the media can and do contribute to 
stereotyping of a wide array of people and phenomena. 
  Th e same scientifi c evidence demonstrating that media 
can have negative eff ects shows that they can produce 
prosocial eff ects as well. 
   Apply mass communication theory to your own use of 
media. 
  Media-literate individuals are themselves good mass 
communication theorists because they understand me-
dia eff ects and how and when they occur. 
 Resources for Review and Discussion
 REVIEW POINTS: TYING CONTENT TO LEARNING OUTCOMES 
 KEY TERMS 
 early window, 319 
 willing suspension of disbelief, 319 
 micro-level eff ects, 320  
 macro-level eff ects, 321  
 administrative research, 321 
 critical research, 321 
 transmissional perspective, 322 
 ritual perspective, 322 
 mass communication theories, 322 
 cultivation analysis, 323 
 attitude change theory, 323 
 middle-range theories, 323 
 mass society theory, 325 
 hypodermic needle theory, 325 
 magic bullet theory, 325 
 grand theory, 325 
 limited eff ects theory, 326 
 two-step fl ow theory, 326 
 opinion leaders, 326 
 opinion followers, 326 
 dissonance theory, 327 
 selective processes, 327 
 selective exposure (attention), 327 
 selective retention, 327 
 selective perception, 328 
 reinforcement theory, 329 
 uses and gratifi cations approach, 330 
 agenda setting, 330 
 dependency theory, 331 
 social cognitive theory, 332  
  modeling, 332  
 imitation, 332 
 identifi cation, 332  
 observational learning, 332 
 inhibitory eff ects, 332  
 disinhibitory eff ects, 332  
 cultural theory, 334 
 critical cultural theory, 334 
 neo-Marxist theory, 334 
  Frankfurt School, 335  
 British cultural theory, 335 
 news production research, 335 
 meaning-making perspective, 337 
 symbolic interaction, 337 
 product positioning, 337 
  social construction of reality, 337 
 symbols, 337 
 signs, 337 

CHAPTER 13 
Theories and Eﬀ ects of Mass Communication 
349
 QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW 
  1.  What are the four eras of mass communication theory?  
  2.  What are dissonance theory and the selective processes? 
  3.  What is agenda setting? 
  4.  What is the distinction between imitation and identifi ca-
tion in social cognitive theory? 
  5.  What assumptions about people and media are shared by 
symbolic interaction and social construction of reality? 
  6.  What are the fi ve assumptions of cultivation analysis?  
  7.  What four common news production conventions shape 
the news to suit the interests of the elite? 
    8.  What are the characteristics of critical cultural studies? 
  9.  What are the early window and willing suspension of 
disbelief? 
 10.  What are the stimulation and aggressive cues models of 
media violence? What is catharsis? 
For further review, go to the LearnSmart study module for 
this chapter.
 QUESTIONS FOR CRITICAL THINKING AND DISCUSSION 
  1.  Do media set the agenda for you? If not, why not? If they 
do, can you cite examples from your own experience?  
  2.  Can you fi nd examples of magazine or television adver-
tising that use ideas from symbolic interaction or social 
construction of reality to sell their products? How do they 
do so?  
    3.  Do you pay attention to alcohol advertising? Do you think 
it infl uences your level of alcohol consumption? 
 typifi cation schemes, 337 
 mainstreaming, 338 
 stimulation model, 340 
  aggressive cues model, 340  
 catharsis, 340 
 vicarious reinforcement, 341 
 environmental incentives, 341 
 desensitization, 343 
 stereotyping, 344 


 
351
 Bradley Manning, whistle-blower or traitor? 
 Learning Objectives 
 Our democracy exists on a foundation of self-governance, and free and responsible mass 
media are essential to both democracy and self-governance. But media, because of their 
power and the often conﬂ icting demands of proﬁ t and service under which they operate, 
are (and should be) open to some control. The level and sources of that control, however, 
are controversial issues for the media, in the government, and in the public forum. After 
studying this chapter you should be able to
 Outline the history and development of our contemporary understanding of the First 
Amendment. 
 Explain the justiﬁ cation for and exercise of media regulation. 
  Distinguish between a media system that operates under a libertarian philosophy 
and one that operates under a social responsibility philosophy. 
 Deﬁ ne and discuss media ethics and how they are applied. 
 Describe the operation and pros and cons of self-regulation. 
 Assess your personal commitment to media reform. 
 14
 Media Freedom, 
Regulation, 
and Ethics 

352 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
1900
1925
1931   Near v. Minnesota prior restraint ruling
1935   ▲ Hauptmann/Lindbergh trial
1943   NBC “traﬃc cop” decision
1947   Social responsibility theory of the press
1919   ▲ “Clear and present danger” ruling
1644   Milton’s Areopagitica
1791   ▲ Bill of Rights ratiﬁed
 UP UNTIL NOW, EVERYTHING HAD BEEN RIGHT ABOUT THE JOB. Editor of a major college daily newspa-
per makes a great resumé entry, you are treated like royalty at school events, you get 
to do something good for your campus, and, if you do your job well, even for the larger 
world out there. But as the tension around you grows, you start to wonder if it’s all 
worth it. 
 First there was the blow-up over your Bradley Manning editorial. Manning is the 
soldier who provided scores of documents concerning the war in the Middle East to 
the website WikiLeaks which, in turn, made them available to the world. Among the 
classifi ed materials were memos and cables indicating that offi  cials knew of but 
ignored torture in Iraq and had covered up evidence of child abuse by contractors in 
Afghanistan. Th ere was evidence that the offi  cial military count of civilian deaths in 
Iraq and Afghanistan was much higher than publicly revealed. Most dramatically, there 
was video footage of a 2007 incident in which an Apache helicopter fi red on civilians 
in Baghdad. It showed American soldiers shooting and killing 11 individuals, including 
two Reuters journalists, none of whom returned fi re. Because the material was classi-
fi ed, Manning was arrested, charged with treason, a crime punishable by death, and 
held in solitary confi nement for more than a year. He was still in jail and you wanted 
to editorialize in favor of a speedy and fair trial. 
 No way, argued your assistant editor. “He’s a traitor and a criminal. Let him rot. Th e 
government made those documents secret for a reason.” You were prepared for this: 
“It’s illegal for offi  cials to classify material if the goal is to hide violations of the law, 
governmental ineffi  ciency, or administrative error. It’s also not allowed if the intent is 
to merely prevent embarrassment to an offi  cial or agency or to prevent the release of 
information that does not pose a threat to national security.” But she was ready for you, 
too: “Revealing those secrets cost American lives!” You countered, “Th ey never should 
have been secrets in the fi rst place, and besides, the Secretary of Defense said no lives 
were lost as a result of the leaks and even the country’s foreign policy was unaff ected. 
And tell me this, what’s the diff erence between Daniel Ellsberg, who released the 
equally classifi ed Pentagon Papers to the  New York Times  and Bradley Manning who 
gave materials to WikiLeaks? Why is Ellsberg considered a whistle-blower and hero 
and Manning a traitor?”   
352 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age

1950
1975
2000
2001   U.S. Patriot Act; Creative Commons founded
2005   MGM v. Grokster P2P ruling; Judith Miller jailed
2007   Josh Wolf freed
2009   Pirate Bay founders jailed; Supreme Court upholds FCC indecency rules
2010   ▲ Bradley Manning
2011   Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Assn.
1979   ▲ Progressive hydrogen bomb case
1964   New York Times v. Sullivan public ﬁgure ruling
1969   Red Lion decision
1971   ▲ Pentagon Papers
1973   Miller decision deﬁnes obscenity
 Th en there’s the soup boycott. Several student organizations have been demanding 
that the campus stop serving Campbell Soup company products in the dining halls. 
Th ey are responding to a national protest against the company organized by the American 
Family Association (AFA), a conservative group angered by Campbell’s placement of 
an ad for its Swanson broth in the gay magazine  Th e Advocate . You want the paper to 
editorialize against the boycott and in support of Campbell’s principled stand for free 
speech. “Must we?” sigh several of your staff ers. “Yes, we must,” you counter. “Gay 
people buy soup; gay dollars are indistinguishable from straight dollars; the magazine 
targets a sought-after demographic; the ad speaks to that demographic. Th ere is a free-
dom of the press issue here that we have an obligation to address.” Th e two-page ad, 
created by the giant New York ad agency BBDO, shows two female restaurant owners 
and their son enjoying a bowl of soup. Th e AFA’s complaint is not only that Campbell 
“has openly begun helping homosexual activists push their agenda,” but that the ad 
goes even further by suggesting with this copy—“Th is holiday season, serve a special 
meal no matter the size and structure of your family”—that “homosexual parents con-
stitute a family and are worthy of support.” When challenged, Campbell’s response was 
unequivocal: “Our position on this is pretty straightforward. Inclusion and diversity 
play an important role in our business, and that fact is refl ected in our marketing plan. 
For more than a century people from all walks for life have enjoyed Campbell’s prod-
ucts, and we will continue to try to communicate in ways that are meaningful and 
relevant to them” (all quotes in Edwards, 2009). In a time of economic insecurity, you 
add, any big company resisting threats of boycott in order to defend its right to com-
municate with its customers deserves support, not protest. Your staff  accepts your 
argument. 
 In these situations you’ve decided in favor of more, rather than less, freedom. Th is 
is America; who can have a problem with that? Both columns run and the Campbell 
piece even includes the controversial ad. You get 61 angry phone calls and e-mails, 
nine longtime advertisers pull their regular weekly buys, and your assistant editor and 
two other staff ers quit the paper.   
 Th ese events, recently faced by real college and professional editors, highlight two 
important lessons off ered in this chapter. First, what is legal may not always be what 
CHAPTER 14 
Media Freedom, Regulation, and Ethics 
353

354 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
is right. Second, when media practitioners do try to do the right thing, they have to 
consider the interests, needs, and values of others besides themselves. 
 In this chapter we look at how the First Amendment has been defi ned and applied 
over time. We study how the logic of a free and unfettered press has come into play in 
the area of broadcast deregulation. We also detail the shift in the underlying philoso-
phy of media freedom from libertarianism to social responsibility theory. Th is provides 
the background for our examination of the ethical environment in which media profes-
sionals must work as they strive to fulfi ll their socially responsible obligations.  
 A Short History of the First 
Amendment  
 Th e U.S. Constitution mentions only one industry by name as deserving special 
protection—the press. Th erefore, our examination of media regulation, self-regulation, 
and ethics must begin with a discussion of this “First Freedom.” 
 As we saw in Chapter 4, the fi rst Congress of the United States was committed to 
freedom of the press. Th e First Amendment to the new Constitution expressly stated 
that “Congress shall make no law . . . abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press.” 
As a result, government regulation of the media must be not only unobtrusive but 
also suffi  ciently justifi ed to meet the limits of the First Amendment. Media industry 
self-regulation must be suffi  ciently eff ective to render offi  cial restraint unnecessary, 
and media practitioners’ conduct should be ethical in order to warrant this special 
protection.  
 Early Sentiment for a Free Press 
 Democracy   —government by the people—requires a free press. Th e framers of the Bill 
of Rights understood this because of their experience with the European monarchies 
from which they and their forebears had fl ed. Th ey based their guarantee of this priv-
ileged position to the press on    libertarianism   , the philosophy that people cannot gov-
ern themselves in a democracy unless they have access to the information they need 
for that governance. Libertarian philosophy is based on the    self-righting principle , 
  The 1787 Philadelphia Constitutional 
Convention. Because they knew democracy could 
not survive otherwise, the framers of the 
Constitution wrote the First Amendment to 
guarantee that the new nation would enjoy 
freedom of speech and press. 

CHAPTER 14 
Media Freedom, Regulation, and Ethics 
355
which was forcefully stated in 1644 by English author and poet John Milton in his book 
 Areopagitica . Milton argued from two main points: 
 • Th e free fl ow or trade of ideas serves to ensure that public discourse will allow the 
truth to emerge.  
   •  Truth will emerge from public discourse because people are inherently rational and 
good. 
 But as we also saw in Chapter 4, even the First Amendment and libertarian philoso-
phy did not guarantee freedom of the press. Th e Alien and Sedition Acts were passed a 
scant eight years after the Constitution was ratifi ed. And Milton himself was to become 
the chief censor of Catholic writing in Oliver Cromwell’s English government.   
 Deﬁ ning and Reﬁ ning the First Amendment 
 Clearly, the idea of freedom of the press needed some clarifi cation. One view was (and 
is) housed in the    absolutist position   , which is expressed succinctly by Supreme Court 
Justice Hugo Black: 
 No law means no law. . . . My view is, without deviation, without exception, without any 
ifs, buts, or whereases, that freedom of speech means that government shall not do any-
thing to people, either for the views they have or the views they express, or the words they 
speak or write. (in McMasters, 2005, p. 15)   
 Yet the absolutist position is more complex than this would suggest. Although abso-
lutists accept that the First Amendment provides a central and fundamental wall of 
protection for the press and free expression, several questions about its true meaning 
remained to be answered over time. You can read about a recent controversial Supreme 
Court First Amendment ruling in the box entitled, “First Amendment Protection for 
Violence but Not for Sex.” But for now, let’s look at some of history’s answers.  
 WHAT DOES “NO LAW” MEAN?  Th e First Amendment said that the U.S. Congress could “make 
no law,” but could state legislatures? City councils? Mayors? Courts? Who has the 
power to proscribe the press? Th is issue was settled in 1925 in a case involving the right 
of a state to limit the publication of a socialist newsletter. Th e Supreme Court, in  Gitlow 
v. New York , stated that the First Amendment is “among the fundamental personal 
rights and ‘liberties’ protected by the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amend-
ment from impairment by the states” (Gillmor & Barron, 1974, p. 1). Given this, “Con-
gress shall make no law” should be interpreted as “government agencies shall make 
no law.” Today, “no law” includes statutes, laws, administrative regulations, executive 
and court orders, and ordinances from government, regardless of locale.   
 WHAT IS “THE PRESS”?  Just what “press” enjoys First Amendment protection? Th e Supreme 
Court, in its 1952  Burstyn v. Wilson  decision, declared that movies were protected 
expression. In 1973 Justice William O. Douglas wrote in  CBS v. Democratic National 
Committee , 
 What kind of First Amendment would best serve our needs as we approach the 21st cen-
tury may be an open question. But the old fashioned First Amendment that we have is the 
Court’s only guideline; and one hard and fast principle has served us through days of calm 
and eras of strife, and I would abide by it until a new First Amendment is adopted. Th at 
means, as I view it, that TV and radio . . . are all included in the concept of “press” as used 
in the First Amendment and therefore are entitled to live under the laissez faire regime 
which the First Amendment sanctions. (Gillmor & Barron, 1974, pp. 7–8)   
 Advertising, or commercial speech, enjoys First Amendment protection. Th is was 
established by the Supreme Court in 1942. Despite the fact that the decision in  Valentine 
v. Christensen  went against the advertiser, the Court wrote that just because expression 
was commercial did not necessarily mean that it was unprotected. Some justices 
argued for a “two-tiered” level of protection, with commercial expression being some-
what less worthy of protection than noncommercial expression. But others argued that 

356 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
this was illogical because almost all media are, in fact, commercial, even when they 
perform a primarily journalistic function. Newspapers, for example, print the news to 
make a profi t. 
 In its 1967  Time, Inc. v. Hill  decision, the Supreme Court applied similar logic to argue 
that the First Amendment grants the same protection to entertainment content as it does 
to nonentertainment content. Is an entertainingly written news report less worthy of 
protection than one that is dully written? Rather than allow the government to make 
these kinds of narrow and ultimately subjective judgments, the Supreme Court has con-
sistently preferred expanding its defi nition of protected expression to limiting it.   
 WHAT IS “ABRIDGMENT”?  Even absolutists accept the idea that limits can be placed on the 
time, place, and manner of expression—as long as the restrictions do not interfere with 
the substance of the expression. Few, for example, would fi nd it unreasonable to limit 
the use of a sound truck to broadcast political messages at 4:00 a.m. But the Supreme 
Court did fi nd unconstitutional an ordinance that forbade all use of sound amplifi ca-
tion except with the permission of the chief of police in its 1948 decision in  Saia v. 
New York . Th e permissibility of other restrictions, however, is less clear-cut. 
grounds in these studies and expert opinions for this court to defer to an 
elected legislature’s conclusion that the videogames in question are 
 particularly likely to harm children.” 
 The issues of free speech and the possible harmful eﬀ ects of violent 
video games were of suﬃ  cient interest to thrust this decision ﬁ rmly into the 
cultural forum, but it was Justice Antonin Scalia’s assertion— “Because 
speech about violence is not obsene,” it cannot be regulated even when 
children are involved and even when it involves sexually assaulting 
an image of a human being; but speech about sex has long been restricted, especially when 
children are involved, so therefore it is censorable—that drew the most attention. The 
decision’s critics saw this as “violence is normal but sex, even nonviolent and consensual, is 
not.” Employing as an example a gruesome game sequence from  Mortal Kombat II in which 
a young woman is ripped in two by freakishly large combatants, Jon Stewart (2011) 
explained the decision to his  Daily Show viewers, “The state has no interest in restricting the 
sale of [violent video games] to children, but if while being disemboweled, this woman were 
to [expose her breast], regulate away.” Enter your voice. Is this a “win” for the First Amend-
ment, a loss, or a split decision? Why, in our culture, does media violence merit greater free 
speech protection than mediated sex? 
 CULTURAL FORUM 
 First Amendment Protection for 
Violence but Not for Sex 
 “A state possesses legitimate power to protect 
children from harm, but that does not include a 
free-ﬂ oating power to restrict the ideas to which 
children may be exposed.” 
 In 2006 California passed a law that would have required the labeling of violent video 
games and banned their sale to children under 18 years old. The gaming industry sued, 
and the case,  Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association  (2011), 
eventually made its way to the U.S. Supreme Court, where in a 7-2 
decision, Justices ruled that “a state possesses legitimate power to 
protect children from harm, but that does not include a free-floating 
power to restrict the ideas to which children may be exposed.” In his 
dissent, Justice Stephen Breyer, citing the scientific evidence linking 
viewing violent games and aggression, argued that he found “sufficient 
  Videogame violence is protected expression. 

CHAPTER 14 
Media Freedom, Regulation, and Ethics 
357
  CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER  Can freedom of the press be limited if the likely result is damag-
ing? Th e Supreme Court answered this question in 1919 in  Schenck v. United States . In 
this case involving the distribution of a pamphlet urging resistance to the military draft 
during World War I, Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote that expression could be 
limited when “the words used are used in such circumstances and are of such a nature 
as to create a clear and present danger that they will bring about the substantive evils 
that Congress has a right to prevent.” Justice Holmes added, “Free speech would not 
protect a man in falsely shouting fi re in a theater and causing panic.” Th is decision is 
especially important because it fi rmly established the legal philosophy that there is no 
absolute freedom of expression; the level of protection is one of degree.   
 BALANCING OF INTERESTS  Th is less-than-absolutist approach is called the    ad hoc balancing 
of interests . Th at is, in individual First Amendment cases several factors should be 
weighed in determining how much freedom the press is granted. In his dissent to the 
Court’s 1941 decision in  Bridges v. California , a case involving a  Los Angeles Times 
editorial, Justice Felix Frankfurter wrote that free speech and press is “not so absolute 
or irrational a conception as to imply paralysis of the means for eff ective protection of 
all the freedoms secured by the Bill of Rights. . . . In the cases before us, the claims on 
behalf of freedom of speech and of the press encounter claims on behalf of liberties 
no less precious.” 
 FREE PRESS VERSUS FAIR TRIAL  One example of the clash of competing liberties is the confl ict 
between free press (First Amendment) and fair trial (Sixth Amendment). Th is debate 
typically takes two forms: (1) Can pretrial publicity deny citizens judgment by 12 
impartial peers, thereby denying them a fair trial? (2) Should cameras be allowed in 
the courtroom, supporting the public’s right to know, or do they so alter the workings 
of the court that a fair trial is impossible? 
 Courts have consistently decided in favor of fair trial in confl icts between the First 
and Sixth Amendments. But it was not until 1961 that a conviction was overturned 
because of pretrial publicity. In  Irvin v. Dowd  the Court reversed the death sentence 
  Is the man here accused of drug dealing guilty 
or innocent? If he is guilty, he should want to cover 
his face to hide his identity. But if he is innocent, 
wouldn’t he be just as likely to want to hide his 
identity? These so-called perp walks raise the issue 
of unfair pretrial publicity. 

358 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
conviction of confessed killer Leslie Irvin because his right to a fair trial had been 
hampered by press coverage that labeled him “Mad Dog Irvin” and reported crimes 
he had committed as a juvenile, his military court-martial, his identifi cation in a police 
lineup, his failure to pass a lie detector test, his confession to six killings and numerous 
robberies, and his willingness to trade a guilty plea for a life sentence. Of 430 potential 
jurors screened before the trial by attorneys, 370 said they were already convinced Irvin 
was guilty. Nonetheless, although “tainted” by pretrial publicity, four of the 370 were 
seated as jurors. Th e Court determined that Irvin’s trial was therefore unfair. 
 Print reporters have long enjoyed access to trials, but broadcast journalists have 
been less fortunate. In 1937, after serious intrusion by newspaper photographers dur-
ing the 1935 trial of Bruno Hauptmann, accused of kidnapping the baby of transatlan-
tic aviation hero Charles Lindbergh, the American Bar Association (ABA) adopted 
canon 35 as part of its Code of Judicial Ethics. Th is rule forbade cameras and radio 
broadcasting of trials. In 1963 the ABA amended the canon to include a prohibition on 
television cameras. Th is, however, did not settle the issue of cameras in the courtroom. 
 Texas was one of three states that did not subscribe to canon 35. When the convic-
tion for theft, swindling, and embezzlement of Texas fi nancier Billy Sol Estes was over-
turned by the Supreme Court because of “the insidious infl uence” (Justice William 
Douglas’s words) of cameras on the conduct of the trial, the wisdom of banning televi-
sion seemed settled. But Justice Clark counseled, “When advances in [broadcast jour-
nalism] permit reporting . . . by television without their present hazards to a fair trial 
we will have another case” ( Estes v. State of Texas , 1965). In other words, cameras were 
back in if they posed no hazard to the principle of fair trial. 
 In 1972 the ABA replaced canon 35 with canon 3A(7), allowing some videotaping of 
trials for specifi c purposes but reaffi  rming its opposition to the broadcast of trial pro-
ceedings. But in 1981 the Supreme Court, in  Chandler v. Florida , determined that tele-
vision cameras in the courtroom were not inherently damaging to fairness. Today, all 
50 states allow cameras in some courts—47 permit them in trial courts—and the U.S. 
Congress is debating opening up federal courts, including the Supreme Court, to cam-
eras. For now, photography and broadcast of federal trials is banned by Federal Rule of 
Criminal Procedure 53. Still, so common has the televising of court proceedings become 
that Court TV, a cable channel programming nothing but real trials and commentary 
  Media intrusion during the 1935 Bruno 
Hauptmann kidnapping trial led to the banning of 
radio transmissions and photographers from the 
courtroom. Hauptmann is seated in the center, 
hands crossed. 

CHAPTER 14 
Media Freedom, Regulation, and Ethics 
359
on them, was launched in 1991 (it’s now called truTV and carries much more varied 
programming).   
 LIBEL AND SLANDER  Libel   , the false or malicious publication of material that damages a 
person’s reputation, and    slander   , the oral or spoken defamation of a person’s charac-
ter, are not protected by the First Amendment. Th e distinction between libel and slan-
der, however, is suffi  ciently narrow that “published defamation, whether it is in a 
newspaper, on radio or television, in the movies, or whatever, is regarded since the 
1990s as libel. And libel rules apply” (Pember, 1999, p. 134). Th erefore, if a report 
(1) defames a person, (2) identifi es that person, and (3) is published or broadcast, it 
loses its First Amendment protection. 
 A report accused of being libelous or slanderous, however, is protected if it meets 
any one of three tests. Th e fi rst test is  truth . Even if a report damages someone’s 
reputation, if it is true, it is protected. Th e second test is  privilege . Coverage of legisla-
tive, court, or other public activities may contain information that is not true or that 
is damaging to someone’s reputation. Th e press cannot be deterred from covering 
these important news events for fear that a speaker’s or witness’s comments will open 
it to claims of libel or slander. Th e third test is  fair comment; that is, the press has the 
right to express opinions or comment on public issues. For example, theater and fi lm 
reviews, however severe, are protected, as is commentary on other matters in the 
public eye. 
 For public fi gures, however, a diff erent set of rules applies. Because they are in the 
public eye, public fi gures are fair game for fair comment. But does that leave them 
open to reports that are false and damaging to their reputations? Th e Supreme Court 
faced this issue in 1964 in  New York Times v. Sullivan . In 1960 the Committee to Defend 
Martin Luther King bought a full-page ad in the  New York Times asking people to 
contribute to Dr. King’s defense fund. Th e ad detailed abuse of Dr. King and other civil 
rights workers at the hands of the Montgomery, Alabama, police. L. B. Sullivan, one of 
three elected commissioners in that city, sued the  Times  for libel. Th e ad copy was not 
true in some of its claims, he said, and because he was in charge of the police, he had 
been “identifi ed.” 
 Th e Supreme Court ruled in favor of the newspaper. Even though some of the spe-
cifi c facts in the ad were not true, the  Times  had not acted with    actual malice . Th e 
Court defi ned the standard of actual malice for reporting on public fi gures as  knowl-
edge of its falsity or reckless disregard  for whether or not it is true.   
 PRIOR RESTRAINT  Th ere is much less confusion about another important aspect of press 
freedom,  prior restraint . Th is is the power of the government to  prevent  the publica-
tion or broadcast of expression. U.S. law and tradition make the use of prior restraint 
relatively rare, but there have been a number of important eff orts by government to 
squelch content before dissemination. 
 In 1931 the Supreme Court ruled in  Near v. Minnesota  that freedom from prior 
restraint was a general, not an absolute, principle. Two of the four exceptions it listed 
were in times of war when national security was involved and when the public order 
would be endangered by the incitement to violence and overthrow by force of orderly 
government. Th ese exceptions were to become the basis of two landmark prior restraint 
decisions. Th e fi rst, involving the  New York Times , dealt with national security in times 
of war; the second, focusing on protecting the public order, involved publishing 
instructions for building an atomic bomb. 
 On June 13, 1971, at the height of the Vietnam War, the  New York Times began 
publication of what commonly became known as the Pentagon Papers. Th e papers 
included detailed discussion and analysis of the conduct of that unpopular war during 
the administrations of Presidents Kennedy and Johnson. President Nixon’s National 
Security Council (NSC) had stamped them Top Secret. Believing that this was an 
improper restriction of the public’s right to know, NSC staff  member Daniel Ellsberg 
gave copies to the  Times . After the fi rst three installments had been published, the 
Justice Department, citing national security, was able to secure a court order stopping 
further publication. Other newspapers, notably, the  Washington Post and  Boston Globe , 

360 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
began running excerpts while the  Times  was silenced until they, too, were enjoined 
to cease. 
 On June 30 the Supreme Court ordered the government to halt its restraint of the 
 Times’ s and other papers’ right to publish the Pentagon Papers. Among the stirring 
attacks on prior restraint written throughout its decision was Justice Hugo Black’s: 
 In the First Amendment the Founding Fathers gave the free press the protection it must 
have to fulfi ll its essential role in our democracy. Th e press was to serve the governed, 
not the governors. Th e Government’s power to censor the press was abolished so that 
the press would remain forever free to censure the Government. Th e press was protected 
so that it could bare the secrets of government and inform the people. Only a free and 
unrestrained press can eff ectively expose deception in government. ( New York Times v. 
United States , 1971)  
 Th en came the case of the magazine  Th e Progressive . In 1979 the magazine 
announced its intention to publish instructions on how to make a hydrogen bomb. 
President Jimmy Carter’s Justice Department successfully obtained a court order halt-
ing publication, even though the article was based on information and material freely 
obtained from public, nonclassifi ed sources. Before the case could come to court, sev-
eral newspapers published the same or similar material. Th e Justice Department 
immediately abandoned its restraint, and six months later  Th e Progressive published 
its original article.   
 OBSCENITY AND PORNOGRAPHY  Another form of press expression that is not protected is 
 obscenity   . Two landmark Supreme Court cases established the defi nition and illegal-
ity of obscenity. Th e fi rst is the 1957  Roth v. United States  decision. Th e Court deter-
mined that sex and obscenity were not synonymous, a signifi cant advance for freedom 
of expression. It did, however, legally affi  rm for the fi rst time that obscenity was unpro-
tected expression. Th e defi nition or test for obscenity that holds even today was 
expressed in the 1973  Miller v. State of California  decision. Chief Justice Warren Burger 
wrote that the basic guidelines must be 
 (a) whether the average person, applying contemporary community standards, would fi nd 
that the work, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest, (b) whether the work 
depicts or describes, in a patently off ensive way, sexual conduct specifi cally defi ned by the 
applicable state law, and (c) whether the work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, 
artistic, political, or scientifi c value. 
  Daniel Ellsberg, who gave the Pentagon Papers 
to the  New York Times , celebrates that paper’s 
Supreme Court victory. 

CHAPTER 14 
Media Freedom, Regulation, and Ethics 
361
 Th e problem for the courts, the media, and the public, of course, is judging content 
against this standard. For example, what is patently off ensive to one person may be 
quite acceptable to others. What is serious art to one may be serious exploitation to 
another. And what of an erotic short story written online by an author in New York City 
but accessed and read by people in Peoria, Illinois? Whose community standards 
would apply? 
 An additional defi nitional problem resides in    pornography , expression calculated 
solely to supply sexual excitement. Pornography is protected expression. Th e distinc-
tion between obscenity and pornography may, however, be a legal one. Sexually 
explicit content is pornography (and protected) until a court rules it illegal; then it is 
obscene (and unprotected). Th e diffi  culty of making such distinctions can be seen in 
Justice Potter Stewart’s famous declaration in  Jacobellis v. Ohio  (1964), “I may not be 
able to come up with a defi nition of pornography, but I certainly know it when I see 
it,” and his dissent two years later in  Ginzburg v. United States  (1966), “If the First 
Amendment means anything, it means that a man cannot be sent to prison merely for 
distributing publications which off end a judge’s sensibilities, mine or any others.” 
Clearly, the issues of the defi nition and protection of obscenity and pornography may 
never be clarifi ed to everyone’s satisfaction. 
 Other Issues of Freedom and Responsibility 
 Th e First Amendment has application to a number of specifi c issues of media respon-
sibility and freedom.  
 INDECENCY  Obscenity and pornography are rarely issues for broadcasters. Th eir commer-
cial base and wide audience make the airing of such potentially troublesome program-
ming unwise. However, broadcasters frequently do confront the issue of    indecency . 
According to the FCC, indecent language or material is that which depicts sexual or 
excretory activities in a way that is off ensive to contemporary community standards. 
 Th e FCC recently modifi ed, much to broadcasters’ dissatisfaction, its way of han-
dling indecency complaints, making it easier for listeners and viewers to challenge 
questionable content. Stations must now prove they are innocent; in other words, a 
complaint has validity by virtue of having been made. To broadcasters, this “guilty until 
proven innocent” approach is an infringement of their First Amendment rights, as it 
requires them to keep tapes of all their content in the event they are challenged, even 
in the absence of evidence that a complaint has merit. 
 Th e debate over indecency, however, has been confounded by several events. First, 
a huge surge in complaints (from 111 in 2000 to more than a million in 2004) followed 
two specifi c broadcast events: the split-second baring of Janet Jackson’s breast at the 
2004 Super Bowl football game and rocker Bono’s spontaneous award show utterance 
of an expletive later that year. And even though the FCC’s own data revealed that 99.9% 
of the complaints, most with identical wording, originated with one group, the conser-
vative Christian Parents Television Council, it still boosted indecency fi nes by 100% 
(Rich, 2005; Soundbites, 2005). Just how widespread and real, asked broadcasters, was 
outrage over indecent content? Th en there were a series of high-profi le incidents of 
self-censorship. Faced with FCC-mandated penalties of up to $325,000 for every single 
station airing “off ensive” content, several PBS member stations refused to show a doc-
umentary on Marie Antoinette because it discussed King Louis XVI’s impotence and 
depicted some of the queen’s suggestive etchings. Several other PBS outlets passed on 
director Martin Scorsese’s musical documentary  Th e Blues  because many of the older 
blues players spoke a bit “naturally” on camera. Because some on-screen rescuers 
uttered curses as they fought through the inferno, several CBS affi  liates refused to 
broadcast, four years after it had fi rst aired without a single complaint,  9/11 Camera 
at Ground Zero , an award-winning documentary honoring the New York City police, 
fi refi ghters, and other rescue personnel who lived and died on that horrible day. Citing 
examples such as these, NBC and Fox eventually challenged the FCC’s indecency rules, 
scoring a federal court of appeals victory in 2007. But when the Commission appealed 

362 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
that decision, a second federal court again sided with the broadcasters, fi nding that the 
FCC’s rules were so vague, they fostered unconstitutional self-censorship (Neumeister, 
2010). Th at decision was eventually upheld by the Supreme Court in its unanimous 
 FCC v. Fox  decision in 2012.   
 DEREGULATION  Th e diffi  culty of balancing the public interest and broadcasters’ freedom is 
at the heart of the debate over deregulation and the relaxation of ownership and other 
rules for radio and television. Changes in ownership rules have always been contro-
versial, but relaxation of the regulation of broadcasters’ public service obligations and 
other content controls have provided just as much debate. 
 Th e courts have consistently supported the FCC’s right to evaluate broadcasters’ 
performance in serving the public interest, convenience, and necessity. Naturally, that 
evaluation must include some judgment of the content broadcasters air. Broadcasters 
long argued that such “judgment” amounted to unconstitutional infringement of their 
First Amendment freedom. Many listeners and viewers saw it as a reasonable and quite 
small price to pay for the use of their (the public’s) airwaves. 
 Th e Supreme Court resolved the issue in 1943 in  National Broadcasting Co. v. United 
States . NBC argued that the FCC was no more than a traffi  c cop, limited to controlling 
the “fl ow of traffi  c.” In this view, the regulation of broadcasters’ frequency, power, times 
of operation, and other technical matters was all that was constitutionally allowable. 
Yet the Court turned what is now known as the    traffi  c cop analogy against NBC. Yes, 
the justices agreed, the commission is a traffi  c cop. But even traffi  c cops have the right 
to control not only the fl ow of traffi  c but its composition as well. For example, drunk 
drivers can be removed from the road. Potentially dangerous “content,” like cars with 
faulty brakes, can also be restricted. It was precisely this traffi  c cop function that 
required the FCC to judge content. Th e commission was thus free to promulgate rules 
such as the    Fairness Doctrine   , which required broadcasters to cover issues of public 
importance and to be fair in that coverage, and    ascertainment , which required broad-
casters to ascertain or actively and affi  rmatively determine the nature of their audi-
ences’ interest, convenience, and necessity. 
 Th e Fairness Doctrine, ascertainment, and numerous other regulations, such as 
rules on children’s programming and overcommercialization, disappeared with the 
coming of deregulation during the Reagan administration. License renewal, for exam-
ple, was once a long and diffi  cult process for stations, which had to generate thousands 
of pages of documents to demonstrate that they not only knew what their audiences 
  In 2006, worried about heavy FCC indecency 
ﬁ nes, several CBS aﬃ  liates chose not to run a 
documentary honoring the 9/11 rescue eﬀ ort 
because several of the police oﬃ  cers and ﬁ reﬁ ghters 
in it cursed as they fought smoke, debris, and fear. 
The award-winning movie had aired four years 
earlier without complaint. 

CHAPTER 14 
Media Freedom, Regulation, and Ethics 
363
wanted and needed but had met those wants and needs. Th e burden of proof in their 
eff orts to keep their licenses rested with them. Had they been fair? Had they kept com-
mercial time to acceptable levels? What was their commitment to news and public 
aff airs? Now deregulated, renewal is conducted through a much less onerous process. 
Broadcasters simply fi le brief quarterly reports with the commission indicating compli-
ance with technical and other FCC rules. Th en, when their licenses are up for renewal 
(every eight years), they fi le a short, postcardlike renewal application. 
 Th e deregulation drive began in earnest with President Reagan’s FCC chair, Mark 
Fowler, in the 1980s. Fowler rejected the trustee model of broadcast regulation. He saw 
many FCC rules as an unconstitutional infringement of broadcasters’ rights and believed 
that “the market” was the audience’s best protector. He said that special rules for the 
control of broadcasting were unnecessary, likening television, for example, to just 
another home appliance. He called television no more than “a toaster with pictures.” 
 Th e fi rst FCC chair under President George W. Bush, Michael Powell, was also a 
strong advocate of deregulation. Of the public interest, he has said that he “has no 
idea” what it is. “It is an empty vessel,” he added, “in which people pour whatever their 
preconceived views or biases are” (quoted in Hickey, 2002, p. 33). In another press 
conference he called regulation of telecommunications “the oppressor” (Coen & Hart, 
2002, p. 4). 
 Th is view of deregulation is not without its critics. Republican and Democratic con-
gressional leaders, liberal and conservative columnists, and numerous public interest 
groups from across the political spectrum continue to campaign against such fruits of 
deregulation as concentration, conglomeration, overcommercialization, the abandon-
ment of children, the lowering of decency standards, and the debasement of news. 
Th eir argument for rolling back the deregulation of broadcasting rests in the philoso-
phy of noted First Amendment scholar Alexander Meiklejohn (1960), who argued half 
a century ago that regulation limiting the media’s freedom is, indeed, forbidden, 
 but not legislation to enlarge and enrich it . Th e freedom of mind which benefi ts members 
of a self-governing society is not a given and fi xed part of human nature. It can be 
increased and established by learning, by teaching, by the unhindered fl ow of accurate 
information, by giving men [ sic ] health and vigor and security, by bringing them together 
in activities of communication and mutual understanding. And the federal legislature is not 
forbidden to engage in that positive enterprise of cultivating the general intelligence upon 
which the success of self-government so obviously depends. On the contrary, in that posi-
tive fi eld the Congress of the United States has a heavy and basic responsibility to promote 
the freedom of speech. (pp. 19–20; italics added)     
  Broadcast deregulation produced a rush of toy-
based children’s television shows such as  Pokemon , 
which critics contend are inherently unfair to 
children who cannot recognize them as program-
length commercials. 

364 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
 COPYRIGHT  Th e First Amendment protects expression.  Copyright —identifying and grant-
ing ownership of a given piece of expression—is designed to protect the creator’s fi nan-
cial interest in that expression. Recognizing that the fl ow of art, science, and other 
expression would be enhanced by authors’ fi nancial interest in their creation, the fram-
ers of the Constitution wrote Article I, Section 8 (8), granting authors exclusive rights 
to their “writings and discoveries.” A long and consistent history of Supreme Court 
decisions has ensured that this protection would be extended to the content of the 
mass media that have emerged since that time. 
 Th e years 1978 and 1998 saw extensive rewritings of U.S. copyright law. Copyright 
now remains with creators (in all media) for the span of their lives, plus 70 years. Dur-
ing this time, permission for the use of the material must be obtained from the copy-
right holder, and if fi nancial compensation (a fee or royalty) is requested, it must be 
paid. Once the copyright expires, the material passes into the    public domain , meaning 
it can be used without permission. 
 Th e exception to copyright is  fair use , instances in which material can be used with-
out permission or payment. Fair use includes (1) limited noncommercial use, such as 
photocopying a passage from a novel for classroom use; (2) use of limited portions of 
a work, such as excerpting a few lines or a paragraph or two from a book for use in a 
magazine article; (3) use that does not decrease the commercial value of the original, 
such as videotaping a daytime football game for private, at-home evening viewing; and 
(4) use in the public interest, such as a  Consumer Reports’  use of pieces of drug com-
pany television commercials to highlight its media literacy eff orts. 
 Two specifi c applications of copyright law pertain to recorded music and cable tele-
vision. Imagine the diffi  culty cable companies would have in obtaining permission 
from all the copyright holders of all the material they import and deliver to their sub-
scribers. Yet the cable operators do make money from others’ works—they collect 
material from original sources and sell it to subscribers. Th e solution to the problem 
of compensating the creators of the material carried by cable systems was the creation 
of the Copyright Royalty Tribunal, to which cable companies paid a fee based primar-
ily on the size of their operations. Th ese moneys were then distributed to the appropri-
ate producers, syndicators, and broadcasters. Congress abolished the Copyright Royalty 
Tribunal in 1993, leaving cable copyright issues in the hands of several diff erent arbi-
tration panels under the auspices of the Library of Congress. 
 Now imagine the diffi  culty songwriters would have in collecting royalties from all 
who use their music—not only fi lm producers and radio and television stations, but 
bowling alleys, supermarkets, and restaurants. Here the solution is the    music licensing 
company . Th e two biggest are the American Society of Composers, Authors and Pub-
lishers (ASCAP) and Broadcast Music Inc. (BMI). Both collect fees based on the users’ 
gross receipts and distribute the money to songwriters and artists.   
 THE INTERNET AND EXPANDING COPYRIGHT  Th e Internet, as we saw in Chapter 7 with MP3 and in 
Chapter 10 with fi le-sharing, is forcing a signifi cant rethinking of copyright, one that 
disturbs many advocates of free expression. Th ey fear that eff orts to protect the intel-
lectual property rights of copyright holders are going too far. Th e expansion of copy-
right, argues technology writer Dan Gillmor (2000), gives “the owners of intellectual 
property vast new authority, simultaneously shredding users’ rights” (p. 1C). 
 For example, in January 2000, a California Superior Court, citing the Digital Mil-
lennium Copyright Act (Chapter 10), ruled the posting of DVD decryption software 
to be illegal. Th e defendants argued that they did not violate copyright. Th e court 
ruled against them because they posted “tools” on the Web that would allow others 
to violate copyright. Tech writer Gillmor (2000) scoff ed, “Let’s ban cars next. Were 
you aware that bank robbers use them for getaways?” (p. 6C). In August of that same 
year, a New York court reaffi  rmed the ban on posting decryption software, adding 
that even posting links to sites off ering the software was a violation of copyright. And 
we’ve already seen the controversy surrounding MP3 and fi le-sharing, neither of 
which copies anybody’s intellectual property, but both of which allow the sharing of 
copyrighted material. 

CHAPTER 14 
Media Freedom, Regulation, and Ethics 
365
 Copyright exists, say critics of its expansion, to encourage the fl ow of art, science, 
and expression, and it grants fi nancial stake to creators, not to enrich those creators 
but to ensure that there is suffi  cient incentive to keep the content fl owing. “It’s always 
important to remember that copyright is a restriction on free speech, and it’s a consti-
tutionally granted restriction on free speech. Th erefore, we need to be careful when we 
play with copyright, because it can have some serious eff ects on public discourse and 
creativity,” argued copyright expert Siva Vaidhyanathan (as quoted in Anderson, 2000, 
p. 25). In other words, tightening copyright restrictions can have the eff ect of inhibiting 
the fl ow of art, science, and expression. 
 Some free-expression champions see the tightening of copyright, or    digital rights 
management (DRM)   , as something other than the justifi able protection of intel-
lectual property. Rather, they argue, it is the drive for more control over and there-
fore profi t from the distribution of content. Technology writer Gillmor (2002) argues 
that new copy-protected digital content and copyright rules combine to “help the 
entertainment cartel grab absolute control over customers’ reading, viewing, and 
listening” (p. F1). 
 Th e DRM debate escalated with the Supreme Court’s 2005  Grokster  decision (Chap-
ter 7). Th e entertainment industries were heartened by the ruling that a technology 
was illegal if it “encouraged” copyright infringement; digital rights activists and tech-
nologists were appalled. Th e Court had disallowed Hollywood’s 1984 challenge to vid-
eotape ( Sony Corp. v. Universal City Studios , the so-called  Betamax decision) because 
VCR, even if some people used it to violate copyright, had “substantial non-infringing 
uses.” But  Grokster  “relies on a new theory of copyright liability that measures whether 
manufacturers created their wares with the ‘intent’ of inducing consumers to infringe. 
It means that inventors and entrepreneurs will not only bear the costs of bringing new 
products to market, but also the costs of lawsuits if consumers start using their prod-
ucts for illegal purposes.” Who, ask critics, can judge an innovation’s intent? Is copy-
right infringement the  primary  use of P2P networks like Grokster, or is their intent to 
bring together people making fair use sharing of already purchased material (Gibbs, 
2005, p. 50)? What is actually at play here, say  Grokster  critics, is the entertainment 
industries’ dual goal of undoing the Betamax decision and eradicating all fair use of 
their content (Howe, 2005b). Not to worry, say others, because technology always over-
runs copyright law. And as we’ve seen at several junctures of this text, this reassess-
ment of DRM and copyright may well already be under way. 
 Despite the fact that the copyright holders have recently had some victories (2009’s 
jailing of fi le-sharing site Pirate Bay’s Swedish founders) and losses (a lawsuit revealed 
that Viacom had been paying marketing companies and its own employees to upload 
poor-quality, fake-pirated versions of its content to YouTube from untraceable comput-
ers in order to promote its television shows while simultaneously suing the video site 
for infringement; Boulton, 2010), most parties seem to be seeking accommodation. 
One eff ort is Creative Commons, a nonprofi t corporation founded in 2001 as an easy 
way for people to share and build on the work of others, consistent with the rules of 
copyright. Creative Commons provides users with free licenses and other legal tools to 
mark (copyright) their creative work with the level of freedom they wish it to carry, 
granting to others specifi c rights to share, remix, or even use it commercially. Among 
more traditional media companies, all four major record labels now sell much of their 
catalogs with limited or no DRM, or as  Wired ‘s Frank Rose (2008) put it, “Music execs 
are trying to turn back the clock, remove DRM, and fi nally give us what we should have 
had in 1999” (p. 34). All the television and most of the cable channels provide free or 
low-cost downloads either without DRM or with limited copyright control. Most of the 
world’s books will soon fi nd themselves living online with quite robust reader access. 
Most big media companies are embracing websites like YouTube and Facebook, will-
ing to forfeit a bit of DRM control in exchange for exposure for their content. Th e future 
of copyright and DRM, then, is being negotiated in the culture right now. You and other 
media consumers sit on one side of the table; the media industries are on the other. 
You will be in a stronger position in these cultural negotiations if you approach these 
developments as a media-literate person. 

366 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
 Social Responsibility Theory  
 As we saw at the beginning of this chapter, the First Amendment is based on the lib-
ertarian philosophy that assumes a fully free press and a rational, good, and informed 
public. But we have also seen in this and earlier chapters that the media are not nec-
essarily fully free. Government control is sometimes allowed. Corporate control is 
assumed and accepted. During the 1930s and 1940s, serious doubts were also raised 
concerning the public’s rationality and goodness. As World War II spread across Europe 
at the end of the 1930s, libertarians were hard-pressed to explain how Nazi propaganda 
could succeed if people could in fact tell right from wrong. As the United States was 
drawn closer to the European confl ict, calls for greater government control of press 
and speech at home were justifi ed by less-than-optimistic views of the “average Amer-
ican’s” ability to handle diffi  cult information. As a result, libertarianism came under 
attack for being too idealistic. 
 Time  magazine owner and publisher Henry Luce then provided money to establish 
an independent commission of scholars, politicians, legal experts, and social activists 
who would study the role of the press in U.S. society and make recommendations on 
how it should best operate in support of democracy. Th e Hutchins Commission on 
Freedom of the Press, named after its chairperson, University of Chicago chancellor 
Robert Maynard Hutchins, began its work in 1942 and, in 1947, produced its report 
“Th e Social Responsibility Th eory of the Press” (Pickard, 2010). 
 Social responsibility theory is a    normative theory   —that is, it explains how media 
should  ideally  operate in a given system of social values—and it is the standard against 
which the public should judge the performance of the U.S. media. Other social and 
political systems adhere to diff erent normative theories, and these will be detailed in 
Chapter 15. 
 Social responsibility theory    asserts that media must remain free of government 
control, but in exchange media must serve the public. Th e core assumptions of this 
theory are a cross between libertarian principles of freedom and practical admissions 
of the need for some form of control on the media (McQuail, 1987): 
 • Media should accept and fulfi ll certain obligations to society.  
   •  Media can meet these obligations by setting high standards of professionalism, 
truth, accuracy, and objectivity.  
   •  Media should be self-regulating within the framework of the law.  
   •  Media should avoid disseminating material that might lead to crime, violence, or 
civil disorder or that might off end minority groups.  
 • Th e media as a whole should be pluralistic, refl ect the diversity of the culture in 
which they operate, and give access to various points of view and rights of reply.  
 • Th e public has a right to expect high standards of performance, and offi  cial inter-
vention can be justifi ed to ensure the public good.  
   •  Media professionals should be accountable to society as well as to their employers 
and the market. 
 In rejecting government control of media, social responsibility theory calls for 
responsible, ethical industry operation, but it does not free audiences from their 
responsibility. People must be suffi  ciently media literate to develop fi rm yet reasonable 
expectations and judgments of media performance. But ultimately it is practitioners, 
through the conduct of their duties, who are charged with operating in a manner that 
obviates the need for offi  cial intrusion. 
 Media Industry Ethics  
 A number of formal and informal controls, both external and internal to the industry, 
are aimed at ensuring that media professionals operate in an ethical manner consis-
tent with social responsibility theory. Among the external formal controls are laws and 

CHAPTER 14 
Media Freedom, Regulation, and Ethics 
367
regulations, codifi ed statements of what can and can’t be done and what content is 
permissible and not permissible, and industry codes of practice. Among the external 
informal controls are pressure groups, consumers, and advertisers. We have seen how 
these informal controls operate throughout this text. Our interest here is in examining 
media’s internal controls, or ethics.  
 Deﬁ ning Ethics 
  Ethics   are rules of behavior or moral principles that guide our actions in given situa-
tions. Th e word comes from the Greek  ethos , which means the customs, traditions, or 
character that guide a particular group or culture. In our discussion, ethics specifi cally 
refer to the application of rational thought by media professionals when they are decid-
ing between two or more competing moral choices.    
 For example, it is not against the law to publish the name of a rape victim. But is it 
ethical? It is not illegal to stick a microphone in a crying father’s face as he cradles the 
broken body of his child at an accident scene. But is it ethical? 
 Th e application of media ethics almost always involves fi nding the  most morally 
defensible  answer to a problem for which there is no single correct or even best 
answer. Return to the grieving father. Th e reporter’s job is to get the story; the pub-
lic has a right to know. Th e man’s sorrow is part of that story, but the man has a 
right to privacy. As a human being he deserves to be treated with respect and to be 
allowed to maintain his dignity. Th e reporter has to decide whether to get the interview 
or leave the grief-stricken man in peace. Th at decision is guided by the reporter’s 
ethics.  
 Three Levels of Ethics 
 Because ethics refl ect a culture’s ideas about right and wrong, they exist at all levels of 
that culture’s operation.    Metaethics    are fundamental cultural values. What is justice? 
What does it mean to be good? Is fairness possible? We need to examine these ques-
tions to know ourselves. But as valuable as they are for self-knowledge, metaethics 
provide only the broadest foundation for the sorts of ethical decisions people make 
daily. Th ey defi ne the basic starting points for moral reasoning. 
 Normative ethics    are more or less generalized theories, rules, and principles of 
ethical or moral behavior. Th e various media industry codes of ethics or standards 
of good practice are examples of normative ethics. Th ey serve as real-world frame-
works within which people can begin to weigh competing alternatives of behavior. 
Fairness is a metaethic, but journalists’ codes of practice, for example, defi ne what 
is meant by fairness in the world of reporting, how far a reporter must go to ensure 
fairness, and how fairness must be applied when being fair to one person means 
being unfair to another. 
 Ultimately, media practitioners must apply both the big rules and the general guide-
lines to very specifi c situations. Th is is the use of    applied ethics , and applying ethics 
invariably involves balancing confl icting interests. 
 Balancing Conﬂ icting Interests 
 In applying ethics, the person making the decisions is called the    moral agent . For 
moral agents, sticky ethical issues invariably bring together confl icting interests—for 
example, those of the editor, readers, and advertisers in this chapter’s opening vignette. 
 Media ethicist Louis Day (2006) identifi ed six sets of individual or group interests 
that often confl ict: 
 • Th e interests of the moral agent’s  individual conscience;  media professionals must 
live with their decisions.  
 • Th e interests of  the object of the act;  a particular person or group is likely to be 
aff ected by media practitioners’ actions.  

368 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
 • Th e interests of  fi nancial supporters;  someone pays the bills that allow the station 
to broadcast or the newspaper or magazine to publish.  
 • Th e interests of  the institution;  media professionals have company loyalty, pride in 
the organization for which they work.  
 • Th e interests of  the profession;  media practitioners work to meet the expectations of 
their colleagues; they have respect for the profession that sustains them.  
 • Th e interests of  society;  media professionals, like all of us, have a social responsibil-
ity. Because of the infl uence their work can have, they may even have greater 
responsibilities than do many other professionals.    
 In mass communication, these confl icting interests play themselves out in a variety 
of ways. Some of the most common, yet thorniest, require us to examine such basic 
issues as truth and honesty, privacy, confi dentiality, personal confl ict of interest, profi t 
and social responsibility, and protection from off ensive content.  
 TRUTH AND HONESTY  Can the media ever be completely honest? As soon as a camera is 
pointed at one thing, it is ignoring another. As soon as a video editor combines two 
diff erent images, that editor has imposed his or her defi nition of the truth. Truth and 
honesty are overriding concerns for media professionals. But what is truth? Take the 
case of Chicago television station WBBM. In its coverage of a 2011 night of violence 
in that city, anchor Steve Bartelstein introduced the story, “Kids on the street as 
young as four were there to see it all unfold, and had disturbing reactions.” Th e report 
then ran video of an interview with a four-year-old African American boy. Asked by 
a reporter, “What are you going to do when you get older?” the boy responded, “I’m 
going to have me a gun!” On camera back at his news desk Bartelstein exclaimed, 
“Th at is very scary indeed.” WBBM, however, did not air the remainder of the inter-
view, which went like this: “You are! Why would you want to do that?” asked the 
startled reporter. “I’m going to be the police!” insisted the boy. But the boy had 
indeed said he was going to get a gun, so all the station did was report the truth 
(Butler, 2011).   
 PRIVACY  Do public fi gures forfeit their right to privacy? In what circumstances? Are the 
president’s marital problems newsworthy if they do not get in the way of the job? Who 
is a public fi gure? When are people’s sexual orientations newsworthy? Do you report 
the names of women who have been raped or the names of juvenile off enders? What 
about sex off enders? How far do you go to interview grieving parents? When is secret 
taping permissible? 
  Senator Larry Craig’s arrest for solicitation was 
news. Absent that event, how newsworthy would 
you have considered his sexual orientation? 

CHAPTER 14 
Media Freedom, Regulation, and Ethics 
369
 Our culture values privacy. We have the right to maintain the privacy of our per-
sonal information. We use privacy to control the extent and nature of interaction 
we have with others. Privacy protects us from unwanted government intrusion. Th e 
media, however, by their very nature, are intrusive. Privacy proves to be particularly 
sensitive because it is almost a metaethic, a fundamental value. Yet the applied 
ethics of the various media industries allow, in fact sometimes demand, that privacy 
be denied. 
 Th e media have faced a number of very important tests regarding privacy over the 
last few years. Media pursuit of celebrities is one. 
 High-profi le stories such as the 2004 rape investigation of basketball player Kobe 
Bryant and the 2007 arrest of Senator Larry Craig highlight the diffi  cult ethical issues 
surrounding privacy. Kobe Bryant is a celebrity, a public fi gure. He therefore loses some 
right to privacy. But what about the woman accusing him of rape? Was it an invasion 
of her privacy when several publications released her name and photograph after they 
appeared on the Web? Craig’s arrest for soliciting sex from an undercover police offi  cer 
in an airport restroom was certainly news; the arrest of a senator is certainly newsworthy. 
Most people would also consider the arrest of an ardent anti–gay rights legislator for 
allegedly seeking gay sex in a public place to be newsworthy as well. But what about 
Senator Craig’s homosexuality in the fi rst place? Many reporters in his home state of 
Idaho and in Washington knew of his sexual orientation (despite his protestations to 
the contrary). Should they have reported on it, especially as the senator was an outspo-
ken anti–gay rights crusader? Or did they consider his, anyone’s, sexual orientation a 
matter of privacy? Before the arrest, many bloggers had revealed Craig’s “secret.” Only 
after the arrest did his local paper, the  Idaho Statesman , report it (Strupp, 2007).  
 CONFIDENTIALITY  An important tool in contemporary news gathering and reporting is    con-
fi dentiality , the ability of media professionals to keep secret the names of people who 
provide them with information. Without confi dentiality, employees could not report 
the misdeeds of their employers for fear of being fi red; people would not tell what they 
know of a crime for fear of retribution from the off enders or unwanted police attention. 
Th e anonymous informant nicknamed “Deep Th roat” would never have felt free to 
divulge the Nixon White House involvement in the Republican break-in of the Demo-
cratic Party’s Watergate campaign offi  ces were it not for the promise of confi dentiality 
from  Washington Post  reporters Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward. 
 But how far should reporters go in protecting a source’s confi dentiality? Should 
reporters go to jail rather than divulge a name? Every state in the Union, except Wyoming, 
  The  Washington Post’ s Carl Bernstein and Bob 
Woodward never would have broken the story of 
the Nixon White House’s involvement in the 
Watergate break-in if it had not been for an 
anonymous source. The reporters honored their 
promise of conﬁ dentiality for 35 years, until “Deep 
Throat,” then FBI Assistant Director Mark Felt, 
revealed himself in 2005. 

370 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
and the District of Columbia has either a    shield law , legislation that expressly protects 
reporters’ rights to maintain sources’ confi dentiality in courts of law, or court precedent 
upholding that right. Th ere is no shield law in federal courts, and many journalists want 
it that way. Th eir fear is that once Congress makes one “media law” it may want to make 
another. For example, media professionals do not want the government to legislate the 
defi nition of “reporter” or “journalist.” 
 Th e ethics of confi dentiality are regularly tested by reporters’ frequent use of quotes 
and information from “unnamed sources,” “sources who wish to remain anonymous,” 
and “inside sources.” Often the guarantee of anonymity is necessary to get the informa-
tion, but is this fair to those who are commented on by these nameless, faceless news-
makers? Don’t these people—even if they are highly placed and powerful 
themselves—have a right to know their accusers?   
 PERSONAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST  As we’ve seen, ethical decision making requires a balancing 
of interests. But what of a media professional’s own confl icts of interest? Should media 
personalities accept speaking fees, consulting contracts, or other compensation from 
groups that may have a vested interest in issues they may someday have to cover? Must 
media organizations disclose any and all possible confl icts of the commentators who 
appear in their news shows? 
 Consider these recent controversies. MSNBC “political analyst” Richard Wolff e is a 
“strategist” for lobbying fi rm Public Strategies. Only when pressed by bloggers did the 
news network begin to identify him as such. CNN’s Bill Schneider is Distinguished 
Senior Fellow and Resident Scholar at Th ird Way, a Washington think tank that lobbies 
against health care reform. Civil rights activist Reverend Al Sharpton hosts MSNBC’s 
nightly current aff airs program,  Politics Daily , which gave considerable coverage to the 
2012 shooting death of unarmed African American teen Trayvon Martin and the con-
troversial Florida “stand your ground“ law that rendered the shooter blameless . . . all 
the while leading vigils in support of the boy’s family and protests against the law. Th e 
Pentagon enlists more than 75 retired generals as “message force multipliers” in sup-
port of the wars in the Middle East. Although the generals had fi nancial ties to more 
than 150 military contractors, and despite the fact that the  New York Times  won a 
Pulitzer Prize for its reporting on the Pentagon’s PR operation, none was ever identifi ed 
in any of the 4,500 appearances they made on news outlets ranging from ABC to NPR 
from January 2002 to mid-2008 (Media Matters, 2008). 
  Reverend Al Sharpton, hands-on social 
advocate or plain-speaking MSNBC current 
aﬀ airs host? 

CHAPTER 14 
Media Freedom, Regulation, and Ethics 
371
 Other confl ict-of-interest issues bedevil media professionals. Th e war in the Mid-
dle East raised the problem of    embedding   , reporters accepting military control over 
their output in exchange for close contact with the troops. Th e interests in confl ict 
here are objectivity and access—do reporters pay too high a price for their exciting 
video or touching personal interest stories? Th is  access journalism —reporters act-
ing deferentially toward news sources in order to ensure continued access—was at 
the core of the American media’s disastrous performance in “both of the major 
catastrophes of our time” (G. Mitchell, 2009, p. 16). Th e fi rst, the unnecessary war 
in Iraq, is personifi ed by Judith Miller and her  New York Times  coverage that has-
tened the invasion. In exchange for continued access to infl uential newsmakers like 
Vice President Dick Cheney and his chief of staff , Scooter Libby, she granted these 
powerful players anonymity “for the purpose of stomping on exactly the kind of 
dissent” for which such grants of confi dentiality are intended (McKelvey, 2009, 
p. 59). She went to jail in 2005 to protect that relationship. Th e second is the press’s 
failure to anticipate and warn citizens about the disastrous economic slide that hit 
the country in late 2008. “How could 9,000 business reporters blow it?” asked fi nan-
cial writer Dean Starkman. Pulitzer Prize–winning Wall Street reporter Gretchen 
Morgenson faulted the media’s own bad economics. “Low morale, lost expertise, 
and constant cutbacks, especially in investigative reporting—these are not condi-
tions that produce an appetite for confrontation and muckraking” (in Starkman, 
2009). McClatchy Newspapers’ Washington Bureau chief John Walcott (2008) was a 
bit harsher, accusing reporters of seeking personal gain in their stenography of Wall 
Street’s false optimism, saying, “Instead of being members of the Fourth Estate, too 
many . . . reporters have been itching to move up an estate or two, to become part 
of the Establishment or share the good times.” Th e box entitled “Journalists as Truth 
Vigilantes?” off ers a look at another ethical issue facing journalists and how well or 
poorly they deal with the issue. 
 PROFIT AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY  Th e media industries are just that, industries. Th ey exist 
not only to entertain and inform their audiences but also to make a profi t for their 
owners and shareholders. What happens when serving profi t confl icts with serving 
the public? 
 Th e confl ict between profi t and responsibility was the subject of the Academy 
Award–nominated 1999 movie  Th e Insider . In late 1995, CBS executives killed an exclu-
sive  60 Minutes  interview with Jeff rey Wigand, a former Brown & Williamson tobacco 
company executive, who told anchor Mike Wallace that cigarette manufacturers 
manipulated nicotine levels and had lied under oath before Congress. Many observers 
at the time—and many moviegoers four years later—believed that the company’s real 
fear was that a threatened lawsuit from Brown & Williamson would reduce the value 
  Is embedding’s trade of increased access in exchange for increased oﬃ  cial control ethical? 
 DOONESBURY © 2003 G. B. Trudeau. Reprinted with permission of Universal Uclick. All rights reserved. 

372 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
 New York Times  public editor Arthur Brisbane wanted to use his blog to make a diﬀ erence. With 
a 2012 post entitled “Should the  Times  be a Truth Vigilante?” he hoped to create a discussion with 
his readers about the proper role of journalists when the people they cover 
express obvious falsehoods. “If the newspaper’s overarching goal is truth, 
oughtn’t truth be embedded in its principal stories? In other words, if a candi-
date repeatedly utters an outright falsehood, shouldn’t the  Times  coverage nail 
it right at the point where the article quotes it?” (2012). 
 What had moved him to ask the question was criticism from his own paper’s Paul 
Krugman who complained that  Times  reporters had repeatedly allowed Republican Presi-
dential candidate Mitt Romney to claim that President Obama “has a habit of apologizing 
for America.” Not a habit; never happened even once, said Krugman, and Brisbane agreed. 
The paper’s reporters, however, never said so in their coverage of candidate Romney. But here 
Brisbane was not sure whether they should. “Is it possible to be objective and fair when the 
reporter is choosing to correct one fact over another?” he asked. 
 The post did indeed make a diﬀ erence, but not quite the one Mr. Brisbane had antici-
pated. In the words of  Salon’s  Glen Greenwald, it “sparked such intense reaction because it 
captured and inﬂ amed long-standing anger toward media outlets for 
mindlessly amplifying statements without examining whether they’re 
true . . . [It’s] basically the equivalent of pondering in a medical journal 
whether doctors should treat diseases, or asking in a law review article 
whether lawyers should defend the legal interests of their clients, etc.: 
reporting facts that conﬂ ict with public claims (what Brisbane tellingly 
demeaned as being “truth vigilantes”) is one of the deﬁ ning functions of 
journalism” (2012). Press critic Jay Rosen added, “Something happened in 
our press over the last 40 years or so that never got acknowledged and to this day would be 
denied by a majority of newsroom professionals. Somewhere along the way, truth-telling 
was surpassed by other priorities the mainstream press felt a stronger duty to. These include 
such things as ‘maintaining objectivity,’ ‘not imposing a judgment,’ ‘refusing to take sides’ 
and sticking to what I have called the ‘view from nowhere’” (2012). 
 But did Mr. Brisbane really make a diﬀ erence? Journalist Clay Shirky says yes, “Having 
asked, in a completely innocent way, whether the  Times  should behave like an advocate for 
the readers, rather than a stenographer to politicians, the question cannot now be unasked. 
Every day in which the  Times  (and indeed, most US papers) fail at what has clearly surfaced 
as their readers’ preference on the matter will be a day in which that gap remains uncomfort-
ably visible” (2012). 
  USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE 
 Journalists as Truth Vigilantes?  
 “It’s basically the equivalent of pondering in a medical 
journal whether doctors should treat diseases.” 
of the executives’ CBS stock. More recently, in February 2010, 173 Toyota dealers, pri-
marily in the southeastern United States, shifted their advertising from ABC affi  liates 
to non-ABC stations “as punishment” for the aggressive coverage of Toyota’s safety 
problems by that network and its chief investigative reporter Brian Ross. To its credit, 
ABC refused to soften its reporting (Rhee & Schone, 2010). 
 © 2012 – www.someguywithawebsite.com. Reprinted 
Courtesy of August I. Pollack.

CHAPTER 14 
Media Freedom, Regulation, and Ethics 
373
 Concentration and conglomeration raise serious questions about media profession-
als’ willingness to choose responsibility over profi t. Media law expert Charles Tilling-
hast (2000) commented, 
 One need not be a devotee of conspiracy theories to understand that journalists, like other 
human beings, can judge where their interests lie, and what risks are and are not prudent, 
given the desire to continue to eat and feed the family. Nor does one have to be possessed 
of such theories to understand that wealthy media corporations often share outlooks common 
to corporations in many diff erent fi elds, as a result of their status, not of any “agreements.” 
It takes no great brain to understand one does not bite the hand that feeds—or that one 
incurs great risk by doing so. (pp. 145–146)   
 Balancing profi t and social responsibility is a concern not just for journalists. Prac-
titioners in entertainment, advertising, and public relations often face this dilemma. 
Does an ad agency accept as a client the manufacturer of sugared children’s cereals 
even though doctors and dentists consider these products unhealthy? Does a public 
relations fi rm accept as a client the trade offi  ce of a country that forces prison inmates 
to manufacture products in violation of international rules? Does a production com-
pany distribute the 1950s television show  Amos ‘ n ’  Andy  knowing that it embodies 
many off ensive stereotypes of African Americans? 
 Moreover, balancing profi t and the public interest does not always involve big com-
panies and millions of dollars. Often, a media practitioner will face an ethical dilemma 
at a very personal level. What would you do in this situation? Th e editor at the maga-
zine where you work has ordered you to write an article about the 14-year-old daugh-
ter of your city’s mayor. Th e girl’s addiction to amphetamines is a closely guarded 
family secret, but it has been leaked to your publication. You believe that this child is 
not a public fi gure. Your boss disagrees, and the boss  is  the boss. By the way, you’ve 
just put a down payment on a lovely condo, and you need to make only two more 
installments to pay off  your new car. Do you write the story?   
 OFFENSIVE CONTENT  Entertainment, news, and advertising professionals must often make 
decisions about the off ensive nature of content. Other than the particular situation of 
broadcasters discussed earlier in this chapter, this is an ethical rather than a legal issue. 
 Off ensive content is protected. Logically, we do not need the First Amendment to 
protect sweet and pretty expression. Freedom of speech and freedom of the press 
  This is  not the way to balance proﬁ t and social responsibility. 
 © Doug Marlette. All Rights Reserved. Reprinted with permission  of Melinda Marlette. 

374 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
exist expressly to allow the dissemination of material that  will  off end. But what is 
off ensive? Clearly, what is off ensive to one person may be quite satisfactory to 
another. Religious leaders on the political Right have attacked the cartoon show 
 SpongeBob Squarepants  for supposedly promoting homosexuality, and critics from 
the political Left have attacked just about every classic Disney cartoon for racial ste-
reotyping. Television stations and networks regularly bleep cusswords that are com-
mon on cable television and in the schoolyard but leave untouched images of 
stabbings, beatings, and shootings. Critics mounted two national protests against 
CBS and its 2010 Super Bowl broadcast. From the Left, there were objections to a 
spot sponsored by conservative group Focus on the Family; from the Right, there 
were objections to an ad for a gay dating site. Where do we draw the line? Do we 
consider the tastes of the audience? Which members of the audience—the most easily 
off ended? Th ese are ethical, not legal, determinations.    
 Codes of Ethics and Self-Regulation 
 To aid practitioners in their moral reasoning, all major groups of media professionals 
have established formal codes or standards of ethical behavior. Among these are the 
Society of Professional Journalists’  Code of Ethics , the American Society of Newspaper 
Editors’  Statement of Principles , the Radio–Television Digital News Association’s  Code 
of Broadcast News Ethics , the American Advertising Federation’s  Advertising Principles 
of American Business , and the Public Relations Society of America’s  Code of Profes-
sional Standards for the Practice of Public Relations . Th ese are prescriptive codes that 
tell media practitioners what they should do. 
 To some, these codes are a necessary part of a true profession; to others, they are 
little more than unenforceable collections of clichés that restrict constitutional 
rights and invite lawsuits from outsiders. Th ey off er at least two important benefi ts 
to ethical media practitioners: Th ey are an additional source of information to be 
considered when making moral judgments, and they represent a particular media 
industry’s best expression of its shared wisdom. To others, however, they are mean-
ingless and needlessly restrictive. Ethicists Jay Black and Ralph Barney (1985/86), 
  To Focus on the Family’s James C. Dobson, 
the friendship between SpongeBob and Patrick is 
oﬀ ensive, crossing “a moral line.” Others might 
disagree. Where you draw the line on oﬀ ensive 
content is an ethical, not a legal, issue. 

CHAPTER 14 
Media Freedom, Regulation, and Ethics 
375
for example, argue, “Th e fact should be evident that the First Amendment has a 
primary purpose of protecting the distribution of ideas . . . from restriction eff orts by 
legions of ‘regulators.’ Ethics codes should be considered among those ‘regulators’” 
(p. 28). Th ey continue, “It is indeed not diffi  cult to fi nd examples of codifi ed profes-
sional ethics that ultimately become self-serving. Th at is, they tend to protect the 
industry, or elements of the industry, at the expense of individuals and other insti-
tutions, even of the full society” (p. 29). 
 In addition to industry professional codes, many media organizations have formu-
lated their own institutional policies for conduct. In the case of the broadcast networks, 
these are enforced by    Standards and Practices Departments . Local broadcasters have 
what are called    policy books   . Newspapers and magazines standardize behavior in two 
ways: through    operating policies    (which spell out standards for everyday operations) 
and  editorial policies    (which identify company positions on specifi c issues). Many 
media organizations also utilize    ombudsmen   , practitioners internal to the company 
who serve as “judges” in disputes between the public and the organization. Sometimes 
they have titles such as public editor, reader advocate, or readers’ representative. Some 
media organizations subscribe to the small number of existing    media councils , panels 
of people from both the media and the public who investigate complaints against the 
media from the public and publish their fi ndings. 
 Th ese mechanisms of normative ethics are a form of self-regulation, designed in 
part to forestall more rigorous or intrusive government regulation. In a democracy 
dependent on mass communication, they serve an important function. We are suspi-
cious of excessive government involvement in media. Self-regulation, however, has 
certain limitations: 
 •  Media professionals are reluctant to identify and censure colleagues who transgress . 
To do so might appear to be admitting that problems exist; whistle-blowers in the 
profession are often met with hostility from their peers.  
 •  Th e standards for conduct and codes of behavior are abstract and ambiguous . Many 
media professionals see this fl exibility as a necessary evil; freedom and autonomy 
are essential. Others believe the lack of rigorous standards renders the codes useless.  
 •  As opposed to those in other professions, media practitioners are not subject to stan-
dards of professional training and licensing . Again, some practitioners view stan-
dards of training and licensing as limiting media freedom and inviting government 
control. Others argue that licensing 
has not had these eff ects on doctors 
and lawyers.  
 •  Media practitioners often have limited 
independent control over their work . 
Media professionals are not autono-
mous, individual professionals. Th ey 
are part of large, hierarchically struc-
tured organizations. Th erefore, it is 
often diffi  cult to punish violations of 
standards because of the diffi  culty in 
fi xing responsibility.  
 Critics of self-regulation argue that 
these limitations are often accepted 
willingly by media practitioners because 
the “true” function of self-regulation is 
“to cause the least commotion” for those 
working in the media industries (Black 
& Whitney, 1983, p. 432). True or not, 
the decision to perform his or her duties 
in an ethical manner ultimately rests 
with the individual media professional. 
  When Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta, one of 
the largest pediatric hospitals in the country, 
launched its Strong4Life movement to ﬁ ght 
childhood obesity, it used several uncompromising 
ads featuring overweight kids. With Georgia having 
the second highest rate of obesity in the country, 
Children’s stood by the need for an in-your-face 
approach. But many people, even some in the public 
health community, saw the images they used as 
oﬀ ensive (Teegardin, 2012). The overriding 
message—the need for families to recognize that 
obesity is a widespread public health problem—is 
certainly is not oﬀ ensive. Why do you think the 
campaign was so controversial? Children’s did not 
give into the pressure to pull the ads and to this day 
remains committed to bring Georgia out of the top 
10 when it comes to childhood obesity. What would 
you have done?   

376 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS   
 Media Reform 
 What do these groups and people have in common—Common Cause, the National 
Rifl e Association, the National Organization for Women, Code Pink: Women’s Pre-
emptive Strike for Peace, the National Association of Black and Hispanic Journalists, 
the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, the AFL–CIO, the Consumer Federation of 
America, the Chicago City Council, the Christian Coalition, the Traditional Values 
Coalition, the National Association of Broadcasters, the Center for Digital Democracy, 
Communication Workers of America,  MoveOn.org , the Writer’s Guild, the Rainbow/
PUSH Coalition, Global Exchange, the Parents Television Council, the Catholic Confer-
ence, the Screen Actors Guild, the Association of Christian Schools, rockers Bonnie 
Raitt, Billy Joel, Pearl Jam, Patti Smith, and Don Henley, country singers Naomi Judd, 
George Jones, and Porter Wagoner, media moguls Ted Turner and Barry Diller, Repub-
licans John McCain, Olympia Snowe, Jesse Helms, Kay Bailey Hutchinson, Ted Stevens, 
and Trent Lott, Democrats John Kerry, John Edwards, Ernest Hollings, Byron Dorgan, 
and Edward Markey? Th ey all publicly oppose the FCC’s weakening of the country’s 
media ownership rules. 
 “Take the force of right-wingers upholding community standards who are deter-
mined to defend local control of the public airwaves,” wrote conservative newspaper 
columnist William Safi re. “Combine that with the force of lefties eager to maintain 
diversity of opinion in local media; add in independent voters’ mistrust of media 
manipulation; then let all these people have access to their representatives by e-mail 
and fax, and voilà! Congress awakens to slap down the power grab” (in “Two Cents,” 
2003, p. 46). Th e FCC’s “drive to loosen the rules,” echoed liberal commissioner Michael 
Copps, “awoke a sleeping giant. American citizens are standing up in never-before-
seen numbers to reclaim their airwaves and to call on those who are entrusted to use 
them to serve the public interest” (in Trigoboff , 2003, p. 36). Th ose never-before-seen 
numbers totaled 2 million communications to the Commission just before and soon 
after its 3-to-2 vote to relax ownership restrictions designed to encourage diversity of 
opinion in broadcasting. Congress received more comment on the decision that sum-
mer than on any other issue besides the invasion of Iraq. 
 Th e people had spoken against greater media concentration and for media reform, 
and they were heard. Over the objections of a Republican-controlled FCC and Repub-
lican president George W. Bush, the Republican-controlled House voted 400 to 21 to 
revoke the FCC’s actions. Th e Republican-controlled Senate followed suit, 55 to 40. 
Upon entering the White House, President Obama expressed his support for media 
reform: “I’m committed to having the FCC review what our current policies are in terms 
of media diversifi cation,” he said. “And part of what I want to do is to expand the diver-
sity of voices in media or have policies that encourage that.” FCC Commissioner Michael 
Copps reiterated the president’s commitment: “Today, a new spirit of change is abroad 
in the land. Th e question is whether we can have media capable of covering the issues 
that real Americans—not just Wall Street and Madison Avenue—care about. A media 
environment dominated by the established interests, unwilling or unable to refl ect the 
concerns of ordinary citizens, is the natural enemy of change” (2008, p. 18). 
 We have seen throughout this text that culture is created and maintained through 
communication, and that mass communication is increasingly central to that process. 
Media-literate citizens, then, demand the most robust communication, for it is through 
our cultural conversations that we create and re-create ourselves, that we know ourselves, 
As Black and Barney (1985/86) explain, an ethical media professional “must ratio-
nally overcome the status quo tendencies . . . to become the social catalyst who 
identifi es the topics and expedites the negotiations societies need in order to remain 
dynamic” (p. 36).  

CHAPTER 14 
Media Freedom, Regulation, and Ethics 
377
the world around us, and others in it. Because media-literate people know that media 
content is a text that provides insight into our culture and our lives, they insist on more 
voices, not fewer. Th e active and growing media reform movement—the sleeping 
giant—is driven by the desire to make our media more responsive, more integral to how 
we live our personal, social, and cultural lives. In truth, then, the media reform move-
ment is rooted in media literacy. 
 If you revisit the diverse cast of activists that opened this section, you’ll see that they 
fi nd wisdom in the words of former FCC commissioner Nicholas Johnson and Pope 
John Paul II. Johnson said that in our pursuit of a “viable self-governing society . . . 
whatever your fi rst issue of concern, media [reform] had better be your second, because 
without change in the media, progress in your primary area is far less likely” (in 
McChesney, 2004, p. 24). Shortly before the death of Pope John Paul II in 2005, the 
Vatican released the popular religious leader’s January 24 letter “to those responsible 
for communications.” “Th e mass media,” wrote the pontiff , “can and must promote 
justice and solidarity according to an organic and correct vision of human develop-
ment by reporting events accurately and truthfully, analyzing situations and problems 
completely, and providing a forum for diff erent opinions. An authentically ethical 
approach to using powerful communication media must be situated within the context 
of a mature exercise of freedom and responsibility, founded upon the supreme criteria 
of truth and justice” (2005, p. 54).   
  The National Riﬂ e Association, John McCain, 
Naomi Judd, and Pearl Jam are committed to media 
reform. Are you? 

378 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
 The primary telecommunications regulatory agency in the United States is the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) (www
.fcc/gov). Its website oﬀ ers a true bounty of information, including the Commission’s eﬀ orts to make better use of the Internet 
to interact with industry and audiences. Inasmuch as  an understanding of the ethical and moral obligations of media practitioners 
is an important component of media literacy, your challenge is to access this site and ﬁ nd the links speciﬁ c to you as an audience 
member. Then answer these questions: What links did you identify as of particular interest to audience members? Why? Did any 
of these links oﬀ er you an opportunity to “talk” to the Commission’s staﬀ ? If yes, which ones? Contact the Commission’s staﬀ  and 
ask a question (or two or three) that is of interest to you. Detail that question and the FCC’s response. Oﬀ er a retort. That is, ask 
another question raised by the Commission’s initial response. Detail your question and its answer. Did the Commission oﬀ er to 
provide you with documents or other material to help you with your queries? If so, what were they? Do you think it is important 
that the FCC stay in touch with audience members? Why or why not? Describe your general reaction to your “conversation” with 
this federal regulatory agency.  
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE 
 Talk to the FCC 

Outline the history and development of our contemporary 
understanding of the First Amendment. 
  Th e First Amendment is based on libertarianism’s self-
righting principle. 
  Th e absolutist position—no law means no law—is not as 
straightforward as it may seem. Questions have arisen 
over the defi nition of the press, what is abridgement, 
balancing of interests, the defi nition of libel and slander, 
the permissibility of prior restraint, and control of 
obscenity and pornography. 

Explain the justifi cation for and exercise of media 
regulation. 
  Media professionals face other legal issues, such as how 
to defi ne and handle indecent content, the impact of 
deregulation, and the limits of copyright. 

Distinguish between a media system that operates under 
a libertarian philosophy and one that operates under a 
social responsibility philosophy. 
  Libertarianism assumes a good and rational public with 
full access to all ideas; social responsibility theory, favor-
ing responsible self-interest over government regula-
tion, is the norm against which the operation of the 
American media system should be judged. 
  Defi ne and discuss media ethics and how they are applied. 
  Ethics, rules of behavior or moral principles that 
guide our actions, are not regulations, but they are 
every bit as important in guiding media professionals’ 
behavior. 
  Th ere are three levels of ethics—metaethics, normative 
ethics, and applied ethics. 
  Ethics require the balancing of several interests—the 
moral agent’s individual conscience, the object of the 
act, fi nancial supporters, the institution itself, the pro-
fession, and society. 
  Ethics, rather than regulation, infl uence judgments 
about matters such as truth and honesty, privacy, 
confi dentiality, personal confl ict of interest, the 
balancing of profi t and social responsibility, and 
the decision to publish or air potentially off ensive 
content. 
   Describe the operation and pros and cons of 
self-regulation. 
  Th ere is divergent opinion about the value and true 
purpose of much industry self-regulation. 
   Assess your personal commitment to media reform. 
  Th e media reform movement generated in response 
to government plans to further relax industry reg-
ulation shows that a media-literate public under-
stands the necessity of a free and democratic media 
system. 
 Resources for Review and Discussion 
 REVIEW POINTS: TYING CONTENT TO LEARNING OUTCOMES   

CHAPTER 14 
Media Freedom, Regulation, and Ethics 
379
 KEY TERMS 
 democracy, 354 
 libertarianism, 354 
 self-righting principle, 354 
 absolutist position, 355 
 ad hoc balancing of interests, 357 
 libel, 359 
  slander, 359  
 actual malice, 359 
 prior restraint, 359 
 obscenity, 360 
 pornography, 361 
 indecency, 361 
 traffi  c cop analogy, 362 
 Fairness Doctrine, 362 
 ascertainment, 362 
 public domain, 364 
 music licensing company, 364 
 digital rights management (DRM), 365 
 normative theory, 366 
  social responsibility theory, 366  
 ethics, 367 
 metaethics, 367 
 normative ethics, 367 
 applied ethics, 367 
 moral agent, 367 
 confi dentiality, 369  
 shield laws, 370 
 embedding, 371 
 access journalism, 371 
 Standards and Practices 
Department, 375 
 policy book, 375 
 operating policy, 375 
 editorial policy, 375 
 ombudsman, 375 
 media councils, 375 
 QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW 
  1.  What are the basic tenets of libertarianism? How do they 
support the First Amendment? 
  2.  What is the absolutist position on the First Amendment?  
  3.  Name important court cases involving the defi nition of “no 
law,” “the press,” “abridgment,” clear and present danger, 
balancing of interests, and prior restraint.  
  4.  Defi ne obscenity, pornography, and indecency. 
  5.  What is the traffi  c cop analogy? Why is it important in the 
regulation of broadcasting? 
  6.  What is copyright? What are the exceptions to copyright? 
What is DRM? 
  7.  What are the basic assumptions of social responsibility 
theory? 
  8.  What are ethics? What are the three levels of ethics? 
  9.  What is confi dentiality? Why is confi dentiality important 
to media professionals and to democracy? 
 10.  What are some forms of media self-regulation? What are 
the strengths and limitations of self-regulation? 
For further review, go to the LearnSmart study module for 
this chapter.
 QUESTIONS FOR CRITICAL THINKING AND DISCUSSION 
  1.  How much regulation or, if you prefer, deregulation do you 
think broadcasters should accept? 
  2.  Of all the groups whose interests must be balanced by me-
dia professionals, which ones do you think would have the 
most infl uence over you? 
  3.  In general, how ethical do you believe media professionals 
to be? Specifi cally, print journalists? Television journalists? 
Advertising professionals? Public relations professionals? 
Television and fi lm writers? Direct mail marketers? 


 
381
 Learning Objectives 
 Satellites and the Internet have made mass media truly global. Earth has become a global 
village. But not all countries use mass media in the same ways. Moreover, many people 
around the world resent the “Americanization” of their indigenous media systems. After 
studying this chapter you should be able to
 Outline the development of global media. 
 Explain the practice of comparative analysis. 
 Identify diﬀ erent media systems from around the world. 
 Describe the debate surrounding the New World Information Order and other 
controversies raised by the globalization of media.    15 
 The BBK Music Phone Supergirl Contest —China’s 
version of American Idol. 
Global Media 

382 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
1900
1925
1928   Baird sends television image from London to New York
1940   ▲ Voice of America goes on air
1901   ▲ Marconi sends wireless signal transatlantic
mid-1920s   European colonial powers use shortwave radio to connect
                          holdings
1923   Radio comes to China
 HENRI AND YOU HAVE BEEN PEN PALS SINCE SEVENTH GRADE. He’s visited you here in the United States, 
and you’ve been to his house in the small, walled village of Alet, near Carcassonne in 
southern France. You treat each other like family. Which means you sometimes fi ght. 
But unlike siblings living under the same roof, you have to carry on your dispute by 
e-mail. 
 Dear Henri, 
 What’s with you guys and your language police? For everyone else it’s  e-mail . For you it’s 
 courrier electronique . People around the world are innovating with Internet  start-ups . You 
have  jeune-pousses . My French isn’t as good as yours, but doesn’t that mean little fl ower 
or something? 
 Mon ami,
 Close,  mais pas de cigare  (but no cigar, my linguistically challenged friend). I admit that we 
may seem a little foolish to the rest of you, but the Académie Française (what you called the 
language police) is simply trying to protect our language because it represents the deepest 
expression of our national identity. Th e French speak French, our popular culture refl ects 
and is refl ected in French, and our history and literature are preserved in French. Maybe 
as an American speaking another country’s language (English from England) you don’t 
understand. We French will not be stripped of our  patrimoine , our cultural heritage. 
 Dear Henri, 
 Too late! English is the fi rst language of 500 million people and the second of another bil-
lion (Baron, 2011). Th e world’s air traffi  c control systems all use English for their commu-
nication. Th ree-quarters of all the world’s mail is written in English. English is the primary 
language for the publication of scientifi c and scholarly reports and for many international 
organizations such as the European Union and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. 
Protecting the culture of a country that reveres Jerry Lewis is one thing, but keeping up 
with the rest of the planet is another. 
 Mon ami, 
 Sacre bleu , we do keep up with the rest of the world! In fact, we are the globe’s cultural 
leaders, the avant garde. Surely you’ve recently seen  Le Fabuleux Destin d’Amélie 
382 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age

1950
1975
2000
2004   Al-Hurra
2006   Al-Jazeera International
2007   Al-Jazeera English in U.S.
2009   UK okays/limits product placement
2010   Sweden says TV movie commercial breaks may be ﬁnable oﬀense;
              Spain limits TV beauty ads
2011   ▲ Arab Spring
 
1980   MacBride Report calls for New World Information Order
1984   German RTL goes on air
1985   Radio Martí goes on air
1989   ▲ Fall of European communism
1990   TV Martí goes on air
1996   Al-Jazeera
1960s   ▲ British pirate broadcasters go on air
Poulain  and  Un Long Dimanche de Fiançailles  at your local cinema. I think in America 
they were called  Amélie  and  Th e Very Long Engagement . Th ey were worldwide hits. And 
I’m sure you saw  Th e Artist , a little French production that won your Academy Award a 
little while ago. 
 Dear Henri, 
 Say what you will, my friend, but 9 of the 15 most viewed TV shows in France last year 
were episodes of  House  and 38 of your top-50 rated programs were American, not only 
 House , but  CSI:NY  and  Criminal Minds . You want more? Th e number-one rated show on 
your most popular noncommercial television channel was  Without a Trace  (Hopewell & 
Keslassy, 2010).   
   Not only are American programs like these overseas hits ( House  is watched by 
82 million people in 66 foreign countries), but American formats are also sold abroad 
to become local productions. Foreign-language  Hollywood Reporter, Dr. Oz, Wheel of 
Fortune, Law & Order , and  Desperate Housewives  clones exist all over the world.  Th e 
Apprentice  is another format that has been sold globally. In China it’s called  Wise Man 
Takes All . China also has a version of  American Idol — Th e BBK Music Phone Supergirl 
Contest . Local versions of foreign shows also travel the other way.  America’s Funniest 
Home Videos  and  Hole in the Wall  originated in Japan;  Th e Killing  comes from Denmark; 
and of course,  American Idol  comes to the United States via England. 
 Th roughout this text we have seen how globalization is altering the operation of the 
various mass media industries, as well as the process of mass communication itself. In 
this chapter, we focus specifi cally on this globalization and its impact. 
 In doing so we will look at the beginnings of international media and their devel-
opment into a truly global mass media system. To study today’s global media we will 
use comparative analyses to see how diff erent countries establish media systems con-
sistent with their specifi c people, cultures, and political systems. Naturally, we will 
discuss the programming available in other countries. And because global media 
infl uence the cultures that use them both positively and negatively, we visit the debate 
over cultural imperialism. Finally, our media literacy discussion deals with contrast-
ing the way other countries handle diff erent media issues with the way we do things 
here in America.  
CHAPTER 15 
Global Media 
383

384 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
 A Short History of Global Media  
 In Chapters 7 and 8 we saw that radio and television were, in eff ect, international in 
their earliest days. Guglielmo Marconi was the British son of an Italian diplomat, and 
among his earliest successes was the 1901 transmission of a wireless signal from 
England to Newfoundland. American inventors, in the persons of Philo Farnsworth 
and Russian immigrant Vladimir Zworykin, met and eventually overcame the chal-
lenge posed by Scotland’s John Logie Baird, among whose greatest achievements was 
the successful transmission of a television picture from London to New York in 1928. 
But both the Marconi and the Baird transmissions were experimental, designed to 
attract attention and money to their infant technologies. However, it was not much 
later in the development of radio and television that these media did indeed become, 
if not truly global, at least international.  
 The Beginning of International Mass Media 
 Almost from the very start, radio signals were broadcast internationally. Beginning in 
the mid-1920s, the major European colonial powers—the Netherlands, Great Britain, 
and Germany—were using    shortwave radio    to connect with their various colonies in 
Africa, Asia, and the Middle East, as well as, in the case of the British, North America 
(Canada) and the South Pacifi c (Australia). Shortwave was (and still is) well suited for 
transmission over very long distances, because its high frequencies easily and effi  -
ciently refl ect—or  skip —off  the ionosphere, producing    sky waves    that can travel vast 
distances. 
 CLANDESTINE STATIONS  It was not only colonial powers that made use of international radio. 
Antigovernment or antiregime radio also constituted an important segment of inter-
national broadcasting. Th ese  clandestine stations    typically emerged “from the darkest 
shadows of political confl ict. Th ey [were] frequently operated by revolutionary groups 
or intelligence agencies” (Soley & Nichols, 1987, p. vii). In World War II, for example, 
stations operating from Britain and other Allied nations encouraged German soldiers 
and sailors to sabotage their vehicles and vessels rather than be killed in battle. Allied 
stations, such as the Atlantic Station and Soldiers’ Radio Calais, also intentionally 
broadcast misleading reports. Posing as two of the many offi  cial stations operated by 
the German army, they frequently transmitted false reports to confuse the enemy or 
to force offi  cial Nazi radio to counter with rebuttals, thus providing the Allies with 
exactly the information they sought. 
 But it was in the Cold War that clandestine broadcasting truly fl owered. In the years 
between the end of World War II and the fall of European communism in 1989, thou-
sands of radio, and sometimes television, pirates took up the cause of either revolu-
tionary (pro-communist) or counterrevolutionary (anti-communist) movements. In 
addition, other governments tangentially related to this global struggle—especially the 
growing anticolonial movements in South and Central America and in Africa—made 
use of clandestine broadcasting. 
 During the Cold War unauthorized, clandestine opposition stations typically oper-
ated outside the nations or regions to which they broadcast to avoid discovery, capture, 
and imprisonment or death. Today the relatively few clandestine operations function-
ing inside the regions to which they transmit can be classifi ed as    indigenous stations , 
and they can make use of technologies other than radio. For example, al-Zawraa (Th e 
Gate) is an antigovernment Sunni-operated satellite television station transmitting 
from constantly changing locations inside Iraq to beam anti-American and anti-Shiite 
content to Sunni insurgents and other Iraqis involved in that war-torn country’s ongo-
ing civil war. Opposition stations transmitting to the regions they hope to infl uence 
from outside those areas are    exogenous stations   . FreeNK is an example of an exoge-
nous (or international) station. It broadcasts from South Korea in opposition to the 
despotic rule of North Korea’s Kim Jong Un. But because radios sold in North Korea 
are pretuned to receive nothing but offi  cial government stations and cannot be 

CHAPTER 15 
Global Media 
385
changed, only radios smuggled into the country can deliver 
FreeNK. FreeNK’s response, therefore, is heavier reliance on the 
Internet. Naturally, many other clandestine operations have 
migrated to the Internet. Even al-Qaeda produces a weekly Web 
newscast,  Sout al-Khilafa ( Voice of the Caliphate ). But because 
the diffi  cult terrain in many embattled nations makes telephone 
lines an impossibility and poverty renders wireless Internet a 
rarity, radio remains the medium of choice for many out-groups.   
 PIRATE BROADCASTERS  Another type of broadcast operation transmit-
ting from outside its desired audience’s geographic location 
involved something a bit more benign than war and revolution. 
Th ese were stations that began broadcasting into Great Britain 
in the 1960s. Called    pirate broadcasters , they were illegally 
operated stations broadcasting to British audiences from off -
shore or foreign facilities. Among the more notable were Radio 
Caroline, which reached a daily audience of a million listeners with 
its signal broadcast from the MV  Frederika  anchored 3½ miles 
off  the Isle of Man, and Radio Veronica, broadcasting from a ship 
off  the coast of the Netherlands. 
 Th ese pirates, unlike their politically motivated clandestine 
cousins, were powerful and well subsidized by advertisers and 
record companies. Moreover, much like the commercial radio stations with which 
we are now familiar, they broadcast 24 hours a day, every day of the year. Th ese 
pirates off ered listeners an alternative to the controlled and low-key programming 
of the British Broadcasting Corporation’s (BBC) stations. Because the BBC was non-
commercial, pirate stations represented the only opportunity for advertisers who 
wanted to reach British consumers. Record companies intent on introducing Britain’s 
youth to their artists and to rock ‘n’ roll also saw the pirates as the only way to reach 
their audience, which the staid BBC all but ignored. 
 Enterprising broadcasters also made use of foreign locales to bring commercial tele-
vision to audiences otherwise denied. Th e top-rated network in Germany today, for 
example, is RTL. Now broadcasting from the German city of Cologne, it began opera-
tions in January 1984 in Luxembourg, transmitting an American-style mix of children’s 
programming, sports, talk shows, and action–adventure programming into Germany 
to compete with that country’s two dominant public broadcasters, ARD and ZDF.   
 THE UNITED STATES AS INTERNATIONAL BROADCASTER     World War II brought the United States into 
the business of international broadcasting. Following the lead of Britain, which had 
just augmented its colonial broadcast system with an    external service called the BBC 
World Service, the United States established in 1940 what would eventually be known 
as the Voice of America (VOA) to counter enemy propaganda and disseminate infor-
mation about America. Th e VOA originally targeted countries in Central and South 
America friendly to Germany, but as the war became global, it quickly began broad-
casting to scores of other nations, attracting, along with Britain’s World Service, a large 
and admiring listenership, fi rst in countries occupied by the Axis powers, and later by 
those in the Soviet sphere of infl uence. 
 It was this Cold War with the Soviets that moved the United States 
into the forefront of international broadcasting, a position it still holds 
today. To counter the eff orts of the Soviet Union’s external service, Radio 
Moscow, the United States established three additional services. Radio in 
the American Sector (RIAS), broadcasting in German, served people 
inside East Berlin and East Germany; Radio Free Europe (RFE) broad-
cast to all of the other Communist-bloc Eastern European countries in 
their native languages; and Radio Liberty (RL) was aimed at listeners in 
the Soviet Union itself. When these services were initiated, people both 
in the United States and abroad were told that they were funded by 
contributions from American citizens. However, as a result of the furor 
    Disc jockey Robby Dale broadcasts from pirate 
station Radio Caroline aboard the MV  Frederika , 
anchored oﬀ  Great Britain’s Isle of Man. 
  The Voice of America logo.
Reprinted by permission of Voice of America. 

386 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
regimes because an independent news organization “was a major departure 
from anything done before and was truly shocking for the Arab public . . . 
some in the Arab world even accused [the channel] of being a mouthpiece 
for American ideas” (Dahl, 2011). Al Jazeera has been banned in Algeria, 
Morocco, Iraq, Bahrain, and Tunisia. When democracy protests erupted in 
Egypt, president Mubarak shuttered Al Jazeera’s oﬃ  ces, took its equipment, 
arrested its reporters, and booted it from the state-owned satellite carrier 
(Al Jazeera took to Facebook to tell people how to ﬁ nd it on 10 other regional 
satellite operations that replaced regular programming with Al Jazeera’s video feed). “I am 
proud to say,” writes the channel’s director general Wadah Khanfar, “the Al Jazeera Network has 
been reporting from the region’s hot spots well before they ‘mattered’ in January, 2011” (2011). 
In fact, many observers argue that the democratic movements now sweeping the Middle East 
could rightly be called “The Al Jazeera Revolution.”  
 Naturally, then, when Al Jazeera English was launched in November 2006, American 
cable companies should have been excited to oﬀ er their viewers this additional perspective 
on a part of the world that so thoroughly dominates U.S. foreign policy and where the 
country was ﬁ ghting two wars. After all, 120 million households in more than 100 countries 
in Europe, Asia, and Africa tune in every day; it’s only proper that in an ever-interconnected 
world Americans would want to tune in as well. In fact, only a few small community opera-
tors in Ohio, Vermont, and the District of Columbia and satellite providers Dish and DirecTV 
elected to carry the world’s fastest-growing news channel. 
 But American viewers did indeed want to see a close-up of the events in Egypt. 
Al Jazeera English’s website had a 2,500 percent increase in traﬃ  c during the Cairo revolt, 
60% of it from within the United States. Of the channel’s four million daily live streaming 
video viewers, 1.6 million were American (Stanley, 2011). Almost half of all downloads of 
Al Jazeera YouTube videos come from the U.S. (Dahl, 2011). Quickly recognizing viewers’ in-
terest, Time Warner Cable and Verizon FiOS in New York City and Los Angeles’s KCET-TV began 
carrying the channel. 
 Enter your voice. How comfortable would you be with Al Jazeera English on your home’s 
television screen? Even if you might not watch it, do you think it’s important that the channel 
is available to more Americans?  
 CULTURAL FORUM 
 Al Jazeera English: Coming to 
Your Town? 
 “The only television news operation with a fully 
staffed operation in Egypt capable of this depth 
and breadth of coverage was Al Jazeera, and 
cable channel Al Jazeera English was almost 
invisible on American television.” 
 As pro-democracy protests exploded across Egypt in January 2011, millions of Americans 
were glued to their video screens. They watched in real time as a spontaneous people’s 
uprising in a Muslim country toppled an oppressive dictator, a despot, Hosni Mubarak, who 
enjoyed the support of the United States. 
 Night after night, day after day, viewers saw video of violent clashes, 
peaceful demonstrations, warm greetings between soldiers and protestors, 
and oﬃ  cial pronouncements. They heard reporters and commentators, 
well versed in Egyptian culture and politics, oﬀ er expert accounts and 
analyses aimed squarely at English-speaking audiences. The drama was 
inescapable. 
 Most of those Americans, however, did not see these historic events 
on their television sets. They saw them unfold online because the only 
television news operation with a fully staﬀ ed operation in Egypt capable of this depth 
and breadth of coverage was Al Jazeera, and cable channel Al Jazeera English was almost 
invisible on American television. 
 Al Jazeera was founded in 1996 by Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani, the Emir of Qatar. 
Al Jazeera means “the island” or “the peninsula,” referring to the shape of Qatar, a small, oil-rich 
country on the Persian Gulf and an American ally. Al-Thani’s goal was to create a news channel 
that would serve as “a beacon for democracy in the highly censored world of state-controlled 
Arabic media.” As a result, Al Jazeera quickly angered most of the neighboring Middle Eastern 
  Palestinian protestors, mistaking Al Jazeera TV’s eﬀ orts at objectivity as pro-
American bias, burn posters of the channel’s logo. 
that arose when it was revealed in 1971 that they were in fact paid for by the Central 
Intelligence Agency, they were brought openly under government control and funded 
and administered by the International Broadcasting Bureau, whose members were 
appointed by the president. 
 Th e communist nations targeted by these services attempted to jam their signals by 
broadcasting on the same frequencies at higher powers, but they were only minimally 
successful in keeping their people from listening to these Western broadcasts. It was 
the success of these    surrogate services   —broadcast operations established by one 
country to substitute for another’s own domestic service—that prompted President 
Ronald Reagan in 1985 to establish a special division of the VOA, Radio Martí, to 

CHAPTER 15 
Global Media 
387
broadcast into Communist Cuba. Radio Martí, still in operation, was 
joined by TV Martí in 1990. 
 A fi nal United States external service established during World War II 
and the Cold War, Armed Forces Radio and Television Service (AFRTS), 
remains active today under its new name, American Forces Radio and 
Television Service. Maintained by the American military, its stated mis-
sion is “to deliver Department of Defense internal information and radio 
and television programming services which provide ‘a touch of home’ to 
Department of Defense personnel and their families serving overseas” 
(AFRTS, 2012). It employs shortwave radio, seven Earth-orbiting satel-
lites, and MP3 technology to reach listeners and viewers in 175 countries 
and aboard U.S. ships with commercial-free fare.  
 THE VOA TODAY  Today, 125 million listeners a day tune in to VOA broadcasts in 45 lan-
guages, and another 20 million people in 23 developing countries listen to its surro-
gate operations, RFE, RL, Radio Martí, and the recently added Radio Free Asia, 
Arabic-language Radio Sawa, and Radio Sila, broadcasting in Arabic and French into 
Darfur from Chad. Th roughout its history, the VOA has frequently vacillated between 
two roles in response to world events and political pressures at home: (1) disseminat-
ing Western propaganda and (2) providing objective information. With the threat of 
communist world domination now nonexistent, it attempts to meet the far less con-
tradictory goals of spreading American culture and disseminating health and social 
information.    
 Th e VOA’s commitment to the spread of American culture is evidenced by the estab-
lishment in 1992 of a 24-hour top 40–style service, VOA Europe, and in 1998 of a 
24-hour, all-news English-language worldwide radio service characterized by a snappy 
style reminiscent of domestic commercial stations. Th e VOA’s focus on transmitting 
health and other practical information can be seen in the increased eff orts it devotes to 
programs aimed at Th ird World nations on AIDS prevention, nutrition, and vaccination. 
  Radio Martí’s logo. 
  The television drama  Touch simultaneously 
premiered in 100 diﬀ erent countries. 

388 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
In pursuit of this humanitarian goal, the VOA now frequently strikes agreements with 
local stations in these countries to broadcast its programs over their AM and FM 
stations, making them accessible to people who listen outside the shortwave band. You 
can read more about a diff erent surrogate service, Qatar’s attempt at openness in the 
closed world of state-controlled Arabic media, in the essay, “Al Jazeera English: Coming 
to Your Town?” 
 Global Media Today  
 In 2012 the drama  Touch , starring Kiefer Sutherland, premiered on America’s Fox Tele-
vision Network. It debuted simultaneously in 100 other countries, all with the same 
sponsor, Unilever. Th e Cartoon Network is satellite- and cablecast in 145 countries in 
14 languages. Th e Discovery Channel has 63 million subscribers in Asia, 35 million in 
Europe, the Middle East, and Africa, 30 million in India, and 18 million in Latin America. 
Nickelodeon is the globe’s most distributed kids channel, viewable in more than 
320 million households worldwide. Although  24 ,  Prison Break , and  Desperate House-
wives  have long been available on the Iranian black market, religious and political 
leaders in that conservative country have given offi  cial approval to the broadcast of 
 Lost . Disney runs 35 subscription services for Japanese mobile phone users, attracting 
38 million subscribers in its fi rst year. CBS maintains six “branded” cable channels in 
the United Kingdom.  SpongeBob Squarepants  is the favorite television show among 
Chinese kids. Th ere is a Chinese production of  Cellular , a Hindi remake of  Bride Wars , 
and Chinese, Brazilian, Russian, Mexican, and Argentinean productions of  High School 
Musical . And although you might have heard American voices in the 2009 movie  Astro 
Boy  (Nicholas Cage, Nathan Lane, and Kristen Bell, for example), it is actually a U.S. 
version of a Japanese  anime  (cartoon). Britain’s Channel 4  alone  pays Fox Television 
$1 million per episode for  Th e Simpsons , and satellite channel BSkyB pays $814,000 an 
episode for  Glee . 
 Downton Abbey , a hit on America’s PBS television network and broadcast in more 
than 200 countries, originally airs on England’s ITV1 and is produced by British pro-
duction company Carnival Films, which is owned by U.S. media giant NBC-Universal. 
American Spanish-language network Telemundo, owned by NBC, has programming 
offi  ces in Tokyo; Mexican media conglomerate Televisa has offi  ces in China and copro-
duction deals with state-run China Central Television, as does Venezuela’s Venevision; 
and Brazil media company Globo produces content for a number of India’s television 
networks. If you’re in the right place, you can join the nearly 400 million households 
worldwide that watch one of MTV’s international channels. TV France International, 
that country’s umbrella distribution organization, has partnerships with Fox, Warner 
Brothers, the Discovery and Sundance channels, and Bravo. Its all-French channel is 
available to viewers in the United States on DirecTV. Close to 200 nations receive CNN 
by satellite. Radio Beijing broadcasts to a worldwide audience in 40 languages; the 
Chinese also maintain the China Xinhua News Network, a 24-hour global English-
language television service, and publish  China Daily USA Weekly , an English-language 
newspaper, in eight major American cities. Hundreds of millions of Internet users 
spread throughout scores of countries can tune in to thousands of Web radio stations 
originating from every continent except Antarctica. AT&T, the United States’ largest 
telecommunications and cable company, and British Telecom, Britain’s biggest tele-
communications provider, have merged their international operations into a single 
$10 billion unit. Media know few national borders. 
 But the global fl ow of expression and entertainment is not welcomed by everyone. 
French law requires that 40% of all music broadcast by its radio stations be in French. 
Iran bans “Western music” altogether from radio and television. Turkey forbids the use 
of the letters  Q  and  W , punishable by fi ne, because they do not belong to the Turkish 
alphabet. Jamaica’s Broadcasting Commission bans American hip-hop music to, it 
says, guard against underage sex and juvenile delinquency. America’s northern neigh-
bor mandates that all television programming contain at least 15% “Canadian-made 

CHAPTER 15 
Global Media 
389
content.” While  Th e Simpsons  is widely distributed across the Middle East by Saudi 
Arabian DBS provider MBC, all references to Duff  Beer have been changed to soda, 
and Moe’s Bar does not appear at all. Th e Germans and Austrians are wary of  Th e 
Simpsons  as well, refusing to air episodes that include the topic of a nuclear accident 
at the plant where Homer works. To ensure that its people do not access “foreign” or 
otherwise “counterrevolutionary” Internet content, the Chinese government requires 
all Internet accounts to be registered with the police. It employs 40,000 “e-police” to 
enforce its dozens of Net-related laws (dissidents call it the Great Firewall). Media may 
know few national borders, but there is growing concern that they at least respect the 
cultures within them. 
 One traditional way to understand the workings of the contemporary global media 
scene is to examine the individual media systems of the diff erent countries around the 
world. In doing so, we can not only become familiar with how diff erent folks in diff er-
ent places use media but also better evaluate the workings of our own system. Natu-
rally, not every media system resembles that of the United States. As a result, such 
concepts as audience expectations, economic foundations, and the regulation of mass 
media diff er across nations. Th e study of diff erent countries’ mass media systems is 
called    comparative analysis or  comparative studies . 
 Comparative Analyses 
 Diff erent countries’ mass media systems refl ect the diversity of their levels of develop-
ment and prosperity, values, and political systems. Th at a country’s political system 
will be refl ected in the nature of its media system is only logical. Authoritarian govern-
ments need to control the mass media to maintain power. Th erefore, they will institute 
a media system very diff erent from that of a democratic country with a capitalistic, free 
economy. Th e overriding philosophy of how media ideally operate in any given system 
of social values is called a normative theory (Chapter 14). 
 William Hachten (1992) off ered “fi ve concepts” that guide the world’s many media 
systems—Western, development, revolutionary, authoritarianism, and communism. 
We’ll examine each and provide a look at examples that exemplify them.  
 THE WESTERN CONCEPT: GREAT BRITAIN  Th e  Western concept    is an amalgamation of the original 
libertarian and social responsibility models (Chapter 14). It recognizes two realities: 
Th ere is no completely free (libertarian) media system on Earth, and even the most 
  Britain’s  Downton Abbey , a hit in America and 
200 other countries. 

390 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
commercially driven systems include the expectation not only of public service and 
responsibility but also of meaningful government oversight of mass communication to 
ensure that media professionals meet those responsibilities. 
 Great Britain off ers a good example of a media system operating under the Western 
concept. Th e BBC was originally built on the premise that broadcasting was a public 
trust (the social responsibility model). Long before television, BBC radio off ered sev-
eral services—one designed to provide news and information, another designed to 
support high or elite culture such as symphony music and plays, 
and a third designed to provide popular music and entertain-
ment. To limit government and advertiser control, the BBC was 
funded by license fees levied on receivers (currently about $215 
a year), and its governance was given over to a nonprofi t cor-
poration. Many observers point to this goal-oriented, noncom-
mercial structure as the reason that the BBC developed, and still 
maintains, the most respected news operation in the world. 
 Eventually, Britain, like all of western Europe, was forced by 
public demand to institute more American-style broadcasting. 
Fueled by that demand and advances in digital broadcasting, 
there are now many hundreds of radio stations in the United 
Kingdom. Most prominent are the 10 domestic BBC networks. 
Th e BBC also maintains 40 local stations that program a com-
bination of local news and music, primarily for older listeners. 
Th ere are also three national commercial radio networks, Virgin 
Radio, Classic FM, and talkSPORT, and a growing number of 
local commercial stations. As in the United States, most belong 
to larger chains. 
 Th e BBC also maintains eight television networks, all digital, 
each having its own character; for example, BBC One carries 
more popular fare, while BBC Two airs somewhat more serious 
content. Commercial television exists, too. ITV programs six 
digital networks; Channel 4 maintains four; and Five runs three. 
Th ese commercial operations accept limits on the amount of 
advertising they air and agree to specifi ed amounts of public 
  Unlike U.S. media, British media do not enjoy 
First Amendment protections, but as their notorious 
tabloids demonstrate, they nonetheless operate with 
a great deal of freedom. 
  You can enjoy  The Simpsons just about 
everywhere in the Middle East, but if you do catch it 
there, you’ll never see Homer drink a beer or visit 
Moe’s Bar. 

CHAPTER 15 
Global Media 
391
aff airs and documentary news programming in exchange for their licenses to broad-
cast. Th is is referred to as their    public service remit . 
 In terms of other regulation, the media in Great Britain do not enjoy a First 
Amendment–like guarantee of freedom. Prior restraint does occur, but only when a 
committee of government offi  cials and representatives of the media industry can agree 
on the issuance of what is called a    D-notice   . British media are also forbidden to report 
on court trials in progress, and Parliament can pass other restrictions on the media 
whenever it wishes—for example, the ban, imposed in 1988 and maintained for several 
years, on broadcasting the voice of anyone associated with the Irish Republican Army 
or other paramilitary movements.   
 THE DEVELOPMENT CONCEPT: HONDURAS  Th e media systems of many Th ird World or developing 
African, Asian, Latin and South American, and eastern European nations formerly 
part of the Soviet bloc best exemplify the    development concept . Here government 
and media work in partnership to ensure that media assist in the planned, benefi cial 
development of the country. Content is designed to meet specifi c cultural and societal 
needs—for example, teaching new farming techniques, disseminating information on 
methods of disease control, and improving literacy. Th is isn’t the same as authoritar-
ian control. Th ere is less censorship and other offi  cial control of content, but often 
marginally so. 
 Honduras off ers one example. Th is small Central American country of 6.4 million 
people is one of the poorest in the Western Hemisphere; 85% of its population lives in 
poverty. As a result, the people own only half a million television sets and 2.5 million 
radio receivers. All of Honduras’s 11 television stations are commercial; 290 of its radio 
stations are commercial and the government network, Radio Honduras, operates 
about 20 stations. Radio and printed leafl ets have been particularly successful in 
reducing the number of infant deaths in Honduras caused by diarrheal dehydration 
and helping people with issues of family planning. 
 Th e 1982 Honduras Constitution guarantees freedom of the press, but there is 
signifi cant control of media content. All the major newspapers are owned by power-
ful business executives or politicians with allegiances to diff erent elites. Because the 
media in Honduras are constitutionally mandated to “cooperate with the state in the 
fulfi llment of its public functions,” journalists must be licensed and adhere to the 
Organic Law of the College of Journalists of Honduras. As such, they are forbidden 
to produce reports that “preach or disseminate doctrines that undermine the foun-
dation of the State or of the family.” Nor can journalists produce content that “threat-
ens, libels, slanders, insults, or in any other way attacks the character of a public 
offi  cial in the exercise of his or her function.” Th ese were the “decrees” invoked by 
the Honduran military government when it ordered the National Commission of 
Telecommunications (Conatel), the offi  cial body that regulates the country’s media, 
to close down television station Canal 36 and Radio Globo after they broadcast mes-
sages from ousted president Manuel Zelaya during a 2009 coup. Th e international 
press freedom organization Reporters Without Borders ranked Honduras 135th in its 
annual world press freedom index (if you’re curious, the U.S. was 47th). Honduras, 
“marked by a culture of violence towards the media . . . has languished at the bottom 
of the list since the coup in June 2009” and earned its poor rating because of the 
“deaths of fi ve journalists in 2011, two as a direct result of their work, as well as the 
regular persecution of opposition media and community radio stations” (Reporters 
Without Borders, 2012).  
 THE REVOLUTIONARY CONCEPT: POLAND  No country “offi  cially” embraces the    revolutionary 
concept    as a normative theory, but this does not mean that a nation’s media will 
never serve the goals of revolution. Stevenson (1994) identifi ed four aims of revolu-
tionary media: ending government monopoly over information, facilitating the orga-
nization of opposition to the incumbent powers, destroying the legitimacy of a 
standing government, and bringing down a standing government. Th e experience of 
the Polish democracy movement Solidarity is a well-known example of the use of 
media as a tool of revolution. 

392 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
 By the fi rst years of the 1980s, the Polish people had grown dissatisfi ed with the 
domination of almost all aspects of their lives by a national Communist Party per-
ceived to be a puppet of the Soviet Union. Th is frustration was fueled by the ability 
of just about all Poles to receive radio and television signals from neighboring dem-
ocratic lands (Poland’s location in central Europe made it impossible for the author-
ities to block what the people saw and heard). In addition, Radio Free Europe, the 
Voice of America, and the BBC all targeted Poland with their mix of Western news, 
entertainment, and propaganda. Its people’s taste for freedom thus whetted, Solidar-
ity established an extensive network of clandestine revolutionary media. Much of it 
was composed of technologies traditionally associated with revolution—pamphlets, 
newsletters, audiotapes and videocassettes—but much of it was also sophisticated 
radio and television technology used to disrupt offi  cial broadcasts and disseminate 
information. Despite government eff orts to shut the system down, which went as far 
as suspending offi  cial broadcasting and mail services in order to deny Solidarity 
these communication channels, the revolution was a success, making Poland the 
fi rst of the Eastern-bloc nations to defy the Party apparatus and install a democrati-
cally elected government. You can read about how new media have added new mus-
cle to the revolutionary concept in the box titled “Social Media and the Middle East 
Democracy Movement.”   
 THE AUTHORITARIANISM AND COMMUNISM CONCEPTS: CHINA     Because only three communist nations 
remain and because the actual operation of the media in these and other  authoritar-
ian systems    is quite similar, we can discuss authoritarianism and communism as a 
single concept. Both call for the subjugation of media for the purpose of serving the 
government. China is not only a good example of a country that operates its media 
according to the authoritarian/communist concepts, it also demonstrates how diffi  cult 
it is becoming for authoritarian governments to maintain strict control over media and 
audiences. 
 Th e Chinese media system is based on that of its old ideological partner, the now-
dissolved Soviet Union. For a variety of reasons, however, it has developed its own 
  The Polish workers’ and democracy 
movement, Solidarity, was greatly aided by media, 
both oﬃ  cial outlets from beyond Poland’s borders 
and its own extensive network of clandestine new 
and old communication technologies. 

CHAPTER 15 
Global Media 
393
peculiar nature. China has more than 1.3 billion people living in more than a million 
hamlets, villages, and cities. As a result, in the early 2000s, the government undertook 
an extensive program called  Cuncun Tong , designed to bring at least radio, but prefer-
ably radio and television, to every one of those million locales. At the same time, it 
closed down hundreds of local newspapers and broadcast stations to solidify its con-
trol over content through its central and provincial government operations, primarily 
China Central Television. Th ere are now 2,416 radio and 1,279 television stations in 
operation. But because of China’s immense size, 66,000 relay or repeater stations are 
employed to reach its many viewers and listeners. Ninety-eight percent of all Chinese 
homes have television ( CIA World Factbook , 2008). 
 Only relatively recently has the newspaper become an important medium. Wide-
spread rural illiteracy and the lack of good pulpwood restricted the newspaper to the 
larger cities. Cities and towns were dotted with hundreds of thousands of reading walls 
where people could catch up on the offi  cial news. But when China embarked on its 
Open Door Policy in the late 1970s, it committed itself to developing the newspaper 
as a national medium. As a result, most reading walls are now gone, the few remaining 
used primarily by older people. 
 Th e media exist in China to serve the government. Chairman Mao Zedong, founder 
of the Chinese Communist Party, clarifi ed the role of the media very soon after coming 
to power in 1949. Th e media exist to propagandize the policies of the Party and to 
educate, organize, and mobilize the masses. Th ese are still their primary functions. 
 Radio came to China via American reporter E. C. Osborn, who established an exper-
imental radio station in China in 1923. Offi  cial Chinese broadcasting began three years 
later. Television went on the air in 1958, and from the outset it was owned and con-
trolled by the Party in the form of Central China Television (CCTV), which in turn 
answers to the Ministry of Radio and Television. Radio, now regulated by China Peo-
ple’s Broadcasting Station (CPBS), and television stations and networks develop their 
own content, but it must conform to the requirements of the Propaganda Bureau of 
the Chinese Communist Party Central Committee. 
 Financially, Chinese broadcasting operates under direct government subsidy. But 
in 1979 the government approved commercial advertising for broadcasting, and it has 
evolved into an important means of fi nancial support. Coupled with the Chinese gov-
ernment’s desire to become a more active participant in the international economy, 
this commercialization has led to increased diversity in broadcast content. It has also 
led to increased corruption as major media, despite its illegality, openly sell news 
  A Chinese reading wall. This 1980-vintage 
photo shows a rapidly disappearing vestige of an 
earlier media era. 

394 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
 Tens of thousands of Iranians from all walks of life took to the streets in the summer of 
2009 to protest what they saw as the illegitimate reelection of President Mahmoud 
Ahmadinejad. The government, already skilled at slowing the Internet and shutting down 
opposition websites, immediately expelled or placed under house arrest all foreign jour-
nalists, closed opposition newspapers, and used its own state-run radio 
and television stations to ﬁ rst ignore the protests and then blame them 
on outside Western agitators hostile to Iran. The protesters responded by 
using the Internet and social media to make a diﬀ erence for their Green 
Revolution and democracy. 
 Only a few decades before, the Polish Solidarity movement’s commu-
nication tools were pamphlets, newspapers, and loudspeaker trucks. But in 
2009, Iran’s police and army, as they had ever since the 1979 Islamic revolu-
tion, easily silenced these outlets. However, rather than stop the insurrec-
tion in a country where a third of the population is linked to the Internet and 60% have cell 
phones, this crushing of dissent pushed the protesters to those very same media where they 
made dramatically eﬀ ective use of Twitter and YouTube. Protest organizers used cell phones 
to direct people to Twitter, where thousands of dissidents could be instantly mobilized into 
hundreds of daily demonstrations and nightly rooftop protests, shouting “Alaho Akbar” 
(God is Great) in deﬁ ance of the government. Hours of violent and bloody cell phone video 
were uploaded onto YouTube, none more famous than the image of Neda Aga Soltan’s death, 
migrating from there to media outlets across the world. 
 Did the Green Revolution’s use of social media make a diﬀ erence? After all, Ahmadinejad’s 
repressive regime remained in power despite weeks of violent protest. Evidence that it did 
was to come soon, as satellite and Web video of the revolt fueled demo-
cratic hopes across the region. 
 On December 17, 2010, Tunisian street vendor Mohamed Bouazizi 
set himself aﬁ re to protest mistreatment by corrupt government police. 
Demonstrations erupted immediately, and protestors uploaded cell 
phone video of their rallies to Facebook, YouTube, and local broadcasters. 
These images of deﬁ ance sped electronically around the country, and the 
revolution swept into all parts of Tunisian society. Twenty-eight days 
after Bouazizi’s sacriﬁ ce, Tunisia’s dictator of 23 years, Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, ﬂ ed into 
exile in Saudi Arabia. 
 Those images also made their way to Egypt, where anger at the brutal June 6, 2010 
beating of Khaled Said at the hands of corrupt Alexandria police had been simmering for 
months. Said’s crime was that he had used his blog to post video of cops sharing the loot 
from a drug bust. Within ﬁ ve days of the 24-year-old businessman’s death, demonstrators 
created a Facebook page, We Are All Khaled Said, to galvanize anger against the authoritarian 
government of Hosni Mubarak. Within a week, the page had 130,000 friends; by year’s end, 
in a country of 5 million Facebook users, it had 473,000 (Preston, 2011). 
 By March 2011 these images of oppressed people ﬁ ghting for freedom and dignity in 
Iraq, Tunisia, and Egypt had spawned an “Arab Spring”—democracy movements in Yemen, 
Libya, Bahrain, Algeria, Morocco, Jordan, Oman, Iraq, Syria, and Saudi Arabia. Some, for ex-
ample in Libya and Bahrain, were met with government brutality, but others produced 
“voluntary” reform on the part of once-powerful rulers who saw that new media were a 
growing, uncontrollable check on their authority. “While it is almost impossible to isolate the 
impact of social media tools from the general swirl of events that set oﬀ  the popular upris-
ings across the Middle East, ” wrote the  New York Times ’s Jennifer Preston, “there is little doubt 
that they provided a new means for ordinary people to connect with human rights advocates 
trying to amass support against police abuse, torture and . . . permanent emergency laws 
allowing people to be jailed without charges. Facebook and YouTube also oﬀ ered a way for 
the discontented to organize and mobilize. . . . Far more decentralized than political parties, 
the strength and agility of the networks clearly caught [Middle Eastern] authorities . . . by 
surprise, even as [these governments] quickly attempted to shut them down” (2011, p. A10).  
  USING MEDIA TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE 
 Social Media and the Middle East 
Democracy Movement 
 “Rather than stop the insurrection in a country where a 
third of the population is linked to the Internet and 60% 
have cell phones, this crushing of dissent pushed the 
protesters to those very same media where they made 
dramatically effective use of Twitter and YouTube.”  
  Cell phone video of the murder of Neda Aga Soltan, seen worldwide on the Internet, not only 
galvanized Iran’s Green Revolutionaries, but earned them global support. 
coverage to Western companies, for example, $20,000 a page in the Chinese version 
of  Esquire  and $4,000 a minute on state-run China Central Television (Barboza, 2012).
  For several decades, only the state’s China TV Programming Agency could buy for-
eign content, and it was limited to purchasing no more than 500 hours a year. Rules 
also restricted stations to programming no more than 25% of their time to imported 
fare.  Th e Teletubbies ( Antenna Babies  in China) is a longtime favorite. Restrictions on 
 foreign  content still exist, but there is now an emphasis on  domestic  coproduction with 

CHAPTER 15 
Global Media 
395
foreign programmers. In 2005, the central government “encouraged” the Ministry of 
Culture, the State Administration of Radio, Film and TV, and the General Administra-
tion of Press and Publications to develop procedures to open “foreign investment in 
cultural products and media in China,” as long as all programming remained “at least 
51% state-owned” (Goldkorn, 2005). Th is is why, as you saw earlier in this chapter, 
producers from across the globe have set up shop in China and why local versions of 
Western fare like  American Idol  and  Ugly Betty  now fl ourish there. 
 Basic government control over major media and the Internet remains, however. For 
example, only 50 foreign movies are permitted exhibition in China each year (20 by 
fl at-fee arrangement and another 30 through profi t-sharing with the government). In 
December 1997, anticipating the explosive growth of the Internet (China today, home 
to 50 million blogs and with more than 485 million users, has the world’s largest and 
fastest-growing online population), the Party began enforcing criminal sanctions 
against those who would use the Net to “split the country,” “injure the reputation of 
state organs,” “defame government agencies,” “promote feudal superstitions,” or other-
wise pose a threat to “social stability.” Internet accounts have to be registered with the 
police. Th e state has established a 24-hour Internet task force to fi nd and arrest send-
ers of “counterrevolutionary” commentary. Popular bulletin boards are shut down 
when their chat becomes a bit too free. Websites such as Human Rights Watch, the 
 New York Times , and publications about China that are independent of government 
control, such as  China News Digest , are offi  cially blocked, but not very successfully, as 
skilled Internet users can easily traverse the Web by routing themselves through distant 
servers such as DynaWeb and FreeGate or from one of the country’s nearly 200,000 
unlicensed Internet cafés (Stewart, 2010; Stone & Barboza, 2010).  
 Programming 
 Regardless of the particular concept guiding media systems in other countries, those 
systems produce and distribute content, in other words, programming. In most 
respects, radio and television programming throughout the world looks and sounds 
much like that found in the United States. Th ere are two main reasons for this situation: 
(1) Th e United States is a world leader in international distribution of broadcast fare, 
and (2) very early in the life of television, American producers fl ooded the world with 
their programming at very low prices. Foreign operators of emerging television systems 
were delighted to have access to this low-cost content, because they typically could not 
  Only 50 foreign movies a year can be exhibited 
in China.  Harry Potter made the cut in 2011.    

396 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
aff ord to produce their own high-quality domestic material. For American producers, 
however, this strategy served the dual purpose of building markets for their program-
ming and ensuring that foreign audiences would develop tastes and expectations 
similar to those in the United States, further encouraging future sales of programs 
originally produced for American audiences (Barnouw, 1990). 
 Naturally, programming varies somewhat from one country to another. Th e commer-
cial television systems of most South American and European countries are far less sen-
sitive about sex and nudity than are their counterparts in the United States. In Brazil, for 
example, despite a constitutional requirement that broadcasters respect society’s social 
and ethical values, television networks such as SBT, TV Record, and TV Globo compete 
in what critics call the  guerra da baixaria , the war of the lowest common denominator. 
Guests on variety shows wrestle with buxom models dressed only in bikinis and eat sushi 
off  other women’s naked bodies. On game shows, male contestants who give wrong 
answers can be punished by having patches of leg hair ripped out, while those who 
answer correctly are rewarded by having a nearly naked model sit in their laps. European 
commercial operations regularly air shows featuring both male and female nudity, some-
times because it is integral to the plot, sometimes simply for titillation. 
 Another diff erence between American programming and that of its global neighbors 
is how that content is utilized in diff erent places. Naturally, broadcasting systems rely-
ing on the sale of commercial time fi nd most value in programming that attracts the 
greatest number of viewers or a large number of viewers with the desired demograph-
ics. Commercial channels are just that, commercial. But many broadcast systems, 
those relying on license fees or other public support, frequently off er programming 
specifi cally designed to have educational, social, or political value. Many nations, even 
those with commercially supported systems, use a particular genre, the soap opera, for 
educational and social purposes. 
  Many countries hope their fare will ﬁ nd a 
worldwide audience, especially an American one. 
Here are two posters from Japanese ﬁ lms hoping to 
make their way to American screens. 

CHAPTER 15 
Global Media 
397
 The Debate over 
Cultural Imperialism  
 Th ere are few physical borders between countries in a globally mediated world. Govern-
ments that could once physically prohibit the introduction and distribution of unwanted 
newspapers, magazines, and books had to work harder at jamming unwanted radio and 
television broadcasts. But they could do it, until satellite came along. Governments can-
not disrupt satellite signals. Only lack of the necessary receiving technology can limit 
their reach. Now, with the Internet, a new receiving technology is cheap, easy to use, 
and available to more and more millions of people in every corner of the world . . . and 
because of the universal availability of free translation software like Google Translate, 
its content is readable to those millions of people wherever they live. As a result, diffi  cult 
questions of national sovereignty and cultural diversity are being raised anew.  
 The MacBride Report and the NWIO 
 Th e debate over these questions reached its height with the 1980 release of the MacBride 
Report by the United Nations Educational, Scientifi c, and Cultural Organization 
(UNESCO). Th e report was named after the chair of the commission set up to study the 
question of how to maintain national and cultural sovereignty in the face of rapid glo-
balization of mass media. At the time, many Th ird World and communist countries were 
concerned that international news coverage was dominated by the West, especially the 
United States, and that Western-produced content was overwhelming the media of 
developing countries, which lacked suffi  cient resources to create their own quality fare. 
Th e fear was that Western cultural values, especially those of the United States, would 
overshadow and displace those of other countries. Th ese countries saw this as a form 
of colonialization, a    cultural imperialism   —the invasion of an indigenous people’s cul-
ture by powerful foreign countries through mass media. 
 Th e MacBride Report, endorsed by UNESCO, called for the establishment of a New 
World Information Order (NWIO) characterized by several elements problematic to 
Western democracies. In arguing that individual nations should be free to control the 
news and entertainment that entered their lands, it called for monitoring of all such 
content, monitoring and licensing of foreign journalists, and requiring that prior gov-
ernment permission be obtained for direct radio, television, and satellite transmissions 
into foreign countries. Western nations rejected these rules as a direct infringement on 
the freedom of the press. 
 Western allies of the United States may have agreed that the 
restrictions of the NWIO were a threat to the free fl ow of informa-
tion, yet virtually every one had in place rules (in the form of 
quotas) that limited U.S. media content in their own countries. 
Canada, our closest cultural neighbor, required that specifi c pro-
portions of all content—print and broadcast—either be produced 
in Canada or refl ect Canadian cultural identity. Canadian law 
forbids foreign (read American) ownership in its commercial 
broadcasting channels. Th e French made illegal the printing of 
certain U.S. words, including “hamburger” and “cartoon” (France 
maintains an offi  cial offi  ce to prosecute those who would 
“debase” its language, the Académie Française in our opening 
vignette). Th e European Union’s Television Without Frontiers 
Directive requires member countries’ broadcasters to dedicate a 
majority of their airtime to European-produced programming 
and to commission at least 10% of all their shows from local, 
independent producers. South Korean law mandates that movie 
houses show native fi lms at least 146 days out of each year. In 
October 2005, UNESCO approved the  Convention on the Protec-
tion and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions  by a 
  When introducing its Mcltaly burger, 
McDonald’s proclaimed that it “spoke Italian.” But 
most Italians deemed their government’s 
endorsement of the new line of fast foods a 
“monstrous act of national betrayal.” 

398 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
vote of 148 to 2. Th e two dissenters were the United States 
and Israel (UNESCO, 2005). Th e convention permits coun-
tries to treat “cultural products” such as movies, books, 
music, and television shows diff erently than they do other, 
more durable commodities. Th at is, countries can legally 
establish quotas and subsidies to protect their local media 
industries. And while the convention’s text argued that the 
defense of every country’s cultural heritage is “an ethical 
imperative, inseparable from respect for human dignity,” it 
was clear from the debate preceding its passage that its true 
goal was protecting other countries’ “cultural heritage” spe-
cifi cally from American media (“How Th ey See Us,” 2005). 
 Th e resistance to U.S. media would not exist among our 
international friends if they did not worry about the integrity 
of their own cultures. It is folly, then, to argue that non-native 
media content will have no eff ect on local culture—as do many U.S. media content pro-
ducers. Th e question today is, How much infl uence will countries accept in exchange for 
fuller membership in the global community? In light of instant, inexpensive, and open 
computer network communication, a parallel question is, Have notions such as national 
sovereignty and cultural integrity lost their meaning? For example, ESPN is carried on 
20 networks in 21 languages to 155 million television households in 183 diff erent coun-
tries.  Th e Simpsons  is drawn in South Korea. Th e BBC broadcasts daily to a worldwide 
audience in 40 languages, as does Radio Beijing from China. CNN uses its satellites to 
transmit to a billion viewers in almost 200 countries.  Th e Simpsons Movie premiered 
simultaneously in 100 countries and in 50 languages. Its summer 2007 opening weekend 
box offi  ce in the United States was $72 million. Elsewhere, it topped $100 million. Two 
of the three largest U.S. record companies have international ownership. Hollywood’s 
Columbia Pictures is owned by Japanese Sony, and 20th Century Fox is owned by Rupert 
Murdoch’s Australian corporation. As Th omas Middelhoff , former CEO of Bertelsmann, 
a German company that controls a large proportion of the U.S. book publishing market 
and earns more money from the United States than from any other nation, including its 
homeland, explained, “We’re not foreign. We’re international. I’m an American with a 
German passport” (as quoted in McChesney, 1999, p. 104).   
 The Case for the Global Village 
 Th ere are diff ering opinions about the benefi ts of this trend away from nation-specifi c 
cultures. Global village proponents see the world community coming closer together as 
a common culture is negotiated and, not incidentally, as we become more economically 
interconnected. Th ere should be little fear that individual cultures and national identi-
ties will disappear, because the world’s great diversity will ensure that culture-specifi c, 
special-interest fare remains in demand. Modern media technology makes the delivery 
of this varied content not only possible but profi table. Not only do native-language ver-
sions of U.S. television shows like  Jeopardy  exist in virtually every western European 
country, but other “translations” are taking place. For example, hot on the heels of the 
success of the Spider-Man movies, Marvel Comics and an Indian company announced 
the birth of  Spider-Man India , in which a young Bombay lad, Pavitr Prabhakar, inherits 
powers from a sacred yogi and accessorizes his Spidey suit with a traditional dhoti while 
dealing with local problems and challenges (Bal, 2004). As a result of these cultural 
exchanges, argue proponents of globalization, “a global culture is created, piece by 
piece, but it grows more variegated and complex along the way. And even as geograph-
ically based identities blur and fade, new subcultures, based on shared tastes in music 
or literature or obscure hobbies, grow up” (Bennett, 2004, p. 62).  
 The Case against the Global Village 
 Th e global village is here, say those with a less optimistic view, and the problem is what 
it looks like.  Time  media writer James Poniewozik (2001, p. 69) calls it “the new cold 
  The two most popular English-language 
magazines on the European continent are  Time and 
 Newsweek , both published in the Netherlands. Do 
these American-born publications pose a threat to 
European nations’ “cultural integrity,” or do they 
bring divergent peoples closer together? 

CHAPTER 15 
Global Media 
399
war—between the Hollywood/Mickey D’s axis and every 
other world culture.” When in 2010, for example, Mickey D’s 
introduced its new line of McItaly fast foods to that nation, 
it announced that “McDonald’s Speaks Italian.” Th e Italian 
government even sent its minister of agriculture to the prod-
uct launch in Rome. But “real Italians” reacted angrily, 
denouncing the government’s actions as a “monstrous act of 
national betrayal” (Fort, 2010). 
 Media critic Robert McChesney (1997) fears for world-
wide democracy. “Th e present course,” he writes, “is one 
where much of the world’s entertainment and journalism 
will be provided by a handful of enormous fi rms, with invari-
ably pro-profi t and pro-global market political positions on 
the central issues of our times. Th e implications for political 
democracy, by any standard, are troubling” (p. 23). 
 Th ere is no simple answer to the debate over protecting the integrity of local cultures. 
As we’ve just seen, there is even disagreement over the wisdom of doing so. Media-
literate people should at least be aware of the debate and its issues, and they may also 
want to consider the paradox of what Josef Joff e (2006), editor of Germany’s weekly  Die 
Zeit , calls the “soft power” of America’s exported culture. It “does not bend hearts” as 
cultural imperialism’s critics contend. Rather, “it twists minds in resentment and rage.” 
He points to data collected by the Pew Global Attitudes Project. When asked if they “like 
American music, movies, and television,” large percentages of citizens in England (62%), 
France (65%), Germany (67%), and Italy (69%) said “yes.” But when asked if “it’s good that 
American ideas and customs are spreading,” other large percentages of people in England 
(33%), France (27%), Germany (24%), and Italy (43%) said “no” (p. 15). Like most debates 
over mass communication, the simple answers aren’t always the correct answers.  
  Proponents of the global ﬂ ow of 
communication ﬁ nd value in the local adoption of 
varied cultures. In Indonesia, Sesame Street becomes 
Jalan Sesama and counts among its residents the 
book-reading orangutan Tantan. 
  The Simpsons Movie premiered simultaneously 
in 100 countries and in 50 languages. Its opening 
weekend box oﬃ  ce in the United States was 
$72 million. Elsewhere, it topped $100 million. 
 DEVELOPING MEDIA LITERACY SKILLS   
 Making the Invisible Visible: 
Comparative Analysis 
 While comparative analysis off ers us a glimpse of other countries’ media systems, it 
also helps us understand our own. Th is is because we tend to think that the charac-
teristics of our own media system are “natural,” the way it is. Th ose aspects of media 
become so familiar that we don’t see or perceive them at all. But comparative analysis, 

400 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
comparing the way our media operate to the workings of another country’s media, 
can help us identify aspects of our own system that might require a little more thought. 
Comparative analysis has the “capacity to render the invisible visible,” to draw atten-
tion to aspects of any media system, including our own, “that may be taken for granted 
and diffi  cult to detect when the focus is on only one national case” (Blumler & Gurevitch, 
1975, p. 76). 
 We’ve seen elsewhere in this text that with New Zealand, the United States is the 
only country in the world that permits advertising of prescription drugs, that America 
is alone among industrialized nations in permitting advertising in children’s television 
programming, and that as opposed to here at home, European nations require that 
Internet users opt-in before their personal data can be shared, but here are a number 
of other aspects of foreign media systems that diff er from our own: 
 • Th e Spanish government bans airing television commercials for beauty products 
and services before 10 p.m. “Broadcasters cannot carry advertisements for things 
that encourage the cult of the body and have a negative impact on self-image—such 
as slimming products, surgical procedures, and beauty treatments—which are 
based on ideas of social rejection as a result of one’s physical image or that success 
is dependent on factors such as weight or looks” (Hall, 2010a, p. 6).  
 • Th e Spanish government also bans advertising on its noncommercial channels, 
relying instead on public subsidies. Since they became  sin public , these outlets have 
seen all-time ratings highs and regularly top the commercial channels (Hopewell & 
de Pablos, 2010).  
   •  Sweden’s Supreme Court ruled that inserting commercial breaks into televised 
movies at particularly dramatic moments “violates the integrity and value of the 
fi lm” and is punishable by fi ne (Rehlin, 2010).  
 • Th e British government is considering a ban on Photoshopped models in publica-
tions aimed at people younger than 16; the French government is considering 
requiring warning labels on print ads that have been retouched; the French version 
of  Marie Claire  magazine runs 100% unretouched issues; the German magazine 
 Brigitte  no longer uses models on its covers or inside on editorial pages, relying 
instead on staff ers and “real women” from its readership (Hall, 2010a).  
   •  British law, which only began permitting product placement in television shows in 
2009, still bans it from children’s programming (Hall, 2010b).  
  These Malaysian female students are 
encouraged to “Makan” (eat) at their local Kuala 
Lumpur McDonald’s. Although critics of cultural 
imperialism see this as an intrusion of Western 
culture into the lives of these people, defenders of 
globalization of culture see the expansion of 
opportunity for both the “sending” and the 
“receiving” cultures. 

CHAPTER 15 
Global Media 
401
   •  With more than 12 million residents, São Paulo, Brazil, is the seventh most populous 
city in the world. Its Clean City Law places a total ban on outdoor business signage 
of any kind. No billboards, no logos, no posters on bus stops. None. More than 70% 
of its citizens say the law is “benefi cial” (Jeff erson, 2011). 
   •  Mexico, Bolivia, and France make free newspapers available to young readers 
(Fitzgerald, 2010).  
 • Annual government funding for noncommercial media in the United States amounts 
to $1.35 per person. In Canada it is $22.48; in Slovenia, $51.57; in the United King-
dom, $80.36; in Denmark, $101.00; and in Finland, $101.01 (Naureckas, 2009).    
 Can you explain why these diff erences might exist? Would any of these rules or 
practices seem “natural” in our American media system? Why or why not? Are there 
any that you would like to see adopted by our homegrown system? Why or why not? 
Th e hallmarks of a media-literate individual are critical thinking, analysis, and refl ec-
tion. As such, you should have ready answers to these questions. Do you?     
  As a media-literate individual you know that  media content is a text providing insight into contemporary culture , and as you’ve just 
read, comparative analysis is one way to “make visible” aspects of your own culture’s media by looking at the media of other places. 
Here are several facts about other countries’ media activities. What do they say to you about those speciﬁ c countries and their media 
systems? How do these facts compare to the same situation in the United States? What do any diﬀ erences say about our media? 
About us as a culture? Take this challenge either by oﬀ ering your responses in a brief essay or in debate with one or more classmates. 
  1. People in Serbia watch more television per day, 5 hours, 39 minutes, than people in any other country. 
  2. The proportion of Indian homes with television rose from less than one-third in 2001 to 50% today, correlating with a 
decrease in the country’s birth rate. 
  3. In Madagascar, barely one in six households has a television. 
  4. More Peruvian homes have televisions than have electricity—people use batteries to run their sets (numbers 1-4 in Global 
Media Habits, 2011). 
  5. South Korea has nearly universal broadband access, yet newspaper circulation has fallen only minimally. 
  6. European daily newspapers have the largest newspaper circulation declines in the world. 
  7. Japan’s biggest newspaper,  Yomiuri Shimbun , with 10 million daily readers, has a larger circulation than the  Wall Street 
Journal ,  New York Times ,  USA Today , and the  Los Angeles Times combined (numbers 5-7 in Global Media, 2011). 
 MEDIA LITERACY CHALLENGE 
 Do Your Own Comparative Analysis 
  Outline the development of global media. 
 For decades, international mass media took the form of 
shortwave radio broadcasts, especially in the form of 
clandestine stations, both exogenous and indigenous. 
 Other exogenous operations are pirate broadcasters 
and many countries’ external services such as the BBC 
and VOA. 

Explain the practice of comparative analysis. 
 Diff erent countries rely on diff erent media systems to 
meet their national needs. Th e study of these varying 
models is called comparative analysis. 
 Naturally, diff erent systems make varying use of 
diff erent programming as their nations’ needs 
demand. 
 Resources for Review and Discussion  
 REVIEW POINTS: TYING CONTENT TO LEARNING OUTCOMES 

402 
PART 4 
Mass-Mediated Culture in the Information Age
 KEY TERMS 
 shortwave radio, 384 
 skip, 384 
 sky waves, 384 
 clandestine stations, 384 
 indigenous stations, 384 
 exogenous stations, 384 
 pirate broadcasters, 385 
 external service, 385 
 surrogate service, 386 
 comparative analysis (studies), 389 
 Western concept, 389 
 public service remit, 391 
 D-notice, 391 
  development concept, 391  
 revolutionary concept, 391 
 authoritarian system, 392 
 cultural imperialism, 397 
 QUESTIONS FOR REVIEW 
  1.  What are clandestine broadcast stations? Diff erentiate 
between indigenous and exogenous stations.  
  2.  What are pirate broadcasters? What diff erentiates them 
from traditional clandestine operators? 
  3.  How did World War II and the Cold War shape the eff orts 
of the United States in terms of its external and surrogate 
services? 
  4.  What is comparative analysis? 
  5.  What are the main characteristics of media systems 
operating under Hachten’s Western concept? 
  6.  What are the main characteristics of media systems 
operating under Hachten’s development concept? 
  7.  What are the main characteristics of media systems oper-
ating under Hachten’s revolutionary concept?  
    8.  What are the main characteristics of media systems oper-
ating under Hachten’s authoritarianism and communism 
concepts?  
  9.  What is cultural imperialism? What two telecommunica-
tions technologies fuel current concern over its operation? 
 10.  What was the MacBride Report? Why did most Western 
nations reject it? 
For further review, go to the LearnSmart study module for 
this chapter.
 QUESTIONS FOR CRITICAL THINKING AND DISCUSSION 
  1.  Britain’s external service, the BBC, is available on short-
wave radio, the Internet, and American cable and satellite 
television. Listen to or watch the BBC. How does its con-
tent compare to the homegrown radio and television with 
which you are familiar? Th ink especially of news. How 
does its reporting diff er from that of cable networks such 
as CNN and from broadcast networks such as ABC, CBS, 
and NBC? Why do you think diff erences exist? Similarities?  
  2.  Do you have experience with another country’s media? If 
so, which one? Can you place that system’s operation 
within one of the concepts listed in this chapter? Describe 
   Identify diff erent media systems from around the world. 
  Th ere are fi ve main models or concepts: Western, develop-
ment, revolutionary, authoritarianism, and communism. 
   Describe the debate surrounding the New World Infor-
mation Order and other controversies raised by the 
globalization of media. 
  Th ere is serious debate about the free and not-so-free 
fl ow of mass communication across borders. Th e 
how that system’s content is similar to and diff erent from 
that with which you are familiar in the United States. 
Do you favor one system’s fare over another’s? Why or 
why not? 
  3.  Do you think countries, especially developing nations, 
should worry about cultural imperialism? Would you 
argue that they should use low-cost Western fare to help 
their developing system get “off  the ground,” or do you 
agree with critics that this approach unduly infl uences 
their system’s ultimate content? 
confl ict is between those who want the free fl ow of 
information and those who worry about the erosion of 
local culture. 
  Much of this controversy, however, has more to do with 
protecting countries’ media systems from American 
infl uence than it does with protecting all countries’ 
cultural integrity. 

G-1
  Glossary 
 absolutist position   regarding the First Amendment, the idea 
that no law means no law 
 access journalism   reporters acting deferentially toward news 
sources in order to ensure continued access 
 accountability metrics  agreement between ad agency and 
client on how the eff ectiveness of a specifi c ad or campaign will 
be judged 
 Acta Diurna   written on a tablet, account of the deliberations of 
the Roman senate; an early “newspaper” 
 actual malice   the standard for libel in coverage of public fi gures 
consisting of “knowledge of its falsity” or “reckless disregard” for 
whether or not it is true 
 addressable technology  technology permitting the trans-
mission of very specifi c content to equally specifi c audience 
members 
 ad hoc balancing of interests   in individual First Amendment 
cases, several factors should be weighed in determining how 
much freedom the press is granted 
 ad-pull policy   demand by an advertiser for an advance review 
of a magazine’s content, with the threat of pulled advertising if 
dissatisfi ed with that content 
 administrative research   studies of the immediate, practical 
infl uence of mass communication 
 advergames   video games produced expressly to serve as brand 
commercials 
 advertorials   ads in magazines and newspapers that take on the 
appearance of genuine editorial content 
 advocacy games   primarily online games supporting an idea 
rather than a product 
 affi  liate  a broadcasting station that aligns itself with a network 
 agenda setting   the theory that media may not tell us what to 
think but do tell us what to think about 
 aggressive cues model   of media violence; media portrayals 
can indicate that certain classes of people are acceptable targets 
for real-world aggression 
 AIDA approach   the idea that to persuade consumers advertis-
ing must attract  attention , create  interest , stimulate  desire , and 
promote  action 
 à la carte pricing   charging cable subscribers by the channel, 
not for tiers 
 Alien and Sedition Acts  series of four laws passed by 1798 U.S. 
Congress making illegal the writing, publishing, or printing of 
“any false scandalous and malicious writing” about the president, 
the Congress, or the U.S. government 
 aliteracy   possessing the ability to read but being unwilling to 
do so 
 all-channel legislation   1962 law requiring all television sets 
imported into or manufactured in the United States to be 
equipped with both VHF and UHF receivers 
 alternative press   typically weekly, free papers emphasizing 
events listings, local arts advertising, and “eccentric” personal 
classifi ed ads 
 ambient advertising   advertising content appearing in nontra-
ditional venues 
 app   abbreviation for application, a piece of software typically 
on a cell phone or other electronic device 
 applied ethics   the application of metaethics and normative 
ethics to very specifi c situations 
 appointment consumption   audiences consume content at a 
time predetermined by the producer and distributor 
 ascertainment   requires broadcasters to ascertain or actively and 
affi  rmatively determine the nature of their audiences’ interest, 
convenience, and necessity; no longer enforced 
 astroturf  fake grassroots organization 
 attitude change theory   theory that explains how people’s atti-
tudes are formed, shaped, and changed and how those attitudes 
infl uence behavior 
 audience fragmentation  audiences for specifi c media content 
becoming smaller and increasingly homogeneous 
 audion tube   vacuum tube developed by DeForest that became 
the basic invention for all radio and television 
 augmented reality (AR)   permits users to point phones at 
things in the real world and be instantly linked to websites con-
taining information about those things superimposed over the 
screen image 
 authoritarian/communism system   a national media system 
characterized by authoritarian control 
 awareness tests   ad research technique that measures the cu-
mulative eff ect of a campaign in terms of a product’s “consumer 
consciousness” 
 bandwidth   a communication channel’s information-carrying 
capacity 
 banners   online advertising messages akin to billboards 
 basic cable   television channels provided automatically by 
virtue of subscription to a cable provider 
 billings   total sale of broadcast airtime 
 Bill of Rights  the fi rst 10 amendments to the U.S. Constitution 
 binary code  information transformed into a series of digits 1 
and 0 for storage and manipulation in computers 
 bitcasters   “radio stations” that can be accessed only over the 
World Wide Web 

G-2 
Glossary
 cloud-music services   sites allowing users to store all their digi-
tal music online and stream it to any computer or digital device 
anywhere 
 coaxial cable   copper-clad aluminum wire encased in plastic 
foam insulation, covered by an aluminum outer conductor, and 
then sheathed in plastic 
 collateral materials   printing, research, and photographs that 
PR fi rms handle for clients, charging as much as 17.65% for this 
service 
 commissions   in advertising, placement of advertising in media 
is compensated, at typically 15% of the cost of the time or space, 
through commissions 
 common carrier   a telecommunications company required to 
carry others’ messages with no power to restrict them—for 
example, a phone company 
 communication  the process of creating shared meaning 
 community antenna television (CATV)  outmoded name for 
early cable television 
 commuter papers   free dailies designed for younger commuters 
 comparative analysis   the study of diff erent countries’ mass 
media systems 
 comparative studies  see  comparative analysis 
 complementary copy   newspaper and magazine content that 
reinforces the advertiser’s message, or at least does not negate it 
 concentration of ownership  ownership of diff erent and nu-
merous media companies concentrated in fewer and fewer 
hands 
 concept fi lms  movies that can be described in one line 
 confi dentiality   the ability of media professionals to keep secret 
the names of people who provide them with information 
 conglomeration   the increase in the ownership of media outlets 
by nonmedia companies 
 consumer culture   a culture in which personal worth and iden-
tity reside not in the people themselves but in the products with 
which they surround themselves 
 consumer juries   ad research technique in which people con-
sidered representative of a target market review a number of 
approaches or variations of a campaign or ad 
 consumption-on-demand   the ability to access any content, 
anytime, anywhere 
 controlled circulation   a magazine provided at no cost to read-
ers who meet some specifi c set of advertiser-attractive criteria 
 conventions   in media content, certain distinctive, standard-
ized style elements of individual genres 
 convergence   the erosion of traditional distinctions among media 
 cookie   an identifying code added to a computer’s hard drive by 
a visited website 
 copyright   identifying and granting ownership of a given piece 
of expression to protect the creators’ fi nancial interest in it 
 copy testing  measuring the eff ectiveness of advertising mes-
sages by showing them to consumers; used for all forms of 
advertising 
 corantos   one-page news sheets on specifi c events, printed in 
English but published in Holland and imported into England by 
British booksellers; an early “newspaper” 
 cord-cutting   viewers leaving cable and DBS altogether and 
relying on Internet-only television  
 BitTorrent  fi le-sharing software that allows users to create 
“swarms” of data as they simultaneously download and upload 
“bits” of a given piece of content 
 blinks  one-second radio commercials 
 block booking   the practice of requiring exhibitors to rent 
groups of movies (often inferior) to secure a better one 
 blockbuster mentality  fi lmmaking characterized by reduced 
risk taking and more formulaic movies; business concerns are 
said to dominate artistic considerations 
 blogs  regularly updated online journals 
    B-movie      the second, typically less expensive, movie in a double 
feature 
 bounded cultures (co-cultures)  groups with specifi c but not 
dominant cultures 
 brand entertainment   when commercials are part of and es-
sential to a piece of media content 
 branding fi lms  sponsor fi nancing of movies to advance a 
manufacturer’s product 
 brand magazine   a consumer magazine published by a retail 
business for readers having demographic characteristics similar 
to those consumers with whom it typically does business 
 British cultural theory   theory of elites’ domination over cul-
ture and its infl uence on bounded cultures 
 broadband   a channel with broad information-carrying capacity 
 broadsides  (sometimes  broadsheets ) early colonial newspa-
pers imported from England, single-sheet announcements or 
accounts of events 
 browsers   software programs loaded on personal computers 
and used to download and view Web fi les 
 bundling   delivering television, VOD, audio, high-speed Inter-
net access, long-distance and local phone service, multiple 
phone lines, and fax via cable 
 C3 rating   measure of viewing of commercials that appear in a 
specifi c program within 3 days of its premiere telecast 
 calotype   early system of photography using translucent paper 
from which multiple prints could be made 
 casual games   classic games most often played in spurts and 
accommodated by small-screen devices 
 catalogue albums   in record retailing, albums more than three 
years old 
 catharsis   theory that watching mediated violence reduces 
people’s inclination to behave aggressively 
 cause marketing  PR in support of social issues and causes 
 cease-and-desist order   demand made by a regulatory agency 
that a given illegal practice be stopped 
 cinématographe   Lumière brothers’ device that both photo-
graphed and projected action 
 circulation  the number of issues of a magazine or newspaper 
that are sold 
 clandestine stations   illegal or unlicensed broadcast operations 
frequently operated by revolutionary groups or intelligence 
agencies for political purposes 
 clear time  when local affi  liates carry a network’s program 
 click stream  the series of choices made by a user on the Web 
 cloud computing   storage of all computer data, including per-
sonal information and system-operating software, on distant 
computers 

Glossary 
G-3
 deregulation   relaxation of ownership and other rules for radio 
and television 
 desensitization   the idea that viewers become more accepting 
of real-world violence because of its constant presence in televi-
sion fare 
 development concept   of media systems; government and 
media work in partnership to ensure that media assist in the 
planned, benefi cial development of the country 
 digital audio radio service (DARS)   direct home or automobile 
delivery of audio by satellite 
 digital cable television   delivery of digital video images and 
other information to subscribers’ homes 
 digital computer   a computer that processes data reduced to a 
binary code 
 digital divide   the lack of technological access among people of 
color, people who are poor or disabled, and those in rural com-
munities 
 digital natives   people who have never known a world without 
the Internet 
 digital recording   recording based on conversion of sound into 
1s and 0s logged in millisecond intervals in a computerized 
translation process 
 digital rights management (DRM)   protection of digitally dis-
tributed intellectual property 
 digital video disc (DVD)   digital recording and playback player 
and disc, fastest-growing consumer electronic product in history 
 digital video recorder (DVR)   video recording device attached to 
a television, which gives viewers signifi cant control over content 
 dime novels   inexpensive late 19th- and early 20th-century 
books that concentrated on frontier and adventure stories; 
sometimes called  pulp novels 
 disinhibitory eff ects   in social cognitive theory, seeing a model 
rewarded for prohibited or threatening behavior increases the 
likelihood that the observer will perform that behavior 
 dissonance theory   argues that people, when confronted by new 
information, experience a kind of mental discomfort, a disso-
nance; as a result, they consciously and subconsciously work to 
limit or reduce that discomfort through the selective processes 
 diurnals   daily accounts of local news printed in 1620s England; 
forerunners of our daily newspaper 
 DMX (Digital Music Express)  home delivery of audio by cable 
 D-notice   in Great Britain, an offi  cially issued notice of prior 
restraint 
 domain name   on the World Wide Web, an identifying name, 
rather than a site’s formal URL, that gives some indication of the 
nature of a site’s content or owner 
 dominant culture (mainstream culture)  the culture that 
seems to hold sway with the large majority of people; that which 
is normative 
 double feature  two fi lms on the same bill 
 duopoly   single ownership and management of multiple radio 
stations in one market 
 early window   the idea that media give children a window on 
the world before they have the critical and intellectual ability to 
judge what they see 
 e-book   a book that is downloaded in electronic form from the 
Internet to a computer or handheld device 
 corporate independent studio   specialty or niche division of a 
major studio designed to produce more sophisticated—but less 
costly—movies 
 corrective advertising   a new set of ads required by a regulatory 
body and produced by the off ender that correct the original 
misleading eff ort 
 cost of entry   amount of money necessary to begin media con-
tent production 
 cost per thousand (CPM)   in advertising, the cost of reaching 
1,000 audience members, computed by the cost of an ad’s place-
ment divided by the number of thousands of consumers it reaches 
 cottage industry   an industry characterized by small operations 
closely identifi ed with their personnel 
 cover  rerecording of one artist’s music by another 
 critical cultural theory   idea that media operate primarily to 
justify and support the status quo at the expense of ordinary 
people 
 critical research   studies of media’s contribution to the larger 
issues of what kind of nation we are building, what kind of peo-
ple we are becoming 
 crowdfunded journalism  journalists pitch stories to readers 
who can contribute small amounts of money to those they want 
to see completed 
 crowdsource  outsourcing tasks to an online network of people, 
the crowd, for cooperative problem-solving and production 
 cultivation analysis   idea that television “cultivates” or con-
structs a reality of the world that, although possibly inaccurate, 
becomes the accepted reality simply because we as a culture 
believe it to be the reality 
 cultural defi nition of communication  communication is a 
symbolic process whereby reality is produced, maintained, re-
paired, and transformed; from James Carey 
 cultural imperialism  the invasion of an indigenous people’s 
culture, through mass media, by outside, powerful countries 
 cultural theory   the idea that meaning and therefore eff ects 
are negotiated by media and audiences as they interact in the 
culture 
 culture   the world made meaningful; socially constructed and 
maintained through communication, it limits as well as liberates 
us, diff erentiates as well as unites us, defi nes our realities and 
thereby shapes the ways we think, feel, and act 
 custom publishing   publications specifi cally designed for 
an individual company seeking to reach a narrowly defi ned 
audience 
 daguerreotype   process of recording images on polished metal 
plates, usually copper, covered with a thin layer of silver iodide 
emulsion 
 dataveillance   the massive electronic collection and distillation 
of consumer data 
 day-and-date release   simultaneously releasing a movie to the 
public in some combination of theater, cable, DVD, and download 
 decoding  interpreting sign/symbol systems 
 democracy  government by the people 
 demographic segmentation   advertisers’ appeal to audiences 
composed of varying personal and social characteristics such as 
race, gender, and economic level 
 dependency theory   idea that media’s power is a function of au-
dience members’ dependency on the media and their content 

G-4 
Glossary
 fi xed-fee arrangement   the arrangement whereby a PR fi rm 
performs a specifi c set of services for a client for a specifi c and 
prearranged fee 
 fl ack   a derogatory name sometimes applied to public relations 
professionals 
 fl ash mobs  (sometimes  smart mobs ) large, geographically dis-
persed groups connected only by communications technology, 
quickly drawn together to perform collective action 
 fl og   fake blog; typically sponsored by a company to anony-
mously boost itself or attack a competitor 
 focus groups   small groups of people who are interviewed, typi-
cally to provide advertising or public relations professionals 
with detailed information 
 forced exposure   ad research technique used primarily for tele-
vision commercials, requiring advertisers to bring consumers to 
a theater or other facility where they see a television program, 
complete with the new ads 
 format   a radio station’s particular sound or programming con-
tent 
 fraction of selection   graphic description of how individuals 
make media and content choices based on expectation of 
reward and eff ort required 
   franchise fi lms   movies produced with full intention of produc-
ing several sequels 
 Frankfurt School   media theory, centered in neo-Marxism, that 
valued serious art, viewing its consumption as a means to ele-
vate all people toward a better life; typical media fare was seen as 
pacifying ordinary people while repressing them 
 freemium games   video games in which advertising serves as 
in-game virtual currency 
 gamifi cation   use of video game skills and conventions to solve 
real-world problems 
 genre   a form of media content with a standardized, distinctive 
style and conventions 
 global village   a McLuhan concept; new communication tech-
nologies permit people to become increasingly involved in one 
another’s lives 
 globalization   ownership of media companies by multinational 
corporations 
 grand theory   a theory designed to describe and explain all as-
pects of a given phenomenon 
 green light process  the process of deciding to make a movie 
 greenwashing   public relations practice of countering the pub-
lic relations eff orts aimed at clients by environmentalists 
 hard news   news stories that help readers make intelligent deci-
sions and keep up with important issues 
 home page   entryway into a website, containing information 
and hyperlinks to other material 
 hosts   computers linking individual personal computer users to 
the Internet 
 hypercommercialism   increasing the amount of advertising 
and mixing commercial and noncommercial media content 
 hyperlink   connection, embedded in Internet or website, allow-
ing instant access to other material in that site as well as to mate-
rial in other sites 
 hypodermic needle theory   idea that media are a dangerous 
drug that can directly enter a person’s system 
 e-commerce   buying products and services online  
 economies of scale   concept that relative cost declines as the 
size of the endeavor grows 
 editorial policy   newspapers’ and magazines’ positions on cer-
tain specifi c issues 
 e-mail (electronic mail)   function of Internet allowing commu-
nication via computer with anyone else online, anyplace in the 
world, with no long-distance fees 
 embedding   war correspondents exchanging control of their 
output for access to the front 
 encoding   transforming ideas into an understandable sign/
symbol system 
 encryption   electronic coding or masking of information on 
the Web that can be deciphered only by a recipient with the 
decrypting key 
 engagement    psychological and behavioral measure of ad 
eff ectiveness designed to replace CPM 
 environmental incentives   in social learning theory, the notion 
that real-world incentives can lead observers to ignore negative 
vicarious reinforcement 
 e-publishing    the publication and distribution of books initially 
or exclusively online 
 e-reader   digital book having the appearance of a traditional 
book but with content that is digitally stored and accessed 
 ethics  rules of behavior or moral principles that guide actions 
in given situations 
 ethnic press   papers, often in a foreign language, aimed at 
minority, immigrant, and non-English readers 
 exergame   video game designed to encourage benefi cial physi-
cal activity 
 exogenous stations   clandestine broadcast operations func-
tioning from outside the regions to which they transmit 
 expanded basic cable   in cable television, a second, somewhat 
more expensive level of subscription 
 external service   in international broadcasting, a service designed 
by one country to counter enemy propaganda and disseminate 
information about itself 
 factory studios  the fi rst fi lm production companies 
 Fairness Doctrine   requires broadcasters to cover issues of 
public importance and to be fair in that coverage; abolished in 
1987 
 fair use   in copyright law, instances in which material may be 
used without permission or payment 
 feature syndicates   clearinghouses for the work of columnists, 
cartoonists, and other creative individuals, providing their work 
to newspapers and other media outlets 
 feedback   the response to a given communication 
 fi ber optics  signals carried by light beams over glass fi bers 
 First Amendment   Congress shall make no law respecting an 
establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise 
thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or 
the right of the people peacefully to assemble, and to petition 
the Government for a redress of grievances 
 fi rst-person perspective game   video game in which all action 
is through the eyes of the player 
 fi rst-run syndication  original programming produced specifi -
cally for the syndicated television market 

Glossary 
G-5
 knowledge gap  growing diff erences in knowledge, civic activ-
ity, and literacy between better-informed and less-informed 
Americans 
 LAN (local area network)   network connecting two or more 
computers, usually within the same building 
 LCD (liquid crystal display)   display surface in which electric 
currents of varying voltage are passed through liquid crystal, 
altering the passage of light through that crystal 
 lead generation   using Internet-created databases to collect 
names, addresses, e-mail addresses, and other information 
about likely clients or customers 
 LED (light-emitting diode)  light-emitting semiconductor 
manipulated under a display screen 
 libel   the false and malicious publication of material that dam-
ages a person’s reputation (typically applied to print media) 
 libertarianism   philosophy of the press that asserts that good 
and rational people can tell right from wrong if presented with 
full and free access to information; therefore, censorship is 
unnecessary 
 limited eff ects theory  media’s infl uence is limited by 
people’s individual diff erences, social categories, and personal 
relationships 
 linotype   technology that allowed the mechanical rather than 
manual setting of print type 
 liquid barretter  fi rst audio device permitting the reception of 
wireless voices; developed by Fessenden 
 literacy   the ability to eff ectively and effi  ciently comprehend 
and utilize a given form of communication 
 lobbying   in public relations, directly interacting with elected 
offi  cials or government regulators and agents 
 Low Power FM (LPFM)   10- to 100-watt nonprofi t community 
radio stations with a reach of only a few miles 
 macro-level eff ects      media’s widescale social and cultural 
impact 
 magalogue   a designer catalogue produced to look like a con-
sumer magazine 
 magic bullet theory   the idea from mass society theory that 
media are a powerful “killing force” that directly penetrates a 
person’s system 
 mainframe computer   a large central computer to which users 
are connected by terminals 
 mainstreaming   in cultivation analysis, television’s ability to 
move people toward a common understanding of how things are 
 mass communication   the process of creating shared meaning 
between the mass media and their audiences 
 mass communication theories   explanations and predictions 
of social phenomena relating mass communication to various 
aspects of our personal and cultural lives or social systems 
 massively multiplayer online role-playing game (MMO)  
interactive online game where characters and actions are con-
trolled by other players, not the computer; also called  virtual 
worlds games 
 mass medium  (pl.  mass media ) a medium that carries mes-
sages to a large number of people 
 mass society theory   the idea that media are corrupting infl u-
ences; they undermine the social order, and “average” people 
are defenseless against their infl uence 
 iconoscope tube  fi rst practical television camera tube, devel-
oped in 1923 
 identifi cation  in social cognitive theory, a special form of imi-
tation by which observers do not exactly copy what they have 
seen but make a more generalized but related response 
 imitation  in social cognitive theory, the direct replication of an 
observed behavior 
 importation of distant signals   delivery of distant television sig-
nals by cable television for the purpose of improving reception 
 in-band-on-channel (IBOC)   digital radio technology that uses 
digital compression to “shrink” digital and analog signals, allow-
ing both to occupy the same frequency 
 indecency   in broadcasting, language or material that depicts 
sexual or excretory activities in a way off ensive to contemporary 
community standards 
 indigenous stations  clandestine broadcast operations func-
tioning from inside the regions to which they transmit 
 inferential feedback   in the mass communication process, feed-
back is typically indirect rather than direct; that is, it is inferential 
 information gap   the widening disparity in amounts and types 
of information available to information haves and have-nots 
 information service   legal designation allowing a telecommu-
nication service provider to maintain control over what passes 
over its lines 
 inhibitory eff ects      in social cognitive theory, seeing a model 
punished for a behavior reduces the likelihood that the observer 
will perform that behavior 
 instant books   books published very soon after some well-
publicized public event 
 instant messaging (IM)   real-time e-mail, allowing two or more 
people to communicate instantaneously and in immediate 
response to one another 
 integrated audience reach   total numbers of the print edition 
of a newspaper plus unduplicated Web readers 
 integrated marketing communications (IMC)  combining 
public relations, marketing, advertising, and promotion into a 
seamless communication campaign 
 Internet  a global network of interconnected computers that 
communicate freely and share and exchange information 
 Internet service provider  see  ISP 
 interpersonal communication  communication between two 
or a few people 
 interruptive ads   magazine ad copy that weaves through or 
around editorial copy 
 island  in children’s television commercials, the product is 
shown simply, in actual size against a neutral background 
 ISP (Internet service provider)  company that off ers Internet 
connections at monthly rates depending on the kind and 
amount of access needed 
 joint operating agreement (JOA)   permits a failing paper to 
merge most aspects of its business with a successful local com-
petitor, as long as editorial and reporting operations remain 
separate 
 kinescope   improved picture tube developed by Zworykin for 
RCA 
 kinetograph  William Dickson’s early motion picture camera 
 kinetoscope   peep show devices for the exhibition of kinetographs 

G-6 
Glossary
 narrowcasting  aiming broadcast programming at smaller, 
more demographically homogeneous audiences 
 neo-Marxist theory   the theory that people are oppressed by 
those who control the culture, the superstructure, as opposed to 
the base 
 network   centralized production, distribution, decision-making 
organization that links affi  liates for the purpose of delivering 
their viewers to advertisers 
 network neutrality   granting equal carriage over phone and 
cable lines to all websites 
 neuromarketing research   biometric measures (brain waves, 
facial expressions, eye-tracking, sweating, and heart rate moni-
toring) used in advertising research  
 newsbook  early weekly British publication that carried ads 
 newspaper chains   businesses that own two or more newspapers 
 news production research   the study of how economic and 
other infl uences on the way news is produced distort and bias 
news coverage toward those in power 
 news staging   re-creation on television news of some event that 
is believed to have happened or which could have happened 
 NFC (near-fi eld communication) chip     tag embedded in a mag-
azine page that connects readers to advertisers’ digital content  
 niche marketing   aiming media content or consumer products 
at smaller, more demographically homogeneous audiences 
 nickelodeons  the fi rst movie houses; admission was one nickel 
 Nipkow disc  fi rst workable device for generating electrical sig-
nals suitable for the transmission of a scene 
 noise  anything that interferes with successful communication 
 nonlinear TV   watching television on our own schedules, not 
the programmer’s 
 normative ethics   generalized theories, rules, and principles of 
ethical or moral behavior 
 normative theory   an idea that explains how media should ide-
ally operate in a given system of social values 
 obscenity   unprotected expression determined by (1) whether 
the average person, applying contemporary community stan-
dards, would fi nd that the work, taken as a whole, appeals to the 
prurient interest, (2) whether the work depicts or describes, in a 
patently off ensive way, sexual conduct specifi cally defi ned by 
the applicable state law, and (3) whether the work, taken as a 
whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientifi c value 
 observational learning   in social cognitive theory, observers 
can acquire (learn) new behaviors simply by seeing those be-
haviors performed 
 off -network   broadcast industry term for syndicated content 
that originally aired on a network 
 off set lithography  late 19th-century advance making possible 
printing from photographic plates rather than from metal casts 
 oligopoly   a media system whose operation is dominated by a 
few large companies 
 ombudsman   internal arbiter of performance for media organi-
zations 
 O&O   a broadcasting station that is owned and operated by a 
network 
 open source software  freely downloaded software 
 operating policy   spells out standards for everyday operations 
for newspapers and magazines 
 master antenna television (MATV)  connecting multiple sets 
in a single location or building to a single, master antenna 
 meaning-making perspective   idea that active audience mem-
bers use media content to create meaning, and meaningful 
experiences, for themselves 
 media councils   panels of people from both the media and the 
public who investigate complaints against the media and pub-
lish their fi ndings 
 media literacy   the ability to eff ectively and effi  ciently compre-
hend and utilize mass communication 
 media multitasking  simultaneously consuming many diff erent 
kinds of media 
 medium (pl.  media )  vehicle by which messages are conveyed 
 metaethics   examination of a culture’s understanding of its fun-
damental values 
 metering   Internet use charged “by the byte”; heavier users pay 
more, more-modest users pay less 
 microcomputer   a very small computer that uses a micropro-
cessor to handle information (also called a  personal computer 
or  PC ) 
 microcinema  fi lmmaking using digital video cameras and 
desktop digital editing machines 
 micro-level eff ects  eff ects of media on individuals 
 microwave relay   audio and video transmitting system in which 
super-high-frequency signals are sent from land-based point to 
land-based point 
 middle-range theories   ideas that explain or predict only lim-
ited aspects of the mass communication process 
 minicomputer   a relatively large central computer to which us-
ers are connected by terminals; not as large as a mainframe 
computer 
    modeling      in social cognitive theory, learning through imitation 
and identifi cation 
 modem   a device that translates digital computer information into 
an analog form so it can be transmitted through telephone lines 
 montage   tying together two separate but related shots in such a 
way that they take on a new, unifi ed meaning 
 moral agent    in an ethical dilemma, the person making the 
decision 
 MP3  fi le compression software that permits streaming of digital 
audio and video data 
 muckraking   a form of crusading journalism that primarily 
used magazines to agitate for change 
 MUD (multiuser dimension)  online text-based interactive 
game 
 multimedia   advanced sound and image capabilities for micro-
computers 
 multiple points of access   ability of a media-literate consumer 
to access or approach media content from a variety of personally 
satisfying directions 
 multiple system operator (MSO)   a company owning several 
diff erent cable television operations 
 murketing   making advertising so pervasive consumers are 
ignorant of its presence 
 music licensing company   an organization that collects fees 
based on recorded music users’ gross receipts and distributes 
the money to songwriters and artists 

Glossary 
G-7
 prior restraint   power of the government to  prevent publication 
or broadcast of expression 
 production values   media content’s internal language and 
grammar; its style and quality 
 product placement   the integration, for a fee, of specifi c branded 
products into media content 
 product positioning   the practice in advertising of assigning 
meaning to a product based on who buys the product rather 
than on the product itself 
 prosumer  a proactive consumer 
 protocols   common communication rules and languages for 
computers linked to the Internet 
 pseudo-event   event that has no real informational or issue 
meaning; it exists merely to attract media attention 
 psychographic segmentation   advertisers’ appeal to consumer 
groups of varying lifestyles, attitudes, values, and behavior patterns 
 P2P   peer-to-peer software that permits direct Internet-based 
communication or collaboration between two or more personal 
computers while bypassing centralized servers 
 public   in PR, any group of people with a stake in an organiza-
tion, issue, or idea 
 public domain   in copyright law, the use of material without 
permission once the copyright expires 
 public service remit   limits on advertising and other public 
service requirements imposed on Britain’s commercial broad-
casters in exchange for the right to broadcast 
 puff ery   the little lie or exaggeration that makes advertising 
more entertaining than it might otherwise be 
 pulp novels  see  dime novels 
 put   agreement between a television producer and network that 
guarantees that the network will order at least a pilot or pay a 
penalty 
 QR (quick response) code   small, black-and-white squares that 
appear on many media surfaces that direct mobile device users 
to a specifi c website 
 radio frequency identifi cation (RFID) chip  grain-of-sand–
sized microchip and antenna embedded in consumer products 
that transmit a radio signal 
 rating   percentage of a market’s total population that is reached 
by a piece of broadcast programming 
 recall testing   ad research technique in which consumers are 
asked to identify which ads are most easily remembered 
 recent catalogue albums   in record retailing, albums out for 
15 months to three years 
 recognition tests   ad research technique in which people who 
have seen a given publication are asked whether they remember 
seeing a given ad 
 reinforcement theory   Joseph Klapper’s idea that if media have 
any impact at all, it is in the direction of reinforcement 
 remainders   unsold copies of books returned to the publisher 
by bookstores to be sold at great discount 
 retainer   in advertising, an agreed-upon amount of money a 
client pays an ad agency for a specifi c series of services 
 retransmission fee   money a local cable operation pays to a 
broadcast station to carry its signal  
 return on investment (ROI)  an accountability-based measure 
of advertising success 
 operating system   the software that tells the computer how to 
work 
 opinion followers   people who receive opinion leaders’ inter-
pretations of media content; from  two-step fl ow theory 
 opinion leaders  people who initially consume media content, 
interpret it in light of their own values and beliefs, and then pass 
it on to opinion followers; from  two-step fl ow theory 
 opt-in/opt-out   consumers giving permission to companies 
to sell personal data, or consumers requesting that companies 
do not sell personal data 
    parity products     products generally perceived as alike by con-
sumers no matter who makes them 
 pass-along readership   measurement of publication readers 
who neither subscribe nor buy single copies but who borrow a 
copy or read one in a doctor’s offi  ce or library 
 payola   payment made by recording companies to DJs to air 
their records 
 paywall  making online content available only to those visitors 
willing to pay 
 penny press  newspapers in the 1830s selling for one penny 
 performance-based advertising   Web advertising where the 
site is paid only when the consumer takes some specifi c action 
 permission marketing  advertising that the consumer actively 
accepts 
 persistence of vision   images our eyes gather are retained by 
our brains for about 1/24 of a second, producing the appearance 
of constant motion 
 personal computer (PC)  see  microcomputer 
 personal peoplemeter   ratings technology; a special remote con-
trol with personalized buttons for each viewer in the household 
 pilot  a sample episode of a proposed television program 
 piracy  the illegal recording and sale of copyrighted material 
 pirate broadcasters   unlicensed or otherwise illegally operated 
broadcast stations 
 pixel   the smallest picture element in an electronic imaging 
system such as a television or computer screen 
 platform   the means of delivering a specifi c piece of media content 
 platform agnostic   having no preference in where media con-
tent is accessed 
 platform agnostic publishing   digital and hardcopy books 
available for any and all reading devices 
 platform rollout   opening a movie on only a few screens in the 
hope that favorable reviews and word-of-mouth publicity will 
boost interest 
 playlist   predetermined sequence of selected records to be 
played by a disc jockey 
 podcasting   recording and downloading of audio fi les stored on 
servers 
 policy book   delineates standards of operation for local broad-
casters 
 pornography   expression calculated solely to supply sexual 
excitement 
 premium cable   cable television channels off ered to viewers for 
a fee above the cost of their basic subscription 
 print on demand (POD)   publishing method whereby publish-
ers store books digitally for instant printing, binding, and deliv-
ery once ordered 

G-8 
Glossary
 social networking sites   Websites that function as online com-
munities of users 
 social responsibility theory   (or  model ) normative theory or 
model asserting that media must remain free of government 
control but, in exchange, must serve the public 
 soft news   sensational stories that do not serve the democratic 
function of journalism 
 spam  unsolicited commercial e-mail 
 spectrum scarcity   broadcast spectrum space is limited, so not 
everyone who wants to broadcast can; those who are granted 
licenses must accept regulation 
 spin  in PR, outright lying to hide what really happened 
 split runs   special versions of a given issue of a magazine in 
which editorial content and ads vary according to some specifi c 
demographic or regional grouping 
 sponsorships   in Web advertising, pages “brought to you by,” 
typically including ad placements, advertorials, and other co-
branded sections 
 spot commercial sales   in broadcasting, selling individual ad-
vertising spots on a given program to a wide variety of advertisers 
 spyware   identifying code placed on a computer by a website 
without permission or notifi cation 
 Standards and Practices Department  the internal content 
review operation of a television network 
 stereotyping   application of a standardized image or concep-
tion applied to members of certain groups, usually based on 
limited information 
 sticky   an attribute of a website; indicates its ability to hold the 
attention of a user 
 stimulation model  of media violence; viewing mediated vio-
lence can increase the likelihood of subsequent aggressive 
behavior 
 streaming   the simultaneous downloading and accessing (play-
ing) of digital audio or video data 
 stripping   broadcasting a syndicated television show at the 
same time fi ve nights a week 
 subscription TV   early experiments with over-the-air pay 
television 
 subsidiary rights  the sale of a book, its contents, even its char-
acters to outside interests, such as fi lmmakers 
 surrogate service   in international broadcasting, an operation 
established by one country to substitute for another’s own 
domestic service 
 sweeps periods   special television ratings times in February, 
May, July, and November in which diaries are distributed to 
thousands of sample households in selected markets 
 symbolic interaction   the idea that people give meaning to 
symbols and then those symbols control people’s behavior in 
their presence 
 symbols   in social construction of reality, things that have 
objective meaning 
 syndication   sale of radio or television content to stations on a 
market-by-market basis 
 synergy   the use by media conglomerates of as many channels 
of delivery as possible for similar content 
 targeting   aiming media content or consumer products at 
smaller, more specifi c audiences 
 reverse compensation   fee paid by a local broadcast station for 
the right to be a network’s affi  liate  
 revolutionary concept   normative theory describing a system 
where media are used in the service of revolution 
 rich media  sophisticated, interactive Web advertising, usually 
employing sound and video 
 ritual perspective   the view of media as central to the represen-
tation of shared beliefs and culture 
 RSS (really simple syndication)   aggregators allowing Web us-
ers to create their own content assembled from the Internet’s 
limitless supply of material 
 satellite-delivered media tour   spokespeople can be simulta-
neously interviewed by a worldwide audience hooked to the in-
terviewee by telephone 
 search engines   Web- or Net-search software providing on-
screen menus 
 search marketing   advertising sold next to or in search results 
produced by users’ keyword searches 
 secondary service   a radio station’s second, or nonprimary, format 
 selective attention  see  selective exposure 
 selective exposure   the idea that people expose themselves 
to or attend to those messages that are consistent with their pre-
existing attitudes and beliefs 
 selective perception   the idea that people interpret messages in 
a manner consistent with their preexisting attitudes and beliefs 
 selective processes   people expose themselves to, remember 
best and longest, and reinterpret messages that are consistent 
with their preexisting attitudes and beliefs 
 selective retention   assumes that people remember best and 
longest those messages that are consistent with their existing 
attitudes and beliefs 
 self-righting principle   John Milton’s articulation of libertarianism 
 share   the percentage of people listening to radio or of homes 
using television tuned in to a given piece of programming 
 shield laws   legislation that expressly protects reporters’ rights 
to maintain sources’ confi dentiality in courts of law 
 shopbills   attractive, artful business cards used by early British 
tradespeople to promote themselves 
 shortwave radio   radio signals transmitted at high frequencies 
that can travel great distances by skipping off  the ionosphere 
 signs   in social construction of reality, things that have subjec-
tive meaning 
 siquis   pinup want ads common in Europe before and in early 
days of newspapers 
 skip  ability of radio waves to refl ect off  the ionosphere 
 sky waves  radio waves that are skipped off  the ionosphere 
 slander   oral or spoken defamation of a person’s character (typ-
ically applied to broadcasting) 
 smart mobs  see  fl ash mobs 
 smartphone   a cell phone containing an advanced operating 
system such as Apple’s iOS or Android. 
 social cognitive theory   idea that people learn through obser-
vation 
 social construction of reality   theory for explaining how cul-
tures construct and maintain their realities using signs and sym-
bols; argues that people learn to behave in their social world 
through interaction with it 

Glossary 
G-9
 uses and gratifi cations approach  the idea that media don’t do 
things  to people; people do things  with media 
 VALS   advertisers’ psychographic segmentation strategy that 
classifi es consumers according to values and lifestyles 
 value-compensation program  ad agency/brand agreement 
that payment of the agency’s fees is predicated on meeting pre-
established goals 
 vast wasteland   expression coined by FCC chair Newton Minow 
in 1961 to describe television content 
 vertical integration   a system in which studios produced their 
own fi lms, distributed them through their own outlets, and ex-
hibited them in their own theaters 
 vicarious reinforcement   in social cognitive theory, the obser-
vation of reinforcement operates in the same manner as actual 
reinforcement 
 video game   a game involving action taking place interactively 
on-screen 
 video news release  (VNR) preproduced report about a client or 
its product that is distributed free of charge to television stations 
 video-on-demand (VOD)   service allowing television viewers 
to access pay-per-view movies and other content that can be 
watched whenever they want 
 viral marketing   PR strategy that relies on targeting specifi c 
Internet users with a given communication and relying on 
them to spread the word 
 virtual worlds games  se  massively multiplayer online role-
playing games 
 Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP)   phone calls transferred in 
digital packets over the Internet rather than on circuit-switched 
telephone wires 
 WAN (wide area network)   network that connects several LANs 
in diff erent locations 
 Web radio   the delivery of “radio” over the Internet directly to 
individual listeners 
 webisode  Web-only television show 
 Western concept   of media systems; normative theory that com-
bines libertarianism’s freedom with social responsibility’s demand 
for public service and, where necessary, regulation 
 Wi-Fi  wireless Internet 
 willing suspension of disbelief  audience practice of willingly 
accepting the content before them as real 
 wire services   news-gathering organizations that provide con-
tent to members 
 World Wide Web   a tool that serves as a means of accessing fi les 
on computers connected via the Internet 
 yellow journalism   early 20th-century journalism emphasizing 
sensational sex, crime, and disaster news 
 zipping  fast-forwarding through taped commercials on a VCR 
 zoned editions   suburban or regional versions of metropolitan 
newspapers 
 zoopraxiscope   early machine for projecting slides onto a dis-
tant surface 
 taste publics   groups of people or audiences bound by little 
more than their interest in a given form of media content 
 technological determinism   the idea that machines and their 
development drive economic and cultural change 
 technology gap   the widening disparity between communica-
tion technology haves and have-nots 
 telecommunications service   legal designation rendering a tele-
communication service provider a common carrier, required to 
carry the messages of others and with no power to restrict them 
 tentpole   an expensive blockbuster around which a studio plans 
its other releases 
 terminals   user workstations that are connected to larger cen-
tralized computers 
 terrestrial digital radio   land-based digital radio relying on digi-
tal compression technology to simultaneously transmit analog 
and one or more digital signals using existing spectrum space 
 theatrical fi lms   movies produced primarily for initial exhibi-
tion on theater screens 
 third-party publishers   companies that create video games for 
existing systems 
 third-person eff ect  the common attitude that others are infl u-
enced by media messages, but we are not 
 360 marketing  see  ambient advertising 
 tiers   groupings of channels made available by a cable or satel-
lite provider to subscribers at varying prices 
 time-shifting  taping a show on a VCR for later viewing 
 Total Audience Measurement Index (TAMi)  measure of view-
ing of a single television episode across all platforms 
 trade books   hard- or softcover books including fi ction and 
most nonfi ction and cookbooks, biographies, art books, coff ee-
table books, and how-to books 
 traffi  c cop analogy   in broadcast regulation, the idea that the 
FCC, as a traffi  c cop, has the right to control not only the fl ow of 
broadcast traffi  c but its composition as well 
 transmissional perspective   the view of media as senders of 
information for the purpose of control 
 transparentists   PR professionals calling for full disclosure of 
their practices—transparency 
 trustee model   in broadcast regulation, the idea that broadcast-
ers serve as the public’s trustees or fi duciaries 
 two-step fl ow theory   the idea that media’s infl uence on people’s 
behavior is limited by opinion leaders—people who initially con-
sume media content, interpret it in light of their own values and 
beliefs, and then pass it on to opinion followers, who have less 
frequent contact with media 
 typifi cation schemes   in social construction of reality, collec-
tions of meanings people have assigned to some phenomenon 
or situation 
 unique selling proposition (USP)   the aspect of an advertised 
product that sets it apart from other brands in the same product 
category 
 URL (uniform resource locator)   the designation of each fi le or 
directory on the host computer connected to the Internet 


R-1
R-1
 Adams, M. (1996). Th e race for radiotelephone: 1900–1920. 
 AWA Review, 10, 78–119. 
 Advertising mediums that most infl uence product purchases. 
(2011, April).  Editor & Publisher, p. 18. 
 AFRTS. (2012). Mission statement. Online: http://afrts
.dodmedia.osd.mil/. 
 Agency report 2011. (2011, April 25).  Advertising Age, pp. 25–32. 
 Aguilar, R. (2012, February 1). What does the activism 
surrounding SOPA reveal about the future of online 
organizing?  Truthout . Online:  http://www.truth-out.org
/what-does-activism-surrounding-sopa-reveal-about-future
-online-organizing/1327952848 . 
  Albiniak, P. (1999, May 3). Media: Littleton’s latest suspect. 
 Broadcasting & Cable , pp. 6–15. 
 Albiniak, P. (2002, April 29). Railing—but no derailing. 
 Broadcasting & Cable, p. 7. 
 Alford, H. (2012, April 22). Watch every click you make.  New 
York Times , p. ST2. 
 Allport, G. W., & Postman, L. J. (1945). Th e basic psychology of 
rumor.  Transactions of the New York Academy of Sciences, 8, 
61–81.  
  Alpert, J., & Hajaj, N. (2008, July 25). We knew the Web was big. 
 Google Blog . Online: http://googleblog.blogspot
.com/2008/07/we-knew-web-was-big.html. 
 Alterman, E. (2005, March 14). Th e pajama game.  
Th e Nation, p. 10. 
 Alterman, E. (2007, September 10–17). It ain’t necessarily so . . . 
 Th e Nation, p. 10. 
 Alterman, E. (2008, February 24). Th e news from Quinn-
Broderville.  Th e Nation, pp. 11–14.  
  Ambrose, J. (2007, January 12). Newspapers going, but not yet 
gone.  Providence Journal, p. B5. 
 Anderson, A., Guskin, E., & Rosenstiel, T. (2012).  Alternative 
weeklies: At long last, a move toward digital.  State of the 
news media 2012 . Online:  http://stateofthemedia.org/2012
/native-american-news-media/alternative-weeklies-at-long
-last-a-move-toward-digital/ . 
 Anderson, C. A., Berkowitz, L., Donnerstein, E., Huesmann, 
L. R., Johnson, J. D., Linz, D., et al. (2003). Th e infl uence of 
media violence on youth.  Psychological Science in the Public 
Interest, 4, 81–110. 
 Anderson, M. (2011, December 13). Lowe’s stands by its 
decision to pull ads from TV show.  Pro v idence Journal , 
p. B8. 
  Anderson, M. K. (2000, May/June). When copyright goes wrong. 
 Extra!, p. 25. 
 Anderson, S. (2012, April 8). Just one more game.  New York 
Times Magazine , pp. 28–33, 55. 
 Andrews, L. (2012, February 5). Facebook is using you.  New 
York Times , p. SR7. 
 Andronikidis, A. I., & Lambrianidou, M. (2010). Children’s 
understanding of television advertising: A grounded theory 
approach,   Psychology and Marketing  , 27, 299–332. 
  Angell, R. (2002, March 11). Read all about it.  Th e New Yorker, 
pp. 27–28. 
  Applebome, P. (2009, March 22). Who killed this little 
bookstore? Th ere are enough suspects to go around.   New 
York Times , p. 23Y. 
 Arango, T., & Carter, B. (2009, November 21). An unsteady 
future for broadcast.  New York Times , p. B1. 
 Arato, A., & Gebhardt, E. (1978).  Th e essential Frankfurt School 
reader . New York: Urizen Books. 
 Arbitron. (2012). Radio station formats. Online:  http://www
.arbitron.com/home/formats.htm . 
 Associated Press. (2010, March ).  A new model for 
communication:  Studying the deep structure of advertising 
and news consumption . Baltimore: Carton Donofrio 
Partners. 
 Associated Press et al. v. United States,   326 U.S. 1, 89 L. Ed. 2013, 
65 S. Ct. 1416 (1945). 
 Association of Magazine Media. (2011, November 21). MAA 
releases benchmark magazine mobile media study. Online: 
 http://magazine.org/association/press/mpa_press
_releases/mag-mobile-reader-study.aspx . 
 Association of Magazine Media. (2012a). Magazine media 
factbook 2011–2012. Online:  http://www.magazine.org
/advertising/magazine-media-factbook/keyfacts.html . 
 Association of Magazine Media. (2012b, January 10).  2011 
overall magazine advertising revenue fl at . Online:  http://
www.magazine.org/advertising/revenue/by_ad_category
/pib-4q-2011.aspx . 
  Atkinson, C. (2004, September 27). Press group attacks 
magazine product placement.  AdAge.com . Online: http://
www.adage.com/news.cms?newsid  41597. 
 Attenberg, J. (2012, March 6). Jonathan Franzen comments on 
Twitter.  Whatever-Whatever.net . Online:  http://www
.whatever-whenever.net/blog/2012/03/delilloness/ . 
 Audit Bureau of Circulations. (2011, November 16). Going 
mobile: How publishers are maturing and monetizing their 
off erings. Online:  http://www.accessabc.com/gomobile/ . 
 Auletta, K. (2001, December 10). Battle stations.  Th e New 
Yorker, pp. 60–67. 
 References 

R-2 
References
Systems . Online: http://cache.upstreamsystems.com
/wp-content/uploads/pdf/YouGov2012n.pdf. 
  Barstow, D. (2006, April 6). Report faults video reports shown as 
news.  New York Times, p. A17. 
 Bart, P. (2000, January 3–9). Th e big media blur.  Variety, 
pp. 4, 95. 
 Bart, P. (2007, June 11–17). And now, a scene from our sponsor. 
 Variety, pp. 4, 58. 
  Barton, L. (2002, July 30). Cereal off enders.  Guardian 
Education, pp. 2–3. 
 Bazelon, E. (2011, October 16). Th e young and the friended. 
 New York Times Magazine , pp. 15–16. 
  Bennett, D. (2004, February). Our mongrel planet.  American 
Prospect, pp. 62–63. 
 Bennett, W. L. (1988).  News: Th e politics of illusion . New York: 
Longman. 
 Berger, P. L., & Luckmann, T. (1966).  Th e social construction of 
reality: A treatise in the sociology of knowledge . Garden City, 
NY: Doubleday. 
 Berkman, H. W., & Gilson, C. (1987).  Advertising: Concepts and 
strategies . New York: Random House. 
 Bernays, E. L. (1986).  Th e later years: Public relations insights, 
1956 – 1988. Rhinebeck, NY: H & M. 
  Berners-Lee, T., & Fischetti, M. (1999).   Weaving the Web: Th e 
original design and ultimate dest i ny of the World Wide Web 
by its inventor. New York: HarperCollins. 
  Bing, J. (2006, January 2–8). Auds: A many-splintered thing. 
 Variety, pp. 1, 38–39. 
 Bittner, J. R. (1994).  Law and regulation of electronic media. 
Englewood Cliff s, NJ: Prentice Hall.  
 BitTorrent. (2012, January 9). Bittorrent and   Torrent software 
surpass 150 million user milestone; announce new consumer 
electronics partnerships. Online:  http://www.bittorrent.com
/intl/es/company/about/ces_2012_150m_users . 
  Black, J. (2001). Hardening of the articles: An ethicist looks at 
propaganda in today’s news.   Ethics in Journalism, 4, 15–36. 
 Black, J., & Barney, R. D. (1985/86). Th e case against mass media 
codes of ethics.   Journal of Mass Media Ethics, 1,   27–36.  
  Black, J., & Whitney, F. C. (1983).   Introduction to mass 
communications. Dubuque, IA: William C. Brown.  
 Blow, C. M. (2009, June 27). Th e purient trap.  New York Times, 
p. A19. 
  Blumenauer, E. (2009, November 15). My near death panel 
experience.  New York Times, p. WK12. 
 Blumler, J. G., & Gurevitch, M. (1975). Towards a comparative 
framework for political commun i cation research. In S. H. 
Chaff ee (Ed.),   Political communication. Issues and strategies 
for r e search . Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. 
 Bogle, D. (1989).  Toms, coons, mulattos, mammies, & bucks: An 
interpretive history of Blacks in American fi lms. New York: 
Continuum. 
 Bosman, J. (2010, November 10). Times will rank e-book best 
sellers.  New York Times, p. C3. 
 Bosman, J. (2011, April 7). One million downloads and 
counting.  New York Times, p. C2. 
 Boss, S. (2007, May 13). Th e greatest mystery: Making a best 
seller.  New York Times, pp. 3.1, 3.6. 
 Auletta, K. (2005, March 28). Th e new pitch.  Th e New Yorker, 
pp. 34–39. 
  Auletta, K. (2010, April 26). Publish or perish.  Th e New Yorker, 
pp. 24–31. 
  Ault, S. (2009, October 16). Studios adjust to digital distribution. 
 Variety . Online: http://www.variety.com/article
/VR1118010062.html?categoryid  3766&cs  1. 
 Avlon, J. (2012, March 10). Rush Limbaugh scandal proves 
contagious for talk-radio advertisers.  Daily Beast . Online: 
http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2012/03/10
/rush-limbaugh-scandal-proves-contagious-for-talk-radio
-advertisers.html. 
 Baar, A. (2011, February 28). Survey fi nds phones revolutionize 
video games.  MediaPost . Online:  http://www.mediapost
.com/publications/article/145761/survey-fi nds-phones
-revolutionize-video-games.html . 
 Baar, A. (2012, January 21). Video rental stores on “life 
support.”  MediaPost . Online:  http://www.mediapost
.com/publications/article/166190/video-rental
-stores-on-life-support.html?print . 
  Bacon, J. (2005, November/December). Saying what they’ve 
been thinking.  Extra!, pp. 13–15. 
 Bagdikian, B. (2004, March). Print will survive.   Editor & 
Publisher, p. 70. 
  Bal, S. (2004, July 9). India ink.  Entertainment Weekly, p. 19. 
 Ball, S., & Bennett, J. (2010, January 15). Heidi Montag, 
Version 3.0.  Newsweek . Online: http://www.newsweek.com
/id/231093.  
  Ball, S., & Bogatz, G. A. (1970).  Th e fi rst year of Sesame Street: 
 An evaluation . Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 
  Banfi eld, A. (2003, April 29). MSNBC’s Banfi eld slams war 
coverage.  AlterNet. Online: http://www.alternet.org/print
.html?storyid  15778. 
 Banning bad news in Iraq. (2004, August 10).  New York Times, 
p. A20. 
  Baran, S. J., Chase, L. J., & Courtright, J. A. (1979).  Th e Waltons: 
Television as a facilitator of prosocial behavior.  Journal of 
Broadcasting, 23, 277–284. 
  Baran, S. J., & Davis, D. K. (2012).  Mass communication theory: 
Foundations, ferment and future (6th ed.). Boston: 
Wadsworth Cengage. 
 Barboza, D. (2012, April 4). In China press, best coverage cash 
can buy.  New York Times , p. 1. 
  Barlow, J. P. (1996). Selling wine without bottles: Th e economy 
of mind on the global Net. In L. H. Leeson (Ed.),  Clicking in: 
Hot links to a digital culture . Seattle, WA: Bay Press.  
 Barnes, B. (2008, March 23). At cineplexes, sports, opera, maybe 
a movie.  New York Times, pp. A1, A15. 
  Barnouw, E. (1966).  A tower in Babel: A history of broadcasting 
in the United States to 1933 . New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
  Barnouw, E. (1990).  Tube of plenty: Th e evolution of American 
television . New York: Oxford Un i versity Press. 
 Baron, D. (2011, October 10). Resistance may be futile: Are 
there alternatives to global English.  OUPBlog . Online: 
http://blog.oup.com/2011/10/global-english/. 
 Barron, G., & Chowdhury, P. (2012, March 7). Th e 
consequences of digital ad bombardment.  U p stream 

References 
R-3
  Carnevale, D. (2005, December 9). Books when you want them. 
 Chronicle of Higher Education, p. A27. 
  Carr, D. (2004, August 2). Publish till you drop.  New York 
Times, p. C1. 
 Carr, D. (2011, January 9). Media savant.  New York Times Book 
Review , pp. 9–10. 
 CBS v. Democratic National Committee, 412 U.S. 94 (1973). 
 Center on Alcohol Marketing and Youth. (2012). Fact sheets: 
Underage drinking in the United States. Online: http://
camy.org. 
 Center for Science in the Public Interest. (2002). Booze news. 
Online: http://www.cspinet.org/booze/alcad.htm.  
 Chandler v. Florida, 449 U.S. 560 (1981). 
 Chang, R. (2009b, July 13). Virtual goods give brands a new way 
to play in gaming.  Advertising Age, p. 12. 
  Chin, F. (1978).   Cable television: A comprehensive bibliography. 
New York: IFI/Plenum. 
 Chmielewski, D. C. (2012, March 20). 100 million TVs will be 
Internet-connected by 2016.  Los  A n geles Times . Online: 
 http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/entertainmentnewsb
uzz/2012/03/100-million-tvs-will-be-internet-connected
-by-2016.html . 
  Chozick, A. & Rohwedder, C. (2011, March 18). Th e ultimate 
reality show.  Wall Street Journal. Online: http://online.wsj
.com/article/SB1000142405274870389970457620444343348
7336.html?mod  wsj_share_twitter. 
 CIA world factbook.   (2008). China. Online: https://www.cia
.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook. 
  Cieply, M. (2010, January 27). He doth surpass himself;  Avatar 
outperforms  Titanic .  New York Times, p. C1. 
 Cisco Systems. (2009, June 9). New Cisco Visual Networking 
Index forecasts global IP traffi  c to increase fi vefold by 2013. 
Online: http://newsroom.cisco.com/dlls/2009
/prod_060909.html. 
  CJR Comment. (2003, September/October). 9/11/03.  Columbia 
Journalism Review, p. 7. 
  Coates, D. (2009, November 13). Ad infi nitum.   MediaPost . 
Online: http://www.mediapost.com/publications/?art
_aid  117174&fa  Articles.showArticle. 
 Coen, R., & Hart, P. (2002, April). Last media ownership limits 
threatened by judicial action.  Extra! Update, p. 4. 
  Condé Nast says it expects to introduce new print products to 
grow retail  sales. (2010, March 4).  Supermarket News . Online: 
http://supermarketnews.   com/news/conde_nast_0304/.  
 Collette-White, M. (2012, January 23). Music sales fall again 
in 2011, but optimism grows.  Re u ters.com . Online: 
 http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/01/23/us
-idUSTRE80M15T20120123 . 
  comScore. (2012, February 9). 2012 U. S. digital future in focus. 
Online:  http://www.comscore.com/Press_Events
/Presentations_Whitepapers/2012/2012_US_Digital_Future
_in_Focus . 
 Consumer Electronics Association. (2008, November 24). How 
Americans plan to make do.   Broadcasting & Cable, p. 18. 
 Cook, J. (2010, March 5).  How ABC News’ Brian Ross staged 
his Toyota death ride.  Gawker . Online: http://gawker
.com/5486666/how-abc-news-brian-ross-staged-his-toyota
-death-ride. 
 Boulton, C. (2010, March 20). YouTube brand may be an 
advantage in Viacom copyright case.   eWeek . Online: http://
www.eweek.com/c/a/Search-EnginesYouTube-Brand-May
-Be-an-Advantage-in-Viacom-Copyright-Case-572764/. 
 Boyce, J. C. (2010, September 7). Americans don’t burn books. 
 Salon . Online:  http://www.huffi  ngtonpost.com/james
-boyce/americans-dont-burn-books_1_b_707187.html . 
 Boylan, J. G. (2010, January 11/18). End of the century.   Th e 
Nation, pp. 31–34. 
 Bradbury, R. (1981).  Fahrenheit 451. New York: Ballantine. 
(Originally published in 1953.) 
  Bragman, H. (2009, January 19). A cynical world could use a 
little PR.  Broadcasting & Cable, p. 28. 
 Braverman, S. (2010, August 26). Would Americans rather be 
younger, thinner, richer or smarter?   Harris Poll. Online: 
http://www.harrisinteractive.com/vault/HI-Harris-Poll
-Adweek-Would-You-Rather-2010-08-26.pdf. 
 Bray, H. (2006, January 28). Google China censorship fuels calls 
for US boycott.  Boston Globe, p. A10. 
 Bridges v. California, 314 U.S. 252 (1941). 
 Brisbane, A. S. (2012, January 12). Should the  Times be a truth 
vigilante?  New York Times . Online: http://publiceditor.blogs
.nytimes.com/2012/01/12/should-the-times-be-a-truth
-vigilante/?scp  1&sq  Should%20the%20Times%20be%20
a%20Truth%20Vigilante&st  cse. 
 Brodesser-Akner, C. (2008, January 7). How Ford snared starring 
role in   Knight Rider TV movie.  Advertising Age,   p. 22.  
 Brodsky, J. (1987, December 8).  Nobel lecture . Online: http://
nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/literature/laureates/1987
/brodsky-lecture-e.html. 
 Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association , U. S. No. 
08-1448 (2011). 
 Brubach, H. (2007, April 15). Starved to perfection.  New York 
Times Style Magazine, p. 42. 
 Burnham, V. (2001).  Supercade: A visual history of the 
videogame age 1971 – 1984 . Cambridge: MIT Press.  
 Burton, B. (2005, November 15). Fake news: It’s the PR industry 
against the rest of us. Online: http://www.prwatch.org
/node/4174/print. 
 Busbee, J. (2011, August 11). Don’t believe what you see: 
More staged news.  Yahoo Sports . Online:  http://www
.redicecreations.com/article.php?id  16299 . 
 Butler, B. (2011, July 20). Young guns.  Maynard Institute for 
Journalism Education . Online: http://mije.org/health
/young-guns. 
 Byrne, D. (2008a, January). Th e fall and rise of music.  Wired, 
pp. 124–129. 
 Byrne, D. (2008b, January). Th e Radiohead revolution.   Wired, 
pp. 120–123. 
  A candid conversation with the high priest of popcult and 
metaphysician of media. (1969, March).   Playboy, 
pp. 53–74, 158. 
  Carey, J. W. (1975). A cultural approach to communication. 
 Communication, 2, 1–22. 
 Carey, J. W. (1989).  Communication as culture . Boston: Unwin 
Hyman. 
 Carmichael, M. (2011, November 14). New necessities: What 
consumers can’t live without.  Adve r tising Age , pp. 6, 8. 

R-4 
References
 DeMaria, R., & Wilson, J. L. (2004).  High score: Th e illustrated 
history of electronic games . New York: McGraw-Hill. 
 Dibbell, J. (2007, June 17). Th e life of the Chinese gold farmer. 
 New York Times Magazine, pp. 36–41. 
 Digital Fast Facts. (2012, February 27).  Advertising Age , insert. 
 Direct Marketing Association. (2011).  2011 statistical factbook . 
New York: Author. 
 Dougherty, H. (2012, February 2). 10 key statistics about 
Facebook.  Hitwise.com . Online: http://weblogs.hitwise
.com/heather-dougherty/2012/02/10_key_statistics_about
_facebo_1.html. 
 Dove Research. (2011).  Th e real truth about beauty: Revisited . 
Online:  http://www.dove.us/social-mission/self-esteem
-statistics.aspx . 
 Drucker, P. E. (1999, October). Beyond the information 
revolution.   Atlantic Monthly, pp. 47–57. 
 Dumenco, S. (2006, January 16). Oh please, a blogger is just a 
writer with a cooler name.  Adve r tising Age, p. 18. 
 Dumenco, S. (2008, June 23). Th -th-th-that’s all, folks! No more 
talk of media end-times.  Adverti s ing Age, p. 48. 
 Dumenco, S. (2010, September 13). In non-loving memory: RIP, 
press releases (1906–2010)—long live the Tweet.  Advertising 
Age , p. 28. 
 Dumenco, S. (2011, December 4). Even the FTC can’t stop 
Facebook’s mad rush toward total information awareness. 
 Advertising Age . Online: http://adage.com/article/the-media
-guy/ftc-stop-facebook-s-rush-total-info-awareness/231337/. 
 Dunham, W. (2009, January 7). Mississippi has highest teen 
birth rate.  Reu ters .  Online: http://www.reuters.com/article
/idUSTRE50679220090107. 
 E&P Staff . (2010, July 2). L. A. county supervisors to ‘L.A. 
Times’: Knock off  the fake ad sections!  Editor & Publisher. 
Online: http://www.editorandpublisher.com/
Headlines/l-a-county-supervisors-to-l-a-times-knock-off -
the-fake-ad-sections-61888-.aspx. 
 E-book sales now outstrip print books, says Amazon. (2011, 
May 29).  Providence Journal , p. F4. 
 E-books outsell paper books on Barnes & Noble online store. 
(2010, December 30).  Huffi  ngton Post. Online: http://www
.huffi  ngtonpost.com/2010/12/30/ebooks-paper-books-
barnes-noble-nook_n_802835.html. 
 Ebenkamp, B. (2009, August 1). Th e monetization of Mimi: 
Mariah CD to have ads.  Billboard . O n line: http://www
.billboard.biz/bbbiz/content_display/industry/
e3i8b177543696059c9f49d0a5a16866ba4. 
 Eddy, M. (2011, October 26). Austrian law student takes on 
Facebook over possible data privacy violations in Europe. 
 Newsday . Online: http://www.newsday.com/news
/austrian-student-takes-on-facebook-over-privacy
-1.3274291. 
 Edison not “the father of sound”? (2008, March 28).  Providence 
Journal, p. A5. 
 Edison Research. (2011). Th e infi nite dial: Navigating digital 
platforms. Online: http://www.edisonresearch.com
/Infi nite_Dial_2011.pdf. 
 Edmonds, R., Guskin, E., & Rosenstiel, T. (2011).  Newspapers: 
Missed the 2010 media rally .  State of the news media 2011 . 
Online:  http://stateofthemedia.org/2011/newspapers-essay/ .  
 Cook, T. D., Appleton, H., Conner, R. F., Shaff er, A., Tamkin, G., 
& Weber, S. J. (1975). Sesame  Street  revisited. New York: 
Russell Sage Foundation. 
  Copps, M. J. (2008, April 7). Not your father’s FCC.   Th e Nation, 
p. 18. 
 Copps, M. J. (2011, June 9). Statement of Commissioner Michael 
J. Copps on release of FCC staff  report “Th e Technology and 
Information Needs of Communities.”   Federal Communications 
Commission . Online:  http://www.fcc.gov/document
/copps-information-needs-communities-report .  
  Cox, A. M. (2005, March). Howard Stern and the satellite wars. 
 Wired, pp. 99–101, 135. 
  Cox, C. (1999, September/October). Prime-time activism.  Utne 
Reader, pp. 20–22. 
  Cox, C. (2000, July/August). Plugged into protest?  Utne Reader, 
pp. 14–15. 
  Crary, D. (2011, May 8). Ad reaction creates debate about 
gender stereotypes for boys.  Prov i dence Journal,  p. B4. 
 Creamer, M. (2007, April 2). Caught in the clutter crossfi re: Your 
Brand.  Advertising Age, pp. 1, 35. 
 Th e crisis in publishing. (2003, February 21).  Th e Week, p. 22. 
 Cuban knows what’s wrong with newspapers. (2006, 
November 20).  Advertising Age, p. 10. 
 Czitrom, D. J. (2007). Twenty-fi ve years later.  Critical Studies in 
Media Communication, 24, 481–485. 
  Dahl, J. (2011, January 28). Why can’t we watch Al Jazeera? 
 Salon. Online: http://www.salon.com/news/politics
/war_room/2011/01/28/dahl_al_jazeera. 
  D’angelo, F. (2009, October 26). Happy birthday, digital 
advertising!  Advertising Age . Online: http://adage.com
/digitalnext/article?article_id  139964. 
 Daniels, E. A. (2009). Sex objects, athletes, and sexy athletes: 
How media representations of women athletes can impact 
adolescent girls and college women.  Journal of Adolescent 
Research, 24, 399–422. 
 Data Page. (2011a, October). Percentage of moms whose 
children used devices by age 2.  Editor &  Publisher , p. 18. 
 Data Page. (2011b, October). Reasons for local newspaper 
subscriptions.  Editor &  Publisher , p. 18. 
 Data Page. (2011c, April). How gen Y access newspaper content. 
 Editor &  Publisher , p. 18. 
 Davis, R. E. (1976).  Response to innovation: A study of popular 
argument about new mass media. New York: Arno Press.  
  Day, L. A. (2006).  Ethics in media communications: Cases and 
controversies (6th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. 
  DeFleur, M. L., & Ball-Rokeach, S. (1975).  Th eories of mass 
communication (3rd ed.). New York: David McKay.  
 deGraf, B. (2004, May 5). Smart mobs vs. Amway.   AlterNet . 
Online: http://www.alternet.org/print.html?storyid  18605. 
 delia Cava, M. R. (2012, March 16–18). Books, CDs, photos, 
going, going . . .   USA Today , pp. 1A–2A. 
 Dellamere, D. (2009, August 19). Lessons from the Birmingham 
Eccentric.  Columbia Journalism Review . Online: http://
www.cjr.org/behind_the_news/lessons_from_the
_birmingham_ec.php?page  all. 
  Deloitte. (2011, February 1). “State of the media democracy” 
survey: TV industry embraces the Internet and prospers. 
Online: http://www.deloitte.com/us/mediademocracy. 

References 
R-5
 Fallows, J. (2010, June). How to save the news.  Atlantic , 
pp. 44–56. 
 Farhi, P. (2005, June/July). Under siege.  American Journalism 
Review, pp. 26–31. 
 Farhi, P. (2009, May 17). Click, change.   Washington Post, p. E1. 
 Farhi, P. (2011, March 29). On NBC, the missing story about 
parent company General Electric.  Washington Post . Online: 
 http://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/on-nbc
-the-missing-story-about-parent-company-general
-electric/2011/03/29/AFpRYJyB_story.html . 
 Farhi, P. (2012, January 3). FCC seeks to change regulation of 
corporate interests disclosure on TV news.  Washington 
Post . Online: http://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle
/style/fcc-seeks-to-change-regulation-of-corporate
-interests-disclosures-on-tv-news/2012/01/03
/gIQAEhQBZP_story.html. 
 Faules, D. F., & Alexander, D. C. (1978).  Communication and 
social behavior: A symbolic int e raction perspective. Reading, 
MA: Addison-Wesley. 
 Feldman, G. (2001, February 12). Publishers caught in a Web. 
 Th e Nation, pp. 35–36. 
 Federal Communications Commission. (2012). Low power 
broadcast radio stations. Online: http://www.fcc.gov
/guides/low-power-broadcast-radio-stations. 
 Finally, 21st century phone service. (2004, January 6).  Business 
Week . Online: http://www.businessweek.com/technology
/content/jan2004/tc2004016. 
 Fischer, M. (2011, October 19). Your phone knows more about 
you than your mom.  Advertising Age . Online: http://adage
.com/article/digitalnext/phone-mom/230507/. 
  Fitzgerald, M. (1999, October 30). Robert Sengstake Abbott. 
 Editor & Publisher, p. 18. 
 Fitzgerald, M. (2010, February). Growing young readers.   Editor 
& Publisher, p. 16. 
 Fleming, M. (2005, June 6–12). H’wood’s new book club. 
 Variety, p. 3. 
 Fonda, D. (2004, June 28). Pitching it to kids.   Time, pp. 52–53. 
 Forbes, T. (2011, June 27). “Cars 2”: Entertainment or 
merchandise mover?  MediaPost . Online:  http://www
.mediapost.com/publications/article/153120/cars-2
-entertainment-or-merchandise-mover.html . 
 Forbes, T. (2012, January 20). Anti-SOPA campaign: An instant 
case history in the new PR.  M e diaPost . Online: http://www
.mediapost.com/publications/article/166193/anti-sopa
-campaign-an-instant-case-history-in-the.html. 
  Fort, M. (2010, January 28). McDonald’s launch McItaly burger. 
 Guardian . Online: http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle
/wordofmouth/2010/jan/28/mcdonalds-launch-mcitaly
-burger. 
 Francis, T. (2011, December 26). Th e Humble Bundle guys—PC 
Gamer’s community heroes of the year.  PC Gamer . Online: 
http://www.pcgamer.com/2011/12/26/the-humble-bundle
-guys-pc-gamers-community-heroes-of-the-year/. 
 Franzen, C. (2012, March 2). Why Facebook shouldn’t worry 
about Znyga’s new platform.  Ide a Lab . Online:  http://
idealab.talkingpointsmemo.com/2012/03/why-facebook
-shouldnt-worry-about-zyngas-new-platform
.php?ref  fpnewsfeed . 
 Edmonds, R., Guskin, E., Rosenstiel, T., & Mitchell, A. (2012). 
Newspapers: Building digital revenues proves painfully 
slow.  State of the news media 2012.  Online: http://
stateofthemedia.org/2012/newspapers-building-digital
-revenues-proves-painfully-slow/.  
 Edwards, J. (2009, January 6). Campbell’s gay soup ad causes 
storm in a bread bowl.  BNET . O n line: http://industry.bnet
.com/advertising/1000485/campbells-gay-soup-ad-causes
-storm-in-a-bread-bowl/. 
  Eggerton, J. (2007, November 12). Net neutrality back in 
spotlight.  Broadcasting & Cable, pp. 19–23. 
 Eggerton, J. (2009, May 14). Copps pushes localism, non-
discrimination principle.  Broadcasting & Cable . Online: 
http://www.broadcastingcable.com/article/232512-Copps
_Pushes_Localism_Non_Discrimination_Principle.php. 
 Electronic Frontier Foundation. (2012, March). Stop the 
Internet blacklist bills. Online:  https://wfc2.wiredforchange
.com/o/9042/p/dia/action/public/?action_KEY  8173 . 
 Elias, P. (2010, December 27). Spam fi ghter brings home the 
bacon.  Providence Journal, p. B2. 
 eMarketer Staff . (2010, January 27). Boomers log some 
serious TV time.  Adweek . Online: http://www.adweek
.com/aw/content_display/news/media/
e3i888f5f58648771050980256a519cf4cb. 
 Entertainment Software Association. (2012). Industry facts. 
Online:  http://www.theesa.com/facts/index.asp . 
 Epstein, Z. (2012, January 16). Video game sales fall 21% in 
December, down 8% for full-year 2011.  BGR.com . Online: 
 http://www.bgr.com/2012/01/16/video-game-sales-fall-21
-in-december-down-8-for-full-year-2011/ . 
 Erard, M. (2004, July 1). In these games, the points are all 
political.  New York Times, p. G1. 
 Estes v. State of Texas, 381 U.S. 532 (1965). 
 Ethnic Buying Power. (2011, December).  Television Advertising 
Bureau . Online:  http://www.tvb.org/media/fi le/TV_Basics.pdf . 
 Ewen, S. (2000). Memoirs of a commodity fetishist.  Mass 
Communication & Society, 3, 439–452. 
 “Facebook Generation” faces identity crisis. (2008, July 4). 
 Medical News Today . Online:  http://www
.medicalnewstoday.com/releases/113878.php. 
 Factsheet: Th e U. S. Media Universe. (2011, January 5).  Nielsen 
Wire . Online: Nielsen Wire http://blog.nielsen.com
/nielsenwire/online_mobile/factsheet-the-u-s-media
-universe/. 
 Fagbire, O. J. (2007, July 17). Product placement just keeping it 
real claims Michael Bay.  Product Placement News . Online: 
http://www.product-placement.biz/200707172269/News
/Product-Placement/product-placement-just-keeping-it
-real-claims-michael-bay.html. 
  Fahri, P. (2011, March 29). On NBC, the missing story about 
parent company General Electric.   Washington Post. Online: 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/on-nbc
-the-missing-story-about-parent-company-general
-electric/2011/03/29/AFpRYJyB_story.html. 
 Fajen, S. (2008, July 7). Th e agency model is bent but not 
broken.  Advertising Age, p. 17. 
 Falk, W. (2005, November 29). Th e trouble with newspapers. 
 Providence Journal, p. B7. 

R-6 
References
  Ginsberg, T. (2002, January/February). Rediscovering the 
world.  American Journalism Review, pp. 48–53. 
 Ginzburg v. United States, 383 U.S. 463 (1966).  
 Gitlin, T. (2004, July). It was a very bad year.  American Prospect, 
pp. 31–34. 
 Gitlow v. New York, 268 U.S. 652 (1925). 
 Global media: Emerging market dailies. (2011, October 3). 
 Advertising Age , p. 34. 
 Global media habits: A TV in every house. (2011, October 3). 
 Advertising Age , p. 8. 
 Goetzl, D. (2011, December 23). MTV Research: It’s (video) 
game time for marketers.  MediaPost . Online: http://www
.mediapost.com/publications/article/164789/mtv-research
-its-video-game-time-for-marketers.html. 
  Goldkorn, J. (2005, August 10). Media regulation in China: 
Closed open closed open for business. Online: http://www
.danwei.org/media_and_advertising/media_regulation_in
_china_clos.php. 
 Graser, M. (2011, February 14–20). Pic biz brandwagon.  Variety , 
pp. 1, 25. 
 Greenberg, K. (2009, March 10). ANA discusses line between 
falsehood, puff ery. MediaPost. O n line:  http://www
.mediapost.com/publications/article/101890/ 
 Greenberg, K. (2011, September 16). Consumers more critical 
of cause marketing.  MediaPost . Online:  http://www
.mediapost.com/publications/article/158743/consumers
-more-critical-of-cause-marketing.html . 
 Greenwald, G. (2012, January 13). Arthur Brisbane and selective 
stenography.  Salon . Online:  http://www.salon.com/2012
/01/13/arthur_brisbane_and_selective_stenography/ . 
  Greider, W. (2005, November 21). All the king’s media.  Th e 
Nation, pp. 30–32. 
 Grimes, M. (2012, April 10). Nielsen: Global consumers’ trust 
in “earned” advertising grows in importance.  Nielsen.com . 
Online: http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/press
-room/2012/nielsen-global-consumers-trust-in-earned
-advertising-grows.html. 
 Gross, D. (2005, July 25). Innovation: Th e future of advertising. 
 Fortune . Online:  http://www.fortune.com/fortune
/0,15935,1085988,00.html.  
 Guskin, E., & Mitchell, A. (2011). Hispanic media: Faring better 
than the mainstream media.  State of the news media 2011 . 
Online:  http://stateofthemedia.org/2011/hispanic-media
-fairing-better-than-the-mainstream-media/ . 
 Guthrie, M. (2010, April 26). Is network TV’s model lost? 
  Broadcasting & Cable, pp. 10 – 11. 
 Guttmacher Institute. (2010, January). U.S. teenage 
pregnancies, births and abortions: National and state trends 
and trends by race and ethnicity. Online:  http://www
.guttmacher.org/pubs/USTPtrends.pdf . 
 Hachten, W. A. (1992).  Th e world news prism (3rd ed.). Ames: 
Iowa State University Press. 
 Hafner, K., & Lyon, M. (1996).  Where wizards stay up late: Th e 
origins of the Internet. New York: Simon & Schuster.  
 Hall, E. (2010a, January 25). Beauty riskier than booze on 
Spanish TV.  Advertising Age, p. 6. 
  Hall, E. (2010b, February 15). U.K. tightens rules on newly 
approved TV product placement.  A d vertising Age, pp. 4, 22. 
 Friedman, W. (2011, December 12). TV usage on rise, print 
grabs more ad $ than mobile.  Medi a Post . Online:  http://
www.mediapost.com/publications/article/164047
/tv-usage-on-rise-print-grabs-more-ad-than-mobil.html . 
  Friend, T. (2000, April 24). Mickey Mouse Club.  Th e New Yorker, 
pp. 212–214. 
  Friend, T. (2009, January 19). Th e Cobra.  Th e New Yorker, 
pp. 40–49. 
  Garchik, L. (2000, July 25). Death and hobbies.   San Francisco 
Chronicle, p. D10. 
  Gardner, E. (2009, November 6). Forty years of sunny days.  USA 
Today, p. 1D. 
 Gardner, T. (2010, November). When haters are best ignored. 
 Extra! , p. 3. 
 Garfi eld, B. (2005, April 4). Th e chaos scenario.  Advertising Age, 
pp. 1, 57–59. 
 Garfi eld, B. (2007, March 26). Th e post-advertising age. 
 Advertising Age, pp. 1, 12–14. 
 Garofoli, J. (2012, January 26). Obama’s speech echoes Occupy 
movement themes.  San Fra n cisco Chronicle , p. A1. 
 Garrett, D. (2007, December 17–23). Disc biz seeks new spin in 
‘08.  Variety, pp. 9, 14. 
 Garside, J., & Power, H. (2008, January 13). EMT managers will 
have to sing for their super.  Telegraph.co.uk. Online: http://
www.telegraph.co.uk/money/main.;html?xml  
/money/2008/01/13/cnemi113.xml.  
  Genoways, T. (2007, September/October). Press pass.   Mother 
Jones, pp. 79–81, 84. 
  Gerbner, G., Gross, L., Jackson-Beeck, M., Jeff ries-Fox, S., & 
Signorielli, N. (1978). Cultural ind i cators: Violence profi le 
no. 9.  Journal of Communication, 28, 176–206. 
 Gerbner, G., Gross, L., Morgan, M., & Signorielli, N. (1980). 
Th e “mainstreaming” of America: V i olence profi le no. 11. 
 Journal of Communication, 30, 10–29. 
 Germain, D. (2005, December 14). Hollywood sees biggest 
box offi  ce decline in 20 years.  AOL News . Online: 
http://aolsvc.news.aol.com/movies/article.adp?id  
20051214130609990010.  
  Gertner, J. (2005, April 10). Our ratings, ourselves.  New York 
Times Magazine, pp. 34–46. 
  GfK Roper. (2008, December 1). What people do during 
commercials.  Advertising Age, p. 6. 
 Gibbs, M. (2005, July 18). A new theory with consequences. 
 Network World, p. 50. 
  Gillespie, E. M. (2005, August 20). Small publishers, big sales. 
 Providence Journal , pp. B1–B2. 
 Gillespie, N. (2007, June). Kiss privacy goodbye—and good 
riddance, too.  Reason. Online: http://www.reason.com
/news/29166.html. 
 Gillmor, D. (2000, August 18). Digital Copyright Act comes back 
to haunt consumers.  San Jose Mercury News, pp. 1C, 6C. 
  Gillmor, D. (2002, July 21). Hollywood, tech make suspicious 
pairing.  San Jose Mercury News, pp. 1F, 7F. 
 Gillmor, D. M., & Barron, J. A. (1974).  Mass communication law: 
Cases and comments. St. Paul, MN: West. 
 Gilson, D. (2011, March/April). Wii shall overcome.  Mother 
Jones , pp. 55–57. 

References 
R-7
 Herskowitz, J. E. (2011, August 18). Journalism schools: 
Surviving or thriving?  Editor &  Publisher . Online:  http://
www.editorandpublisher.com/Features/Article/Journalism
-Schools--Surviving-or-Th riving- . 
  Hickey, N. (2002, May/June). Media monopoly Q&A.  Columbia 
Journalism Review, pp. 30–33. 
 Hightower, J. (2004a, May). Th e people’s media reaches more 
people than Fox does.  Hightower Lowdown, pp. 1–4. 
 Hightower, J. (2004b, May 15). Grand larceny of pin-striped 
thieves.   Progressive Populist, p. 3.  
 Hinchey, M. (2006, February 6). More media owners.  Th e 
Nation, p. 15. 
  Hirschberg, L. (2007, September 2). Th e music man.  New York 
Times Magazine, pp. 28–33, 46–49. 
 Hogan, M. (2011, November 20). In an iTune age, do we need 
the record store?  Salon . Online:  http://www.salon
.com/2011/11/20/in_an_itunes_age_do_we_need_the
_record_store/. 
 Hopewell, J., & de Pablos, E. (2010, February 1–7). Spanish auds 
fl ock to pubcaster’s ad-free pix.  Variety , p. 13. 
 Hopewell, J., & Keslassy, E. (2010, January 11–17). Gauls love 
“House” call.  Variety, pp. 4, 25. 
 Hovland, C. I., Lumsdaine, A. A., & Sheffi  eld, F. D. (1949). 
 Experiments on mass communication. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.  
 How they see us. (2005, November 4).  Th e Week, p. 19. 
 Howe, J. (2005a, November). Th e hit factory.  Wired, 
pp. 200–205, 218. 
 Howe, J. (2005b, August). Th e uproar over downloads.  Wired, 
p. 40. 
 Iezzi, T. (2007, January 29). A more-targeted world isn’t 
necessarily a more civilized one.   Adverti s ing Age, p. 11. 
 Ifi ll, G. (2007, April 10). Trash talk radio.  New York Times, 
p. A21. 
 Indvik, L. (2011, January 5). Forrester: Tablet sales will eclipse 
laptop sales by 2015.  Mashable  Tech . Online: http://
mashable.com/2011/01/05/forrester-tablet-sales/. 
  Internet Movie Database. (2012). Top grossing movies of all 
time at the USA box offi  ce. Online: http://www.imdb.com
/boxoffi  ce/alltimegross.  
 Internet World Stats. (2012). Internet usage statistics. Online: 
http://www.Internetworldstats.com/stats.htm. 
 Internet World Stats. (2012, February 8). World Internet 
usage and population statistics. Online:  http://www
.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm . 
 Irvin v. Dowd, 366 U.S. 717 (1961). 
 Italie, H. (2007, November 18). Government study: Americans 
reading less. Online: http://www.chron.com/disp/story
.mpl/ap/politics/5312713.html. 
  Ives, N. (2006a, February 13). Print buyers search for real-time 
ad metrics.  Advertising Age, p. S-2. 
 Ives, N. (2006b, April 17). Magazines shape up for digital future. 
 Advertising Age, pp. 3, 46. 
 Ives, N. (2007a, April 23) Mags march calmly into face of chaos. 
 Advertising Age, pp. 3, 44. 
  Ives, N. (2007b, May 28). All the mag stats you can handle. 
 Advertising Age, p. 4. 
 Hall, E. T. (1976).  Beyond culture. New York: Doubleday. 
 Hall, J. (2010, October 7). Branded-entertainment lessons 
courtesy of a Quebec TV show.  Adve r tising Age. Online: 
http://adage.com/article_id  146334. 
  Hall, K. (2009, February 16). Kevin Smith challenges Southwest: 
Bring airline seat to Daily Show and I’ll sit in it.  Huffi  ngton 
Post . Online: http://www.huffi  ngtonpost.com/2010/02/16
/kevin-smith-challenges-so_n_463886.html.  
  Hall, S. (1980). Cultural studies: Two paradigms.   Media, Culture 
and Society, 2, 57–72. 
 Halliday, J. (2007, February 12). GM cuts $600M off  ad spend—
yes, really.  Advertising Age, pp. 1, 25. 
 Hamilton, A. (2000, August 21). Meet the new surfer girls. 
 Time, p. 67. 
 Hamilton, A. (2005, January 10). Video vigilantes.   Time, 
pp. 60–63. 
  Hampp, A. (2009, May 18). OMFG! A show with few TV viewers 
is still a hit.  Advertising Age, p. 18. 
 Hampp, A. (2010, January 4).  Avatar soars on fat ad spending, 
mass marketing.  Advertising Age, pp. 1, 20. 
 Hampton, K. N., Goulet, L. S., Rainie, L., & Purcell, K. (2011, 
June 16). Social networking sites and our lives.  Pew Internet 
& American Life Project . Online: http://pewinternet.org
/~/media//Files/Reports/2011/PIP%20-%20Social%20
networking%20sites%20and%20our%20lives.pdf. 
  Hansell, S. (2005, June 28). Cable wins Internet-access ruling. 
 New York Times, p. C1. 
 Hardt, H. (2007, December). Constructing photography: 
Fiction as cultural evidence.  Critical St u dies in Media 
Communication , pp. 476–480. 
 Harris, M. (1983).  Cultural anthropology. New York: 
Harper & Row. 
 Harris, S. D. (2009, December 20). More and more consumers 
turn to e-readers.  Providence Journal, E4. 
 Havrilesky, H. (2010, January 30). “Digital Nation”: What has 
the Internet done to us?  Salon . O n  line: http://www.salon
.com/entertainment/tv/frontline/index.html?story  /ent/tv
/iltw/2010/01/30/frontline_digital_nation. 
  Hayes, C. (2007, November 12). Th e new right-wing smear 
machine.  Th e Nation, pp. 11–13. 
 Hayes, D. (2003, September 15–21). H’wood grapples with 
third-act problems.  Variety, pp. 1, 53. 
 Hayes, N. (2012, February 22). Out-of-home advertising grows 
in 2011.  Outdoor Advertising A s sociation of America . 
Online: http://www.oaaa.org/press/news/news
.aspx?NewsId  1367. 
 Hedges, C. (2011, June 27). Gone with the papers.  Truthdig.
com . Online:  http://www.truthdig.com/report/item/gone
_with_the_papers_20110627/ . 
 Hefl ing, K. (2012, March 7). Minority students punished more 
harshly by schools.  Providence  Journal , p. B3. 
 Helm, J. (2002, March/April). When history looks back. 
 Adbusters. 
 Hendricks, M. (2012, February 1). Growth trend continues for 
newspaper websites; more visitors stayed longer in Q4 2011 vs. 
2010.  Newspaper Association of America . Online: http://www
.naa.org/News-and-Media/Press-Center/Archives/2012
/Growth-Trend-Continues-For-Newspaper-Websites.aspx. 

R-8 
References
 Johnson, C. A. (2009, February 11). Cutting through advertising 
clutter.  CBS News . Online: http://www.cbsnews.com/2100
-3445_162-2015684.html. 
  Johnson, S. (2009, June 15). How Twitter will change the way we 
live.  Time ,  pp. 32–37. 
 Justices scrap Internet child porn law. (2002, April 17). 
 Providence Journal, p. A3. 
  Kalet, H. (2007, May 15). Imus shocked at grassroots reaction. 
 Progressive Populist, p. 21. 
 Kamiya, G. (2009, February 17). Th e death of news.  Salon . 
Online: www.salon.com/opinion/kamiya/2009/02/17
/newspapers/print.html. 
 Kantar Media. (2011, March 17). Branded entertainment. 
Online:  http://kantarmediana.com/insight-center/news
/us-advertising-expenditures-increased-65-percent-2010 . 
 Kato, M. (2012, January). Arrested development.  Game 
Informer , pp. 10–12. 
 Katz, E., & Lazarsfeld, P. F. (1955).  Personal infl uence: Th e part 
played by people in the fl ow of communications. New York: 
Free Press. 
 Keller, B. (2011, July 17). Let’s ban books.  New York Times 
Magazine , pp. 9–10. 
 Kelly, C. (2010, June 11). Female athletes almost invisible on 
television—except Abby Sunderland.  True Slant.  Online: 
 http://trueslant.com/caitlinkelly/2010/06/11/female
-athletes-almost-invisible-on-television-except-abby
-sunderland/ . 
 Kelly, K. (2008, November 23). Becoming screen literate.  New 
York Times Magazine, pp. 48–53. 
  Kennedy, D. (2004, June 9). Mad as hell at the FCC.  Boston 
Phoenix . Online: http://www.alternet.org/print
.html?storyid  16116. 
 Kennedy, L. (2002, June). Spielberg in the Twilight Zone.  Wired, 
pp. 106–113, 146. 
 Kent, S. L. (2001).  Th e ultimate history of video games . New 
York: Th ree Rivers Press. 
 Kerkian, S. (2011, October 4). Global consumers voice demand 
for greater corporate responsibility.  Cone Communications . 
Online:  http://www.coneinc.com/2011globalcrrelease . 
 Kern, T. (2005, December 5). Convergence makes a comeback. 
 Broadcasting & Cable, p. 32. 
 Khanfar, W. (2011, February 1). US viewers seek Al Jazeera 
coverage.  Al Jazeera. Online: http://english.aljazeera.net
/indepth/opinion/2011/02/201121121041735816.html.  
 Kirsner, S. (2005, April). Hayden’s planetarium.   CMO Magazine . 
Online: http://www.cmomagazine.com/read/040105
/planetarium.html. 
 Klaassen, A. (2005a, December 5). Local TV nets try pay to play. 
 Advertising Age, pp. 1, 82. 
 Klaassen, A. (2005b, December 5). Want a gold record? Forget 
radio, go online:  Advertising Age,  p. 12. 
 Klapper, J. T. (1960).  Th e eff ects of mass communication. New 
York: Free Press. 
 Klein, N. (1999).  No logo: Taking aim at the brand bullies. New 
York: Picador.  
 Klosterman, C. (2005, August). What we have here is a failure to 
communicate.   Esquire, pp. 62–64. 
 Ives, N. (2008, November 17). As ASME fortifi es ad/edit divide, 
some mags fl out it.  Advertising Age , 3. 
 Ives, N. (2010, April 2). Ads venturing further into magazines’ 
editorial pages.  Advertising Age. O n line: http://adage.com
/article/mediaworks/ads-venturing-magazines-editorial
-pages/143111/. 
  Ives, N. (2011a, January 31). Look, up in the air: It’s a bird, a 
plane, captive affl  uent print readers.  Advertising Age, p. 3. 
 Ives, N. (2011b, February 21). “Th e Greatest Movie Ever Sold” 
is buying in.  Advertising Age . Online:  http://adage.com
/article/mediaworks/product-placement-explored-bashed
-spurlock-fi lm/148991/ . 
 Ives, N. (2011c, June 22). American Medical Association pushes 
end to photoshopped body images in ads.  Advertising Age . 
Online:  http://adage.com/article/mediaworks/ama-end
-ads-unrealistic-body-images/228354/ . 
 Ives, N. (2012, January 19). Online ad spending to pass print for 
the fi rst time, forecast says.  A d vertising Age . Online:  http://
adage.com/article/mediaworks/emarketer-online-ad
-spending-pass-print-time/232221/ . 
 Iyengar, S., & Kinder, D. R. (1987).  News that matters: Television 
and American opinion. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.  
 Izadi, E. (2011, October 19). Th e rise of interracial marriage. 
 DCentric . Online:  http://dcentric.wamu.org/2011/10
/the-rise-of-interracial-marriage/ . 
 Jackson, J. (2001, September/October). Th eir man in 
Washington.  Extra!, pp. 6–9. 
 Jackson, J. (2012, April). 12 th annual fear & favor review.  Extra! , 
pp. 7–9. 
  Jackson, J., & Hart, P. (2002, March/April). Fear and favor 2001. 
 Extra!, pp. 20–27. 
 Jacobellis v. Ohio, 378 U.S. 184, 197 (1964). 
 James, M. (2011, December 8). Cable TV networks feel pressure 
of programming costs.  Los  A n geles Times . Online:  http://
articles.latimes.com/2011/dec/08/business/la-fi -ct-cable
-economics-20111208 . 
  Jamieson, K. H., & Campbell, K. K. (1997).  Th e interplay of 
infl uence: News, advertising, politics, and the mass media. 
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. 
  Jardin, X. (2005a, April). Th e Cuban revolution.   Wired, 
pp. 119–121. 
  Jardin, X. (2005b, December). Th inking outside the box offi  ce. 
 Wired, pp. 256–257. 
 Jeff erson, C. (2011, December 22). Happy, fl ourishing city with 
no advertising.  Good Cities . Online: http://www.good.is
/post/a-happy-fl ourishing-city-with-no-advertising/. 
 Joff e, J. (2006, May 14). Th e perils of soft power.  New York Times 
Magazine, pp. 15–17. 
  John Paul II. (2005, April 11). Two cents: Letter to 
commemorate the Feast of Saint Francis D e Sales. 
 Broadcasting & Cable, p. 54. 
 Johnson, B. (2011a, October 3). Leading media companies. 
 Advertising Age , pp. 44–45. 
 Johnson, B. (2011b, December 5). Where’s the growth? Follow 
the BRIC road. Advertising Age, pp. 1, 8. 
 Johnson, C. (2012, Spring). Second chance.  American 
Journalism Review , pp. 18–25. 

References 
R-9
 Lovison, J. (2011, December 2). Game over—or level up. 
 MediaPost . Online: http://www.mediapost.com
/publications/article/163431/game-over-or-level
-up.html. 
 Lowenstein, D. (2005, May). 2005 state of the industry speech. 
Entertainment.Software Associ a tion. Online: http://www
.theesa.com/archives/2005/05/e3_state_0_1.php. 
 Lowrey, A. (2011, July 20). Readers without Borders.  Slate. 
Online:  http://www.slate.com/articles/business
/moneybox/2011/07/readers_without_borders.html . 
 Lowery, S. A., & DeFleur, M. L. (1995).  Milestones in mass 
communication research. White Plains, NY: Longman. 
 Lowman, S. (2010, March 21). Th e future of children’s book 
publishing.  Washington Post ,  p. BW8. 
 Lowry, B. (2010, June 21–27). Tunes in, turned on—all the time. 
 Variety,  pp. 10, 13. 
 Ludwig, S. (2012, February 2). As number of Facebook users 
surge on mobile, company faces new challenges. 
 VentureBeat . Online:  http://www.washingtonpost.com
/business/technology/as-number-of-facebook-users-surge
-on-mobile-company-faces-new- challenges/2012/02/02
/gIQA7mXvtQ_story.html?wpisrc  nl_tech . 
 Lunden, I. (2012a, January 31).  Social network ads: LinkedIn 
falls behind Twitter; Facebook biggest of all.  PaidContent . 
Online:  http://paidcontent.org/article/419-social-network
-ads-linkedin-falls-behind-twitter-facebook-biggest-of-al/ . 
 Lunden, I. (2012b, February 17). Analyst: Facebook will make 
$1.2 billion annually from mobile ads.  TechCrunch . Online: 
 http://techcrunch.com/2012/02/17/analyst-facebook-will
-make-1-2-billion-annually-from-mobile-ads/ . 
  Lunden, I. (2012c, February 24). First look: Survey warns of 
consumers turning off  from digital ads.   TechCrunch . Online: 
 http://techcrunch.com/2012/02/24/fi rst-look-survey
-warns-of-consumers-turning-off -from-digital-ads/ . 
 Lyons, D. (2005, November 14). Attack of the blogs.   Forbes , 
pp. 128–138. 
  MacArthur, K. (2003, November 18). KFC pulls controversial 
health-claim chicken ads.   AdAge.com . Online: http://www
.adage.com/news.cms? newsid  39220. 
 MacMillan, R. (2009, February 11). In DC media, newspapers 
sink, niche outlets swim.   Reuters . Online: http://blogs
.reuters.com/mediafi le/2009/02/11/in-dc-media
-newspapers-sink-niche-outlets-swim/. 
  Madden, M. (2012, February 24). Privacy management on 
social media sites.  Pew Internet & American Life Project . 
Online: http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2012/Privacy
-management-on-social-media-aspx. 
 Madrak, S. (2009, October 31). Th e Senate announces deal on 
reporters’ shield law; bloggers i n cluded.  Crooks and Liars . 
Online: http://crooksandliars.com/susie-madrak/senate
-announces-deal-reporters-shiel. 
  Mahler, J. (2010, January 24). James Patterson Inc.  New York 
Times Magazine ,  pp. 32–39, 46–48. 
  Mandese, J. (2009, July 8). Forrester revises interactive outlook, 
will account for 21% of marketing by 2014.   MediaPost . 
Online: http://www.mediapost.com/publications
/?fa  Articles.showArticle&art_aid  109381. 
 Manjoo, F. (2008, July 27). Branded.  New York Times Book 
Review, p. 7. 
 Knopper, S. (2011, November 24). Rock radio takes another hit. 
 Rolling Stone , p. 19. 
 Knopper, S. (2012, March 1). Is the CD era fi nally over?  Rolling 
Stone , p. 13. 
 Konner, J. (1999, March/April). Of Clinton, the Constitution & 
the press.  Columbia Journalism R e view, p. 6. 
 Kristula, D. (1997, March).  Th e history of the Internet. Online: 
http://www.davesite.com/webstation/net-history.shtml. 
 Kulicke, H. (2011, October). Quest for success.  Editor & 
Publisher , pp. 48–52. 
 Kulicke, H. (2012, February). Publishers seek to capitalize on 
e-books.  Editor & Publisher , pp. 41–44. 
 Kuralt, C. (1977).  When television was young (videotape). New 
York: CBS News. 
 Kurtz, H. (2009, August 24). Death panels smite journalism. 
 Washington Post . Online: http://www.washingtonpost.com
/wp-dyn/content/article/2009/08/24/AR2009082400996.html. 
 Kuttner, R. (2007, March/April). Th e race.  Columbia Journalism 
Review, pp. 24–32. 
 Lasswell, H. D. (1948). Th e structure and function of 
communication in society. In L. Bryson (Ed.),  Th e 
communication of ideas. New York: Harper. 
 Lawless, J. (2008, January 2). US near bottom of Global Privacy 
Index.  Washington Post . Online: http://www
.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/01/02
/AR2008010201082_pdf. 
  Lazarsfeld, P. F. (1941). Remarks on administrative and critical 
communications research.  Studies in Philosophy and Social 
Science, 9, 2–16. 
  Leading national advertisers. (2010, June 21).   Advertising Age, 
pp. 10–11. 
 Learmonth, M. (2010a, January 18). Th inking outside the box: 
Web TVs skirt cable giants.  Adve r tising Age, pp. 1, 19. 
 Learmonth, M. (2010b, February 2). For some consumers, 
online video ads still grate.  Advertising Age . Online: http://
adage.com/article_id  141860. 
 Lemann, N. (2009, November 15). Journalism schools can push 
coverage beyond breaking news.  Chronicle of Higher 
Education, pp. B8–B9. 
 Lemire, C. (2011, May 20). Spurlock sells out and has a great 
time doing it.  Providence Journal , p. D3. 
 Lepore, J. (2009, January 26). Back issues.   Th e New Yorker, 
pp. 68–73. 
  Lester, J. (2002, Spring). Carved runes in a clearing.  Umass, 
pp. 24–29. 
  Lewis, P. (2005, July 25). Invasion of the podcast people. 
 Fortune, pp. 204–205. 
 Lithwick, D. (2012, March 12). Extreme makeover.  New Yorker , 
pp. 76–79. 
 Littleton, C., & Schneider, M. (2009, December 7–13). Turn on 
tune in.  Vari ety , pp. 1, 62. 
  Loechner, J. (2011a, March 2). Play it again, Sam.   Mediapost. 
Online: http://www.mediapost.com/publications
/?fa  Articles.showArticle&art_aid  14573. 
 Loechner, J. (2011b, June 23).  Teen media behavior; texting, 
talking, socializing, TV watching, mobiling.   MediaPost . 
Online:  http://www.mediapost.com/publications
/article/152661/  .  

R-10 
References
  McGonigal, J. (2011, February 15). Video games: An hour a 
day is key to success in life.   Huffi  n g ton Post . Online:  
http://www.huffi  ngtonpost.com/jane-mcgonigal
/video-games_b_823208.html  .  
 McKelvey, T. (2009, June). Keeping secrets.  American Prospect, 
pp. 58–59. 
  McKenna, K. (2000, August). John Malkovich interview. 
 Playboy, pp. 65–78. 
 McLuhan, M. (1962).  Th e Gutenberg galaxy: Th e making of 
typographic man. London: Routledge. 
 McLuhan, M. (1964).  Understanding media: Th e extensions of 
man. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
 McLuhan, M., & Fiore, Q. (1967).  Th e medium is the massage. 
New York: Random House. 
 McLuhan, M., & Stern, G. E. (1967). A dialogue: Q & A. In M. 
McLuhan & G. E. Stern (Eds.),  McLuhan: Hot and cool: A 
primer for the understanding of McLuhan and a critical 
symposium with a rebuttal by McLuhan. New York: 
Dial Press.  
 McMasters, P. K. (2005, March 27). Censorship is alive and well, 
deadly to free expression.   Prov i dence Journal, p. I5. 
 McQuail, D. (1987).  Mass communication theory: An 
introduction. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. 
 Meadows, B. (2009, February 14). Kevin Smith “too fat” to fl y 
Southwest.  People . Online: http://www.cnn.com/2010
/SHOWBIZ/02/15/kevin.smith.southwest/index.html. 
  Media Matters. (2008, May 14). Military analysts named in 
 Times exposé appeared or were quoted more than 4,500 
times on broadcast nets, cables, NPR. Online: http://
mediamatters.org/research/200805130001. 
  Meehan, M. (2004, January 20). Th e ratings game: System has 
its fl aws, one of which is lax oversight.   Knight Ridder Tribune 
News Service, p. 1. 
 Meikeljohn, A. (1960).  Political freedom . New York: Harper. 
 Melber, A. (2008, October 30). Web puts dog-whistle politics on 
a leash.   Th e  Nation . Online: http://www.thenation.com
/doc/20081117/melber. 
 Menaker, D. (2009, September 14). Redactor agonistes.  Barnes 
& Noble Review . Online: http://bnreview.barnesandnoble
.com/t5/Reviews-Essays/Redactor-Agonistes/ba-p/1367. 
 Merton, R. K. (1967).  On theoretical sociology.  New York: Free 
Press. 
 Mieszkowski, K. (2008, February 2). Young voters are 
stoked.  Salon . Online: http://www.salon.com/news
/feature/2008/02/02/youth_vote_2008.html. 
 Miller v. State of California, 413 U.S. 15 (1973). 
  Mindlin, A. (2009, January 5). Web passes papers as news 
source.  New York Times ,  p. B3. 
 Mirkinson, J. (2012, February 29).  Rush Limbaugh: Sandra 
Fluke, woman denied right to speak at contraception 
hearing, a “slut.”  Huffi  ngton Post . Online:  http://www
.huffi  ngtonpost.com/2012/02/29/rush-limbaugh-sandra
-fl uke-slut_n_1311640.html . 
 Mitchell, A., Rosenstiel, T., & Christian, L. (2012). Mobile 
devices and news consumption: Some good signs for 
journalism.  State of the news media 2012 . Online: http://
stateofthemedia.org/2012/mobile-devices-and-news
-consumption-some-good-signs-for-journalism/. 
 Manjoo, F. (2011, July 26). How Netfl ix is killing piracy.  Slate . 
Online:  http://www.slate.com/articles/technology
/technology/2011/07/how_netfl ix_is_killing_piracy.html . 
 Marche, S. (2012, May). Is Facebook making us lonely?  Atlantic . 
Online: http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine
/archive/2012/05/is-facebook-making-us-lonely/8930/. 
 Marich, R. (2011, October 17 – 23). VOD’s vigor gives H’wood 
new hope.  Variety , pp. 1, 12. 
 Market share for each distributor in 2011. (2011).  Th e 
Numbers.  Online: http://www.the-numbers.com/market
/Distributors2011.php. 
  Marriott, H. (2005, October 27). ICCO president Saunders 
calls for “ethical” approach.  PRWeek . Online: http://
www.prweek.com/uk/news/article/524519. 
 Martin, C. E. (2007, April 18). Th e frightening normalcy of 
hating your body. Online: http://www.truthout.org
/issues_06/printer_041807WA.shtml. 
  Masnick, M., & Ho, M. (2012, January).  Th e sky is rising . 
 Techdirt . Online:  http://www.techdirt.com/skyisrising/ . 
  Mast, G., & Kawin, B. F. (1996).  A short history of the movies. 
Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 
  Mastro, D. (2009). Eff ects of racial and ethnic stereotyping. In 
J. Bryant & M. B. Oliver (Eds.),  M e dia eff ects: Advances in 
theory and research . New York: Routledge. 
 Matsa, K., Rosenstiel, T., & Moore, P. (2011). Magazines: A 
shake-out for news weeklies.  State of the news media 2011 . 
Online:  http://stateofthemedia.org/2011/magazines-essay/ . 
 Matsa, K., Sasseen, J., & Mitchell, A. (2012). Magazines: Are 
hopes for tablets overdone?  State of the news media 2012. 
Online: http://stateofthemedia.org/2012/magazines-are
-hopes-for-tablets-overdone/. 
  McAdams, D. D. (2010, March 22). Broadcast nets own 80% of 
prime-time shows.  Television Broadcast . Online: http://
www.televisionbroadcast.com/article/96866. 
  McChesney, R. W. (1997). Corporate media and the threat to 
democracy. New York: Seven St o ries Press. 
  McChesney, R. W. (1999).   Rich media, poor democracy. Urbana: 
University of Illinois Press. 
  McChesney, R. W. (2004, July). Waging the media battle. 
 American Prospect, pp. 24–28. 
 McChesney, R. W. (2007).  Communication revolution . New 
York: New Press. 
  McClellan, S. (2002, May 27). Winning, and losing too. 
 Broadcasting & Cable, pp. 6–7. 
 McClellan, S. (2011, October 19). Public more worried about 
privacy loss than terrorism.  Medi a Post . Online:  http://www
.mediapost.com/publications/article/160709/public-more
-worried-about-privacy-loss-than-terror.html  .  
  McClellan, S. (2012, March 14). Global ad budgets shift to 
emerging markets.  MediaPost . Online: http://www
.mediapost.com/publications/article/170166/global-ad
-budgets-shift-to-emerging-markets.html. 
 McCombs, M. E., & Shaw, D. L. (1972). Th e agenda-setting 
function of mass media.  Public Op i nion Quarterly, 36, 
176–187.  
  McCullagh, D. (2005, June 27). DSL providers hope to mimic 
cable’s win. Online: http://news.com.com/2102-1034_3
-5765085.html.  

References 
R-11
 New York Times v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254 (1964). 
 New York Times v. United States, 403 U.S. 713 (1971). 
 Nichols, J. (2007, January 29). Newspapers . . . and after?   Th e 
Nation, pp. 11–17. 
 Nichols, J. (2009, May 18). Public fi rms’ greed fueled papers’ 
woes.  Providence Journal , p. C5. 
 Nichols, J. (2010, February 22). Obama’s neutrality. 
 Th e Nation, p. 5. 
 Nielsen Company. (2011, January 6).   U. S. audiences & devices. 
Online: http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/wp-content
/uploads/2011/01/nielsen-media-fact-sheet-jan-11.pdf. 
  Ninety-Second Congress. (1972).   Hearings before the 
Subcommittee on Communications on the Surgeon General’s 
Report by the Scientifi c Advisory Committee on Television 
and Social Beh a vior.   Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Offi  ce.  
  Norsigian, J., Diskin, V., Doress-Worters, P., Pincus, J., Sanford, 
W., & Swenson, N. (1999). Th e Boston Women’s Health Book 
Collective and   Our bod ies, ourselves:   A brief history and 
refl ection.  Journal of the American Medi cal Women’s 
Association . Online: http://www.ourbodiesourselves.org. 
  NPD Group. (2011, October 19).  According to Th e NPD Group, 
Americans still listen to music on AM/FM radio more than 
any other choice, but streaming music via smartphones is 
gaining ground. Online:  http://npdgroup.com/wps/portal
/npd/us/news/pressreleases/pr_111019a . 
 O’Brien, T. L. (2005, February 13). Spinning frenzy: P. R.’s bad 
press.  New York Times, p. 3.1. 
 Olmstead, K., Sasseen, J., Mitchell, A., & Rosenstiel, T. (2012). 
Digital: News gains audience but loses ground in chase for 
revenue.  State of the news media 2012 . Online: http://
stateofthemedia.org/2012/digital-news-gains-audience
-but-loses-more-ground-in-chase-for-revenue/. 
 100 global marketers, 2011. (2011, December 5).  Advertising 
Age , pp. 6–7. 
  Online video business. (2012, January 2).  Broadcasting & Cable , 
pp. 30 – 31. 
 Online video market 2011. (2011, September 19).  Advertising 
Age , Insert. 
 Open Mobile Video Coalition. (2012, January 6).  Mobile digital 
TV expands nationwide to 120 stations. Online:  http://www
.openmobilevideo.com/_assets/docs/press-releases/2012
/OMVC-at-CES-2012-FINAL.pdf . 
  Oppelaar, J. (2003, May 12–18). Will Apple for pay keep 
doldrums away?  Variety, p. 42. 
 Oremus, W. (2012, April 13). Hell phone.  Slate . Online:  
http://www.slate.com/articles/technology
/technology/2012/04/how_to_stop_text_spam
_why_cellphone_spam_is_on_the_rise_and_what
_you_can_do_about_it_.2.html . 
 Oreskovic, A. (2012, January 23). YouTube video views hit 
4 billion per day.  Huffi  ngton Post . Online:  http://www
.huffi  ngtonpost.com/2012/01/23/youtube-video
-views_n_1223070.html . 
 Ortutay, B. (2012, January 23). Pew report fi nds tablet, e-book 
ownership nearly doubled over the holidays.  Minneapolis 
Star-Tribune . Online:  http://www.startribune.com
/lifestyle/137878993.html . 
 Mitchell, B. (2011, October 19). It’s time: 5 reasons to put up a 
metered paywall.  Poynter . Online:  http://www.poynter.org
/latest-news/business-news/newspay/149953/its-time-5
-reasons-for-taking-the-plunge-into-a-metered-paywall/ . 
 Mitchell, G. (2009, April). Watchdogs failed to bark on 
economy.  Editor & Publisher , p. 16 
 Mitchell, S. (2009, August 15). Death of the category killers. 
 Progressive Populist ,  pp. 1, 8. 
 Mnookin, S. (2007, December). Th e angry mogul.  Wired, 
pp. 202–212. 
 Mobile Marketing 2011. (2011, October 10).  Advertising Age , Insert. 
 Morozov, E. (2012, January 23). Warning: Th is site contains 
conspiracy theories.  Slate . Online: http://www.slate.com
/articles/technology/future_tense/2012/01/anti_vaccine
_activists_9_11_deniers_and_google_s_social_search_.html. 
 Morrisey, J. (2011, September 4). O.K., downloaders, let’s try 
this song again.  New York Times , p. BU1. 
 Morrison, P. (2011, October). Media monopoly revisited.  Extra! 
pp. 13 – 15. 
 Moses, A. (2007, August 7). New life for Afterworld on Web and 
phone. Online: http://www.smh.com.au/news/afterworld
-series-hits-tv-web-and-phone/207/08/07.htm. 
  Moyers, B. (2004, September 11). Journalism under fi re. 
 AlterNet . Online: http://www.alternet.org/module/19918. 
  Moyers, B. (2007, February 12). Discovering what democracy 
means. Online: http://www.tompaine.com/discovering
_what_democracy_means.php. 
  Muller, J. (2011, September 13). Where newspapers thrive.  Los 
Angeles Times . Online: http://articles.latimes.com/2011
/sep/13/opinion/la-oe-muller-weeklies-20110913. 
 Mutual Film Corp. v. Industrial Commission  of Ohio, 236 U.S. 
230 (1915). 
 National Broadcasting Co. v. United States, 319 U.S. 190 (1943). 
 National Cable and Telecommunications Association (NCTA). 
(2012). Industry statistics. Online: http://www.ncta.com
/statistics/aspx. 
 Naureckas, J. (2009, November). Public media and the 
democratifi cation of news.  Extra! , pp. 12–13. 
 Near v. Minnesota, 283 U.S. 697 (1931). 
 Neff , J. (2011, March 14). Study: When it comes to value 
perception, Amazon tops brands in U.S. and globally. 
 Advertising Age . Online:  http://adage.com/article/news
/millward-brown-study-amazon-tops-global-brand
-rankings/149393/ . 
 Neuman, W. (2011, April 29). U.S. seeks new limits on food ads 
for children.  New York Times , p. B1. 
  Neumeister, L. (2010, July 7). “Bad words” ban for TV struck 
down.  Providence Journal, p. B4. 
 Th e new imperative. (2005, September 26).   Advertising Age, 
pp. M1–M24. 
  Newport, F. (2011, August 29). Americans rate computer 
industry best, federal gov’t worst.  Ga l lup.com . Online: 
 http://www.gallup.com/poll/149216/americans-rate
-computer-industry-best-federal-gov-worst.aspx . 
  Newspaper Association of America. (2011, August 26). 
Newspaper readership & audience by age and gender. 
Online:  http://www.naa.org/Trends-and-Numbers
/Readership/Age-and-Gender.aspx . 

R-12 
References
Online:  http://www.huffi  ngtonpost.com/jeff -pollack
/sympathy-for-the-devil-wh_b_865887.html . 
 Pomerantz, D. (2009, August 6). Th e Web auteur.  Forbes . 
Online:  http://www.forbes.com/2009/08/06/online-video
-innovation-technology-e-gang-09-whedon.html. 
 Poniewozik, J. (2001, Fall). Get up, stand up.  Time, 
pp. 68–70. 
  Poniewozik, J. (2004, September 27). Th e age of iPod politics. 
 Time, p. 84. 
 PopCap. (2011, December 2). 2011 PopCap games social 
gaming research.  Information  Solutions Group . Online: 
 http://www.infosolutionsgroup.com/pdfs/2011_PopCap
_Social_Gaming_Research_Results.pdf . 
 Popova, M. (2012, January 10). Network: Th e secret life of your 
personal data, animated.  Brai n picking.org . Online:  http://
www.brainpickings.org/index.php/2012/01/10/network
-michael-rigley/ . 
  PR in the driver’s seat. (2009, October 26).   Advertising 
Age,   p. S6.  
  Preston, J. (2011, February 6). Movement began with outrage 
and a Facebook page that gave it an outlet.  New York Times, 
p. A10. 
 Project for Excellence in Journalism. (2004).  Th e state of the 
news media 2004 . Online: www.stateofthemedia.org./2004/. 
 Project for Excellence in Journalism. (2006).  Th e state of the 
news media 2005. Online: http://www.stateofthenewsmedia
.org/2005/.  
 PRSA. (2012a, March). Industry facts and fi gures.  Public 
Relations Society of America.  Online: http://media.prsa.org
/prsa  overview/industry  facts  fi gures/. 
 PRSA. (2012b, March, 2012). What is public relations?  Public 
Relations Society of America . Online:  http://www.prsa.org
/aboutprsa/publicrelationsdefi ned/ . 
 Przybys, J. (2011, January 30). Facebook changing the meaning 
of friendship.  Las Vegas Review-Journal . Online:  http://
www.lvrj.com/living/facebook-changing-the-meaning-of
-friendship-114891819.html . 
  Purcell, K., & Rainie, L. (2010, March 1). Understanding the 
participatory news consumer.  Pew Internet and American 
Life Project . Online: http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2010
/Online-News.aspx. 
 Purcell, K., Rainie, L., Mitchell, A., Rosensteil, T., & Olmstead, 
K. (2010). Understanding the part  i  cipatory news consumer. 
 Pew Internet & American Life Project. Online: http://
pewinternet.org/Reports/2010/Online-News.aspx. 
 Quantcast. (2012, March). Top sites for United States. Online: 
http://www.quantcast.com/top-sites/US. 
  Quindlen, A. (2000, July 17). Aha! Caught you reading. 
 Newsweek, p. 64. 
 Radio Broadcasters Attract Another 2.1 Million Weekly 
Listeners According to Radar 108. (2011, March 16). 
 Arbitron . Online:  http://arbitron.mediaroom.com/index
.php?s  43&item  750 . 
 Raine, L. (2011, May 30). Internet phone calls.  Pew Internet and 
American Life Project . Online:  http://pewinternet.org
/Reports/2011/13--Internet-phone-calls--Skype/Main
-report.aspx. 
 Osnos, P. (2009, March/April). Rise of the reader.  Columbia 
Journalism Review, pp. 38–39. 
  Ott, B. (2009, June 5). America’s safest cities.  Real Clear Politics . 
Online: http://www.realclearpolitics.com
/articles/2009/06/05/americas_safest_cities_96815.html. 
  Outing, S. (2005, November 16). Investigative journalism: Will it 
survive?  Editor & Publisher. O n line: http://www
.editorandpublisher.com/eandp/columns/stopthepresses
_display.jsp?vnu_content_id  1001523690. 
 Packard, V. O. (1957).  Th e hidden persuaders. New York: David 
McKay. 
 Palast, G. (2003, July 31). Silence of the media lambs.  AlterNet. 
Online: http://www.alternet.org/print.html?storyid  16524. 
 Palser, B. (2011, Winter). Apple’s gift to publishers.  American 
Journalism Review , p. 52. 
 Patel, S. (2012, February 29). Inmobi releases fi rst wave of mobile 
media consumption Q4 survey—global results.  Inmobi . 
Online: http://www.inmobi.com/inmobiblog/2012/02/29
/inmobi-releases-fi rst-wave-of-mobile-media-consumption
-q4-survey-%E2%80%93-global-results/. 
  Pearlstein, S. (2005, November 9). Prime time gets redefi ned. 
 Washington Post, p. D1. 
 Pegoraro, R. (2005, August 14). Broadband is too important to 
be left to cable-phone duopoly.  Washington Post, p. F7. 
 Pelli, D. G., & Bigelow, C. (2009, October 20). A writing 
revolution.  Seed Magazine . Online: http://seedmagazine
.com/content/article/a_writing_revolution/. 
  Pember, D. (1999).  Mass media law . Boston: McGraw-Hill. 
  Perez-Pena, R. (2007, December 8). Success without ads.  New 
York Times, p. C1. 
 Pew Research Center. (2011, September 22).  Press widely 
criticized, but trusted more than other sources . Online: 
 http://www.people-press.org/2011/09/22/press-widely
-criticized-but-trusted-more-than-other-institutions/ . 
 Phillips, B. (2010, September 9). U.S. Department of 
Transportation announces record-low level of drunk-driving 
fatalities.  Beer Institute . Online:  http://www.beerinstitute.org
/BeerInstitute/fi les/ccLibraryFiles/Filename/000000001089
/Dept%20of%20Transportation%20Data%202010%20-%20
FINAL%209-9-10.pdf . 
 Pickard, V. (2010). “Whether the giants should be slain or 
persuaded to be good”: Revisiting the Hutchins Commission 
and the role of media in a democratic society.  Critical 
Studies in Media Communication , 27, 391–411. 
 Pincus, J. (1998). Introduction. In Boston Women’s Health Book 
Collective (Eds.),  Our bodies, ourselves for the new century 
(pp. 21–23). New York: Touchstone. 
  Plambeck, J. (2010, February 25). 10 billionth download for 
iTunes.  New York Times ,  p. C5. 
  Plate, T. (2003, January 23). Media giantism and the IHT crisis. 
 Providence Journal, p. B4. 
 Poggi, J. (2012, February 27). What is interactive TV, anyway? 
 Advertising Age , p. 62. 
  Pollak, C. (2009, December 18). Video games in play. 
 NielsenWire . Online: http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire
/consumer/video-games-in-play/. 
 Pollack, J. (2011, May 30). Sympathy for the devil: Why the 
major labels might be right this time.  Huffi  ngton Post . 

References 
R-13
http://www.npr.org/blogs/alltechconsidered/2010/02
/this_aint_your_mothers_farmvil.html. 
 Santhanam, L., Mitchell, A., & Rosenstiel, T. (2012). Audio: How 
far will digital go?  State of the news media 2012 . Online: 
 http://stateofthemedia.org/2012/audio-how-far-will
-digital-go/ . 
 Saroyan, S. (2011, June 17). Storyseller.  New York Times 
Magazine , pp. 26–29. 
 Sass, E. (2009, April 10). “Custom publishing” chugs along. 
 MediaPost . Online: http://www.mediapost.com
/publications/?fa  Articles.showArticle&art_aid  103849. 
 Sass, E. (2010a, July 15). Mag bag: Hearst campaign highlights 
mag readership.  MediaPost . Online:  http://www.mediapost
.com/publications/article/132058/mag-bag-hearst
-campaign-highlights-mag-readership.html . 
 Sass, E. (2010b, December 29). Time spent on magazines, 
newspapers, radio slips in 2010.  M e diapost. Online: http://
www.mediapost.com/publications/?fa  Articles
.showArticle&art_aid  142090. 
 Sass, E. (2011a, July 27). 56% of Americans check online news 
daily.  MediaPost . Online:  http://www.mediapost.com
/publications/article/154841/ . 
 Sass, E. (2011b, September 2). Winners and losers: Th e 
changing media ad landscape.  Medi a Post . Online:  http://
www.mediapost.com/publications/article/157452/ . 
 Sass, E. (2011c, October 28). Clear Channel Radio lays off  DJs. 
 MediaPost . Online: http://www.mediapost.com/publications
/article/161330/clear-channel-radio-lays-off -djs.html. 
 Sass, E. (2011d, November 2). Newspaper circs sink again. 
 MediaPost . Online:  http://www.mediapost.com/publications
/article/161566/newspaper-circs-sink-again.html .  
 Sass, E. (2011e, December 14). 239 magazines launched 
in 2011.  MediaPost . Online:  http://www.mediapost
.com/publications/article/164252/239-magazines-
launched-in-2011.html . 
 Sass, E. (2012, April 17). Hispanics wield $1 trillion  buying 
power.  MediaPost . Online: http://www.mediapost.com
/publications/article/172672/hispanics-wield-1-trillion
-buying-power.html. 
 Sauer, A. (2006, February 27). Brandchannel’s 2005 Product 
Placement Awards. Online: http://brandchannel.com/ar
_id  303&section  main. 
 Schechner, S., & Peers, M. (2011, December 6). Cable-TV honchos 
cry foul over soaring cost of ESPN.  Wall Street Journal . Online: 
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB1000142405297020408320457
7080793289112260.html. 
 Schenck v. United States, 249 U.S. 47 (1919). 
 Schwartzman, A. J. (2004, December 3). Media Access Project 
issues statement on Supreme Court order granting certiorari 
in  Brand X v. FCC. Online: http://www.mediaaccess.org. 
 Schweizer, K. (2010, September 13). Asia-Pacifi c to pass North 
America as biggest ad market in 2014.  Bloomberg. Online: 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2010-09-12/asia-pacifi c
-to-pass-north-america-as-biggest-ad-market-in-2014.html. 
  Scribner, S. (2001, February 7). Conspiracy to limit the fi lms we 
see.  Hartford Courant, pp. D1, D3. 
 Seabrook, J. (2003, July 7). Th e money note.  Th e New Yorker, 
pp. 42–55. 
 Rainey, J. (2011, December 5). NBC stations will use content 
from nonprofi t news outlets.  Los  Angeles Times . Online: 
 http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/entertainmentnewsbuzz
/2011/12/nbc-stations-will-share-content-from-non-profi t
-news-outlets.html . 
  Recording Industry Association of America. (2011). 
2010 year-end shipment statistics. Online: http://www
.RIAA.com. 
  Rehlin, G. (2010, March 1–7). Swedish court takes un-
commercial break.  Variety , p. 4. 
 Remnick, D. (2012, July 11 & 18). It gets better.  New Yorker , 
pp. 31–32. 
 Reporters Without Borders. (2012, January 25). 2011–2012 
world press freedom index. Online:  http://en.rsf.org/IMG
/CLASSEMENT_2012/C_GENERAL_ANG.pdf . 
  Rhee, J., & Schone, M. (2010, February 8). Toyota dealers pull 
ABC TV ads; anger over “exce s sive stories.”  ABC News . 
Online: http://abcnews.go.com/Blotter/toyota-dealers-pull
-abc-tv-ads-anger-excessive-toyota-safety-recall
/story?id  9776474. 
 Ricchiardi, S. (2007, August/September). Distorted picture. 
 American Journalism Review , pp. 36–43. 
 Rich, F. (2004, March 28). Real journalism’s in trouble, while 
fake stuff  fl ourishes.  Providence Journal, pp. E1, E2. 
 Rich, F. (2005, February 6). Th e year of living indecently.  New 
York Times, p. 2.1. 
  Rich, M. (2007, July 22). A magical spell on kids’ reading habits? 
 Providence Journa l , p. J2. 
  Rideout, V. J., Foehr, U. G., & Roberts, D. F. (2010).   Generation 
M 2 : Media in the lives of 8- to 18-year-olds . Menlo Park, CA: 
Kaiser Family Foundation. 
  Romenesko, J. (2012, April 16). Editor: We’ll cover advertisers’ 
staged events.  JimRomenesko.com . Online:  http://
jimromenesko.com/2012/04/16/newspaper-will-cover
-advertisers-staged-events/. 
  Rosaldo, R. (1989).  Culture and truth: Th e remaking of social 
analysis. Boston: Beacon Press. 
 Rose, F. (2008, March). Let my video go.  Wired, pp. 33–34. 
 Rosen, J. (2012, January 12). So whaddaya think: should we put 
truthtelling back up there at number one?  Press Th ink . 
Online:  http://pressthink.org/2012/01/so-whaddaya-think
-should-we-put-truthtelling-back-up-there-at-number-one/ . 
  Rosenberg, R. S. (1992).  Th e social impact of computers. Boston: 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 
  Rosenstiel, T., & Mitchell, A. (2011). Overview.   State of the news 
media 2011. Online: http://stateofthemedia.org/2011
/overview-2/. 
 Roth v. United States, 354 U.S. 476 (1957). 
 Saia v. New York, 334 U.S. 558 (1948). 
 Sampson, H. T. (1977).  Blacks in black and white: A source book 
on Black fi lms. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press. 
 Sandage, C. H., Fryburger, V., & Rotzoll, K. (1989).   Advertising 
theory and practice. New York: Longman.  
  Sanders, L., & Halliday, J. (2005, May 24). BP institutes “ad-pull” 
policy for print publications.  AdAge.com . Online: http://
www.adage.com/news.cms?newsId  45132. 
 Sanders, S. (2010, February 19). Th is ain’t your mother’s 
Farmville—well, actually it is.  National Public Radio . Online: 

R-14 
References
.com/publications/article/163170/economist-reports-1
-million-app-readers.html . 
 Smith, S. (2011c, November 3).  Smartphones now reach 62% 
of young adults 25 to 34.  Medi a Post . Online:  http://www
.mediapost.com/publications/article/161724/smartphones
-now-reach-62-of-young-adults-25-to-34.html?edition  399
24#ixzz1lnMVVprx . 
  Smith, S. (2012a, March 1).  Pew claims smartphone tipping 
point passed.  MediaPost . Online: http://www.mediapost
.com/publications/article/169171/pew-claims-smartphone
-tipping-point-passed.html . 
 Smith, S. (2012b, March 5).  25 billion apps served—Apple also 
touts 514,000 jobs created.  M e diaPost . Online:  http://www
.mediapost.com/publications/article/169366/25-billion
-apps-served-apple-also-touts-514000.html . 
 Smith, S. (2012c, March 23). End of an age: Netfl ix, Hulu, 
Amazon will beat physical video viewing in 2012.  MediaPost . 
Online: http://www.mediapost.com/publications/article
/170863/end-of-an-age-netfl ix-hulu-amazon-will-beat
-phy.html. 
 Smolkin, R. (2004, April/May). Th e next generation.   American 
Journalism Review, pp. 20–28. 
 Snyder, G. (2004, May 31–June 6). DVDs spawn a new star 
system.  Variety, p. 9. 
 Soley, L. C., & Nichols, J. S. (1987).  Clandestine radio 
broadcasting: A study of revolutionary and 
counterrevolutionary electronic communication. 
New York: Praeger. 
 Sony Corp. v. Universal City Studios, 464 U.S. 417 (1984). 
  SoundBites. (2005, December). A better mousetrap.  Extra! 
Update, p. 2. 
  SoundBites. (2011, August). Driven by profi ts, not quality. 
 Extra! , p. 3. 
 SRI Consulting. (2008, January).  Understanding U.S. consumers. 
Menlo Park, CA: Author. 
 Stanley, A. (2011, February 1). Th e TV watch: “Skins,” sex and 
foreign aff airs.  New York Times. Online: http://artsbeat
.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/02/01/the-tv-watch-skins-sex
-and-foreign-aff airs/. 
 Stanley, T. L. (2005, December 19). Reasons people skip movies. 
 Advertising Age, p. 20. 
 Starkman, D. (2009, January 14). How could 9,000 business 
reporters blow it?  Mother Jones . O n line: http://www
.motherjones.com/print/19947. 
 Stars diss Hollywood: Clooney, Edgerton & more swipe at 
commercial movie bombs. (2012, January 23).  Huffi  ngton 
Post . Online:  http://www.huffi  ngtonpost.com/2012/01/23
/stars-diss-hollywood-clooney-edgerton_n_1223315.html . 
 Stauber, J. C., & Rampton, S. (1995).  Toxic sludge is good for you: 
Lies, damn lies and the public relations industry. Monroe, 
ME: Common Courage Press. 
 Stein, L. (2010, February 12). Where has all the trust gone? 
 MediaPost . Online: http://www.mediapost.com
/publications/?fa  Articles.showArticle&art_aid  122357. 
 Steinberg, B. (2011, October 3). Are video-on-demand viewers 
Big Media’s next great hope?   A d vertising Age , p. 16. 
  Steinberg, S. H. (1959).   Five hundred years of printing. London: 
Faber & Faber. 
 Seabrook, J. (2012, January 16). Streaming dreams.   New Yorker , 
pp. 24 – 30. 
  Scola, N. (2011, November 20). Congress seeks to tame the 
Internet.  Salon . Online: http://www.salon.com/2011/11/20
/congress_seeks_to_tame_the_internet/. 
  Seipp, C. (2002, June). Online uprising.  American Journalism 
Review, pp. 42–47. 
  Seitel, F. P. (2004).  Th e practice of public relations . Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Pearson. 
  Sellers, J. (2001).  Arcade fever . Philadelphia: Running Press.  
 Shame on BP and Morgan Stanley ad pull policies. (2005, 
May 24).  AdAge.com . Online: http://www.adage.com
/news.cms?newsId  45141. 
 Shane, S. (2012, February 8). Radical U.S. Muslims little threat, 
study says.  New York Times,  p. A10. 
 Sheehy, A. (2011, October). E-book publishing & e-reading 
devices 2011 to 2015.  Generatorr e search.com . Online:  http://
www.giiresearch.com/report/gs220581-ebook-publishing
-ereading-devices-2011-2015.html . 
  Shenk, D. (1997).  Data smog: Surviving the information glut. 
New York: Harper Edge. 
  Sherman, S. (2004, March 15). Floating with the tide.   Th e 
Nation, pp. 4–5. 
  Shields, R. (2009, November 1). Illegal downloaders “spend the 
most on mu sic,” says poll.  Th e  Independent , p. 6. 
 Shirky, C. (2010). Th e shock of inclusion.  Edge . Online: http://
www.edge.org/q2010/q10_1.html. 
  Shirky, C. (2012, January 12).  Th e  New York Times public 
editor’s very public utterance. Guardian. Online:  http://
www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/cifamerica/2012
/jan/13/new-york-times-public-editor?CMP  twt_gu . 
 Should Comcast buy Disney? (2004, February 27).   Th e 
Week, p. 39. 
 Sigmund, J. (2010, October 20). Newspapers reach nearly 
three-in-four adult consumers with bu y ing power every 
week.  Newspaper Association of America. Online: http://
www.naa.org/PressCenter/SearchPressReleases/2010
/NEWSPAPERS-REACH-NEARLY-THREE-IN-FOUR-ADULT
-CONSUMERS-WITH-BUYING-POWER-EVERY-WEEK.aspx.  
 Silverblatt, A. (2008).  Media literacy (3rd ed.). Westport, CT: 
Praeger. 
 Sirota, D. (2011, May 27). Kid-baiting ads have gone too far. 
 Salon . Online: http://www.salon.com/2011/05/27/snoop
_dogg_ronald_mcdonald_advertising/. 
 Skenazy, L. (2008, May 19). Keep targeting kids and the parents 
will start targeting you.  Adverti s ing Age, p. 20. 
 Sloan, W., Stovall, J., & Startt, J. (1993).  Media in America: A 
history.  Scottsdale, AZ: Publishing Horizons. 
 Smith, L. D. (2011, May 25). 2011 Edelman value, engagement 
and trust in the era of social ente r tainment survey.  Edelman.
com . Online: http://www.edelman.com/news/ShowOne
.asp?ID  274. 
  Smith, S. (2011a, December 29).  Facebook reaches 300 million 
active mobile app users.  Medi a Post . Online:  http://www
.mediapost.com/publications/article/164958/facebook
-reaches-300-million-active-mobile-app-use.html . 
  Smith, S. (2011b, November 29). “ Economist” reports 1 million 
app readers.  MediaPost . Online:  http://www.mediapost

References 
R-15
http://www.bowker.com/press/bowker/2005_0524
_bowker.htm. 
 Tebbel, J. (1987).  Between covers: Th e rise and transformation of 
American book publishing. New York: Oxford University Press. 
  Tebbel, J., & Zuckerman, M. E. (1991).  Th e magazine in America 
1741 – 1990. New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Teegardin, C. (2012, January 1). Grim childhood obesity ads stir 
critics.  Atlanta Journal Constit u tion . Online:  http://www.ajc
.com/news/grim-childhood-obesity-ads-1279499.html . 
 Teens killed girl using  Mortal Kombat   moves: Police. (2007, 
December 20). Online: http://www.thewest.com.au
/ContentID  51798. 
  Television Bureau of Advertising. (2011). TV basics. Online: 
http://www.tvb.org/tvfacts/tvbasics.html. 
  Tessler, J. (2010, February 23). FCC says broadband education 
needed.  TVNewsCheck . Online: http://www.tvnewscheck
.com/articles/2010/02/23/daily.2/. 
 Th arp, P. (2012, April 11). Cable bills to pass $200 a month by 
2020: Industry forecast.  New York Post . Online: http://www
.nypost.com/p/news/business/report_cable_month_by
_znd9R7wovueqksw5Cm0DjO. 
 Th ompson, B. (2007, November 19). A troubling case of readers’ 
block.   Washington Post, p. C1. 
 Th ompson, B. (2009, June 1). At publishers’ convention, is 
writing on the wall?  Washington Post . Online: http://www
.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2009/05/31
/AR2009053102119.html.  
 Th ornton, L. (2009, February/March). Can the press fi x itself? 
 American Journalism Review , p. 2. 
 Th orp, B. K. (2011, April 1). Terry Jones burns Qur’an; Mob kills 
ten UN workers.  Broward/Palm Beach New Times . Online: 
 http://blogs.browardpalmbeach.com/pulp/2011/04/terry
_jones_afghan_riot.php . 
  Tillinghast, C. H. (2000).   American broadcast regulation and the 
First Amendment: Another look. Ames: Iowa State University 
Press. 
 Time, Inc. v. Hill, 385 U.S. 374 (1967). 
  Timpane, J. (2010, March 30). Google’s vast digital library. 
 Providence Journal , pp. D1–D2. 
 Top 50 global marketers. (2009, December 28). Annual 2010. 
 Advertising Age ,  p. 15. 
 Traffi  c stats. (2010, March 2). Pogo.com.  Alexa . Online: http://
www.alexa.com/siteinfo/pogo.com. 
  Trench, M. (1990).   Cyberpunk. Mystic Fire Videos. New York: 
Intercon Production. 
 Trigoboff , D. (2003, June 9). Copps: Dereg foes will be back. 
 Broadcasting & Cable, p. 36. 
  Tsukayama, H. (2012a, January 17). SOPA: Twitter will not join 
Wikipedia, Reddit in blackout.   Washington Post . Online: 
 http://www.washingtonpost.com/business/technology
/sopa-twitter-will-not-join-wikipedia-reddit-in-
blackout/2012/01/17/gIQAvDta5P_story.html . 
 Tsukayama , H. (2012b, March 28).  Xbox adds HBO Go, MLB.TV, 
Xfi nity, as it evolves from game console.  Washington Post . 
Online:  http://www.washingtonpost.com/business
/technology/xbox-adds-hbo-go-mlbtv-xfi nity-as-it-evolves
-from-game-console/2012/03/28/gIQASdAWgS_story
.html?wpisrc  nl_tech . 
 Stelter, B. (2012, February 2). Youths are watching, but less 
often on TV.  New York Times , p. B1. 
  Sterling, C. H., & Kitross, J. M. (1990).   Stay tuned: A concise 
history of American broadcasting. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. 
 Stevenson, M. (2008, June 27). Trying to parse the new radio 
daze.  Providence Journal, p. B4. 
 Stevenson, R. L. (1994).  Global communication in the twenty-
fi rst century. New York: Longman. 
 Stewart, C. S. (2010, February). Th e lost boys.  Wired , 
pp. 68–73, 107. 
 Stewart, Jon. (2011, June 30). Moral combat.  Th e Daily Show . 
Online: http://www.thedailyshow.com/watch/thu-june
-30-2011/moral-kombat. 
 St. George, D. (2009, April 20). Study fi nds some youth “addicted” 
to video games.  Washington  Post . Online:  http://www
.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2009/04/19
/AR2009041902350.html . 
  Stone, B. (2009, March 29). Is Facebook growing up too fast? 
 New York Times, pp. BU1, 6–7. 
  Stone, B., & Barboza, D. (2010, January 16). Scaling the digital 
wall.  New York Times ,  p. B1. 
 Th e story of the Ad Council. (2001, October 29).  Broadcasting & 
Cable, pp. 4–11. 
 Streisand, B., & Newman, R. J. (2005, November 14). Th e new 
media elites.  U.S. News & World Report ,  pp. 54–63. 
 Stross, R. (2011, May 29). Consumer complaints made easy. 
Maybe too easy.  New York Times , p. BU3. 
 Strupp, J. (2007, October). When is it appropriate to “out” polls? 
 Editor & Publisher, pp. 12–13. 
 Sullivan, A. (2002, May). Th e blogging revolution.   Wired, 
pp. 43–44. 
 Sullivan, J. (2011, May/June). True enough.  Columbia 
Journalism Review , pp. 34–39. 
  Sullivan, L. (2009, June 16). In-game ads in the ad game. 
 MediaPost . Online: http://www.mediapost.com
/publications/?fa  Articles.showArticle&art_aid  108089. 
 Sullivan, L. (2011, September 7). Home run: Sharpie YouTube 
ad grabs 62 million impressions.  MediaPost . Online: http://
www.mediapost.com/publications/article/158097/. 
  Survey: Readers prefer community paper for news. (2011, 
December 1).  National Newspaper  A s sociation . Online: 
 http://www.nnaweb.org/?/nnaweb/content01/2475/ . 
 Swing,  E. L.,  Gentile, D. A., Anderson, C. A., & Walsh, D. A.  
(2010). T elevision and video game exposure and the 
development of attention problems.  Pediatrics , 126, 214 – 221. 
 Szalavitz, M. (2011, November 7). Study: Whites more likely to 
abuse drugs than blacks.  Time . Online:  http://healthland
.time.com/2011/11/07/study-whites-more-likely-to-abuse
-drugs-than-blacks/ . 
 Szatmary, D. P. (2000).  Rockin’ in time: A social history of 
rock-and-roll (4th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
  Taylor, C. (2003, March 10). Day of the smart mobs.   Time, p. 53. 
  Taylor, D. (1991). Transculturating   transculturation  . 
 Performing Arts Journal, 13, 90–104. 
 Taylor, K. (2005, April). Th e state of digital cinema.   Wired, p. 121.  
 Teague, D. (2005, May 24). U.S. book production reaches 
new high of 195,000 titles in 2004; fi  c tion soars. Online: 

R-16 
References
.com/publications/article/170607/tablets-to-be-major
-player-in-mobile-games.html . 
 Walsh, M. (2012c, April 3). Online radio moving up the 
charts.  MediaPost . Online:  http://www.mediapost.com
/publications/article/171672/online-radio-moving-up-the
-charts.html?edition  45319 . 
 Walsh, M. (2012d, April 5). Pandora hits 1 billion listening 
hours, revs lag.  MediaPost . Online: http://www.mediapost
.com/publications/article/171883/pandora-hits-1-billion
-listening-hours-revs-lag.html?edition  45447. 
 Ward, E., Stokes, G., & Tucker, K. (1986).  Rock of Ages: Th e 
Rolling Stone  history of rock & roll.   New York: Rolling Stone 
Press. 
 Wartella, E. A. (1997).  Th e context of television violence. Boston: 
Allyn & Bacon.  
  Wasik, B. (2012, January). Crowd control.   Wired , pp. 76–83, 
112 – 113.  
 Wasserman, E. (2009, February 23). Press travails need 
Web-wide response.  Providence Journal, p. B6. 
  Webber, E. (2007, April 30). No need to bare all: PR should strive 
for translucence.   Advertising Age, p. 8. 
 Wedemeyer, J. (2010, January 29). Christina Hendricks and her 
husband defend her controve r sial Golden Globes dress. 
 People . Online: http://stylenews.peoplestylewatch
.com/2010/01/29/christina-hendricks-and-her-husband
-defend-her-controversial-golden-globes-dress/. 
 Whitney, D. (2011, November 23). A chaos theorist on video 
guides: Maybe we need them, but maybe we have outgrown 
them. MediaPost. Online:  http://www.mediapost.com
/publications/article/162952/a-chaos-theorist-on-video
-guides-maybe-we-need-th.html . 
 Whitney, D. (2012, February 22). Machima’s one billion views 
and counting come from a strong POV.  MediaPost . Online: 
http://www.mediapost.com/publications/article/168255
/machinimas-one-billion-views-and-counting-come-fr.html. 
 Whitney, L. (2010, January 13). Poll: Most won’t pay to read 
newspapers   online. Online: http://news.cnet.com/8301
-1023_3-10433893-93.html.  
  Whittaker, Z. (2012, June 22). Facebook could see ad revenue 
hit in “Sponsored Stories” lawsuit. ZDNet. Online:  http://
www.zdnet.com/blog/btl/facebook-could-see-ad-revenue
-hit-in-sponsored- stories-lawsuit/80613 . 
  Why Elvis still lives. (2002, August 9).   Th e Week, p. 9. 
 Why I believe in PR. (2009, October 26).  Advertising Age, p. S12. 
  Williams, M. E. (2009, August 12). Th is is your brain on 
retouching.  Salon . Online: http://www.salon.com
/mwt/broadsheet/feature/2009/08/12/kelly_clarkson
/index.html. 
 Williams, M. E. (2011, March 30). Why are parents defending 
a kids’ push-up bra?  Salon . Online:  http://www.salon
.com/2011/03/30/abercrombie_fi tch_pushup_bikinis_for
_children/ . 
 Williams, T. (2002, January/February). Dream society. 
 Adbusters, p. 17. 
 Windwalker, S. (2011, February 13). Amazon positioned for 50% 
overall market share by end of 2012.  Se e kingalpha.com . 
Online:  http://seekingalpha.com/article/250507-amazon
-positioned-for-50-overall-market-share-by-end-of-2012 . 
 Tsukayama, H. (2012c, April 3). Consumers concerned about 
online data sharing, sales.  Washin g ton Post . Online:  http://
www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-tech/post
/consumers-concerned-about-online-data-sharing
-sales/2012/04/03/gIQAWwpOtS_blog.html?wpisrc  nl_tech . 
 25 banned books that you should read today. (2011, March 
3).  DegreeDirectory.org . Online:  http://degreedirectory.org
/articles/25_Banned_Books_Th at_You_Should_Read_Today
.html . 
  Two cents: William Safi re on re-reg vote. (2003, July 21). 
 Broadcasting & Cable, p. 46. 
 UNESCO. (2005, October 20). General Conference adopts 
Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the 
Diversity of Cultural Expressions. Online: http://portal
.unesco.org. 
 USA Today.  (2000, July 9). Th e  Potter phenomenon: It’s just 
magic.   Honolulu Advertiser, p. E4. 
  U.S. Census Bureau. (2012). Marriage and divorces—number 
and rate by state: 1990 – 2009. O n line: http://www.census
.gov/compendia/statab/2012/tables/12s0133.pdf. 
 US movie market summary 1995 to 2012. (2012, February 8). 
 Th e Numbers . Online:  http://www.the-numbers.com
/market/ . 
 Valentine v. Christensen, 316 U.S. 52 (1942). 
  Vane, S. (2002, March). Taking care of business.   American 
Journalism Review, pp. 60–65. 
 Verrier, R. (2012, February 9). Average movie-ticket price 
edges up to a record $7.93 for 2011.  Los Angeles 
Times . Online:  http://latimesblogs.latimes.com
/entertainmentnewsbuzz/2012/02/average-movie
-ticket-price-2011.html . 
  Virgin, B. (2004, March 18). We’ve become instant billboards. 
 Seattle Post-Intelligencer, p. E1. 
  Vorhaus, M. (2009, February 9). Ad presence in console games 
has little eff ect on purchase.  A d vertising Age, p. 18. 
 Walcott, J. (2008, October 9). Truth is not subjective.  McClatchy 
Newspapers . Online: http://www.mcclatchydc.com/257
/story/53716.html. 
  Walker, R. (2009). Reality bytes.  New York Times Magazine, 
p. 32. 
 Wallenstein, A. (2012, April 16). Survey: A la carte could fetch 
$1.50 per channel.  Variety . Online: http://www.variety.com
/article/VR1118052724.html?cmpid  RSS. 
 Walsh, M. (2011b, January 26). Gartner: App sales to top $15 
billion in 2011.  Mediapost.  Online: http://www.mediapost
.com/publications/?fa  Articles. showArticle&art
_aid  14368. 
 Walsh, M. (2011a, January 26). Stop the presses, mobile 
surpasses print time spent.  MediaPost . Online: http://www
.mediapost.com/publications/article/164050/stop-the
-presses-mobile-surpasses-print-time-spen.html. 
 Walsh, M. (2012a, February 23). “Th e Daily” has 100,000 
subs—is that a ceiling or just a start?  MediaPost .  http://
www.mediapost.com/publications/article/168512
/the-daily-has-100000-subs-is-that-a-ceiling
.html?edition  43858 . 
 Walsh, M. (2012b, March 21). Tablets to be a major player in 
mobile games.  MediaPost . Online:  http://www.mediapost

References 
R-17
 Zeller, T. (2006, January 15). China, still winning against the 
Web.   New York Times, p. A4. 
 Zickuhr, K. (2010, December 16). Craigslist and online 
classifi eds.  Pew Internet & American Life Project . Online: 
 http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2010/Generations-2010
/Trends/Classifi eds.aspx . 
 Zickuhr, K. (2011, February 13). Generations and their gadgets. 
 Pew Internet & American Life Project. Online: http://www
.pewinternet.org/Reports/2011/Generations-and-gadgets
.aspx.  
 Zickuhr, K., & Smith, A. (2012, April 13). Digital diff erences.  Pew 
Internet & American Life Project . Online: http://pewinternet
.org/Reports/2012/Digital-diff erences/Overview.aspx#. 
 Zinn, H. (1995).  A people’s history of the United States, 
1492 – present . New York: HarperPerenn i al. 
  Zittrain, J. (2009, July 20). Lost in the cloud.  New York Times , 
p. A19 . 
 Winslow, G. (2009, January 5). Delivery dilemmas.  Broadcasting 
& Cable, pp. 15–16. 
  Wronge, Y. S. (2000, August 17). New report fuels TV-violence 
debate.  San Jose Mercury News, pp. 1E, 3E. 
 Yao, D. (2010, February 3). Dog star man.  Providence Journal, 
p. B2. 
 Yarow, J. (2012, March 27). iPad users are spending $70,000 a 
day on iPad newspapers and magazines.  Business Insider . 
Online:  http://www.businessinsider.com/ipad-users-are
-spending-70000-a-day-on-newspapers-and-magazines
-2012-3 . 
 Young, B. (2009, December 10). Human capacity for information 
is massive but fi nite.   Tec h NewsWorld  . Online: http://www
.technewsworld.com/perl/search.pl?query  Human  
capacity  for  information  is  massive  but  fi nite.  
 Younge, G. (2010, October 11). Islamophobia, European-style. 
 Nation, p. 10. 


C-1
PHOTO CREDITS
 Chapter 1   Opener: © Sean Gallup/Getty 
Images; page 8 (left): © Jeremy Woodhouse/
Getty Images RF; p. 8 (right): © Corbis RF; 
p. 10 (Simpsons): © Fox/Photofest; p. 10 
(McD): Th e McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc./
John Flournoy, photographer; p. 10 (fl ag): 
© Joe Drivas/Getty Images; p. 10 (Guitar 
Hero): Courtesy of Activision; p. 11 (left): © AP 
Photo/Richard Hartog; p. 11 (right): © ZUMA 
Press/Newscom; p. 12 (left): © Michael Tran/
FilmMagic/Getty Images; p. 12 (right): © Ruby 
Washington/Th e New York Times/Redux; 
p. 13 (top): © ABC Family/Photofest; p. 13 
(left): © CBS/Courtesy Everett Collection; 
p. 13 (right): © Th e CW/Courtesy Everett 
Collection; p. 14 (top): © AP Photo/lm Otero; 
0. 15: Courtesy of Extra! Th e Magazine of 
Fairness & Accuracy in Reporting; p. 16: © Jim 
Wehtje/Getty Images RF; p. 19: © North Wind 
Picture Archives/Alamy; p. 20: Th e Granger 
Collection, NY; p. 23 (top): © 20th Century 
Fox/Courtesy Everett Collection; p. 23 
(bottom): © Twentieth Century Fox Film 
Corporation/Th e Kobal Collection; p. 26: 
© Roger L. Wollenberg-Pool/Getty Images.   
 Chapter 2   Opener: © Jason Merritt/
FilmMagic/Getty Images; p. 30: photo: William 
Rexer/© Tribeca Film/Courtesy Everett 
Collection; p. 32 (man): © Photomondo/Getty 
Images RF; p. 32 (phone): © Th omas Northcut/
Getty Images RF; p. 32 (keys): © Photographer’s 
Choice/Getty Images RF; p. 32 (remote): 
© Stockbyte/Punchstock RF; p. 32 (paper): 
© Lawrence Manning/Corbis RF; p. 32 
(DVD): © Stockbyte/Punchstock RF; p. 35: © AP 
Photo/Kyodo News; p. 38: Th e McGraw-Hill 
Companies, Inc./Lars A. Niki, photographer; 
p. 39: © American Idol Prod./19 Television/Fox 
TV Network/Fremantle Media North America/
Th e Kobal Collection/Michael Becker; p. 40 
(both): © Susan Baran.  
 Chapter 3 
  Opener: © TSEL/Splash News/
Newscom; p. 48 (left, right): Th e Granger 
Collection, NY; p. 48 (middle): Library of 
Congress; p. 49 (left): Th e Granger Collection, 
NY; p. 49 (middle): © Anglo Enterprise/
Vineyard/Th e Kobal Collection; p. 49 (right): 
© Oleksiy Maksymenko Photography/
Alamy; p. 50: © Anglo Enterprise/Vineyard/
Th e Kobal Collection; p. 51 (top): Th e Granger 
Collection, NY; p. 51 (bottom): Courtesy of 
Culver Pictures; p. 53 (left): Th e McGraw-Hill 
Companies, Inc./Mark A. Dierker, photographer;
p. 53 (right): © Onsite/Alamy; p. 54: © Studio 
101/Alamy; p. 55: © Oleksiy Maksymenko/
Alamy RF; p. 56 (top): The McGraw-Hill 
Companies, Inc./Mark A. Dierker, photographer; 
p. 56 (bottom): © Veer RF; p. 59 (left): © Kevin 
Dietsch/UPI/Newscom; p. 59 (right): © 
Oleksiy Maksymenko Photography/Alamy; 
p. 60: © Leon Neal/AFP/Getty Images; p. 63 
(all): Courtesy of Ten Speed Press; p. 64: © 
Sipa via AP Images; p. 65: © Susan Baran; 
p. 66 (both): Courtesy of Human Rights 
First; p. 67: © Martin Oeser/AFP/Getty 
Images.  
 Chapter 4 
  Opener: © Joseph McKeown/
Hulton Archive/Getty Images; p. 72 (left): 
© Pixtal/age Fotostock RF; p. 72 (middle): 
Courtesy of John Frost Historical Newspapers; 
p. 72 (right): Th e Granger Collection, NY; p. 73 
(left): Th e McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc./Jill 
Braaten, photographer; p. 73 (middle): 
© Jack Delano/Library of Congress/Getty 
Images; p. 73 (right): © Alliance Images/
Alamy; p. 74: Courtesy of John Frost Historical 
Newspapers; p. 75 (both), p. 77: Th e Granger 
Collection, NY; p. 79: © ProPublica; p. 80: 
© Stockbyte/Getty Images RF; p. 81 (top): 
© Lew Robertson/Corbis RF; p. 81 (bottom), 
p. 82: © Susan Baran; p. 83: Photo by David 
Bloom, Citizens to Save the Eccentric; p. 84 
(left): Reprinted with the Permission of the 
Providence Phoenix. Copyright tk. All rights 
reserved.; p. 84 (right): © Sipa via AP 
Images; p. 85: © Dave Krieger/Getty 
Images; p. 86: © AP Photo/Wilfredo Lee; 
p. 91 (top): © MIXA/PunchStock RF; p. 91 
(bottom): © Alliance Images/Alamy .  
 Chapter 5 
  Opener (Cosmo): © AP Photo/
Hearst; (Wired): © Alliance Images/Alamy; 
(Rolling Stone): © AP Photo/Rolling Stone; 
p. 98 (left): Library of Congress; p. 98 (all): 
Th e Granger Collection, NY; p. 99 (middle): 
© Creative Crop/Digital Vision/Getty Images 
RF; p. 100, p. 101 (both): Th e Granger 
Collection, NY; p. 102 (left): © AP Photo/
People; p. 102 (right): © Studio 101/Alamy; 
p. 102 (bottom): © Susan Baran; p. 103 (left): 
© Alliance Images/Alamy; p. 104 (right): Th e 
Granger Collection, NY; p. 106: © Stockbyte/
PunchStock RF; p. 107 (top): © Creative 
Crop/Digital Vision/Getty Images RF; p. 107 
(bottom): Courtesy of the Meredith 
Corporation; p. 109: © Editorial Image, LLC/
Alamy; p. 110 (left): Courtesy McMurry, Inc. 
Cover illustration by Sean McCabe; p. 110 
(middle): Illustration © Anne Horst/www
.i2iart.com; p. 110 (right): Courtesy of Web 
MD; p. 112 (top): © Onsite/Alamy; p. 112 
(bottom all): © Custom Content Council; 
p. 113: Courtesy of Psychologie Heute; p. 115: 
Article: Courtesy of Woman’s Day/Hearst 
Magazines. Ad: © 2012 Th e Clorox Pet Products 
Company. Reprinted with permission. FRESH 
STEP® is a registered trademark of Th e Clorox 
Pet Products Company. Used with permission.; 
p. 116 (left): © Image Source/Getty Images 
RF; p. 116 (right): Courtesy of Th e Advertising 
Archives; p. 117: © 2011 Condé Nast/Patrick 
Demarchelier. All rights reserved. Originally 
published in Glamour. Reprinted by 
permission.   
 Chapter 6 
  Opener: photo: Dale Robinette/
© Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures/
Courtesy Everett Collection; p. 122 (left): 
© Pixtal/age Fotostock RF; p. 122 (middle, 
right): Th e Granger Collection, NY; p. 123 
(top): © Lumier/Th e Kobal Collection; p. 123 
(left): © Moviestore collection Ltd/Alamy; 
p. 123 (middle): Courtesy of Everett 
Collection; p. 123 (DVD): © Howard 
Kingsnorth/Getty Images RF; p. 123 (right): 
© Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation/
Th e Kobal Collection; p. 125 (both): Th e 
Granger Collection, NY; p. 127 (top): © Star 
Film/Edison Manufacturing Company/
Photofest; p. 127 (bottom): © Roger-Viollet/
Th e Image Works; p. 128, p. 129: Courtesy 
of  Everett Collection; p. 131: © Moviestore 
collection Ltd/Alamy; p. 132: © 20th Century 
Fox Film Corp./Courtesy Everett Collection; 
p. 134: © Warner Brothers/Seven Arts/
Photofest; p. 135: © Tony Cordoza/Alamy 
RF; p. 136 (left): © 20th Century Fox/
Courtesy Everett Collection; p. 136 (middle): 
© Walt Disney Pictures/Courtesy Everett 
Collection; p. 136 (right): © Blumhouse 
Productions/Th e Kobal Collection; p. 137: 
© Adrian Weinbrecht/Getty Images; p. 139 
(left): © Th e Weinstein Company/Courtesy 
Everett Collection; p. 139 (right): photo: Egon 
Endrenyi/© Warner Bros./Courtesy Everett 
Collection; p. 140:  © Sony Pictures Classics/
Courtesy Everett Collection; p. 141, p. 142 
(left): Courtesy of Everett Collection; p. 142 
(right): © Paramount/Courtesy Everett 
Credits

C-2 
Credits
Congress; p. 289 (left): Courtesy of Culver 
Pictures; p. 289 (top): © Susan Baran; p. 289 
(middle): © Brand X Pictures/PunchStock 
RF; p. 289 (right computer): © iStockvectors/
Getty Images RF; p. 289 (right magazines): 
© Creative Crop/Digital Vision/Getty Images 
RF; p. 290 (top): © Adam Woolfi tt/Woodfi n 
Camp & Associates; p. 290 (bottom): © AP 
Photo/Rusty Kennedy; p. 291: Th e Granger 
Collection, NY; p. 292: © 2012 Hasbro, Inc. 
Used with permision.; p. 293 (top): Th e 
Granger Collection, NY; p. 294 (bottom): 
Courtesy of Brown Brothers; p. 294 (left): 
© Th e Martin Advertising Agency/Getty 
Images; p. 294 (right): McGruff  the Crime 
Dog appears courtesy of the National Crime 
Prevention Council—Th e nation’s focal point 
for crime prevention; p. 295: Courtesy of 
Culver Pictures; p. 297 (top): Courtesy of Th e 
Advertising Archives; p. 297 (bottom): © Mike 
Kemp/Rubberball/Getty Images RF; p. 298: 
Courtesy Campaign for a Commercial-Free 
Childhood; p. 299: © Christina Kennedy/
PhotoEdit; p. 303: Courtesy of Defi nition 
Branding & Marketing; p. 304: © Brand X/
Superstock RF; p. 305: From “Public Service 
Announcement Posters” by the National 
Sexual Violence Resource Center, 2012. 
Available from http://www.nsvrc.org. 
Copyright 2012 by the National Sexual 
Violence Resource Center. Reprinted with 
permission.; p. 310: © Bill Aron/PhotoEdit; 
p. 312: © Brand X Pictures/PunchStock RF.  
 Chapter 13 
   Opener: © Byron Peter/Photo 
Researchers; p. 318 (left): © Famous Players/
Paramount/Th e Kobal Collection; p. 318 
(middle): © Ingram Publishing RF; p. 318 
(right): Offi  ce of War Information Photograph 
Collection/Library of Congress; p. 319 
(left): Courtesy of Professor Albert Bandura, 
Stanford University; p. 319 (middle): © Bill 
Aron/PhotoEdit; p. 319 (right): Th e McGraw-
Hill Companies, Inc./Mark A. Dierker, 
photographer; p. 320: © Susan Baran; p. 321: 
© CW/Courtesy Everett Collection; p. 322: 
© Bill Aron/PhotoEdit; p. 324: © Famous 
Players/Paramount/Th e Kobal Collection; 
p. 327: © CBS Radio/Photofest; p. 329: 
© Brand X Pictures RF; p. 333: © Comedy 
Central/Courtesy Everett Collection; p. 334: 
© Ragdoll Ltd./Courtesy Everett Collection; 
p. 336: © Mark Wilson/Getty Images; p. 340: 
© Warner Brothers/Photofest; p. 341: Courtesy 
of Professor Albert Bandura, Stanford 
University; p. 342: photo: Kelsey McNeal/
TM and Copyright © 20th Century Fox Film 
Corp. All rights reserved, Courtesy Everett 
Collection; p. 344: Courtesy of Th e Advertising 
Archives; p. 345 (L Word): photo: Liane 
Hentscher/© Showtime/Courtesy Everett 
Collection; p. 345 (Will & Grace): © NBC/
Courtesy Everett Collection; p. 345 (Modern 
Family): Th e Kobal Collection/Picture Desk; 
p. 345 (Queer as Folk): photo: L. Pief Weyman/
Showtime, © SHOWTIME/Courtesy Everett 
Collection; p. 326: The McGraw-Hill 
Companies, Inc./Mark A. Dierker, photographer.  
p. 199 (Th rones): © HBO/Th e Kobal 
Collection; p. 203: © Tim Pannell/Corbis RF; 
p. 205: © David Silverman/Getty Images.  
 Chapter 9 
  Opener: © Anatolii Babii/
Alamy; p. 210 (left, middle): Wayne Namerow 
Collection, photograph courtesy of Wayne 
Namerow; p. 210 (right): © Brand X Pictures/
PunchStock RF; p. 211 (left): © Roger 
Ressmeyer/Corbis; p. 211 (middle): 
© BananaStock/PunchStock RF; p. 211 (right): 
© Toy Alan King/Alamy; p. 212 (left, right): 
Wayne Namerow Collection, photograph 
courtesy of Wayne Namerow; p. 212 (bottom): 
Courtesy of the Computer History Museum; 
p. 213 (top): © Roger Ressmeyer/Corbis; p. 213 
(bottom): © AP Photo/Mike Derer; p. 215 (all): 
© Susan Baran; p. 219 (top): © Chris Ratcliff e/
Bloomberg via Getty Images; p. 223: © Allan 
Shoemake/Getty Images RF. 
 Chapter 10   Opener: © Khaled Desouki/AFP/
Getty Images; p. 232 (left): Library of Congress; 
p. 232 (middle, right): © AP Photo; p. 233 (top): 
© Robbie McClaran; p. 233 (left): © Dynamic 
Graphics/Jupiterimages RF; p. 233 (middle): 
© Jason Reed/Getty Images RF; p. 233 (right): 
© Creatas/PictureQuest RF; p. 234 (top): 
© Bernard Gutfryd/Woodfi n Camp & 
Associates; p. 234 (bottom): From the MIT 
Museum, © Koby-Antupit Studio, Cambridge/
Belmont, MA; p. 235, p. 236 (top): © AP 
Photo; p. 236 (bottom): © Agence France 
Presse/Getty Images; p. 237 (left): © AP Photo/
Apple Inc.; p. 237 (right): Courtesy of Apple; 
p. 237 (bottom): © PSL Images/Alamy; p. 239 
(left): © Doug Wilson/Corbis; p. 239 (right): 
© AP Photo/Paul Sakuma; p. 239 (bottom): 
© Roger Ressmeyer/Corbis; p. 240: © Catrina 
Genovese/WireImage/Getty Images; p. 242: 
© Brand X/JupiterImages/Getty Images RF; 
p. 245 (left): © 1962 University of Toronto Press. 
Reproduced by permission of the publisher. 
Photo by Alan Gallegos/AG Photograph; 
p. 245 (right): Courtesy of MIT Press; p. 247: 
© Emmanuel Dunand/AFP/GettyImages; 
p. 249: © Mario Tama/Getty Images.  
 Chapter 11   Opener: © McGraw-Hill 
Education/Mark Dierker, photographer; p. 264 
(left): Th e Granger Collection, NY; p. 264 
(middle, right): Library of Congress; p. 265 (left): 
Courtesy of Culver Pictures; p. 265 (middle): 
© Tony Freeman/PhotoEdit; p. 265 (right): 
Courtesy of Toyota; p. 266: © Bill Coons/UPI/
Newscom; p. 267: © Tony Freeman/PhotoEdit; 
p. 268 (top): Courtesy of Toyota; p. 268 (bottom): 
Th e Granger Collection, NY; p. 269: © Getty 
Images; p. 270: Courtesy of Culver Pictures; 
p. 271, p. 272: © Courtesy Everett Collection; 
p. 277: © AP Photo/Peter Kramer; p. 278: 
© Hand-out/Ronald McDonald House 
Charities/Newscom; p. 280: Courtesy 
Cambridge Consulting Corporation/USDA; 
p. 282: © Bettmann/Corbis.  
 Chapter 12 
   Opener: © Andy Kropa/Getty 
Images; p. 288 (left, right): Th e Granger 
Collection, NY; p. 288 (middle): Library of 
Collection; p. 146: © DreamWorks/Courtesy 
Everett Collection. 
 Chapter 7 
  Opener: © Ethan Miller/
Billboards2012/Getty Images for ABC; p. 152 
(left): Th e Granger Collection, NY; p. 152 
(middle): © Comstock Images/Alamy RF; 
p. 152 (right): © Michael Ochs Archives/Getty 
Images; p. 153 (left): © Bettmann/Corbis; 
p. 153 (middle): © Digital Vision/Getty Images 
RF; p. 153 (right): © Masterfi le RF; p. 154: 
© AP Photo; p. 155 (both): Th e Granger 
Collection, NY; p. 156: Courtesy of Culver 
Pictures; p. 157: Th e Granger Collection, 
NY; p. 159 (top): © Bettmann/Corbis; p. 159 
(bottom): Courtesy of Broadcasting & 
Cable; p. 160: © Stockbyte/PunchStock RF; 
p. 162: © RubberBall Productions RF; p. 163 
(top): © Michael Ochs Archives/Getty 
Images; p. 163 (bottom): © Alexander 
Tamargo/Getty Images; p. 165: © p. Ughetto/
PhotoAlto RF; p. 167 (all): © Bettmann/
Corbis; p. 168  (left): © Chris Polk/WireImage/
Getty Images; p. 168  (right): © Kyrre Lien/
AFP/Getty Images; p. 168  (bottom): photo: 
Adam Rose/© Fox/Courtesy Everett 
Collection; p. 169 (left): © Steve Jennings/
WireImage/Getty Images; p. 169 (right): 
© Kevin Mazur/WireImage/Getty Images; 
p. 171: © L. Mouton/PhotoAlto RF; p. 172: 
© Jason Squires/WireImage/Getty Images; 
p. 174: Courtesy of Apple; p. 175: © Dave 
Hogan/Getty Images; p. 176: © Alex Wong/
Getty Images.  
 Chapter 8   Opener: photo: Giovanni Rufi no/
© Showtime/Courtesy Everett Collection; 
p. 182 (left): © Division of Work and Industry 
National Museum of American History, 
Smithsonian Institution; p. 182 (middle): 
Th e Granger Collection, NY; p. 182 (right): 
© Ingram Publishing RF; p. 183 (top): © West 
High Drama/LLC/Th e Kobal Collection; p. 183 
(left TV): © Classic PIO/Fotosearch RF; p. 183 
(left Lucy): © CBS/Photofest; p. 183 (middle): 
© Handout/KRT/Newscom; p. 183 (right): Th e 
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc./Mark A. Dierker, 
photographer; p. 184: © Division of Work 
and Industry National Museum of American 
History, Smithsonian Institution; p. 185 (left): 
Courtesy of Culver Pictures; p. 185 (right): 
Th e Granger Collection, NY; p. 186 (all): Th e 
Kobal Collection/Picture Desk; p. 187: © CBS/
Photofest; p. 189: © AP Photo; p. 190: © Ryan 
McVay/Getty Images RF; p. 191: © Th e Barco 
Library of Th e Cable Center, Denver, CO; p. 192: 
© Children’s Television Network/Jim Hensen/
Courtesy Everett Collection; p. 194 (left): 
© CBS/Photofest; p. 194 (right): © NBC/
Courtesy Everett Collection; p. 194 (bottom): 
© Courtesy Everett Collection; p. 195:  © Jason 
Reed/Getty Images RF;   p. 196: © Jeff  Greenberg/
PhotoEdit; p. 197: © Kevin Jordan/Getty 
Images RF; p. 198: © Mike Ehrmann/Getty 
Images; p. 199 (Spartacus): © USA Network/
Courtesy Everett Collection; p. 199 (Newsroom): 
photo: John P. Johnson/© HBO/Courtesy Everett 
Collection; p. 199 (Girls): © HBO/Photofest; 

Credits 
C-3
Sinai/Getty Images; p. 387 (top): Courtesy of 
Radio Marti TV; p. 387 (bottom): photo: Kelsey 
McNeal/© Fox/Courtesy Everett Collection; 
p. 389: © PBS/Photofest; p. 390 (top): © Fox/
Photofest; p. 390 (bottom): © Clynt Garnham 
Publishing/Alamy; p. 392: © Peter Turnley/
Corbis; p. 393: © Vince Streano/Corbis; 
p. 394: © Bulent Kilic/AFP/Getty Images; 
p. 395: © Philippe Lopez/AFP/Getty Images; 
p. 396 (left): © Tokyo Th eatres K.K./Courtesy 
Everett Collection; p. 396 (right): © Fever 
Dreams/Courtesy Everett Collection; 
p. 397: © Fabio Campana/epa/Corbis; p. 398: 
© Peter Hilz/Redux; p. 399 (top): © 20th 
Century Fox. All rights reserved/Courtesy Everett 
Collection; p. 399 (bottom): © Bay Ismoyo/
AFP/Getty Images; p. 400: © AP Photo/Vincent 
Th ian.  
Images; p. 374: © Paramount/Courtesy 
Everett Collection; p. 375: Courtesy of 
Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta; p. 377 
(NRA): © Philip Scalia/Alamy; p. 377 (Judd): 
© Tim Mosenfelder/Getty Images; p. 377 
(McCain): © Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty 
Images; p. 377 (Pearl Jam): © Neal Preston/
Corbis. 
 Chapter 15 
   Opener: © Wang Jiaowen/ZUMA 
Press/Newscom; p. 382 (left): © Ingram 
Publishing RF; p. 382 (right): Courtesy of Voice 
of America; p. 383 (left): © Hulton-Deutsch 
Collection/Corbis; p. 383 (middle): © Peter 
Turnley/Corbis; p. 383 (right): © Bulent Kilic/
AFP/Getty Images; p. 385 (top): © Hulton-
Deutsch Collection/Corbis; p. 385 (bottom): 
Courtesy of Voice of America; p. 386: © Uriel 
 Chapter 14 
  Opener: © Jose Luis Magana/
AP/Corbis; p. 352 (left): National Archives 
and Records Administration; p. 352 (middle): 
© Photodisc/Punchstock RF; p. 352 (right): 
Courtesy of Culver Pictures; p. 353 (left): 
© Bettmann/Corbis; p. 353 (middle): © Getty 
Images RF; p. 353 (right): Courtesy of the 
United States Government; p. 354: © Getty 
Images; p. 356: © Splash News/Newscom; 
p. 357: © AP Photo/Don Heupel; p. 358: 
Courtesy of Culver Pictures; p. 360: 
© Bettmann/Corbis; p. 362: © Anthony 
Correia/Getty Images; p. 363: © Warner Bros./
Courtesy Everett Collection; p. 368: © AP 
Photo/Troy Maben/FILE; p. 369 (left): © AP 
Photo; p. 369 (right): © Deanne Fitzmaurice/
San Francisco Chronicle/Corbis; p. 370: 
© Terrence Jennings/Picturegroup via AP 


 á la carte cable pricing,  196 , 198, 200 
 ABA (American Bar Association), 358 
 Abbott, Robert Sengstacke, 76 
 ABC (American Broadcasting Company), 158, 
193, 372 
 ABC (Audit Bureau of Circulations), 90, 109, 
110, 293 
 Abercrombie & Fitch, 113 
 absolutist position on freedom of the press,  355 
 Access Industries, 164 
 access journalism,  371 
 accountability guarantees, 107–108,  107 
 accountability metrics,  308 
 achievers (psychographic segment), 311 
 Acta Diurna,  73 
 Activision, 218–219, 224 
 actual malice,  359 
 Ad Council.  See Advertising Council 
 ad hoc balancing of interests,  357 
 ad-pull policies,  116 
 Adams, John, 50 
 Adams, M., 154 
 Adbusters.com, 109, 247 
 Th e Addams Family, 143 
 addiction, 224 
 addressable technologies,  37 
 Adelstein, Jonathan, 33 
 administrative research,  321 , 322 
 Adorno, Th eodor, 335 
 Advance Publications, 86 
 Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), 
235–236 
 Advantage, 64 
 Adventureland, 344 
 Th e Adventures of Huckleberry Finn (Twain), 
51, 55 
 advergames,  225 , 225–226,  225 , 308 
 advertising, 288–315 
 and alcohol use, 343,  344 
 ambient,  286–287 
 audience, 104, 309–311,  310 
 comparative analysis, 390–391, 393–394, 
400, 401 
 and convergence, 88, 306–307,  307 
 criticisms of, 296, 297–300,  297 ,  298 
 deception in, 293,  293 
 defenses of, 296–297 
 and deregulation,  363 
 and DVDs, 144 
 and fi lm, 137, 138, 144 
 and freedom of the press/freedom of 
expression, 299, 355–356 
 globalization, 311,  312 
 industry structure, 301–306,  301 ,  302 , 
308–310 
 intentional imprecision in, 311–313 
 and media eff ects, 319, 343 
 and mobile devices, 307, 309 
 pervasiveness of, 38, 288–290, 297, 303 
 and pirate broadcasters, 385 
 prosocial uses of, 294,  294 , 303 
 and psychographic segmentation, 310–311 
 and public relations, 271, 276, 280,  280 , 302 
 radio, 158, 161, 163, 293 
 regulation, 293, 303–305, 344 
 and social construction of reality, 338 
 and symbolic interaction theory, 337 
 timeline, 288–289 
 See also advertising history; 
hypercommercialism; Internet 
advertising; magazine advertising; 
newspapers advertising; product 
placement 
 Advertising Age, 116 
 advertising agencies, 101, 291, 292, 
301–302,  301 
 Advertising Council, 294,  294 
 advertising history, 291–296 
 early history, 291,  291 
 and industrialization, 291–292 
 magazines, 101, 103, 292,  292 
 newspapers, 17, 74, 75 
 professionalization, 292–293 
 radio, 158, 293 
 television, 186–187, 295–296 
 World War II, 293–295 
 Advertising Research Foundation, 308 
 advertorials,  114 , 114–115,  115 
 advocacy games,  226 
 Th e Advocate, 353 
 affi  liates,  158 , 193 
 affi  nity, 104, 109, 112 
 African American media 
 advertising, 310 
 book publishing, 52 
 fi lm, 128, 129 
 magazines, 103 
 newspapers, 76, 82 
 sound recording, 164, 166–167,  167 
 Th e African Queen, 146 
 AFRTS (Armed Forces Radio and Television 
Service), 387 
 Afterworld, 182 
 agenda setting,  93 
 agenda-setting theory,  330 , 330–331 
 aggressive cues model,  340 
 Aguilar, R., 249 
 AIDA approach,  299 
 Akeelah and the Bee, 142 
 Al Jazeera English, 386 
 Alarm, 22 
 Albert Nobbs, 140 
 Albiniak, P., 320 
 Alcoa Presents, 187 
 alcohol use, 343–344 
 Alexander, Dennis, 337 
 Alford, Henry, 253 
 Alice in Wonderland, 143 
 Alien and Sedition Acts, 75, 355 
 aliteracy,  55 , 55–57,  56 
 All-American Muslim, 14 
 all-channel legislation,  191 
 Allen, Gracie,  159 
 Allen, Paul, 238 
 Allport, Gordon W., 328 
 Alpert, J., 240 
 Alterman, Eric, 34, 249, 325 
 alternate-ending DVDs, 43 
 alternative press,  63 , 64,  82 , 82–83,  84 
 Alvin and the Chipmunks, 134 
 AM radio, 160–161 
 Th e Amazing Race, 194 
 Amazon.com, 60, 64, 66–67,  67 , 144 
 ambient advertising,  290 
 ambivalence.  See positive/negative attitudes 
toward media 
 Ambrose, J., 91 
 America Online (AOL), 220–221, 238 
 America Rock, 192 
 American Academy of Child & Adolescent 
Psychiatry, 343 
 American Academy of Pediatrics, 299, 343 
 American Advertising Federation, 293, 374 
 American Association of Advertising 
Agencies, 293, 308 
 American Bar Association (ABA), 358 
 American Beauty, 250 
 American Boy, 100 
 American Broadcasting Company (ABC), 
158, 193, 372 
 American Council on Public Relations, 270 
 Th e American Crisis (Paine), 51 
 American Idol, 31,  39 , 168, 192, 383, 395 
 American Magazine, or a Monthly View of 
the Political State of the British 
Colonies, 100 
I-1
 Index 
Boldfaced locators signify defi nitions in the text of glossary terms. Italic locators signify illustrations.

I-2 
Index
 American Medical Association, 
117, 343 
 American Pie, 134 
 American Psychological Association, 343 
 American Revolution, 50–51, 74, 75 
 American Society of Composers, Authors and 
Publishers (ASCAP), 364 
 American Society of Magazine Editors 
(ASME), 114, 116–117 
 American Society of Newspaper Editors, 
78, 374 
 Th e Americans  (Jakes), 52 
 America’s Funniest Home Videos, 383 
 amNewYork, 84 
 Amos ‘n’ Andy, 373 
 Amsterdam News, 82 
 ancient cultures, 73, 267, 291 
 Anderson, A., 83 
 Anderson, Craig, 224 
 Anderson, M., 14 
 Anderson, M. K., 365 
 Anderson, S., 222 
 Andrews, L., 257 
 Android, 222 
 Andronikidis, A. I., 298 
 Angry Birds,  208–209 , 222 
 anonymity, 246, 248, 255, 370 
 Anonymizer, 255 
 Antenna Babies, 394 
 Anti-Aging Games, 216,  216 
 Anti-Spyware Coalition, 255 
 AOL (America Online), 220–221, 238 
 AOl Game, 220–221 
 appearance, 9–11,  11 ,  12 ,  13 
 Apple, 144, 173, 238, 242.  See also iPod 
 Apple TV, 144 
 Applebome, P., 65 
 AppleTV, 203 
 applied ethics,  367 
 appointment consumption,  43 
 Th e Apprentice, 38, 383 
 apps,  16 , 90, 242.  See also  mobile devices 
 AR (augmented reality),  254 
 Arab Spring,  230–231 , 243, 386,  386 , 
394,  394 
 Arato, A., 335 
 Arbitron, 161, 162 
 Arbuckle, Fatty, 131 
 Arcade Fire,  168 , 174 
 Archer, Th omas, 74 
 Architectural Digest, 116 
 Th e Arena, 101 
 Arena Football,  222 , 224–225 
 Areopagitica (Milton), 355 
 Armat, Th omas, 126 
 Armed Forces Radio and Television Service 
(AFRTS), 387 
 Armstrong, Tim, 43 
 Army-McCarthy Hearings, 188,  189 
 Arnaz, Desi, 188 
 ARPA (Advanced Research Projects Agency), 
235–236 
 Arrive,  110 
 L’Arrivee d’un train en gare, 122,  123 
 Arthus-Bertrand, Yann, 30–31 
 Th e Artist, 136 
 ASCAP (American Society of Composers, 
Authors and Publishers), 364 
 Ascend (Hocking), 58 
 ascertainment,  362 
 Ask, 240 
 ASME (American Society of Magazine 
Editors), 114, 116–117 
 Associated Press, 76 
 Associated Press v. US, 33 
 Association of Alternative Newsmedia, 83 
 Association of American Publishers, 57 
 Association of Magazine Media, 104, 106, 
107, 111 
 Association of National Advertisers, 293, 308 
 Astro Boy, 388 
 astroturf,  266 
 AT&T, 185, 388 
 Atanasoff , John V., 235 
 Atari, 213–214, 219 
 Atkinson, C., 116 
 Atlanta Journal-Constitution,  88 
 Atlantic Monthly, 100 
 Atlantic Station, 384 
 Atom.com, 202 
 Attenberg, J., 259 
 attitude change theory,  323 , 327–329 
 attractiveness, 9–11,  11 ,  12 ,  13 
 audience 
 advertising, 104, 309–311,  310 
 book publishing, 52 
 as consumer/as product, 17, 18 
 as content producer, 40, 42 
 fi lm, 134–136,  135 
 Internet users, 243 
 local, 80–82,  81 , 83, 89, 161, 164 
 magazines, 37,  102–103 , 103–104 
 in mass communication process, 5,  8 , 43 
 and mass communication theory, 330, 
337–339 
 newspapers, 78, 91–92,  91 
 platform agnosticism, 41 
 public relations, 272–273 
 radio, 37, 160,  160 , 161 
 television, 37, 191–193 
 video games, 217–218,  217 , 221 
 See also audience fragmentation 
 audience fragmentation, 31,  37 , 37–38 
 and advertising, 310,  310 
 and concentration/conglomeration, 35, 37 
 and convergence, 41 
 and magazines, 37,  102–103 , 103–104 
 and radio, 160, 161 
 audience testing, 142 
 audion tube,  154 
 Audit Bureau of Circulations (ABC), 90, 109, 
110, 293 
 augmented reality (AR),  254 
 Auletta, K., 57, 306 
 Ault, S., 138 
 AuthorHouse, 59 
 authoritarian systems,  392 , 392–395 
 Author’s Guild, 61 
 Auto Race, 214 
 Avatar, 22,  23 , 138, 139, 142, 143 
 Avlon, J., 176 
 Avon, 64 
 awareness tests,  306 
 Ayer, F. Wayland, 292 
 B-movies,  132 
 Baar, A., 31, 222 
 Babbage, Charles, 234 
 back nine, 194 
 Bacon, J., 15 
 Baer, Ralph, 213 
 Baffl  e Ball, 211,  212 
 Bagdikian, Ben, 33, 83 
 Baird, John Logie, 184, 384 
 Bal, S., 398 
 Ball, Lucille,  187 , 188, 194 
 Ball, S., 192 
 Ball-Rokeach, Sandra, 331–332 
 Ballmer, Steve, 73 
 Baltimore Sun, 88 
 Bandura, Albert, 341–342 
 bandwidth,  202 
 Banfi eld, Ashleigh, 36 
 banners (online ads),  307 
 Bantam Doubleday Dell, 61 
 Bar Hunger campaign, 264,  266 
 Baran, Paul, 235–236, 244 
 Baran, S. J., 347 
 Baran, Stanley J., 334 
 Barboza, D., 394, 395 
 Barlow, John Perry, 251 
 Barnes, B., 139 
 Barnes & Noble, 61, 65, 66 
 Barney, Ralph D., 374–375, 376 
 Barnouw, Erik, 157, 396 
 Barnum, P. T., 268 
 Barron, G., 297, 307 
 Barron, J. A., 355 
 Barrymore, John, 130 
 Barstow, D., 283 
 Bart, Peter, 34, 147 
 Bartelstein, Steve, 368 
 Barton, Laura, 298–299 
 base (in critical cultural theory), 334 
 Bass, Ralph, 166 
 Batman, 143 
 Batman (game), 219 
 Battleground,  183 
 Baxter, Leone, 271 
 Baxter, Steven, 211 
 Bay, Michael, 146 
 Bazelon, E., 257 
 BBC (British Broadcasting Corporation), 385, 
390–391, 392, 398 
 BBDO Worldwide, 279 
 Th e BBK Music Phone Supergirl Contest,  
380–381 , 383 
 Beach Music (Conroy), 53 
 Beadle & Company, 51 
 Beatles, 159 
 Beatty, Warren,  134 
 Beavis and Butthead, 143 
 Beeler, Jeff , 87 
 Bejeweled, 219 
 believers (psychographic segment), 311 
 Bell, Alexander Graham, 156 
 Bellovin, Steve, 236 
 Ben Hur, 133 

Index 
I-3
 Benatar, Giselle, 108 
 Bennett, D., 398 
 Bennett, James Gordon, 75 
 Bennett, W. Lance, 335, 336 
 Berger, Peter, 337–338 
 Berkman, H. W., 291 
 Berliner, Emile, 155–156 
 Bernays, Edward, 269, 281,  282 
 Berners-Lee, Tim, 239 
 Bernstein, Carl, 369,  369 
 Berry, Chuck, 163, 164, 166,  167 
 Bertelsmann, 164, 398 
 BET, 196 
 Betamax  decision, 365 
 Bethesda Softworks, 219 
 Better Business Bureau, 299 
 Bewitched, 143 
 Bewkes, Jeff , 111 
 Bieber, Justin,  150–151 , 165, 168 
 Th e Big Bang Th eory,  194 , 195 
 Bigelow, Charles, 42 
 Bill Haley and the Comets, 166 
 Bill of Rights,  75.  See also  freedom of the 
press/freedom of expression 
 billings,  163 
 binary code,  234 
 Bing, 240 
 Bing, Jonathan, 30, 32 
 Th e Birds, 142 
 Birmingham Eccentric, 83 
 Th e Birth of a Nation, 128,  128 , 129 
 Th e Birth of a Race, 129 
 bitcasters,  170 
 BITNET, 236 
 Bittner, J. R., 157 
 BitTorrent,  174 
 Black, Hugo, 33, 355, 360 
 Black, Jay, 91, 374–375, 376 
 Black Swan, 140 
 Blackboard Jungle, 133 
 Blackett-Sample-Hummert, 293 
 Blackshaw, Peter, 249 
 Th e Blair Witch Project, 138, 144 
 Blavatnik, Len, 164 
 blinks,  290 
 Blip.tv, 202 
 block booking,  133 
 blockbuster mentality, 62, 63, 65,  141 , 
141–143 
 blogs,  41 
 China, 395 
 and confl icts of interest, 370 
 fake, 282 
 and freedom of expression, 248–249 
 and honesty, 372 
 and mass communication process, 41 
 and newspapers, 89 
 and privacy, 369 
 and public relations, 277 
 Bloomberg Businessweek, 79 
 Blue Valentine, 147 
 Th e Blues, 361 
 Blumler, J. G., 400 
 BMI (Broadcast Music Inc.), 364 
 Bob and Carol and Ted and Alice, 134 
 body image, 117,  118 
 Bogatz, G. A., 192 
 Bogle, D., 129 
 Bogost, Ian, 226 
 Bolivia, 401 
 Bonnie and Clyde, 134,  134 
 Bono, 361 
 book burning, 66 
 book club editions, 57 
 book publishing, 50–69 
 aliteracy, 55–57,  56 
 ambivalence about, 16 
 audience, 52 
 book burning, 66 
 censorship of, 53–55,  55 , 66, 68 
 and conglomeration, 61–62 
 consumer behavior, 31 
 and convergence, 58–59, 62 
 cultural value of, 52–53 
 and fi lm, 62–64 
 history of, 49–52 
 hypercommercialism in, 62–64 
 industry structure, 57 
 and mobile devices, 59–61 
 retailing, 65–67,  65 
 small presses,  63 , 64 
 timeline, 49 
 Books-A-Million, 65 
 books.com, 67 
 Borders, 65, 66 
 Borgnine, Ernest,  340 
 Born Th is Way (Lady Gaga), 172 
 Bosman, J., 58 
 Boss, S., 61 
 Boston Globe, 89, 90, 359–360 
 Boston News-Letter, 74 
 Boston Phoenix, 82 
 Boston Tea Party, 267,  268 
 Boston Women’s Health Collective, 
53, 54 
 bottom-line mentality, 34 
 Bouazizi, Mohamed, 394 
 Boulton, C., 365 
 bounded cultures (co-cultures),  12 , 14 
 Bourne, Nicholas, 74 
 Boxee, 203 
 Boyce, James, 66 
 Boylan, Gabriel, 171 
 BP, 116, 117 
 Bradbury, Ray, 48, 52 
 Bradford, Andrew, 100 
 Th e Brady Bunch, 143 
 Bragman, Howard, 277 
 brand entertainment,  38 , 38–39 
 brand magazines,  112 , 112–113 
 Branded Cities, 290 
 Brandeis, Louis, 252 
 branding fi lms,  147 
 brands, 292 
 Bratz, 25 
 Braverman, S., 11 
 Bray, H., 35, 36 
 Brazil, 396, 401 
 Breaking Bad, 344 
 Brenner, Steve, 320 
 Bride Wars, 388 
 Bridges v. California, 357 
 A Brief and True Report of the New Found 
Land of Virginia (White), 267 
 Brigitte, 400 
 Brill, Steven, 89 
 Bringing Up Baby, 132,  132 
 Brinkley, David, 185 
 Brisbane, Arthur, 372 
 British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), 385, 
390–391, 392, 398 
 British cultural theory,  335 
 British Telecom, 388 
 broadband,  202 
 Broadcast Music Inc. (BMI), 364 
 broadcasting, 154, 156–157,  156. See also 
radio; satellite broadcasting; television 
 Broadcasting/Telecasting,  159 
 broadsides (broadsheets),  74 
 Brodesser-Akner, C., 145 
 Brodeur Worldwide, 279 
 Brodsky, Joseph, 55 
 Broken Blossoms, 128 
 Brothers in Arms (Dire Straits), 171,  172 
 Brown & Williamson, 371–372 
 Brown v. Entertainment Merchants 
Association, 356 
 browsers,  240 
 Brubach, H., 10 
 Bruckheimer, Jerry, 193–194 
 Brunelle, Margot, 113 
 Bryan, William Jennings, 268 
 Bryant, Kobe, 369 
 Buff ett, Warren, 91 
 Bug, 147 
 Th e Bulgari Connection (Weldon), 64 
 bundling,  204 
 Burger, Warren, 360 
 Burger King, 143, 147, 299 
 Burnham, V., 214 
 Burns, Ed, 30, 31, 145 
 Burns, George,  159 
 Burns, John, 36 
 Burns, Ken, 39 
 Burson-Marsteller, 266, 279 
 Burstyn v. Wilson, 355 
 Burton, B., 281 
 Busbee, J., 205 
 Bush, George W., 363, 376 
 Bushnell, Nolan, 212–213,  213 , 214, 216 
 business magazines, 105 
 Butler, B., 368 
 Butter, Nathaniel, 74 
 Byrne, David, 174, 175 
 C3 rating,  190 
 cable, 195–200 
 and audience fragmentation, 37 
 industry structure, 196–200,  197 ,  199 
 and information gap, 258 
 interactive, 203 
 and magazines, 113–114 
 and sweeps, 189–190 
 technology development, 190–191, 
195–196 
 and video games, 220 
 Cable Television Consumer Protection and 
Competition Act (1992), 196 

I-4 
Index
 Cablevision, 196 
 Cadillac,  269 
 Call of Duty, 218, 219, 220 
 calotype,  126 
 Cambridge Press, 50 
 Campbell, John, 74 
 Campbell, K. K., 298 
 Campbell Soup, 353,  354 
 Canada, 388–389, 397 
 Cancer Prevention Works,  112 
 “Canons of Journalism and Statement of 
Principles” (American Society of 
Newspaper Editors), 78 
 capitalism, 17–18, 20, 296 
 Capra, Frank, 270,  271 , 327 
 Captain Kangaroo, 192 
 car radios, 162 
 CareerBuilder, 88 
 Carey, J. W., 245, 322 
 Carey, James W., 7, 14, 333, 337 
 Carey, Mariah, 38, 165 
 Carmichael, M., 32 
 Carnevale, D., 58 
 Carr, D., 113, 245 
 Cars, 143 
 Cars.com, 89 
 Carter, Jimmy, 360 
 Cartoon Network, 388 
 casual games,  222 
 catalogue albums,  165 
 Catcher in the Rye (Salinger), 52, 53 
 catharsis,  340 , 340–341 
 Cathy’s Book, 64 
 CATV (community antenna television),  190 
 cause marketing,  274 
 CBS.  See Columbia Broadcasting System 
 CBS Evening News, 25 
 CBS v. Democratic National Committee, 355 
 CCTV (Central China Television), 393 
 CDC (Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention), 342 
 CDs (compact discs), 171,  172 , 173, 174 
 cease-and-desist orders,  303 , 303–304 
 celebrities, 359, 368–369 
 cell phones, 16.  See also  mobile devices 
 Cellular, 388 
 censorship 
 and book publishing, 53–55,  55 , 
66, 68 
 comparative analysis, 395 
 of fi lm, 131 
 and globalization, 35–36 
 and information gap, 258 
 and shock jocks, 176–177 
 Center for Media and Democracy, 283 
 Center for Public Integrity, 79 
 Center for Science in the Public Interest, 343 
 Center on Alcohol Marketing and Youth, 343 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC), 342 
 Central China Television (CCTV), 393 
 Cerf, Vinton, 236 
 Ceriani, Javier,  163 
 chain ownership 
 book retailing, 65, 66 
 movie theaters, 139 
 newspapers, 78, 86–87 
 See also concentration of ownership; 
conglomeration 
 Champs Sports, 224–225 
 Chandler v. Florida, 358 
 Channel F, 214 
 Charles, Ray, 166 
 Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, 142 
 Charlie’s Angels, 143 
 Chase, L. J., 347 
 Cheney, Dick, 371 
 Cherokee Observer, 76 
 Cherokee Phoenix, 76 
 Cherokee Rose Bud, 76 
 Chicago Daily News, 80 
 Chicago Defender, 76 
 Child Pornography Prevention Act 
(1996), 250 
 children 
 and advertising, 298–299,  298 , 305,  363 
 and book publishing, 67–68 
 and freedom of the press/freedom of 
expression, 356 
 and media eff ects, 319 
 media multitasking, 32 
 See also youth markets 
 Children’s Food and Beverage Advertising 
Initiative, 299 
 Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta, 375 
 Children’s Internet Protection Act (2000), 251 
 Children’s Television Act (1990), 299 
 Children’s Television Workshop (CTW), 192 
 Chin, F., 190 
 China 
 comparative analysis, 392–395 
 and global media, 35–37, 388, 389 
 and history of mass communication, 19 
 and public relations, 266 
 China Daily USA Weekly, 388 
 China People’s Broadcasting Station 
(CPBS), 393 
 Chmielewski, D. C., 202 
 Chords, 166 
 Chowdhury, P., 297, 307 
 Chozick, A., 35 
 Christian, A., 90 
 Christian Parents Television Council, 361 
 El Cid, 133 
 Cieply, M., 138 
 CinemaScope, 133 
 cinématographe,  126 
 Cinemax, 198, 200 
 circulation 
 magazines,  106 ,  108 , 108–110 
 newspapers, 78–79, 80, 90 
 Cisco, 35 
 Cisco Systems, 216 
 Citadel, 169 
 Cityville, 222 
 Civil War, 291–292 
 CK, Louis,  28–29 , 145 
 Clancy, Tom, 62 
 clandestine stations,  384 , 384–385, 392 
 Clark, Mary Higgins, 62 
 Clark, Tom, 358 
 Clark & Weinstock, 279 
 Clarkson, Kelly, 117 
 class confl ict.  See critical cultural theory; 
social change 
 classifi ed advertising, 83, 88, 89–90 
 Classmates.com, 242 
 clear and present danger, 357 
 Clear Channel Communications, 163, 164, 
221, 290 
 clear time,  193 
 Clench, James, 63 
 click stream,  255 
 Th e Client (Grisham), 62 
 Clinton, Bill, 252 
 Clinton, Michael, 104 
 cloud computing, 221,  254 , 254–255 
 cloud-music services,  173 
 CMP (cost per thousand),  302 , 308 
 CNN, 34–35, 370, 388, 398 
 co-cultures (bounded cultures),  
12 , 14 
 Coates, D., 298 
 coaxial cable,  185 , 190 
 Coca-Cola,  39 ,  295 
 Codemaster, 219 
 codes of ethics, 374–375 
 Coen, R., 363 
 Cohen, Ted, 173 
 Cold Case, 194 
 Cold Mountain (Frazier), 62 
 Cold War, 234, 384–386 
 collateral materials,  274 
 Collette-White, M., 31 
 Collier’s, 101, 103,  295 
 Collins, Suzanne, 53 
 colonial North America 
 advertising, 291 
 book publishing, 49–51 
 magazines, 100 
 newspapers, 74–75,  74 
 public relations, 267–268,  268 
 Th e Color Purple (Walker), 55 
 Colossus, 234 
 Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS) 
 affi  liates, 193 
 and book publishing, 62 
 and ethics, 371–372, 374 
 and freedom of the press/freedom of 
expression, 355 
 and global media, 388 
 and news, 25, 185, 205 
 1950s, 185, 188 
 and radio, 158, 176 
 and ratings, 189–190 
 and TV Everywhere Initiative, 204 
 Columbia Phonograph Company, 156 
 Columbia Pictures, 140, 398 
 Columbia Records, 159 
 Columbia Studios, 63 
 Columbine school shootings (1999), 226–227, 
320, 321 
 Comcast 
 and cable, 196 
 and concentration of ownership, 33 
 and convergence, 31 
 and fi lm, 141, 144 
 and Internet, 238, 259 

Index 
I-5
 and television, 204 
 and video games, 220, 221 
 Comedy Central, 39, 202 
 comic books, 143 
 comics, 85 
 commercialism.  See  hypercommercialism 
 commercials.  See advertising 
 commissions,  301 
 Committee on Public Information (CPI), 
269,  270 
 Common Sense (Paine), 50–51, 55 
 communication, defi ned,  4 , 4–6,  4 , 337 
 Communications Act (1934), 158, 161 
 communism.  See authoritarian systems 
 community antenna television (CATV),  190 
 community relations function of public 
relations, 274 
 commuter papers, 83–84,  84 ,  84 
 Como, Perry, 164 
 company magazines, 105 
 comparative analysis (comparative studies), 
 389 , 389–395, 399–401 
 competition loss.  See concentration of 
ownership 
 complementary copy,  116 ,  116 
 computer games.  See  video games 
 Computer Space, 213 
 Comstock, Anthony, 54 
 concentration of ownership,  33 
 and convergence, 41 
 defenses of, 35 
 and ethics, 371–373 
 Internet, 256 
 and news, 36 
 newspapers, 86–87 
 public relations, 279 
 radio, 163–164 
 See also conglomeration 
 concept fi lms,  141 , 141–142 
 Condé Nast, 98 
 Cone Communications, 279 
 confi dentiality,  369 , 369–370 
 confl icts of interest, 34, 370–371 
 conglomeration,  34 , 34–35, 36 
 and book publishing, 61–62 
 and ethics, 371–373 
 and fi lm, 141–143 
 Internet, 256 
 and newspapers, 86 
 and sound recording, 164–165 
 See also concentration of ownership; 
hypercommercialism 
 connotatively loaded words, 313 
 Conrad, Frank, 157 
 Conroy, Pat, 53 
 Consumer Alert, 64 
 consumer culture,  299 
 and advertising, 295, 299–300 
 and Internet, 232–233 
 and magazines, 101 
 and public relations, 271 
 consumer juries,  305 
 consumer magazines, 105 
 Consumer Reports, 108–109,  109 
 Consumers Union, 108, 293 
 consumption-on-demand,  43 
 Contact (game), 211 
 content degradation, 34–35 
 book publishing, 62, 63 
 fi lm, 137, 141–143 
 newspapers, 87, 91–92 
 sound recording, 165 
 television, 68, 187 
 See also blockbuster mentality 
 content production, 5,  8 
 democratization of, 41–42 
 skills for, 22–23 
 See also interactivity 
 controlled circulation magazines,  108 ,  110 
 Convention on the Protection and Promotion 
of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, 
397–398 
 conventions,  25 , 26 
 convergence, 30–31,  33 , 39–41 
 and advertising, 88, 306–307,  307 
 and book publishing, 58–59, 62 
 and fi lm, 138, 143–145 
 and genre conventions, 25, 26 
 impact on traditional stores,  40 
 and newspapers, 88–90 
 and public relations, 280–281 
 and radio/sound recording, 167–172 
 and television, 200–204, 306 
 and video games, 220–221 
 Cook, J., 205 
 Cook, T. D., 192 
 cookies,  255 
 Coolidge, Calvin, 157 
 Cooney, Joan Ganz, 192 
 Copps, Michael, 163–164, 258, 376 
 Cops, 319 
 copy testing,  305 
 copyright, 60–61, 173–174,  174 , 251–252, 
364–365 
 Copyright Royalty Tribunal, 364 
 corantos,  74 
 cord-cutting,  198 
 Cornish, Samuel, 76 
 corporate advertising, 302 
 corporate independents,  140 
 corporations.  See concentration of 
ownership; conglomeration; 
globalization 
 corrective advertising,  304 
 correspondent system, 75–77 
 Th e Cosby Show, 31 
 CosmoGirl, 114 
 Cosmopolitan, 101 
 cost of entry,  42 
 cost per thousand (CPM),  302 , 308 
 cottage industries,  61 
 counseling function of public relations, 274 
 court shows, 195 
 Courtright, J. A., 347 
 covers (recorded music),  164 , 166 
 Cox, 220 
 Cox, A. M., 177 
 Cox, C., 247 
 CPBS (China People’s Broadcasting 
Station), 393 
 CPI (Committee on Public Information), 
269,  270 
 Craig, Larry,  368 , 369 
 Crandall, Risa, 114 
 Crary, D., 333 
 Crash, 136, 140 
 Crazy Taxi,  222 
 Creamer, Matthew, 290 
 Creative Commons, 365 
 creativity, 308–310 
 Creel, George, 269 
 Crew Cuts, 166 
 Crichton, Michael, 62 
 Th e Crisis, 103 
 critical cultural theory,  334 , 334–335 
 critical research,  321 , 321–322 
 critical thinking, 21, 25 
 Cross Dressing (Fitzhugh), 64 
 cross-promotion, 224–225 
 Crossover Dribble (Timberlake), 62 
 Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon, 140 
 Th e Crow, 143 
 crowdfunded journalism,  79 
 crowdsourcing,  210 
 CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, 194, 319 
 CSI: Miami,  13 , 194, 344 
 CSI: NY, 194 
 CTW (Children’s Television Workshop), 192 
 Cuban, Mark, 87, 145 
 cultivation analysis,  323 , 338–339 
 cultural defi nition of communication,  7 
 cultural homogenization, 165, 167 
 cultural imperialism, 397–399,  397 ,  398 ,  399 
 cultural storytelling model of mass 
communication, 14–15,  14 , 37–38 
 cultural theories, 329, 333–336,  334 
 culture, 9–15 
 and advertising, 299–300 
 and book publishing, 52–53 
 as contested, 11,  12 
 cultivation analysis on, 338–339 
 defi ned,  9 , 14 
 eff ects of, 9–12, 14 
 and fi lm, 131 
 importance of communication for, 7 
 and Internet, 259 
 and media eff ects, 320–321 
 and printing, 19–20 
 and public relations, 282 
 and radio, 175 
 shared nature of, 9 
 social construction of, 9,  10 
 and social construction of reality, 337–338 
 and sound recording, 164 
 and storytelling, 14–15,  14 , 37–38 
 and technology, 16–17 
 Cumulus, 163, 164 
 Cuncun Tong, 393 
 Curb Your Enthusiasm, 198 
 current trends, 30–45 
 audience fragmentation, 31, 35, 37–38 
 concentration/conglomeration, 33–35, 
36, 41 
 consumer behavior, 31 
 convergence, 30–31, 33, 39–41 
 globalization, 35–37 
 hypercommercialism, 38–39 
 and mass communication process, 41–44 

I-6 
Index
current trends (continued)
 and media pervasiveness, 32–33 
 See also audience fragmentation; 
concentration of ownership; 
conglomeration; convergence; 
hypercommercialism 
 Curtis, Cyrus H. K., 292 
 custom publishing,  108 , 112–113,  112 
 cynicism.  See positive/negative attitudes 
toward media 
 Cyrus, Miley,  11 , 41 
 Czitrom, Daniel J., 234 
 D-notice,  391 
 Daguerre, Louis, 125, 126 
 daguerrotype,  125 ,  125 
 Dahl, J., 386 
 dailies, 79–81,  80 , 83–84 
 Th e Daily, 90 
 Th e Daily Show, 22,  26 
 Daily Star,  390 
 Dale, Robby,  385 
 Dance Dance Revolution, 216 
 D’angelo, F., 307 
 Daniels, E. A., 11 
 Danzinger, Lucy, 117 
 DARS (digital audio radio service),  169 
 dataveillance,  253 
 Dateline NBC, 25 
 Davis, Bill, 79 
 Davis, Dennis, 334 
 Davis, Ossie,  186 
 Davis, R. E., 255 
 Day, Benjamin, 75, 76 
 Day, Louis, 367–368 
 day-and-date release,  30 , 30–31 
 Daytona Beach News Journal, 87 
 DBS (direct broadcast satellite), 198, 220 
 DDB Worldwide, 279 
 de Graff , Robert, 51–52 
 de Pablos, E., 400 
 Declaration of Principles  (Lee), 269 
 decoding,  6 
 decryption software, 252, 364 
 “Deep Th roat,” 369,  369 
 DeFleur, Melvin L., 325, 331–332 
 DeForest, Lee, 154,  155 , 156 
 deGraf, Brad, 247 
 delia Cava, M. R., 201 
 Dellamere, D., 83 
 Deloitte, 111 
 DeMaria, R., 212, 213 
 democracy,  354 
 and advertising, 17 
 Arab Spring,  230–231 , 243, 386,  386 , 
394,  394 
 and concentration/conglomeration, 33, 36, 
87, 88 
 and concentration of ownership, 33 
 and freedom of the press/freedom of 
expression, 354 
 and Internet, 247, 255–256,  256 , 258 
 and mass communication theory, 324 
 and media literacy, 21, 25 
 and newspapers, 92 
 and printing, 20 
 demonraphic segmentation,  310 
 demonstration ads, 296,  297 
 Dennis the Menace, 143 
 Denny’s, 276, 299 
 dependency theory,  331 , 331–332 
 Depp, Johnny, 142 
 deregulation,  163 , 303, 362–363,  363 
 Th e Descendants, 136, 140 
 desensitization,  343 
 designated driver concept, 342 
 Desperate Housewives, 22, 383, 388 
 development concept of media,  391 
 development/fund-raising function of public 
relations, 274 
 Dexter, 198 
 Diane,  112 
 Th e Diary of a Young Girl (Frank), 55, 56 
 Dibbell, J., 221 
 Dickson, William, 124–125, 126 
 Diddley, Bo,  167 
 Diesel, 113 
 digests, 101 
 digital audio radio service (DARS),  169 
 digital cable television,  203 
 digital compression, 203 
 digital computers,  234 , 234–235 
 digital divide,  256 ,  256 
 digital lockers, 173 
 digital media.  See Internet; mobile devices 
 Digital Millennium Copyright Act (1998), 
251–252, 364 
 Digital Music Express (DMX),  169 
 digital natives,  243 
 digital recording,  171 
 digital rights management (DRM),  365 
 digital technologies 
 and cable, 203 
 and convergence, 41 
 and fi lm, 137, 138, 144 
 photo altering, 117–118, 400 
 and radio, 169 
 and sound recording, 171–172 
 digital video discs.  See DVDs 
 digital video recorders (DVRs),  201 
 dime (pulp) novels,  51 
 Dionne, Erin,  65 
 Dire Straits, 171, 172 
 direct broadcast satellite (DBS), 198, 220 
 direct market advertising, 303,  304 , 307 
 Direct Marketing Association, 303 
 DirecTV, 198 
 disc jockeys (DJs), 161–162,  163 , 164 
 discount stores, 65 
 Discovery Channel, 113, 388 
 discrimination, 12, 14 
 Dish, 204 
 Dish Network, 39, 198 
 disinhibitory eff ects,  332 
 Disney 
 and cable, 200 
 and conglomeration, 141 
 and convergence, 41 
 and fi lm, 140 
 and global media, 388 
 merchandise tie-ins, 143 
 and stereotyping, 374 
 and streaming, 144 
 and television, 299 
 Disney/Capital Cities/ABC, 141 
 dissonance theory,  327 , 328 
 distribution, 138–139 
 fi lm, 138–139, 144, 145 
 sound recording, 174–175 
 television, 193 
 Ditlow, Clarence, 64 
 diurnals,  74 
 Diversifi ed Agency Services, 279 
 DJs (disc jockeys), 161–162,  163 , 164 
 DMX (Digital Music Express),  169 
 Dmytryk, Edward, 133 
 Dobson, James C., 374 
 Doctors Without Borders,  305 
 domain names,  240 
 dominant (mainstream) culture,  11 
 Domino, Fats, 166 
 Don Juan, 130, 131 
 Donkey Kong, 214,  214 , 216 
 Doom, 214–215,  215 , 226, 227, 321 
 double features,  132 
 DoubleClick, 255 
 Dougherty, H., 203, 242 
 Douglas, William O., 355, 358 
 Douglass, Frederick, 76 
 Dove Research, 10 
 downloading, 173–174, 255 
 Downton Abbey, 388,  389 
 Dr. Mario, 216 
 Dr. Oz, 383 
 Dr. Phil,  194 
 Dr. Spock’s Baby and Child Care (Spock), 53 
 dramatized news, 335–336 
 Draw Something, 222 
 DreamWorks, 63 
 DRM (digital rights management),  365 
 Drucker, P. E., 19 
 drug use, 343–344 
 Drunk Driving Prevention Act (1988), 267 
 DuBois, W. E. B., 103 
 Dudley Do-Right, 143 
 Duke Energy, 39 
 Th e Dukes of Hazzard, 143 
 Dumenco, Simon, 73, 249, 257, 281 
 Dune, 142 
 duopoly,  163 
 DVDs (digital video discs), 31, 43, 137, 
143–144, 195,  201 , 201 
 DVRs (digital video recorders),  201 
 e-books,  58 , 58–59 
 E. Bruce Harrison Consulting, 280 
 e-commerce,  307 
 e-mail, 236,  238 , 242, 247, 252, 253 
 E! News, 25 
 e-publishing,  58 
 e-readers,  59 ,  59. See also mobile devices 
 EA, 218, 219, 220, 221, 223, 224–225 
 early window,  319 
 “Earth Angel,” 166 
 Earthlink, 238 
 Eastman, George, 125, 126 
 Easy Rider, 140,  141 
 EchoStar, 198 

Index 
I-7
 Eckert, John Presper, 235 
 economies of scale,  35 
 Th e Economist, 111 
 Eddy, M., 257 
 Edelman PR, 279 
 Edison, Th omas, 124, 126, 129, 155 
 Edison Research, 170, 172, 204 
 editorial policies,  375 
 Edmonds, R., 72, 81, 89, 90 
 education, 51, 192.  See also  medial literacy; 
prosocial uses of media 
 Edwards, J., 353 
 Th e Eff ects of Mass Communication (Klapper), 
329–330 
 Eggerton, J., 258 
 Egypt, 394 
 Eisenhower, Dwight D., 271 
 Eisner, Michael, 136 
 el-hi books, 57 
 Elder Scrolls, 219 
 elections.  See politics 
 Electronic Communication Privacy Act 
(1986), 252 
 Electronic Frontier Foundation, 249, 251 
 Elias, P., 238 
 elites, 335 
 Elle,  113 
 Ellison, Ralph, 52 
 Ellsberg, Daniel, 352, 359,  360 
 embedded journalists,  371 
 EMI, 165 
 emotions, 24 
 employee/member relations function of 
public relations, 274 
 encoding,  6 
 encryption,  252 
 Engage, 255 
 engagement, 104, 109, 112,  308 
 ENIAC, 235,  235 
 Entertainment Resources and Marketing 
Association (ERMA), 146 
 Entertainment Software Association, 225 
 Entertainment Software Association (ESA), 
16, 215, 217, 224 
 Entertainment Software Ratings Board 
(ESRB), 227 
 environmental incentives,  341 
 Epitaph, 165 
 Epix, 221 
 Epstein, Jason, 62 
 Epstein, Z., 31 
 Erard, M., 226 
 ERMA (Entertainment Resources and 
Marketing Association), 146 
 ESA (Entertainment Software Association), 
16, 215, 217, 224 
 ESPN, 113, 200, 398 
 Espresso Book Machine, 59,  60 
 Esquire, 113 
 ESRB (Entertainment Software Ratings 
Board), 227 
 Estes v. State of Texas, 358 
 Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind, 140 
 ethics, 366–376 
 and concentration/conglomeration, 
371–373 
 and confi dentiality, 369–370 
 and confl icting interests, 367–368 
 and confl icts of interest, 370–371 
 defi ned,  367 
 levels of, 367 
 and media literacy, 23–24 
 and off ensive content, 373–374 
 and privacy, 368–369 
 self-regulation, 374–376 
 and truth/honesty, 368, 372 
 ethnic press,  82 
 European Union (EU), 397 
 Th e Eveready Hour, 293 
 EverQuest, 221 
 eWatch, 281 
 Ewen, Stuart, 21 
 exergames,  216 
 exhibition (fi lm), 139 
 exogenous stations,  384 , 384–385 
 expanded basic cable,  196 
 experiencers (psychographic segment), 311 
 external services,  385 
 Extra!, 15,  15 , 25 
 Extreme Makeover—Home Edition, 38 
 Extremely Loud and Incredibly Close, 136 
 ExxonMobil, 275 
 EyeToy Kinetic, 216 
 Facebook 
 and advertising, 309 
 and audience fragmentation, 38 
 and concentration/conglomeration, 256 
 and copyright, 365 
 and fi lm, 145 
 and friendship, 346 
 and mobile devices, 242 
 pervasiveness of, 16 
 and privacy, 257 
 and public relations, 266 
 and sound recording, 171 
 and video, 202–203 
 and video games, 222 
 facial recognition, 254 
 factory studios,  128 
 Fagbire, O. J., 146 
 Fahrenheit 451 (Bradbury), 48,  
50 , 52 
 Fahri, P., 34 
 fair trial rights, 357–359,  358 
 fair use, 251,  252 , 364 
 Fairbanks, Douglas, 131 
 Fairbanks Daily News-Miner, 87 
 Fairchild Camera and Instrument, 214 
 Fairness Doctrine,  362 
 Faith Fighter, 226 
 Fajen, S., 308 
 Falk, William, 87 
 Fallows, J., 78 
 Falwell, Jerry, 333 
 Fame, 142–143 
 Th e Family Guy, 22,  23 
 Fantastic Four fi lms, 142, 143 
 Farhi, P., 38, 88, 283 
 Farmville,  220 , 222 
 Farnsworth, Philo, 184,  185 , 384 
 Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 61 
 Father of the Bride, 146 
 Fatworld, 226,  226 
 Faules, Don, 337 
 FCC.  See Federal Communications 
Commission 
 FCC v. Fox, 362 
 Fear Factor, 190 
 feature syndicates,  85 
 Federal Communications Commission (FCC) 
 and advertising, 299, 303 
 and cable, 196, 198 
 and deregulation, 362–363 
 and freedom of the press/freedom of 
expression, 361–362 
 and media literacy, 378 
 and media reform, 376 
 and public relations, 283 
 and radio, 158, 161, 164, 175 
 and television, 185 
 Federal Privacy Act (1974), 253 
 Federal Radio Commission (FRC), 157–158 
 Federal Regulation of Lobbying Act 
(1946), 271 
 Federal Trade Commission (FTC) 
 and advertising, 293, 299, 303–305, 313 
 and Internet, 257 
 and video games, 227 
 Th e Federalist Papers, 268 
 Federation of American Scientists, 216 
 feedback,  5 , 6–7,  8 , 43, 243, 277 
 Feldman, G., 62 
 Felt, Mark,  369 
 feminism, 54, 335 
 Ferrera, America, 117 
 Fessenden, Reginald, 154, 156 
 Fibber McGee and Molly, 158 
 fi ber optics,  196 
 50/50, 22 
 fi le sharing, 173, 364, 365 
 fi lm, 122–149 
 and advertising, 137, 138, 144 
 audience, 134–136,  135 
 and book publishing, 62–64 
 and cable, 198 
 and conglomeration, 141–143 
 consumer behavior, 31 
 and convergence, 138, 143–145 
 future of, 137 
 globalization, 142, 395,  395 
 industry structure, 136, 138–140 
 and Internet, 137, 144 
 and media literacy, 22, 145–147 
 and mobile devices, 145 
 pervasiveness of, 16 
 product placement in, 143, 145–147,  146 
 and radio, 132, 133 
 and television, 132–134, 143 
 timeline, 122–123 
 and video games, 143 
 See also fi lm history 
 fi lm history, 124–134 
 African American fi lm, 128, 129 
 Depression era, 131, 132 
 early entrepreneurs, 124–126 
 early narrative, 126–128,  127 ,  128 
 and McCarthyism, 133 

I-8 
Index
fi lm history (continued)
 scandals, 131–132 
 studio system, 129–131, 132, 133 
 talkies, 130–131 
 and television, 132–134 
 fi ltering software, 251 
 Final Fantasy, 143 
 fi nancial relations function of public 
relations, 274 
 Financial Soccer,  225 
 Fiore, Q., 244 
 FiOS-TV, 198 
 fi rewall, 87, 116 
 First Amendment,  75 , 133.  See also freedom 
of the press/freedom of expression 
 fi rst-person perspective games,  215 
 fi rst-run syndication,  195 
 Fischer, M., 90 
 Fischetti, M., 239 
 Fitzgerald, M., 76, 401 
 Fitzhugh, Bill, 64 
 Five Hundred Years of Printing (Steinberg), 19 
 fi xed-fee arrangements,  274 
 fl ash mobs (smart mobs),  247 
 Fleishman-Hillard, 279 
 Fleming, M., 63 
 Th e Flintstones, 143 
 fl ogs,  282 
 Fluke, Sandra, 176–177,  176 
 FM radio, 160, 161 
 Focus Features, 63, 140 
 Focus Films, 63 
 focus groups,  278 
 Focus on the Family, 374 
 Foehr, U. G., 32 
 Fonda, D., 298 
 Food and Drug Administration, 344 
 Football, 214 
 Footloose,  142 
 For-Play, 214 
 Forbes, T., 143, 249 
 ForbesLife, 99 
 forced exposure,  305 
 Ford, Henry, 269 
 Foreign Agents Registration Act (1938), 270 
 foreign distribution.  See  global media 
 foreign-language newspapers, 76 
 format radio, 160,  161 , 161–162,  162 
 formats,  31 
 Fort, M., 399 
 42nd Street, 132 
 Foursquare, 224 
 Fowler, Mark, 363 
 Fox 
 and book publishing, 63 
 and concentration of ownership, 33 
 and fi lm, 140, 141 
 and global media, 388 
 and indecency, 361–362 
 origins of, 130 
 and television, 189, 204, 205 
 and TV Everywhere Initiative, 204 
 See also 20th Century Fox 
 Fox Searchlight, 140 
 Fox Television Network, 114 
 fraction of selection,  44 
 fragmented news, 336 
 France, 388, 397, 401 
 franchise fi lms,  143 
 Francis, T., 219 
 Frank, Anne, 55 
 Frankenstein, 132 
 Frankfurt School,  335 
 Frankfurter, Felix, 357 
 Franklin, Benjamin, 50, 51, 74, 100, 
267–268, 291 
 Franklin, James, 50, 74 
 Franzen, C., 222 
 Franzen, Jonathan, 259 
 Frasier, 195 
 Frazier, Charles, 62 
 FRC (Federal Radio Commission), 157–158 
 Fred, 202 
 Th e Free Culture Game, 226 
 Freed, Alan,  163 , 166 
 freedom of the press/freedom of expression, 
352–366 
 and ad hoc balancing of interests, 357 
 and advertising, 299, 355–356 
 Alien and Sedition Acts, 75, 355 
 China, 35–36, 395 
 and clear and present danger, 357 
 comparative analysis, 391 
 and concentration/conglomeration, 33 
 and copyright, 364–365 
 defi nitions, 355–356 
 and deregulation, 362–363 
 and fair trial rights, 357–359,  358 
 and globalization, 35–36 
 history of, 75, 354–355 
 and indecency, 361–362 
 and Internet, 246–252 
 and Iraq War, 352 
 and libel/slander, 359 
 and McCarthyism, 133 
 and obscenity/pornography, 360–361 
 and prior restraint, 359–360 
 and radio, 175 
 and shock jocks, 175 
 social responsibility theory, 366, 389 
 timeline, 352–353 
 Zenger case, 74–75 
 See also regulation 
 Freedom’s Journal, 76 
 freemium model, 170,  225 
 freeNK, 384–385 
 Friedman, W., 16, 31, 183 
 Friend, T., 136, 142 
 Friends,  194 , 195 
 Friendster, 242 
 front-page news, 93 
 Frontier Communications, 259 
 Fryburger, V., 291 
 FTC.  See Federal Trade Commission 
 Th e Fugitive, 143 
 Fun & Games, 226 
 Funkitron, 220 
 FX.  See special eff ects 
 Gallup, George, 270 
 Game Boy Advance, 204, 218 
 Game of Th rones, 198,  199 
 game shows, 195 
 Games for Health, 216 
 gametap.com, 222 
 gamifi cation,  216 
 Gannett, 83, 86, 87 
 Gannett Broadcasting, 39 
 Garchik, L., 68 
 Gardner, E., 192 
 Gardner, Tom, 66 
 Garfi eld, Bob, 98–99, 306, 308 
 Garofoli, J., 247 
 Garside, J., 165 
 Gates, Bill, 237–238,  239 
 Gavin Anderson & Company, 279 
 gay/lesbian people,  345 , 353, 369 
 GE (General Electric), 33, 34, 141 
 Gebhardt, E., 335 
 Geertz, Cliff ord, 9 
 Geff en, David, 174 
 General Electric (GE), 33, 34, 141 
 General Magazine, and Historical Chronicle, 
for All the British Plantations in 
America, 100 
 General Motors, 145, 270, 306 
 Genghis Khan, 267 
 Genoways, T., 205 
 genre, 24–25,  25 , 26,  26 , 158–159, 185 
 George of the Jungle, 143 
 Gerbner, George, 338, 339 
 Germain, D., 137 
 Germany, 400 
 Gertner, J., 201 
 Get Health Reform Right, 266 
 Get Smart, 143 
 Gibbs, M., 365 
 Gibson, William, 53, 232–233,  233 , 244 
 Gilbertson, Ashley, 205 
 Gillespie, E. M., 64 
 Gillespie, N., 37 
 Gillmor, Dan M., 355, 364, 365 
 Gilson, C., 291 
 Gilson, Dave, 224 
 Ginsberg, Th omas, 36 
 Ginzburg v. United States, 361 
 Gioia, Dana, 56 
 Th e Girl Who Kicked the Hornet’s Nest 
(Larsson), 58 
 Th e Girl Who Played with Fire  (Larsson), 58 
 Th e Girl with the Dragon Tattoo  (Larsson), 58 
 Th e Girlfriend Experience, 31 
 Girls, 198,  199 
 Gitlin, Todd, 336 
 Gitlow v. New York, 355 
 glacks,  265 
 Glamour, 117,  117 
 Glee, 168,  168 , 388 
 global media, 35–37, 382–402 
 advertising, 311,  312 
 comparative analysis, 389–395, 399–401 
 cultural imperialism debate, 397–399 
 extent of, 383,  387 , 388,  389 
 fi lm, 142, 395,  395 
 global village concept, 232, 245, 398–399 
 history of, 384–388 
 magazines, 113 
 programming, 395–396 

Index 
I-9
 public relations, 279,  279 
 resistance to, 388–389,  390 , 397–398 
 sound recording, 164 
 timeline, 382–383 
 U.S. markets for,  396 
 video games, 214 
 Global Privacy Index, 253 
 global village concept, 232,  245 , 398–399 
 globalization,  35 , 35–37.  See also global 
media 
 GlucoBoy, 216 
 Goebbels, Joseph, 54–55 
 Goetzl, D., 281 
 Gold, Howard, 88 
 Golden, Andrew, 226 
 Goldeneye 007, 226 
 Goldkorn, J., 395 
 Goldmark, Peter, 159 
 Gone with the Wind, 128 
 Good Housekeeping, 101 
 Goodbye Columbus, 134 
 Goodman, Ellen, 85 
 Goodwin, Hannibal, 125, 126 
 Google 
 and book publishing, 60–61 
 and cloud computing, 254 
 and concentration/conglomeration, 
41, 256 
 and fi lm, 144 
 and globalization, 35, 36–37, 397 
 and Internet regulation, 249 
 search engine, 240 
 Google Print, 60–61 
 Google Translate, 397 
 Goosebumps  series, 55 
 Gossip Girl,  13 , 168, 189 
 Gotham Books, 62 
 Gottlieb, David, 211 
 Goulet, L. S., 346 
 Gourmet, 98 
 governmental aff airs function of public 
relations, 274 
 GQ,  102 
 Gracie, 147 
 Th e Graduate, 134 
 Grammar Rock, 192 
 Gran Torino, 136 
 Gran Turismo  series, 219 
 Grand Th eft Auto, 219, 220, 222, 224,  224 
 grand theories,  325 
 graphics, 117–118 
 Graser, M., 138 
 Great Britain, 389–391,  390 , 400 
 Great Depression 
 and advertising, 293,  293 
 and book publishing, 51–52 
 and fi lm, 131, 132 
 and public relations, 270 
 and sound recording, 158 
 and video games, 211 
 Great Recession, 371 
 Th e Great Train Robbery, 126,  127 
 Greeley, Horace, 76 
 Green Hornet, 142 
 green light process,  138 , 138–139 
 Greenberg, K., 274, 304 
 GreenGraffi  ti, 290 
 Greenwald, Glen, 372 
 greenwashing,  280 
 Gregorian, Vartan, 52 
 Greider, William, 42 
 Grey’s Anatomy, 22 
 Griffi  th, D. W., 128, 129, 130 
 Grimes, M., 298 
 Gripe,  262–263 , 281 
 Grisham, John, 53, 62 
 Grokster decision, 174, 365 
 Gross, D., 308 
 Gross, L., 338, 339 
 guerra da baixaria, 396 
 Th e Guiding Light, 159 
 Guitar Hero,  10 
 Gunfi ght, 214 
 Th e Gunsaulus Mystery, 129 
 Gurevitch, M., 400 
 Guskin, E., 72, 81, 83, 89, 90 
 Gutenberg, Johannes, 19,  20 , 49 
 Gutenberg Bible, 19,  19 
 Th e Gutenberg Galaxy (McLuhan), 19, 
244,  245 
 Guthrie, M., 193 
 Guttmacher Institute, 347 
 Hachten, William, 389 
 Hafner, K., 234 
 Hajaj, N., 240 
 Hall, E., 400 
 Hall, E. T., 9 
 Hall, J., 38 
 Hall, K., 277 
 Hall, Stuart, 335 
 Hall Pass, 140 
 Halliday, Jean, 116, 306 
 Hallmark Channel, 226 
 Halloween II, 140 
 Halo, 219 
 Hamilton, A., 243 
 Hamilton, Alexander, 268 
 Hamilton, Andrew, 75 
 Hampp, A., 138, 189 
 Hampton, K. N., 346 
 Handguns, 109 
 handheld devices.  See mobile devices 
 Th e Hangover, 144 
 Happy Aquariums,  220 
 Harcourt General, 61 
 hard news,  92 
 Hardt, Hanno, 15 
 Harper Brothers, 51 
 HarperCollins, 61, 62, 63 
 Harper’s Bazaar, 113 
 Harper’s Weekly, 100, 101,  101 
 Harris, Benjamin, 74 
 Harris, Eric, 226 
 Harris, M., 9 
 Harry Potter fi lms, 136, 138, 142, 143,  395 
 Harry Potter series (Rowling), 53, 55, 
67–68,  67 
 Harry Rosen, 113 
 Hart, P., 272, 363 
 Hasbro, 147 
 Hauptmann, Bruno, 358,  358 
 Havrilesky, Heather, 259 
 Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 51 
 Hayden, Steve, 309 
 Hayes, Christopher, 250 
 Hayes, Dade, 142 
 Hayes, N., 303 
 Hays, Will H., 132 
 HBO (Home Box Offi  ce), 195, 198, 200, 221 
 HDTV (high-defi nition digital television), 203 
 Hearst, William Randolph, 77 
 Hearst Books, 61 
 Hearst Corporation, 78, 86, 113, 114 
 Hedges, Chris, 79 
 Hefl ing, K., 329 
 Helm, Jelly, 300 
 Th e Help,  120–121 , 136 
 Hemisphere, 108 
 Hendricks, Christina,  12 
 Hendricks, M., 89 
 Hepburn, Katherine, 146 
 Here’s the Situation (Sorrentino), 62,  64 
 heroes, 26 
 Herskowitz, J. E., 72, 79 
 Hickey, N., 363 
 Th e Hidden Persuaders (Packard), 
270–271, 296 
 high-defi nition digital television (HDTV), 203 
 High School Musical, 388 
 higher education books, 57 
 Hightower, Jim, 35, 64 
 Hill and Knowlton, 274, 279 
 Hinchey, Maurice, 33 
 Hirschberg, L., 174 
 Hispanic media.  See Spanish-language media 
 History Channel, 200 
 history of mass communication 
 book publishing, 49–52 
 freedom of the press/freedom of 
expression, 75, 354–355 
 global media, 384–388 
 industrialization, 20–21 
 Internet, 234–238 
 magazines, 100–104, 292 
 newspapers, 17, 51, 73–78 
 printing, 19–20, 49 
 public relations, 266–271 
 radio, 154–155, 156–160, 293 
 sound recording, 155–156, 159 
 video games, 211–215 
 See also advertising history; mass 
communication theory; television 
history 
 Hitler, Adolf, 270 
 Ho, M., 16, 32, 57, 164, 218, 222 
 Hoaxbusters.org, 250 
 Hocking, Amanda, 58 
 Hogan, M., 173 
 Hole in the Wall, 383 
 Hollywood.  See fi lm; studio system 
 Hollywood 10, 133 
 Hollywood Reporter, 383 
 Hollywoodization, 63–64 
 Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 357 
 Holt, Lester, 34 
 Holt, Pat, 62 
 Holt, Sid, 114 

I-10 
Index
 Home, 30–31 
 Home Box Offi  ce (HBO), 195, 198, 200, 221 
 home pages,  240 , 240, 242 
 Home Pong, 214 
 Th e Homesteader, 129 
 Honduras, 391 
 honesty, 368, 372 
 Hoover, Herbert, 157 
 Hopewell, J., 400 
 Horkheimer, Max, 335 
 hosts (Internet),  236 , 236–237, 239–240 
 Hotel New Hampshire (Irving), 53 
 House, 383 
 House of Cards, 182 
 House Un-American Activities Committee 
(HUAC), 133.  See also McCarthyism 
 Hovland, Carl I., 327 
 Howard Dean for Iowa Game, 226 
 Howe, J., 172, 365 
 Howe, Louis McHenry, 270 
 HQ, 99 
 HTTP (hypertext transfer protocols), 238–239 
 HUAC (House Un-American Activities 
Committee), 133.  See also McCarthyism 
 Th e Hucksters, 270,  272 
 Th e Hulk, 143 
 Hulu,  183 , 202, 221 
 Humble Indie Bundle, 219 
 Humpty Dumpty, 211,  212 
 Hunger Games  (Collins), 53 
 Huntley, Chet, 185 
 Huppenthal, John, 55 
 Hurricane Katrina, 15,  15 
 Hurt Locker, 22, 136, 140 
 Hutchins Commission on Freedom of the 
Press, 366 
 hypercommercialism,  38 , 38–39 
 and advertising, 297, 298–299, 308 
 in book publishing, 62–64 
 in newspapers,  86 , 87 
 resistance to, 108–109 
 in video games, 222–226,  222 ,  225 
 See also conglomeration 
 hyperlinks,  242 
 hypertext transfer protocols (HTTP), 238–239 
 hypodermic needle theory,  325 
 I Love Lucy, 186,  187 , 188 
 I-News (Individuated News), 37 
 IBM, 235, 236, 237, 238 
 IBOC (in-band-on-channel),  169 
 ICANN (Internet Corporation for Assigned 
Names and Numbers), 240 
 Ice Age, 134 
 iconoscope tube,  184 
 identifi cation,  332 
 Iezzi, Teressa, 37–38 
 IFC Entertainment, 144 
 Ifi ll, Gwen, 176 
 IGN Entertainment, 41 
 iHeart Radio, 221 
 iJustine, 202 
 IM (instant messaging),  238 , 247 
 Imagine, 63 
 IMC (integrated marketing communications), 
 280 , 281 
 imitation,  332 
 Imitation of Life, 134 
 immigration, 75, 77, 130, 291, 324 
 importation of distant signals,  191 
 Imus, Don, 175, 176 
 in-band-on-channel (IBOC),  169 
 In the Night Kitchen (Sendak), 55 
 Ince, Th omas H., 130 
 InChairTV, 290 
 indecency,  361 , 361–362 
 independent media 
 alternative press,  63 , 64, 82–83,  84 
 book publishing, 64, 65 
 fi lm, 140 
 sound recording, 164–165, 175 
 television, 191 
 video games, 219 
 indie media.  See independent media 
 indigenous stations,  384 
 Individuated News (I-News), 37 
 industrial advertising, 303,  303 
 industrial magazines, 105, 269 
 industrialization, 20–21, 101, 268, 
291–292, 324 
 industry relations function of public 
relations, 274–275 
 industry structure 
 advertising, 301–306,  301 ,  302 , 308–310 
 book publishing, 57 
 cable, 196–200,  197 ,  199 
 fi lm, 136, 138–140 
 Internet, 238–243,  241 
 magazines, 104–105,  106 
 newspapers, 78–84 
 public relations, 273–276,  273 , 278 
 radio, 160–164 
 sound recording, 164–166,  165 , 
174–175 
 television, 193–195 
 video games, 218–220,  218 
 See also concentration of ownership; 
conglomeration 
 Indvik, L., 237 
 inferential feedback,  6 , 6–7 
 Infi nity Broadcasting, 175 
 information gap, 256,  258 
 Inglourious Basterds, 140 
 inhibitory eff ects,  332 
 innovators (psychographic segment), 311 
 Th e Insider, 371–372 
 Inspector Gadget, 143 
 Instagram, 242, 256 
 instant books,  63 
 instant messaging (IM),  238 , 247 
 institutional advertising, 302 
 Insurge Pictures, 144 
 integrated audience reach,  90 , 110 
 integrated marketing communications 
(IMC),  280 , 281 
 intellectual property.  See copyright 
 interactive cable, 203 
 interactivity 
 and advertising, 307, 309–310 
 and audience fragmentation, 38 
 and Internet, 243 
 and newspapers, 89 
 and television, 203 
 and video games, 223, 226 
 International Children’s Digital Library, 60 
 International News Service, 76 
 internationalization.  See global media 
 Internet, 232–261,  233 ,  234 
 and book publishing, 58, 64, 66–67 
 and cable, 198 
 and clandestine stations, 385 
 comparative analysis, 395 
 and concentration/conglomeration, 256 
 and consumer culture, 232–233 
 and democracy, 247, 255–256,  256 , 258 
 and feedback, 43 
 and fi lm, 137, 144 
 Five Freedoms, 258–259 
 and freedom of the press/freedom of 
expression, 246–252 
 and globalization, 35–37, 388, 389 
 history of, 234–238 
 industry structure, 238–243,  241 
 and magazines, 99, 110–111, 113 
 and mass communication process, 243–245 
 and media literacy, 23, 258–259 
 misinformation on,  248 , 250 
 and mobile devices, 237, 242–243,  242 
 and newspapers, 78, 79, 83, 88–90,  88 
 pervasiveness of, 16 
 pornography on, 250–251 
 privacy issues, 252–255, 257 
 prosocial uses of, 242–243,  246 , 
247–248,  247 
 and public relations, 280 
 and radio, 170, 388 
 regulation, 249, 250–252 
 and social change,  246 , 247,  247 , 249,  249 
 and sound recording, 166, 170, 
171–174, 175 
 and television, 182, 202–203 
 timeline, 232–233 
 users, 243 
 video, 168, 182, 202–203, 256, 309,  309 
 and video games, 216, 220–221,  220 , 
222,  223 
 See also Internet advertising 
 Internet advertising 
 classifi ed advertising, 88 
 and convergence, 307 
 and creativity, 308–310 
 criticisms of,  297 
 formats of,  307 
 and hypercommercialism, 38 
 measurement of, 308 
 and permission marketing, 309–310 
 and social networking sites, 308 
 and video games, 222 
 YouTube, 202 
 Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and 
Numbers (ICANN), 240 
 Internet Public Library, 89 
 Internet service providers (ISPs),  238 , 259 
 interpersonal communication,  5 , 5–6,  8 
 interruptive ads,  114 
 Interscope Records, 174 
 Intolerance, 128 
 investigative reporting, 79 

Index 
I-11
 iOS, 222 
 iPad, 59, 91, 237 
 iPhone, 91, 222 
 iPod,  38 , 39, 170, 173,  174 
 Iran, 388, 394 
 Iraq War, 36, 247, 370, 371 
 Irvin v. Dowd, 357–358 
 Irving, John, 53 
 Irwin, May, 131 
 Th e Island, 145,  146 
 island shots,  305 
 ISPs (Internet service providers),  238 , 259 
 issues management function of public 
relations, 275 
 Italie, H., 56 
 ITP, 113 
 iTunes, 90, 173 
 iUniverse, 59, 61 
 Ives, N., 38, 99, 108, 109, 114, 117, 307 
 Ivins, Molly, 92 
 Iyengar, Shanto, 331 
 Izadi, E., 320 
 J. Crew, 113, 333 
 J. Walter Th ompson agency, 292 
 Th e Jack Benny Show, 158 
 Jackson, Andrew, 268 
 Jackson, J., 87, 256, 272 
 Jackson, Janet, 361 
 Jackson, Jesse, Jr.,  377 
 Jackson-Beeck, M., 338 
 Jacobellis v. Ohio, 361 
 Jaff e, Joseph, 308 
 Jakes, John, 52 
 Jamaica, 388 
 James, M., 200 
 James Bond 007, 219 
 James Bond fi lms, 143, 219 
 Jamieson, K. H., 298 
 Jardin, X., 43, 145 
 Jay, John, 268 
 Jay-Z, 172 
 al-Jazeera, 386 
 Th e Jazz Singer, 130,  131 
 Jeff erson, C., 401 
 Jeff erson, Th omas, 50, 92 
 Jeff ries-Fox, S., 338 
 Jeopardy, 398 
 Th e Jerry Springer Show, 319 
 Jersey Shore, 62, 319 
 JFK,  25 
 JOAs (joint operating agreements),  86 
 Jobs, Steve, 237, 238,  239 
 Joff e, Josef, 399 
 Johansson, Scarlett, 145,  146 
 John Paul II, 377 
 John Wiley & Sons, 51 
 Johnny Mnemonic  (Gibson), 232 
 Johnson, B., 218, 311 
 Johnson, C., 90 
 Johnson, George, 129 
 Johnson, Mitchell, 226 
 Johnson, Nicholas, 320, 377 
 Johnson, Noble P., 129 
 Johnson, S., 289 
 Johnson, Steven, 38 
 Johnson & Johnson, 266 
 joint operating agreements (JOAs),  86 
 Jolson, Al, 130,  131 
 Jones, Terry, 66 
 Jonesboro school shooting (1998), 226 
 Judd, Naomi,  377 
 Julius Caesar, 267 
 jumps, 93 
 Juniper, Tony, 280 
 Juno, 136 
 Jurassic Park (Crichton), 62 
 Kahn, Robert, 236 
 Kalet, Hank, 176–177 
 Kamiya, Gary, 79 
 Kansas City Star, 89 
 Kantar Media, 38 
 Kato, M., 218 
 Katz, E., 326 
 Kauff man, L. A., 247 
 Kawin, B. F., 131 
 Kay Kyer’s Kollege of Musical Knowledge, 158 
 KDKA, 157 
 Keillor, Garrison, 85 
 Keller, B., 31 
 Kelly, C., 11 
 Kelly, Ed, 104 
 Kelly, Kevin, 20 
 Kendall, Amos, 268 
 Kennedy, Anthony, 250 
 Kennedy, D., 17 
 Kennedy, L., 33 
 Kent, Steven, 211–212 
 Kentucky Fried Chicken, 290, 313 
 Kerkian, S., 275, 281 
 Kern, Tony, 41 
 Ketchum, 279 
 Khanfar, Wadah, 386 
 Kiker, Julian, 346 
 Kiley, Richard,  186 
 Th e Killing, 383 
 Kinder, Donald, 331 
 Kindle, 59,  59 
 Kinect, 218 
 kinescope,  184 
 kinetograph,  125 
 kinetoscope,  126 
 King, Stephen, 53, 58, 67–68 
 King Features, 85 
 King Kong, 141 
 Th e King’s Speech, 136, 138,  139 , 140 
 Kingsley, Ben, 141 
 Kinsley, Michael, 111 
 Kirsner, S., 309 
 Th e Kiss, 131 
 Kitross, J. M., 156, 188 
 Klaassen, A., 39, 171 
 Klapper, Joseph, 329–330, 341 
 Klebold, Dylan, 226 
 Klein, N., 280 
 Klostermann, C., 306 
 Knight Commission on the Information 
Needs of Communities in a 
Democracy, 256 
 Knocked Up, 22 
 Knopper, S., 164, 173 
 knowledge gap,  258 
 Konami, 216, 218 
 Konner, J., 34 
 Koppel, Ted, 17 
 Korea, 19 
 Kraft Television Th eatre, 186,  186 
 Kristula, D., 236 
 Krugman, Paul, 372 
 Kulicke, H., 58, 242 
 Kuralt, C., 185 
 Kutcher, Ashton, 242 
 Kuttner, Robert, 43 
 Th e L Word,  345 
 L.A. Weekly, 82 
 labor movement, 269 
 Ladd, Jim, 164 
 Ladies’ Home Journal, 101, 292 
 Lady Gaga, 172 
 Lakota Times, 76 
 Lambrianidou, M., 298 
 Landmark Th eaters, 145 
 Lane, Allen, 51 
 LANS (Local Area Networks),  215 , 238 
 Lanzano, Steve, 109 
 laptop computers, 237,  237 
 Lardner, Ring, Jr., 133 
 Larsson, Stieg, 58 
 Lasswell, Harold, 5 
 Last House on the Left, 142 
 Late Show with David Letterman, 190 
 Law & Order, 383 
 Lawless, J., 253 
 Lawrence, Mike, 281 
 Layar, 254 
 Lazarsfeld, Paul F., 321, 325–326 
 LCD (liquid crystal display) screens,  214 
 Leach, Grant, 297 
 lead generation,  307 
 Lead Us Not Into Temptation (Talking 
Heads), 174 
 Learmonth, M., 297 
 LED (light-emitting diode) screens,  214 
 Lee, Harper, 55 
 Lee, Ivy, 269, 270, 281 
 Legend of Zelda, 214,  214 
 Leighton, Richard, 304 
 leisure, 21, 101, 104, 130, 295 
 Lemann, N., 72 
 Lemire, Christy, 146 
 Th e Lemon Book (Nader & Ditlow), 64 
 Lepore, J., 74 
 Lester, Julius, 53 
 Lewis, Charles, 79 
 Lewis, Peter, 170 
 Lexus, 116 
 LG Electronics, 144 
 Libby, Lewis “Scooter,” 371 
 libel,  359 
 libertarianism,  354 , 354–355, 366, 389–390 
 Liberty, 196 
 license deals, 174 
 Licklider, Joseph C. R., 234,  234 , 244 
 Liebling, A. J., 247 
 Life, 37, 101 
 Lightner, Candy, 267 

I-12 
Index
 Lights of New York, 130 
 Lilo & Stitch, 134 
 Limbaugh, Rush, 175, 176–177 
 limited eff ects theories, 325,  326 , 328, 330, 
332, 333 
 Lin, Jeremy,  198 
 Th e Lincoln Lawyer, 140 
 Lincoln Motion Picture Company, 129 
 Lincoln’s Dream, 129 
 LinkedIn, 242 
 Lionsgate, 144 
 Lippmann, Walter, 325 
 liquid barretter,  154 
 literacy,  19 , 19–20, 21, 51, 100, 101.  See also 
media literacy 
 Lithwick, D., 345 
 Little, Brown, 61 
 Little Brown Book,  112 
 Little Caesar, 132 
 Little Orphan Annie, 158 
 Little Richard, 163, 164, 166,  167 
 LittleBigPlanet, 224 
 Littleton, C., 168 
 Live Nation, 174 
 lobbying,  274 
 Local Area Networks (LANs),  215 , 238 
 local audiences, 80–82,  81 , 83, 89, 161, 164 
 Local Community Radio Act (2005), 164 
 Loechner, J., 201, 204 
 Th e Lone Ranger, 158 
 Long, John, 118 
 Long, Johnny, 166 
 Long Beach Beachcomber, 87 
 Look, 37, 101, 104 
 Lopez, Jennifer,  39 
 Th e Lorax, 143 
 Lord and Th omas, 269, 292 
 Los Angeles Times, 79 
 Lost, 192, 193 
 Th e Lost Squad, 143 
 Th e Lost World, 141 
 Lovelace, Lady Ada Byron, 234 
 Lovison, J., 222 
 Low Power FM (LPFM),  160 , 164 
 Lowenstein, Douglas, 221, 228 
 Lowery, S. A., 325 
 Lowman, S., 68 
 Lowrey, A., 65 
 Lowry, B., 16 
 LPFM (Low Power FM),  160 , 164 
 Lucas, George, 138, 144 
 Luce, Henry, 366 
 Luckmann, Th omas, 337–338 
 Ludwig, S., 16 
 Luff , Bob, 200–201 
 Lumière brothers, 122, 123, 126 
 Lumsdaine, A. A., 327 
 Lunden, I., 38, 308 
 Lyon, M., 234 
 Lyons, D., 249 
 MacArthur, K., 313 
 MacBride Report (UNESCO), 397 
 MacDonald, Andrew, 52 
 Machinima, 182 
 Mackey, John, 249 
 MacMillan, R., 34 
 Macomb Daily, 87 
 macro-level media eff ects,  321 
 MADD (Mothers Against Drunk Driving), 
266, 267 
 Madden, M., 257, 346 
 Madden NFL, 218, 219,  219 
 Madison, James, 268 
 Madonna, 174,  175 
 Mafi a Wars, 222 
 magalogues,  113 
 magazine advertising, 105, 107–110 
 advertiser categories,  107 
 advertorials, 114–115,  115 
 and audience, 104 
 and circulation, 109 
 content infl uence, 115–117 
 and convergence, 307 
 and custom publishing, 112 
 history of, 101, 103, 292,  292 
 interruptive ads, 114 
 and television, 103, 113–114 
 magazines, 98–119 
 and audience fragmentation, 37,  102–103 , 
103–104 
 consumer behavior, 31 
 custom publishing, 108, 112–113 
 graphics in, 117–118 
 history of, 100–104, 292 
 industry structure, 104–105,  106 
 and information gap, 258 
 and Internet, 99, 110–111, 113 
 and mobile devices, 111–112 
 prosocial uses of, 108–109,  109 
 and television, 103, 113–114 
 timeline, 98–99 
 See also magazine advertising 
 magic bullet theory,  325 
 Magnavox, 213–214 
 Mahler, J., 61 
 mail-order books, 57 
 mainframe computers, 235,  235 ,  236 ,  237 
 mainstream (dominant) culture,  11 
 mainstreaming,  338 
 makers (psychographic segment), 311 
 Malkovich, John, 134–135 
 Man-Computer Symbiosis (Licklider), 234 
 Th e Man in the Gray Flannel Suit, 270 
 management function of public relations, 278 
 Manchin, Joe,  336 
 Manjoo, F., 144, 290 
 Mann, Aimee,  169 , 175 
 Manning, Bradley,  350–351 , 352 
 manufacturing and distribution deals, 175 
 Mao Zedong, 393 
 Marche, S., 242 
 Marconi, Guglielmo, 154,  154 , 384 
 Maria Full of Grace, 344 
 Marich, R., 203 
 Marie Claire, 400 
 Marimow, Bill, 88 
 Mario games, 219 
 Mario Teaches Typing, 217 
 Marketcast, 142 
 marketing communication function of public 
relations, 275–276 
 Marriott, H., 282 
 Mars Needs Moms,  136 
 Marterie, Ralph, 166 
 Martha Stewart Living, 39 
 Martin, Courtney, 11 
 Martin, Trayvon, 370 
 Marvel Comics, 398 
 Marvel’s Th e Avengers, 143 
 Masnick, M., 16, 32, 57, 164, 218, 222 
 Mason, Julie, 33 
 mass communication 
 as cultural forum, 15, 335 
 cultural storytelling model, 14–15,  14 , 
37–38 
 mass communication process,  5 ,  6 , 6–8 
 and current trends, 41–44 
 and Internet, 243–245 
 and media literacy, 21, 44 
 vs. interpersonal communication,  8 
 mass communication theory, 318–349,  322 
 agenda-setting theory, 330–331 
 attitude change theory, 323, 327–329 
 cultural theories, 333–336 
 defi ned, 322–323 
 dependency theory, 331–332 
 limited eff ects theories, 325, 326, 328, 330, 
332, 333 
 mass society theory, 324–325 
 meaning-making perspective, 337–339 
 and media literacy, 347–348 
 reinforcement theory, 320, 329–330, 341 
 social cognitive theory, 332, 333, 
340–341,  341 
 timeline, 318–319 
 two-step fl ow theory, 326–327,  326 
 uses and gratifi cations approach, 330,  
331 , 333 
 and  Th e War of the Worlds, 325–326 
 See also media eff ects 
 mass market media, 57 
 mass media,  6 
 mass society theory, 324–325,  325 
 massively multiplayer online role-playing 
games (MMO),  221 , 243 
 Mast, G., 131 
 master antenna television (MATV),  191 
 Mastro, D., 344 
 Matsa, K., 111 
 Mattel Toys, 214 
 Matthau, Walter,  186 
 Matthews, Carole, 64 
 MATV (master antenna television),  191 
 Mauchly, John, 235 
 Maxwell, Joseph P., 156 
 “Maybellene,” 166 
 Mays, Lowry, 35 
 McAdams, D. D., 195 
 McAdams, Rachael, 145 
 McAvoy, May,  131 
 McCain, John,  377 
 McCall’s, 101 
 McCarthy, Jenny, 250 
 McCarthy, Joseph, 55, 133, 188,  189. See also 
McCarthyism 
 McCarthyism, 55, 133, 186, 188,  189 , 333 
 McChesney, Robert W., 36, 86, 377, 398, 399 

Index 
I-13
 McClatchy, 86 
 McClellan, S., 195, 253, 311 
 McClendon, Gordon, 162 
 McClintock, P., 144 
 McClure’s,  100 , 101 
 McCombs, Maxwell, 330, 331 
 McDonald’s,  10 , 143,  298 ,  397 , 399,  400 
 McGonigal, Jane, 224 
 McKelvey, T., 371 
 McKinley, William, 268 
 McLaren, Malcolm, 165 
 McLaughlin, Andrew, 35 
 McLuhan, M., 245 
 McLuhan, Marshall, 4, 19, 49, 53, 232–233, 
234,  234 , 244–245, 333 
 McMasters, P. K., 355 
 McPheters & Co., 109 
 McQuail, D., 366 
 McShane, Claudette, 64 
 Meadows, B., 277 
 meaning-making perspective,  337 , 337–339 
 media 
 in mass communication process, 5,  6 
 power of, 22, 24 
 media councils,  375 
 media eff ects, 318–322 
 administrative vs. critical research, 321–322 
 drugs/alcohol, 343–344 
 micro vs. macro, 320–321 
 and prosocial uses of media, 320, 347 
 stereotyping, 344, 346–347 
 transmissional vs. ritual perspective, 322, 
 322 , 328 
 violence, 321,  321 , 339–343,  341 
 media literacy, 21–26 
 and advertising, 311–313 
 and book publishing, 67–68 
 and comparative analysis, 399–401 
 defi ned,  18 
 and Federal Communications 
Commission, 378 
 and fi lm, 22, 145–147 
 and fraction of selection, 44 
 and Internet, 23, 258–259 
 and magazines, 117–118 
 and mass communication process, 21, 44 
 and mass communication theory, 347–348 
 and media reform, 376–377 
 and newspapers, 92 
 and public relations, 282–284 
 and radio, 175–177 
 skills for, 24–25 
 and television, 22, 24, 204–206 
 and video games, 226–228 
 Media Matters, 370 
 media multitasking,  32 
 Media News Group, 86 
 media pervasiveness, 4, 16,  16 ,  32 , 32–33 
 advertising, 38, 288–290, 297, 303 
 media reform, 376–377.  See also regulation 
 media relations function of public 
relations, 275 
 MediaPredict, 62 
 medium.  See media 
 Th e Medium Is the Message (McLuhan & 
Fiore), 244 
 Meehan, M., 227 
 Meiklejohn, Alexander, 363 
 Melber, A., 249 
 Méliès, Georges, 126, 127 
 Melville, Herman, 51 
 Men in Black, 143 
 Menaker, Daniel, 62 
 merchandise tie-ins, 143 
 Mercury Th eater of the Air, 159 
 Meredith,  107 , 108 
 Merge Records, 174 
 Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, 
55, 56 
 Merton, R. K., 323 
 message, 5, 6,  8 , 42–43 
 message movies, 133–134 
 metaethics,  367 
 Metal Gear, 218 
 metered systems, 90 
 metering,  259 
 metropolitan dailies, 80 
 Mexico, 401 
 Meyer, Stephenie, 53 
 MGM/UA, 132, 138, 140 
 MGM v. Grokster, 174 
 Miami Herald, 89 
 Micheaux, Oscar, 129 
 Michigan Citizen, 82 
 micro-level media eff ects,  320 , 320–321 
 microcinema,  144 
 microcomputers (personal computers),  237 , 
237–238 
 micropayments, 90 
 Microsoft 
 and cloud computing, 254 
 and concentration/conglomeration, 256 
 founding of, 238 
 and globalization, 35 
 and hypercommercialism, 39 
 and magazines, 111 
 and mobile devices, 237 
 and video games, 218, 219, 221 
 microwave relay,  185 
 Middelhoff , Th omas, 398 
 middle class, 271 
 middle-range theories,  323 
 Midnight Cowboy, 134 
 Midnight in Paris, 136, 140,  140 
 Midway, 214 
 Mieszkowski, K., 255 
 Miller, Judith, 36, 371 
 Miller Beer, 290, 305 
 Miller v. State of California, 360 
 Million Book Project, 60 
 Million Dollar Baby, 140 
 Milton, John, 355 
 Milton Bradley, 214,  292 
 Mindlin, A., 90, 249 
 minicomputers,  237 
 minority relations/multicultural aff airs 
function of public relations, 276 
 Minow, Newton, 191 
 Miramax, 145 
 Mirkinson, J., 176 
 Missile Attack, 214 
 Mission Impossible fi lms, 143 
 Mitchell, A., 41–42, 80, 89, 90, 111, 160, 162, 
171, 307 
 Mitchell, B., 90 
 Mitchell, G., 371 
 Mitchell, L., 90 
 Mitchell, S., 65 
 MMO (massively multiplayer online role-
playing games),  221 , 243 
 MMOWGLI, 210, 216 
 Mnookin, S., 173 
 mobile devices, 16 
 and advertising, 307, 309 
 and book publishing, 59–61 
 and convergence, 40 
 and fi lm, 145 
 and Five Internet Freedoms, 258 
 and Internet, 237, 242–243,  242 
 and magazines, 111–112 
 and newspapers, 90–91, 93 
 and public relations, 281 
 and sound recording, 170–171,  171 
 and television, 182, 204 
 and video games, 216, 218, 221, 222 
 See also radio 
 Moby Dick (Melville), 51 
 modeling,  332 
 modems,  172 
 Modern Family, 319,  345 
 Mohit, Farhad, 281 
 money, 17–18 
 Moneyball, 136 
 Monster.com, 88, 89 
 montage,  126 , 128 
 Montana, Hannah, 165 
 Montcoal mining disaster,  336 
 Moore, P., 111 
 moral agents,  367 
 Th e More You Know  series, 342 
 Morgan, M., 339 
 Morgan Stanley, 116, 117 
 Morgenson, Gretchen, 371 
 Morozov, E., 250 
 Morrison, P., 86, 163 
 Morrissey, J., 173 
 Mortal Kombat, 143, 222, 332, 356 
 Moses, A., 182 
 Motherload, 39 
 Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD), 
266, 267 
 Motion Picture Association of America 
(MPAA), 138 
 Motion Picture Patents Company (MPPC) 
(the Trust), 129–130 
 Motion Picture Producers and Distributors of 
America (MPPDA), 132 
 Motion Picture Production Code 
(MPPC), 132 
 moveable type, 16–17 
 MoveOn.org,  246 , 247 
 movies.  See fi lm 
 Moyers, Bill, 34, 52 
 MP3, 170,  172 , 364 
 MPAA (Motion Picture Association of 
America), 138 
 MPPC (Motion Picture Patents Company) 
(the Trust), 129–130 

I-14 
Index
 MPPC (Motion Picture Production 
Code), 132 
 MPPDA (Motion Picture Producers and 
Distributors of America), 132 
 Mr. Deeds Goes to Town, 132 
 Ms., 108 
 MSN Games, 222–223 
 MSNBC, 89, 370 
 MSOs (multiple system operators),  196 , 198, 
200, 204 
 MTV, 167, 168, 388 
 MTV Music Generator, 219 
 muckraking era,  101 , 269, 293 
 Muller, J., 72, 81, 83 
 multimedia,  238 
 multinational corporations.  See 
concentration of ownership; 
conglomeration; globalization 
 multiple points of access,  22 
 multiple system operators (MSOs),  196 , 198, 
200, 204 
 Multiplication Rock, 192 
 Mundorff , Ted, 139 
 Munsey’s Magazine, 101 
 Murdoch, Rupert, 79, 198, 398 
 murketing,  290 
 Murrow, Edward R., 185, 188 
 music.  See radio; sound recording 
 Music Genome Project, 170 
 music licensing companies,  364 
 must-carry, 203 
 Mutual, 158 
 Muybridge, Eadweard, 124,  125 
 MVP Baseball series, 218, 219 
 My Big Fat Greek Wedding, 140 
 My Blood Approves (Hocking), 58 
 My Chemical Romance,  169 , 175 
 My Favorite Martian, 143 
 MySpace, 41, 171, 242, 256 
 Myst, 214–215,  215 , 216 
 NAACP (National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People), 
103, 129 
 Nader, Ralph, 64 
 Namco, 214 
 Napoleon Dynamite, 144 
 NARB (National Advertising Review 
Board), 296 
 narrowcasting,  37 
 Th e Nation, 101 
 National Advertising Review Board 
(NARB), 296 
 National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People (NAACP), 103, 129 
 National Association of Accredited Publicity 
Directors, 270 
 National Broadcasting Co. v. United 
States, 362 
 National Broadcasting Company (NBC) 
 and concentration/conglomeration, 33, 34 
 and freedom of the press/freedom of 
expression, 361, 362 
 and global media, 388 
 and Internet, 89 
 and news, 79, 185 
 and radio, 158 
 and television, 193 
 National Cable and Telecommunications 
Association (NCTA), 191, 197, 203, 204 
 National Cinemas, 139 
 national consumer advertising, 303 
 national dailies, 79–80 
 National Endowment for the Arts (NEA), 56 
 National Geographic, 39, 111 
 National Institute on Media and the 
Family, 227 
 National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and 
Alcoholism, 343 
 National Lampoon’s Van Wilder, 144 
 National Public Radio (NPR), 79, 161 
 National Research Group, 142 
 National Restaurant Association, 299 
 Native American newspapers, 76 
 Naureckas, J., 401 
 Navajo Times, 76 
 Nazism, 54–55, 325, 366 
 NBC.  See National Broadcasting Company 
 NCTA (National Cable and 
Telecommunications Association), 191, 
197, 203, 204 
 near-fi eld communication (NFC) chips,  112 
 Near v. Minnesota, 359 
 NEC, 214 
 Neff , J., 67 
 neo-Marxist theory,  334 
 Neopets.com, 226 
 NES, 214 
 Net Nanny, 251 
 Netfl ix, 39, 144, 182, 202, 218, 221 
 network neutrality,  255 , 258 
 networks, 158,  193 , 194, 195, 196, 197 
 Neuborne, Bert, 34 
 Neumann, W., 299 
 Neumeister, L., 362 
 Neuromancer (Gibson), 53, 232 
 neuromarketing research,  306 
 New Deal, 270 
 New-England Courant, 74 
 New Line Cinema, 63, 140 
 New World Information Order (NWIO), 
397–398 
 New York Associated Press, 76 
 New York Daily Graphic, 156,  156 
 New York Morning Herald, 75–76 
 New York Morning Journal, 77 
 New York Society for the Suppression of Vice, 54 
 New York Sun, 75,  75 , 76 
 New York Times 
 advertising, 87 
 chain ownership, 86 
 circulation of, 80 
 and confl icts of interest, 371 
 and Internet, 90 
 and mobile devices, 91 
 motto of, 25 
 and nonprofi t newsrooms, 79 
 and Pentagon Papers, 359–360 
 and product placement, 64 
 New York Times News Service, 85 
 New York Times v. Sullivan, 359 
 New York Tribune, 76 
 New York Weekly Journal, 74–75 
 New York World, 77,  77 
 New Yorker, 103, 107 
 Newlyweds,  30 , 31, 145 
 Newman, R. J., 43 
 Newport, F., 16 
 Newport Daily News, 90 
 news 
 ambivalence about, 16 
 comparative analysis, 390, 401 
 and concentration/conglomeration, 
34–35, 36 
 and cultural storytelling model, 15 
 and democratization of content 
production, 42 
 and freedom of the press/freedom of 
expression, 356 
 genre conventions in, 25,  26 
 history of, 185 
 Internet, 88–89 
 and mass communication theory, 331, 
335–336 
 and media eff ects, 319 
 and public relations, 282 
 radio, 159, 163–164, 169 
 and social construction of reality, 338 
 staged, 204–206,  205 
 video news releases, 280, 282–284,  283 
 violence in, 21 
 See also newspapers 
 News Corp., 41, 63, 79, 90, 141, 198, 256 
 News from Indian Country, 76 
 news production research,  335 , 335–336,  336 
 news services (wire services),  76 , 76–77, 85 
 news staging, 204–206,  205 ,  205 
 newsbooks,  291 
 newspaper advertising, 84 
 alternative press, 83 
 and conglomeration, 87 
 and convergence, 88 
 fi rewall erosion, 87 
 history of, 17, 74, 75 
 and Internet, 89–90 
 weeklies, 81 
 Newspaper Association of America, 78, 91 
 newspaper chains,  78 
 Newspaper Enterprise Association (NEA), 85 
 Newspaper Preservation Act (1970), 86 
 newspapers, 72–95 
 audience, 78, 91–92,  91 
 comparative analysis,  390 , 391, 393 
 concentration/conglomeration, 86–87 
 consumer behavior, 31 
 and convergence, 88–90 
 feature syndicates, 85 
 and freedom of the press/freedom of 
expression, 359–360 
 history of, 17, 51, 73–78 
 hypercommercialism in,  86 , 87 
 industry structure, 78–84 
 and information gap, 258 
 and Internet, 78, 79, 83, 88–90,  88 
 and mobile devices, 90–91, 93 
 news services, 76–77, 85 
 story placement, 93,  93 
 timeline, 72–73 

Index 
I-15
 Th e Newsroom,  199 
 Newsstand (Apple), 91,  91 , 111 
 Newsweek, 89, 113,  398 
 NFC (near-fi eld communication) chips,  112 
 niche marketing,  37 
 Nichols, J. S., 384 
 Nichols, John, 88, 92 
 Nickelodeon, 388 
 nickelodeons,  127 , 127–128 
 Nielsen ratings, 39, 189–190 
 Niépce, Joseph Nicéphore, 125 
 Nike, 216,  300 
 9/11 Camera at Ground Zero, 361,  362 
 1960s 
 and alternative press, 82 
 and mass communication theory, 
330, 333 
 pirate broadcasters, 385 
 and sound recording, 159, 166, 167 
 and television, 191 
 violence, 339–340 
 Nintendo, 204, 214, 218 
 Nipkow, Paul, 184 
 Nipkow disc,  184 ,  184 
 Nissan,  310 
 Nixon, 25 
 Noble, Edward, 158 
 noise,  6 , 24 
 noncommercial radio, 161, 164 
 nonlinear TV,  183 
 nonprofi t newsrooms, 79 
 Nook, 59 
 normalized news, 336,  336 
 normative ethics,  367 
 normative theories,  366 
 Norsigian, J., 54 
 North Star, 76 
 Novanglus Papers (Adams), 50 
 NPR (National Public Radio), 79, 161 
 N.W. Ayer & Sons, 269, 292 
 NWIO (New World Information Order), 
397–398 
 Oakland Press, 87 
 O&Os,  158 
 Oates, Joyce Carol, 53 
 Obama, Barack, 242, 249, 372, 376 
 Obama Race for the White House Game, 226 
 obesity, 299 
 O’Brien, T. L., 266 
 obscenity,  360 , 360–361 
 observational learning,  332 
 Occupy movement, 247,  247 
 Odyssey (game), 213 
 Of Mice and Men (Steinbeck), 55 
 off -network programs,  193 
 off ensive content, 373–374 
 Offi  ce of War Information (OWI), 270, 
326–327 
 Ogilvy PR Worldwide, 266, 279 
 Oiligarchy, 226 
 Old School, 144 
 oligopoly,  35 
 Olmstead, K., 41–42, 90, 307 
 ombudsmen,  375 
 Omnicrom Group, 279 
 On Boxing (Oates), 53 
 online media.  See Internet 
 Open Content Alliance, 60 
 Open Mobile Video Coalition, 204 
 open source software,  172 
 operating policies,  375 
 operating systems,  238 
 opinion followers,  326 
 opinion leaders,  326 
 Oppelaar, J., 173 
 opt-in/opt-out,  253 ,  254 
 Orange County Register, 87 
 Oremus, W., 242 
 Oreskovic, A., 42, 202 
 Ortutay, B., 58 
 Osborn, E. C., 393 
 Osgood, Charles E., 5–6 
 Osgood-Schramm model of communication, 
5–6,  5 
 Osnos, Peter, 58 
 Ott, B., 347 
 Our Bodies, Ourselves (Boston Women’s 
Health Collective), 53, 54 
 out-of-home advertising, 303, 401 
 Outdoor Advertising Association, 293 
 Outing, S., 88 
 Outsmart Jennifer Lopez, 222–223 
 Outspark, 225 
 OWI (Offi  ce of War Information), 270, 
326–327 
 Oxford University Press, 59 
 Oxydol’s Own Ma Perkins, 159 
 P2P,  173 , 173–174, 365 
 Pac-Man, 214,  214 
 Pacifi ca Radio, 161 
 Packard, Vance, 270–271, 296 
 Paddle-Ball, 214 
 Paine, Th omas, 50–51,  51 , 55 
 Palast, Greg, 36 
 Paley, William S., 158 
 Palmer, Volney B., 291 
 Palser, B., 91, 111 
 Pamela  (Richardson), 50 
 Pandora Radio, 170, 171 
 paperbacks, 51–52 
 Paramount 
 and book publishing, 62, 63 
 and conglomeration, 141 
 and convergence, 144 
 history of, 130, 132 
 and industry structure, 140 
 and microcinema, 144 
 and social networking sites, 145 
 and television, 195 
 Paramount Decision, 132, 133 
 Paranormal Activity,  136 , 138, 140, 144 
 Pariah, 140 
 parity products,  296 
 pass-along readership,  78 , 78–79, 109 
 Patel, S., 204, 307 
 patent medicine advertising, 293,  293 
 Patterson, James, 61 
 Paul, I., 31 
 Paulson, Ken, 90 
 pay-per-view, 198 
 payola,  39 
 PayPerPost, 249 
 paywalls,  90 
 PBS (Public Broadcasting Service), 361, 388 
 PCs (personal computers) (microcomputers), 
 237 , 237–238 
 Pearl Jam,  377 
 Pearlstein, Steven, 145 
 Peckinpah, Sam, 340 
 Peers, M., 200 
 Pelli, Denis, 42 
 Pember, D., 359 
 Penguin Books, 51, 63 
 Penguin Group, 61 
 Penguin Putnam, 62 
 Penguins, 166 
 Pennsylvania Gazette, 74,  75 , 100, 291 
 penny press, 17, 75–76,  75 
 Pentagon Papers, 352, 359–360 
 Penthouse, 108 
 People,  102 
 Perez-Pena, R., 108 
 performance-based advertising,  308 
 Periscope, 214 
 permission marketing,  309 , 309–310 
 perp walks,  357 
 Perseus/Running Press, 64 
 persistence of vision,  124 
 personal computers (PCs) (microcomputers), 
 237 , 237–238 
 personal development, 53, 300 
 personal peoplemeter,  189 , 190 
 personal refl ection, 53 
 personalization 
 advertising, 37, 303,  304 
 book retailing, 65–66 
 and Five Internet Freedoms, 258 
 and mass communication process, 37, 42 
 news, 37, 335 
 radio, 170 
 sound recording, 42–43 
 video games, 218 
 Persuasive Games, 216 
 Peter Packet Game and Challenge, 216 
 Pew Global Attitudes Project, 399 
 Pew Research Center, 16 
 Phair, Judy, 266 
 Phantom Menace, 144 
 Philadelphia Daily News, 90 
 Philadelphia Inquirer, 90 
 Philadelphia New Observer, 82 
 Philips, Brian, 171 
 Philips, Jack,  157 
 Phillips, B., 267 
 Phillips, Sam, 166 
 phone-over-cable, 204 
 phonographs, 155–157,  155 
 Photoshop, 117–118, 400 
 Th e Pianist, 140 
 Pickard, V., 366 
 Pickford, Mary, 131 
 Pikmin series, 219 
 pilots,  193 , 194 
 Pincus, Jane, 54 
 PIPA (Protect Intellectual Property Act), 249 
 piracy, 144, 165,  172 , 172–173 

I-16 
Index
 Pirate Bay, 365 
 pirate broadcasters,  385 ,  385 
 Pirates of the Caribbean fi lms, 138, 142 
 pixels,  184 
 Plambeck, J., 173 
 Plants vs. Zombies, 219 
 Plate, T., 33 
 platform agnosticism,  41 ,  60.  See also 
convergence 
 platform rollout,  139 
 platforms,  31 
 playlists,  162 
 Playstation, 219,  219 
 PlayStation Portable (PSP), 204, 218, 290 
 PlayStation Vita, 204, 218, 222 
 Th e Plow Th at Broke the Plains, 132 
 pluralism, 12 
 Pocket Books, 51–52 
 POD (print on demand), 58,  59 , 60, 61 
 podcasting,  170 
 Poggi, J., 203, 221 
 Pogo.com, 221, 222, 223 
 Pokémon, 40, 219,  363 
 Poland, 391–392,  392 
 policy books,  375 
 political cartoons,  75 
 politics 
 and Internet, 234, 247, 248 
 and mass communication theory, 326, 
330, 336 
 and newspapers, 74–75,  75 
 and public relations, 268, 274, 276 
 and television, 191 
 and video games, 226 
 See also democracy 
 Politics Daily, 370 
 Polizzi, Nicole (Snooki),  46–47 , 62 
 Pollack, J., 174 
 POM Wonderful, 304–305 
 Pong, 213–214,  213 
 Pong Doubles, 214 
 Poniewozik, James, 38, 398–399 
 Pontiac, 38 
 Poor Richard’s Almanack (Franklin), 50,  51 
 PopCap, 219, 222 
 Popova, M., 253 
 Popular Mechanics, 114 
 Popular Science, 111 
 pornography, 250–251,  361 
 Porter, Edwin S., 126, 127, 128 
 Porter Novelli, 279 
 positive/negative attitudes toward media 
 advertising, 297 
 and Internet, 248 
 magazines, 104 
 and pervasiveness, 16 
 public relations, 16, 265, 266, 268–269, 
281–282 
 Postal Act (1879), 101 
 Postman, Leo J., 328 
 Powell, Michael, 256, 258, 363 
 Powells.com, 67 
 power 
 and advertising, 18 
 cultivation analysis on, 339 
 and literate culture, 20 
 of media, 22, 24 
 of technology, 16–17 
 Power, H., 165 
 PR.  See public relations 
 A Prayer for Owen Meany (Irving), 53 
 Precious, 140 
 premium cable,  195 , 198, 200 
 Presley, Elvis, 166 
 Preston, Jennifer, 394 
 Pretty Little Liars,  13 
 PRI (Public Radio International), 161 
 Th e Prince of Tides (Conroy), 53 
 print on demand (POD), 58,  59 , 60, 61 
 printing, 16–17, 19–20,  19 , 49, 100 
 prior restraint,  359 , 359–360 
 Prison Break, 388 
 privacy 
 and ethics, 368–369 
 and feedback, 43 
 and Internet, 252–255, 257 
 Privacy International, 253 
 Procter & Gamble, 250, 293, 306 
 Proctor, Steve, 87 
 product placement,  38 , 114 
 and advertising, 306–307, 308 
 in book publishing, 64 
 comparative analysis, 400 
 in fi lm, 143, 145–147,  146 
 in video games,  222 , 223–225 
 product positioning,  337 
 production 
 fi lm, 138 
 news, 335–336 
 skills for, 22–23 
 television, 193 
 production values,  25 , 25–26 
 professional advertising, 302 
 professional books, 57 
 professional magazines, 105 
 professionalization, 271, 292–293 
 Professor Quiz, 158 
 profi t motives.  See conglomeration; 
hypercommercialism 
 profi t-sharing deals, 174 
 Th e Progressive, 101, 360 
 Progressive movement, 269 
 Prohibition, 39 
 Project for Excellence in Journalism, 34, 
35, 104 
 Project Gutenberg, 60 
 promotion 
 fi lm, 138–139 
 sound recording, 166 
 See also advertising 
 promotional retail advertising, 303 
 ProPublica, 79 
 prosocial uses of media 
 advertising, 294,  294 , 303 
 book publishing, 52–53, 54 
 and ethics, 372 
 global media, 396 
 Internet, 242–243,  246 , 247–248,  247 
 magazines, 108–109,  109 
 and media eff ects, 320, 347 
 newspapers, 79 
 public relations, 264, 266,  266 , 267,  267 ,  278 
 television, 192, 342 
 video games, 216,  216 , 217, 226,  226 
 See also social change 
 prosumers,  309 
 Protect Intellectual Property Act (PIPA), 249 
 Protestant Reformation, 16–17 
 protocols,  236 
 Providence Journal, 87 
 PRSA (Public Relations Society of America), 
266, 270, 271, 273, 278, 281, 374 
 Przybys, J., 346 
 pseudo-events,  267 
 PSP (PlayStation Portable), 204, 218, 290 
 psychographic segmentation,  310 , 310–311 
 Psychology Today,  113 
 public aff airs function of public relations, 276 
 Public Broadcasting Act (1967), 191 
 Public Broadcasting Service (PBS), 361, 388 
 public domain,  364 
 Public Enemy, 172 
 public fi gures, 359, 368–369 
 Public Opinion (Lippmann), 325 
 Public Radio International (PRI), 161 
 public relations (PR), 264–285 
 and advertising, 271, 276, 280,  280 , 302 
 ambivalence about, 16 
 audience, 272–273 
 and concentration/conglomeration, 279 
 and convergence, 280–281 
 defi ned, 265–266 
 and ethics, 370 
 globalization, 279,  279 
 history of, 266–271 
 industry structure, 273–276,  273 , 278 
 and mobile devices, 281 
 positive/negative attitudes toward, 16, 265, 
266, 268–269, 281–282 
 prosocial uses of, 264, 266,  266 , 267, 
 267 ,  278 
 and social change, 274,  275 
 and social networking sites, 266, 277, 281 
 timeline, 264–265 
 video news releases, 280, 282–284,  283 
 Public Relations Society of America (PRSA), 
266, 270, 271, 273, 278, 281, 374 
 public service advertising, 303 
 public service remit,  391 
 Public Strategies, 370 
 Th e Publicity Bureau, 269 
 Publick Occurrences Both Foreign and 
Domestick, 74,  74 
 publics,  272 , 272–273 
 puff ery,  304 , 313 
 Pulitzer, Joseph, 77 
 pulp (dime) novels,  51 
 Pulp Fiction, 140, 142 
 Purcell, K., 41–42, 346 
 Purple Violets, 145 
 Pursuits, 99 
 Pussycat Dolls,  168 , 174 
 puts,  194 
 Q*bert, 216 
 al-Qaeda, 385 
 Qorvis, 266 
 QR (quick response) codes,  112 ,  112 

Index 
I-17
 Quadrapong, 214 
 qualifi ers, 312–313 
 Queer as Folk,  345 
 Quest, 238 
 quick response (QR) codes,  112 ,  112 
 Quindlen, Anna, 67 
 quiz show scandal, 186–187 
 QVC, 196,  196 
 R&B (rhythm and blues), 164, 166–167 
 race 
 and fi lm, 128, 129 
 and mass communication theory, 
328–329,  328 
 and public relations, 276 
 and sound recording, 164, 166–167,  167 
 stereotyping based on, 15,  15 , 346, 347 
 and television, 188 
 radio, 152–164 
 advertising, 158, 161, 163, 293 
 ambivalence about, 16 
 audience, 37, 160,  160 , 161 
 clandestine stations, 384–385, 392 
 comparative analysis, 390, 391, 392, 393 
 concentration of ownership, 163–164 
 consumer behavior, 31 
 and convergence, 167–172 
 and democracy, 255 
 dumbing down, 68 
 and fi lm, 132, 133 
 globalization, 395 
 history of, 154–155, 156–160, 293 
 and hypercommercialism, 39 
 industry structure, 160–164 
 and Internet, 170, 388 
 and satellite broadcasting, 168–169 
 shock jocks, 175–177 
 and sound recording, 166, 168 
 and television, 160 
 terrestrial digital radio, 169 
 timeline, 152–153 
 Radio Act (1912), 157 
 Radio Act (1927), 157 
 Radio Beijing, 388 
 Radio Caroline, 385,  385 
 Radio Corporation of America (RCA), 132, 
155,  155 , 156, 158, 159, 184–185 
 Radio Free Asia, 387 
 Radio Free Europe (RFE), 385–386, 387, 392 
 radio frequency identifi cation chip 
(RFIC),  254 
 Radio Honduras, 391 
 Radio in the American Sector (RIAS), 385–386 
 Radio Liberty (RL), 385–386, 387 
 Radio Martí, 388–389 
 Radio Sawa, 387 
 Radio Sila, 387 
 radio simulcasts, 170 
 Radio-Television Digital News 
Association, 374 
 Radio-Television News Directors 
Association, 283 
 Radio Veronica, 385 
 railroads, 101, 269, 291, 292 
 Raine, L., 238 
 Rainey, J., 79 
 Rainie, L., 41–42, 346 
 Rampton, S., 282 
 Th e Ram’s Horn, 76 
 Random House, 61, 63 
 Rather, Dan, 34 
 ratings, 39,  163 , 189–190,  190 ,  195 
 Ratner, Brett, 146 
 RCA (Radio Corporation of America), 132, 
155,  155 , 156, 158, 159, 184–185 
 RCA Victor, 155,  155 
 Th e Reader, 140 
 Reader’s Digest, 101 
 readership.  See audience 
 Readership.com, 109–110 
 Reagan, Ronald, 362, 386–387 
 Real Racing GTI, 225,  225 
 Real World Records, 164–165 
 realarcade.com, 222 
 Reality Is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better 
and How Th ey Can Change the World 
(McGonigal), 224 
 reality shows, 319 
 Th e Realization of a Negro’s Ambition, 
129,  129 
 Reason, 37 
 Rebel Without a Cause, 133–134 
 recall testing,  306 
 recent catalogue albums,  165 
 recognition tests,  305 , 305–306 
 Recording Industry Association of America 
(RIAA), 165, 171, 173 
 Red Bulletin, 112 
 Red Channels: Th e Report of Communist 
Infl uence in Radio and Television, 188 
 Red Scare.  See McCarthyism 
 Red State, 145 
 Red Tails (Lucas), 138 
 Reebok, 304–305 
 ReganBooks, 63 
 regulation 
 advertising, 293, 303–305, 344 
 comparative analysis, 391 
 deregulation, 163, 303, 362–363,  363 
 and freedom of the press/freedom of 
expression, 354 
 Internet, 249, 250–252 
 and mass communication theory, 324 
 public relations, 271, 283 
 radio, 156, 157–158 
 television, 191 
 video games, 225–227 
 and World War II, 294–295 
 See also Federal Communications 
Commission; Federal Trade 
Commission; freedom of the press/
freedom of expression; self-regulation 
 Rehlin, G., 400 
 Reid, Wallace, 131–132 
 reinforcement theory, 320,  329 , 329–330, 341 
 religious books, 57 
 R.E.M., 165 
 remainders,  59 
 Remnick, D., 345 
 Reporters Without Borders, 391 
 reruns, 188, 198 
 research function of public relations, 276 
 Resident Evil, 142, 143 
 responsibility, 15, 17, 21, 249, 259 
 retail advertising, 303 
 Retail Council of Canada, 227 
 retainers,  301 
 retransmission fees,  193 
 return on investment (ROI),  308 
 reverse compensation,  193 
 Revolution Films, 63 
 revolutionary concept of media,  391 , 391–392 
 Revolutionary Road, 136 
 RFE (Radio Free Europe), 385–386, 387, 392 
 RFIC (radio frequency identifi cation 
chip),  254 
 Rhee, J., 372 
 rhythm and blues (R&B), 164, 166–167 
 RIAA (Recording Industry Association of 
America), 165, 171, 173 
 RIAS (Radio in the American Sector), 385–386 
 Rice, John C., 131 
 Rich, F., 361 
 Rich, M., 68 
 rich media,  307 
 Richardson, Brooke, 35 
 Richardson, Leonard, 168 
 Richardson, Samuel, 50 
 Richhiardi, Sherry, 117–118 
 Richie Rich, 143 
 Rideout, V. J., 32 
 ringtones, 171 
 Th e Rite, 139,  139 
 ritual perspective on media eff ects,  322 ,  
322 , 328 
 Rivera, Geraldo, 205,  205 
 RKO, 132 
 RL (Radio Liberty), 385–386, 387 
 Road to Perdition, 143 
 Roback, Diane, 68 
 Roberts, D. F., 32 
 rock ‘n’ roll, 166–167 
 Rockefeller, John D., Jr., 269 
 Rockwell, Norman, 103 
 Rocky experiment, 341–342 
 Roeper, Richard, 137 
 Rogow, Stan, 182 
 Rohwedder, C., 35 
 ROI (return on investment),  308 
 Roku, 203 
 Rome, ancient, 73, 267, 291 
 Romenesko, J., 87 
 Romeo and Juliet (Shakespeare), 250 
 Romney, Mitt, 372 
 Ronald McDonald House,  278 
 Roosevelt, Franklin D., 270 
 Roosevelt, Th eodore, 101 
 Roper, Elmo, 270 
 Rosaldo, R., 9 
 Rose, Frank, 365 
 Rosen, Jay, 372 
 Rosenbaum, Jonathan, 142 
 Rosenberg, R. S., 235 
 Rosenstiel, T., 41–42, 72, 80, 81, 83, 89, 90, 
111, 160, 162, 171, 307 
 Rosetta Project, 60 
 Ross, Brian, 372 
 Roth v. United States, 360 

I-18 
Index
 Rotzoll, K., 291 
 Rowling, J. K., 53, 55, 67–68 
 RSS,  43 
 Rubin, Rick, 174 
 Rush Hour fi lms, 134, 146 
 Russell, Steve, 212 
 Russwurum, John B., 76 
 Safi re, William, 33, 376 
 Saia v. New York, 356 
 Said, Khaled, 394 
 Th e Saint, 143 
 Salinger, J. D., 52, 53 
 Salon, 79, 99,  99 , 111, 259 
 Sampson, H. T., 129 
 Samsung, 221 
 San Francisco Examiner, 77 
 San Jose Mercury News, 89 
 Sandage, C. H., 291, 292 
 Sanders, L., 116 
 Santhanam, L., 160, 162, 171 
 Sarnoff , David, 156, 184, 255 
 Saroyan, S., 58 
 Sass, E., 31, 84, 89, 98, 105, 107, 110, 113, 160, 
164, 310 
 Sasseen, J., 90, 111, 307 
 satellite broadcasting, 168–169, 195, 198 
 satellite-delivered media tours,  280 
 Saturday Evening Post, 37, 100, 101, 103,  
103 , 104 
 Sauer, A., 145 
 Saunders, John, 282 
 Saved, 136 
 Scalia, Antonin, 356 
 Th e Scarlet Letter (Hawthorne), 51 
 Schechner, S., 200 
 Schenck v. United States, 357 
 Schmidt, Eric, 89 
 Schneider, Bill, 370 
 Schneider, M., 168 
 Schone, M., 372 
 school shootings, 226–227, 320, 321 
 Schramm, Wilbur, 5–6 
 Schramm model of mass communication, 
6, 7,  7 
 Schrems, Max, 257 
 SciFi Channel, 182 
 Scola, N., 249 
 Scooby-Doo, 134 
 Scorsese, Martin, 361 
 Scott, Emmett J., 129 
 Scott de Martinville, Edouard-Leon, 155 
 Scribner, S., 142 
 Scripps, 78 
 ScrollMotion, 59 
 Seabrook, John, 31, 165 
 search engines,  240 
 Search Inside the Book, 60 
 search marketing,  307 
 Seattle Weekly,  83 
 Second Life, 221 
 secondary services,  161 
 See It Now, 188 
 see-through society, 248 
 Sega, 214, 224 
 Seipp, C., 248 
 Seitel, Fraser, 282 
 Seitzer, Dieter, 172 
 selective exposure (selective attention),  327 
 selective perception,  328 
 selective processes,  327 , 327–329 
 selective retention,  327 , 327–328 
 Self,  103 , 117 
 self-censorship, 55, 131, 362 
 self-distribution model, 145, 175 
 self-regulation, 227, 253, 296, 299, 354, 
374–376 
 self-righting principle,  354 , 354–355 
 Sellers, J., 214 
 Sendak, Maurice, 55 
 Sennett, Mack, 130 
 September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, 12, 14, 
 14 , 36, 248 
 sequels, 143, 218–220 
 Sergeant, Ben, 85 
 Sesame Street, 192 
 “Sh-Boom,” 166 
 “Shake, Rattle and Roll,” 166 
 Shakespeare, William, 55, 250 
 Shanahan, Timothy, 57 
 Shane, S., 14 
 Shapp, Milton Jerrold, 190–191 
 shares,  190 
 Sharpie, 309,  309 
 Sharpton, Al, 370,  370 
 Shaw, Donald, 330, 331 
 Shea, Daniel, 255 
 Sheehy, A., 58 
 Sheffi  eld, F. D., 327 
 Th e Sheik,  324 
 Shenk, D., 255 
 Sherman, Scott, 36 
 Shi Tao, 36 
 shield laws,  370 
 Shields, R., 174 
 Shirky, Clay, 259, 372 
 Sho-Ban News, 76 
 shopbills,  291 
 Shore, Nick, 281 
 A Shore Th ing (Polizzi), 62 
 shortwave radio,  384 
 Showtime, 198 
 Sideways, 64 
 Sifry, Micah, 248–249 
 Sigmund, J., 84 
 Signorielli, N., 338, 339 
 signs,  337 
 SiliconValley.com, 89 
 Silverblatt, Art, 21, 347 
 Simmons Market Research Bureau, 109 
 Simon & Schuster, 61, 62, 63 
 Simonoff , Eric, 61 
 Simpson, O. J., 117 
 Th e Simpsons,  10 , 22, 388, 389,  390 , 398 
 Th e Simpsons Movie, 398,  399 
 Sin City, 143 
 single-copy sales, 108 
 single-sponsor magazines, 107 
 siquis,  291 
 SiriusXM, 169, 175 
 Sirota, D., 299 
 60 Minutes, 79, 371–372 
 Sixth Amendment, 357–358 
 Th e 64,000 Question, 187 
 Skenazy, L., 298 
 Th e Skin I Live In, 140 
 skipping (radio signals),  384 
 Sky,  110 
 sky waves,  384 
 Skype, 256 
 Skyy,  322 
 Slacker, 170, 221 
 slander,  359 
 Slate, 99, 111,  111 
 Slingbox, 203 
 Sloan, W., 76 
 Sloane, Everett,  186 
 small presses,  63 , 64 
 small-town dailies, 81 
 smart mobs (fl ash mobs),  247 
 SmartGlass, 221 
 smartphones,  16 , 170–171, 254.  See also 
mobile devices 
 smear forward, 250 
 smellovision, 133 
 Smith, A., 256 
 Smith, Howard K., 188 
 Smith, Kate, 270, 327 
 Smith, Kevin, 145, 277,  277 , 281 
 Smith, L. D., 16 
 Smith, S., 16, 111, 201, 242 
 Smokey the Bear, 276,  280 
 Smolkin, R., 80 
 Snopes.com,  248 , 250 
 Snyder, G., 144 
 soap operas, 396 
 social change 
 Arab Spring,  230–231 , 243, 386,  386 , 
394,  394 
 and book publishing, 52–53, 54 
 comparative analysis, 391–392,  392 
 and fi lm, 133–134 
 and Internet,  246 , 247,  247 , 249,  249 
 and magazines, 100, 101, 109 
 and newspapers, 76 
 and public relations, 274,  275 
 and sound recording, 166–167 
 and television, 191 
 See also prosocial uses of media 
 social cognitive theory,  332 , 333, 
340–341,  341 
 social construction of reality,  337 , 337–338 
 Th e Social Construction of Reality (Berger & 
Luckmann), 337, 337–338 
 Th e Social Network, 147 
 social networking sites,  242 
 and advertising, 308 
 and audience fragmentation, 38 
 and fi lm, 145 
 and friendship, 346 
 and mass communication process, 41 
 and mobile devices, 242 
 pervasiveness of, 16 
 and public relations, 266, 277, 281 
 and social change, 394 
 and sound recording, 171, 175 
 and video, 202–203 
 and video games,  220 , 222,  223 

Index 
I-19
 social responsibility theory,  366 , 389 
 Society of Professional Journalists, 374 
 Soderbergh, Steven, 31, 43, 144 
 soft news,  91 , 91–92 
 Soldiers’ Radio Calais, 384 
 Soley, L. C., 384 
 Solidarity (Poland), 391,  392 
 Soltan, Neda Aga, 394,  394 
 Sony 
 advertising, 290,  290 
 and copyright, 365 
 and fi lm, 141, 144 
 and global media, 398 
 and hypercommercialism, 39 
 and mobile devices, 204 
 movie theater ownership, 139 
 and sound recording, 164 
 and video games, 216, 218, 219, 222 
 Sony Classics, 140 
 Sony Corp. v. Universal City Studios, 365 
 SOPA (Stop Online Piracy Act), 249, 255 
 Th e Sopranos, 198 
 Sorrentino, Mike “Th e Situation,” 62,  64 
 sound fi lm, 130–131 
 sound recording 
 consumer behavior, 31 
 and convergence, 167–172 
 and copyright, 173–174, 364 
 history of, 155–156, 159 
 industry structure, 164–166,  165 , 174–175 
 and Internet, 166, 170, 171–174, 175 
 and mobile devices, 170–171,  171 
 pervasiveness of, 16 
 pirate broadcasters, 385 
 and race, 164, 166–167,  167 
 and radio, 166, 168 
 and television, 166, 167–168,  168 
 source.  See  content production 
 Sout al-Khilafa, 385 
 South Park,  333 
 Southwest Airlines, 277, 280 
 Space Invaders, 214 
 Spacewar, 212,  212 
 Spain, 400 
 spam,  238 
 Spanish-language media, 82, 310,  310 
 Spartacus, 133, 198,  199 
 Spears, Britney, 242 
 special eff ects, 133, 134,  136 , 138, 306 
 special events/public participation function 
of public relations, 276 
 specialization,  102–103 , 103–104, 161–162. 
 See also audience fragmentation 
 spectaculars, 133 
 spectrum scarcity,  157 , 157–158 
 Speed Racer, 139, 143 
 Spice Channel, 198 
 Spider-Man (game), 219, 222 
 Spider-Man fi lms, 31, 143, 398 
 Spider-Man India, 398,  399 
 Spielberg, Steven, 17 
 spin,  277 
 split runs,  107 
 Split Verse, 64 
 Spock, Benjamin, 53 
 SpongeBob Squarepants, 374,  374 , 388 
 sponsorship 
 in book publishing, 64 
 in fi lm, 147 
 Internet,  307 
 in magazines, 105, 107 
 in newspapers, 39 
 in radio, 293 
 in sound recording, 166 
 in television, 186, 187 
 in video games, 226 
 spot commercial sales,  187 
 Spotify, 170, 171 
 Spot.us, 79 
 Sputnik,  236 
 spyware,  255 
 Squires, John, 99 
 SRI Consulting, 310 
 St. George, D., 224 
 staged news, 204–206,  205 ,  205 
 Stamp Act (1765), 50, 75, 268 
 standard distribution deals, 174 
 Standard Rate and Data Service, 109 
 standardized test books, 57 
 Standards and Practices Departments,  375 
 Stanford, Leland, 124 
 Stanley, A., 386 
 Stanley, T. L., 137 
 Stanton, Frank, 342 
 Stanza, 59 
 Star Wars fi lms, 143 
 Starbucks, 250 
 Starkman, Dean, 371 
 Starnes, Todd, 333 
 Startt, J., 76 
 Stauber, J. C., 282 
 Stearn, G. E., 245 
 Stein, Len, 277 
 Steinbeck, John, 55 
 Steinberg, B., 203 
 Steinberg, S. H., 19 
 Steinfi eld, Jesse L., 340 
 Stelter, B., 202 
 Stengel, Jim, 306 
 stereotyping, 9–11, 228,  344 , 344, 346–347 
 Sterling, C. H., 156, 188 
 Stern, Howard, 175 
 Sterne, Elaine, 129 
 Stevenson, M., 164 
 Stevenson, R. L., 391 
 Stewart, C. S., 395 
 Stewart, Jon, 356 
 Stewart, Martha, 63 
 Stewart, Potter, 361 
 stickiness,  223 
 stimulation model,  340 
 Stokes, G., 166 
 Stone, B., 395 
 Stone, Oliver, 25 
 Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA), 249, 255 
 Storz, Todd, 161–162 
 Stovall, J., 76 
 streaming, 144,  170 , 204 
 Street Hoops, 224 
 Streisand, B., 43 
 stripping (syndication),  195 
 strivers (psychographic segment), 311 
 Strong4Life movement,  375 
 Stross, Randall, 281 
 Strupp, J., 369 
 studio system, 129–131, 132, 133, 139–140 
 Sturgis, Kent, 64 
 Style & Design, 99 
 subscription reference books, 57 
 subscription TV,  198 
 subsidiary rights,  62 , 62–63 
 suburban dailies, 80–81 
 suff rage movement, 101 
 Sullivan, Andrew, 248 
 Sullivan, J., 282 
 Sullivan, L., 309 
 A Summary View of the Rights of British 
America (Jeff erson), 50 
 Sun Records, 166 
 Sundance Channel, 198 
 Sunderland, Abby,  11 
 Super Mario, 217, 219 
 Super Mario Sunshine, 224 
 Super Pong, 214 
 Superman, 143 
 Supernatural,  321 
 superstructure, 334 
 Supreme Court.  See  specifi c cases 
 Surgeon General’s Scientifi c Advisory 
Committee on Television and Social 
Behavior, 339–340 
 surrogate services, 385–387,  386 
 Survivor, 189–190 
 survivors (psychographic segment), 311 
 Sweden, 400 
 sweeps periods,  189 , 189–190 
 Swenson, Mike, 277 
 Swing, E. L., 224 
 symbolic interaction theory,  337 
 symbols,  337 
 syndication,  169 , 194–195 
 synergy,  41.  See also convergence 
 Szalavitz, M., 347 
 Szatmary, David, 166 
 tablets, 237,  237. See also  mobile devices 
 Taco Bell, 143 
 Th e Taking of Pelham, 143 
 Talbot, William Henry Fox, 125–126 
 Talese, Gay, 62 
 talk shows, 185, 195, 319 
 talkies, 130–131 
 Talking Heads, 174 
 TAMi (Total Audience Measurement Index), 
110,  189 
 Tapulous, 41 
 targeting,  37 
 taste publics,  37 , 37–38 
 Tatum, Channing, 145 
 Taylor, C., 247 
 Taylor, D., 9 
 Taylor, K., 144 
 Taylor, Roxanne, 277 
 Taylor, William Desmond, 131–132 
 TBWA Worldwide, 279 
 Teague, D., 61 
 Tebbel, John, 51, 52, 100 
 Tech Model Railroad Club (TMRC), 212 

I-20 
Index
 Technocrati, 248 
 technological determinism,  16 , 16–17 
 technology 
 and content producers, 42 
 and convergence, 41 
 and culture, 16–17 
 and magazines, 113–114 
 and mass communication theory, 324 
 power of, 16–17 
 and public relations, 271 
 special eff ects, 133, 134,  136 , 138, 306 
 See also Internet; mobile devices 
 technology gap,  256 
 Teegardin, C., 375 
 teenagers.  See youth markets 
 Telecommunications Act (1996), 163 
 telegraph, 76 
 Telemundo, 388 
 telephone service, 204 
 Th e Teletubbies, 333,  334 , 394 
 television, 182–207 
 ambivalence about, 16 
 audience, 37, 191–193 
 comparative analysis, 390–391, 
392, 393, 395 
 consumer behavior, 31 
 and convergence, 200–204, 306 
 and democracy, 255 
 and emotions, 24 
 and fi lm, 132–134, 143 
 globalization,  387 , 388–389, 395–396 
 and hypercommercialism, 38, 39 
 industry structure, 193–195 
 infl uence of, 17 
 and Internet, 182, 202–203 
 and magazines, 103, 113–114 
 and mass communication theory, 330, 332, 
333, 338–339 
 and media eff ects, 319 
 and media literacy, 22, 24, 204–206 
 and mobile devices, 182, 204 
 and newspapers, 78 
 pervasiveness of, 16 
 prosocial uses of, 192, 342 
 and public relations, 267, 280 
 and radio, 160 
 ratings, 189–190,  190 , 195,  195 
 and sound recording, 166, 
167–168,  168 
 staged news, 204–206,  205 
 timeline, 182–183 
 and two-step fl ow theory, 326 
 See also television history 
 television advertising 
 cable, 113–114 
 comparative analysis, 390–391 
 and convergence, 306 
 and digital video recorders, 201 
 history of, 186–187, 295–296 
 and hypercommercialism, 38 
 and magazines, 103, 113–114 
 and ratings, 190 
 and role of money, 18 
 success of, 192–193 
 and video, 201 
 Television Bureau of Advertising, 163 
 television history, 183–191 
 advertising, 186–187, 295–296 
 cable, 190–191 
 1950s, 185–190 
 technology development, 184–185,  184 , 
190–191 
 World War II, 132–133, 185 
 Th e Tempest (Shakespeare), 55 
 Th e Ten Commandments, 133 
 Ten Speed Press,  63 
 tentpoles,  142 
 terminals,  237 
 terrestrial digital radio,  169 
 terrorist attacks, 12, 14,  14 , 36, 248 
 Tesla, Nikola, 154 
 Tessler, J., 256 
 Texaco, 271 
 Texaco Star Th eater, 187 
 Al-Th ani, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa (Emir of 
Qatar), 386 
 Th arp, P., 198, 200 
 theatrical fi lms,  143 
 Th ere’s a Poison Going On, 172 
 thinkers (psychographic segment), 311 
 third-party publishers,  218 , 218–220 
 third-person eff ect,  24 
 30 Days of Night, 143 
 Th omas, Bill, 61 
 Th omas, J. Parnell, 133 
 Th e Th omas Berryman Number (Patterson), 61 
 Th ompson, B., 56, 57, 60 
 Th ornton, L., 89 
 Th orp, B. K., 66 
 3D movies, 133 
 3DS, 218 
 300, 142, 143 
 360 advertising,  290 
 360 Call of Duty,  219 
 360 deals, 174, 175 
 Th rill Jockey, 174 
 Th y Neighbor’s Wife (Talese), 62 
 tiers,  196 
 Tillinghast, Charles H., 36, 157, 373 
 Timberlake, Justin, 62 
 Time, Inc., 108 
 Time, Inc. v. Hill, 356 
 Time magazine,  101 , 103, 107, 110, 113, 117 
 time-shifting,  201 
 Time Warner, 33, 61, 63, 141, 196, 259 
 Timex,  297 
 Timpane, J., 61 
 Tinker, Grant, 342 
 Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy, 140 
 Titanic (fi lm), 134,  136 , 138, 142, 143 
 Titanic (ship), 157,  157 
 Th e Titans (Jakes), 52 
 TiVo, 144 
 TMRC (Tech Model Railroad Club), 212 
 TNT, 200 
 To Kill a Mockingbird (fi lm), 134 
 To Kill a Mockingbird (Lee), 55 
 To Read or Not to Read (NEA), 56 
 Toby Press, 59 
 Tomb Raider, 143 
 Tomlinson, Ray, 236 
 Tony Hawk, 219–220 
 Total Audience Measurement Index (TAMi), 
110,  189 
 Touch,  387 , 388 
 A Tower in Babel (Barnouw), 157 
 Townsend, Charles, 98 
 Toy Story, 134, 143 
 Toyota, 266,  268 , 276, 372 
 Tracy, Spencer, 146 
 trade advertising, 302 
 trade books,  57 
 trade magazines, 105 
 Traffi  c, 140, 250 
 traffi  c cop analogy,  362 
 Transformers fi lms, 136, 138, 142, 144, 
145, 146 
 transmissional perspective on media eff ects, 
 322 , 328 
 transparentists,  282 
 Th e Tree of Life, 136, 140 
 Trench, M., 232 
 Tribeca, 63 
 Tribune Company, 86, 88 
 Trigoboff , D., 376 
 A Trip to the Moon, 126,  127 
 Trivial Pursuit, 217 
 Truff aut, François, 48 
 Truman, Harry, 166 
 Trumbo, Dalton, 133 
 the Trust (Motion Picture Patents Company) 
(MPPC), 129–130 
 trustee model of regulation,  157 , 
157–158, 363 
 truth, 368, 372 
 Truth or Consequences, 158 
 truTV, 196, 358–359 
 TryMedia, 220 
 Tsukayama, H., 221, 249, 253 
 Tucker, K., 166 
 Tunisia, 394 
 Turkey, 388 
 Turner, Joe, 166 
 Turner Diaries (MacDonald), 52 
 turntable.fm, 171 
 TV Everywhere Initiative, 204 
 TV France International, 388 
 TV Guide, 108 
 TV Martí, 387 
 Twain, Mark, 51, 55 
 12 Angry Men, 134 
 20th Century Fox, 130, 132, 140, 398.  
See also Fox 
 24, 342,  342 , 388 
 28 Days Later, 140 
 Twilight series (Meyer), 53 
 Twister, 141 
 Twitter, 38, 242–243, 259, 277 
 two-step fl ow theory,  326 , 326–327,  326 
 Tyagi, Himanshu, 346 
 Tylenol, 266 
 Tyler, Steven,  39 
 typifi cation schemes,  337 , 337–338 
 Ubisoft, 219 
 Ugly Betty, 395 
 Ultima Online, 221 
 underrepresentation, 344 

Index 
I-21
 Understanding Media: Th e Extensions of Man 
(McLuhan), 232, 244,  245 
 UNESCO, 397–398 
 unfi nished statements, 311–312 
 Uniform Resource Locators (URLs),  240 
 unique selling proposition (USP),  296 
 United Airlines, 108 
 United Feature Syndicate, 85 
 United Press, 76 
 United Press International, 78 
 United States Literary Gazette, 100 
 United Students Against Sweatshops 
(USAS), 280 
 UNIVAC, 235 
 Universal, 130, 138, 140, 141, 144, 145, 
147, 164 
 university press books, 57 
 Unlimited, 111 
 Up, 22 
 urbanization, 130, 269, 324 
 URLs (Uniform Resource Locators),  240 
 U.S. Census Bureau, 347 
 U.S. Government Accountability Offi  ce, 
283, 299 
 U.S. News Weekly, 99 
 USA Today, 79–80, 87 
 USAS (United Students Against 
Sweatshops), 280 
 Usenet, 236 
 uses and gratifi cations approach,  330 ,  
331 , 333 
 USP (unique selling proposition),  296 
 Vaidhyanathan, Siva, 365 
 Valentine v. Christensen, 355–356 
 Valentine’s Day, 140, 146–147 
 VALS,  310 , 310–311 
 value-compensation programs,  308 
 Vanderbilt, William, 269 
 Vane, S., 87 
 vast wasteland,  191 
 Verhille, Peter, 280 
 Verizon, 198, 204, 221, 238 
 Verklin, David, 113 
 Verrier, R., 137 
 vertical integration,  132 , 133 
 Viacom, 33, 63, 141, 196, 200, 365 
 vicarious reinforcement,  341 
 Victim’s Crime Act (1984), 267 
 video, 201 
 and fi lm, 138 
 Internet, 168, 182, 202–203, 256, 309,  309 
 and news, 280, 282–284,  283 
 and public relations, 280 
 See also fi lm 
 video games, 210–229,  216 
 audience, 217–218,  217 , 221 
 consumer behavior, 31 
 and convergence, 220–221 
 defi ned, 215–217,  215 
 and fi lm, 143 
 and freedom of the press/freedom of 
expression, 356 
 and gender stereotyping, 228 
 history of, 211–215 
 hypercommercialism in, 222–226,  222 ,  225 
 industry structure, 218–220,  218 
 and Internet, 216, 220–221,  220 , 222,  223 
 and mobile devices, 216, 218, 221, 222 
 negative eff ects of, 224, 226, 333 
 pervasiveness of, 16 
 prosocial uses of, 216,  216 , 217, 226,  226 
 regulation, 225–227 
 timeline, 211–212 
 video news releases (VNR),  280 , 282–284,  283 
 video-on-demand (VOD),  203 
 Village Voice, 82 
 violence 
 and freedom of the press/freedom of 
expression, 356 
 and mass communication theory, 332 
 and media eff ects, 321,  321 , 339–343,  341 
 and media literacy, 21, 24 
 and video games, 224, 226, 356,  356 
 viral marketing,  280 
 Virgin, B., 113 
 virtual worlds games.  See massively 
multiplayer online role-playing games 
 Visa, 225 
 Visa Inc., 225–226 
 vitascopes, 126 
 VNR (video news releases),  280 , 282–284,  283 
 VOA (Voice of America), 385, 387–388, 392 
 VOD (video-on-demand),  203 
 Vogue, 113 
 Voice of America (VOA), 385, 387–388, 392 
 voice over Internet protocol (VoIP),  238 
 VoIP (voice over Internet protocol),  238 
 Volkswagen, 225 
 Vook, 59 
 Vorhaus, M., 223 
 Vorhaus, Mike, 31 
 Th e Vow, 145 
 Waitress, 147 
 Walcott, John, 371 
 Walden Media, 63 
 Walk It Off , 107 
 Walker, Alice, 55 
 Walker, Nancy,  186 
 Walker, R., 254 
 Th e Walking Dead, 39 
 Wall Street Journal, 79, 90 
 Wallenstein, A., 200 
 Walsh, M., 16, 90, 160, 170, 222 
 Walson, John, 190,  191 , 195 
 Wanamaker, John, 305 
 WANs (Wide Area Networks),  238 
 War Advertising Council, 293–294 
 War Horse, 136 
 Th e War of the Worlds, 325,  327 
 Ward, Caroline, 68 
 Ward, E., 166 
 Ward, Ed, 166 
 Warner Brothers 
 and book publishing, 63 
 and conglomeration, 141 
 and industry structure, 140 
 and social networking sites, 145 
 and streaming, 144 
 and talkies, 130 
 and television, 195 
 and vertical integration, 132 
 and video games, 219 
 Warner Music Group, 164, 174 
 Warning! Dating May Be Hazardous to Your 
Health (McShane), 64 
 Wartella, Ellen, 343 
 Washington Post, 79, 89, 359–360, 369 
 Washington Post Company, 111 
 Washington Post News Service, 85 
 Washington Post’s Express, 84 
 Washington Star, 80 
 Wasik, Bill, 247 
 Wasserman, E., 34 
 Watergate, 369 
 We Are All Khaled Said, 394 
 We Were the Mulvaneys (Oates), 53 
 Web radio,  170 
 Webber, Eric, 282 
 webisodes,  39 
 Weblogs.  See blogs 
 WebMD,  110 , 112 
 Wedemeyer, J., 12 
 Weeds,  180–181 , 198 
 Th e Week, 107–108 
 weeklies, 81–83 
 Th e Weekly News, 291 
 Weldon, Fay, 64 
 Welles, Orson, 159, 188, 325,  327 
 West, Kanye, 172 
 Western concept of media,  389 , 389–391 
 Westinghouse Electric, 269 
 Westinghouse Studio One, 186 
 Westwood One, 169 
 Whalley, Tom, 173 
 Wheaton, Anne Williams, 271 
 Wheel of Fortune, 383 
 Wheeler-Lea Act (1938), 293 
 Whitaker and Baxter, 271 
 White, John, 267 
 Whiteout, 143 
 Whitney, D., 144 
 Whitney, F. C., 385 
 Whitney, L., 90, 182 
 Whittaker, Z., 308 
 Whole Foods, 249 
 Why We Fight series, 270,  271 
 Wi-Fi,  40 
 Wide Area Networks (WANs),  238 
 Th e Widow Jones, 131 
 Wigand, Jeff rey, 371 
 Wii, 218, 219 
 WikiLeaks, 248, 352 
 Wikipedia, 249 
 Th e Wild Bunch,  340 
 Wilder, Gene, 142 
 Will & Grace,  345 
 William and Kate: A Royal Love Story 
(Clench), 63 
 William Esty agency, 292 
 Williams, Harry, 214 
 Williams, M. E., 11, 117 
 Williams, Rowan, 298–299 
 Williams, T., 297 
 Willie Wonka and the Chocolate Factory, 142 
 willing suspension of disbelief,  319 
 Willis, Scott, 85 

I-22 
Index
 Wilson, J. L., 212, 213 
 Wilson, James, 50 
 Wilson, Woodrow, 269 
 Windwalker, S., 67 
 Winslow, G., 31 
 Winsten, Jay, 342 
 WIPO (World Intellectual Property 
Organization), 252 
 Th e Wire, 198 
 wire services (news services),  
76 , 76–77, 85 
 Wired,  96–97 , 245 
 Wireless Ship Act (1910), 157 
 Wise Man Takes All, 383 
 Within Our Gates, 129 
 Without a Trace, 194 
 Wolff e, Richard, 370 
 Woman’s Day, 108,  115 
 Woman’s Home Companion, 101 
 Th e Women, 147 
 women 
 appearance, 9–11,  11 ,  12 ,  13 , 
117–118,  117 
 and magazines, 101, 104, 117–118,  117 
 media underrepresentation of,  11 
 in public relations, 271 
 stereotyping, 9–11, 228 
 See also feminism 
 Woodward, Bob, 369,  369 
 Th e World According to Garp (Irving), 53 
 World Intellectual Property Organization 
(WIPO), 252 
 World of Warcraft, 221, 224 
 World War I 
 and fi lm, 130 
 and public relations, 269,  270 
 and radio, 154–155, 156 
 World War II 
 and advertising, 293–295,  295 
 and global media, 384, 385 
 and magazines, 103–104 
 and mass communication theory, 326–327, 
335, 366 
 and public relations, 270,  271 
 and radio, 159 
 and sound recording, 159, 166 
 and television, 132–133, 185 
 World Wide Web,  238 , 238–242.  See also 
Internet 
 Wozniak, Stephen, 237, 238,  239 
 WPP, 279 
 Wright, Richard, 52 
 Wrigley, Brenda, 266 
 Writers Guild of America, 38 
 Wronge, Y. S., 343 
 X-Files fi lms, 143 
 X-Men, 143 
 Xbox, 218, 219, 221 
 Xlibris, 59, 61 
 XNS Sports, 219 
 Xpand,  303 
   Yahoo!, 15, 35, 36, 88, 170, 221, 256 
 Yanowitch, Richard, 43 
 Yao, D., 169 
 Yarow, J., 91 
 yellow journalism,  77 , 77–78,  77 
 Young, B., 32 
 Young, James Webb, 12, 297 
 youth markets 
 and alcohol use, 343 
 and copyright, 365 
 fi lm, 134,  135 , 136, 137 
 Internet video, 202 
 newspapers, 91–92 
 and pornography, 250–251 
 and public relations, 281 
 sound recording, 164, 166 
 video games, 224, 227 
 See also children 
 YouTube, 168, 182, 202, 256, 
309,  309 
 Zeller, T., 35 
 Zenger, John Peter, 74–75 
 Zickuhr, K., 88, 256 
 Zinio, 59 
 Zinn, Howard, 269 
 zipping,  201 
 Zittrain, Jonathan, 255 
 zoned editions,  80 
 zoopraxiscope,  124 
 Zucker, Jeff , 30 
 Zuckerberg, Mark, 257 
 Zuckerman, Mary Ellen, 100 
 Zukor, Adolph, 130 
 Zworykin, Vladimir, 184,  185 , 384 
 Zynga, 41, 222 
uploaded by [stormrg]

IntroductIon to 
Mass CoMMuniCation  
MedIa LIteracy and cuLture 
encourages students to be active, critical consumers of media content and to 
recognize the role that the media play in both shaping and reﬂecting culture. 
New for the eighth edition, McGraw-Hill Connect® Mass Communication combines contemporary 
course content and groundbreaking digital tools to create a unique learning environment. The result? 
Greater course success for students.
With Connect Mass Communication, the Introduction to Mass Communication: Media Literacy and 
Culture program integrates an interactive eBook with dynamic online activities and assignments that 
help students study more eﬃciently and eﬀectively. McGraw-Hill LearnSmart™, McGraw-Hill’s adaptive 
learning system, assesses students’ knowledge of course content and maps out personalized study plans  
for success.
FInd out More at ConneCt.MCgraw-hILL.CoM.
McGraw-Hill Create™ provides a simple way for instructors to customize their courses. 
To register and get more information, go to http://create.mcgraw-hill.com.
www.mhhe.com/baran8e

