www.ebook3000.com


For more information, visit www.wileyplus.com 
WileyPLUS builds students’ confidence because it takes the guesswork  
out of studying by providing students with a clear roadmap:  
• 
what to do
• 
how to do it
• 
if they did it right
It offers interactive resources along with a complete digital textbook that help  
students learn more. With WileyPLUS, students take more initiative so you’ll have  
greater impact on their achievement in the classroom and beyond.
WileyPLUS is a research-based online environment 
for effective teaching and learning.
Now available for
 Now with: ORION, An Adaptive Experience
www.ebook3000.com

ALL THE HELP, RESOURCES, AND PERSONAL 
SUPPORT YOU AND YOUR STUDENTS NEED!
www.wileyplus.com/resources
Technical Support 24/7
FAQs, online chat,
and phone support
www.wileyplus.com/support
Student support from an  
experienced student user
Collaborate with your colleagues,
find a mentor, attend virtual and live
events, and view resources
2-Minute Tutorials and all
of the resources you and your
students need to get started
Your WileyPLUS Account Manager, 
providing personal training  
and support
www.WhereFacultyConnect.com
Pre-loaded, ready-to-use  
assignments and presentations
created by subject matter experts
Student
Partner
Program
Quick
Start
© Courtney Keating/iStockphoto

Ninth Edition
INTRODUCTORY STATISTICS
PREM S. MANN
EASTERN CONNECTICUT STATE UNIVERSITY
www.ebook3000.com

Vice President and Director  Laurie Rosatone
Sponsoring Editor  Jennifer Brady
Acquisitions Editor  Joanna Dingle
Project Editor  Ellen Keohane
Market Solutions Assistant  Carolyn DeDeo
Senior Content Manager  Valerie Zaborski
Senior Production Editor  Ken Santor
Production Management Services  Jackie Henry, Aptara, Inc.
Senior Photo Editor  Billy Ray
Marketing Manager  John Lavacca III
Senior Designer  Wendy Lai
Senior Product Designer  David Dietz
Product Design Manager  Thomas Kulesa
Cover Designer  Wendy Lai
Cover photo:  © Shaiith/Getty Images, Inc.
This book was set in 10/12 Times LT Std-Roman by Aptara®, Inc. and printed and bound 
by R.R. Donnelley/Kendallville. The cover was printed by R.R. Donnelley/Kendallville.
This book is printed on acid free paper. 
∞
Copyright © 2016, 2013, 2010, 2007, 2004, 2001, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved. 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 
107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the 
Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. 
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, website www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for 
permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, 
Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, (201)748-6011, fax (201)748-6008, website http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Evaluation copies are provided to qualified academics and professionals for review purposes only, for use 
in their courses during the next academic year. These copies are licensed and may not be sold or transferred to a 
third party. Upon completion of the review period, please return the evaluation copy to Wiley. Return instructions 
and a free of charge return shipping label are available at www.wiley.com/go/returnlabel. Outside of the United 
States, please contact your local representative.
The inside back cover will contain printing identification and country of origin if omitted from this page. 
In addition, if the ISBN on the back cover differs from the ISBN on this page, the one on the back cover 
is correct.
ISBN 978-1-119-14832-6 (Binder Ready Version) 
ISBN 978-1-119-23543-9 (Evaluation/Desk Copy Version)
ISBN 978-1-119-23456-2 (HSBVersion)
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

To the memory of my parents
www.ebook3000.com

PREFACE
Introductory Statistics is written for a one- or two-semester first course in applied statistics. 
This book is intended for students who do not have a strong background in mathematics. The 
only prerequisite for this text is knowledge of elementary algebra. 
Today, college students from almost all fields of study are required to take at least one 
course in statistics. Consequently, the study of statistical methods has taken on a prominent role 
in the education of students from a variety of backgrounds and academic pursuits. From the first 
edition, the goal of Introductory Statistics has been to make the subject of statistics interesting 
and accessible to a wide and varied audience. Three major elements of this text support this goal:
1. 
 Realistic content of its examples and exercises, drawing from a comprehensive range of 
applications from all facets of life 
2. 
Clarity and brevity of presentation 
3. 
Soundness of pedagogical approach 
These elements are developed through the interplay of a variety of significant text features. 
The feedback received from the users of the eighth edition (and earlier editions) of Introductory 
Statistics has been very supportive and encouraging. Positive experiences reported by instructors 
and students have served as evidence that this text offers an interesting and accessible approach 
to statistics—the author’s goal from the very first edition. The author has pursued the same goal 
through the refinements and updates in this ninth edition, so that Introductory Statistics can continue 
to provide a successful experience in statistics to a growing number of students and instructors. 
New to the Ninth Edition 
The following are some of the changes made in the ninth edition: 
■   New for the ninth edition, are the videos that are accessible via the WileyPLUS course 
associated with this text. These videos provide step-by-step solutions to selected examples 
in the book. 
■   A large number of the examples and exercises are new or revised, providing contemporary 
and varied ways for students to practice statistical concepts. 
■   Coverage of sample surveys, sampling techniques, and design of experiments has been 
moved from Appendix A to Chapter 1. 
■   In Chapter 3, the discussions of weighted mean, trimmed mean, and coefficient of variation 
have been moved from the exercises to the main part of the chapter.
■   The majority of the case studies are new or revised, drawing on current uses of statistics in 
areas of student interest. 
■   New data are integrated throughout, reinforcing the vibrancy of statistics and the relevance 
of statistics to student lives right now. 
■   The Technology Instructions sections have been updated to support the use of the latest 
versions of TI-84 Color/TI-84, Minitab, and Excel. 
■   Many of the Technology Assignments at the end of each chapter are either new or have been 
updated. 
vi

Preface
vii
■   The data sets posted on the book companion Web site and WileyPLUS have been updated. 
■   Most of the Uses and Misuses sections at the end of each chapter have been updated or replaced.
■   Many of the Mini-Projects, which are now located on the book companion Web site, are 
either new or have been updated.
■   Many of the Decide for Yourself sections, also located on the book companion Web site, are 
either new or have been updated.
Hallmark Features of This Text 
Clear and Concise Exposition The explanation of statistical methods and concepts is clear and 
concise. Moreover, the style is user-friendly and easy to understand. In chapter introductions and 
in transitions from section to section, new ideas are related to those discussed earlier. 
Thorough Examples The text contains a wealth of examples. The examples are usually pre-
sented in a format showing a problem and its solution. They are well sequenced and thorough, 
displaying all facets of concepts. Furthermore, the examples capture students’ interest because 
they cover a wide variety of relevant topics. They are based on situations that practicing statisti-
cians encounter every day. Finally, a large number of examples are based on real data taken from 
sources such as books, government and private data sources and reports, magazines, newspapers, 
and professional journals. 
Step-by-Step Solutions A clear, concise solution follows each problem presented in an example. 
When the solution to an example involves many steps, it is presented in a step-by-step format. For 
instance, examples related to tests of hypothesis contain five steps that are consistently used to 
solve such examples in all chapters. Thus, procedures are presented in the concrete settings of 
applications rather than as isolated abstractions. Frequently, solutions contain highlighted remarks 
that recall and reinforce ideas critical to the solution of the problem. Such remarks add to the 
clarity of presentation. 
Titles for Examples Each example based on an application of concepts now contains a title that 
describes to what area, field, or concept the example relates.
Margin Notes for Examples A margin note appears beside each example that briefly describes 
what is being done in that example. Students can use these margin notes to assist them as they read 
through sections and to quickly locate appropriate model problems as they work through exercises. 
Frequent Use of Diagrams Concepts can often be made more understandable by describing 
them visually with the help of diagrams. This text uses diagrams frequently to help students 
understand concepts and solve problems. For example, tree diagrams are used a few times in 
Chapters 4 and 5 to assist in explaining probability concepts and in computing probabilities. 
Similarly, solutions to all examples about tests of hypothesis contain diagrams showing rejection 
regions, nonrejection regions, and critical values. 
Highlighting Definitions of important terms, formulas, and key concepts are enclosed in colored 
boxes so that students can easily locate them. 
Cautions Certain items need special attention. These may deal with potential trouble spots that 
commonly cause errors, or they may deal with ideas that students often overlook. Special empha-
sis is placed on such items through the headings Remember, An Observation, or Warning. An 
icon is used to identify such items. 
Real World Case Studies These case studies, which appear in most of the chapters, provide 
additional illustrations of the applications of statistics in research and statistical analysis. Most of 
these case studies are based on articles or data published in journals, magazines, newspapers, or 
Web sites. Almost all case studies are based on real data. 
Variety of Exercises The text contains a variety of exercises, including technology assignments. 
Moreover, a large number of these exercises contain several parts. Exercise sets appearing at the 
www.ebook3000.com

viii
Preface 
end of each section (or sometimes at the end of two or three sections) include problems on the 
topics of that section. These exercises are divided into two parts: Concepts and Procedures that 
emphasize key ideas and techniques and Applications that use these ideas and techniques in 
concrete settings. Supplementary exercises appear at the end of each chapter and contain exer-
cises on all sections and topics discussed in that chapter. A large number of these exercises are 
based on real data taken from varied data sources such as books, government and private data 
sources and reports, magazines, newspapers, and professional journals. Not only do the exercises 
given in the text provide practice for students, but the real data contained in the exercises provide 
interesting information and insight into economic, political, social, psychological, and other 
aspects of life. The exercise sets also contain many problems that demand critical thinking skills. 
The answers to selected odd-numbered exercises appear in the Answers section at the back of the 
book. Optional exercises are indicated by an asterisk (*). 
Advanced Exercises All chapters have a set of exercises that are of greater difficulty. Such 
exercises appear under the heading Advanced Exercises after the Supplementary Exercises. 
Uses and Misuses This feature toward the end of each chapter (before the Glossary) points out 
common misconceptions and pitfalls students will encounter in their study of statistics and in 
everyday life. Subjects highlighted include such diverse topics as do not feed the animals. 
Decide for Yourself This feature is accessible online at www.wiley.com/college/mann. Each 
Decide for Yourself discusses a real-world problem and raises questions that readers can think 
about and answer. 
Glossary Each chapter has a glossary that lists the key terms introduced in that chapter, along 
with a brief explanation of each term.
Self-Review Tests Each chapter contains a Self-Review Test, which appears immediately after the 
Supplementary and Advanced Exercises. These problems can help students test their grasp of the 
concepts and skills presented in respective chapters and monitor their understanding of statistical 
methods. The problems marked by an asterisk (*) in the Self-Review Tests are optional. The 
answers to almost all problems of the Self-Review Tests appear in the Answer section. 
Technology Usage At the end of each chapter is a section covering uses of three major technolo-
gies of statistics and probability: the TI-84 Color/TI-84, Minitab, and Excel. For each technology, 
students are guided through performing statistical analyses in a step-by-step fashion, showing 
them how to enter, revise, format, and save data in a spreadsheet, workbook, or named and 
unnamed lists, depending on the technology used. Illustrations and screen shots demonstrate the 
use of these technologies. Additional detailed technology instruction is provided in the technol-
ogy manuals that are online at www.wiley.com/college/mann. 
Technology Assignments Each chapter contains a few technology assignments that appear at the 
end of the chapter. These assignments can be completed using any of the statistical software. 
Mini-projects Associated with each chapter of the text are Mini-projects posted online at www.
wiley.com/college/mann. These Mini-projects are either very comprehensive exercises or they 
ask students to perform their own surveys and experiments. They provide practical applications 
of statistical concepts to real life. 
Data Sets A large number of data sets appear on the book companion Web site at www.wiley.
com/college/mann. These large data sets are collected from various sources, and they contain 
information on several variables. Many exercises and assignments in the text are based on these 
data sets. These large data sets can also be used for instructor-driven analyses using a wide variety 
of statistical software packages as well as the TI-84. These data sets are available on the Web 
site of the text in numerous formats, including Minitab and Excel.
Videos New for the Ninth Edition, videos for each text section illustrate concepts related to the 
topic covered in that section to more deeply engage the students. These videos are accessible via 
WileyPLUS. 

Preface
ix
GAISE Report Recommendations Adopted 
In 2003, the American Statistical Association (ASA) funded the Guidelines for Assessment and 
Instruction in Statistics Education (GAISE) Project to develop ASA-endorsed guidelines for 
assessment and instruction in statistics for the introductory college statistics course. The report, 
which can be found at www.amstat.org/education/gaise, resulted in the following series of 
recommendations for the first course in statistics and data analysis.
1. 
Emphasize statistical literacy and develop statistical thinking. 
2. 
Use real data. 
3. 
Stress conceptual understanding rather than mere knowledge of procedures. 
4. 
Foster active learning in the classroom. 
5. 
Use technology for developing concepts and analyzing data. 
6. 
Use assessments to improve and evaluate student learning. 
Here are a few examples of how this Introductory Statistics text can assist in helping you, the 
instructor, in meeting the GAISE recommendations. 
1. 
 Many of the exercises require interpretation, not just answers in terms of numbers. Graphical 
and numeric summaries are combined in some exercises in order to emphasize looking at the 
whole picture, as opposed to using just one graph or one summary statistic. 
2. 
 The Uses and Misuses and online Decide for Yourself features help to develop statistical 
thinking and conceptual understanding. 
3. 
 All of the data sets listed in Appendix A are available on the book’s Web site. They have been 
formatted for a variety of statistical software packages. This eliminates the need to enter data 
into the software. A variety of software instruction manuals also allow the instructor to spend 
more time on concepts and less time teaching how to use technology. 
4. 
 The online Mini-projects help students to generate their own data by performing an 
 experiment and/or taking random samples from the large data sets mentioned in  Appendix A. 
We highly recommend that all statistics instructors take the time to read the GAISE report. There 
is a wealth of information in this report that can be used by everyone. 
Web Site 
www.wiley.com/college/mann 
After you go to the page exhibited by the above URL, click on Visit the Companion Sites. Then click 
on the site that applies to you out of the two choices. This Web site provides additional resources for 
instructors and students. The following items are available for instructors on this Web site: 
• Key Formulas
• Printed Test Bank 
• Mini-Projects
• Decide for Yourself
• Power Point Lecture Slides
• Instructor’s Solutions Manual 
• Data Sets (see Appendix A for a complete list of these data sets) 
• Chapter 14: Multiple Regression 
• Chapter 15: Nonparametric Methods 
• Technology Resource Manuals: 
 • TI Graphing Calculator Manual
 • Minitab Manual
 • Excel Manual
These manuals provide step-by-step instructions, screen captures, and examples for using tech-
nology in the introductory statistics course. Also provided are exercise lists and indications of 
which exercises from the text best lend themselves to the use of the package presented. 
www.ebook3000.com

x
Preface 
Using WileyPLUS 
SUCCESS: WileyPLUS helps to ensure that each study session has a positive outcome by putting 
students in control. Through instant feedback and study objective reports, students know if they 
did it right and where to focus next, so they achieve the strongest results. 
Our efficacy research shows that with WileyPLUS, students improve their outcomes by as 
much as one letter grade. WileyPLUS helps students take more initiative, so you will have greater 
impact on their achievement in the classroom and beyond. 
What Do Students Receive with WileyPLUS? 
• The complete digital textbook, saving students up to 60% off the cost of a printed text. 
• Question assistance, including links to relevant sections in the online digital textbook. 
• Immediate feedback and proof of progress, 24/7. 
•  Integrated, multimedia resources—including videos—that provide multiple study paths and 
encourage more active learning. 
What Do Instructors Receive with WileyPLUS?
• Reliable resources that reinforce course goals inside and outside of the classroom. 
• The ability to easily identify those students who are falling behind. 
•  Media-rich course materials and assessment content, including Instructor’s Solutions Manual, 
PowerPoint slides, Learning Objectives, Printed Test Bank, and much more. 
 www.wileyplus.com. Learn More. 
Supplements 
The following supplements are available to accompany this text: 
■   Instructor’s Solutions Manual (ISBN 978-1-119-14830-2). This manual contains com-
plete solutions to all of the exercises in the text.
■   Printed Test Bank The printed copy of the test bank contains a large number of multiple-
choice questions, essay questions, and quantitative problems for each chapter. It can be 
downloaded and printed from WileyPLUS or from www.wiley.com/college/mann. 
■   Student Solutions Manual (ISBN 978-1-119-14829-6). This manual contains complete 
solutions to all of the odd-numbered exercises in the text.
D. P. Adhikari
Marywood University
Wendy Ahrendsen
South Dakota State University
Nan Hutchins Bailey
The University of Texas at Tyler
Les Barnhouse
Athabasca University
Hossein Behforooz
Utica College
Joleen Beltrami
University of the Incarnate Word
Bill Burgin
Gaston College
David Bush
Villanova University
Acknowledgments 
I thank the following reviewers of the ninth edition of this book, whose comments and sugges-
tions were invaluable in improving the text. 

Preface
xi
Ferry Butar Butar
Sam Houston State University
Chris Chappa
University of Texas at Tyler
Jerry Chen
Suffolk County Community College, 
Ammerman Campus
A. Choudhury
Illinois State University
Robert C. Forsythe
Frostburg State University
Daesung Ha
Marshall University
Rhonda Hatcher
Texas Christian University
Joanna Jeneralczuk
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Annette Kanko
University of the Incarnate Word
Mohammad Kazemi
University of North Carolina, 
Charlotte
Janine Keown-Gerrard
Athabasca University
Hoon Kim
California State Polytechnic 
University—Pomona
Matthew Knowlen
Horry Georgetown Technical College
Maurice LeBlanc 
Kennesaw State University 
Min-Lin Lo
California State University, San Bernardino
Natalya Malakhova
Johnson County Community College
Nola McDaniel
McNeese State University
Stéphane Mechoulan
Dalhousie University
Robert L. Nichols
Florida Gulf Coast University
Jonathan Oaks
Macomb Community 
College—South Campus
Marty Rhoades
West Texas A&M University
Mary Beth Rollick
Kent State University—Kent
Seema Sehgal 
Athabasca University
Linda Simonsen
University of Washington, Bothell
Criselda Toto
Chapman University
Viola Vajdova
Benedictine University
Daniel Weiner
Boston University
I express my thanks to the following for their contributions to earlier editions of this book that 
made it better in many ways: Chris Lacke (Rowan University), Gerald Geissert (formerly of 
Eastern Connecticut State University), Daniel S. Miller (Central Connecticut State University), 
and David Santana-Ortiz (Rand Organization). 
I extend my special thanks to Doug Tyson, James Bush, and Chad Cross, who contributed to 
this edition in many significant ways. I take this opportunity to thank Mark McKibben for work-
ing on the solutions manuals and preparing the answer section and Julie M. Clark for checking 
the solutions for accuracy. 
It is of utmost importance that a textbook be accompanied by complete and accurate sup-
plements. I take pride in mentioning that the supplements prepared for this text possess these 
qualities and much more. I thank the authors of all these supplements. 
It is my pleasure to thank all the professionals at John Wiley & Sons with whom I enjoyed 
working during this revision. Among them are Laurie Rosatone (Vice President and Director), 
Joanna Dingle (Acquisitions Editor), Wendy Lai (Senior Designer), Billy Ray (Senior Photo 
Editor), Valerie Zaborski (Senior Content Manager), Ken Santor (Senior Production Editor), 
Ellen Keohane (Project Editor), Jennifer Brady (Sponsoring Editor), Carolyn DeDeo (Market 
Solutions Assistant), David Dietz (Senior Product Designer), and John LaVacca (Marketing 
Manager). I also want to thank Jackie Henry (Full Service Manager) for managing the production 
process and Lisa Torri (Art Development Editor) for her work on the case study art. 
Any suggestions from readers for future revisions would be greatly appreciated. Such 
suggestions can be sent to the author at premmann@yahoo.com or mann@easternct.edu. 
I recently retired from Eastern Connecticut State University and, hence, will prefer that readers 
email me at premmann@yahoo.com.
 
 
Prem S. Mann 
 
 
December 2015
www.ebook3000.com

CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1 Introduction 
1
1.1 Statistics and Types of Statistics 
2
Case Study 1–1 2014 Lobbying Spending by Selected Companies 
3
Case Study 1–2 Americans’ Life Outlook, 2014 
4
1.2 Basic Terms 
5
1.3 Types of Variables 
7
1.4 Cross-Section Versus Time-Series Data 
9
1.5 Population Versus Sample 
10
1.6 Design of Experiments 
18
1.7 Summation Notation 
22
Uses and Misuses / Glossary / Supplementary Exercises / Advanced Exercises / Self-Review Test / Technology 
Instructions / Technology Assignments
CHAPTER 2 Organizing and Graphing Data 
36
2.1 Organizing and Graphing Qualitative Data 
37
Case Study 2–1 Ideological Composition of the U.S. Public, 2014 
40
Case Study 2–2 Millennials’ Views on Their Level of Day-to-Day Banking Knowledge 
41
2.2 Organizing and Graphing Quantitative Data 
43
Case Study 2–3 Car Insurance Premiums per Year in 50 States 
49
Case Study 2–4 Hours Worked in a Typical Week by Full-Time U.S. Workers 
50
Case Study 2–5 How Many Cups of Coffee Do You Drink a Day? 
53
2.3 Stem-and-Leaf Displays 
60
2.4 Dotplots 
64
Uses and Misuses / Glossary / Supplementary Exercises / Advanced Exercises / Self-Review Test / Technology 
Instructions / Technology Assignments
CHAPTER 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures 
77
3.1 Measures of Center for Ungrouped Data 
78
Case Study 3–1 2013 Average Starting Salaries for Selected Majors 
81
Case Study 3–2 Education Level and 2014 Median Weekly Earnings 
83
3.2 Measures of Dispersion for Ungrouped Data 
89
3.3 Mean, Variance, and Standard Deviation for Grouped Data 
97
3.4 Use of Standard Deviation 
103
Case Study 3–3 Does Spread Mean the Same as Variability and Dispersion? 
106
xii

Contents
xiii
3.5 Measures of Position 
108
3.6 Box-and-Whisker Plot 
113
Uses and Misuses / Glossary / Supplementary Exercises / Advanced Exercises / Appendix 3.1 / Self-Review Test / 
Technology Instructions / Technology Assignments
CHAPTER 4 Probability 
129
4.1 Experiment, Outcome, and Sample Space 
130
4.2 Calculating Probability 
133
4.3  Marginal Probability, Conditional Probability, and Related Probability 
Concepts 140
Case Study 4–1 Do You Worry About Your Weight? 
143
4.4 Intersection of Events and the Multiplication Rule 
150
4.5 Union of Events and the Addition Rule 
156
4.6  Counting Rule, Factorials, Combinations, and Permutations 
162
Case Study 4–2 Probability of Winning a Mega Millions Lottery Jackpot 
166
Uses and Misuses / Glossary / Supplementary Exercises / Advanced Exercises / Self-Review Test / Technology 
Instructions / Technology Assignments
CHAPTER 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their 
Probability Distributions 
179
5.1 Random Variables 
180
5.2 Probability Distribution of a Discrete Random Variable 
182
5.3 Mean and Standard Deviation of a Discrete Random Variable 
187
Case Study 5–1 All State Lottery 
189
5.4 The Binomial Probability Distribution 
193
5.5 The Hypergeometric Probability Distribution 
203
5.6 The Poisson Probability Distribution 
206
Case Study 5–2 Global Birth and Death Rates 
210
Uses and Misuses / Glossary / Supplementary Exercises / Advanced Exercises / Self-Review Test / Technology 
Instructions / Technology Assignments
CHAPTER 6 Continuous Random Variables and 
the Normal Distribution 
227
6.1  Continuous Probability Distribution and the Normal Probability Distribution 
228
Case Study 6–1 Distribution of Time Taken to Run a Road Race 
231
6.2 Standardizing a Normal Distribution 
242
6.3 Applications of the Normal Distribution 
247
6.4  Determining the z and x Values When an Area Under the Normal Distribution 
Curve Is Known 
252
6.5 The Normal Approximation to the Binomial Distribution 
257
Uses and Misuses / Glossary / Supplementary Exercises / Advanced Exercises / Appendix 6.1 / Self-Review Test / 
Technology Instructions / Technology Assignments
CHAPTER 7 Sampling Distributions 
275
7.1 Sampling Distribution, Sampling Error, and Nonsampling Errors 
276
7.2 Mean and Standard Deviation of x 
281
www.ebook3000.com

xiv
Contents
7.3 Shape of the Sampling Distribution of x 283
7.4 Applications of the Sampling Distribution of x 
289
7.5  Population and Sample Proportions; and the Mean, Standard Deviation, 
and Shape of the Sampling Distribution of p
̭
 
293
7.6 Applications of the Sampling Distribution of p
̭
 299
Uses and Misuses / Glossary / Supplementary Exercises / Advanced Exercises / Self-Review Test / Technology 
Instructions / Technology Assignments
CHAPTER 8 Estimation of the Mean and Proportion 
311
8.1 Estimation, Point Estimate, and Interval Estimate 
312
8.2 Estimation of a Population Mean: σ Known 
315
Case Study 8–1 Annual Salaries of Registered Nurses, 2014 
319
8.3 Estimation of a Population Mean: σ Not Known 
324
8.4 Estimation of a Population Proportion: Large Samples 
331
Case Study 8–2 Americans’ Efforts to Lose Weight Still Trail Desires 
334
Uses and Misuses / Glossary / Supplementary Exercises / Advanced Exercises / Self-Review Test / Technology 
Instructions / Technology Assignments
CHAPTER 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion 
346
9.1 Hypothesis Tests: An Introduction 
347
9.2 Hypothesis Tests About μ: σ Known 
354
Case Study 9–1 Average Student Loan Debt for the Class of 2013 
364
9.3 Hypothesis Tests About μ: σ Not Known 
367
9.4 Hypothesis Tests About a Population Proportion: Large Samples 
375
Case Study 9–2 Are Upper-Income People Paying Their Fair Share in Federal Taxes? 
382
Uses and Misuses / Glossary / Supplementary Exercises / Advanced Exercises / Self-Review Test / Technology 
Instructions / Technology Assignments
CHAPTER 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: 
Two Populations 
396
10.1  Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population Means 
for Independent Samples: σ1 and σ2 Known 
397
10.2 Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population Means 
 
for Independent Samples: σ1 and σ2 Unknown but Equal 
404
10.3  Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population Means 
for Independent Samples: σ1 and σ2 Unknown and Unequal 
411
10.4 Inferences About the Mean of Paired Samples (Dependent Samples) 
416
10.5  Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population Proportions 
for Large and Independent Samples 
425
Uses and Misuses / Glossary / Supplementary Exercises / Advanced Exercises / Self-Review Test / Technology 
Instructions / Technology Assignments
CHAPTER 11 Chi-Square Tests 
448
11.1 The Chi-Square Distribution 
449
11.2 A Goodness-of-Fit Test 
451
Case Study 11–1 Are People on Wall Street Honest and Moral? 
457

Contents
xv
11.3 A Test of Independence or Homogeneity 
459
11.4 Inferences About the Population Variance 
469
Uses and Misuses / Glossary / Supplementary Exercises / Advanced Exercises / Self-Review Test / Technology 
Instructions / Technology Assignments
CHAPTER 12 Analysis of Variance 
483
12.1 The F Distribution 
484
12.2 One-Way Analysis of Variance 
486
Uses and Misuses / Glossary / Supplementary Exercises / Advanced Exercises / Self-Review Test / Technology 
Instructions / Technology Assignments
CHAPTER 13 Simple Linear Regression 
502
13.1 Simple Linear Regression 
503
Case Study 13–1 Regression of Weights on Heights for NFL Players 
512
13.2 Standard Deviation of Errors and Coefficient of Determination 
517
13.3 Inferences About B 
524
13.4 Linear Correlation 
528
13.5 Regression Analysis: A Complete Example 
533
13.6 Using the Regression Model 
539
Uses and Misuses / Glossary / Supplementary Exercises / Advanced Exercises / Self-Review Test / Technology 
Instructions / Technology Assignments
CHAPTER 14 Multiple Regression
This chapter is not included in this text but is available for download from WileyPLUS or from 
www.wiley.com/college/mann.
CHAPTER 15 Nonparametric Methods
This chapter is not included in this text but is available for download from WileyPLUS or from 
www.wiley.com/college/mann.
APPENDIX A Explanation of Data Sets 
A1
APPENDIX B Statistical Tables 
B1
ANSWERS TO SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED EXERCISES AND SELF-REVIEW TESTS AN1
INDEX I1
www.ebook3000.com


1
CHAPTER1
The study of statistics has become more popular than ever over the past four decades. The increas-
ing availability of computers and statistical software packages has enlarged the role of statistics as 
a tool for empirical research. As a result, statistics is used for research in almost all professions, from 
medicine to sports. Today, college students in almost all disciplines are required to take at least one 
statistics course. Almost all newspapers and magazines these days contain graphs and stories on 
statistical studies. After you finish reading this book, it should be much easier to understand these 
graphs and stories.
Every field of study has its own terminology. Statistics is no exception. This introductory chapter 
explains the basic terms and concepts of statistics. These terms and concepts will bridge our under-
standing of the concepts and techniques presented in subsequent chapters.
Are you, as an American, thriving in your life? Or are you struggling? Or, even worse, are you suffering? 
A poll of 176,903 American adults, aged 18 and older, was conducted January 2 to December 30, 2014, 
as part of the Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index survey. The poll found that while 54.1% of these 
Americans said that they were thriving, 42.1% indicated that they were struggling, and 3.8% mentioned 
that they were suffering. (See Case Study 1–2.)
© Carol Thacker/iStockphoto
1.1 Statistics and Types of 
Statistics
Case Study 1–1 2014 
Lobbying Spending by 
Selected Companies
Case Study 1–2 Americans’ 
Life Outlook, 2014
1.2 Basic Terms
1.3 Types of Variables
1.4 Cross-Section Versus 
Time-Series Data
1.5 Population Versus Sample
1.6 Design of Experiments
1.7 Summation Notation
Introduction
www.ebook3000.com

2
Chapter 1 Introduction
In this section we will learn about statistics and types of statistics.
1.1.1 What Is Statistics?
The word statistics has two meanings. In the more common usage, statistics refers to numerical 
facts. The numbers that represent the income of a family, the age of a student, the percentage of 
passes completed by the quarterback of a football team, and the starting salary of a typical college 
graduate are examples of statistics in this sense of the word. A 1988 article in U.S. News & World 
Report mentioned that “Statistics are an American obsession.”1 During the 1988 baseball World 
Series between the Los Angeles Dodgers and the Oakland A’s, the then NBC commentator Joe 
Garagiola reported to the viewers numerical facts about the players’ performances. In response, 
fellow commentator Vin Scully said, “I love it when you talk statistics.” In these examples, the 
word statistics refers to numbers.
 
The following examples present some statistics:
1. 
During March 2014, a total of 664,000,000 hours were spent by Americans watching March 
Madness live on TV and/or streaming (Fortune Magazine, March 15, 2015).
2. 
Approximately 30% of Google’s employees were female in July 2014 (USA TODAY, July 24, 
2014).
3. 
According to an estimate, an average family of four living in the United States needs $130,357 
a year to live the American dream (USA TODAY, July 7, 2014).
4. 
Chicago’s O’Hare Airport was the busiest airport in 2014, with a total of 881,933 flight 
arrivals and departures.
5. 
In 2013, author James Patterson earned $90 million from the sale of his books (Forbes, 
September 29, 2014).
6. 
About 22.8% of U.S. adults do not have a religious affiliation (Time, May 25, 2015).
7. 
Yahoo CEO Marissa Mayer was the highest paid female CEO in America in 2014, with a 
total compensation of $42.1 million.
 
The second meaning of statistics refers to the field or discipline of study. In this sense of the 
word, statistics is defined as follows.
1.1 Statistics and Types of Statistics
Statistics Statistics is the science of collecting, analyzing, presenting, and interpreting data, 
as well as of making decisions based on such analyses.
 
Every day we make decisions that may be personal, business related, or of some other kind. 
Usually these decisions are made under conditions of uncertainty. Many times, the situations or 
problems we face in the real world have no precise or definite solution. Statistical methods help 
us make scientific and intelligent decisions in such situations. Decisions made by using statistical 
methods are called educated guesses. Decisions made without using statistical (or scientific) 
methods are pure guesses and, hence, may prove to be unreliable. For example, opening a large 
store in an area with or without assessing the need for it may affect its success.
 
Like almost all fields of study, statistics has two aspects: theoretical and applied. Theoretical 
or mathematical statistics deals with the development, derivation, and proof of statistical theo-
rems, formulas, rules, and laws. Applied statistics involves the applications of those theorems, 
formulas, rules, and laws to solve real-world problems. This text is concerned with applied sta-
tistics and not with theoretical statistics. By the time you finish studying this book, you will have 
learned how to think statistically and how to make educated guesses.
1.1.2 Types of Statistics
Broadly speaking, applied statistics can be divided into two areas: descriptive statistics and 
inferential statistics.
1“The Numbers Racket: How Polls and Statistics Lie,” U.S. News & World Report, July 11, 1988, pp. 44–47.

Descriptive Statistics
Suppose we have information on the test scores of students enrolled in a statistics class. In statis-
tical terminology, the whole set of numbers that represents the scores of students is called a data 
set, the name of each student is called an element, and the score of each student is called an 
observation. (These terms are defined in more detail in Section 1.2.)
 
Many data sets in their original forms are usually very large, especially those collected by 
federal and state agencies. Consequently, such data sets are not very helpful in drawing conclu-
sions or making decisions. It is easier to draw conclusions from summary tables and diagrams 
than from the original version of a data set. So, we summarize data by constructing tables, draw-
ing graphs, or calculating summary measures such as averages. The portion of statistics that helps 
us do this type of statistical analysis is called descriptive statistics.
2014 LOBBYING 
SPENDING 
BY SELECTED 
COMPANIES
CASE STUDY 1–1
Data source: Fortune Magazine, June 1, 2015
The accompanying chart shows the lobbying spending by five selected companies during 2014. Many com-
panies spend millions of dollars to win favors in Washington. According to Fortune Magazine of June 1, 2015, 
“Comcast has remained one of the biggest corporate lobbyists in the country.” In 2014, Comcast spent 
$17 million, Google spent $16.8 million, AT&T spent $14.2 million, Verizon spent $13.3 million, and Time 
Warner Cable spent $7.8 million on lobbying. These numbers simply describe the total amounts spent by 
these companies on lobbying. We are not drawing any inferences, decisions, or predictions from these data. 
Hence, this data set and its presentation is an example of descriptive statistics.
3
Descriptive Statistics Descriptive statistics consists of methods for organizing, displaying, 
and describing data by using tables, graphs, and summary measures.
 
Chapters 2 and 3 discuss descriptive statistical methods. In Chapter 2, we learn how to con-
struct tables and how to graph data. In Chapter 3, we learn how to calculate numerical summary 
measures, such as averages.
 
Case Study 1–1 presents an example of descriptive statistics.
Inferential Statistics
In statistics, the collection of all elements of interest is called a population. The selection of a 
portion of the elements from this population is called a sample. (Population and sample are 
discussed in more detail in Section 1.5.)
2014 LOBBYING SPENDING BY SELECTED COMPANIES
AT&T Inc.
Time Warner Cable
$14,200,000
$7,800,000
Comcast Corp.
$17,000,000
Verizon
$13,300,000
$16,800,000
Google
www.ebook3000.com

 
A major portion of statistics deals with making decisions, inferences, predictions, and fore-
casts about populations based on results obtained from samples. For example, we may make 
some decisions about the political views of all college and university students based on the polit-
ical views of 1000 students selected from a few colleges and universities. As another example, we 
may want to find the starting salary of a typical college graduate. To do so, we may select 2000 
recent college graduates, find their starting salaries, and make a decision based on this informa-
tion. The area of statistics that deals with such decision-making procedures is referred to as 
inferential statistics. This branch of statistics is also called inductive reasoning or inductive 
statistics.
AMERICANS’ LIFE 
OUTLOOK, 2014
CASE STUDY 1–2
Data source: Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index
A poll of 176,903 American adults, aged 18 and older, was conducted January 2 to December 30, 2014, 
as part of the Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index survey. Gallup and Healthways have been “tracking 
Americans’ life evaluations daily” since 2008. According to this poll, in 2014, Americans’ outlook on life 
was the best in seven years, as 54.1% “rated their lives highly enough to be considered thriving,” 42.1% 
said they were struggling, and 3.8% mentioned that they were suffering. As mentioned in the chart, the 
margin of sampling error was ±1%. In Chapter 8, we will discuss the concept of margin of error, which can 
be combined with these percentages when making inferences. As we notice, the results described in the 
chart are obtained from a poll of 176,903 adults. We will learn in later chapters how to apply these results 
to the entire population of adults. Such decision making about the population based on sample results is 
called inferential statistics.
4
Inferential Statistics Inferential statistics consists of methods that use sample results to help 
make decisions or predictions about a population.
 
Case Study 1–2 presents an example of inferential statistics. It shows the results of a survey 
in which American adults were asked about their opinions about their lives.
 
Chapters 8 through 15 and parts of Chapter 7 deal with inferential statistics.
Probability, which gives a measurement of the likelihood that a certain outcome will occur, 
acts as a link between descriptive and inferential statistics. Probability is used to make statements 
about the occurrence or nonoccurrence of an event under uncertain conditions. Probability and 
probability distributions are discussed in Chapters 4 through 6 and parts of Chapter 7.
AMERICAN’S LIFE OUTLOOK 2014
Margin of sampling error ±1%
INSUFFICIENT
FUNDS
LAYOFF NOTICE
We regret to inform you that your
position has been eliminated.
Marg
our
Struggling
42.1%
Thriving
54.1%
Suffering
3.8%

1.2 Basic Terms
5
EXERCISES
b. The following table gives the earnings of the world’s top seven 
female professional athletes for the year 2014 (ceoworld.biz).
Female Professional Athlete
2014 Earnings 
(millions of dollars)
Maria Sharapova
24.4
Li Na
23.6
Serena Williams
22.0
Kim Yuna
16.3
Danica Patrick
15.0
Victoria Azarenka
11.1
Caroline Wozniacki
10.8
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
1.1 Briefly describe the two meanings of the word statistics.
1.2 Briefly explain the types of statistics.
APPLICATIONS
1.3 Which of the following is an example of descriptive statistics 
and which is an example of inferential statistics? Explain.
a. In a survey by Fortune Magazine and SurveyMonkey, partici-
pants were asked what was the most important factor when 
purchasing groceries (Fortune, June 1, 2015). The following 
table lists the summary of the responses of these participants. 
Assume that the maximum margin of error is ±1.5%.
Factor
Percent of Respondents
Price
42.4
Nutrition
36.0
Absence of additives
16.4
Number of calories
 3.8
Carbon footprint
 1.5
It is very important to understand the meaning of some basic terms that will be used frequently 
in this text. This section explains the meaning of an element (or member), a variable, an observa-
tion, and a data set. An element and a data set were briefly defined in Section 1.1. This section 
defines these terms formally and illustrates them with the help of an example.
 
Table 1.1 gives information, based on Forbes magazine, on the total wealth of the world’s 
eight richest persons as of March 2015. Each person listed in this table is called an element or a 
member of this group. Table 1.1 contains information on eight elements. Note that elements are 
also called observational units.
1.2 Basic Terms
Table 1.1  Total Wealth of the World’s Eight Richest 
Persons
 
Total Wealth 
Name 
(billions of dollars)
Bill Gates 
79.2
Carlos Slim Helu 
77.1
Warren Buffett 
72.7
Amancio Ortega 
64.5
Larry Ellison 
54.3
Charles Koch 
42.9
David Koch 
42.9
Christy Walton 
41.7
Source: Forbes, March 23, 2015.
Variable
An element 
or member
{
An observation or 
measurement
{
Element or Member An element or member of a sample or population is a specific subject or object 
(for example, a person, firm, item, state, or country) about which the information is collected.
www.ebook3000.com

6
Chapter 1 Introduction
The total wealth in our example is called a variable. The total wealth is a characteristic of these 
persons on which information is collected.
Variable A variable is a characteristic under study that assumes different values for different 
elements. In contrast to a variable, the value of a constant is fixed.
 
A few other examples of variables are household incomes, the number of houses built in a 
city per month during the past year, the makes of cars owned by people, the gross profits of com-
panies, and the number of insurance policies sold by a salesperson per day during the past month.
 
In general, a variable assumes different values for different elements, as illustrated by the 
total wealth for the eight persons in Table 1.1. For some elements in a data set, however, the 
values of the variable may be the same. For example, if we collect information on incomes of 
households, these households are expected to have different incomes, although some of them 
may have the same income.
 
A variable is often denoted by x, y, or z. For instance, in Table 1.1, the total wealth for per-
sons may be denoted by any one of these letters. Starting with Section 1.7, we will begin to use 
these letters to denote variables.
 
Each of the values representing the total wealths of the eight persons in Table 1.1 is called an 
observation or measurement.
Observation or Measurement The value of a variable for an element is called an observation 
or measurement.
 
From Table 1.1, the total wealth of Warren Buffett was $72.7 billion. The value $72.7 billion is an 
observation or a measurement. Table 1.1 contains eight observations, one for each of the eight persons.
 
The information given in Table 1.1 on the total wealth of the eight richest persons is called 
the data or a data set.
Data Set A data set is a collection of observations on one or more variables.
 
Other examples of data sets are a list of the prices of 25 recently sold homes, test scores of 
15 students, opinions of 100 voters, and ages of all employees of a company.
EXERCISES
Briefly explain the meaning of a member, a variable, a measurement, 
and a data set with reference to the information in this table.
1.6 The following table lists the number of deaths by cause as 
reported by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on 
February 6, 2015 (Source: www.cdc.gov).
Cause of Death
Number of Deaths
Heart disease
611,105
Cancer
584,881
Accidents
130,557
Stroke
128,978
Alzheimer’s disease
84,767
Diabetes
75,578
Influenza and Pneumonia
56,979
Suicide
41,149
a. What is the variable for this data set?
b. How many observations are in this data set?
c. How many elements does this data set contain?
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
1.4 Explain the meaning of an element, a variable, an observation, 
and a data set.
APPLICATIONS
1.5 The following table lists the number of deaths by cause as 
reported by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on 
February 6, 2015 (Source: www.cdc.gov).
Cause of Death
Number of Deaths
Heart disease
611,105
Cancer
584,881
Accidents
130,557
Stroke
128,978
Alzheimer’s disease
84,767
Diabetes
75,578
Influenza and Pneumonia
56,979
Suicide
41,149

1.3 Types of Variables
7
In Section 1.2, we learned that a variable is a characteristic under investigation that assumes differ-
ent values for different elements. Family income, height of a person, gross sales of a company, price 
of a college textbook, make of the car owned by a family, number of accidents, and status (fresh-
man, sophomore, junior, or senior) of a student enrolled at a university are examples of variables.
 
A variable may be classified as quantitative or qualitative. These two types of variables are 
explained next.
1.3.1 Quantitative Variables
Some variables (such as the price of a home) can be measured numerically, whereas others (such 
as hair color) cannot. The price of a home is an example of a quantitative variable while hair 
color is an example of a qualitative variable.
1.3 Types of Variables
Quantitative Variable A variable that can be measured numerically is called a quantitative 
variable. The data collected on a quantitative variable are called quantitative data.
 
Income, height, gross sales, price of a home, number of cars owned, and number of accidents 
are examples of quantitative variables because each of them can be expressed numerically. For 
instance, the income of a family may be $81,520.75 per year, the gross sales for a company may 
be $567 million for the past year, and so forth. Such quantitative variables may be classified as 
either discrete variables or continuous variables.
Discrete Variables
The values that a certain quantitative variable can assume may be countable or noncountable. For 
example, we can count the number of cars owned by a family, but we cannot count the height of 
a family member, as it is measured on a continuous scale. A variable that assumes countable 
values is called a discrete variable. Note that there are no possible intermediate values between 
consecutive values of a discrete variable.
Discrete Variable A variable whose values are countable is called a discrete variable. In other 
words, a discrete variable can assume only certain values with no intermediate values.
 
For example, the number of cars sold on any given day at a car dealership is a discrete vari-
able because the number of cars sold must be 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . and we can count it. The number of 
cars sold cannot be between 0 and 1, or between 1 and 2. Other examples of discrete variables are 
the number of people visiting a bank on any day, the number of cars in a parking lot, the number 
of cattle owned by a farmer, and the number of students in a class.
Continuous Variables
Some variables assume values that cannot be counted, and they can assume any numerical value 
between two numbers. Such variables are called continuous variables.
Continuous Variable A variable that can assume any numerical value over a certain interval or 
intervals is called a continuous variable.
 
The time taken to complete an examination is an example of a continuous variable because 
it can assume any value, let us say, between 30 and 60 minutes. The time taken may be 42.6 min-
utes, 42.67 minutes, or 42.674 minutes. (Theoretically, we can measure time as precisely as we 
www.ebook3000.com

8
Chapter 1 Introduction
want.) Similarly, the height of a person can be measured to the tenth of an inch or to the hun-
dredth of an inch. Neither time nor height can be counted in a discrete fashion. Other examples 
of continuous variables are the weights of people, the amount of soda in a 12-ounce can (note that 
a can does not contain exactly 12 ounces of soda), and the yield of potatoes (in pounds) per acre. 
Note that any variable that involves money and can assume a large number of values is typically 
treated as a continuous variable.
1.3.2 Qualitative or Categorical Variables
Variables that cannot be measured numerically but can be divided into different categories are 
called qualitative or categorical variables.
Qualitative or Categorical Variable A variable that cannot assume a numerical value but can be 
classified into two or more nonnumeric categories is called a qualitative or categorical variable. 
The data collected on such a variable are called qualitative data.
 
For example, the status of an undergraduate college student is a qualitative variable because 
a student can fall into any one of four categories: freshman, sophomore, junior, or senior. Other 
examples of qualitative variables are the gender of a person, the make of a computer, the opinions 
of people, and the make of a car.
 
Figure 1.1 summarizes the different types of variables.
Figure 1.1 Types of variables.
Variable
Quantitative
Qualitative or categorical
(e.g., make of a
computer, opinions of
people, gender)
Discrete
(e.g., number of
houses, cars,
accidents)
Continuous
(e.g., length,
age, height,
weight, time)
EXERCISES
a. The amount of time a student spent studying for an exam
b. The amount of rain last year in 30 cities
c. The arrival status of an airline flight (early, on time, late, 
canceled) at an airport
d. A person’s blood type
e. The amount of gasoline put into a car at a gas station
1.9 Classify the following quantitative variables as discrete or 
continuous.
a. The amount of time a student spent studying for an exam
b. The amount of rain last year in 30 cities
c. The amount of gasoline put into a car at a gas station
d. The number of customers in the line waiting for service at a 
bank at a given time
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
1.7 Explain the meaning of the following terms.
a. Quantitative variable
b. Qualitative variable
c. Discrete variable
d. Continuous variable
e. Quantitative data
f. Qualitative data
APPLICATIONS
1.8 Indicate which of the following variables are quantitative and 
which are qualitative.

1.4 Cross-Section Versus Time-Series Data
9
a. Which of these variables are qualitative variables?
b. Which of these variables are quantitative variables?
c. Which of the quantitative variables of part b are discrete 
variables?
d. Which of the quantitative variables of part b are continuous 
variables?
1.10 A survey of families living in a certain city was conducted to 
collect information on the following variables: age of the oldest per-
son in the family, number of family members, number of males in the 
family, number of females in the family, whether or not they own a 
house, income of the family, whether or not the family took vacations 
during the past one year, whether or not they are happy with their 
financial situation, and the amount of their monthly mortgage or rent.
Based on the time over which they are collected, data can be classified as either cross-section or 
time-series data.
1.4.1 Cross-Section Data
Cross-section data contain information on different elements of a population or sample for the 
same period of time. The information on incomes of 100 families for 2015 is an example of 
cross-section data. All examples of data already presented in this chapter have been cross-
section data.
1.4 Cross-Section Versus Time-Series Data
Cross-Section Data Data collected on different elements at the same point in time or for the 
same period of time are called cross-section data.
 
Table 1.1, reproduced here as Table 1.2, shows the total wealth of each of the eight richest 
persons in the world. Because this table presents data on the total wealth of eight persons for the 
same period, it is an example of cross-section data.
Table 1.2  Total Wealth of World’s Eight Richest 
Persons
 
Total Wealth 
Name 
(billions of dollars)
Bill Gates 
79.2
Carlos Slim Helu 
77.1
Warren Buffett 
72.7
Amancio Ortega 
64.5
Larry Ellison 
54.3
Charles Koch 
42.9
David Koch 
42.9
Christy Walton 
41.7
Source: Forbes, March 23, 2015.
1.4.2 Time-Series Data
Time-series data contain information on the same element at different points in time. Informa-
tion on U.S. exports for the years 2001 to 2015 is an example of time-series data.
Time-Series Data Data collected on the same element for the same variable at different points 
in time or for different periods of time are called time-series data.
www.ebook3000.com

10
Chapter 1 Introduction
 
The data given in Table 1.3 are an example of time-series data. This table lists the average 
tuition and fee charges in 2014 dollars for in-state students at four-year public institutions in the 
United States for selected years.
Table 1.3  Average Tuition and Fees in 2014 Dollars 
at Four-Year Public Institutions
 
Tuition and Fee 
Years 
(Dollars)
1974–75 
2469
1984–85 
2810
1994–95 
4343
2004–05 
6448
2014–15 
9139
Source: The College Board.
EXERCISES
b. Number of accidents each year in Dallas from 2000 to 2015
c. Number of supermarkets in each of 40 cities as of December 
31, 2015
d. Gross sales of 200 ice cream parlors in July 2015
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
1.11 Explain the difference between cross-section and time-series 
data. Give an example of each of these two types of data.
APPLICATIONS
1.12 Classify the following as cross-section or time-series data.
a. Food bill of a family for each month of 2015
We will encounter the terms population and sample on almost every page of this text. Conse-
quently, understanding the meaning of each of these two terms and the difference between them 
is crucial.
 
Suppose a statistician is interested in knowing the following:
1. 
The percentage of all voters in a city who will vote for a particular candidate in an election
2. 
Last year’s gross sales of all companies in New York City
3. 
The prices of all homes in California
 
In these examples, the statistician is interested in all voters in a city, all companies in New 
York City, and all homes in California. Each of these groups is called the population for the 
respective example. In statistics, a population does not necessarily mean a collection of people. 
It can, in fact, be a collection of people or of any kind of item such as houses, books, television 
sets, or cars. The population of interest is usually called the target population.
1.5 Population Versus Sample
Population or Target Population A population consists of all elements—individuals, items, or 
objects—whose characteristics are being studied. The population that is being studied is also 
called the target population.

1.5 Population Versus Sample
11
 
Most of the time, decisions are made based on portions of populations. For example, the 
election polls conducted in the United States to estimate the percentages of voters who favor 
various candidates in any presidential election are based on only a few hundred or a few thousand 
voters selected from across the country. In this case, the population consists of all registered 
voters in the United States. The sample is made up of a few hundred or few thousand voters who 
are included in an opinion poll. Thus, the collection of a number of elements selected from a 
population is called a sample. Figure 1.2 illustrates the selection of a sample from a population.
Sample A portion of the population selected for study is referred to as a sample.
 
The collection of information from the elements of a sample is called a sample survey. 
When we collect information on all elements of the target population, it is called a census. Often 
the target population is very large. Hence, in practice, a census is rarely taken because it is expen-
sive and time-consuming. In many cases, it is even impossible to identify each element of the 
target population. Usually, to conduct a survey, we select a sample and collect the required infor-
mation from the elements included in that sample. We then make decisions based on this sample 
information. As an example, if we collect information on the 2015 incomes of all families in 
Connecticut, it will be referred to as a census. On the other hand, if we collect information on the 
2015 incomes of 50 families selected from Connecticut, it will be called a sample survey.
Population
Sample
Figure 1.2 Population and sample.
Census and Sample Survey A survey that includes every member of the population is called a 
census. A survey that includes only a portion of the population is called a sample survey.
Representative Sample A sample that represents the characteristics of the population as 
closely as possible is called a representative sample.
 
The purpose of conducting a sample survey is to make decisions about the corresponding 
population. It is important that the results obtained from a sample survey closely match the 
results that we would obtain by conducting a census. Otherwise, any decision based on a sample 
survey will not apply to the corresponding population. As an example, to find the average income 
of families living in New York City by conducting a sample survey, the sample must contain 
families who belong to different income groups in almost the same proportion as they exist in the 
population. Such a sample is called a representative sample. Inferences derived from a repre-
sentative sample will be more reliable.
www.ebook3000.com

12
Chapter 1 Introduction
 
A sample may be selected with or without replacement. In sampling with replacement, each 
time we select an element from the population, we put it back in the population before we select 
the next element. Thus, in sampling with replacement, the population contains the same number 
of items each time a selection is made. As a result, we may select the same item more than once 
in such a sample. Consider a box that contains 25 marbles of different colors. Suppose we draw 
a marble, record its color, and put it back in the box before drawing the next marble. Every time 
we draw a marble from this box, the box contains 25 marbles. This is an example of sampling 
with replacement. The experiment of rolling a die many times is another example of sampling 
with replacement because every roll has the same six possible outcomes.
 
Sampling without replacement occurs when the selected element is not replaced in the 
population. In this case, each time we select an item, the size of the population is reduced by one 
element. Thus, we cannot select the same item more than once in this type of sampling. Most of 
the time, samples taken in statistics are without replacement. Consider an opinion poll based on 
a certain number of voters selected from the population of all eligible voters. In this case, the 
same voter is not selected more than once. Therefore, this is an example of sampling without 
replacement.
1.5.1 Why Sample?
Most of the time surveys are conducted by using samples and not a census of the population. 
Three of the main reasons for conducting a sample survey instead of a census are listed next.
Time
In most cases, the size of the population is quite large. Consequently, conducting a census takes 
a long time, whereas a sample survey can be conducted very quickly. It is time-consuming to 
interview or contact hundreds of thousands or even millions of members of a population. On the 
other hand, a survey of a sample of a few hundred elements may be completed in much less time. 
In fact, because of the amount of time needed to conduct a census, by the time the census is com-
pleted, the results may be obsolete.
Cost
The cost of collecting information from all members of a population may easily fall outside the 
limited budget of most, if not all, surveys. Consequently, to stay within the available resources, 
conducting a sample survey may be the best approach.
Impossibility of Conducting a Census
Sometimes it is impossible to conduct a census. First, it may not be possible to identify and 
access each member of the population. For example, if a researcher wants to conduct a survey 
about homeless people, it is not possible to locate each member of the population and include him 
or her in the survey. Second, sometimes conducting a survey means destroying the items included 
in the survey. For example, to estimate the mean life of lightbulbs would necessitate burning out 
all the bulbs included in the survey. The same is true about finding the average life of batteries. 
In such cases, only a portion of the population can be selected for the survey.
1.5.2 Random and Nonrandom Samples
Depending on how a sample is drawn, it may be a random sample or a nonrandom sample.
Random and Nonrandom Samples A random sample is a sample drawn in such a way that 
each member of the population has some chance of being selected in the sample. In a nonran-
dom sample, some members of the population may not have any chance of being selected in 
the sample.
 
Suppose we have a list of 100 students and we want to select 10 of them. If we write the 
names of all 100 students on pieces of paper, put them in a hat, mix them, and then draw 
10 names, the result will be a random sample of 10 students. However, if we arrange the 

1.5 Population Versus Sample
13
names of these 100 students alphabetically and pick the first 10 names, it will be a nonrandom 
sample because the students who are not among the first 10 have no chance of being selected 
in the sample.
 
A random sample is usually a representative sample. Note that for a random sample, each 
member of the population may or may not have the same chance of being included in the sample.
 
Two types of nonrandom samples are a convenience sample and a judgment sample. In a 
convenience sample, the most accessible members of the population are selected to obtain the 
results quickly. For example, an opinion poll may be conducted in a few hours by collecting 
information from certain shoppers at a single shopping mall. In a judgment sample, the mem-
bers are selected from the population based on the judgment and prior knowledge of an expert. 
Although such a sample may happen to be a representative sample, the chances of it being so are 
small. If the population is large, it is not an easy task to select a representative sample based on 
judgment.
 
The so-called pseudo polls are examples of nonrepresentative samples. For instance, a survey 
conducted by a magazine that includes only its own readers does not usually involve a repre-
sentative sample. Similarly, a poll conducted by a television station giving two separate telephone 
numbers for yes and no votes is not based on a representative sample. In these two examples, 
respondents will be only those people who read that magazine or watch that television station, 
who do not mind paying the postage or telephone charges, or who feel compelled to respond.
 
Another kind of sample is the quota sample. To select such a sample, we divide the target 
population into different subpopulations based on certain characteristics. Then we select a sub-
sample from each subpopulation in such a way that each subpopulation is represented in the 
sample in exactly the same proportion as in the target population. As an example of a quota sample, 
suppose we want to select a sample of 1000 persons from a city whose population has 48% men 
and 52% women. To select a quota sample, we choose 480 men from the male population and 
520 women from the female population. The sample selected in this way will contain exactly 
48% men and 52% women. Another way to select a quota sample is to select from the population 
one person at a time until we have exactly 480 men and 520 women.
 
Until the 1948 presidential election in the United States, quota sampling was the most com-
monly used sampling procedure to conduct opinion polls. The voters included in the samples 
were selected in such a way that they represented the population proportions of voters based on 
age, sex, education, income, race, and so on. However, this procedure was abandoned after the 
1948 presidential election, in which the underdog, Harry Truman, defeated Thomas E. Dewey, 
who was heavily favored based on the opinion polls. First, the quota samples failed to be repre-
sentative because the interviewers were allowed to fill their quotas by choosing voters based on 
their own judgments. This caused the selection of more upper-income and highly educated people, 
who happened to be Republicans. Thus, the quota samples were unrepresentative of the popula-
tion because Republicans were overrepresented in these samples. Second, the results of the 
opinion polls based on quota sampling happened to be false because a large number of factors 
differentiate voters, but the pollsters considered only a few of those factors. A quota sample based 
on a few factors will skew the results. A random sample (one that is not based on quotas) has a 
much better chance of being representative of the population of all voters than a quota sample 
based on a few factors.
1.5.3 Sampling and Nonsampling Errors
The results obtained from a sample survey may contain two types of errors: sampling and non-
sampling errors. The sampling error is also called the chance error, and nonsampling errors are 
also called the systematic errors.
Sampling or Chance Error
Usually, all samples selected from the same population will give different results because they 
contain different elements of the population. Moreover, the results obtained from any one sample 
will not be exactly the same as the ones obtained from a census. The difference between a sample 
result and the result we would have obtained by conducting a census is called the sampling 
error, assuming that the sample is random and no nonsampling error has been made.
www.ebook3000.com

14
Chapter 1 Introduction
 
The sampling error occurs because of chance, and it cannot be avoided. A sampling error can 
occur only in a sample survey. It does not occur in a census. Sampling error is discussed in detail 
in Chapter 7, and an example of it is given there.
Nonsampling Errors or Biases
Nonsampling errors or biases can occur both in a sample survey and in a census. Such errors 
occur because of human mistakes and not chance. Nonsampling errors are also called systematic 
errors or biases.
Sampling Error The sampling error is the difference between the result obtained from a 
sample survey and the result that would have been obtained if the whole population had been 
included in the survey.
Nonsampling Errors or Biases The errors that occur in the collection, recording, and tabulation 
of data are called nonsampling errors or biases.
 
Nonsampling errors can be minimized if questions are prepared carefully and data are han-
dled cautiously. Many types of systematic errors or biases can occur in a survey, including selec-
tion error, nonresponse error, response error, and voluntary response error. Figure 1.3 shows the 
types of errors.
(i) Selection Error or Bias
When we need to select a sample, we use a list of elements from which we draw a sample, and 
this list usually does not include many members of the target population. Most of the time it is 
not feasible to include every member of the target population in this list. This list of members of 
the population that is used to select a sample is called the sampling frame. For example, if we 
use a telephone directory to select a sample, the list of names that appears in this directory makes 
the sampling frame. In this case we will miss the people who are not listed in the telephone direc-
tory. The people we miss, for example, will be poor people (including homeless people) who do 
not have telephones and people who do not want to be listed in the directory. Thus, the sampling 
frame that is used to select a sample may not be representative of the population. This may cause 
the sample results to be different from the population results. The error that occurs because the 
sampling frame is not representative of the population is called the selection error or bias.
Figure 1.3 Types of errors.
Selection 
error 
or bias
Response 
error
or bias
Voluntary 
response error
or bias
Nonresponse 
error 
or bias
Sampling or
chance error
Nonsampling or systematic 
errors or biases
Types of errors

1.5 Population Versus Sample
15
 
If a sample is nonrandom (and, hence, nonrepresentative), the sample results may be quite 
different from the census results.
(ii) Nonresponse Error or Bias
Even if our sampling frame and, consequently, the sample are representative of the population, 
nonresponse error may occur because many of the people included in the sample may not 
respond to the survey.
Selection Error or Bias The list of members of the target population that is used to select a 
sample is called the sampling frame. The error that occurs because the sampling frame is not 
representative of the population is called the selection error or bias.
Nonresponse Error or Bias The error that occurs because many of the people included in the 
sample do not respond to a survey is called the nonresponse error or bias.
 
This type of error occurs especially when a survey is conducted by mail. A lot of people do 
not return the questionnaires. It has been observed that families with low and high incomes do not 
respond to surveys by mail. Consequently, such surveys overrepresent middle-income families. 
This kind of error occurs in other types of surveys, too. For instance, in a face-to-face survey 
where the interviewer interviews people in their homes, many people may not be home when the 
interviewer visits their homes. The people who are home at the time the interviewer visits and the 
ones who are not home at that time may differ in many respects, causing a bias in the survey 
results. This kind of error may also occur in a telephone survey. Many people may not be home 
when the interviewer calls. This may distort the results. To avoid the nonresponse error, every 
effort should be made to contact all people included in the sample.
(iii) Response Error or Bias
The response error or bias occurs when the answer given by a person included in the survey is 
not correct. This may happen for many reasons. One reason is that the respondent may not have 
understood the question. Thus, the wording of the question may have caused the respondent to 
answer incorrectly. It has been observed that when the same question is worded differently, many 
people do not respond the same way. Usually such an error on the part of respondents is not 
intentional.
Response Error or Bias The response error or bias occurs when people included in the survey 
do not provide correct answers.
 
Sometimes the respondents do not want to give correct information when answering a ques-
tion. For example, many respondents will not disclose their true incomes on questionnaires or in 
interviews. When information on income is provided, it is almost always biased in the upward 
direction.
 
Sometimes the race of the interviewer may affect the answers of respondents. This is espe-
cially true if the questions asked are about race relations. The answers given by respondents may 
differ depending on the race of the interviewer.
(iv) Voluntary Response Error or Bias
Another source of systematic error is a survey based on a voluntary response sample.
Voluntary Response Error or Bias Voluntary response error or bias occurs when a survey is 
not conducted on a randomly selected sample but on a questionnaire published in a magazine or 
newspaper and people are invited to respond to that questionnaire.
www.ebook3000.com

16
Chapter 1 Introduction
 
The polls conducted based on samples of readers of magazines and newspapers suffer from 
voluntary response error or bias. Usually only those readers who have very strong opinions 
about the issues involved respond to such surveys. Surveys in which the respondents are required 
to call some telephone numbers also suffer from this type of error. Here, to participate, many 
times a respondent has to pay for the call, and many people do not want to bear this cost. Conse-
quently, the sample is usually neither random nor representative of the target population because 
participation is voluntary.
1.5.4 Random Sampling Techniques
There are many ways to select a random sample. Four of these techniques are discussed next.
Simple Random Sampling
From a given population, we can select a large number of samples of the same size. If each of 
these samples has the same probability of being selected, then it is called simple random 
sampling.
Simple Random Sampling In this sampling technique, each sample of the same size has the 
same probability of being selected. Such a sample is called a simple random sample.
 
One way to select a simple random sample is by a lottery or drawing. For example, if we 
need to select 5 students from a class of 50, we write each of the 50 names on a separate piece of 
paper. Then, we place all 50 names in a hat and mix them thoroughly. Next, we draw 1 name 
randomly from the hat. We repeat this experiment four more times. The 5 drawn names make up 
a simple random sample.
 
The second procedure to select a simple random sample is to use a table of random numbers, 
which has become an outdated procedure. In this age of technology, it is much easier to use a 
statistical package, such as Minitab, to select a simple random sample.
Systematic Random Sampling
The simple random sampling procedure becomes very tedious if the size of the population is 
large. For example, if we need to select 150 households from a list of 45,000, it is very time-
consuming either to write the 45,000 names on pieces of paper and then select 150 households or 
to use a table of random numbers. In such cases, it is more convenient to use systematic random 
sampling.
 
The procedure to select a systematic random sample is as follows. In the example just men-
tioned, we would arrange all 45,000 households alphabetically (or based on some other charac-
teristic). Since the sample size should equal 150, the ratio of population to sample size is 
45,000/150 = 300. Using this ratio, we randomly select one household from the first 300 house-
holds in the arranged list using either method. Suppose by using either of the methods, we select 
the 210th household. We then select the 210th household from every 300 households in the list. 
In other words, our sample includes the households with numbers 210, 510, 810, 1110, 1410, 
1710, and so on.
Systematic Random Sample In systematic random sampling, we first randomly select one 
member from the first k units of the list of elements arranged based on a given characteristic 
where k is the number obtained by dividing the population size by the intended sample size. Then 
every kth member, starting with the first selected member, is included in the sample.
Stratified Random Sampling
Suppose we need to select a sample from the population of a city, and we want households with 
different income levels to be proportionately represented in the sample. In this case, instead of 
selecting a simple random sample or a systematic random sample, we may prefer to apply a dif-
ferent technique. First, we divide the whole population into different groups based on income 

1.5 Population Versus Sample
17
levels. For example, we may form three groups of low-, medium-, and high-income households. 
We will now have three subpopulations, which are usually called strata. We then select one 
sample from each subpopulation or stratum. The collection of all three samples selected from 
the three strata gives the required sample, called the stratified random sample. Usually, the 
sizes of the samples selected from different strata are proportionate to the sizes of the subpopu-
lations in these strata. Note that the elements of each stratum are identical with regard to the 
possession of a characteristic.
Stratified Random Sample In a stratified random sample, we first divide the population into 
subpopulations, which are called strata. Then, one sample is selected from each of these strata. 
The collection of all samples from all strata gives the stratified random sample.
 
Thus, whenever we observe that a population differs widely in the possession of a character-
istic, we may prefer to divide it into different strata and then select one sample from each stratum. 
We can divide the population on the basis of any characteristic, such as income, expenditure, 
gender, education, race, employment, or family size.
Cluster Sampling
Sometimes the target population is scattered over a wide geographical area. Consequently, if a 
simple random sample is selected, it may be costly to contact each member of the sample. In such 
a case, we divide the population into different geographical groups or clusters and, as a first step, 
select a random sample of certain clusters from all clusters. We then take a random sample of 
certain elements from each selected cluster. For example, suppose we are to conduct a survey of 
households in the state of New York. First, we divide the whole state of New York into, say, 40 
regions, which are called clusters or primary units. We make sure that all clusters are similar 
and, hence, representative of the population. We then select at random, say, 5 clusters from 40. 
Next, we randomly select certain households from each of these 5 clusters and conduct a survey 
of these selected households. This is called cluster sampling. Note that all clusters must be 
representative of the population.
Cluster Sampling In cluster sampling, the whole population is first divided into (geographi-
cal) groups called clusters. Each cluster is representative of the population. Then a random 
sample of clusters is selected. Finally, a random sample of elements from each of the selected 
clusters is selected.
EXERCISES
1.17 Explain the following four sampling techniques.
a.  Simple random sampling
b. Systematic random sampling
c. Stratified random sampling
d. Cluster sampling
1.18 In which sampling technique do all samples of the same size 
selected from a population have the same chance of being selected?
APPLICATIONS
1.19 Explain whether each of the following constitutes data col-
lected from a population or a sample.
a. The number of pizzas ordered on Fridays during 2015 at all of 
the pizza parlors in your town.
b. The dollar values of auto insurance claims filed in 2015 for 
200 randomly selected policies.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
1.13 Briefly explain the terms population, sample, representative 
sample, sampling with replacement, and sampling without replacement.
1.14 Give one example each of sampling with and sampling without 
replacement.
1.15 Briefly explain the difference between a census and a sample 
survey. Why is conducting a sample survey preferable to conducting a 
census?
1.16 Explain the following.
a. Random sample
b. Nonrandom sample
c. Convenience sample
d. Judgment sample
e. Quota sample
www.ebook3000.com

18
Chapter 1 Introduction
c. The opening price of each of the 500 stocks in the S&P 500 
stock index on January 4, 2016.
d. The total home attendance for each of the 18 teams in Major 
League Soccer during the 2015 season.
e. The living areas of 35 houses listed for sale on March 7, 2015 
in Chicago, Illinois.
1.20 A statistics professor wanted to find out the average GPA 
(grade point average) for all students at her university. She used all 
students enrolled in her statistics class as a sample and collected infor-
mation on their GPAs to find the average GPA.
a. Is this sample a random or a nonrandom sample? Explain.
b. What kind of sample is it? In other words, is it a simple random 
sample, a systematic sample, a stratified sample, a cluster 
sample, a convenience sample, a judgment sample, or a quota 
sample? Explain.
c. What kind of systematic error, if any, will be made with this 
kind of sample? Explain.
1.21 A statistics professor wanted to find the average GPA (grade 
point average) of all students at her university. The professor obtains 
a list of all students enrolled at the university from the registrar’s 
office and then selects 150 students at random from this list using a 
statistical software package such as Minitab.
a. Is this sample a random or a nonrandom sample? Explain.
b. What kind of sample is it? In other words, is it a simple ran-
dom sample, a systematic sample, a stratified sample, a clus-
ter sample, a convenience sample, a judgment sample, or a 
quota sample? Explain.
c. Do you think any systematic error will be made in this case? 
Explain.
1.22 A statistics professor wanted to select 20 students from his 
class of 300 students to collect detailed information on the profiles of 
his students. The professor enters the names of all students enrolled in 
his class on a computer. He then selects a sample of 20 students at 
random using a statistical software package such as Minitab.
a. Is this sample a random or a nonrandom sample? Explain.
b. What kind of sample is it? In other words, is it a simple random 
sample, a systematic sample, a stratified sample, a cluster 
sample, a convenience sample, a judgment sample, or a quota 
sample? Explain.
c. Do you think any systematic error will be made in this case? 
Explain.
1.23 A company has 1000 employees, of whom 58% are men and 
42% are women. The research department at the company wanted to 
conduct a quick survey by selecting a sample of 50 employees and 
asking them about their opinions on an issue. They divided the popu-
lation of employees into two groups, men and women, and then 
selected 29 men and 21 women from these respective groups. The 
interviewers were free to choose any 29 men and 21 women they 
wanted. What kind of sample is it? Explain.
1.24 A magazine published a questionnaire for its readers to fill out 
and mail to the magazine’s office. In the questionnaire, cell phone 
owners were asked how much they would have to be paid to do with-
out their cell phones for one month. The magazine received responses 
from 5439 cell phone owners.
a. What type of sample is this? Explain.
b. To what kind(s) of systematic error, if any, would this survey 
be subject?
1.25 A researcher wanted to conduct a survey of major companies to 
find out what benefits are offered to their employees. She mailed 
questionnaires to 2500 companies and received questionnaires back 
from 493 companies. What kind of systematic error does this survey 
suffer from? Explain.
1.26 An opinion poll agency conducted a survey based on a random 
sample in which the interviewers called the parents included in the 
sample and asked them the following questions:
  i. Do you believe in spanking children?
 ii. Have you ever spanked your children?
iii. If the answer to the second question is yes, how often?
What kind of systematic error, if any, does this survey suffer from? 
Explain.
1.27 A survey based on a random sample taken from one borough of 
New York City showed that 65% of the people living there would 
prefer to live somewhere other than New York City if they had the 
opportunity to do so. Based on this result, can the researcher say that 
65% of people living in New York City would prefer to live some-
where else if they had the opportunity to do so? Explain.
To use statistical methods to make decisions, we need access to data. Consider the following 
examples about decision making:
1. 
A government agency wants to find the average income of households in the United States.
2. 
A company wants to find the percentage of defective items produced by a machine.
3. 
A researcher wants to know if there is an association between eating unhealthy food and 
cholesterol level.
4. 
A pharmaceutical company has developed a new medicine for a disease and it wants to check 
if this medicine cures the disease.
 
All of these cases relate to decision making. We cannot reach a conclusion in these examples 
unless we have access to data. Data can be obtained from observational studies, experiments, or 
surveys. This section is devoted mainly to controlled experiments. However, it also explains 
observational studies and how they differ from surveys.
1.6 Design of Experiments

1.6 Design of Experiments
19
 
Suppose two diets, Diet 1 and Diet 2, are being promoted by two different companies, and 
each of these companies claims that its diet is successful in reducing weight. A research nutrition-
ist wants to compare these diets with regard to their effectiveness for losing weight. Following 
are the two alternatives for the researcher to conduct this research.
1. 
The researcher contacts the persons who are using these diets and collects information on 
their weight loss. The researcher may contact as many persons as she has the time and finan-
cial resources for. Based on this information, the researcher makes a decision about the 
comparative effectiveness of these diets.
2. 
The researcher selects a sample of persons who want to lose weight, divides them randomly 
into two groups, and assigns each group to one of the two diets. Then she compares these two 
groups with regard to the effectiveness of these diets.
 
The first alternative is an example of an observational study, and the second is an example 
of a controlled experiment. In an experiment, we exercise control over some factors when we 
design the study, but in an observational study we do not impose any kind of control.
Treatment A condition (or a set of conditions) that is imposed on a group of elements by the 
experimenter is called a treatment.
 
In an observational study the investigator does not impose a treatment on subjects or ele-
ments included in the study. For instance, in the first alternative mentioned above, the researcher 
simply collects information from the persons who are currently using these diets. In this case, the 
persons were not assigned to the two diets at random; instead, they chose the diets voluntarily. In 
this situation the researcher’s conclusion about the comparative effectiveness of the two diets 
may not be valid because the effects of the diets will be confounded with many other factors 
or variables. When the effects of one factor cannot be separated from the effects of some other 
factors, the effects are said to be confounded. The persons who chose Diet 1 may be completely 
different with regard to age, gender, and eating and exercise habits from the persons who chose 
Diet 2. Thus, the weight loss may not be due entirely to the diet but to other factors or variables 
as well. Persons in one group may aggressively manage both diet and exercise, for example, 
whereas persons in the second group may depend entirely on diet. Thus, the effects of these other 
variables will get mixed up (confounded) with the effect of the diets.
 
Under the second alternative, the researcher selects a group of people, say 100, and ran-
domly assigns them to two diets. One way to make random assignments is to write the name of 
each of these persons on a piece of paper, put them in a hat, mix them, and then randomly draw 
50 names from this hat. These 50 persons will be assigned to one of the two diets, say Diet 1. The 
remaining 50 persons will be assigned to the second diet, Diet 2. This procedure is called rand-
omization. Note that random assignments can also be made by using other methods such as a 
table of random numbers or technology.
Randomization The procedure in which elements are assigned to different groups at random is 
called randomization.
 
When people are assigned to one or the other of two diets at random, the other differences 
among people in the two groups almost disappear. In this case these groups will not differ very 
much with regard to such factors as age, gender, and eating and exercise habits. The two groups 
will be very similar to each other. By using the random process to assign people to one or the 
other of two diets, we have controlled the other factors that can affect the weights of people. 
Consequently, this is an example of a designed experiment.
 
As mentioned earlier, a condition (or a set of conditions) that is imposed on a group of ele-
ments by the experimenter is called a treatment. In the example on diets, each of the two diet 
types is called a treatment. The experimenter randomly assigns the elements to these two treat-
ments. Again, in such cases the study is called a designed experiment.
www.ebook3000.com

20
Chapter 1 Introduction
 
The group of people who receive a treatment is called the treatment group, and the group 
of people who do not receive a treatment is called the control group. In our example on diets, 
both groups are treatment groups because each group is assigned to one of the two types of diet. 
That example does not contain a control group.
Designed Experiment and Observational Study When the experimenter controls the (random) 
assignment of elements to different treatment groups, the study is said to be a designed experi-
ment. In contrast, in an observational study the assignment of elements to different treatments 
is voluntary, and the experimenter simply observes the results of the study.
Treatment and Control Groups The group of elements that receives a treatment is called the 
treatment group, and the group of elements that does not receive a treatment is called the 
control group.
EXAMPLE 1–1 
Testing a Medicine
Suppose a pharmaceutical company has developed a new medicine to cure a disease. To see 
whether or not this medicine is effective in curing this disease, it will have to be tested on a group 
of humans. Suppose there are 100 persons who have this disease; 50 of them voluntarily decide 
to take this medicine, and the remaining 50 decide not to take it. The researcher then compares 
the cure rates for the two groups of patients. Is this an example of a designed experiment or an 
observational study?
Solution This is an example of an observational study because 50 patients voluntarily joined 
the treatment group; they were not randomly selected. In this case, the results of the study may 
not be valid because the effects of the medicine will be confounded with other variables. All of 
the patients who decided to take the medicine may not be similar to the ones who decided not to 
take it. It is possible that the persons who decided to take the medicine are in the advanced stages 
of the disease. Consequently, they do not have much to lose by being in the treatment group. The 
patients in the two groups may also differ with regard to other factors such as age, gender, and so on.
An example of an 
observational study.
EXAMPLE 1–2 
Testing a Medicine
Reconsider Example 1–1. Now, suppose that out of the 100 people who have this disease, 50 are 
selected at random. These 50 people make up one group, and the remaining 50 belong to the 
second group. One of these groups is the treatment group, and the second is the control group. 
The researcher then compares the cure rates for the two groups of patients. Is this an example of 
a designed experiment or an observational study?
Solution In this case, the two groups are expected to be very similar to each other. Note that 
we do not expect the two groups to be exactly identical. However, when randomization is used, 
the two groups are expected to be very similar. After these two groups have been formed, one 
group will be given the actual medicine. This group is called the treatment group. The other group 
will be administered a placebo (a dummy medicine that looks exactly like the actual medicine). 
This group is called the control group. This is an example of a designed experiment because the 
patients are assigned to one of two groups—the treatment or the control group—randomly. 
◼
 
Usually in an experiment like the one in Example 1–2, patients do not know which group 
they belong to. Most of the time the experimenters do not know which group a patient belongs to. 
This is done to avoid any bias or distortion in the results of the experiment. When neither patients 
nor experimenters know who is taking the real medicine and who is taking the placebo, it is called 
a double-blind experiment. For the results of the study to be unbiased and valid, an experiment 
must be a double-blind designed experiment. Note that if either experimenters or patients or both 
An example of a 
designed experiment.
◼

1.6 Design of Experiments
21
have access to information regarding which patients belong to treatment or control groups, it will 
no longer be a double-blind experiment.
 
The use of a placebo in medical experiments is very important. A placebo is just a dummy 
pill that looks exactly like the real medicine. Often, patients respond to any kind of medicine. 
Many studies have shown that even when the patients were given sugar pills (and did not know 
it), many of them indicated a decrease in pain. Patients respond to a placebo because they have 
confidence in their physicians and medicines. This is called the placebo effect.
 
Note that there can be more than two groups of elements in an experiment. For example, an 
investigator may need to compare three diets for people with regard to weight loss. Here, in a 
designed experiment, the people will be randomly assigned to one of the three diets, which are 
the three treatments.
 
In some instances we have to base our research on observational studies because it is not 
feasible to conduct a designed experiment. For example, suppose a researcher wants to compare 
the starting salaries of business and psychology majors. The researcher will have to depend on an 
observational study. She will select two samples, one of recent business majors and another of 
recent psychology majors. Based on the starting salaries of these two groups, the researcher will 
make a decision. Note that, here, the effects of the majors on the starting salaries of the two 
groups of graduates will be confounded with other variables. One of these other factors is that the 
business and psychology majors may be different in regard to intelligence level, which may affect 
their salaries. However, the researcher cannot conduct a designed experiment in this case. She 
cannot select a group of persons randomly and ask them to major in business and select another 
group and ask them to major in psychology. Instead, persons voluntarily choose their majors.
 
In a survey we do not exercise any control over the factors when we collect information. This 
characteristic of a survey makes it very close to an observational study. However, a survey may 
be based on a probability sample, which differentiates it from an observational study.
 
If an observational study or a survey indicates that two variables are related, it does not mean 
that there is a cause-and-effect relationship between them. For example, if an economist takes a 
sample of families, collects data on the incomes and rents paid by these families, and establishes 
an association between these two variables, it does not necessarily mean that families with higher 
incomes pay higher rents. Here the effects of many variables on rents are confounded. A family 
may pay a higher rent not because of higher income but because of various other factors, such as 
family size, preferences, or place of residence. We cannot make a statement about the cause-and-
effect relationship between incomes and rents paid by families unless we control for these other 
variables. The association between incomes and rents paid by families may fit any of the follow-
ing scenarios.
1. 
These two variables have a cause-and-effect relationship. Families that have higher incomes 
do pay higher rents. A change in incomes of families causes a change in rents paid.
2. 
The incomes and rents paid by families do not have a cause-and-effect relationship. Both of 
these variables have a cause-and-effect relationship with a third variable. Whenever that 
third variable changes, these two variables change.
3. 
The effect of income on rent is confounded with other variables, and this indicates that 
income affects rent paid by families.
 
If our purpose in a study is to establish a cause-and-effect relationship between two varia-
bles, we must control for the effects of other variables. In other words, we must conduct a 
designed study.
EXERCISES
1.30 In March 2005, the New England Journal of Medicine pub-
lished the results of a 10-year clinical trial of low-dose aspirin therapy 
for the cardiovascular health of women (Time, March 21, 2005). The 
study was based on 40,000 healthy women, most of whom were in 
their 40s and 50s when the trial began. Half of these women were 
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
1.28 Explain the difference between a survey and an experiment.
1.29 Explain the difference between an observational study and an 
experiment.
www.ebook3000.com

22
Chapter 1 Introduction
administered 100 mg of aspirin every other day, and the others were 
given a placebo. Assume that the women were assigned randomly to 
these two groups.
a. Is this an observational study or a designed experiment? 
Explain.
b. From the information given above, can you determine whether 
or not this is a double-blind study? Explain. If not, what addi-
tional information would you need?
1.31 In March 2005, The New England Journal of Medicine pub-
lished the results of a 10-year clinical trial of low-dose aspirin therapy 
for the cardiovascular health of women (Time, March 21, 2005). The 
study was based on 40,000 healthy women, most of whom were in 
their 40s and 50s when the trial began. Half of these women were 
administered 100 mg of aspirin every other day, and the others were 
given a placebo. The study looked at the incidences of heart attacks in 
the two groups of women. Overall the study did not find a statistically 
significant difference in heart attacks between the two groups of 
women. However, the study noted that among women who were at 
least 65 years old when the study began, there was a lower incidence 
of heart attack for those who took aspirin than for those who took a 
placebo. Suppose that some medical researchers want to study this 
phenomenon more closely. They recruit 2000 healthy women aged 
65 years and older, and randomly divide them into two groups. One 
group takes 100 mg of aspirin every other day, and the other group 
takes a placebo. The women do not know to which group they belong, 
but the doctors who are conducting the study have access to this 
information.
a. Is this an observational study or a designed experiment? 
Explain.
b. Is this a double-blind study? Explain.
1.32 In March 2005, The New England Journal of Medicine pub-
lished the results of a 10-year clinical trial of low-dose aspirin therapy 
for the cardiovascular health of women (Time, March 21, 2005). The 
study was based on 40,000 healthy women, most of whom were in 
their 40s and 50s when the trial began. Half of these women were 
administered 100 mg of aspirin every other day, and the others were 
given a placebo. The study noted that among women who were at least 
65 years old when the study began, there was a lower incidence of 
heart attack for those who took aspirin than for those who took pla-
cebo. Some medical researchers want to study this phenomenon more 
closely. They recruit 2000 healthy women aged 65 years and older, and 
randomly divide them into two groups. One group takes 100 mg of 
aspirin every other day, and the other group takes a placebo. Neither 
patients nor doctors know which group patients belong to.
a. Is this an observational study or a designed experiment? 
Explain.
b. Is this study a double-blind study? Explain.
1.33 A federal government think tank wanted to investigate whether 
a job training program helps the families who are on welfare to get off 
the welfare program. The researchers at this agency selected 5000 
volunteer families who were on welfare and offered the adults in those 
families free job training. The researchers selected another group of 
5000 volunteer families who were on welfare and did not offer them 
such job training. After 3 years the two groups were compared in 
regard to the percentage of families who got off welfare. Is this an 
observational study or a designed experiment? Explain.
1.34 A federal government think tank wanted to investigate whether 
a job training program helps the families who are on welfare to get off 
the welfare program. The researchers at this agency selected 10,000 
families at random from the list of all families that were on welfare. 
Of these 10,000 families, the agency randomly selected 5000 families 
and offered them free job training. The remaining 5000 families were 
not offered such job training. After 3 years the two groups were com-
pared in regard to the percentage of families who got off welfare. Is 
this an observational study or a designed experiment? Explain.
1.35 A federal government think tank wanted to investigate whether 
a job training program helps the families who are on welfare to get off 
the welfare program. The researchers at this agency selected 5000 
volunteer families who were on welfare and offered the adults in those 
families free job training. The researchers selected another group of 
5000 volunteer families who were on welfare and did not offer them 
such job training. After three years the two groups were compared in 
regard to the percentage of families who got off welfare. Based on that 
study, the researchers concluded that the job training program causes 
(helps) families who are on welfare to get off the welfare program. Do 
you agree with this conclusion? Explain.
1.36 A federal government think tank wanted to investigate whether 
a job training program helps the families who are on welfare to get off 
the welfare program. The researchers at this agency selected 10,000 
families at random from the list of all families that were on welfare. 
Of these 10,000 families, the researchers randomly selected 5000 
families and offered the adults in those families free job training. The 
remaining 5000 families were not offered such job training. After 
three years the two groups were compared in regard to the percentage 
of families who got off welfare. Based on that study, the researchers 
concluded that the job training program causes (helps) families who 
are on welfare to get off the welfare program. Do you agree with this 
conclusion? Explain.
Sometimes mathematical notation helps express a mathematical relationship concisely. This 
section describes the summation notation that is used to denote the sum of values.
 
Suppose a sample consists of five books, and the prices of these five books are $175, $80, 
$165, $97, and $88, respectively. The variable, price of a book, can be denoted by x. The prices 
of the five books can be written as follows:
Price of the first book = x1 = $175
1.7 Summation Notation
Subscript of x denotes the 
number of the book

1.7 Summation Notation
23
Similarly,
 Price of the second book = x2 = $80
 Price of the third book = x3 = $165
 Price of the  fourth book = x4 = $97
 Price of the fifth book = x5 = $88
In this notation, x represents the price, and the subscript denotes a particular book.
 
Now, suppose we want to add the prices of all five books. We obtain
x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 + x5 = 175 + 80 + 165 + 97 + 88 = $605
 
The uppercase Greek letter ∑ (pronounced sigma) is used to denote the sum of all values. 
Using ∑ notation, we can write the foregoing sum as follows:
∑x = x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 + x5 = $605
The notation ∑x in this expression represents the sum of all values of x and is read as “sigma x” 
or “sum of all values of x.”
Using summation notation: 
one variable.
© Troels Graugaard/iStockphoto
EXAMPLE 1–4
The following table lists four pairs of m and f values:
m
12
15
20
30
f
 5
 9
10
16
Compute the following:
(a) ∑m   (b) ∑f 2    (c) ∑mf     (d) ∑m2f
Solution We can write
 m1 = 12   m2 = 15   m3 = 20   m4 = 30
 f1 = 5  
 f2 = 9  
 f3 = 10    f4 = 16
(a) ∑m = 12 + 15 + 20 + 30 = 77
(b) ∑f 2 = (5)2 + (9)2 + (10)2 + (16)2 = 25 + 81 + 100 + 256 = 462
Using summation notation: 
two variables.
EXAMPLE 1–3 
Annual Salaries of Workers
Annual salaries (in thousands of dollars) of four workers are 75, 90, 125, and 61, respectively. 
Find
(a) ∑x    (b) (∑x)2    (c) ∑x2
Solution Let x1, x2, x3, and x4 be the annual salaries (in thousands of dollars) of the first, second, 
third, and fourth worker, respectively. Then,
x1 = 75, x2 = 90, x3 = 125, and x4 = 61
(a) ∑x = x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 = 75 + 90 + 125 + 61 = 351 = $351,000
(b) Note that (∑x)2 is the square of the sum of all x values. Thus,
(∑x)2 = (351)2 = 123,201
(c) The expression ∑x2 is the sum of the squares of x values. To calculate ∑x2, we first 
square each of the x values and then sum these squared values. Thus,
 ∑x2 = (75)2 + (90)2 + (125)2 + (61)2
 = 5625 + 8100 + 15,625 + 3721 = 33,071
◼
www.ebook3000.com

24
Chapter 1 Introduction
(c) To compute ∑mf, we multiply the corresponding values of m and f and then add the 
products as follows:
 ∑mf = m1 f1 + m2  f2 + m3  f3 + m4 f4
 = 12(5) + 15(9) + 20(10) + 30(16) = 875
(d) To calculate ∑m2f, we square each m value, then multiply the corresponding m2 and 
f values, and add the products. Thus,
 ∑m2f = (m1)2f1 + (m2)2f2 + (m3)2f3 + (m4)2f4
 = (12)2(5) + (15)2(9) + (20)2(10) + (30)2(16) = 21,145
 
The calculations done in parts (a) through (d) to find the values of ∑m, ∑f 2, ∑mf, and ∑m2f  
can be performed in tabular form, as shown in Table 1.4.
Table 1.4
 
m 
f 
f 2 
mf 
m2f
 
12 
 5 
  5 × 5 = 25 
 12 × 5 = 60 
 12 × 12 × 5 =
720
 
15 
 9 
  9 × 9 = 81 
 15 × 9 = 135 
 15 × 15 × 9 =
2025
 
20 
10 
10 × 10 = 100 
20 × 10 = 200 
20 × 20 × 10 =
4000
 
30 
16 
16 × 16 = 256 
30 × 16 = 480 
30 × 30 × 16 = 14,400
 ∑m = 77 
∑f = 40 
∑f 2 = 462 
∑mf = 875 
∑m2f = 21,145
The columns of Table 1.4 can be explained as follows.
1. 
The first column lists the values of m. The sum of these values gives ∑m = 77.
2. 
The second column lists the values of f. The sum of this column gives ∑f = 40.
3. 
The third column lists the squares of the f values. For example, the first value, 25, is the 
square of 5. The sum of the values in this column gives ∑f 2 = 462.
4. 
The fourth column records products of the corresponding m and f values. For example, the 
first value, 60, in this column is obtained by multiplying 12 by 5. The sum of the values in 
this column gives ∑mf = 875.
5. 
Next, the m values are squared and multiplied by the corresponding f values. The resulting 
products, denoted by m2f, are recorded in the fifth column. For example, the first value, 720, 
is obtained by squaring 12 and multiplying this result by 5. The sum of the values in this 
column gives ∑m2f = 21,145. 
◼
EXERCISES
$35, $92, $144, $175, $11, and $57, respectively. Let y denote the 
amount spent by a customer on groceries in a single visit. Find:
a. ∑y  b. (∑y)2  c. ∑y2
1.39 A car was filled with 16 gallons of gas on seven occasions. The 
number of miles that the car was able to travel on each tankful was 
387, 414, 404, 396, 410, 422, and 414. Let x denote the distance 
traveled on 16 gallons of gas. Find:
a. ∑x  b. (∑x)2  c. ∑x2
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
1.37 The following table lists five pairs of m and f values.
m
 5
10
17
20
25
f
12
 8
 6
16
 4
Compute the value of each of the following:
a. ∑m  b. ∑f 2  c. ∑mf   d. ∑m2f
APPLICATIONS
1.38 Eight randomly selected customers at a local grocery store 
spent the following amounts on groceries in a single visit: $216, $184, 

Glossary
25
USES AND MISUSES...
JUST A SAMPLE PLEASE
Have you ever read an article or seen an advertisement on television 
that claims to have found some important result based on a scientific 
study? Or maybe you have seen some results based on a poll con-
ducted by a research firm. Have you ever wondered how samples are 
selected for such studies, or just how valid the results really are?
 
One of the most important considerations in conducting a study 
is to ensure that a representative sample has been taken in such a 
way that the sample represents the underlying population of interest. 
So, if you see a claim that a recent study found that a new drug was 
a magic bullet for curing cancer, how might we investigate how valid 
this claim is?
 
It is very important to consider how the population was sampled 
in order to understand both how useful the result is and if the result is 
really generalizable. In research, a result that is generalizable means 
that it applies to the general population of interest, not just to the 
sample that was taken or to only a small segment of the population.
 
One of the most common sampling strategies is the simple 
random sample in which each subject in a population has some 
chance of being chosen for the study. Though there are numerous ways 
to take a valid statistical sample, simple random samples ensure that 
there is equal representation of members of the population of interest, 
and therefore we see this type of sampling strategy employed quite 
often. But, how many samples taken for studies are truly random? It 
is not uncommon in survey research, for example, to send people out 
to a mall or to a busy street corner with clipboard and survey in hand 
to ask questions of those willing to take the survey. It is also not 
uncommon for polling firms to call from a random set of telephone 
numbers—in fact, many of you may have received a call to participate 
in a poll. In either of these scenarios, it is likely that those willing to 
take the time to answer a survey may not represent everyone in the 
population of interest. Additionally, if a telephone poll is used, it is 
impossible to sample those without a telephone or those that do not 
answer the call, and hence this segment of the population may not be 
available to be included in the sample.
 
One of the major consequences of having a poor sample is the 
risk of creating bias in the results. Bias causes the results to potentially 
deviate from what they would be under ideal sampling circumstances. 
In the examples just presented, we have an example of volunteer bias 
in which the results are skewed to represent only those willing to 
participate. There could also be observer bias in which the person 
conducting a poll only approaches certain people—perhaps those 
that seem friendly or more likely to participate—in which case a large 
segment of the potential population is ignored. Results from such 
studies would certainly be suspect.
 
The take-home message is that, when reading the results of 
studies or polls, it is very important to stop and consider what popula-
tion was actually sampled, how representative that sample really is, 
and if the results may be biased in such a way that the results are not 
generalizable to the larger population. One of the great things about 
taking a statistics course is that you will learn many tools that will 
allow you to look at the world of data more critically so that you can 
make informed decisions about the studies that you read or hear 
about in the media. So the next time you hear, “9 out of 10 people 
say…,” consider if they asked only 10 people or if they asked a million 
people. Learn to be good consumers of data!
Descriptive statistics Collection of methods for organizing, display-
ing, and describing data using tables, graphs, and summary measures.
Designed experiment A study in which the experimenter controls 
the assignment of elements to different treatment groups.
Discrete variable A (quantitative) variable whose values are countable.
Double-blind experiment An experiment in which neither the 
doctors (or researchers) nor the patients (or members) know to which 
group a patient (or member) belongs.
Element or member A specific subject or object included in a 
sample or population.
Experiment A method of collecting data by controlling some or 
all factors.
Inferential statistics Collection of methods that help make deci-
sions about a population based on sample results.
Judgment sample A sample that includes the elements of the popu-
lation selected based on the judgment and prior knowledge of an expert.
Census A survey conducted by including every element of the 
population.
Cluster A subgroup (usually geographical) of the population that is 
representative of the population.
Cluster sampling A sampling technique in which the population 
is divided into clusters and a sample is chosen from one or a few 
clusters.
Continuous variable A (quantitative) variable that can assume any 
numerical value over a certain interval or intervals.
Control group The group on which no condition is imposed.
Convenience sample A sample that includes the most accessible 
members of the population.
Cross-section data Data collected on different elements at the same 
point in time or for the same period of time.
Data or data set Collection of observations or measurements on a 
variable.
Glossary
www.ebook3000.com

26
Chapter 1 Introduction
Nonresponse error The error that occurs because many of the 
people included in the sample do not respond.
Nonsampling or systematic errors The errors that occur in the 
collection, recording, and tabulation of data.
Observation or measurement The value of a variable for an element.
Observational study A study in which the assignment of ele-
ments to different treatments is voluntary, and the researcher simply 
observes the results of the study.
Population or target population The collection of all elements 
whose characteristics are being studied.
Qualitative or categorical data Data generated by a qualitative 
variable.
Qualitative or categorical variable A variable that cannot assume 
numerical values but is classified into two or more categories.
Quantitative data Data generated by a quantitative variable.
Quantitative variable A variable that can be measured numerically.
Quota sample A sample selected in such a way that each group or 
subpopulation is represented in the sample in exactly the same pro-
portion as in the target population.
Random sample A sample drawn in such a way that each element 
of the population has some chance of being included in the sample.
Randomization The procedure in which elements are assigned to 
different (treatment and control) groups at random.
Representative sample A sample that contains the characteristics 
of the population as closely as possible.
Response error The error that occurs because people included in 
the survey do not provide correct answers.
Sample A portion of the population of interest.
Sample survey A survey that includes elements of a sample.
Sampling frame The list of elements of the target population that 
is used to select a sample.
Sampling or chance error The difference between the result 
obtained from a sample survey and the result that would be obtained 
from the census.
Selection error The error that occurs because the sampling frame is 
not representative of the population.
Simple random sampling If all samples of the same size selected 
from a population have the same chance of being selected, it is called 
simple random sampling. Such a sample is called a simple random 
sample.
Statistics Science of collecting, analyzing, presenting, and inter-
preting data and making decisions.
Stratified random sampling A sampling technique in which the 
population is divided into different strata and a sample is chosen from 
each stratum.
Stratum A subgroup of the population whose members are identi-
cal with regard to the possession of a characteristic.
Survey Collecting data from the elements of a population or 
sample.
Systematic random sampling A sampling method used to choose 
a sample by selecting every kth unit from the list.
Target population The collection of all subjects of interest.
Time-series data Data that give the values of the same variable for 
the same element at different points in time or for different periods 
of time.
Treatment A condition (or a set of conditions) that is imposed 
on a group of elements by the experimenter. This group is called the 
treatment group.
Variable A characteristic under study or investigation that assumes 
different values for different elements.
Voluntary response error The error that occurs because a survey is 
not conducted on a randomly selected sample, but people are invited 
to respond voluntarily to the survey.
1.41 The following table lists the number of billionaires for each of a 
few selected countries as of October 2014.
Country
Number of Billionaires
United States
492
China
152
Russia
111
Germany
 85
Brazil
 65
India
 56
Are the data presented in this table an example of cross-section or of 
time-series data? Explain.
1.40 The following table lists the total revenue for each of a few 
selected companies for the year 2014 (Source: Fortune Magazine).
Company
Revenue for Fiscal Year 2014 
(millions of dollars)
Walmart
476,294
Exxon Mobil
407,666
Apple
170,910
General Motors
155,427
Ford Motor
146,917
General Electric
146,231
Explain the meaning of a member, a variable, a measurement, and a 
data set with reference to this table.
Supplementary Exercises

Advanced Exercises
27
1.42 Indicate whether each of the following constitutes data collected 
from a population or a sample.
a. A group of 25 patients selected to test a new drug
b. Total items produced on a machine for each year from 2001 
to 2015
c. Yearly expenditures on clothes for 50 persons
d. Number of houses sold by each of the 10 employees of a real 
estate agency during 2015
1.43 State which of the following is an example of sampling with 
replacement and which is an example of sampling without replacement.
a. Selecting 10 patients out of 100 to test a new drug
b. Selecting one professor to be a member of the university 
senate and then selecting one professor from the same group 
to be a member of the curriculum committee
1.44 The number of shoe pairs owned by six women is 8, 14, 3, 7, 10, 
and 5, respectively. Let x denote the number of shoe pairs owned by a 
woman. Find:
a. ∑x  b. (∑x)2  c. ∑x2
1.45 The following table lists six pairs of x and y values.
x
7
11
8
 4
14
28
y
5
15
7
10
 9
19
Compute the value of each of the following:
a. ∑y  b. ∑x2  c. ∑xy  d. ∑x2y  e. ∑y2
1.46 A professor is teaching a large class that has 247 students. He 
wants to select a sample of 15 students to do a study on the habits of 
his students. For each of the following sampling methods, explain 
what kind of method is used (e.g., is it a random sample, nonrandom 
sample, sample with replacement, sample without replacement, con-
venience sample, judgment sample, quota sample).
a. There are 15 sociology majors in his class. He selects these 15 
students to include in the sample.
b. He goes through the roster and finds that he knows 30 of the 
247 students. Using his knowledge about these students, he 
selects 15 students from these 30 to include in the sample.
c. He enters names of all 247 students in a spreadsheet on his 
computer. He uses a statistical software (such as Minitab) to 
select 15 students.
1.47 A researcher advertised for volunteers to study the relationship 
between the amount of meat consumed and cholesterol level. In 
response to this advertisement, 3476 persons volunteered. The 
researcher collected information on the meat consumption and 
cholesterol level of each of these persons. Based on these data, the 
researcher concluded that there is a very strong positive association 
between these two variables.
a. Is this an observational study or a designed experiment? Explain.
b. Based on this study, can the researcher conclude that con-
sumption of meat increases cholesterol level? Explain why or 
why not.
1.48 A pharmaceutical company developed a new medicine for 
compulsive behavior. To test this medicine on humans, the company 
advertised for volunteers who were suffering from this disease and 
wanted to participate in the study. As a result, 1820 persons responded. 
Using their own judgment, the group of physicians who were con-
ducting this study assigned 910 of these patients to the treatment 
group and the remaining 910 to the control group. The patients in the 
treatment group were administered the actual medicine, and the 
patients in the control group were given a placebo. Six months later 
the conditions of the patients in the two groups were examined and 
compared. Based on this comparison, the physicians concluded that 
this medicine improves the condition of patients suffering from com-
pulsive behavior.
a. Comment on this study and its conclusion.
b. Is this an observational study or a designed experiment? 
Explain.
c. Is this a double-blind study? Explain.
1.49 A pharmaceutical company has developed a new medicine for 
compulsive behavior. To test this medicine on humans, the physicians 
conducting this study obtained a list of all patients suffering from 
compulsive behavior who were being treated by doctors in all hospi-
tals in the country. Further assume that this list is representative of the 
population of all such patients. The physicians then randomly selected 
1820 patients from this list. Of these 1820, randomly selected 910 
patients were assigned to the treatment group, and the remaining 910 
patients were assigned to the control group. The patients did not know 
which group they belonged to, but the doctors had access to such 
information. Six months later the conditions of the patients in the two 
groups were examined and compared. Based on this comparison, the 
physicians concluded that this medicine improves the condition of 
patients suffering from compulsive behavior.
a. Comment on this study and its conclusion.
b. Is this an observational study or a designed experiment? Explain.
c. Is this a double-blind study? Explain.
1.50 A pharmaceutical company has developed a new medicine for 
compulsive behavior. To test this medicine on humans, the physicians 
conducting this study obtained a list of all patients suffering from 
compulsive behavior who were being treated by doctors in all hospi-
tals in the country. Assume that this list is representative of the popu-
lation of all such patients. The physicians then randomly selected 
1820 patients from this list. Of these 1820 patients, randomly selected 
910 patients were assigned to the treatment group, and the remaining 
910 patients were assigned to the control group. Neither patients nor 
doctors knew what group the patients belonged to. Six months later 
the conditions of the patients in the two groups were examined and 
compared. Based on this comparison, the physicians concluded that 
this medicine improves the condition of patients suffering from com-
pulsive behavior.
a. Is this an observational study or a designed experiment? 
Explain.
b. Is this a double-blind study? Explain.
returned the completed questionnaires, and 1240 of them answered 
that question. The current average annual income of these 1240 
respondents was $61,200.
1.51 A college mailed a questionnaire to all 5432 of its alumni who 
graduated in the last 5 years. One of the questions was about the 
current annual incomes of these alumni. Only 1620 of these alumni 
Advanced Exercises
www.ebook3000.com

28
Chapter 1 Introduction
a. Do you think $61,200 is likely to be an unbiased estimate of 
the current average annual income of all 5432 alumni? If so, 
explain why.
b. If you think that $61,200 is probably a biased estimate of the 
current average annual income of all 5432 alumni, what 
sources of systematic errors do you think are present here?
c. Do you expect the estimate of $61,200 to be above or below 
the current average annual income of all 5432 alumni? Explain.
1.52 A group of veterinarians wants to test a new canine vaccine for 
Lyme disease. (Lyme disease is transmitted by the bite of an infected deer 
tick.) One hundred dogs are randomly selected to receive the vaccine 
(with their owners’ permission) from an area that has a high incidence of 
Lyme disease. These dogs are examined by veterinarians for symptoms 
of Lyme disease once a month for a period of 12 months. During this 
12-month period, 10 of these 100 dogs are diagnosed with Lyme disease. 
During the same 12-month period, 18% of the unvaccinated dogs in the 
area are found to have contracted Lyme disease.
a. Does this experiment have a control group?
b. Is this a double-blind experiment?
c. Identify any potential sources of bias in this experiment.
d. Explain how this experiment could have been designed to 
reduce or eliminate the bias pointed out in part c.
 1. A population in statistics means a collection of all
a. men and women
b. subjects or objects of interest
c. people living in a country
 2. A sample in statistics means a portion of the
a. people selected from the population of a country
b. people selected from the population of an area
c. population of interest
 3. Indicate which of the following is an example of a sample with 
replacement and which is a sample without replacement.
a. Five friends go to a livery stable and select five horses to ride 
(each friend must choose a different horse).
b. A box contains five marbles of different colors. A marble is 
drawn from this box, its color is recorded, and it is put back 
into the box before the next marble is drawn. This experiment 
is repeated 12 times.
 4. Indicate which of the following variables are quantitative and 
which are qualitative. Classify the quantitative variables as discrete or 
continuous.
a. Women’s favorite TV programs
b. Salaries of football players
c. Number of pets owned by families
d. Favorite breed of dog for each of 20 persons
 5. Explain the following types of samples: random sample, nonran-
dom sample, representative sample, convenience sample, judgement 
sample, quota sample, sample with replacement, and sample without 
replacement.
 6. Explain the following concepts: sampling or chance error, non-
sampling or systematic error, selection bias, nonresponse bias, response 
bias, and voluntary response bias.
 7. Explain the following sampling techniques: simple random 
sampling, systematic random sampling, stratified random sampling, 
and cluster sampling.
 8. Explain the following concepts: an observational study, a designed 
experiment, randomization, treatment group, control group, double-blind 
experiment, and placebo effect.
 9. The following table lists the midterm test scores of six students 
in a class.
Student
Score
John
83
Destiny
97
Colleen
88
Carl
 
72
Joseph
91
Victoria
68
Explain the meaning of a member, a variable, a measurement, and a 
data set with reference to this table.
10. The number of types of cereal in the pantries of six households 
is 6, 11, 3, 5, 6, and 2, respectively. Let x be the number of types of 
cereal in the pantry of a household. Find:
a. ∑x  b. (∑x)2  c. ∑x2
11. The following table lists the age (rounded to the nearest year) 
and price (rounded to the nearest thousand dollars) for each of the 
seven cars of the same model.
Age (x) 
(years)
Price (y) 
(thousand dollars)
 3
28.4
 7
17.2
 5
21.6
 9
13.9
12
 6.3
 8
16.8
10
 9.4
Let age be denoted by x and price be denoted by y. Calculate
a. ∑x  b. ∑y  c. ∑x2  d. ∑xy  e. ∑x2y  f. (∑y)2
12. A psychologist needs 10 pigs for a study of the intelligence of 
pigs. She goes to a pig farm where there are 40 young pigs in a large 
pen. Assume that these pigs are representative of the population of all 
pigs. She selects the first 10 pigs she can catch and uses them for her 
study.
Self-Review Test

Technology Instructions
29
a. Do these 10 pigs make a random sample?
b. Are these 10 pigs likely to be representative of the entire 
population? Why or why not?
c. If these 10 pigs do not form a random sample, what type of 
sample is it?
d. Can you suggest a better procedure for selecting a sample of 
10 from the 40 pigs in the pen?
13. A newspaper wants to conduct a poll to estimate the percentage 
of its readers who favor a gambling casino in their city. People register 
their opinions by placing a phone call that costs them $1.
a. Is this method likely to produce a random sample?
b. Which, if any, of the types of biases listed in this appendix are 
likely to be present and why?
14. The Centre for Nutrition and Food Research at Queen Margaret 
University College in Edinburgh studied the relationship between 
sugar consumption and weight gain (Fitness, May 2002). All the 
people who participated in the study were divided into two groups, 
and both of these groups were put on low-calorie, low-fat diets. The 
diet of the people in the first group was low in sugar, but the people 
in the second group received as much as 10% of their calories from 
sucrose. Both groups stayed on their respective diets for 8 weeks. 
During these 8 weeks, participants in both groups lost 1/2 to 3/4 
pound per week.
a. Was this a designed experiment or an observational study?
b. Was there a control group in this study?
c. Was this a double-blind experiment?
15. A researcher wanted to study if regular exercise can control dia-
betes. He took a sample of 1200 adults who were under treatment for 
diabetes. He asked them if they exercise regularly or not and whether 
their diabetes was under control or not. Based on this information he 
reached his conclusion that regular exercise can keep diabetes under 
control. Is this an observational study or a designed experiment?
16. A researcher wanted to know if using regular fertilizer or 
organic fertilizer will affect the yield of potatoes. He divided a large 
parcel of land into 10 small parcels and then randomly selected five 
parcels to grow potatoes using regular fertilizer and the other five 
parcels using organic fertilizer. Is this an observational study or a 
randomized experiment?
Note: The Mini-Projects are located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Mini-Projects
Note: The Decide for Yourself feature is located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Decide for Yourself
TI-84 Color/TI-84
CHAPTER 1
TECHNOLOGY 
INSTRUCTIONS
The TI-84 Color Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for the TI-84 Plus C 
color graphing calculator running the 4.0 operating system. Some screens, menus, and func-
tions will be slightly different in older operating systems. The TI-84 and TI-84 Plus can perform 
all of the same functions but will not have the “Color” option referenced in some of the menus.
Entering and Editing Data
1. On the TI-84, variables are referred to as lists.
2. When entering data that does not need to be saved for later use, you can use the default lists, 
which are named L1, L2, L3, L4, L5, and L6.
3. To set up the editor to view these lists, select STAT > EDIT > SetUpEditor. Press ENTER.
4. To view these lists in the editor, select STAT > EDIT > Edit. (See Screen 1.1.)
5. To enter data in a list, type each data value and then press ENTER after each data value. 
(See Screen 1.2.)
6. To edit data values in a list, use the arrow keys to move to the cell you wish to edit, type the 
new value, and then press ENTER.
Note: Complete TI-84, Minitab, and Excel manuals are available for download at the textbook’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Screen 1.1
Screen 1.2
www.ebook3000.com

30
Chapter 1 Introduction
Creating a Named List
1. When entering data that will be saved for later use, you can create named lists. List names 
may contain a maximum of five characters, including letters or numbers.
2. Select STAT > EDIT > SetUpEditor and then type the names of your lists, separated by 
commas. Press ENTER. (See Screen 1.3.)
 
 Note: To type list names, select ALPHA and the letter (in green on your keypad) or select 2nd > ALPHA 
to engage the A-LOCK (alpha-lock). To disengage the A-LOCK, press ALHPA.
3. To view these lists in the editor, select STAT > EDIT > Edit. (See Screen 1.4.)
4. To return the editor to the default lists, select STAT > EDIT > SetUpEditor. Press ENTER.
Operations with Lists
1. To calculate the sum of the values in a list select 2nd > STAT > MATH > sum, enter 
the name of the list (e.g., 2nd > 1 for L1), and then press the ) key. Press ENTER. 
(See Screens 1.5 and 1.6.)
2. To calculate the square of the sum of the values in a list, denoted by (∑x)2, use the same 
instructions as in step 1, but press the x2 key before you press ENTER. (See Screen 1.6.)
3. To calculate the square of each value in a list, select 2nd > STAT, select the name of your 
list, press the x2 key, and then press ENTER. (See Screen 1.6.)
4. To calculate the sum of the squares of the values in a list, denoted by ∑x2, apply the same 
instructions as in step 1 to the list created in step 3. Screen 1.6 shows the appearance of 
these two processes. (See Screen 1.6.)
Selecting Random Samples
 1. The following data represent the ages, in years, at which 10 patients were first diagnosed 
with diabetes. Enter these data in L1 in the order they appear below. We will select a 
random sample of 4 data values from these 10.
18, 7, 46, 32, 62, 65, 51, 40, 28, 72
Screen 1.3
Screen 1.4
Screen 1.5
Screen 1.6

Technology Instructions
31
 2. Select 2nd > MODE to reach the home screen.
 3. Select MATH > PROB > randIntNoRep.
 4. Use the following settings in the randIntNoRep menu:
• Type 1 at the lower prompt.
• Type 10 at the upper prompt.
• Type 10 at the n prompt.
 
 
Note: Always enter the total number of data values for the upper and n prompt.
 5. Highlight Paste and press ENTER.
 6. Press STO >.
 7. Select 2nd > STAT > NAMES > L2.
 8. Press ENTER. (See Screen 1.7.)
 
 
 Note: The numbers 1 through 10 may be in a different order on your screen than they appear in 
Screen 1.7 because they were randomly sampled.
 9. Select 2nd > STAT > OPS > SortA.
 10. Select 2nd > 2 to display L2.
 11. Press , (the comma key).
 12. Select 2nd > 1 to display L1.
 13. Press ) (the right parenthesis key).
 14. Press ENTER. (See Screen 1.7.)
 15. Select STAT > EDIT > Edit to view your lists. (See Screen 1.8.)
 16. The top four numbers in L1 are the random sample of 4 data values.
 
 
 Note: The numbers in L1 may be in a different order on your screen than they appear in Screen 1.8 
because the data were randomly sorted by the numbers in L2.
The Minitab Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Minitab version 17. Some 
screens, menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Minitab.
Entering and Saving Data
 1. In Minitab you will see the screen divided into two parts:
• The top half is called the Session window, which will contain numeric output.
• The bottom half is called the Worksheet, which looks similar to a spreadsheet, where 
you will enter your data. Minitab allows you to have multiple worksheets within a 
project.
 2. Use the mouse or the arrow keys to select where you want to start entering your data in 
the worksheet. Each column in the worksheet corresponds to a variable, so you can enter 
only one kind of data into a given column. Data can be numeric, text, or date/time. If a 
column contains text data, Minitab will add “-T” to the column heading and if a column 
contains a date/time, Minitab will add “-D” to the column heading. (See Screen 1.9.)
Minitab
Screen 1.7
Screen 1.8
Screen 1.9
www.ebook3000.com

32
Chapter 1 Introduction
 3. The blank row between the column labels and the first row is for variable names. In these 
blank cells, you can type the names of variables.
 4. The direction in which data is entered can be changed by clicking the direction arrow at the 
top left of the worksheet (See Screen 1.9.)
 5. Click on a cell and begin typing. Press ENTER when you are finished an entry.
 6. If you need to revise an entry, go to that cell with the mouse or the arrow keys and begin 
typing. Press ENTER to put the revised entry into the cell.
 7. When you are finished, select File > Save Project As to save your work as a file on your 
computer. Minitab will automatically assign the file extension .mpj to your work after 
the filename. Or you can also save just the worksheet by selecting File > Save Current 
Worksheet. Minitab will add .mtb extensions to your saved file.
 8. As an exercise, enter the data shown below into Minitab. Name the columns Month, Cost, 
and Increase. Save the result as the file test.mpj.
Month 
Cost 
Increase
January 
52 
0.08
February 
48 
0.06
March 
49 
0.07
 9. To open a saved file, select File > Open and select the file name.
 10. If you are already in Minitab and you want to start a new worksheet, select File > New and 
choose Worksheet. Whenever you save a project, Minitab will automatically save all of the 
worksheets in the project.
Creating New Columns from Existing Columns
Note: This example calculates the squares of values in a column but other computations can be 
performed, such as computing ∑x2 or ∑xy.
1. To calculate a column containing the squares of the values in the column Sales as shown in 
Screen 1.9, select Calc > Calculator.
2. In the Store result in variable box, type the name of the column to contain the new values 
(such as C4).
3. Click inside the Expression box, click C2 Sales in the column to the left of the Expression 
box, and then click Select. You can also type C2 in the Expression box.
4. Click on the exponentiation (^) button on the keypad in this dialog box. Type 2 after the 
two ^ in the Expression box. Click OK. (See Screen 1.10.)
5. The numbers 1296, 1681, 1225, and 961 should appear in column C4 of the worksheet.
Calculating the Sum of the Values in a Column
1. To calculate the sum of the values in the Sales column from Screen 1.9, select Calc > 
Column Statistics, which will produce a dialog box.
2. From the Statistic list, select Sum.
3. Click in the Input Variable box. The list of variables will appear in the left portion of the 
dialog box.
Screen 1.10

Technology Instructions
33
4. Click on the column Sales, then click Select. You can also type C2 in the Input variable 
box. (See Screen 1.11.)
5. Click OK. The result will appear in the Session window.
Selecting Random Samples
1. The following data represent the ages, in years, at which 10 patients were first diagnosed 
with diabetes. Enter these data in column C1 in the order they appear below. We will select a 
random sample of 4 data values from these 10.
18, 7, 46, 32, 62, 65, 51, 40, 28, 72
2. Select Calc > Random Data > Sample from Columns.
3. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen: (See Screen 1.12.)
• Type 4 in the Number of rows to sample box.
• Type C1 in the From columns box.
• Type C2 in the Store samples in box.
4. Click OK.
5. Four data values from C1 are randomly selected without replacement and stored in C2. 
(See Screen 1.13.)
 
 Note: The numbers in C2 may be different on your screen than they appear in Screen 1.13 
because the data were randomly sampled.
Screen 1.11
Screen 1.12
The Excel Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Excel 2013. Some screens, 
menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Excel. To enable some of the 
advanced Excel functions, you must enable the Data Analysis Add-In for Excel.
Entering and Saving Data
1. In Excel, use the mouse or the arrow keys to select where you want to start entering your 
data. Data can be numeric or text. The rectangles are called cells, and the cells are collec-
tively known as a spreadsheet.
2. You can format your data by selecting the cells that you want to format, then clicking 
HOME and choosing the formatting option from the NUMBER group.
3. If you need to revise an entry, go to that cell with the mouse or the arrow keys. You can 
retype the entry or you can edit it. To edit it, double-click on the cell and use the arrow keys 
and the backspace key to help you revise the entry, then press ENTER to place the revised 
entry into the cell.
Excel
Screen 1.13
www.ebook3000.com

34
Chapter 1 Introduction
4.  When you are done, select Save As from the FILE tab to save your work as a file 
on your computer. Excel will automatically assign the file extension .xlsx after the 
filename.
5.  As an exercise, enter the following data into Excel, format the second column as 
currency, and then format the third column as percent. Save the result as the file 
test.xlsx. (See Screen 1.14.)
Month 
Cost 
Increase
January 
52 
0.08
February 
48 
0.06
March 
49 
0.07
6. To open a saved file, select Open from the FILE tab and select the filename.
Creating New Columns from Existing Columns
Note: This example calculates the squares of values in a column but other computations 
can be performed, such as computing ∑x2 or ∑xy.
1. Open the file test.xlsx. Click on cell D2.
2.  Type =B2^2 and then press ENTER. The value $2704.00 should appear, which 
is the square of $52.00, the value in cell B2. (See Screen 1.15.)
3.  Highlight cell D2 and then select Copy from the Clipboard group on the HOME 
tab. Highlight cells D3 and D4 and then select Paste from the Clipboard group on 
the HOME tab.
4. The numbers $2304.00 and $2401.00 should appear in cells D3 and D4, 
respectively. (See Screen 1.16.)
Calculating the Sum of the Values in a Column
1. Open the file test.xlsx. Click on cell B5.
2.  Select FORMULAS > Function Library > ∑. Excel should automatically 
enter the Sum function along with the range of cells involved in the sum. (Note: If 
the range of cells is incorrect, you can type any changes.) (See Screen 1.16.)
3. Press ENTER. The number $149.00 should appear in cell B5.
Selecting Random Samples
1.  The following data represent the age, in years, at which 10 patients were 
first diagnosed with diabetes. Enter these data into cells A1 through A10 
in the order they appear below. We will select a random sample of 4 data 
values from these 10.
18, 7, 46, 32, 62, 65, 51, 40, 28, 72
2. Select DATA > Data Analysis.
3. From the dialog box that appears on screen, select Sampling.
4.  Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen 
(See Screen 1.17):
• Type A1:A10 in the Input Range box.
• Select Random in the Sampling Method box.
Screen 1.14
Screen 1.15
Screen 1.16
Screen 1.17

Technology Assignments
35
• Type 4 in the Number of Samples box.
• Select New Worksheet Ply in the Output options box.
5. Click OK.
6. Four data values from A1 to A10 are randomly selected without replacement and stored in a 
new worksheet.
Enabling the Data Analysis Add-In
1. Click the FILE > Options.
2. From the resulting dialog box, click Add-ins.
3. In the Manage box, select Excel Add-ins and then click Go.
4. In the Add-Ins dialog box, select the Analysis ToolPak check box, and then click OK.
5. If Analysis ToolPak is not listed in the Add-Ins available box, click Browse to locate it.
6. If you are prompted that the Analysis ToolPak is not currently installed on your computer, 
click Yes to install it.
TA1.2 Refer to the data on total revenues for companies given in 
Table 1.1 of the text.
a. Enter these data into Minitab or Excel. Save the data file with 
the name REVENUE. Close the file, then open the file again.
b. Use technology to find the total revenue for these companies.
c. Print a hard copy or take a screen shot of the data you entered.
TA1.3 Refer to Data Set IV, Manchester Road Race Data, on the 
Web site of this text (see Appendix A). Using the technology of your 
choice, select a random sample of 300 from column C3.
TA1.4 Refer to Data Set I, City Data, on the Web site of this text (see 
Appendix A). Using the technology of your choice, select a random 
sample of 100 from column C12.
TA1.1 The following table gives the names, hours worked, and salary 
for the past week for five workers.
Name
Hours 
Worked
Salary ($)
John
42
1325
Shannon
33
2583
Kathy
28
3255
David
47
5090
Steve
40
1020
a. Enter these data into the spreadsheet. Save the data file as 
WORKER. Exit the session or program. Then restart the pro-
gram or software and retrieve the file WORKER.
b. Print a hard copy of the spreadsheet containing the data you 
entered.
TECHNOLOGY ASSIGNMENTS
www.ebook3000.com

36
CHAPTER2
In addition to thousands of private organizations and individuals, a large number of U.S. government 
agencies (such as the Bureau of the Census, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the National Agricultural 
Statistics Service, the National Center for Education Statistics, the National Center for Health Statis-
tics, and the Bureau of Justice Statistics) conduct hundreds of surveys every year. The data collected 
from each of these surveys fill hundreds of thousands of pages. In their original form, these data sets 
may be so large that they do not make sense to most of us. Descriptive statistics, however, supplies 
the techniques that help to condense large data sets by using tables, graphs, and summary mea-
sures. We see such tables, graphs, and summary measures in newspapers and magazines every day. 
At a glance, these tabular and graphical displays present information on every aspect of life. Conse-
quently, descriptive statistics is of immense importance because it provides efficient and effective 
methods for summarizing and analyzing information.
This chapter explains how to organize and display data using tables and graphs. We will learn 
how to prepare frequency distribution tables for qualitative and quantitative data; how to construct 
bar graphs, pie charts, histograms, and polygons for such data; and how to prepare stem-and-leaf 
displays.
What is your political ideology? Do you classify yourself a consistently liberal person or a consistently 
conservative person, a mostly liberal person or a mostly conservative person, or are you someone 
who belongs to a group called “mixed”? Pew Research Center conducted a national survey of 10,013 
adults in 2014 to find the political views of adults in the United States. To see the results of this study, 
see Case Study 2–1.
Spencer Platt/Getty Images, Inc.
2.1 Organizing and Graphing 
Qualitative Data
Case Study 2–1 Ideological 
Composition of the U.S. 
Public, 2014
Case Study 2–2 Millennials’ 
Views on Their Level of 
Day-to-Day Banking 
Knowledge
2.2 Organizing and Graphing 
Quantitative Data
Case Study 2–3 Car Insurance 
Premiums per Year in 
50 States
Case Study 2–4 Hours 
Worked in a Typical Week 
by Full-Time U.S. Workers
Case Study 2–5 How Many 
Cups of Coffee Do You 
Drink a Day?
2.3 Stem-and-Leaf Displays
2.4 Dotplots
Organizing and Graphing Data

2.1 Organizing and Graphing Qualitative Data
37
This section discusses how to organize and display qualitative (or categorical) data. Data sets are 
organized into tables and displayed using graphs. First we discuss the concept of raw data.
2.1.1 Raw Data
When data are collected, the information obtained from each member of a population or sample 
is recorded in the sequence in which it becomes available. This sequence of data recording is 
random and unranked. Such data, before they are grouped or ranked, are called raw data.
2.1 Organizing and Graphing Qualitative Data
Raw Data Data recorded in the sequence in which they are collected and before they are 
processed or ranked are called raw data.
 
Suppose we collect information on the ages (in years) of 50 students selected from a 
university. The data values, in the order they are collected, are recorded in Table 2.1. For 
instance, the first student’s age is 21, the second student’s age is 19 (second number in the 
first row), and so forth. The data in Table 2.1 are quantitative raw data.
Table 2.1 Ages of 50 Students
21 
19 
24 
25 
29 
34 
26 
27 
37 
33
18 
20 
19 
22 
19 
19 
25 
22 
25 
23
25 
19 
31 
19 
23 
18 
23 
19 
23 
26
22 
28 
21 
20 
22 
22 
21 
20 
19 
21
25 
23 
18 
37 
27 
23 
21 
25 
21 
24
 
Suppose we ask the same 50 students about their student status. The responses of the 
students are recorded in Table 2.2. In this table, F, SO, J, and SE are the abbreviations for 
freshman, sophomore, junior, and senior, respectively. This is an example of qualitative (or 
categorical) raw data.
Table 2.2 Status of 50 Students
J 
F 
SO 
SE 
J 
J 
SE 
J 
J 
J
F 
F 
J 
F 
F 
F 
SE 
SO 
SE 
J
J 
F 
SE 
SO 
SO 
F 
J 
F 
SE 
SE
SO 
SE 
J 
SO 
SO 
J 
J 
SO 
F 
SO
SE 
SE 
F 
SE 
J 
SO 
F 
J 
SO 
SO
 
The data presented in Tables 2.1 and 2.2 are also called ungrouped data. An ungrouped data 
set contains information on each member of a sample or population individually. If we rank the 
data of Table 2.1 from lowest to the highest age, they will still be ungrouped data but not raw data.
2.1.2 Frequency Distributions
The Gallup polling agency recently surveyed randomly selected 1015 adults aged 18 and over 
from all 50 U.S. states and the District of Columbia. These adults were asked, “Please tell me 
how concerned you are right now about each of the following financial matters, based on your 
current financial situation—are you very worried, moderately worried, not too worried, or not 
worried at all.” Among a series of financial situations, one such situation was not having enough 
money to pay their normal monthly bills. Table 2.3 lists the responses of these adults. The Gallup 
report contained the percent of adults belonging to each category, which we have converted to 
www.ebook3000.com

38
Chapter 2 Organizing and Graphing Data
numbers in the table. In this table, the variable is how much are adults worried about not having 
enough money to pay normal monthly bills. The categories representing this variable are listed in 
the first column of the table. Note that these categories are mutually exclusive. In other words, 
each of the 1015 adults belongs to one and only one of these categories. The number of adults 
who belong to a certain category is called the frequency of that category. A frequency distribu-
tion exhibits how the frequencies are distributed over various categories. Table 2.3 is called a 
frequency distribution table or simply a frequency table.
Table 2.3  Worries About Not Having Enough 
Money to Pay Normal Monthly Bills
Response 
Number of Adults
Very worried 
162
Moderately worried 
203
Not too worried 
305
Not worried at all 
325
Others 
 20
 
Sum = 1015
Source: Gallup Poll.
Variable
Category
Frequency
Frequency column
Frequency Distribution of a Qualitative Variable A frequency distribution of a qualitative variable 
lists all categories and the number of elements that belong to each of the categories.
 
Example 2–1 illustrates how a frequency distribution table is constructed for a qualitative 
variable.
Constructing a frequency 
distribution table for 
qualitative data.
EXAMPLE 2–1 
What Variety of Donuts Is Your Favorite?
A sample of 30 persons who often consume donuts were asked what variety of donuts is their 
favorite. The responses from these 30 persons are as follows:
glazed 
filled 
other 
plain 
glazed 
other
frosted 
filled 
filled 
glazed 
other 
frosted
glazed 
plain 
other 
glazed 
glazed 
filled
frosted 
plain 
other 
other 
frosted 
filled
filled 
other 
frosted 
glazed 
glazed 
filled
Construct a frequency distribution table for these data.
Solution Note that the variable in this example is favorite variety of donut. This variable 
has five categories (varieties of donuts): glazed, filled, frosted, plain, and other. To prepare 
a frequency distribution, we record these five categories in the first column of Table 2.4. 
Then we read each response (each person’s favorite variety of donut) from the given infor-
mation and mark a tally, denoted by the symbol |, in the second column of Table 2.4 next 
to the corresponding category. For example, the first response is glazed. We show this in 
the frequency table by marking a tally in the second column next to the category glazed. 
Note that the tallies are marked in blocks of five for counting convenience. Finally, we 
record the total of the tallies for each category in the third column of the table. This column is 
called the column of frequencies and is usually denoted by f. The sum of the entries in the fre-
quency column gives the sample size or total frequency. In Table 2.4, this total is 30, which is the 
sample size.
© Jack Puccio/iStockphoto

2.1.3 Relative Frequency and Percentage Distributions
The relative frequency of a category is obtained by dividing the frequency of that category by 
the sum of all frequencies. Thus, the relative frequency shows what fractional part or proportion 
of the total frequency belongs to the corresponding category. A relative frequency distribution 
lists the relative frequencies for all categories.
Table 2.4 Frequency Distribution of Favorite Donut Variety
Donut Variety 
Tally 
Frequency ( f)
Glazed 
 
8
Filled 
 
7
Frosted 
 
5
Plain 
 
3
Other 
 
7
 
 
Sum = 30
Calculating Relative Frequency of a Category
Relative frequency of a category = Frequency of that category
Sum of all frequencies
Calculating Percentage
Percentage = (Relative frequency) · 100%
 
The percentage for a category is obtained by multiplying the relative frequency of that 
category by 100. A percentage distribution lists the percentages for all categories.
EXAMPLE 2–2 
What Variety of Donuts Is Your Favorite?
Determine the relative frequency and percentage distributions for the data in Table 2.4.
Solution The relative frequencies and percentages from Table 2.4 are calculated and listed in 
Table 2.5. Based on this table, we can state that 26.7% of the people in the sample said that glazed 
donut is their favorite. By adding the percentages for the first two categories, we can state that 
50% of the persons included in the sample said that glazed or filled donut is their favorite. The 
other numbers in Table 2.5 can be interpreted in similar ways.
Constructing relative frequency 
and percentage distributions.
Table 2.5  Relative Frequency and Percentage Distributions 
of Favorite Donut Variety
Donut Variety 
Relative Frequency 
Percentage
Glazed 
8/30 = .267 
.267(100) = 26.7
Filled 
7/30 = .233 
.233(100) = 23.3
Frosted 
5/30 = .167 
.167(100) = 16.7
Plain 
3/30 = .100 
.100(100) = 10.0
Other 
7/30 = .233 
.233(100) = 23.3
 
  Sum = 1.000 
           Sum = 100%
◼
2.1 Organizing and Graphing Qualitative Data
39
www.ebook3000.com

 
Notice that the sum of the relative frequencies is always 1.00 (or approximately 1.00 if the 
relative frequencies are rounded), and the sum of the percentages is always 100 (or approxi-
mately 100 if the percentages are rounded). 
◼
2.1.4 Graphical Presentation of Qualitative Data
All of us have heard the adage “a picture is worth a thousand words.” A graphic display can reveal 
at a glance the main characteristics of a data set. The bar graph and the pie chart are two types 
of graphs that are commonly used to display qualitative data.
Bar Graphs
To construct a bar graph (also called a bar chart), we mark the various categories on the horizon-
tal axis as in Figure 2.1. Note that all categories are represented by intervals of the same width. We 
mark the frequencies on the vertical axis. Then we draw one bar for each category such that the 
height of the bar represents the frequency of the corresponding category. We leave a small gap 
between adjacent bars. Figure 2.1 gives the bar graph for the frequency distribution of Table 2.4.
Glazed
Filled
Frosted
Plain
Other
Donut variety
Frequency
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Figure 2.1 Bar graph for the 
frequency distribution of 
Table 2.4.
IDEOLOGICAL 
COMPOSITION OF 
THE U.S. PUBLIC, 
2014
CASE STUDY 2–1
Pew Research Center conducted a national survey of 10,013 adults January 23 to March 16, 2014, to find the 
political views of adults in the United States. As the above bar chart shows, 12% of the adults polled said 
that they were consistently liberal, 22% indicated that they were mostly liberal, and so on. In this survey, Pew 
Research Center also found that, overall, the percentage of Americans who indicated that they were consist-
ently conservative or consistently liberal has increased from 10% to 21% during the past two decades. Note 
that in this chart, the bars are drawn horizontally.
Source: Pew Research Center, June, 
2014 Report: Political Polarization in the 
American Public.
Data source: Pew Research Center
IDEOLOGICAL COMPOSITION OF THE U.S. PUBLIC, 2014
Mostly conservative
Consistently 
conservative
18%
9%
22%
12%
Consistently
liberal
Mostly liberal
Mixed
39%
40

 
The bar graphs for relative frequency and percentage distributions can be drawn simply by 
marking the relative frequencies or percentages, instead of the frequencies, on the vertical axis.
 
Sometimes a bar graph is constructed by marking the categories on the vertical axis and the 
frequencies on the horizontal axis. Case Study 2–1 presents such an example.
Pareto Chart
To obtain a Pareto chart, we arrange (in a descending order) the bars in a bar graph based on their 
heights (frequencies, relative frequencies, or percentages). Thus, the bar with the largest height 
appears first (on the left side) in a bar graph and the one with the smallest height appears at the 
end (on the right side) of the bar graph.
Bar Graph A graph made of bars whose heights represent the frequencies of respective categories 
is called a bar graph.
Pareto Chart A Pareto chart is a bar graph with bars arranged by their heights in descending 
order. To make a Pareto chart, arrange the bars according to their heights such that the bar with 
the largest height appears first on the left side, and then subsequent bars are arranged in descend-
ing order with the bar with the smallest height appearing last on the right side.
Figure 2.2 shows the Pareto chart for the frequency distribution of Table 2.4. It is the same bar 
chart that appears in Figure 2.1 but with bars arranged based on their heights.
Pie Charts
A pie chart is more commonly used to display percentages, although it can be used to display 
frequencies or relative frequencies. The whole pie (or circle) represents the total sample or popu-
lation. Then we divide the pie into different portions that represent the different categories.
41
MILLENNIALS’ 
VIEWS ON THEIR 
LEVEL OF DAY-
TO-DAY BANKING 
KNOWLEDGE
CASE STUDY 2–2
TD Bank conducted a poll of Millennials (aged 18–34) January 28 to February 10, 2014, with the main focus 
on understanding their banking behaviors and preferences. As shown in the pie chart, 19% of the Millennials 
said they were extremely knowledgeable about day-to-day banking, 40% said they were very knowledgeable, 
35% said they were somewhat knowledgeable, 5% admitted not to be very knowledgeable, and 1% men-
tioned that they were not knowledgeable at all.
Source: TD Bank: The Millennial 
Financial Behaviors & Needs. 
February 2014.
Data source: TD Bank: The Millennial Financial Behaviors & Needs Survey
MILLENNIALS’ VIEWS ON THEIR LEVEL OF DAY-TO-DAY BANKING KNOWLEDGE
EWS ON THEIR LEVEL OF DAY-TO-DAY BANK
EWS ON THEIR LEVEL OF DAY TO DAY BANK
Very
knowledgeable
40%
Extremely
knowledgeable
19%
Not very 
knowledgeable
5%
Somewhat
knowledgeable
35%
Not at all 
knowledgeable
1%
www.ebook3000.com

42
Chapter 2 Organizing and Graphing Data
 
Figure 2.3 shows the pie chart for the percentage distribution of Table 2.5.
Glazed
Filled
Other
Frosted
Plain
Donut variety
Frequency
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Figure 2.2 Pareto chart for the frequency distribution of 
Table 2.4.
Pie Chart A circle divided into portions that represent the relative frequencies or percentages 
of a population or a sample belonging to different categories is called a pie chart.
Figure 2.3 Pie chart for the percentage distribution 
of Table 2.5.
Glazed
26.7%
Filled
23.3%
Frosted
16.7%
Plain
10.0%
Other
23.3%
EXERCISES
a. Prepare a frequency distribution table.
b. Calculate the relative frequencies and percentages for all 
categories.
c. What percentage of the elements in this sample belong to 
category Y?
d. What percentage of the elements in this sample belong to 
category N or D?
e. Draw a pie chart for the percentage distribution.
f. Make a Pareto chart for the percentage distribution.
APPLICATIONS
2.4 In the past few years, many states have built casinos and many more 
are in the process of doing so. Forty adults were asked if building casinos 
is good for society. Following are the responses of these adults, where G 
stands for good, B indicates bad, and I means indifferent or no answer.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
2.1 Why do we need to group data in the form of a frequency table? 
Explain briefly.
2.2 How are the relative frequencies and percentages of categories 
obtained from the frequencies of categories? Illustrate with the help of 
an example.
2.3 The following data give the results of a sample survey. The 
letters Y, N, and D represent the three categories.
D
N
N
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
D
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
N
N
Y
N
Y
Y
N
D
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y
N
N
D
Y

2.2 Organizing and Graphing Quantitative Data
43
B
G
B
B
I
G
B
I
B
B
G
B
B
G
B
B
B
G
G
I
B
G
B
B
I
G
G
G
B
B
I
G
B
B
B
G
G
B
B
G
a. Prepare a frequency distribution table.
b. Calculate the relative frequencies and percentages for all 
categories.
c. What percentage of the adults in this sample said building 
casinos is good?
d. What percentage of the adults in this sample said building 
casinos is bad or were indifferent?
e. Draw a bar graph for the frequency distribution.
f. Draw a pie chart for the percentage distribution.
g. Make a Pareto chart for the percentage distribution.
2.5 A whatjapanthinks.com survey asked residents of Japan to 
name their favorite pizza topping. The possible responses included 
the following choices: pig-based meats, for example, bacon or 
ham (PI); seafood, for example, tuna, crab, or cod roe (S); vegeta-
bles and fruits (V); poultry (PO); beef (B); and cheese (C). The 
following data represent the responses of a random sample of 36 
people.
V
PI
B
PI
V
PO
S
PI
V
S
V
S
PI
S
V
V
V
PI
S
S
V
PI
C
V
V
V
C
V
S
PO
V
PI
S
PI
PO
PI
a. Prepare a frequency distribution table.
b. Calculate the relative frequencies and percentages for all 
categories.
c. What percentage of the respondents mentioned vegetables 
and fruits, poultry, or cheese?
d. Make a Pareto chart for the relative frequency distribution.
2.6 The following data show the method of payment by 16 cus-
tomers in a supermarket checkout line. Here, C refers to cash, 
CK to check, CC to credit card, D to debit card, and O stands for 
other.
C
CK
CK
C
CC
D
O
C
CK
CC
D
CC
C
CK
CK
CC
a. Construct a frequency distribution table.
b. Calculate the relative frequencies and percentages for all 
categories.
c. Draw a pie chart for the percentage distribution.
2.7 In a 2013 survey of employees conducted by Financial Finesse 
Inc., employees were asked about their overall financial stress 
levels. The following table shows the results of this survey (www.
financialfinesse.com).
Financial Stress Level
Percentage of Responses
No financial stress
14
Some financial stress
63
High financial stress
18
Overwhelming financial stress
 5
a. Draw a pie chart for this percentage distribution.
b. Make a Pareto chart for this percentage distribution.
In the previous section we learned how to group and display qualitative data. This section explains 
how to group and display quantitative data.
2.2.1 Frequency Distributions
Table 2.6 gives the weekly earnings of 100 employees of a large company. The first column lists 
the classes, which represent the (quantitative) variable weekly earnings. For quantitative data, 
an interval that includes all the values that fall on or within two numbers—the lower and upper 
limits—is called a class. Note that the classes always represent a variable. As we can observe, the 
classes are nonoverlapping; that is, each value for earnings belongs to one and only one class. The 
second column in the table lists the number of employees who have earnings within each class. 
For example, 4 employees of this company earn $801 to $1000 per week. The numbers listed in 
the second column are called the frequencies, which give the number of data values that belong 
to different classes. The frequencies are denoted by f.
 
For quantitative data, the frequency of a class represents the number of values in the data set 
that fall in that class. Table 2.6 contains six classes. Each class has a lower limit and an upper 
limit. The values 801, 1001, 1201, 1401, 1601, and 1801 give the lower limits, and the values 
1000, 1200, 1400, 1600, 1800, and 2000 are the upper limits of the six classes, respectively. The 
data presented in Table 2.6 are an illustration of a frequency distribution table for quantitative 
data. Whereas the data that list individual values are called ungrouped data, the data presented in 
a frequency distribution table are called grouped data.
2.2 Organizing and Graphing Quantitative Data
www.ebook3000.com

44
Chapter 2 Organizing and Graphing Data
Variable
Third class
Table 2.6  Weekly Earnings of 100 Employees 
of a Company
Weekly Earnings  
Number of Employees
      (dollars) 
f
 801 to 1000 
 4
1001 to 1200 
11
1201 to 1400 
39
1401 to 1600 
24
1601 to 1800 
16
1801 to 2000 
 6
Frequency column
Frequency of
the third class
{
Lower limit of
the sixth class
Upper limit of
the sixth class
Frequency Distribution for Quantitative Data A frequency distribution for quantitative data 
lists all the classes and the number of values that belong to each class. Data presented in the form 
of a frequency distribution are called grouped data.
 
The difference between the lower limits of two consecutive classes gives the class width. 
The class width is also called the class size.
Finding Class Width
To find the width of a class, subtract its lower limit from the lower limit of the next class. Thus:
Width of a class = Lower limit of the next class −Lower limit of the current class
Thus, in Table 2.6,
Width of the first class = 1001 −801 = 200
The class widths for the frequency distribution of Table 2.6 are listed in the second column of 
Table 2.7. Each class in Table 2.7 (and Table 2.6) has the same width of 200.
 
The class midpoint or mark is obtained by dividing the sum of the two limits of a class by 2.
Calculating Class Midpoint or Mark
Class midpoint or mark = Lower limit + Upper limit
2
Thus, the midpoint of the first class in Table 2.6 or Table 2.7 is calculated as follows:
Midpoint of the first class = 801 + 1000
2
= 900.5
The class midpoints for the frequency distribution of Table 2.6 are listed in the third column of 
Table 2.7.

2.2 Organizing and Graphing Quantitative Data
45
 
Usually this approximate class width is rounded to a convenient number, which is then used 
as the class width. Note that rounding this number may slightly change the number of classes 
initially intended.
(3) Lower Limit of the First Class or the Starting Point
Any convenient number that is equal to or less than the smallest value in the data set can be used 
as the lower limit of the first class.
 
Example 2–3 illustrates the procedure for constructing a frequency distribution table for 
quantitative data.
Table 2.7  Class Widths and Class Midpoints for Table 2.6
Class Limits 
Class Width 
Class Midpoint
 801 to 1000 
200 
 900.5
1001 to 1200 
200 
1100.5
1201 to 1400 
200 
1300.5
1401 to 1600 
200 
1500.5
1601 to 1800 
200 
1700.5
1801 to 2000 
200 
1900.5
2.2.2 Constructing Frequency Distribution Tables
When constructing a frequency distribution table, we need to make the following three major 
decisions.
(1) Number of Classes
Usually the number of classes for a frequency distribution table varies from 5 to 20, depending 
mainly on the number of observations in the data set.1 It is preferable to have more classes as the 
size of a data set increases. The decision about the number of classes is arbitrarily made by the 
data organizer.
(2) Class Width
Although it is not uncommon to have classes of different sizes, most of the time it is preferable 
to have the same width for all classes. To determine the class width when all classes are the same 
size, first find the difference between the largest and the smallest values in the data. Then, the 
approximate width of a class is obtained by dividing this difference by the number of desired 
classes.
1One rule to help decide on the number of classes is Sturge’s formula:
c = 1 + 3.3 log n
where c is the number of classes and n is the number of observations in the data set. The value of log n can be obtained 
by using a calculator.
Calculation of Class Width
Approximate class width = Largest value −Smallest value
Number of classes
www.ebook3000.com

46
Chapter 2 Organizing and Graphing Data
EXAMPLE 2–3 
Values of Baseball Teams, 2015
The following table gives the value (in million dollars) of each of the 30 baseball teams as esti-
mated by Forbes magazine (source: Forbes Magazine, April 13, 2015). Construct a frequency 
distribution table.
Values of Baseball Teams, 2015
 
Value 
 
Value
Team 
(millions of dollars) 
Team 
(millions of dollars)
Arizona Diamondbacks 
840 
Milwaukee Brewers 
875
Atlanta Braves 
1150 
Minnesota Twins 
895
Baltimore Orioles 
1000 
New York Mets 
1350
Boston Red Sox 
2100 
New York Yankees 
3200
Chicago Cubs 
1800 
Oakland Athletics 
725
Chicago White Sox 
975 
Philadelphia Phillies 
1250
Cincinnati Reds 
885 
Pittsburgh Pirates 
900
Cleveland Indians 
825 
San Diego Padres 
890
Colorado Rockies 
855 
San Francisco Giants 
2000
Detroit Tigers 
1125 
Seattle Mariners 
1100
Houston Astros 
800 
St. Louis Cardinals 
1400
Kansas City Royals 
700 
Tampa Bay Rays 
605
Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim 
1300 
Texas Rangers 
1220
Los Angeles Dodgers 
2400 
Toronto Blue Jays 
870
Miami Marlins 
650 
Washington Nationals 
1280
Constructing a frequency 
distribution table for 
quantitative data.
Table 2.8 Frequency Distribution of the Values of Baseball Teams, 2015
Value of a Team  
 
Number of Teams
   (in million $) 
Tally 
( f)
 601–1050 
 
16
1051–1500 
 
 9
1501–1950 
 
 1
1951–2400 
 
 3
2401–2850 
 
 0
2851–3300 
 
 1
 
 
Σ f = 30
Solution In these data, the minimum value is 605, and the maximum value is 3200. Suppose 
we decide to group these data using six classes of equal width. Then,
Approximate width of each class = 3200 −605
6
= 432.5
Now we round this approximate width to a convenient number, say 450. The lower limit of the 
first class can be taken as 605 or any number less than 605. Suppose we take 601 as the lower 
limit of the first class. Then our classes will be
601–1050, 1051–1500, 1501–1950, 1951–2400, 2401–2850, and 2851–3300
We record these five classes in the first column of Table 2.8.

2.2 Organizing and Graphing Quantitative Data
47
EXAMPLE 2–4 
Values of Baseball Teams, 2015
Calculate the relative frequencies and percentages for Table 2.8.
Solution The relative frequencies and percentages for the data in Table 2.8 are calculated and 
listed in the second and third columns, respectively, of Table 2.9.
 
Using Table 2.9, we can make statements about the percentage of teams with values 
within a certain interval. For example, from Table 2.9, we can state that about 53.3% of the 
baseball teams had estimated values in the interval $601 million to $1050 million in April 
2015. By adding the percentages for the first two classes, we can state that about 83.3% of the 
baseball teams had estimated values in the interval $601 million to $1500 million in April 
2015. Similarly, by adding the percentages for the last three classes, we can state that about 
 
Now we read each value from the given data and mark a tally in the second column of 
Table 2.8 next to the corresponding class. The first value in our original data set is 840, which 
belongs to the 601–1050 class. To record it, we mark a tally in the second column next to the 
601–1050 class. We continue this process until all the data values have been read and entered in 
the tally column. Note that tallies are marked in blocks of five for counting convenience. After 
the tally column is completed, we count the tally marks for each class and write those numbers 
in the third column. This gives the column of frequencies. These frequencies represent the 
number of baseball teams with values in the corresponding classes. For example, 16 of the 
teams have values in the interval $601–$1050 million.
 
Using the ∑ notation (see Section 1.7 of Chapter 1), we can denote the sum of frequencies 
of all classes by ∑f. Hence,
∑ f = 16 + 9 + 1 + 3 + 0 + 1 = 30
 
The number of observations in a sample is usually denoted by n. Thus, for the sample data, 
∑f is equal to n. The number of observations in a population is denoted by N. Consequently, ∑f 
is equal to N for population data. Because the data set on the values of baseball teams in Table 2.8 
is for all 30 teams, it represents a population. Therefore, in Table 2.8 we can denote the sum of 
frequencies by N instead of ∑f. 
◼
 
Note that when we present the data in the form of a frequency distribution table, as in 
Table 2.8, we lose the information on individual observations. We cannot know the exact value 
of any team from Table 2.8. All we know is that 16 teams have values in the interval $601–$1050 
million, and so forth.
2.2.3 Relative Frequency and Percentage Distributions
Using Table 2.8, we can compute the relative frequency and percentage distributions in the 
same way as we did for qualitative data in Section 2.1.3. The relative frequencies and percent-
ages for a quantitative data set are obtained as follows. Note that relative frequency is the same 
as proportion.
Calculating Relative Frequency and Percentage
 Relative frequency of a class = Frequency of that class
Sum of all frequencies =
f
∑f
 Percentage = (Relative frequency) · 100%
 
Example 2–4 illustrates how to construct relative frequency and percentage distributions.
Constructing relative frequency 
and percentage distributions.
www.ebook3000.com

Table 2.9  Relative Frequency and Percentage Distributions 
of the Values of Baseball Teams
Value of a Team  
Relative
  (in million $) 
Frequency 
Percentage
 601–1050 
16/30 = .533 
53.3
1051–1500 
9/30 = .300 
30.0
1501–1950 
1/30 = .033 
3.3
1951–2400 
3/30 = .100 
10.0
2401–2850 
0/30 = .000 
0.0
2851–3300 
1/30 = .033 
3.3
 
   Sum = .999 
Sum = 99.9%
13.3% of the baseball teams had estimated values in the interval $1951 million to $3300 million 
in April 2015. 
◼
2.2.4 Graphing Grouped Data
Grouped (quantitative) data can be displayed in a histogram or a polygon. This section describes 
how to construct such graphs. We can also draw a pie chart to display the percentage distribution 
for a quantitative data set. The procedure to construct a pie chart is similar to the one for qualita-
tive data explained in Section 2.1.4; it will not be repeated in this section.
Histograms
A histogram can be drawn for a frequency distribution, a relative frequency distribution, or 
a percentage distribution. To draw a histogram, we first mark classes on the horizontal axis 
and frequencies (or relative frequencies or percentages) on the vertical axis. Next, we draw 
a bar for each class so that its height represents the frequency of that class. The bars in a 
histogram are drawn adjacent to each other with no gap between them. A histogram is called 
a frequency histogram, a relative frequency histogram, or a percentage histogram 
depending on whether frequencies, relative frequencies, or percentages are marked on the 
vertical axis.
Histogram A histogram is a graph in which classes are marked on the horizontal axis and the 
frequencies, relative frequencies, or percentages are marked on the vertical axis. The frequencies, 
relative frequencies, or percentages are represented by the heights of the bars. In a histogram, 
the bars are drawn adjacent to each other.
 
Figures 2.4 and 2.5 show the frequency and the percentage histograms, respectively, for 
the data of Tables 2.8 and 2.9 of Sections 2.2.2 and 2.2.3. The two histograms look alike 
because they represent the same data. A relative frequency histogram can be drawn for the 
relative frequency distribution of Table 2.9 by marking the relative frequencies on the vertical 
axis.
 
In Figures 2.4 and 2.5, we used class midpoints to mark classes on the horizontal axis. How-
ever, we can show the intervals on the horizontal axis by using the class limits instead of the class 
midpoints.
48
Chapter 2 Organizing and Graphing Data

Figure 2.4 Frequency histogram for Table 2.8.
Frequency
14
6
4
2
0
8
10
12
16
825.5 1275.5 1725.5 2175.5 2625.5
Value (million $)
3075.5
Figure 2.5 Percentage distribution histogram for 
Table 2.9.
Percent
30
20
10
0
40
50
60
825.5 1275.5 1725.5 2175.5 2625.5
Value (million $)
3075.5
Polygons
A polygon is another device that can be used to present quantitative data in graphic form. To 
draw a frequency polygon, we first mark a dot above the midpoint of each class at a height equal 
to the frequency of that class. This is the same as marking the midpoint at the top of each bar in 
a histogram. Next we include two more classes, one at each end, and mark their midpoints. Note 
that these two classes have zero frequencies. In the last step, we join the adjacent dots with 
straight lines. The resulting line graph is called a frequency polygon or simply a polygon.
 
A polygon with relative frequencies marked on the vertical axis is called a relative frequency 
polygon. Similarly, a polygon with percentages marked on the vertical axis is called a percentage 
polygon.
CAR INSURANCE 
PREMIUMS PER 
YEAR IN 50 STATES
CASE STUDY 2–3
Data source: www.insure.com
The above histogram shows the percentage distribution of annual car insurance premiums in 50 states. The 
data used to make this distribution and histogram are based on estimates made by insure.com. They col-
lected data from six large insurance companies in 10 ZIP codes for each state. The rates were obtained “for 
the same full-coverage policy for the same driver—a 40-year-old man with a clean driving record and good 
credit.” The rates used in this histogram are the averages “for the 20 best-selling vehicles in the U.S.” As the 
histogram shows, in 20% of the states the car insurance rates were in the interval $800 to $1024, and so on. 
Note that the last class ($1700 or higher) has no upper limit. Such a class is called an open-ended class.
Source: www.insure.com, April 13, 
2015.
IN GOD WE
TRUST
D
IN GOD WE
TRUST
D
IN GOD WE
TRUST
D
IN GOD WE
TRUST
D
AUTO
INSURANCE
xxxxxxxxxxxxx    xxxxx   xxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxx
CAR INSURANCE PREMIUMS PER YEAR IN 50 STATES
20%
$800 to $1024
34%
$1025 to $1249
18%
18%
$1250 to $1474
$1475 to $1699
10%
$1700 or higher
49
www.ebook3000.com

50
Chapter 2 Organizing and Graphing Data
Polygon A graph formed by joining the midpoints of the tops of successive bars in a histogram 
with straight lines is called a polygon.
 
Figure 2.6 shows the frequency polygon for the frequency distribution of Table 2.8.
HOURS WORKED IN 
A TYPICAL WEEK 
BY FULL-TIME U.S. 
WORKERS
CASE STUDY 2–4
Data source: www.gallup.com
The above pie chart shows the percentage distribution of hours worked in a typical week by full-time workers 
in the United States. The data are based on a recent Gallup poll of 1271 workers. As the numbers in the pie 
chart show, 8% of these workers said they work for less than 40 hours a week, 53% work for 40 to 49 hours 
a week, and so on. As you can observe, two of the classes are open-ended classes in this chart.
Source: www.gallup.com, 
August 29, 2014.
Figure 2.6 Frequency polygon for Table 2.8.
Frequency
14
6
4
2
0
8
10
12
16
825.5 1275.5 1725.5 2175.5 2625.5
Value (million $)
3075.5
375.5
3525.5
 
For a very large data set, as the number of classes is increased (and the width of classes is 
decreased), the frequency polygon eventually becomes a smooth curve. Such a curve is called a 
frequency distribution curve or simply a frequency curve. Figure 2.7 shows the frequency curve 
for a large data set with a large number of classes.
12
6
3
1
11
5
7
8
4
2
10
9
12
6
3
1
11
5
7
8
4
2
10
9
12
11
1
7
5
10
2
8
4
9
3
6
12
6
3
1
11
5
7
8
4
2
10
9
12
6
3
1
11
5
7
8
4
2
10
9
12
6
3
1
11
5
7
8
4
2
10
9
HOURS WORKED IN A TYPICAL WEEK BY FULL-TIME U.S. WORKERS
Less than 40 hours
40 to 49
53%
50 to 59
21%
60 or more
18%
8%
50

2.2 Organizing and Graphing Quantitative Data
51
2.2.5 More on Classes and Frequency Distributions
This section presents two alternative methods for writing classes to construct a frequency distri-
bution for quantitative data.
Less-Than Method for Writing Classes
The classes in the frequency distribution given in Table 2.8 for the data on values of baseball 
teams were written as 601–900, 901–1200, and so on. Alternatively, we can write the classes in a 
frequency distribution table using the less-than method. The technique for writing classes shown 
in Table 2.8 is used for data sets that do not contain fractional values. The less-than method is 
more appropriate when a data set contains fractional values. Example 2–5 illustrates the less-than 
method.
Figure 2.7 Frequency distribution curve.
Frequency
x
EXAMPLE 2–5 
Federal and State Tax on Gasoline as 
of April 1, 2015
Based on the information collected by American Petroleum Institute, Table 2.10 lists the total of 
federal and state taxes (in cents per gallon) on gasoline for each of the 50 states as of April 1, 
2015 (www.api.org).
Table 2.10 Total Federal and State Tax on Gasoline as of April 1, 2015
State 
Gasoline Tax 
State 
Gasoline Tax
Alabama 
39.3 
Maryland 
48.7
Alaska 
29.7 
Massachusetts 
44.9
Arizona 
37.4 
Michigan 
51.5
Arkansas 
40.2 
Minnesota 
47.0
California 
66.0 
Mississippi 
37.2
Colorado 
40.4 
Missouri 
35.7
Connecticut 
59.3 
Montana 
46.2
Delaware 
41.4 
Nebraska 
44.9
Florida 
54.8 
Nevada 
51.6
Georgia 
44.9 
New Hampshire 
42.2
Hawaii 
62.1 
New Jersey 
32.9
Idaho 
43.4 
New Mexico 
37.3
Illinois 
52.5 
New York 
62.9
Indiana 
51.3 
North Carolina 
54.7
Iowa 
50.4 
North Dakota 
41.4
Kansas 
42.4 
Ohio 
46.4
Kentucky 
44.4 
Oklahoma 
35.4
Louisiana 
38.4 
Oregon 
49.5
Maine 
48.4 
Pennsylvania 
70.0
Constructing a frequency 
distribution using the 
less-than method.
(Continued)
www.ebook3000.com

52
Chapter 2 Organizing and Graphing Data
Construct a frequency distribution table. Calculate the relative frequencies and percentages for all 
classes.
Solution The minimum value in the data set of Table 2.10 is 29.7, and the maximum value is 
70. Suppose we decide to group these data using five classes of equal width. Then,
Approximate class width = 70 −29.7
5
= 8.06
We round this number to a more convenient number—say 9—and take 9 as the width of each 
class. We can take the lower limit of the first class equal to 29.7 or any number lower than 29.7. 
If we start the first class at 27, the classes will be written as 27 to less than 36, 36 to less than 45, 
and so on. The five classes, which cover all the data values of Table 2.10, are recorded in the first 
column of Table 2.11. The second column in Table 2.11 lists the frequencies of these classes. 
A value in the data set that is 27 or larger but less than 36 belongs to the first class, a value that 
is 36 or larger but less than 45 falls into the second class, and so on. The relative frequencies and 
percentages for classes are recorded in the third and fourth columns, respectively, of Table 2.11. 
Note that this table does not contain a column of tallies.
State 
Gasoline Tax 
State 
Gasoline Tax
Rhode Island 
51.4 
Vermont 
48.9
South Carolina 
35.2 
Virginia 
40.8
South Dakota 
48.4 
Washington 
55.9
Tennessee 
39.8 
West Virginia 
53.0
Texas 
38.4 
Wisconsin 
51.3
Utah 
42.9 
Wyoming 
42.4
Table 2.11  Frequency, Relative Frequency, and Percentage Distributions of the Total Federal 
and State Tax on Gasoline
Federal and State Tax 
          (in cents) 
Frequency 
Relative Frequency 
Percentage
27 to less than 36 
5 
.10 
10
36 to less than 45 
21 
.42 
42
45 to less than 54 
16 
.32 
32
54 to less than 63 
6 
.12 
12
63 to less than 72 
2 
.04 
4
 
Sum = 50 
Sum = 1.00 
Sum = 100
Note that in Table 2.11, the first column lists the class intervals using the boundaries, and not 
the limits. When we use the less than method to write classes, we call the two end-points of a 
class the lower and upper boundaries. For example, in the first class, which is 27 to less than 
36, 27 is the lower boundary and 36 is the upper boundary. The difference between the two 
boundaries gives the width of the class. Thus, the width of the first class is 36 − 27 = 9. All 
classes in Table 2.11 have the same width, which is 9. 
◼
 
A histogram and a polygon for the data of Table 2.11 can be drawn the same way as for the 
data of Tables 2.8 and 2.9.
Single-Valued Classes
If the observations in a data set assume only a few distinct (integer) values, it may be appropriate 
to prepare a frequency distribution table using single-valued classes—that is, classes that are 
made of single values and not of intervals. This technique is especially useful in cases of discrete 
data with only a few possible values. Example 2–6 exhibits such a situation.

EXAMPLE 2–6 
Number of Vehicles Owned by Households
The administration in a large city wanted to know the distribution of the number of vehicles 
owned by households in that city. A sample of 40 randomly selected households from this city 
produced the following data on the number of vehicles owned.
5
1
1
2
0
1
1
2
1
1
1
3
3
0
2
5
1
2
3
4
2
1
2
2
1
2
2
1
1
1
4
2
1
1
2
1
1
4
1
3
Construct a frequency distribution table for these data using single-valued classes.
Solution The observations in this data set assume only six distinct values: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. 
Each of these six values is used as a class in the frequency distribution in Table 2.12, and these 
six classes are listed in the first column of that table. To obtain the frequencies of these classes, 
the observations in the data that belong to each class are counted, and the results are recorded in 
the second column of Table 2.12. Thus, in these data, 2 households own no vehicle, 18 own one 
vehicle each, 11 own two vehicles each, and so on.
 
The data of Table 2.12 can also be displayed in a bar graph, as shown in Figure 2.8. To con-
struct a bar graph, we mark the classes, as intervals, on the horizontal axis with a little gap 
between consecutive intervals. The bars represent the frequencies of respective classes.
 
The frequencies of Table 2.12 can be converted to relative frequencies and percentages the 
same way as in Table 2.9. Then, a bar graph can be constructed to display the relative frequency 
or percentage distribution by marking the relative frequencies or percentages, respectively, on the 
vertical axis.
HOW MANY CUPS 
OF COFFEE DO YOU 
DRINK A DAY?
CASE STUDY 2–5
Data source: Gallup poll of U.S. adults aged 18 and older conducted July 9–12, 2012
In a Gallup poll conducted by telephone interviews on July 9–12, 2012, U.S. adults of age 18 years and older 
were asked, “How many cups of coffee, if any, do you drink on an average day?” According to the results of 
the poll, shown in the accompanying pie chart, 36% of these adults said that they drink no coffee (repre-
sented by zero cups in the chart), 26% said that they drink one cup of coffee per day, and so on. The last 
class is open-ended class that indicates that 10% of these adults drink four or more cups of coffee a day. 
This class has no upper limit. Since the values of the variable (cups of coffee) are discrete and the variable 
assumes only a few possible values, the first four classes are single-valued classes.
Source: http://www.gallup.com/poll/ 
156116/Nearly-Half-Americans-Drink-
Soda-Daily.aspx.
HOW MANY CUPS OF COFFEE DO YOU DRINK A DAY?
10%
3 cups
9%
1 cup
26%
0 cups
36%
4 or more cups
2 cups
19%
© Jorge Salcedo/iStockphoto
Constructing a frequency 
distribution using single-valued 
classes.
53
www.ebook3000.com

54
Chapter 2 Organizing and Graphing Data
2.2.6 Cumulative Frequency Distributions
Consider again Example 2–3 of Section 2.2.2 about the values of baseball teams. Suppose we 
want to know how many baseball teams had values of $1500 million or less in 2015. Such a question 
can be answered by using a cumulative frequency distribution. Each class in a cumulative 
frequency distribution table gives the total number of values that fall below a certain value. A 
cumulative frequency distribution is constructed for quantitative data only.
Table 2.12  Frequency Distribution of the 
Number of Vehicles Owned
 
 
Number of
 Vehicles Owned 
Households ( f)
 
0 
 2
 
1 
18
 
2 
11
 
3 
 4
 
4 
 3
 
5 
 2
 
 
∑f = 40
Figure 2.8 Bar graph for Table 2.12.
0
1
2
3
4
5
Vehicles owned
Frequency
18
15
12
9
6
3
0
Cumulative Frequency Distribution A cumulative frequency distribution gives the total number 
of values that fall below the upper boundary of each class.
 
In a cumulative frequency distribution table, each class has the same lower limit but a dif-
ferent upper limit. Example 2–7 illustrates the procedure for preparing a cumulative frequency 
distribution.
EXAMPLE 2–7 
Values of Baseball Teams, 2015
Using the frequency distribution of Table 2.8, reproduced here, prepare a cumulative frequency 
distribution for the values of the baseball teams.
 Value of a Team  
Number of Teams
 (in million $) 
( f)
 
 601–1050 
16
 
1051–1500 
9
 
1501–1950 
1
 
1951–2400 
3
 
2401–2850 
0
 
2851–3300 
1
Solution Table 2.13 gives the cumulative frequency distribution for the values of the baseball 
teams. As we can observe, 601 (which is the lower limit of the first class in Table 2.8) is taken as 
the lower limit of each class in Table 2.13. The upper limits of all classes in Table 2.13 are the 
same as those in Table 2.8. To obtain the cumulative frequency of a class, we add the frequency 
of that class in Table 2.8 to the frequencies of all preceding classes. The cumulative frequencies 
are recorded in the second column of Table 2.13.
Constructing a cumulative 
frequency distribution table.
 
◼

2.2 Organizing and Graphing Quantitative Data
55
Table 2.13  Cumulative Frequency Distribution of Values 
of Baseball Teams, 2015
Class Limits 
Cumulative Frequency
601–1050 
16
601–1500 
16 + 9 = 25
601–1950 
16 + 9 + 1 = 26
601–2400 
16 + 9 + 1 + 3 = 29
601–2850 
16 + 9 + 1 + 3 + 0 = 29
601–3300 
16 + 9 + 1 + 3 + 0 + 1 = 30
 
From Table 2.13, we can determine the number of observations that fall below the upper 
limit of each class. For example, 26 teams were valued between $601 and $1950 million. 
◼
 
The cumulative relative frequencies are obtained by dividing the cumulative frequencies 
by the total number of observations in the data set. The cumulative percentages are obtained by 
multiplying the cumulative relative frequencies by 100.
Calculating Cumulative Relative Frequency and Cumulative Percentage
 Cumulative relative frequency = Cumulative frequency of a class
Total observations in the data set
 Cumulative percentage = (Cumulative relative frequency) · 100%
 
Table 2.14 contains both the cumulative relative frequencies and the cumulative percentages 
for Table 2.13. We can observe, for example, that 90% of the teams were valued between $601 
and $1800 million.
2.2.7 Shapes of Histograms
A histogram can assume any one of a large number of shapes. The most common of these shapes 
are
1. 
Symmetric
2. 
Skewed
3. 
Uniform or rectangular
 
A symmetric histogram is identical on both sides of its central point. The histograms shown 
in Figure 2.9 are symmetric around the dashed lines that represent their central points.
Table 2.14  Cumulative Relative Frequency and Cumulative Percentage 
Distributions for Values of Baseball Teams, 2015
 
Cumulative 
Cumulative
Class Limits 
Relative Frequency 
Percentage
601–1050 
16/30 = 
53.33
601–1500 
25/30 = 
83.33
601–1950 
26/30 = 
86.67
601–2400 
29/30 = 
96.67
601–2850 
29/30 = 
96.67
601–3300 
30/30 = 1.000 
100.00
.5333
.8333
.8667
.9667
.9667
www.ebook3000.com

56
Chapter 2 Organizing and Graphing Data
 
A skewed histogram is nonsymmetric. For a skewed histogram, the tail on one side is 
longer than the tail on the other side. A skewed-to-the-right histogram has a longer tail on the 
right side (see Figure 2.10a). A skewed-to-the-left histogram has a longer tail on the left side 
(see Figure 2.10b).
Figure 2.9 Symmetric histograms.
Frequency
Variable
Frequency
Variable
Figure 2.10 (a) A histogram skewed to the right. (b) A histogram skewed to the left.
Frequency
Frequency
Variable
Variable
(a)
(b)
 
A uniform or rectangular histogram has the same frequency for each class. Figure 2.11 is 
an illustration of such a case.
Figure 2.11 A histogram with uniform 
distribution.
Frequency
Variable
 
Figures 2.12a and 2.12b display symmetric frequency curves. Figures 2.12c and 2.12d show 
frequency curves skewed to the right and to the left, respectively.
Figure 2.12 (a), (b) Symmetric frequency curves. (c) Frequency curve skewed to 
the right. (d) Frequency curve skewed to the left.
Variable
Variable
Frequency
Frequency
Variable
Variable
Frequency
Frequency
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

2.2 Organizing and Graphing Quantitative Data
57
2.2.8 Truncating Axes
Describing data using graphs gives us insights into the main characteristics of the data. But graphs, 
unfortunately, can also be used, intentionally or unintentionally, to distort the facts and deceive the 
reader. The following are two ways to manipulate graphs to convey a particular opinion or impression.
1. 
Changing the scale either on one or on both axes—that is, shortening or stretching one or 
both of the axes.
2. 
Truncating the frequency axis—that is, starting the frequency axis at a number greater than 
zero.
 
Suppose 400 randomly selected adults were asked whether or not they are happy with their 
jobs. Of them, 156 said that they are happy, 136 said that they are not happy, and 108 had no 
opinion. Converting these numbers to percentages, 39% of these adults said that they are happy, 
34% said that they are not happy, and 27% had no opinion. Let us denote the three opinions by 
A, B, and C, respectively. The following table shows the results of this survey.
 Opinion 
Percentage
 
A 
39
 
B 
34
 
C 
27
 
 
Sum = 100
Now let us make two bar graphs—one showing the complete vertical axis and the second using a 
truncated vertical axis. Figure 2.13 shows a bar graph with the complete vertical axis. By looking 
at this bar graph, we can observe that the opinions represented by three categories in fact differ 
by small percentages. But now look at Figure 2.14 in which the vertical axis has been truncated 
to start at 25%. By looking at this bar chart, if we do not pay attention to the vertical axis, we may 
erroneously conclude that the opinions represented by three categories vary by large percentages.
A
B
C
Category
Percentage
40.0
37.5
35.0
32.5
30.0
27.5
25.0
Figure 2.14 Bar graph with truncation 
of the vertical axis.
Figure 2.13 Bar graph without 
truncation of the vertical axis.
A
B
C
Category
Percentage
40
30
20
10
0
 
When interpreting a graph, we should be very cautious. We should observe carefully whether 
the frequency axis has been truncated or whether any axis has been unnecessarily shortened or 
stretched.
EXERCISES
2.9 How are the relative frequencies and percentages of classes 
obtained from the frequencies of classes? Illustrate with the help of an 
example.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
2.8 Briefly explain the three decisions that have to be made to group 
a data set in the form of a frequency distribution table.
www.ebook3000.com

58
Chapter 2 Organizing and Graphing Data
2.10 Three methods—writing classes using limits, using the less-
than method, and grouping data using single-valued classes—were 
discussed to group quantitative data into classes. Explain these three 
methods and give one example of each.
APPLICATIONS
2.11 A local gas station collected data from the day’s receipts, record-
ing the gallons of gasoline each customer purchased. The following 
table lists the frequency distribution of the gallons of gas purchased by 
all customers on this one day at this gas station.
Gallons of Gas
Number of Customers
0 to less than 4
 31
4 to less than 8
 78
8 to less than 12
 49
12 to less than 16
 81
16 to less than 20
117
20 to less than 24
 13
a. How many customers were served on this day at this gas station?
b. Find the class midpoints. Do all of the classes have the same 
width? If so, what is this width? If not, what are the different 
class widths?
c. Prepare the relative frequency and percentage distribution 
columns.
d. What percentage of the customers purchased 12 gallons or 
more?
e. Explain why you cannot determine exactly how many cus-
tomers purchased 10 gallons or less.
f. Prepare the cumulative frequency, cumulative relative fre-
quency, and cumulative percentage distributions using the 
given table.
2.12 A data set on money spent on lottery tickets during the past year 
by 200 households has a lowest value of $1 and a highest value of $1167. 
Suppose we want to group these data into six classes of equal widths.
a. Assuming that we take the lower limit of the first class as 
$1 and the width of each class equal to $200, write the class 
limits for all six classes.
b. Find the class midpoints.
2.13 The following data give the one-way commuting times (in 
minutes) from home to work for a random sample of 50 workers.
23
17
34
26
18
33
46
42
12
37
44
15
22
19
28
32
18
39
40
48
16
11
 9
24
18
26
31
 7
30
15
18
22
29
32
30
21
19
14
26
37
25
36
23
39
42
46
29
17
24
31
a. Construct a frequency distribution table using the classes 0–9, 
10–19, 20–29, 30–39, and 40–49.
b. Calculate the relative frequency and percentage for each class.
c. Construct a histogram for the percentage distribution made in 
part b.
d. What percentage of the workers in this sample commute for 
30 minutes or more?
e. Prepare the cumulative frequency, cumulative relative fre-
quency, and cumulative percentage distributions using the 
table of part a.
Exercises 2.14 to 2.19 are based on the following data
The following table includes partial data for a health fair held at a 
local mall by community college nursing students. The data are 
provided for 30 male and 30 female participants who stopped by 
the health fair booth. Data includes participant’s age to the nearest 
year, body weight in pounds, and blood glucose level measured in 
mg/dL.
Participant
Age 
(Males)
Age 
(Females)
Weight 
(Males)
Weight 
(Females)
Blood 
Glucose 
(Males)
Blood 
Glucose 
(Females)
 1
55
23
197
111
140
124
 2
24
38
137
137
106
105
 3
45
25
139
136
 93
121
 4
38
47
261
105
 92
109
 5
49
23
169
208
117
 97
 6
41
46
201
117
 77
 86
 7
54
34
176
244
128
131
 8
32
35
203
234
 95
143
 9
30
36
210
258
149
134
10
59
58
168
156
131
 90
11
55
58
223
211
130
124
12
21
46
248
163
106
108
13
52
26
151
 99
108
110
14
61
28
220
162
143
144
15
56
53
211
253
 76
 81

2.2 Organizing and Graphing Quantitative Data
59
16
55
33
104
119
124
109
17
52
62
262
231
 89
 81
18
33
35
122
258
107
 85
19
34
31
136
138
103
135
20
33
29
156
139
100
105
21
31
20
222
232
 98
 97
22
27
34
174
140
112
132
23
34
50
230
236
121
113
24
48
47
167
234
105
149
25
25
44
262
149
 81
 99
26
47
21
234
196
134
149
27
49
55
146
202
113
 75
28
22
43
214
229
 93
 85
29
35
53
130
220
124
126
30
29
31
232
190
 76
148
2.14 a.  Construct a frequency distribution table for ages of male 
participants using the classes 20–29, 30–39, 40–49, 50–59, 
and 60–69.
b. Calculate the relative frequency and percentage for each 
class.
c. Construct a histogram for the frequency distribution of part a.
d. What percentage of the male participants are younger 
than 40?
2.15 a.  Construct a frequency distribution table for ages of female 
participants using the classes 20–29, 30–39, 40–49, 50–59, 
and 60–69.
b. Calculate the relative frequency and percentage for each 
class.
c. Construct a histogram for the frequency distribution of part a.
d. What percentage of the female participants are younger than 40?
e. Compare the histograms for Exercises 2.14 and 2.15 and 
mention the similarities and differences.
2.16 a.  Construct a frequency distribution table for weights of male 
participants using the classes 91–125, 126–160, 161–195, 
196–230, and 231–265.
b. Calculate the relative frequency and percentage for each 
class.
c. Construct a histogram for the relative frequency distribution 
of part b.
d. What percentage of the male participants have weights less 
than 161 lbs?
2.17 a.  Construct a frequency distribution table for weights of female 
participants using the classes 91–125, 126–160, 161–195, 
196–230, and 231–265.
b. Calculate the relative frequency and percentage for each 
class.
c. Construct a histogram for the relative frequency distribution 
of part a.
d. What percentage of the female participants have weights less 
than 161 lbs?
e. Compare the histograms for Exercises 2.16 and 2.17 and 
mention the similarities and differences.
2.18 a.  Construct a frequency distribution table for blood glucose 
levels of male participants using the classes 75–89, 90–104, 
105–119, 120–134, and 135–149.
b. Calculate the relative frequency and percentage for each 
class.
c. Construct a histogram for the percentage distribution of 
part b.
d. What percentage of the male participants have blood glucose 
levels more than 119?
e. Prepare the cumulative frequency, cumulative relative fre-
quency, and cumulative percentage distributions using the 
table of part a.
2.19 a.  Construct a frequency distribution table for blood glucose 
levels of female participants using the classes 75–89, 90–104, 
105–119, 120–134, and 135–149.
b. Calculate the relative frequency and percentage for each 
class.
c. Construct a histogram for the percentage distribution of 
part b.
d. What percentage of the female participants have blood 
glucose levels more than 119?
e. Compare the histograms for Exercises 2.18 and 2.19 and 
mention the similarities and differences.
f. Prepare the cumulative frequency, cumulative relative fre-
quency, and cumulative percentage distributions using the 
table of part a.
2.20 The following table lists the number of strikeouts per game 
(K/game) for each of the 30 Major League baseball teams during the 
2014 regular season.
Participant
Age 
(Males)
Age 
(Females)
Weight 
(Males)
Weight 
(Females)
Blood 
Glucose 
(Males)
Blood 
Glucose 
(Females)
www.ebook3000.com

60
Chapter 2 Organizing and Graphing Data
Team 
K/game 
Team 
K/game 
Team 
K/game
Arizona Diamondbacks 
7.89 
Houston Astros 
7.02 
Philadelphia Phillies 
7.75
Atlanta Braves 
8.03 
Kansas City Royals 
7.21 
Pittsburgh Pirates 
7.58
Baltimore Orioles 
7.25 
Los Angeles Angels 
8.28 
San Diego Padres 
7.93
Boston Red Sox 
7.49 
Los Angeles Dodgers 
8.48 
San Francisco Giants 
7.48
Chicago Cubs 
8.09 
Miami Marlins 
7.35 
Seattle Mariners 
8.13
Chicago White Sox 
7.11 
Milwaukee Brewers 
7.69 
St. Louis Cardinals 
7.54
Cincinnati Reds 
7.96 
Minnesota Twins 
6.36 
Tampa Bay Rays 
8.87
Cleveland Indians 
8.95 
New York Mets 
8.04 
Texas Rangers 
6.85
Colorado Rockies 
6.63 
New York Yankees 
8.46 
Toronto Blue Jays 
7.40
Detroit Tigers 
7.68 
Oakland Athletics 
6.68 
Washington Nationals 
7.95
Data source: MLB.com.
a. Construct a frequency distribution table. Take 6.30 as the lower 
boundary of the first class and .55 as the width of each class.
b. Prepare the relative frequency and percentage distribution 
columns for the frequency distribution table of part a.
2.21 The following data give the number of turnovers (fumbles and 
interceptions) made by both teams in each of the football games 
played by a university during the 2014 and 2015 seasons.
2
3
1
1
6
5
3
5
5
1
5
2
1
5
3
4
4
5
8
4
5
2
2
2
6
a. Construct a frequency distribution table for these data using 
single-valued classes.
b. Calculate the relative frequency and percentage for each class.
c. What is the relative frequency of games in which there were 
4 or 5 turnovers?
d. Draw a bar graph for the frequency distribution of part a.
2.22 The following table gives the frequency distribution for the 
numbers of parking tickets received on the campus of a university 
during the past week by 200 students.
 Number of Tickets 
Number of Students
 
0 
59
 
1 
44
 
2 
37
 
3 
32
 
4 
28
Draw two bar graphs for these data, the first without truncating the 
frequency axis and the second by truncating the frequency axis. In the 
second case, mark the frequencies on the vertical axis starting with 
25. Briefly comment on the two bar graphs.
Another technique that is used to present quantitative data in condensed form is the stem-and-
leaf display. An advantage of a stem-and-leaf display over a frequency distribution is that by 
preparing a stem-and-leaf display we do not lose information on individual observations. A stem-
and-leaf display is constructed only for quantitative data.
2.3 Stem-and-Leaf Displays
Stem-and-Leaf Display In a stem-and-leaf display of quantitative data, each value is divided 
into two portions—a stem and a leaf. The leaves for each stem are shown separately in a display.
 
Example 2–8 describes the procedure for constructing a stem-and-leaf display.
EXAMPLE 2–8 
Scores of Students on a Statistics Test
The following are the scores of 30 college students on a statistics test.
75
52
80
96
65
79
71
87
93
95
69
72
81
61
76
86
79
68
50
92
83
84
77
64
71
87
72
92
57
98
Construct a stem-and-leaf display.
Constructing a stem-and-leaf 
display for two-digit numbers.

2.3 Stem-and-Leaf Displays
61
Solution To construct a stem-and-leaf display for these scores, we split each score into two 
parts. The first part contains the first digit of a score, which is called the stem. The second part 
contains the second digit of a score, which is called the leaf. Thus, for the score of the first stu-
dent, which is 75, 7 is the stem and 5 is the leaf. For the score of the second student, which is 52, 
the stem is 5 and the leaf is 2. We observe from the data that the stems for all scores are 5, 6, 7, 
8, and 9 because all these scores lie in the range 50 to 98. To create a stem-and-leaf display, we 
draw a vertical line and write the stems on the left side of it, arranged in increasing order, as 
shown in Figure 2.15.
Figure 2.15 Stem-and-leaf display.
Stems
5
2             Leaf for 52
6
7
5             Leaf for 75
8
9
 
After we have listed the stems, we read the leaves for all scores and record them next 
to the corresponding stems on the right side of the vertical line. For example, for the first 
score we write the leaf 5 next to stem 7; for the second score we write the leaf 2 next 
to stem 5. The recording of these two scores in a stem-and-leaf display is shown in 
Figure 2.15.
 
Now, we read all scores and write the leaves on the right side of the vertical line in the 
rows of corresponding stems. The complete stem-and-leaf display for scores is shown in 
Figure 2.16.
Figure 2.16 Stem-and-leaf 
display of test scores.
5
2 0 7
6
5 9 1 8 4
7
5 9 1 2 6 9 7 1 2
8
0 7 1 6 3 4 7
9
6 3 5 2 2 8
 
By looking at the stem-and-leaf display of Figure 2.16, we can observe how the data 
values are distributed. For example, the stem 7 has the highest frequency, followed by stems 8, 
9, 6, and 5.
 
The leaves for each stem of the stem-and-leaf display of Figure 2.16 are ranked (in increas-
ing order) and presented in Figure 2.17.
Figure 2.17 Ranked 
stem-and-leaf display of 
test scores.
5
0 2 7
6
1 4 5 8 9
7
1 1 2 2 5 6 7 9 9
8
0 1 3 4 6 7 7
9
2 2 3 5 6 8
 
As already mentioned, one advantage of a stem-and-leaf display is that we do not lose infor-
mation on individual observations. We can rewrite the individual scores of the 30 college students 
from the stem-and-leaf display of Figure 2.16 or Figure 2.17. By contrast, the information on 
individual observations is lost when data are grouped into a frequency table.
◼
www.ebook3000.com

62
Chapter 2 Organizing and Graphing Data
EXAMPLE 2–9 
Monthly Rents Paid by Households
The following data give the monthly rents paid by a sample of 30 households selected from a 
small town.
880
1081
721
1075
1023
775
1235
750
965
960
1210
985
1231
932
850
825
1000
915
1191
1035
1151
630
1175
952
1100
1140
750
1140
1370
1280
Construct a stem-and-leaf display for these data.
Solution Each of the values in the data set contains either three or four digits. We will take the 
first digit for three-digit numbers and the first two digits for four-digit numbers as stems. Then 
we will use the last two digits of each number as a leaf. Thus for the first value, which is 880, the 
stem is 8 and the leaf is 80. The stems for the entire data set are 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13. They 
are recorded on the left side of the vertical line in Figure 2.18. The leaves for the numbers are 
recorded on the right side.
Figure 2.18 Stem-and-leaf 
display of rents.
6
30
7
21 75 50 50
8
80 50 25
9
65 60 85 32 15 52
10
81 75 23 00 35
11
91 51 75 00 40 40
12
35 10 31 80
13
70
 
Sometimes a data set may contain too many stems, with each stem containing only a few 
leaves. In such cases, we may want to condense the stem-and-leaf display by grouping the stems. 
Example 2–10 describes this procedure.
EXAMPLE 2–10 
Number of Hours Spent Working on Computers 
by Students
The following stem-and-leaf display is prepared for the number of hours that 25 students spent 
working on computers during the past month.
0
6
1
1 7 9
2
2 6
3
2 4 7 8
4
1 5 6 9 9
5
3 6 8
6
2 4 4 5 7
7
8
5 6
Prepare a new stem-and-leaf display by grouping the stems.
Solution To condense the given stem-and-leaf display, we can combine the first three rows, the 
middle three rows, and the last three rows, thus getting the stems 0–2, 3–5, and 6–8. The leaves 
for each stem of a group are separated by an asterisk (*), as shown in Figure 2.19. Thus, the leaf 
6 in the first row corresponds to stem 0; the leaves 1, 7, and 9 correspond to stem 1; and leaves 2 
and 6 belong to stem 2.
Figure 2.19 Grouped stem-and-
leaf display.
0–2
6 * 1 7 9 * 2 6
3–5
2 4 7 8 * 1 5 6 9 9 * 3 6 8
6–8
2 4 4 5 7 * * 5 6
Mark Harmel/Stone/Getty Images
Constructing a stem-and-leaf 
display for three- and four-digit 
numbers.
Preparing a grouped 
stem-and-leaf display.
◼

2.3 Stem-and-Leaf Displays
63
 
If a stem does not contain a leaf, this is indicated in the grouped stem-and-leaf display by two 
consecutive asterisks. For example, in the stem-and-leaf display of Figure 2.19, there is no leaf 
for 7; that is, there is no number in the 70s. Hence, in Figure 2.19, we have two asterisks after the 
leaves for 6 and before the leaves for 8. 
◼
 
Some data sets produce stem-and-leaf displays that have a small number of stems relative to 
the number of observations in the data set and have too many leaves for each stem. In such cases, 
it is very difficult to determine if the distribution is symmetric or skewed, as well as other char-
acteristics of the distribution that will be introduced in later chapters. In such a situation, we can 
create a stem-and-leaf display with split stems. To do this, each stem is split into two or five parts. 
Whenever the stems are split into two parts, any observation having a leaf with a value of 0, 1, 2, 
3, or 4 is placed in the first split stem, while the leaves 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 are placed in the second 
split stem. Sometimes we can split a stem into five parts if there are too many leaves for one stem. 
Whenever a stem is split into five parts, leaves with values of 0 and 1 are placed next to the first 
part of the split stem, leaves with values of 2 and 3 are placed next to the second part of the split 
stem, and so on. The stem-and-leaf display of Example 2–11 shows this procedure.
EXAMPLE 2–11 
Consider the following stem-and-leaf display, which has only two stems. Using the split stem 
procedure, rewrite this stem-and-leaf display.
3
1 1 2 3 3 3 4 4 7 8 9 9 9
4
0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 6 6 7
Solution To prepare a split stem-and-leaf display, let us split the two stems, 3 and 4, into two 
parts each as shown in Figure 2.20. The first part of each stem contains leaves from 0 to 4, and 
the second part of each stem contains leaves from 5 to 9.
Figure 2.20 Split stem-and-leaf display.
3
1 1 2 3 3 3 4 4
3
7 8 9 9 9
4
0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 3 3
4
6 6 7
Figure 2.21 Split stem-and-leaf display.
3
1 1
3
2 3 3 3
3
4 4
3
7
3
8 9 9 9
4
0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1
4
2 2 2 2 2 3 3
4
4
6 6 7
 
In the stem-and-leaf display of Figure 2.20, the first part of stem 4 has a substantial number 
of leaves. So, if we decide to split stems into five parts, the new stem-and-leaf display will look 
as shown in Figure 2.21.
 
There are two important properties to note in the split stem-and-leaf display of Figure 2.21. 
The third part of split stem 4 does not have any leaves. This implies that there are no observations 
in the data set having a value of 44 or 45. Since there are observations with values larger than 45, 
we need to leave an empty part of split stem 4 that corresponds to 44 and 45. Also, there are no 
observations with values of 48 or 49. However, since there are no values larger than 47 in the 
data, we do not have to write an empty split stem 4 after the largest value. 
◼
Stem-and-leaf display with 
split stems.
www.ebook3000.com

64
Chapter 2 Organizing and Graphing Data
EXERCISES
1, 2, 3, and 4, and the second part should contains the leaves 
5, 6, 7, 8, and 9.
c. Which display (the one in part a or the one in part b) provides 
a better representation of the features of the distribution? 
Explain why you believe this.
2.28 The following data give the taxes paid (rounded to thousand 
dollars) in 2014 by a random sample of 30 families.
11
17
35
 3
15
 9
21
13
 5
19
 5
12
 8
16
10
 8
12
 6
14
18
 8
12
 5
 3
14
28
38
18
22
15
a. Prepare a stem-and-leaf display for these data. Arrange the 
leaves for each stem in increasing order.
b. Prepare a split stem-and-leaf display for these data. Split each 
stem into two parts. The first part should contain the leaves 
0 through 4, and the second part should contain the leaves 
5 through 9.
2.29 The following data give the one-way commuting times (in 
minutes) from home to work for a random sample of 50 workers.
23
17
34
26
18
33
46
42
12
37
44
15
22
19
28
32
18
39
40
48
16
11
 9
24
18
26
31
7
30
15
18
22
29
32
30
21
19
14
26
37
25
36
23
39
42
46
29
17
24
31
Construct a stem-and-leaf display for these data. Arrange the leaves 
for each stem in increasing order.
2.30 The following data give the money (in dollars) spent on text-
books during the Fall 2015 semester by 35 students selected from a 
university.
565
728
870
620
345
868
610
765
550
845
530
705
490
258
320
505
957
787
617
721
635
438
575
702
538
720
460
840
890
560
570
706
430
968
638
a. Prepare a stem-and-leaf display for these data using the last 
two digits as leaves.
b. Condense the stem-and-leaf display by grouping the stems as 
2–4, 5–6, and 7–9.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
2.23 Briefly explain how to prepare a stem-and-leaf display for a 
data set. You may use an example to illustrate.
2.24 What advantage does preparing a stem-and-leaf display have over 
grouping a data set using a frequency distribution? Give one example.
2.25 Consider the following stem-and-leaf display.
2–3
18 45 56  *  29  67 83 97
4–5
04 27 33 71  *   23 37 51 63 81 92
6–8
22 36 47 55 78   89  *   *  10 41
Write the data set that is represented by this display.
APPLICATIONS
2.26 The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration collects 
data on fatal accidents that occur on roads in the United States. The fol-
lowing data represent the number of vehicle fatalities for 39 counties in 
South Carolina for 2012 (www-fars.nhtsa.dot.gov/States).
 4
48
 9
 9
31
22
26
17
20
12
 6
 5
14
 9
16
27
 3
33
 9
20
68
13
51
13
48
23
12
13
10
15
 8
 1
 2
 4
17
16
 6
52
50
Prepare a stem-and-leaf display for these data. Arrange the leaves for 
each stem in increasing order.
2.27 The following data give the times (in minutes) taken by 50 stu-
dents to complete a statistics examination that was given a maximum 
time of 75 minutes to finish.
41
28
45
60
53
69
70
50
63
68
37
44
42
38
74
53
66
65
52
64
26
45
66
35
43
44
39
55
64
54
38
52
58
72
67
65
43
65
68
27
64
49
71
75
45
69
56
73
53
72
a. Prepare a stem-and-leaf display for these data. Arrange the 
leaves for each stem in increasing order.
b. Prepare a split stem-and-leaf display for the data. Split each 
stem into two parts. The first part should contains the leaves 0, 
One of the simplest methods for graphing and understanding quantitative data is to create a 
dotplot. As with most graphs, statistical software should be used to make a dotplot for large data 
sets. However, Example 2–12 demonstrates how to create a dotplot by hand.
 
Dotplots can help us detect outliers (also called extreme values) in a data set. Outliers 
are the values that are extremely large or extremely small with respect to the rest of the data 
values.
2.4 Dotplots

2.4 Dotplots
65
Outliers or Extreme Values Values that are very small or very large relative to the majority of 
the values in a data set are called outliers or extreme values.
EXAMPLE 2–12 
Ages of Students in a Night Class
A statistics class that meets once a week at night from 7:00 PM to 9:45 PM has 33 students. 
The following data give the ages (in years) of these students. Create a dotplot for these data.
34
21
49
37
23
22
33
23
21
20
19
33
23
38
32
31
22
20
24
27
33
19
23
21
31
31
22
20
34
21
33
27
21
Solution To make a dotplot, we perform the following steps.
Step 1. The minimum and maximum values in this data set are 19 and 49 years, respectively. 
First, we draw a horizontal line (let us call this the numbers line) with numbers that cover the 
given data as shown in Figure 2.22. Note that the numbers line in Figure 2.22 shows the values 
from 19 to 49.
Creating a dotplot.
Figure 2.22 Numbers line.
19
21
23
25
27
29
31
33
35
37
39
41
43
45
47
49
Step 2. Next we place a dot above the value on the numbers line that represents each of the ages 
listed above. For example, the age of the first student is 34 years. So, we place a dot above 34 on 
the numbers line as shown in Figure 2.23. If there are two or more observations with the same 
value, we stack dots above each other to represent those values. For example, as shown in the data 
on ages, two students are 19 years old. We stack two dots (one for each student) above 19 on the 
numbers line, as shown in Figure 2.23. After all the dots are placed, Figure 2.23 gives the complete 
dotplot.
19
21
23
25
27
29
31
33
35
37
39
41
43
45
47
49
Ages of Students
Figure 2.23 Dotplot for ages of students in a statistics class.
 
As we examine the dotplot of Figure 2.23, we notice that there are two clusters (groups) of 
data. Eighteen of the 33 students (which is almost 55%) are 19 to 24 years old, and 10 of the 33 
students (which is about 30%) are 31 to 34 years old. There is one student who is 49 years old 
and is an outlier.  
◼
www.ebook3000.com

66
Chapter 2 Organizing and Graphing Data
USES AND MISUSES...
GRAPHICALLY SPEAKING…
Imagine a high school in Middle America, if you will. We shall call it 
Central High School. In Central High there are a fair number of very 
talented athletes who play soccer, baseball, football, and basketball. 
At the annual fundraiser for the school, the cheer squad sells advance 
tickets to the home games so that the community can be entertained 
by the local school athletes.
 
As it happens, the cheer squad was able to sell a total of 175 
tickets at this year’s fundraising event. The ticket sales for the various 
sports were as follows:
 
Number of
Sport 
Tickets Sold
Soccer 
23
Baseball 
30
Football 
63
Basketball 
59
EXERCISES
23
17
34
26
18
33
46
42
12
37
44
15
22
19
28
32
18
39
40
48
16
11
 9
24
18
26
31
 7
30
15
18
22
29
32
30
21
19
14
26
37
25
36
23
39
42
46
29
17
24
31
Create a dotplot for these data.
2.37 The following table, which is based on Consumer Reports 
tests and surveys, gives the overall scores (combining road-test and 
reliability scores) for 28 brands of vehicles for which they had 
enough data (USA Today, February 25, 2015). Create a dotplot for 
these data.
Brand 
Overall Score 
Brand 
Overall Score
Acura 
65 
Kia 
68
Audi 
73 
Lexus 
78
Buick 
69 
Lincoln 
59
Cadillac 
58 
Mazda 
75
Chevrolet 
59 
MBW 
66
Chrysler 
54 
Mercedes-Benz 
56
Dodge 
52 
MiniCooper 
46
Fiat 
32 
Nissan 
59
Ford 
53 
Porsche 
70
GMC 
61 
Scion 
54
Honda 
69 
Subaru 
73
Hyundai 
64 
Toyota 
74
Infiniti 
59 
Volkswagen 
60
Jeep 
39 
Volvo 
65
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
2.31 Briefly explain how to prepare a dotplot for a data set. You may 
use an example to illustrate.
2.32 What are the benefits of preparing a dotplot? Explain.
2.33 Create a dotplot for the following data set.
1
2
0
5
1
1
3
2
0
5
2
1
2
1
2
0
1
3
1
2
APPLICATIONS
2.34 The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration collects 
data on fatal accidents that occur on roads in the United States. The fol-
lowing data represent the number of vehicle fatalities for 39 counties in 
South Carolina for 2012 (www-fars.nhtsa.dot.gov/States).
 4
48
 9
 9
31
22
26
17
20
12
 6
 5
14
 9
16
27
 3
33
 9
20
68
13
51
13
48
23
12
13
10
15
 8
 1
 2
 4
17
16
 6
52
50
Make a dotplot for these data.
2.35 The following data give the times (in minutes) taken by 50 stu-
dents to complete a statistics examination that was given a maximum 
time of 75 minutes to finish.
41
28
45
60
53
69
70
50
63
68
37
44
42
38
74
53
66
65
52
64
26
45
66
35
43
44
39
55
64
54
38
52
58
72
67
65
43
65
68
27
64
49
71
75
45
69
56
73
53
72
Create a dotplot for these data.
2.36 The following data give the one-way commuting times (in 
minutes) from home to work for a random sample of 50 workers.
 
In order to show the results of the ticket sales to the Central High 
community, some of the students got together and decided to make 

Glossary
67
an attractive graph to display the ticket sales in the local paper. As 
dutiful students, they carefully investigated types of charts that might 
work, and ultimately decided to arrange the graph by sport on the 
horizontal-axis and the number of tickets sold on the vertical-axis. To 
make the graph a bit more vivid, they embellished it using a pictogram 
(that is, a graph made with pictures). They used the following graph to 
publish in the local paper.
 
A more conservative approach would have been to use a stand-
ard bar chart. The following bar graph was constructed using the 
same information as in the pictogram above.
The graph was very well received by the readers of the local paper, 
and was very attractive to the eye. Further, the football and basket-
ball teams and their supporters were happy to see just how much 
more popular their respective sports were compared to soccer and 
baseball. However, there is a major problem with the graph. This 
graph had the intent of showing the number of tickets sold. This 
means that we should focus on the height of the balls for each sport, 
which, when read horizontally across to the vertical-axis, do in fact 
match the number of tickets reported to have been sold in the table 
above. But the eye is easily deceived. What is immediately clear is 
that we tend to focus on the relative sizes of the balls, not the heights 
that they represent. In that context, it seems that a huge number of 
basketball tickets were sold compared to the other sports because 
the eye focuses immediately on the circumference or the area of the 
circle represented by the basketball, which appears much larger than 
the other balls. In fact, comparing soccer to basketball, the area of 
the basketball in the graph is 6.6 times larger than that of the soccer 
ball, whereas the tickets sold for basketball were about 2.6 times 
more than the soccer tickets sold.
 
Obviously, this graph does not have the same eye appeal as the 
one reported in the newspaper; however, it is much clearer to an 
observer. It is obvious from this graph that the number of soccer tick-
ets and the number of baseball tickets were quite close, as were the 
number of football and the number of basketball tickets. It is also clear 
that the number of football tickets is about three times larger than the 
number of soccer tickets and that the number of football tickets is 
about two times larger than the number of baseball tickets. These rela-
tionships were much more difficult to discern in the pictogram.
 
In 1954, Darrell Huff wrote a fascinating and entertaining book 
titled How to Lie with Statistics (Huff, Darrell, How to Lie with Statis-
tics, 1954, New York: W. W. Norton). That book contains many illus-
trations of how graphs can be used to deceive—either intentionally or 
unintentionally—those doing a visual interpretation of data. As Mr. Huff 
states in his book, “The crooks already know these tricks; honest 
men must learn them in self-defense.” In that regard, it is sometimes 
useful to learn how not to do something in order to understand the 
importance of doing it correctly.
Number of tickets sold
Sport
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
70
Soccer
Baseball
Football Basketball
Number of tickets sold
Sport
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
70
Soccer
Baseball
Football
Basketball
Cumulative frequency The frequency of a class that includes all values 
in a data set that fall below the upper boundary or limit of that class.
Cumulative frequency distribution A table that lists the total number 
of values that fall below the upper boundary or limit of each class.
Cumulative percentage The cumulative relative frequency multi-
plied by 100.
Cumulative relative frequency The cumulative frequency of a 
class divided by the total number of observations.
Frequency distribution A table that lists all the categories or 
classes and the number of values that belong to each of these catego-
ries or classes.
Grouped data A data set presented in the form of a frequency 
distribution.
Bar graph A graph made of bars whose heights represent the fre-
quencies of respective categories.
Class An interval that includes all the values in a (quantitative) data 
set that fall within two numbers, the lower and upper limits of the class.
Class boundary The lower and upper numbers of a class interval 
in less-than method.
Class frequency The number of values in a data set that belong to 
a certain class.
Class midpoint or mark The class midpoint or mark is obtained 
by dividing the sum of the lower and upper limits (or boundaries) of 
a class by 2.
Class width or size The difference between the two boundaries of a class 
or the difference between the lower limits of two consecutive classes.
Glossary
www.ebook3000.com

68
Chapter 2 Organizing and Graphing Data
Histogram A graph in which classes are marked on the horizontal 
axis and frequencies, relative frequencies, or percentages are marked 
on the vertical axis. The frequencies, relative frequencies, or percent-
ages of various classes are represented by the heights of bars that are 
drawn adjacent to each other.
Outliers or Extreme values Values that are very small or very large 
relative to the majority of the values in a data set.
Pareto chart A bar graph in which bars are arranged in decreasing 
order of heights.
Percentage The percentage for a class or category is obtained by 
multiplying the relative frequency of that class or category by 100.
Pie chart A circle divided into portions that represent the relative 
frequencies or percentages of different categories or classes.
Polygon A graph formed by joining the midpoints of the tops of 
successive bars in a histogram by straight lines.
Raw data Data recorded in the sequence in which they are collected 
and before they are processed.
Relative frequency The frequency of a class or category divided by 
the sum of all frequencies.
Skewed-to-the-left histogram A histogram with a longer tail on 
the left side.
Skewed-to-the-right histogram A histogram with a longer tail on 
the right side.
Stem-and-leaf display A display of data in which each value is 
divided into two portions—a stem and a leaf.
Symmetric histogram A histogram that is identical on both sides 
of its central point.
Ungrouped data Data containing information on each member of a 
sample or population individually.
Uniform or rectangular histogram A histogram with the same 
frequency for all classes.
a. Construct a frequency distribution table. Take 32 as the lower 
limit of the first class and 6 as the class width.
b. Calculate the relative frequency and percentage for each class.
c. Construct a histogram for the frequency distribution of part a.
d. On what percentage of these 40 days did this student send 44 
or more text messages?
e. Prepare the cumulative frequency, cumulative relative fre-
quency, and cumulative percentage distributions.
2.41 The following data give the number of orders received for a 
sample of 30 hours at the Timesaver Mail Order Company.
34
44
31
52
41
47
38
35
32
39
28
24
46
41
49
53
57
33
27
37
30
27
45
38
34
46
36
30
47
50
a. Construct a frequency distribution table. Take 23 as the lower 
limit of the first class and 7 as the width of each class.
b. Calculate the relative frequencies and percentages for all 
classes.
c. For what percentage of the hours in this sample was the number 
of orders more than 36?
d. Prepare the cumulative frequency, cumulative relative fre-
quency, and cumulative percentage distributions.
2.42 The following data give the amounts (in dollars) spent on 
refreshments by 30 spectators randomly selected from those who 
patronized the concession stands at a recent Major League Baseball 
game.
 4.95
27.99
8.00
5.80
4.50
2.99
4.85
6.00
 9.00
15.75
9.50
3.05
5.65
21.00
16.60
18.00
21.77
12.35
7.75
10.45
3.85
28.45
8.35
17.70
19.50
11.65
11.45
3.00
6.55
16.50
a. Construct a frequency distribution table using the less-than 
method to write classes. Take $0 as the lower boundary of the 
first class and $6 as the width of each class.
2.38 The following data give the political party of each of the first 
30 U.S. presidents. In the data, D stands for Democrat, DR for Demo-
cratic Republican, F for Federalist, R for Republican, and W for 
Whig.
F
F
DR
DR
DR
DR
D
D
W
W
D
W
W
D
D
R
D
R
R
R
R
D
R
D
R
R
R
D
R
R
a. Prepare a frequency distribution table for these data.
b. Calculate the relative frequency and percentage distributions.
c. Draw a bar graph for the relative frequency distribution and a 
pie chart for the percentage distribution.
d. Make a Pareto chart for the frequency distribution.
e. What percentage of these presidents were Whigs?
2.39 The following data give the number of television sets owned by 
40 randomly selected households.
1
1
2
3
2
4
1
3
2
1
3
0
2
1
2
3
2
3
2
2
1
2
1
1
1
3
1
1
1
2
2
4
2
3
1
3
1
2
2
4
a. Prepare a frequency distribution table for these data using 
single-valued classes.
b. Compute the relative frequency and percentage distributions.
c. Draw a bar graph for the frequency distribution.
d. What percentage of the households own two or more televi-
sion sets?
2.40 The following data give the number of text messages sent on 
40 randomly selected days during 2015 by a high school student:
32
33
33
34
35
36
37
37
37
37
38
39
40
41
41
42
42
42
43
44
44
45
45
45
47
47
47
47
47
48
48
49
50
50
51
52
53
54
59
61
Supplementary Exercises

Advanced Exercises
69
b. Calculate the relative frequencies, and percentages for all classes.
c. Draw a histogram for the frequency distribution.
d. Prepare the cumulative frequency, cumulative relative fre-
quency, and cumulative percentage distributions.
2.43 The following table lists the average one-way commuting 
times (in minutes) from home to work for 30 metropolitan areas around 
the world with more than 1 million residents (urbandemographics.
blogspot.com).
 
Average 
 
Average
 
Commute Length 
 
Commute Length
City 
(minutes) 
City 
(minutes)
Barcelona 
24.2 
Paris 
33.7
Belém 
31.5 
Paulo 
42.8
Belo Horizonte 
34.4 
Porto Alegre 
27.7
Berlin 
31.6 
Recife 
34.9
Boston 
28.9 
Rio de Janeiro 
42.6
Brasilia - DF 
34.8 
Salvador 
33.9
Chicago 
30.7 
San Francisco 
28.7
Curitiba 
32.1 
Santiago 
27.0
Fortaleza 
31.7 
Seattle 
26.9
London 
37.0 
Shanghai 
50.4
Los Angeles 
28.1 
Stockholm 
35.0
Madrid 
33.0 
Sydney 
34.0
Milan 
26.7 
Tokyo 
34.5
Montréal 
31.0 
Toronto 
33.0
New York 
34.6 
Vancouver 
30.0
a. Prepare a frequency distribution table for these data using the 
less-than method to write classes. Use 22 minutes as the lower 
boundary of the first class and 6 minutes as the class width.
b. Calculate the relative frequencies and percentages for all classes.
c. Draw a histogram for the frequency distribution.
d. Make the cumulative frequency, cumulative relative frequency, 
and cumulative percentages distributions.
2.44 The following data give the number of text messages sent on 
40 randomly selected days during 2015 by a high school student.
32
33
33
34
35
36
37
37
37
37
38
39
40
41
41
42
42
42
43
44
44
45
45
45
47
47
47
47
47
48
48
49
50
50
51
52
53
54
59
61
Prepare a stem-and-leaf display for these data.
2.45 The following data give the number of orders received for a 
sample of 30 hours at the Timesaver Mail Order Company.
34
44
31
52
41
47
38
35
32
39
28
24
46
41
49
53
57
33
27
37
30
27
45
38
34
46
36
30
47
50
Prepare a stem-and-leaf display for these data.
2.46 The following data give the number of text messages sent on 40 
randomly selected days during 2015 by a high school student.
32
33
33
34
35
36
37
37
37
37
38
39
40
41
41
42
42
42
43
44
44
45
45
45
47
47
47
47
47
48
48
49
50
50
51
52
53
54
59
61
Create a dotplot for these data.
2.47 The following data give the number of orders received for a 
sample of 30 hours at the Timesaver Mail Order Company.
34
44
31
52
41
47
38
35
32
39
28
24
46
41
49
53
57
33
27
37
30
27
45
38
34
46
36
30
47
50
Create a dotplot for these data.
c. How can you change the frequency distribution so that the 
resulting histogram gives a clearer picture?
2.49 Suppose a data set contains the ages of 135 autoworkers ranging 
from 20 to 53 years.
a. Using Sturge’s formula given in footnote 1 in section 2.2.2, 
find an appropriate number of classes for a frequency distribu-
tion for this data set.
b. Find an appropriate class width based on the number of 
classes in part a.
2.50 Stem-and-leaf displays can be used to compare distributions 
for two groups using a back-to-back stem-and-leaf display. In such a 
display, one group is shown on the left side of the stems, and the other 
group is shown on the right side. When the leaves are ordered, the 
leaves increase as one moves away from the stems. The following 
stem-and-leaf display shows the money earned per tournament entered 
for the top 30 money winners in the 2008–09 Professional Bowlers 
Association men’s tour and for the top 21 money winners in the 2008–
09 Professional Bowlers Association women’s tour.
2.48 The following frequency distribution table gives the age distri-
bution of drivers who were at fault in auto accidents that occurred 
during a 1-week period in a city.
Age (years) 
f
18 to less than 20 
 7
20 to less than 25 
12
25 to less than 30 
18
30 to less than 40 
14
40 to less than 50 
15
50 to less than 60 
16
60 and over 
35
Advanced Exercises
a. Draw a relative frequency histogram for this table.
b. In what way(s) is this histogram misleading?
www.ebook3000.com

70
Chapter 2 Organizing and Graphing Data
 Women’s 
 
Men’s
 
8 
0
 
8871 
1
 65544330 
2 
334456899
 
840 
3 
03344678
 
52 
4 
011237888
 
21 
5 
9
 
 
6 
9
 
5 
7
 
 
8 
7
 
 
9 
5
d. Does either of the tours appears to have any outliers? If so, 
what are the earnings levels for these players?
2.51 Statisticians often need to know the shape of a population to 
make inferences. Suppose that you are asked to specify the shape of 
the population of weights of all college students.
a. Sketch a graph of what you think the weights of all college 
students would look like.
b. The following data give the weights (in pounds) of a random 
sample of 44 college students (F and M indicate female and 
male, respectively).
123 F
195 M
138 M
115 F
179 M
119 F
148 F
147 F
180 M
146 F
179 M
189 M
175 M
108 F
193 M
114 F
179 M
147 M
108 F
128 F
164 F
174 M
128 F
159 M
193 M
204 M
125 F
133 F
115 F
168 M
123 F
183 M
116 F
182 M
174 M
102 F
123 F 
 99 F
161 M
162 M
155 F
202 M
110 F
132 M
 i. Construct a stem-and-leaf display for these data.
ii. Can you explain why these data appear the way they do?
c. Construct a back-to-back stem-and-leaf display for the data 
on weights, placing the weights of the female students to 
the left of the stems and those of the male students to the 
right of the stems. Does one gender tend to have higher 
weights than the other? Explain how you know this from the 
display.
The leaf unit for this display is 100. In other words, the data used 
represent the earnings in hundreds of dollars. For example, for the 
women’s tour, the first number is 08, which is actually 800. The 
second number is 11, which actually is 1100.
a. Do the top money winners, as a group, on one tour (men’s or 
women’s) tend to make more money per tournament played 
than on the other tour? Explain how you can come to this con-
clusion using the stem-and-leaf display.
b. What would be a typical earnings level amount per tourna-
ment played for each of the two tours?
c. Do the data appear to have similar spreads for the two tours? 
Explain how you can come to this conclusion using the stem-
and-leaf display.
4. 
Thirty-six randomly selected senior citizens were asked if their 
net worth is more than or less than $200,000. Their responses are 
given below, where M stands for more, L represents less, N means do 
not know or do not want to tell.
M
M
L
L
L
N
M
N
L
L
M
M
L
L
N
L
L
M
M
L
N
L
L
L
M
M
L
M
L
L
M
M
L
N
L
N
a. Make a frequency distribution for these 36 responses.
b. Using the frequency distribution of part a, prepare the relative 
frequency and percentage distributions.
c. What percentage of these senior citizens claim to have net 
worth less than $200,000?
d. Make a bar graph for the frequency distribution.
e. Make a Pareto chart for the frequency distribution.
f. Draw a pie chart for the percentage distribution.
5. 
Forty-eight randomly selected car owners were asked about their 
typical monthly expense on gas. The following data show the responses 
of these 48 car owners.
$210 160
430
255
176
135
221
359
380
405
391
477
 333 209
267
121
357
 87
167
 95
347
487
302
545
 351 256
492
277
245
367
159
187
253
287
456
 64
  76 166
304
444
193
479
188
148
 53
327
234
110
a. Construct a frequency distribution table. Use the classes 
50–149, 150–249, 250–349, 350–449, and 450–549.
b. Calculate the relative frequency and percentage for each class.
1. 
Briefly explain the difference between ungrouped and grouped 
data and give one example of each type.
2. 
The following table gives the frequency distribution of times (to 
the nearest hour) that 90 fans spent waiting in line to buy tickets to a 
rock concert.
Waiting Time 
      (hours) 
Frequency
 0 to  6 
 5
 7 to 13 
27
14 to 20 
30
21 to 27 
20
28 to 34 
 8
Circle the correct answer in each of the following statements, which 
are based on this table.
a. The number of classes in the table is 5, 30, 90.
b. The class width is 6, 7, 34.
c. The midpoint of the third class is 16.5, 17, 17.5.
d. The lower boundary of the second class is 6.5, 7, 7.5.
e. The upper limit of the second class is 12.5, 13, 13.5.
f. The sample size is 5, 90, 11.
g. The relative frequency of the second class is .22, .41, .30.
3. 
Briefly explain and illustrate with the help of graphs a symmetric 
histogram, a histogram skewed to the right, and a histogram skewed to 
the left.
Self-Review Test

Technology Instructions
71
c. Construct a histogram for the percentage distribution made in 
part b.
d. What percentage of the car owners in this sample spend $350 
or more on gas per month?
e. Prepare the cumulative frequency, cumulative relative frequency, 
and cumulative percentage distributions using the table of part a.
6. 
Thirty customers from all customers who shopped at a large 
grocery store during a given week were randomly selected and their 
shopping expenses was noted. The following data show the expenses 
(in dollars) of these 30 customers.
89.20
145.23
191.54
45.36
67.98
123.67
187.57
56.43
102.45
158.76
134.07
67.49
212.60
165.75
46.50
111.25
64.54
23.67
135.09
193.46
87.65
133.76
156.28
88.64
65.90
120.50
55.45
91.54
153.20
44.39
a. Prepare a frequency distribution table for these data. Use the 
classes as 20 to less than 60, 60 to less than 100, 100 to less 
than 140, 140 to less than 180, and 180 to less than 220.
b. What is the width of each class in part a?
c. Using the frequency distribution of part a, prepare the relative 
frequency and percentage distributions.
d. What percentage of these customers spent less than $140 at 
this grocery store?
e. Make a histogram for the frequency distribution.
f. Prepare the cumulative frequency, cumulative relative frequency, 
and cumulative percentage distributions using the table of part a.
7. 
Construct a stem-and-leaf display for the following data, which 
give the times (in minutes) that 24 customers spent waiting to speak 
to a customer service representative when they called about problems 
with their Internet service provider.
12
15
 7
29
32
16
10
14
17
 8
19
21
 4
14
22
25
18
 6
22
16
13
16
12
20
8. 
Consider this stem-and-leaf display:
3
0 3 7
4
2 4 6 7 9
5
1 3 3 6
6
0 7 7
7
1 9
Write the data set that was used to construct this display.
9. 
Make a dotplot for the data on typical monthly expenses on gas 
for the 48 car owners given in Problem 5.
Note: The Mini-Projects are located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Mini-Projects
Note: The Decide for Yourself feature is located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Decide for Yourself
TI-84 Color/TI-84
Chapter 2
TECHNOLOGY 
INSTRUCTIONS
The TI-84 Color Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for the TI-84 Plus C 
color graphing calculator running the 4.0 operating system. Some screens, menus, and func-
tions will be slightly different in older operating systems. The TI-84 and TI-84 Plus can perform 
all of the same functions but will not have the “Color” option referenced in some of the menus.
TI-84 calculators do not have the options/capabilities to make the bar graph, pie chart, stem-
and-leaf display, and dotplot.
Creating a Frequency Histogram for Example 2–3 of the Text
1. Enter the data from Example 2–3 of the text into L1. (See Screen 2.1.)
2. Select 2nd > Y = (the STAT PLOT menu).
3. If more than one plot is turned on, select PlotsOff and then press ENTER to turn off the 
plots.
Note: Complete TI-84, Minitab, and Excel manuals are available for download at the textbook’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Screen 2.1
www.ebook3000.com

72
Chapter 2 Organizing and Graphing Data
4. From the STAT PLOT menu, select Plot 1. Use the following settings (see Screen 2.2):
• Select On to turn the plot on.
• At the Type prompt, select the third icon (histogram).
• At the Xlist prompt, enter L1 by pressing 2nd > 1.
• At the Freq prompt, enter 1.
• Select BLUE  at the Color prompt.
    (Skip this step if you do not have the TI-84 Color calculator.)
5. Select ZOOM > ZoomStat to display the histogram. This function will automatically 
choose window settings and class boundaries for the histogram. (See Screen 2.3.)
6. Press TRACE and use the left and right arrow keys to see the class boundaries and 
frequencies for each class. (See Screen 2.4.)
7. To manually change the window settings and the class boundaries, press WINDOW and use 
the following settings:
• Type 600 at the Xmin prompt. Xmin is the extreme left value of the window and the 
lower boundary value of the first class.
• Type 2700 at the Xmax prompt. Xmax is the extreme right value of the window.
• Type 300 at the Xscl prompt. Xscl is the class width.
• Type -3 at the Ymin prompt. Ymin is the extreme bottom value of the window.
• Type 15 at the Ymax prompt. Ymax is the extreme top value of the window.
• Type 3 at the Yscl prompt. Yscl is the distance between tick marks on the y-axis.
• Press GRAPH to see the histogram with the new settings.
The Minitab Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Minitab version 17. Some 
screens, menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Minitab.
Creating a Bar Graph for Example 2–1 of the Text
Bar Graph for Ungrouped Data
1. Enter the 30 data values of Example 2–1 of the text into column C1.
2. Select Graph > Bar Chart.
3. Use the following settings in the resulting dialog box:
• Select Counts of unique values, select Simple, and click OK.
4. Use the following settings in the new dialog box:
• Type C1 in the Categorical variables box, and click OK.
5. The bar graph will appear in a new window. (See Screen 2.5.)
Bar Graph for Grouped Data
1. Enter the grouped data from Example 2–1 as shown in Table 2.4 of the text. Put the Donut 
Variety into column C1 and the Frequency into column C2.
Minitab
Screen 2.4
Screen 2.2
Screen 2.3
Screen 2.5

Technology Instructions
73
2. Select Graph > Bar Chart.
3. Use the following settings in the resulting dialog box:
• Select Values from a table, select Simple, and click OK.
4. Use the following settings in the new dialog box:
• Type C2 in the Graph variables box, C1 in the Categorical variable box, and click OK.
5. The bar graph will appear in a new window. (See Screen 2.5.)
To make a Pareto chart, after step 4 above, click on Chart Options in the same dialog box. 
Select Decreasing Y in the next dialog box. Click OK in both dialog boxes. The Pareto chart 
will appear in a new window.
Creating a Pie Chart for Example 2–1 of the Text
Pie Chart for Ungrouped Data
1. Enter the 30 data values of Example 2–1 of the text into column C1.
2. Select Graph > Pie Chart.
3. Use the following settings in the resulting dialog box:
• Select Chart counts of unique values, and type C1 in the Categorical 
variables box.
• To label slices of the pie chart with percentages or category names, select 
Labels > Slice Labels. Choose the options you prefer and click OK.
4. The pie chart will appear in a new window. (See Screen 2.6.)
Pie Chart for Grouped Data
1. Enter the grouped data from Example 2–1 as shown in Table 2.4 of the text. Put the Donut 
Variety into column C1 and the Frequency into column C2.
2. Select Graph > Pie Chart.
3. Use the following settings in the resulting dialog box:
• Select Chart values from a table, type C1 in the Categorical variable box, and type C2 
in the Summary variables box.
• To label slices of the pie chart with percentages or category names, select Labels > Slice 
Labels. Choose the options you prefer, and click OK.
4. The pie chart will appear in a new window. (See Screen 2.6.)
Creating a Frequency Histogram for Example 2–3 of the Text
1. Enter the 30 data values of Example 2–3 of the text into column C1.
2. Select Graph > Histogram, select Simple, and click OK.
3. Use the following settings in the resulting dialog box:
• Type C1 in the Graph variables box.
• If you wish to add labels, titles, or subtitles to the histogram, select Labels and choose the 
options you prefer, and click OK.
Screen 2.6
www.ebook3000.com

74
Chapter 2 Organizing and Graphing Data
4. The histogram will appear in a new window. (See Screen 2.7.)
5. To change the class boundaries double-click on any of the bars in the 
histogram and the Edit Bars dialog box will appear. Click on the 
Binning tab. Now choose one of the following two options:
• To set the class midpoints, select Midpoint under Interval Type, 
select Midpoint/Cutpoint positions under the Interval Definition 
box, and then type the class midpoints (separate each value with a 
space). Click OK.
• To set the class boundaries, select Cutpoint under Interval Type, 
select Midpoint/Cutpoint positions, and then type the left boundary 
for each interval and the right endpoint of the last interval (separate 
each value with a space). Click OK.
Creating a Stem-and-Leaf Display for Example 2–8 of the Text
1. Enter the 30 data values of Example 2–8 of the text into column C1.
2. Select Graph > Stem-and-Leaf.
3. Type C1 in the Graph variables box and click OK.
4. The stem-and-leaf display will appear in the Session window. (See Screen 2.8.)
5. If there are too many stems, you can specify an Increment for each branch of the 
stem-and leaf display in the box next to Increment of the above dialog box. For example, 
the stem-and-leaf display shown in Screen 2.8 has an increment of size 5. In other words, 
the stem-and-leaf display in Screen 2.8 is a split stem-and-leaf display with each stem 
split in two.
Creating a Dotplot for Example 2–12 of the Text
1. Enter the 33 data values from Example 2–12 of the text into column C1.
2. Name the column Age.
3. Select Graph > Dotplot.
4. Select Simple from the One Y box and click OK.
5. Type C1 in the Graph variables box and click OK.
6. The dotplot will appear in a new window. (See Screen 2.9.)
Screen 2.7
Screen 2.8
Screen 2.9
The Excel Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Excel 2013. Some screens, 
menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Excel. To enable some of the 
advanced Excel functions, you must enable the Data Analysis Add-In for Excel.
Excel does not have the capability to make a stem-and-leaf display and dotplot.
Excel

Technology Instructions
75
Creating a Bar Graph for Example 2–1 of the Text
1. Enter the grouped data from Example 2–1 as shown in Table 2.4 of the text.
2.  Highlight the cells that contain the donut varieties and the frequencies. (See 
Screen 2.10.)
3.  Click INSERT and then click the Insert Column Chart icon in the Charts group.
4. Select the first icon in the 2–D Column group in the dropdown box.
5. A new graph will appear with the bar graph.
Creating a Pie Chart for Example 2–1 of the Text
1.  Enter the grouped data from Example 2–1 as shown in Table 2.4 of the text.
2.  Highlight the cells that contain the donut varieties and the frequencies. (See Screen 2.10.)
3. Click INSERT and then click the Insert Pie Chart icon in the Charts group.
4. Select the first icon in the 2–D Pie group in the dropdown box.
5. A new graph will appear with the pie chart. (See Screen 2.11.)
Note: You may click in the text box and change “Chart Title” to an appropriate title or you may select the 
text box and delete it.
Creating a Frequency Histogram for Example 2–3 of the Text
1. Enter the data from Example 2–3 of the text into cells A1 to A30.
2. Determine the class boundaries and type the right boundary for each class in cells B1 to B8. 
In this example, we will use the right boundary values of 750, 1000, 1250, 1500, 1750, 2000, 
2250, and 2500, which are different from the ones used in Example 2–3.
3. Click DATA and then click Data Analysis from the Analysis group.
4. Select Histogram from the Data Analysis dialog box and click OK.
5. Click in the Input Range box and then highlight cells A1 to A30.
6.  Click in the Bin Range box and then highlight cells B1 to B8.
7.  In the Output options box, select New Worksheet Ply and check the Chart Output check 
box. Click OK.
8.  A new worksheet will appear with the frequency distribution and the corresponding histogram. 
(See Screen 2.12.)
Screen 2.10
Screen 2.11
Screen 2.12
www.ebook3000.com

76
Chapter 2 Organizing and Graphing Data
a. Make a histogram for these data.
b. Prepare a stem-and-leaf display for these data.
c. Make a dotplot for these data.
TA2.7 Refer to Data Set VII on McDonald’s menu items that accom-
panies this text (see Appendix A). Create a dotplot for the sodium 
content of the menu items listed in column 6.
TA2.8 Refer to Data Set X on Major League Baseball hitting that 
accompanies this text (see Appendix A). Construct a dotplot for the 
number of home runs hit listed in column 7.
TA2.9 Refer to Data Set VII on McDonald’s menu items that accom-
panies this text (see Appendix A).
a. Construct a histogram for the data on total carbs listed in 
column 5, allowing technology to choose the width of the 
intervals for you.
b. Construct another histogram for the data on total carbs listed 
in column 5, but use intervals that are half the width of the 
histogram in part a.
c. Construct another histogram for the data on total carbs listed 
in column 5, but use intervals that are twice the width of the 
histogram in part a.
d. Comment on which histogram you believe gives the best 
understanding of the data and why you feel this way.
TA2.10 Refer to Data Set IV on the Manchester Road Race that 
accompanies this text (see Appendix A).
a. Create a bar graph for the gender of the runners listed in 
column 6.
b. Create a histogram for the net time to complete the race listed 
in column 3.
TA2.1 In the past few years, many states have built casinos, and 
many more are in the process of doing so. Forty adults were asked if 
building casinos is good for society. Following are the responses of 
these adults, where G stands for good, B indicates bad, and I means 
indifferent or no answer.
B
G
B
B
I
G
B
I
B
B
G
B
B
G
B
B
B
G
G
I
B
G
B
B
I
G
G
G
B
B
I
G
B
B
B
G
G
B
B
G
a. Construct a bar graph and pie chart for these data.
b. Arrange the bars of the bar graph of part a in decreasing order 
to prepare a Pareto chart.
TA2.2 Refer to Data Set XII on coffeemaker ratings that accompa-
nies this text (see Appendix A). Create a bar graph and pie chart for 
the variable listed in Column 7.
TA2.3 Refer to Data Set V on the highest grossing movies of 2014 
that accompanies this text (see Appendix A). Construct a histogram 
for the opening weekend gross earnings listed in Column 5.
TA2.4 Refer to Data Set I on the prices of various products in differ-
ent cities across the United States that accompanies this text (see 
Appendix A). Construct a histogram for the prices of 1 gallon of regu-
lar unleaded gas listed in column 13.
TA2.5 Refer to Data Set XII on coffeemaker ratings that accompa-
nies this text (see Appendix A). Create a stem-and-leaf display for the 
overall scores of coffeemakers listed in column 3.
TA2.6 The following data give the one-way commuting times (in 
minutes) from home to work for a random sample of 50 workers.
23
17
34
26
18
33
46
42
12
37
44
15
22
19
28
32
18
39
40
48
16
11
 9
24
18
26
31
 7
30
15
18
22
29
32
30
21
19
14
26
37
25
36
23
39
42
46
29
17
24
31
TECHNOLOGY ASSIGNMENTS

77
77
CHAPTER 3
In Chapter 2 we discussed how to summarize data using different methods and to display data using 
graphs. Graphs are one important component of statistics; however, it is also important to numeri-
cally describe the main characteristics of a data set. The numerical summary measures, such as the 
ones that identify the center and spread of a distribution, identify many important features of a distri-
bution. For example, the techniques learned in Chapter 2 can help us graph data on family incomes. 
However, if we want to know the income of a “typical” family (given by the center of the distribution), 
the spread of the distribution of incomes, or the relative position of a family with a particular income, 
the numerical summary measures can provide more detailed information (see Figure 3.1). The 
measures that we discuss in this chapter include measures of (1) center, (2) dispersion (or spread), 
and (3) position.
Do you know there can be a big difference in the starting salaries of college graduates with different 
majors? Whereas engineering majors had an average starting salary of $62,600 in 2013, business 
majors received an average starting salary of $55,100, math and science majors received $43,000, 
and humanities and social science majors had an average starting salary of $38,000 in 2013. See 
Case Study 3–1.
Sam Edwards/Getty Images, Inc.
3.1 Measures of Center for 
Ungrouped Data
Case Study 3–1 2013 Average 
Starting Salaries for 
Selected Majors
Case Study 3–2 Education 
Level and 2014 Median 
Weekly Earnings
3.2 Measures of Dispersion 
for Ungrouped Data
3.3 Mean, Variance, and 
Standard Deviation for 
Grouped Data
3.4 Use of Standard Deviation
Case Study 3–3 Does Spread 
Mean the Same as 
Variability and Dispersion?
3.5 Measures of Position
3.6 Box-and-Whisker Plot
Numerical Descriptive Measures
www.ebook3000.com

78
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
We often represent a data set by numerical summary measures, usually called the typical 
values. A measure of center gives the center of a histogram or a frequency distribution 
curve. This section discusses five different measures of center: the mean, the median, the 
trimmed mean, the weighted mean, and the mode. However, another measure of center, the 
geometric mean, is explained in an exercise following this section. We will learn how to 
calculate each of these measures for ungrouped data. Recall from Chapter 2 that the data that 
give information on each member of the population or sample individually are called 
ungrouped data, whereas grouped data are presented in the form of a frequency distribution 
table.
3.1.1 Mean
The mean, also called the arithmetic mean, is the most frequently used measure of center. 
This book will use the words mean and average synonymously. For ungrouped data, the mean 
is obtained by dividing the sum of all values by the number of values in the data set:
Mean = Sum of all values
Number of values
 
The mean calculated for sample data is denoted by x (read as “x bar”), and the mean cal-
culated for population data is denoted by μ (Greek letter mu). We know from the discussion in 
Chapter 2 that the number of values in a data set is denoted by n for a sample and by N for a 
population. In Chapter 1, we learned that a variable is denoted by x, and the sum of all values 
of x is denoted by ∑x. Using these notations, we can write the following formulas for the 
mean.
Calculating Mean for Ungrouped Data The mean for ungrouped data is obtained by dividing 
the sum of all values by the number of values in the data set. Thus,
Mean for population data:  μ =
∑x
N
Mean for sample data: 
 x =
∑x
n
where ∑x is the sum of all values, N is the population size, n is the sample size, μ is the population 
mean, and x is the sample mean.
3.1 Measures of Center for Ungrouped Data
Income
$76,260
Center
Position of a 
particular family
Spread
Figure 3.1 

3.1 Measures of Center for Ungrouped Data
79
EXAMPLE 3–1 
2014 Profits of 10 U.S. Companies
Table 3.1 lists the total profits (in million dollars) of 10 U.S. companies for the year 2014 (www.
fortune.com).
Table 3.1 2014 Profits of 10 U.S. Companies
Company
Profits 
(million of dollars)
Apple
37,037
AT&T
18,249
Bank of America
11,431
Exxon Mobil
32,580
General Motors
5346
General Electric
13,057
Hewlett-Packard
5113
Home Depot
5385
IBM
16,483
Wal-Mart
16,022
Find the mean of the 2014 profits for these 10 companies.
Solution The variable in this example is 2014 profits of a company. Let us denote this variable 
by x. The 10 values of x are given in the above table. By adding these 10 values, we obtain the 
sum of x values, that is:
 ∑x = 37,037 + 18,249 + 11,431 + 32,580 + 5346 + 13,057 + 5113 + 5385 + 16,483 + 16,022
 = 160,703
Note that the given data include only 10 companies. Hence, it represents a sample with n = 10. 
Substituting the values of ∑x and n in the sample formula, we obtain the mean of 2014 profits of 
10 companies as follows:
x =
∑x
n = 160,703
10
= 16,070.3 = $16,070.3 million
Thus, these 10 companies earned an average of $16,070.3 million profits in 2014. 
◼
EXAMPLE 3–2 
Ages of Employees of a Company
The following are the ages (in years) of all eight employees of a small company:
53
32
61
27
39
44
49
57
Find the mean age of these employees.
Solution Because the given data set includes all eight employees of the company, it represents 
the population. Hence, N = 8. We have
∑x = 53 + 32 + 61 + 27 + 39 + 44 + 49 + 57 = 362
The population mean is
μ =
∑x
N = 362
8
= 45.25 years
Thus, the mean age of all eight employees of this company is 45.25 years, or 45 years and 
3 months. 
◼ 
Calculating the sample mean for 
ungrouped data.
Calculating the population mean 
for ungrouped data.
www.ebook3000.com

80
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
 
Reconsider Example 3–2. If we take a sample of three employees from this company and 
calculate the mean age of those three employees, this mean will be denoted by x. Suppose the 
three values included in the sample are 32, 39, and 57. Then, the mean age for this sample is
x = 32 + 39 + 57
3
= 42.67 years
If we take a second sample of three employees of this company, the value of x will (most likely) 
be different. Suppose the second sample includes the values 53, 27, and 44. Then, the mean age 
for this sample is
x = 53 + 27 + 44
3
= 41.33 years
Consequently, we can state that the value of the population mean μ is constant. However, the 
value of the sample mean x varies from sample to sample. The value of x for a particular sample 
depends on what values of the population are included in that sample.
 
Sometimes a data set may contain a few very small or a few very large values. As mentioned 
in Chapter 2, such values are called outliers or extreme values.
 
A major shortcoming of the mean as a measure of center is that it is very sensitive to outliers. 
Example 3–3 illustrates this point.
EXAMPLE 3–3 
Prices of Eight Homes
Following are the list prices of eight homes randomly selected from all homes for sale in a 
city.
$245,670
176,200
360,280
272,440
450,394
310,160
393,610
3,874,480
Note that the price of the last house is $3,874,480, which is an outlier. Show how the inclusion of 
this outlier affects the value of the mean.
Solution If we do not include the price of the most expensive house (the outlier), the mean of 
the prices of the other seven homes is:
 Mean without the outlier = 245,670 + 176,200 + 360,280 + 272,440 + 450,394 + 310,160 + 393,610
7
 = 2,208,754
7
= $315,536.29
Now, to see the impact of the outlier on the value of the mean, we include the price of the most 
expensive home and find the mean price of eight homes. This mean is:
Mean with the outlier
 = 245,670 + 176,200 + 360,280 + 272,440 + 450,394 + 310,160 + 393,610 + 3,874,480
8
 = 6,083,234
8
= $760,404.25
Thus, when we include the price of the most expensive home, the mean more than doubles, as it 
increases from $315,536.29 to $760,404.25. 
◼
 
The preceding example should encourage us to be cautious. We should remember that the 
mean is not always the best measure of center because it is heavily influenced by outliers. Some-
times other measures of center give a more accurate impression of a data set. For example, when 
a data set has outliers, instead of using the mean, we can use either the trimmed mean or the 
median as a measure of center.
Illustrating the effect of an 
outlier on the mean.

3.1.2 Median
Another important measure of center is the median. It is defined as follows.
Median The median is the value that divides a data set that has been ranked in increasing order 
in two equal halves. If the data set has an odd number of values, the median is given by the value 
of the middle term in the ranked data set. If the data set has an even number of values, the median 
is given by the average of the two middle values in the ranked data set.
 
As is obvious from the definition of the median, it divides a ranked data set into two equal 
parts. The calculation of the median consists of the following two steps:
1. 
Rank the given data set in increasing order.
2. Find the value that divides the ranked data set in two equal parts. This value gives the 
median.1
 
Note that if the number of observations in a data set is odd, then the median is given by the 
value of the middle term in the ranked data. However, if the number of observations is even, then 
the median is given by the average of the values of the two middle terms.
EXAMPLE 3–4 
Compensations of Female CEOs
Table 3.2 lists the 2014 compensations of female CEOs of 11 American companies (USA TODAY, 
May 1, 2015). (The compensation of Carol Meyrowitz of TJX is for the fiscal year ending in 
January 2015.)
2013 AVERAGE 
STARTING 
SALARIES FOR 
SELECTED MAJORS
CASE STUDY 3–1
Data source: www.forbes.com 
The above chart, based on data from Forbes.com, shows the 2013 average starting salaries for a few selected 
majors. As we can notice, among these six majors, engineering commanded the highest starting salary of 
$62,600 in 2013, and humanities and social science majors had the lowest starting salary of $38,000 in 2013. 
Computer science major was the second highest with a starting salary of $59,100. As we can observe, there 
is a large variation in the 2013 starting salaries for these six majors.
Source:  Forbes.com.
Engineering     $62,600
Computer science    $59,100
Communication    $44,600
Math & Science    $43,000
Humanities & Social Science    $38,000
2013 AVERAGE STARTING SALARIES FOR SELECTED MAJORS
Business    $55,100
1Note that the middle value in a data set ranked in decreasing order will also give the value of the median.
Calculating the median for 
ungrouped data: odd number 
of data values.
81
www.ebook3000.com

82
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
Table 3.2 Compensations of 11 Female CEOs
Company & CEO
2014 Compensation 
(millions of dollars)
General Dynamics, Phebe Novakovic
19.3
GM, Mary Barra
16.2
Hewlett-Packard, Meg Whitman
19.6
IBM, Virginia Rometty
19.3
Lockheed Martin, Marillyn Hewson
33.7
Mondelez, Irene Rosenfeld
21.0
PepsiCo, Indra Nooyi
22.5
Sempra, Debra Reed
16.9
TJX, Carol Meyrowitz
28.7
Yahoo, Marissa Mayer
42.1
Xerox, Ursula Burns
22.2
Find the median for these data.
Solution To calculate the median of this data set, we perform the following two steps.
Step 1: The first step is to rank the given data. We rank the given data in increasing order as 
follows:
16.2
16.9
19.3
19.3
19.6
21.0
22.2
22.5
28.7
33.7
42.1
Step 2: The second step is to find the value that divides this ranked data set in two equal parts. 
Here there are 11 data values. The sixth value divides these 11 values in two equal parts. Hence, 
the sixth value gives the median as shown below.
16.2
16.9
19.3
19.3
19.6
21.0
22.2
22.5
28.7
33.7
42.1
 
Median
Thus, the median of 2014 compensations for these 11 female CEOs is $21.0 million. Note that in 
this example, there are 11 data values, which is an odd number. Hence, there is one value in the 
middle that is given by the sixth term, and its value is the median. Using the value of the median, 
we can say that half of these CEOs made less than $21.0 million and the other half made more 
than $21.0 million in 2014. 
◼
EXAMPLE 3–5 
Cell Phone Minutes Used
The following data give the cell phone minutes used last month by 12 randomly selected 
persons.
230
2053
160
397
510
380
263
3864
184
201
326
721
Find the median for these data.
Solution To calculate the median, we perform the following two steps.
Step 1: In the first step, we rank the given data in increasing order as follows:
160
184
201
230
263
326
380
397
510
721
2053
3864
Step 2: In the second step, we find the value that divides the ranked data set in two equal parts. 
This value will be the median. The value that divides 12 data values in two equal parts falls 
Calculating the median for 
ungrouped data: even number 
of data values.
Chris Ratcliffe/Bloomberg 
via/GettyImages, Inc.

between the sixth and the seventh values. Thus, the median will be given by the average of the 
sixth and the seventh values as follows.
160
184
201
230
263
326
380
397
510
721
2053
3864
Median = 353
Median = Average of the two middle values = 326 + 380
2
= 353 minutes
Thus, the median cell phone minutes used last month by these 12 persons was 353. We can state 
that half of these 12 persons used less than 353 cell phone minutes and the other half used more 
than 353 cell phone minutes last month. Note that this data set has two outliers, 2053 and 3864 
minutes, but these outliers do not affect the value of the median. 
◼
 
The median gives the center of a histogram, with half of the data values to the left of the 
median and half to the right of the median. The advantage of using the median as a measure of 
center is that it is not influenced by outliers. Consequently, the median is preferred over the mean 
as a measure of center for data sets that contain outliers.
 
Sometime we use the terms resistant and nonresistant with respect to outliers for summary 
measures. A summary measure that is less affected by outliers is called a resistant summary 
measure, and the one that is affected more by outliers is called a nonresistant summary measure. 
From the foregoing discussion about the mean and median, it is obvious that the mean is a non-
resistant summary measure, as it is influenced by outliers. In contrast, the median is a resistant 
summary measure because it is not influenced by outliers.
EDUCATION LEVEL 
AND 2014 MEDIAN 
WEEKLY EARNINGS
CASE STUDY 3–2
Data source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
The above chart shows the 2014 median weekly earnings by education level for persons aged 25 and over 
who held full-time jobs. These salaries are based on the Current Population Survey conducted by the U.S. 
Bureau of Labor Statistics. Although this survey is called the Current Population Survey, actually it is based 
on a sample. Usually the samples taken by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics for these surveys are very 
large. As shown in the chart, the highest median weekly earning (of $1639) in 2014 was for workers with 
professional degrees, and the lowest (of $488) was for workers with less than high school diplomas. Accord-
ing to this survey, the median earning for all workers (aged 25 and over with full-time jobs) included in the 
survey was $839 in 2014, which is not shown in the graph.
Source: www.bls.gov.
EDUCATION LEVEL AND 2014 MEDIAN WEEKLY EARNINGS
Doctoral degree   $1591
Professional degree   $1639
Master’s degree   $1326
Bachelor’s degree   $1101
Associate’s degree   $792
High school diploma   $668
$488
Some college, no degree   $741
Less than 
high school diploma    
83
www.ebook3000.com

84
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
3.1.3 Mode
Mode is a French word that means fashion—an item that is most popular or common. In statis-
tics, the mode represents the most common value in a data set.
Mode The mode is the value that occurs with the highest frequency in a data set.
EXAMPLE 3–6 
Speeds of Cars
The following data give the speeds (in miles per hour) of eight cars that were stopped on I-95 for 
speeding violations.
77
82
74
81
79
84
74
78
Find the mode.
Solution In this data set, 74 occurs twice, and each of the remaining values occurs only once. 
Because 74 occurs with the highest frequency, it is the mode. Therefore,
 
Mode = 74 miles per hour 
◼
 
A major shortcoming of the mode is that a data set may have none or may have more than 
one mode, whereas it will have only one mean and only one median. For instance, a data set with 
each value occurring only once has no mode. A data set with only one value occurring with the 
highest frequency has only one mode. The data set in this case is called unimodal as in 
Example 3–6 above. A data set with two values that occur with the same (highest) frequency has 
two modes. The distribution, in this case, is said to be bimodal as in Example 3–8 below. If more 
than two values in a data set occur with the same (highest) frequency, then the data set contains 
more than two modes and it is said to be multimodal as in Example 3–9 below.
EXAMPLE 3–7 
Incomes of Families
Last year’s incomes of five randomly selected families were $76,150, $95,750, $124,985, 
$87,490, and $53,740. Find the mode.
Solution Because each value in this data set occurs only once, this data set contains no 
mode. 
◼
EXAMPLE 3–8 
Commuting Times of Employees
A small company has 12 employees. Their commuting times (rounded to the nearest minute) 
from home to work are 23, 36, 14, 23, 47, 32, 8, 14, 26, 31, 18, and 28, respectively. Find the 
mode for these data.
Solution In the given data on the commuting times of these 12 employees, each of the values 
14 and 23 occurs twice, and each of the remaining values occurs only once. Therefore, this data 
set has two modes: 14 and 23 minutes. 
◼
EXAMPLE 3–9 
Ages of Students
The ages of 10 randomly selected students from a class are 21, 19, 27, 22, 29, 19, 25, 21, 22, and 
30 years, respectively. Find the mode.
Solution This data set has three modes: 19, 21, and 22. Each of these three values occurs with 
a (highest) frequency of 2. 
◼
 
One advantage of the mode is that it can be calculated for both kinds of data—quantitative 
and qualitative—whereas the mean and median can be calculated for only quantitative data.
Calculating the mode for 
ungrouped data.
Data set with no mode.
Data set with two modes.
Data set with three modes.

3.1 Measures of Center for Ungrouped Data
85
EXAMPLE 3–10 
Status of Students
The status of five students who are members of the student senate at a college are senior, 
sophomore, senior, junior, and senior, respectively. Find the mode.
Solution Because senior occurs more frequently than the other categories, it is the mode for 
this data set. We cannot calculate the mean and median for this data set. 
◼
3.1.4 Trimmed Mean
Earlier in this chapter, we learned that the mean as a measure of center is impacted by outliers. 
When a data set contains outliers, we can use either median or trimmed mean as a measure of the 
center of a data set.
Trimmed Mean After we drop k% of the values from each end of a ranked data set, the mean 
of the remaining values is called the k% trimmed mean.
Thus, to calculate the trimmed mean for a data set, first we rank the given data in increasing order. 
Then we drop k% of the values from each end of the ranked data where k is any positive number, 
such as 5%, 10%, and so on. The mean of the remaining values is called the k% trimmed mean. 
Remember, although we drop a total of 2 × k% of the values, k% from each end, it is called the 
k% trimmed mean. The following example illustrates the calculation of the trimmed mean.
EXAMPLE 3–11 
Money Spent on Books by Students
The following data give the money spent (in dollars) on books during 2015 by 10 students 
selected from a small college.
890
1354
1861
1644
87
5403
1429
1993
938
2176
Calculate the 10% trimmed mean.
Solution To calculate the trimmed mean, first we rank the given data as below.
87
890
938
1354
1429
1644
1861
1993
2176
5403
To calculate the 10% trimmed mean, we drop 10% of the data values from each end of the ranked 
data.
10% of  10 values = 10 (.10) = 1
Hence, we drop one value from each end of the ranked data. After we drop the two values, one 
from each end, we are left with the following eight values:
890
938
1354
1429
1644
1861
1993
2176
The mean of these eight values will be called the 10% trimmed mean. Since there are 8 values, 
n = 8. Adding these eight values, we obtain ∑x as follows:
∑x = 890 + 938 + 1354 + 1429 + 1644 + 1861 + 1993 + 2176 = 12,285
The 10% trimmed mean will be obtained by dividing 12,285 by 8 as follows:
10% Trimmed Mean = 12,285
8
= 1535.625 = $1535.63
Thus, by dropping 10% of the values from each end of the ranked data for this example, we can 
state that students spent an average of $1535.63 on books in 2015.
 
Since in this data set $87 and $5403 can be considered outliers, it makes sense to drop these 
two values and calculate the trimmed mean for the remaining values rather than calculating the 
mean of all 10 values. 
◼ 
Finding the mode for qualitative 
data.
Calculating the trimmed mean.
www.ebook3000.com

86
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
3.1.5 Weighted Mean
In many cases, when we want to find the center of a data set, different values in the data set may 
have different frequencies or different weights. We will have to consider the weights of different 
values to find the correct mean of such a data set. For example, suppose Maura bought gas for her 
car four times during June 2015. She bought 10 gallons at a price of $2.60 a gallon, 13 gallons at 
a price of $2.80 a gallon, 8 gallons at a price of $2.70 a gallon, and 15 gallons at a price of $2.75 
a gallon. In such a case, the mean of the four prices as calculated in Section 3.1.1 will not give 
the actual mean price paid by Maura in June 2015. We cannot add the four prices and divide by 
four to find the average price. That can be done only if she bought the same amount of gas each 
time. But because the amount of gas bought each time is different, we will have to calculate the 
weighted mean in this case. The amounts of gas bought will be considered the weight here.
Weighted Mean When different values of a data set occur with different frequencies, that is, 
each value of a data set is assigned different weight, then we calculate the weighted mean to find 
the center of the given data set.
To calculate the weighted mean for a data set, we denote the variable by x and the weights by w. 
We add all the weights and denote this sum by ∑w. Then we multiply each value of x by the 
corresponding value of w. The sum of the resulting products gives ∑xw. Dividing ∑xw by ∑w 
gives the weighted mean.
Weighted Mean The weighted mean is calculated as:
Weighted Mean =
∑xw
∑w
where x and w denote the variable and the weights, respectively.
The following example illustrates the calculation of the weighted mean.
EXAMPLE 3–12 
Prices and Amounts of Gas Purchased
Maura bought gas for her car four times during June 2015. She bought 10 gallons at a price of 
$2.60 a gallon, 13 gallons at a price of $2.80 a gallon, 8 gallons at a price of $2.70 a gallon, and 
15 gallons at a price of $2.75 a gallon. What is the average price that Maura paid for gas during 
June 2015?
Solution Here the variable is the price of gas per gallon, and we will denote it by x. The 
weights are the number of gallons bought each time, and we will denote these weights by w. We 
list the values of x and w in Table 3.3, and find ∑w. Then we multiply each value of x by the cor-
responding value of w and obtain ∑xw by adding the resulting values. Finally, we divide ∑xw 
by ∑w to find the weighted mean.
Table 3.3 Prices and Amounts of Gas Purchased
Price (in dollars) 
x
 
Gallons of Gas 
w
 
xw
2.60
10
26.00
2.80
13
36.40
2.70
 8
21.60
2.75
15
41.25
 
 
∑w = 46
 
∑xw = 125.25
Calculating the weighted mean.

3.1 Measures of Center for Ungrouped Data
87
Weighted Mean =
∑xw
∑w = 125.25
46
= $2.72
Thus, Maura paid an average of $2.72 a gallon for the gas she bought in June 2015. 
◼ 
 
To summarize, we cannot say for sure which of the various measures of center is a better mea-
sure overall. Each of them may be better under different situations. Probably the mean is the most-
used measure of center, followed by the median. The mean has the advantage that its calculation 
includes each value of the data set. The median and trimmed mean are better measures when a data 
set includes outliers. The mode is simple to locate, but it is not of much use in practical applications.
3.1.6 Relationships Among the Mean, Median, and Mode
As discussed in Chapter 2, two of the many shapes that a histogram or a frequency distribution 
curve can assume are symmetric and skewed. This section describes the relationships among the 
mean, median, and mode for three such histograms and frequency distribution curves. Knowing 
the values of the mean, median, and mode can give us some idea about the shape of a frequency 
distribution curve.
1. 
For a symmetric histogram and frequency distribution curve with one peak (see Figure 3.2), the 
values of the mean, median, and mode are identical, and they lie at the center of the distribution.
Frequency
Variable
Mean = median = mode
Figure 3.2 Mean, median, and 
mode for a symmetric histogram and 
frequency distribution curve.
2. For a histogram and a frequency distribution curve skewed to the right (see Figure 3.3), the 
value of the mean is the largest, that of the mode is the smallest, and the value of the median 
lies between these two. (Notice that the mode always occurs at the peak point.) The value of 
the mean is the largest in this case because it is sensitive to outliers that occur in the right tail. 
These outliers pull the mean to the right.
Frequency
Variable
Mode
Median
Mean
Figure 3.3 Mean, median, and 
mode for a histogram and frequency 
distribution curve skewed to the right.
3. 
If a histogram and a frequency distribution curve are skewed to the left (see Figure 3.4), the 
value of the mean is the smallest and that of the mode is the largest, with the value of the 
median lying between these two. In this case, the outliers in the left tail pull the mean to the left.
Frequency
Variable
Mode
Median
Mean
Figure 3.4 Mean, median, and 
mode for a histogram and frequency 
distribution curve skewed to the left.
www.ebook3000.com

88
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
EXERCISES
3.11 The following data give the amounts (in dollars) of electric 
bills for November 2015 for 12 randomly selected households selected 
from a small town.
205
265
176
314
243
192
297
357
238
281
342
259
Calculate the mean and median for these data. Do these data have a 
mode? Explain.
3.12 Twenty randomly selected married couples were asked how 
long they have been married. Their responses (rounded to years) are 
listed below.
12
27
 8
15
5
 9
18
13
35
23
19
33
41
59
3
26
 5
34
27
51
a. Calculate the mean, median, and mode for these data.
b. Calculate the 10% trimmed mean for these data.
3.13 The following data give the 2015 bonuses (in thousands of 
dollars) of 10 randomly selected Wall Street managers.
127
82
45
99
153
3261
77
108
68
278
a. Calculate the mean and median for these data.
b. Do these data have a mode? Explain why or why not.
c. Calculate the 10% trimmed mean for these data.
d. This data set has one outlier. Which summary measures are 
better for these data?
3.14 The following data give the total food expenditures (in dollars) 
for the past one month for a sample of 20 families.
1125
530 1234
595 427 872 1480
699 1274 1187
933 1127
716 1065 934 930 1046 1199 1353
441
a. Calculate the mean and median for these data.
b. Calculate the 20% trimmed mean for these data.
3.15 The following data give the prices (in thousand dollars) of all 
10 homes that were sold in a small town last year.
205
214
265
195
283
188
251
325
219
295
a. Calculate the mean and median for these data.
b. Calculate the 10% trimmed mean for these data.
3.16 The following data give the annual salaries (in thousand 
dollars) of 20 randomly selected health care workers.
50
71
57
39
45
64
38
53
35
62
74
40
67
44
77
61
58
55
64
59
a. Calculate the mean, median, and mode for these data.
b. Calculate the 15% trimmed mean for these data.
3.17 The following data give the number of patients who visited a 
walk-in clinic on each of 20 randomly selected days.
23
37
26
19
33
22
30
42
24
26
28
32
37
29
38
24
35
20
34
38
a. Calculate the mean, median, and mode for these data.
b. Calculate the 15% trimmed mean for these data.
3.18 The following data represent the systolic blood pressure read-
ing (that is, the top number in the standard blood pressure reading) in 
mmHg for each of 20 randomly selected middle-aged males who were 
taking blood pressure medication.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
3.1 Explain how the value of the median is determined for a data set 
that contains an odd number of observations and for a data set that 
contains an even number of observations.
3.2 Briefly explain the meaning of an outlier. Is the mean or the 
median a better measure of center for a data set that contains outliers? 
Illustrate with the help of an example.
3.3 Using an example, show how outliers can affect the value of the 
mean.
3.4 Which of the five measures of center (the mean, the median, the 
trimmed mean, the weighted mean, and the mode) can be calculated 
for quantitative data only, and which can be calculated for both quan-
titative and qualitative data? Illustrate with examples.
3.5 Which of the five measures of center (the mean, the median, the 
trimmed mean, the weighted mean, and the mode) can assume more 
than one value for a data set? Give an example of a data set for which 
this summary measure assumes more than one value.
3.6 Is it possible for a (quantitative) data set to have no mean, no 
median, or no mode? Give an example of a data set for which this 
summary measure does not exist.
3.7 Explain the relationships among the mean, median, and mode for 
symmetric and skewed histograms. Illustrate these relationships with 
graphs.
3.8 Prices of cars have a distribution that is skewed to the right with 
outliers in the right tail. Which of the measures of center is the best to 
summarize this data set? Explain.
3.9 The following data set belongs to a population:
5
−7
2
0
−9
16
10
7
Calculate the mean, median, and mode.
APPLICATIONS
3.10 The following data give the 2014 profits (in millions of 
dollars) of the top 10 companies listed in the 2014 Fortune 500 
(source: www.fortune.com).
Company
2014 Profits 
(millions of dollars)
Wal-Mart Stores
16,022
Exxon Mobil
32,580
Chevron
21,423
Berkshire Hathaway
19,476
Apple
37,037
Phillips 66
3726
General Motors
5346
Ford Motor
7155
General Electric
13,057
Valero Energy
2720
Find the mean and median for these data. Do these data have a mode? 
Explain.

3.2 Measures of Dispersion for Ungrouped Data
89
139
151
138
153
134
136
141
126
109
144
111
150
107
132
144
116
159
121
127
113
a. Calculate the mean, median, and mode for these data.
b. Calculate the 10% trimmed mean for these data.
3.19 In a survey of 640 parents of young children, 360 said that 
they will not want their children to play football because it is a very 
dangerous sport, 210 said that they will let their children play 
football, and 70 had no opinion. Considering the opinions of these 
parents, what is the mode?
3.20 A statistics professor based her final grades on quizzes, in-class 
group work, homework, a midterm exam, and a final exam. However, 
not all of the assignments contributed equally to the final grade. John 
received the scores (out of 100 for each assignment) listed in the table 
below. The instructor weighted each item as shown in the table.
Assignment
John’s Score 
(Total Points)
Percentage of Final Grade 
Assigned by the Instructor
Quizzes
75
30
In-class group work
52
 5
Homework
85
10
Midterm exam
74
15
Final exam
81
40
Calculate John’s final grade score (out of 100) in this course. 
(Hint: Note that it is often easier to convert the weights to decimal 
form for weighting, e.g., 30% = .30; in this way, the sum of weights 
will equal 1, making the formula easier to apply.)
3.21 A clothing store bought 8000 shirts last year from five different 
companies. The following table lists the number of shirts bought from 
each company and the price paid for each shirt.
Company
Number of 
Shirts Bought
Price per Shirt 
(dollars)
Best Shirts
1200
30
Top Wear
1900
45
Smith Shirts
1400
40
New Design
2200
35
Radical Wear
1300
50
Calculate the weighted mean that represents the average price paid for 
these 8000 shirts.
3.22 One property of the mean is that if we know the means and 
sample sizes of two (or more) data sets, we can calculate the com-
bined mean of both (or all) data sets. The combined mean for two 
data sets is calculated by using the formula
Combined mean = x = n1x1 + n2x2
n1 + n2
where n1 and n2 are the sample sizes of the two data sets and x1 and x2 
are the means of the two data sets, respectively. Suppose a sample of 
10 statistics books gave a mean price of $140 and a sample of 8 math-
ematics books gave a mean price of $160. Find the combined mean. 
(Hint: For this example: n1 = 10, n2 = 8, x1 = $140, x2 = $160.)
3.23 For any data, the sum of all values is equal to the product of the 
sample size and mean; that is, ∑x = nx. Suppose the average amount 
of money spent on shopping by 10 persons during a given week is 
$105.50. Find the total amount of money spent on shopping by these 
10 persons.
3.24 The mean 2015 income for five families was $99,520. What 
was the total 2015 income of these five families?
3.25 The mean age of six persons is 46 years. The ages of five of 
these six persons are 57, 39, 44, 51, and 37 years, respectively. Find 
the age of the sixth person.
3.26 Seven airline passengers in economy class on the same flight 
paid an average of $361 per ticket. Because the tickets were purchased 
at different times and from different sources, the prices varied. The 
first five passengers paid $420, $210, $333, $695, and $485. The sixth 
and seventh tickets were purchased by a couple who paid identical 
fares. What price did each of them pay?
3.27 When studying phenomena such as inflation or population 
changes that involve periodic increases or decreases, the geometric 
mean is used to find the average change over the entire period under 
study. To calculate the geometric mean of a sequence of n values x1, 
x2,..., xn, we multiply them together and then find the nth root of this 
product. Thus
Geometric mean =
n√x1 · x2 · x3 ·  . . . · xn
Suppose that the inflation rates for the last five years are 4%, 3%, 
5%, 6%, and 8%, respectively. Thus at the end of the first year, the 
price index will be 1.04 times the price index at the beginning of 
the year, and so on. Find the mean rate of inflation over the 5-year 
period by finding the geometric mean of the data set 1.04, 1.03, 
1.05, 1.06, and 1.08. (Hint: Here, n = 5, x1 = 1.04, x2 = 1.03, and so 
on. Use the x1/n key on your calculator to find the fifth root. Note that 
the mean inflation rate will be obtained by subtracting 1 from the 
geometric mean.)
*
*
*
*
*
*
The measures of center, such as the mean, median, and mode, do not reveal the whole picture of 
the distribution of a data set. Two data sets with the same mean may have completely different 
spreads. The variation among the values of observations for one data set may be much larger or 
smaller than for the other data set. (Note that the words dispersion, spread, and variation have 
similar meanings.) Consider the following two data sets on the ages (in years) of all workers at 
each of two small companies.
Company 1:
47
38
35
40
36
45
39
Company 2:
70
33
18
52
27
3.2 Measures of Dispersion for Ungrouped Data
www.ebook3000.com

90
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
 
The mean age of workers in both these companies is the same, 40 years. If we do not know the 
ages of individual workers at these two companies and are told only that the mean age of the work-
ers at both companies is the same, we may deduce that the workers at these two companies have a 
similar age distribution. As we can observe, however, the variation in the workers’ ages for each of 
these two companies is very different. As illustrated in the diagram, the ages of the workers at the 
second company have a much larger variation than the ages of the workers at the first company.
Company 1 
36 
39
 
35 
38 40 
45 47
Company 2
 
18 
27 
33 
52 
70
 
Thus, a summary measure such as the mean, median, or mode by itself is usually not a suf-
ficient measure to reveal the shape of the distribution of a data set. We also need a measure that 
can provide some information about the variation among data values. The measures that help us 
learn about the spread of a data set are called the measures of dispersion. The measures of center 
and dispersion taken together give a better picture of a data set than the measures of center alone. 
This section discusses four measures of dispersion: range, variance, standard deviation, and coef-
ficient of variation.
3.2.1 Range
The range is the simplest measure of dispersion to calculate. It is obtained by taking the differ-
ence between the largest and the smallest values in a data set.
Finding the Range for Ungrouped Data
Range = Largest value − Smallest value
EXAMPLE 3–13 
Total Areas of Four States
Table 3.4 gives the total areas in square miles of the four western South-Central states of the 
United States.
Table 3.4
State
 
Total Area 
(square miles)
Arkansas
53,182
Louisiana
49,651
Oklahoma
69,903
Texas
267,277
Find the range for this data set.
Solution The largest total area for a state in this data set is 267,277 square miles, and the 
smallest area is 49,651 square miles. Therefore,
 Range = Largest value −Smallest value
 = 267,277 −49,651 = 217,626 square miles
Thus, the total areas of these four states are spread over a range of 217,626 square miles. 
◼
 
The range, like the mean, has the disadvantage of being influenced by outliers. In Example 3–13, 
if the state of Texas with a total area of 267,277 square miles is dropped, the range decreases from 
217,626 square miles to 69,903 − 49,651 = 20,252 square miles. Consequently, the range is not a 
Calculating the range for 
ungrouped data.

3.2 Measures of Dispersion for Ungrouped Data
91
good measure of dispersion to use for a data set that contains outliers. This indicates that the 
range is a nonresistant measure of dispersion.
 
Another disadvantage of using the range as a measure of dispersion is that its calculation is 
based on two values only: the largest and the smallest. All other values in a data set are ignored 
when calculating the range. Thus, the range is not a very satisfactory measure of dispersion.
3.2.2 Variance and Standard Deviation
The standard deviation is the most-used measure of dispersion. The value of the standard deviation 
tells how closely the values of a data set are clustered around the mean. In general, a lower value of 
the standard deviation for a data set indicates that the values of that data set are spread over a rela-
tively smaller range around the mean. In contrast, a larger value of the standard deviation for a data 
set indicates that the values of that data set are spread over a relatively larger range around the mean.
 
The standard deviation is obtained by taking the positive square root of the variance. The 
variance calculated for population data is denoted by σ2 (read as sigma squared),2 and the vari-
ance calculated for sample data is denoted by s2. Consequently, the standard deviation calculated 
for population data is denoted by σ, and the standard deviation calculated for sample data is 
denoted by s. Following are what we will call the basic formulas that are used to calculate the 
variance and standard deviation.3
 σ2 =
∑(x −μ)2
N
  and  s2 =
∑(x −x)2
n −1
σ = B
∑(x −μ)2
N
  and  s = B
∑(x −x)2
n −1
where σ2 is the population variance, s2 is the sample variance, σ is the population standard 
deviation, and s is the sample standard deviation.
 
The quantity x − μ or x −x in the above formulas is called the deviation of the x value from 
the mean. The sum of the deviations of the x values from the mean is always zero; that is, 
∑(x −μ) = 0 and ∑(x −x) = 0.
 
For example, suppose the midterm scores of a sample of four students are 82, 95, 67, and 92, 
respectively. Then, the mean score for these four students is
x = 82 + 95 + 67 + 92
4
= 84
The deviations of the four scores from the mean are calculated in Table 3.5. As we can observe 
from the table, the sum of the deviations of the x values from the mean is zero; that is, ∑(x −x) = 0. 
For this reason we square the deviations to calculate the variance and standard deviation.
Table 3.5
x  
x −x
82
82 − 84 = −2
95
95 − 84 = +11
67
67 − 84 = −17
92
92 − 84 = +8
∑(x −x) = 0
 
From the computational point of view, it is easier and more efficient to use short-cut formulas 
to calculate the variance and standard deviation. By using the short-cut formulas, we reduce the 
computation time and round-off errors. Use of the basic formulas for ungrouped data is illus-
trated in Section A3.1.1 of Appendix 3.1 of this chapter. The short-cut formulas for calculating 
the variance and standard deviation are given on the next page.
2Note that ∑ is uppercase sigma and σ is lowercase sigma of the Greek alphabet.
3From the formula for σ2, it can be stated that the population variance is the mean of the squared deviations of x values 
from the mean. However, this is not true for the variance calculated for a sample data set.
www.ebook3000.com

92
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
Short-Cut Formulas for the Variance and Standard Deviation for Ungrouped Data
σ2 =
∑x2 −(
(∑x)2
N
)
N
  and  s2 =
∑x2 −(
(∑x)2
n
)
n −1
where σ2 is the population variance and s2 is the sample variance.
 The standard deviation is obtained by taking the positive square root of the variance.
 Population standard deviation:  σ = R
∑x2 −(
(∑x)2
N
)
N
 Sample standard deviation:
  s = R
∑x2 −(
(∑x)2
n
)
n −1
Note that the denominator in the formula for the population variance is N, but that in the formula 
for the sample variance it is n − 1.4
 
Thus, to calculate the variance and standard deviation for a data set, we perform the follow-
ing three steps: In the first step, we add all the values of x in the given data set and denote this sum 
by ∑x. In the second step, we square each value of x and add these squared values, which is 
denoted by ∑x2. In the third step, we substitute the values of n, ∑x, and ∑x2 in the correspond-
ing formula for variance or standard deviation and simplify.
 
Examples 3–14 and 3–15 show the calculation of the variance and standard deviation.
EXAMPLE 3–14 
Compensations of Female CEOs
Refer to the 2014 compensations of 11 female CEOs of American companies given in 
Example 3–4. The table from that example is reproduced below.
Company & CEO
2014 Compensation 
(millions of dollars)
General Dynamics, Phebe Novakovic
19.3
GM, Mary Barra
16.2
Hewlett-Packard, Meg Whitman
19.6
IBM, Virginia Rometty
19.3
Lockheed Martin, Marillyn Hewson
33.7
Mondelez, Irene Rosenfeld
21.0
PepsiCo, Indra Nooyi
22.5
Sempra, Debra Reed
16.9
TJX, Carol Meyrowitz
28.7
Yahoo, Marissa Mayer
42.1
Xerox, Ursula Burns
22.2
Find the variance and standard deviation for these data.
Calculating the sample variance 
and standard deviation for 
ungrouped data.
4The reason that the denominator in the sample formula is n − 1 and not n follows: The sample variance underestimates 
the population variance when the denominator in the sample formula for variance is n. However, the sample variance 
does not underestimate the population variance if the denominator in the sample formula for variance is n − 1. In 
Chapter 8 we will learn that n − 1 is called the degrees of freedom.
Chris Ratcliffe/Bloomberg 
via/GettyImages, Inc.

3.2 Measures of Dispersion for Ungrouped Data
93
Solution Let x denote the 2014 compensations (in millions of dollars) of female CEOs of 
American companies. The calculation of ∑x and ∑x2 is shown in Table 3.6.
Table 3.6 Calculation of ∑x and ∑x2
x
 
x²
19.3
372.49
16.2
262.44
19.6
384.16
19.3
372.49
33.7
1135.69
21.0
441.00
22.5
506.25
16.9
285.61
28.7
823.69
42.1
1772.41
22.2
492.84
∑x = 261.5
∑x2 = 6849.07
Calculation of the variance involves the following three steps.
Step 1. Calculate ∑x.
 The sum of the values in the first column of Table 3.6 gives the value of ∑x, which is 261.5.
Step 2. Find ∑x2.
 The value of ∑x2 is obtained by squaring each value of x and then adding the squared values. The 
results of this step are shown in the second column of Table 3.6. Notice that ∑x2 = 6849.07.
Step 3.  Determine the variance.
 Substitute the values of n, ∑x, and ∑x2 in the variance formula and simplify. Because the 
given data are on the 2014 compensations of 11 female CEOs of American companies, we use 
the formula for the sample variance using n = 11.
s2 =
∑x2 −(
( ∑x)2
n
)
n −1
=
6849.07 −(
(261.5)2
11
)
11 −1
= 6849.07 −6216.5682
10
= 63.2502
 Now to obtain the standard deviation, we take the (positive) square root of the variance. Thus,
s = √63.2502 = 7.952999 = $7.95 million
 Thus, the standard deviation of the 2014 compensations of these 11 female CEOs of American 
companies is $7.95 million. 
◼ 
1. The values of the variance and the standard deviation are never negative. That is, 
the numerator in the formula for the variance should never produce a negative value. 
Usually the values of the variance and standard deviation are positive, but if a data set 
has no variation, then the variance and standard deviation are both zero. For example, if 
four persons in a group are the same age—say, 35 years—then the four values in the data 
set are
35  35  35  35
 
If we calculate the variance and standard deviation for these data, their values will be zero. 
This is because there is no variation in the values of this data set.
 Two Observations
www.ebook3000.com

94
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
2. 
The measurement units of the variance are always the square of the measurement units 
of the original data. This is so because the original values are squared to calculate the vari-
ance. In Example 3–14, the measurement units of the original data are millions of dollars. 
However, the measurement units of the variance are squared millions of dollars, which, of 
course, does not make any sense. Thus, the variance of the 2014 compensations of 11 female 
CEOs of American companies is 63.2502 squared million dollars. But the standard deviation 
of these compensations is $7.95 million. The measurement units of the standard deviation 
are the same as the measurement units of the original data because the standard deviation is 
obtained by taking the square root of the variance.
 
Earlier in this chapter, we explained the difference between resistant and nonresistant sum-
mary measures. The variance and standard deviation are nonresistant summary measures as 
their values are sensitive to the outliers. The existence of outliers in a data set will increase the 
values of the variance and standard deviation.
EXAMPLE 3–15 
Earnings of Employees
The following data give the 2015 earnings (in thousands of dollars) before taxes for all six 
employees of a small company.
88.50  108.40  65.50  52.50  79.80  54.60
Calculate the variance and standard deviation for these data.
Solution Let x denote the 2015 earnings before taxes of an employee of this company. The 
values of ∑x and ∑x2 are calculated in Table 3.7.
Table 3.7
x
 
x2
88.50
7832.25
108.40
11,750.56
65.50
4290.25
52.50
2756.25
79.80
6368.04
54.60
2981.16
∑x = 449.30
∑x2 = 35,978.51
Because the data in this example are on earnings of all employees of this company, we use the 
population formula to compute the variance using N = 6. Thus, the variance is
σ2 =
∑x2 −(
(∑x)2
N
)
N
=
35,978.51 −(
(449.30)2
6
)
6
= 388.90
The standard deviation is obtained by taking the (positive) square root of the variance:
σ = R
∑x2 −(
(∑x)2
N
)
N
= √388.90 = 19.721 thousand = $19,721
Thus, the standard deviation of the 2015 earnings of all six employees of this company is 
$19,721. 
◼
Note that ∑x2 is not the same as (∑x)2. The value of ∑x2 is obtained by squaring the x values 
and then adding them. The value of (∑x)2 is obtained by squaring the value of ∑x.
Calculating the population 
variance and standard deviation 
for ungrouped data.
Warning 

3.2 Measures of Dispersion for Ungrouped Data
95
 
The uses of the standard deviation are discussed in Section 3.4. Later chapters explain how 
the mean and the standard deviation taken together can help in making inferences about the 
population.
3.2.3 Coefficient of Variation
One disadvantage of the standard deviation as a measure of dispersion is that it is a measure of 
absolute variability and not of relative variability. Sometimes we may need to compare the 
variability for two different data sets that have different units of measurement. In such cases, a 
measure of relative variability is preferable. One such measure is the coefficient of variation.
Coefficient of Variation
The coeffi cient of variation, denoted by CV, expresses standard deviation as a percentage of the 
mean and is computed as follows.
 For population data:    CV = σ
μ × 100%
 For sample data: 
 CV = s
x × 100%
Note that the coeffi cient of variation does not have any units of measurement, as it is always 
expressed as a percent.
Thus, to calculate the coefficient of variation, we perform the following steps: First we calculate 
the mean and standard deviation for the given data set. Then we divide the standard deviation by 
the mean and multiply the answer by 100%.
 
The following example shows the calculation of the coefficient of variation.
EXAMPLE 3–16 
Salaries and Education
The yearly salaries of all employees working for a large company have a mean of $72,350 and a 
standard deviation of $12,820. The years of schooling (education) for the same employees have 
a mean of 15 years and a standard deviation of 2 years. Is the relative variation in the salaries 
higher or lower than that in years of schooling for these employees? Answer the question by 
calculating the coefficient of variation for each variable.
Solution Because the two variables (salary and years of schooling) have different units of 
measurement (dollars and years, respectively), we cannot directly compare the two standard 
deviations. Hence, we calculate the coefficient of variation for each of these data sets.
 CV for salaries = σ
μ × 100% = 12,820
72,350 × 100% = 17.72%
 CV for years of schooling = σ
μ × 100% = 2
15 × 100% = 13.33%
Thus, the standard deviation for salaries is 17.72% of its mean and that for years of schooling is 
13.33% of its mean. Since the coefficient of variation for salaries has a higher value than the coef-
ficient of variation for years of schooling, the salaries have a higher relative variation than the 
years of schooling. 
◼ 
Note that the coefficient of variation for salaries in the above example is 17.72%. This means that 
if we assume that the mean of salaries for these employees is 100, then the standard deviation of 
salaries is 17.72. Similarly, if the mean of years of schooling for these employees is 100, then the 
standard deviation of years of schooling is 13.33.
Calculating the coefficient 
of variation.
www.ebook3000.com

96
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
3.2.4 Population Parameters and Sample Statistics
A numerical measure such as the mean, median, mode, range, variance, or standard deviation 
calculated for a population data set is called a population parameter, or simply a parameter. A 
summary measure calculated for a sample data set is called a sample statistic, or simply a statistic. 
Thus, μ and σ are population parameters, and x and s are sample statistics. As an illustration, 
x = $16,070.3 million in Example 3–1 is a sample statistic, and μ = 45.25 years in Example 3–2 
is a population parameter. Similarly, s = $7.95 million in Example 3–14 is a sample statistic, 
whereas σ = $19,721 in Example 3–15 is a population parameter.
EXERCISES
b. Calculate the coefficient of variation.
c. Are the values of these summary measures population param-
eters or sample statistics? Explain.
3.36 The following data give the number of patients who visited a 
walk-in clinic on each of 20 randomly selected days.
23
37
26
19
33
22
30
42
24
26
28
32
37
29
38
24
35
20
34
38
a. Calculate the range, variance, and standard deviation for these 
data.
b. Calculate the coefficient of variation.
3.37 The following data represent the systolic blood pressure read-
ing (that is, the top number in the standard blood pressure reading) in 
mmHg for each of 20 randomly selected middle-aged males who were 
taking blood pressure medication.
139
151
138
153
134
136
141
126
109
144
111
150
107
132
144
116
159
121
127
113
a. Calculate the range, variance, and standard deviation for these 
data.
b. Calculate the coefficient of variation.
3.38 The following data give the one-way commuting times (in 
minutes) from home to work for all 12 employees working at a small 
company.
35
10
22
38
31
27
53
44
16
44
25
12
a. Calculate the range, variance, and standard deviation for these 
data.
b. Calculate the coefficient of variation.
c. What does the high value of the standard deviation tell 
you?
3.39 The following data give the times (in minutes) that all 10 stu-
dents took to complete an assignment in a statistics class.
15
26
16
36
31
13
29
18
21
39
a. Calculate the range, variance, and standard deviation for these 
data.
b. Calculate the coefficient of variation.
c. What does the high value of the standard deviation tell you?
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
3.28 The range, as a measure of spread, has the disadvantage of 
being influenced by outliers. Illustrate this with an example.
3.29 Can the standard deviation have a negative value? Explain.
3.30 When is the value of the standard deviation for a data set zero? 
Give one example. Calculate the standard deviation for the example 
and show that its value is zero.
3.31 Briefly explain the difference between a population parameter 
and a sample statistic. Give one example of each.
3.32 The following data set belongs to a population:
5  −7  2  0  −9  16  10  7
Calculate the range, variance, and standard deviation.
APPLICATIONS
3.33 The following data give the prices of seven textbooks ran-
domly selected from a university bookstore.
$89  $170  $104  $113  $56  $161 $147
a. Find the mean for these data. Calculate the deviations of the 
data values from the mean. Is the sum of these deviations zero?
b. Calculate the range, variance, standard deviation and coeffi-
cient of variation.
3.34 The following data give the number of years of employment 
for all 20 employees of a small company.
23
9
12
21
24
6
33
34
17
3
12
31
5
10
27
9
15
16
30
38
a. Compute the range, variance, and standard deviation for these 
data.
b. Calculate the coefficient of variation.
c. Are the values of these summary measures population param-
eters or sample statistics? Explain.
3.35 The following data give the annual salaries (in thousand 
dollars) of 20 randomly selected health care workers.
50
71
57
39
45
64
38
53
35
62
74
40
67
44
77
61
58
55
64
59
a. Compute the range, variance, and standard deviation for these 
data.

3.3 Mean, Variance, and Standard Deviation for Grouped Data
97
3.40 The following data give the amount (in dollars) of electric bills for 
November 2015 for 12 randomly selected households from a small town.
205
265
176
314
243
192
297
357
238
281
342
259
a. Calculate the range, variance, and standard deviation for these 
data.
b. Calculate the coefficient of variation.
3.41 The following data give the 2015 bonuses (in thousands of 
dollars) of 10 randomly selected Wall Street managers.
127
82 45 99
153
3261 77
108
68
278
a. Calculate the range, variance, and standard deviation for these 
data.
b. Calculate the coefficient of variation.
3.42 The following data give the hourly wage rates of eight employees 
of a company.
$22
22
22
22
22
22
22
22
Calculate the standard deviation. Is its value zero? If yes, why?
3.43 The yearly salaries of all employees who work for a com-
pany have a mean of $62,350 and a standard deviation of $6820. 
The years of experience for the same employees have a mean of 
15 years and a standard deviation of 2 years. Is the relative variation 
in the salaries larger or smaller than that in years of experience for 
these employees?
3.44 The SAT scores of 100 students have a mean of 975 and a 
standard deviation of 105. The GPAs of the same 100 students have a 
mean of 3.16 and a standard deviation of .22. Is the relative variation 
in SAT scores larger or smaller than that in GPAs?
3.45 Consider the following two data sets.
Data Set I:
12
25
37
 8
41
Data Set II:
19
32
44
15
48
Note that each value of the second data set is obtained by adding 7 
to the corresponding value of the first data set. Calculate the stand-
ard deviation for each of these two data sets using the formula for 
sample data. Comment on the relationship between the two standard 
deviations.
*
In Sections 3.1.1 and 3.2.2, we learned how to calculate the mean, variance, and standard devia-
tion for ungrouped data. In this section, we will learn how to calculate the mean, variance, and 
standard deviation for grouped data.
3.3.1 Mean for Grouped Data
We learned in Section 3.1.1 that the mean is obtained by dividing the sum of all values by the 
number of values in a data set. However, if the data are given in the form of a frequency table, we 
no longer know the values of individual observations. Consequently, in such cases, we cannot 
obtain the sum of individual values. We find an approximation for the sum of these values using 
the procedure explained in the next paragraph and example. The formulas used to calculate the 
mean for grouped data follow.
Calculating Mean for Grouped Data
Mean for population data:  μ =
∑mf
N
Mean for sample data:
 x =
∑mf
n
where m is the midpoint and f is the frequency of a class.
 
To calculate the mean for grouped data, first find the midpoint of each class and then multi-
ply the midpoints by the frequencies of the corresponding classes. The sum of these products, 
denoted by ∑mf, gives an approximation for the sum of all values. To find the value of the mean, 
divide this sum by the total number of observations in the data.
EXAMPLE 3–17 
Daily Commuting Times for Employees
Table 3.8 gives the frequency distribution of the daily one-way commuting times (in minutes) 
from home to work for all 25 employees of a company.
Calculating the population mean 
for grouped data.
3.3 Mean, Variance, and Standard Deviation for Grouped Data
www.ebook3000.com

98
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
Table 3.8
Daily Commuting Time
(minutes)
 
Number of
Employees ( f)
 0 to less than 10
 
4
10 to less than 20
9
20 to less than 30
6
30 to less than 40
4
40 to less than 50
2
Calculate the mean of the daily commuting times.
Solution Note that because the data set includes all 25 employees of the company, it represents 
the population. Table 3.9 shows the calculation of ∑mf. Note that in Table 3.9, m denotes the 
midpoints of the classes.
Table 3.9
Daily Commuting Time
(minutes)
 
f
 
m 
mf
 0 to less than 10
4
 5
 20
10 to less than 20
9
15
135
20 to less than 30
6
25
150
30 to less than 40
4
35
140
40 to less than 50
2
45
 90
N = 25
∑mf = 535
 
To calculate the mean, we first find the midpoint of each class. The class midpoints are 
recorded in the third column of Table 3.9. The products of the midpoints and the corresponding 
frequencies are listed in the fourth column. The sum of the fourth column values, denoted by 
∑mf, gives the approximate total daily commuting time (in minutes) for all 25 employees. The 
mean is obtained by dividing this sum by the total frequency. Therefore,
μ =
∑mf
N
= 535
25 = 21.40 minutes
Thus, the employees of this company spend an average of 21.40 minutes a day commuting from 
home to work. 
◼ 
 
What do the numbers 20, 135, 150, 140, and 90 in the column labeled mf in Table 3.9 
represent? We know from this table that 4 employees spend 0 to less than 10 minutes commut-
ing per day. If we assume that the time spent commuting by these 4 employees is evenly 
spread in the interval 0 to less than 10, then the midpoint of this class (which is 5) gives the 
mean time spent commuting by these 4 employees. Hence, 4 × 5 = 20 is the approximate total 
time (in minutes) spent commuting per day by these 4 employees. Similarly, 9 employees 
spend 10 to less than 20 minutes commuting per day, and the total time spent commuting by 
these 9 employees is approximately 135 minutes a day. The other numbers in this column can 
be interpreted in the same way. Note that these numbers give the approximate commuting 
times for these employees based on the assumption of an even spread within classes. The total 
commuting time for all 25 employees is approximately 535 minutes. Consequently, 21.40 
minutes is an approximate and not the exact value of the mean. We can find the exact value of 
the mean only if we know the exact commuting time for each of the 25 employees of the 
company.

3.3 Mean, Variance, and Standard Deviation for Grouped Data
99
EXAMPLE 3–18 
Number of Orders Received
Table 3.10 gives the frequency distribution of the number of orders received each day during the 
past 50 days at the office of a mail-order company.
Table 3.10
Number of Orders  
Number of Days ( f)
10–12
 4
13–15
12
16–18
20
19–21
14
Calculate the mean.
Solution Because the data set includes only 50 days, it represents a sample. The value of ∑mf  
is calculated in Table 3.11.
Table 3.11
Number of Orders 
f
 
m 
mf
10–12
 4
11
 44
13–15
12
14
168
16–18
20
17
340
19–21
14
20
280
n = 50
∑mf = 832
The value of the sample mean is
x =
∑mf
n
= 832
50 = 16.64 orders
Thus, this mail-order company received an average of 16.64 orders per day during these 
50 days. 
◼
3.3.2 Variance and Standard Deviation for Grouped Data
Following are what we will call the basic formulas that are used to calculate the population and 
sample variances for grouped data:
σ2 =
∑f (m −μ)2
N
  and  s2 =
∑f (m −x)2
n −1
where σ2 is the population variance, s2 is the sample variance, and m is the midpoint of a class.
 
In either case, the standard deviation is obtained by taking the positive square root of the 
variance.
 
Again, the short-cut formulas are more efficient for calculating the variance and standard 
deviation. Section A3.1.2 of Appendix 3.1 at the end of this chapter shows how to use the basic 
formulas to calculate the variance and standard deviation for grouped data.
Short-Cut Formulas for the Variance and Standard Deviation for Grouped Data
σ2 =
∑m2f −(
(∑mf)2
N
)
N
  and  s2 =
∑m2f −(
(∑mf)2
n
)
n −1
where σ2 is the population variance, s2 is the sample variance, and m is the midpoint of a class.
Calculating the sample mean 
for grouped data.
www.ebook3000.com

100
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
 
The standard deviation is obtained by taking the positive square root of the variance.
Population standard deviation:    σ = R
∑m2f −(
(∑mf)2
N
)
N
Sample standard deviation:   s = R
∑m2f −(
(∑mf)2
n
)
n −1
 
Examples 3–19 and 3–20 illustrate the use of these formulas to calculate the variance and 
standard deviation.
EXAMPLE 3–19 
Daily Commuting Times of Employees
The following data, reproduced from Table 3.8 of Example 3–17, give the frequency distribution 
of the daily one-way commuting times (in minutes) from home to work for all 25 employees of 
a company.
Daily Commuting Time
(minutes)
 
Number of 
Employees ( f)
 0 to less than 10
4
10 to less than 20
9
20 to less than 30
6
30 to less than 40
4
40 to less than 50
2
Calculate the variance and standard deviation.
Solution All four steps needed to calculate the variance and standard deviation for grouped 
data are shown after Table 3.12.
Table 3.12
Daily Commuting Time 
(minutes)
 
f
 
m
 
mf
 
m2f
 0 to less than 10
4
5
 20
 100
10 to less than 20
9
15
135
2025
20 to less than 30
6
25
150
3750
30 to less than 40
4
35
140
4900
40 to less than 50
2
45
 90
4050
N = 25
∑mf = 535
∑m2f = 14,825
Step 1. Calculate the value of ∑mf.
 To calculate the value of ∑mf, first find the midpoint m of each class (see the third column in 
Table 3.12) and then multiply the corresponding class midpoints and class frequencies (see the 
fourth column). The value of ∑mf  is obtained by adding these products. Thus,
∑mf = 535
Calculating the population 
variance and standard deviation 
for grouped data.

3.3 Mean, Variance, and Standard Deviation for Grouped Data
101
Step 2. Find the value of ∑m2f.
 To find the value of ∑m2f, square each m value and multiply this squared value of m by the cor-
responding frequency (see the fifth column in Table 3.12). The sum of these products (that is, the 
sum of the fifth column) gives ∑m2f. Hence,
∑m2f = 14,825
Step 3. Calculate the variance.
 Because the data set includes all 25 employees of the company, it represents the population. 
Therefore, we use the formula for the population variance:
σ2 =
∑m2f −(
(∑mf )2
N
)
N
=
14,825 −(
(535)2
25
)
25
= 3376
25
= 135.04
Step 4. Calculate the standard deviation.
 To obtain the standard deviation, take the (positive) square root of the variance.
σ = √σ2 = √135.04 = 11.62 minutes
 Thus, the standard deviation of the daily commuting times for these employees is 11.62 
minutes. 
◼
 
Note that the values of the variance and standard deviation calculated in Example 3–19 for 
grouped data are approximations. The exact values of the variance and standard deviation can be 
obtained only by using the ungrouped data on the daily commuting times of these 25 employees.
EXAMPLE 3–20 
Number of Orders Received
The following data, reproduced from Table 3.10 of Example 3–18, give the frequency distribu-
tion of the number of orders received each day during the past 50 days at the office of a mail-
order company.
Number of Orders 
f
10–12
 4
13–15
12
16–18
20
19–21
14
Calculate the variance and standard deviation.
Solution All the information required for the calculation of the variance and standard devia-
tion appears in Table 3.13.
Table 3.13
Number of Orders  
f
 
m  
mf
 
m2f
10–12
 4
11
 44
 484
13–15
12
14
168
2352
16–18
20
17
340
5780
19–21
14
20
280
5600
n = 50
∑mf = 832
∑m2f = 14,216
Calculating the sample variance 
and standard deviation for 
grouped data.
www.ebook3000.com

102
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
 
Because the data set includes only 50 days, it represents a sample. Hence, we use the sample 
formulas to calculate the variance and standard deviation. By substituting the values into the 
formula for the sample variance, we obtain
s2 =
∑m2f −(
(∑mf )2
n
)
n −1
=
14,216 −(
(832)2
50
)
50 −1
= 7.5820
Hence, the standard deviation is
s = √s2 = √7.5820 = 2.75 orders
Thus, the standard deviation of the number of orders received at the office of this mail-order 
company during the past 50 days is 2.75. 
◼
EXERCISES
3.50 The following table gives the frequency distribution of the total 
miles driven during 2015 by 300 car owners.
Miles Driven in 2015 
(in thousand)
 
Number of Car Owners
 0 to less than  5
 7
 5 to less than 10
26
10 to less than 15
59
15 to less than 20
71
20 to less than 25
62
25 to less than 30
39
30 to less than 35
22
35 to less than 40
14
Find the mean, variance, and standard deviation. Give a brief interpre-
tation of the values in the column labeled mf in your table of calcula-
tions. What does ∑mf  represent?
3.51 The following table gives information on the amounts 
(in dollars) of electric bills for August 2015 for a sample of 50 
families.
Amount of Electric Bill 
(dollars)
 
Number of Families
 0 to less than  60
 5
60 to less than 120
16
120 to less than 180
11
180 to less than 240
10
240 to less than 300
 8
Find the mean, variance, and standard deviation. Give a brief interpre-
tation of the values in the column labeled mf in your table of calcula-
tions. What does ∑mf  represent?
3.52 The following data give the amounts (in dollars) spent last 
month on food by 400 randomly selected families.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
3.46 Are the values of the mean and standard deviation that are cal-
culated using grouped data exact or approximate values of the mean 
and standard deviation, respectively? Explain.
3.47 Using the population formulas, calculate the mean, variance, 
and standard deviation for the following grouped data.
x
2–4
5–7
8–10
11–13
14–16
f
5
9
14
7
5
3.48 Using the sample formulas, find the mean, variance, and stand-
ard deviation for the grouped data displayed in the following table.
x
 
f
 0 to less than  4
17
 4 to less than  8
23
 8 to less than 12
15
12 to less than 16
11
16 to less than 20
 8
20 to less than 24
 6
APPLICATIONS
3.49 The following table gives the frequency distribution of the 
number of hours spent last week on cell phones (making phone calls 
and texting) by all 100 students in the tenth grade at a school.
Hours
 
Number of Students
 0 to less than  4
14
 4 to less than  8
18
 8 to less than 12
25
12 to less than 16
18
16 to less than 20
16
20 to less than 24
 9
Find the mean, variance, and standard deviation.

3.4 Use of Standard Deviation
103
Food Expenditure 
(in dollars)
 
Number of 
Families
 200 to less than  500
38
 500 to less than  800
105
 800 to less than 1100
130
1100 to less than 1400
60
1400 to less than 1700
42
1700 to less than 2000
18
2000 to less than 2300
 7
Calculate the mean, variance, and standard deviation.
3.53 The following table gives the frequency distribution of the 
number of hours spent per week on activities that involve sports and/
or exercise by a sample of 400 Americans. The numbers are consistent 
with the summary results from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Ameri-
can Time Use Survey (www.bls.gov).
Hours per Week
 
Number of People
   0 to less than  3.5
34
 3.5 to less than  7.0
92
 7.0 to less than 10.5
55
10.5 to less than 14.0
83
14.0 to less than 28.0
121
28.0 to less than 56.0
15
Find the mean, variance, and standard deviation.
By using the mean and standard deviation, we can find the proportion or percentage of the total 
observations that fall within a given interval about the mean. This section briefly discusses 
Chebyshev’s theorem and the empirical rule, both of which demonstrate this use of the standard 
deviation.
3.4.1 Chebyshev’s Theorem
Chebyshev’s theorem gives a lower bound for the area under a curve between two points that are 
on opposite sides of the mean and at the same distance from the mean.
Chebyshev’s Theorem For any number k greater than 1, at least (1 − 1/k2) of the data values lie 
within k standard deviations of the mean.
 
Note that k gives the distance between the mean and a point in terms of the number of standard 
deviations. To find the area under a curve between two points using Chebyshev’s theorem, we 
perform the following steps: First we find the distance between the mean and each of the two 
given points. Note that both these distances must be the same to apply Chebyshev’s theorem. 
Then we divide the distance calculated above by the standard deviation. This gives the value of k. 
Finally we substitute the value of k in the formula 1 −1
k2 and simplify. Multiply this answer by 
100 to obtain the percentage. This gives the minimum area (in percent) under the distribution 
curve between the two points.
 
Figure 3.5 illustrates Chebyshev’s theorem.
At least 1 − 1/k2
of the values lie in
the shaded areas
kσ
kσ
μ − kσ
μ + kσ
μ
Figure 3.5 Chebyshev’s theorem.
3.4 Use of Standard Deviation
www.ebook3000.com

104
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
 
Table 3.14 lists the areas under a distribution curve for different values of k using Chebyshev’s 
theorem.
Table 3.14 Areas Under the Distribution Curve Using Chebyshev’s Theorem
k
Interval
1 −1
k2
Minimum Area Within 
k Standard Deviations
1.5
μ ± 1.5 σ
1 −
1
1.52 = 1 −.44 = .56
56%
2.0
μ ± 2 σ
1 −1
22 = 1 −.25 = .75
75%
2.5
μ ± 2.5 σ
1 −
1
2.52 = 1 −.16 = .84
84%
3.0
μ ± 3 σ
1 −
1
3.02 = 1 −.11 = .89
89%
 
For example, using Table 3.14, if k = 2, then according to Chebyshev’s theorem, at least .75, 
or 75%, of the values of a data set lie within two standard deviations of the mean. This is shown 
in Figure 3.6.
At least 75% of
the values lie in
the shaded areas
μ − 2σ
μ
μ + 2σ
Figure 3.6 Percentage of values 
within two standard deviations of 
the mean for Chebyshev’s theorem.
If k = 3, then according to Chebyshev’s theorem, at least .89, or 89%, of the values fall within 
three standard deviations of the mean. This is shown in Figure 3.7.
At least 89% of
the values lie in
the shaded areas
μ − 3σ
μ
μ + 3σ
Figure 3.7 Percentage of values 
within three standard deviations of 
the mean for Chebyshev’s theorem.
 
Although in Figures 3.5 through 3.7 we have used the population notation for the mean 
and standard deviation, the theorem applies to both sample and population data. Note that 
Chebyshev’s theorem is applicable to a distribution of any shape. However, Chebyshev’s theorem 
can be used only for k > 1. This is so because when k = 1, the value of 1 − 1/k2 is zero, and 
when k < 1, the value of 1 − 1/k2 is negative.
EXAMPLE 3–21 
Blood Pressure of Women
The average systolic blood pressure for 4000 women who were screened for high blood pressure 
was found to be 187 mm Hg with a standard deviation of 22. Using Chebyshev’s theorem, find 
the minimum percentage of women in this group who have a systolic blood pressure between 143 
and 231 mm Hg.
Applying Chebyshev’s theorem.

3.4 Use of Standard Deviation
105
Solution Let μ and σ be the mean and the standard deviation, respectively, of the systolic blood 
pressures of these women. Then, from the given information,
μ = 187 and σ = 22
To find the percentage of women whose systolic blood pressures are between 143 and 231 mm Hg, 
the first step is to determine k. As shown below, each of the two points, 143 and 231, is 44 units 
away from the mean.
   
 44 
 | 
 44 
 
 143 
μ = 187 
231
The value of k is obtained by dividing the distance between the mean and each point by the stand-
ard deviation. Thus,
k = 44/22 = 2
From Table 3.14, for k = 2, the area under the curve is at least 75%. Hence, according to 
Chebyshev’s theorem, at least 75% of the women have a systolic blood pressure between 143 and 
231 mm Hg. This percentage is shown in Figure 3.8.
 
Systolic blood
pressure
231
187
143
At least 75% of the 
women have a systolic
blood pressure between
143 and 231
μ − 2σ
μ
μ + 2σ
Figure 3.8 Percentage of women with systolic blood pressure 
between 143 and 231.
 
◼
3.4.2 Empirical Rule
Whereas Chebyshev’s theorem is applicable to a distribution of any shape, the empirical rule 
applies only to a specific shape of distribution called a bell-shaped distribution, as shown in 
Figure 3.9. More will be said about such a distribution in Chapter 6, where it is called a 
normal curve. In this section, only the following three rules for the curve are given.
Empirical Rule For a bell-shaped distribution, approximately
1. 68% of the observations lie within one standard deviation of the mean.
2. 95% of the observations lie within two standard deviations of the mean.
3. 99.7% of the observations lie within three standard deviations of the mean.
Table 3.15 lists the areas under a bell-shaped distribution for the above mentioned three 
intervals.
Table 3.15  Approximate Areas under a Bell-Shaped 
Distribution Using the Empirical Rule
Interval
 
Approximate Area
μ ± 1 σ
68%
μ ± 2 σ
95%
μ ± 3 σ
99.7%
PhotoDisc, Inc./Getty Images
www.ebook3000.com

 
Figure 3.9 illustrates the empirical rule. Again, the empirical rule applies to both population 
data and sample data.
95%
99.7%
68%
μ − 3σ μ − 2σ μ − σ
μ
μ + 3σ
μ + 2σ
μ + σ
Figure 3.9 Illustration of the empirical rule.
EXAMPLE 3–22 
Age Distribution of Persons
The age distribution of a sample of 5000 persons is bell-shaped with a mean of 40 years and 
a standard deviation of 12 years. Determine the approximate percentage of people who are 16 to 
64 years old.
Solution We use the empirical rule to find the required percentage because the distribution of 
ages follows a bell-shaped curve. From the given information, for this distribution,
x = 40 years and  s = 12 years
Applying the empirical rule.
DOES SPREAD 
MEAN THE SAME 
AS VARIABILITY 
AND DISPERSION?
CASE STUDY 3–3
In any discipline, there is terminology that one needs to learn in order to become fluent. Accounting majors 
need to learn the difference between credits and debits, chemists need to know how an ion differs from an 
atom, and physical therapists need to know the difference between abduction and adduction. Statistics is no 
different. Failing to learn the difference between the mean and the median makes much of the remainder of 
this book very difficult to understand.
 
Another issue with terminology is the use of words other than the terminology to describe a specific 
concept or scenario. Sometimes the words one chooses to use can be vague or ambiguous, resulting in 
confusion. One debate in the statistics community involves the use of the word “spread” in place of the words 
“dispersion” and “variability.” In a 2012 article, “Lexical ambiguity: making a case against spread,” authors 
Jennifer Kaplan, Neal Rogness, and Diane Fisher point out that the Oxford English Dictionary has more than 
25 definitions for the word spread, many of which students know coming into a statistics class. As a result of 
knowing some of the meanings of spread, students who use the word spread in place of variability or 
dispersion “do not demonstrate strong statistical meanings of the word spread at the end of a one-semester 
statistics course.”
 
In order to examine the extent of this issue, the authors of the article designed a study in which they 
selected 160 undergraduate students taking an introductory statistics course from 14 different professors at 
three different universities and in the first week of the semester asked them to write sentences and definitions 
for spread using its primary meaning. Then, at the end of the semester, the same students were asked to 
write sentences and definitions for spread using its primary meaning in statistics. The authors found that 
responses of only one-third of the students related spread to the concept of variability, which has to do with 
how the data vary around the center of a distribution. A slightly larger percentage of students gave responses 
that “defined spread as ‘to cover evenly or in a thin layer,’” while approximately one in eight responded with 
a definition that was synonymous with the notion of range. Seven other definitions were given by at least 
three students in the study.
 
Although more of the definitions and sentences provided at the end of the course had something to do 
with statistics, the authors did not see an increase in the percentage of definitions that associated spread 
with the concept of variability. Hence, they suggested that the ambiguity of the term spread is sufficient 
enough to stop using it in place of the terms variability and dispersion.
Source: Kaplan, J. J., Rogness, N. T., 
and Fisher, D. G., “Lexical ambiguity: 
making a case against spread,” 
 Teaching Statistics, 2011, 34, (2), 
pp. 56–60. © 2011 Teaching Statistics 
Trust.
106

3.4 Use of Standard Deviation
107
Figure 3.10 Percentage of people who are 16 to 64 years old.
64
   = 40
Ages
16 − 40 = −24
= −2s
= 2s
64 − 40 = 24
16
 − 2s
x
x
  + 2s
x
Each of the two points, 16 and 64, is 24 units away from the mean. Dividing 24 by 12, we convert 
the distance between each of the two points and the mean in terms of the number of standard 
deviations. Thus, the distance between 16 and 40 and that between 40 and 64 is each equal to 2s. 
Consequently, as shown in Figure 3.10, the area from 16 to 64 is the area from x −2s to x + 2s.
 
Because, from Table 3.15, the area within two standard deviations of the mean is approxi-
mately 95% for a bell-shaped curve, approximately 95% of the people in the sample are 16 to 
64 years old. 
◼
EXERCISES
3.61 The one-way commuting times from home to work for all 
employees working at a large company have a mean of 34 minutes 
and a standard deviation of 8 minutes.
a. Using Chebyshev’s theorem, find the minimum percentage of 
employees at this company who have one-way commuting 
times in the following intervals.
 
i. 14 to 54 minutes    ii. 18 to 50 minutes
*b. Using Chebyshev’s theorem, find the interval that contains 
one-way commuting times of at least 89% of the employees 
at this company.
3.62 The mean monthly mortgage paid by all home owners in a 
town is $2365 with a standard deviation of $340.
a. Using Chebyshev’s theorem, find the minimum percentage 
of all home owners in this town who pay a monthly 
 mortgage of
 
i. $1685 to $3045    ii. $1345 to $3385
*b. Using Chebyshev’s theorem, find the interval that contains 
the monthly mortgage payments of at least 84% of all home 
owners in this town.
3.63 The one-way commuting times from home to work for all 
employees working at a large company have a bell-shaped curve with 
a mean of 34 minutes and a standard deviation of 8 minutes. Using the 
empirical rule, find the approximate percentages of the employees at 
this company who have one-way commuting times in the following 
intervals.
a. 10 to 58 minutes b. 26 to 42 minutes c. 18 to 50 minutes
3.64 The prices of all college textbooks follow a bell-shaped distri-
bution with a mean of $180 and a standard deviation of $30.
a. Using the empirical rule, find the (approximate) percentage of 
all college textbooks with their prices between
 
 
i. $150 and $210    ii. $120 and $240
*b.  Using the empirical rule, find the interval that contains the 
prices of (approximate) 99.7% of college textbooks.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
3.54 Briefly explain Chebyshev’s theorem and its applications.
3.55 Briefly explain the empirical rule. To what kind of distribution 
is it applied?
3.56 A sample of 2000 observations has a mean of 74 and a standard 
deviation of 12. Using Chebyshev’s theorem, find the minimum per-
centage of the observations that fall in the intervals x ± 2s, x ± 2.5s, 
and x ± 3s. Note that  x ± 2s represents the interval x −2s to x + 2s, 
and so on.
3.57 A large population has a mean of 230 and a standard devia-
tion of 41. Using Chebyshev’s theorem, find the minimum percent-
age of the observations that fall in the intervals μ ± 2σ, μ ± 2.5σ, 
and μ ± 3σ.
3.58 A large population has a bell-shaped distribution with a mean 
of 310 and a standard deviation of 37. Using the empirical rule, find 
the approximate percentage of the observations that fall in the inter-
vals μ ± 1σ, μ ± 2σ, and μ ± 3σ.
3.59 A sample of 3000 observations has a bell-shaped distribution 
with a mean of 82 and a standard deviation of 16. Using the empirical 
rule, find the approximate percentage of the observations that fall in 
the intervals x ± 1s, x ± 2s, and x ± 3s.
APPLICATIONS
3.60 The mean time taken by all participants to run a road race was 
found to be 220 minutes with a standard deviation of 20 minutes. 
Using Chebyshev’s theorem, find the minimum percentage of runners 
who completed the race in
a. 180 to 260 minutes
b. 160 to 280 minutes
c. 170 to 270 minutes
www.ebook3000.com

108
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
A measure of position determines the position of a single value in relation to other values in a 
sample or a population data set. There are many measures of position; however, only quartiles, 
percentiles, and percentile rank are discussed in this section.
3.5.1 Quartiles and Interquartile Range
Quartiles are the summary measures that divide a ranked data set into four equal parts. Three 
measures will divide any data set into four equal parts. These three measures are the first quar-
tile (denoted by Q1), the second quartile (denoted by Q2), and the third quartile (denoted by 
Q3). The data should be ranked in increasing order before the quartiles are determined. The quar-
tiles are defined as follows. Note that Q1 and Q3 are also called the lower and the upper quartiles, 
respectively.
Quartiles Quartiles are three values that divide a ranked data set into four equal parts. The 
second quartile is the same as the median of a data set. The first quartile is the median of the 
observations that are less than the median, and the third quartile is the median of the observations 
that are greater than the median.
 
Figure 3.11 describes the positions of the three quartiles.
Figure 3.11 Quartiles.
Q2
Q1
Q3
Each of these portions contains 25% of the
observations of a data set arranged in increasing order
25%
25%
25%
25%
 
Approximately 25% of the values in a ranked data set are less than Q1 and about 75% are 
greater than Q1. The second quartile, Q2, divides a ranked data set into two equal parts; hence, the 
second quartile and the median are the same. Approximately 75% of the data values are less than 
Q3 and about 25% are greater than Q3.
 
The difference between the third quartile and the first quartile for a data set is called the 
interquartile range (IQR), which is a measure of dispersion.
Calculating Interquartile Range The difference between the third and the fi rst quartiles gives 
the interquartile range; that is,
IQR = Interquartile range = Q3 −Q1
Examples 3–23 and 3–24 show the calculation of the quartiles and the interquartile range.
EXAMPLE 3–23 
Commuting Times for College Students
A sample of 12 commuter students was selected from a college. The following data give the 
typical one-way commuting times (in minutes) from home to college for these 12 students.
29
14
39
17
7
47
63
37
42
18
24
55
(a) Find the values of the three quartiles.
(b) Where does the commuting time of 47 fall in relation to the three quartiles?
(c) Find the interquartile range.
Finding quartiles and the 
interquartile range.
3.5 Measures of Position

3.5 Measures of Position
109
Solution
(a) We perform the following steps to find the three quartiles.
Step 1. First we rank the given data in increasing order as follows:
7
14
17
18
24
29
37
39
42
47
55
63
Step 2. We find the second quartile, which is also the median. In a total of 12 data 
values, the median is between sixth and seventh terms. Thus, the median and, hence, the 
second quartile is given by the average of the sixth and seventh values in the ranked data 
set, that is the average of 29 and 37. Thus, the second quartile is:
Q2 = 29 + 37
2
= 33
Note that Q2 = 33 is also the value of the median.
Step 3. We find the median of the data values that are smaller than Q2, and this gives 
the value of the first quartile. The values that are smaller than Q2 are:
7
14
17
18
24
29
The value that divides these six data values in two equal parts is given by the average of 
the two middle values, 17 and 18. Thus, the first quartile is:
Q1 = 17 + 18
2
= 17.5
Step 4. We find the median of the data values that are larger than Q2, and this gives the 
value of the third quartile. The values that are larger than Q2 are:
37
39
42
47
55
63
The value that divides these six data values in two equal parts is given by the average of 
the two middle values, 42 and 47. Thus, the third quartile is:
Q3 = 42 + 47
2
= 44.5
Now we can summarize the calculation of the three quartiles in the following figure.
 
Values smaller than the median 
Values larger than the median
7
14
17
18
24
29
37
39
42
47
55
63
 
Q1 = 17 + 18
2
= 17.5 
Q2 = 29 + 37
2
= 33 
Q3 = 42 + 47
2
= 44.5
The value of Q1 = 17.5 minutes indicates that 25% of these 12 students in this 
sample commute for less than 17.5 minutes and 75% of them commute for more than 
17.5 minutes. Similarly, Q2 = 33 indicates that half of these 12 students commute for 
less than 33 minutes and the other half of them commute for more than 33 minutes. 
The value of Q3 = 44.5 minutes indicates that 75% of these 12 students in this 
sample commute for less than 44.5 minutes and 25% of them commute for more than 
44.5 minutes.
(b) By looking at the position of 47 minutes, we can state that this value lies in the top 25% 
of the commuting times.
(c) The interquartile range is given by the difference between the values of the third and the 
first quartiles. Thus,
 
IQR = Interquartile range = Q3 −Q1 = 44.5 −17.5 = 27 minutes 
◼ 
Finding quartiles for an even 
number of data values.
Position of a value in relation 
to quartiles.
Finding the interquartile range.
www.ebook3000.com

110
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
EXAMPLE 3–24 
Ages of Employees
The following are the ages (in years) of nine employees of an insurance company:
47
28
39
51
33
37
59
24
33
(a) Find the values of the three quartiles. Where does the age of 28 years fall in relation to 
the ages of these employees?
(b) Find the interquartile range.
Solution
(a) First we rank the given data in increasing order. Then we calculate the three quartiles as 
follows:
 
Values less than the median 
Values greater than the median
24
28
33
33
37
39
47
51
59
 
Q1 = 28 + 33
2
= 30.5 
Q2 = 37 
Q3 = 47 + 51
2
= 49
  
Also the median
Thus the values of the three quartiles are
Q1 = 30.5 years,  Q2 = 37 years,  and  Q3 = 49 years
The age of 28 falls in the lowest 25% of the ages.
(b) The interquartile range is
 
IQR = Interquartile range = Q3 −Q1 = 49 −30.5 = 18.5 years 
◼
3.5.2 Percentiles and Percentile Rank
Percentiles are the summary measures that divide a ranked data set into 100 equal parts. Each 
(ranked) data set has 99 percentiles that divide it into 100 equal parts. The data should be ranked 
in increasing order to compute percentiles. The kth percentile is denoted by Pk, where k is an 
integer in the range 1 to 99. For instance, the 25th percentile is denoted by P25. Figure 3.12 shows 
the positions of the 99 percentiles.
P3
P2
P1
1%
1%
1%
P99
P98
P97
Each of these portions contains 1% of the observations of a data
set arranged in increasing order
1%
1%
1%
Figure 3.12 Percentiles.
 
Thus, the kth percentile, Pk, can be defined as a value in a data set such that about k% of the 
measurements are smaller than the value of Pk and about (100 − k)% of the measurements are 
greater than the value of Pk.
 
The approximate value of the kth percentile is determined as explained next.
Calculating Percentiles The (approximate) value of the kth percentile, denoted by Pk, is
Pk = Value of the (
k × n
100 )th term in a ranked data set
where k denotes the number of the percentile and n represents the sample size.
If the value of  k × n
100   is fractional, always round it up to the next higher whole number.
Finding the interquartile range.
Finding quartiles and the 
interquartile range.
Finding quartiles for an odd 
number of data values.

3.5 Measures of Position
111
Thus, to calculate the kth percentile, first we rank the given data set in increasing order. Then, to 
find the kth percentile, we find the (k × n/100)th term where n is the total number of data values 
in the given data set. If the value of (k × n/100) is fractional, we round it up to the next higher 
whole number. The value of this (k × n/100)th term in the ranked data set gives the kth percentile, Pk.
 
Example 3–25 describes the procedure to calculate the percentiles. 
EXAMPLE 3–25 
Commuting Times for College Students
Refer to the data on one-way commuting times (in minutes) from home to college of 12 students 
given in Example 3–23, which is reproduced below.
29
14
39
17
7
47
63
37
42
18
24
55
Find the value of the 70th percentile. Give a brief interpretation of the 70th percentile.
Solution We perform the following three steps to find the 70th percentile for the given data.
Step 1. First we rank the given data in increasing order as follows:
7
14
17
18
24
29
37
39
42
47
55
63
Step 2. We find the (k × n/100)th term. Here n = 12 and k = 70, as we are to find the 70th 
percentile.
k × n
100 = 70 × 12
100
= 8.4 = 9th term
Thus, the 70th percentile, P70, is given by the value of the 9th term in the ranked data set. Note that 
we rounded 8.4 up to 9, which is always the case when calculating a percentile.
Step 3. We find the value of the 9th term in the ranked data. This gives the value of the 70th 
percentile, P70.
P70 = Value of the 9th term = 42 minutes
Thus, we can state that approximately 70% of these 12 students commute for less than or equal 
to 42 minutes. 
◼ 
 
We can calculate the percentile rank for a particular value xi of a data set by using the 
formula given below. The percentile rank of xi gives the percentage of values in the data set that 
are less than xi. To find the percentile rank for a data value xi, we first rank the given data set 
in increasing order. Then we find the number of data values that are less than xi. Finally, we 
divide this number by the number of total values and multiply by 100. This gives the percentile 
rank for xi.
Finding Percentile Rank of a Value
Percentile rank of xi =
Number of values less than xi
Total number of values in the data set × 100%
 
Example 3–26 shows how the percentile rank is calculated for a data value.
EXAMPLE 3–26 
Commuting Times for College Students
Refer to the data on one-way commuting times (in minutes) from home to college of 12 students 
given in Example 3–23, which is reproduced below.
29
14
39
17
7
47
63
37
42
18
24
55
Find the percentile rank of 42 minutes. Give a brief interpretation of this percentile rank.
Finding the percentile for 
a data set.
Finding the percentile rank for 
a data value.
www.ebook3000.com

112
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
Solution We perform the following three steps to find the percentile rank of 42.
Step 1. First we rank the given data in increasing order as follows:
7
14
17
18
24
29
37
39
42
47
55
63
Step 2. Find how many data values are less than 42.
In the above ranked data, there are eight data values that are less than 42.
Step 3. Find the percentile rank of 42 as follows given that 8 of the 12 values in the given data 
set are smaller than 42:
Percentile rank of 42 = 8
12 × 100% = 66.67%
Rounding this answer to the nearest integral value, we can state that about 67% of the students in 
this sample commute for less than 42 minutes. 
◼ 
 
Most statistical software packages use slightly different methods to calculate quartiles and 
percentiles. Those methods, while more precise, are beyond the scope of this text.
EXERCISES
32
33
33
34
35
36
37
37
37
37
38
39
40
41
41
42
42
42
43
44
44
45
45
45
47
47
47
47
47
48
48
49
50
50
51
52
53
54
59
61
a. Calculate the values of the three quartiles and the interquartile 
range. Where does the value 49 fall in relation to these quartiles?
b. Determine the approximate value of the 91st percentile. Give 
a brief interpretation of this percentile.
c. For what percentage of the days was the number of text messages 
sent 40 or higher? Answer by finding the percentile rank of 40.
3.72 The following data give the number of new cars sold at a deal-
ership during a 20-day period.
8
 5
12
 3
9
10
6
12
8
 8
4
16
10
11
7
 7
3
 5
9
11
a. Calculate the values of the three quartiles and the interquartile 
range. Where does the value of 4 lie in relation to these quartiles?
b. Find the (approximate) value of the 25th percentile. Give a 
brief interpretation of this percentile.
c. Find the percentile rank of 10. Give a brief interpretation of 
this percentile rank.
3.73 The following data give the annual salaries (in thousand 
dollars) of 20 randomly selected health care workers.
50
71
57
39
45
64
38
53
35
62
74
40
67
44
77
61
58
55
64
59
a. Calculate the values of the three quartiles and the interquar-
tile range. Where does the value 57 fall in relation to these 
quartiles?
b. Find the approximate value of the 30th percentile. Give a brief 
interpretation of this percentile.
c. Calculate the percentile rank of 61. Give a brief interpretation 
of this percentile rank.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
3.65 Briefly describe how the three quartiles are calculated for a 
data set. Illustrate by calculating the three quartiles for two examples, 
the first with an odd number of observations and the second with an 
even number of observations.
3.66 Explain how the interquartile range is calculated. Give one 
example.
3.67 Briefly describe how the percentiles are calculated for a data set.
3.68 Explain the concept of the percentile rank for an observation of 
a data set.
APPLICATIONS
3.69 The following data give the speeds of 13 cars (in mph) 
measured by radar, traveling on I-84.
73
75
69
68
78
69
74
76
72
79
68
77
71
a. Find the values of the three quartiles and the interquartile range.
b. Calculate the (approximate) value of the 35th percentile.
c. Compute the percentile rank of 71.
3.70 The following data give the total food expenditures (in dollars) 
for the past one month for a sample of 20 families.
1125
530 1234
595
427
872 1480
699 1274 1187
933 1127
716 1065
934 1630 1046 2199 1353
441
a. Calculate the values of the three quartiles and the interquartile 
range.
b. Find the approximate value of the 57th percentile.
c. Calculate the percentile rank of 1046. Give a brief interpreta-
tion of this percentile rank.
3.71 The following data give the number of text messages sent by 
a high school student on 40 randomly selected days during 2015:

3.6 Box-and-Whisker Plot
113
3.6 Box-and-Whisker Plot
A box-and-whisker plot gives a graphic presentation of data using five measures: the median, 
the first quartile, the third quartile, and the smallest and the largest values in the data set between 
the lower and the upper inner fences. (The inner fences are explained in Example 3–27.) A box-
and-whisker plot can help us visualize the center, the spread, and the skewness of a data set. It 
also helps detect outliers. We can compare different distributions by making box-and-whisker 
plots for each of them.
Box-and-Whisker Plot A plot that shows the center, spread, and skewness of a data set. It is 
constructed by drawing a box and two whiskers that use the median, the first quartile, the third 
quartile, and the smallest and the largest values in the data set between the lower and the upper 
inner fences.
 
Note that a box-and-whisker plot is made using the following five-number summary values:
Minimum value
Q1
Median
Q3
Maximum value
The minimum and the maximum values used here must be within the lower and the upper inner 
fences that will be explained below. Making a box-and-whisker plot involves five steps that are 
explained in the example below.
EXAMPLE 3–27 
Incomes of Households
The following data are the incomes (in thousands of dollars) for a sample of 12 households.
75
69
84
112
74
104
81
90
94
144
79
98
Construct a box-and-whisker plot for these data.
Solution The following five steps are performed to construct a box-and-whisker plot.
Step 1. First, rank the data in increasing order and calculate the values of the median, the first 
quartile, the third quartile, and the interquartile range. The ranked data are
69
74
75
79
81
84
90
94
98
104
112
144
For these data,
 Median = (84 + 90)∕2 = 87
 Q1 = (75 + 79)∕2 = 77
 Q3 = (98 + 104)∕2 = 101
 IQR = Q3 −Q1 = 101 −77 = 24
Step 2. Find the points that are 1.5 × IQR below Q1 and 1.5 × IQR above Q3. These two points 
are called the lower and the upper inner fences, respectively.
 1.5 × IQR = 1.5 × 24 = 36
 Lower inner fence = Q1 −36 = 77 −36 = 41
 Upper inner fence = Q3 + 36 = 101 + 36 = 137
Step 3. Determine the smallest and the largest values in the given data set within the two inner 
fences. These two values for our example are as follows:
 Smallest value within the two inner fences = 69
 Largest value within the two inner fences = 112
Constructing a 
box-and-whisker plot.
www.ebook3000.com

114
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
Step 4. Draw a horizontal line and mark the income levels on it such that all the values in the 
given data set are covered. Above the horizontal line, draw a box with its left side at the position 
of the first quartile and the right side at the position of the third quartile. Inside the box, draw a 
vertical line at the position of the median. The result of this step is shown in Figure 3.13.
Figure 3.13
65
First
quartile
Third
quartile
Median
Income
75
85
95
105
115
125
135
145
Step 5. By drawing two lines, join the points of the smallest and the largest values within the 
two inner fences to the box. These values are 69 and 112 in this example as listed in Step 3. The 
two lines that join the box to these two values are called whiskers. A value that falls outside the 
two inner fences is shown by marking an asterisk and is called an outlier. This completes the 
box-and-whisker plot, as shown in Figure 3.14.
Figure 3.14
65
First
quartile
Third
quartile
Smallest value
within the two
inner fences
Largest value
within the two
inner fences
Median
75
85
95
105
115
125
135
145
Income
An
outlier
 
In Figure 3.14, about 50% of the data values fall within the box, about 25% of the values fall 
on the left side of the box, and about 25% fall on the right side of the box. Also, 50% of the values 
fall on the left side of the median and 50% lie on the right side of the median. The data of this 
example are skewed to the right because the lower 50% of the values are spread over a smaller 
range than the upper 50% of the values. 
◼
 
The observations that fall outside the two inner fences are called outliers. These outliers can 
be classified into two kinds of outliers—mild and extreme outliers. To do so, we define two outer 
fences—a lower outer fence at 3.0 × IQR below the first quartile and an upper outer fence at 
3.0 × IQR above the third quartile. If an observation is outside either of the two inner fences but 
within the two outer fences, it is called a mild outlier. An observation that is outside either of the 
two outer fences is called an extreme outlier. For Example 3–27, the two outer fences are calcu-
lated as follows.
 3 × IQR = 3 × 24 = 72
 Lower outer fence = Q1 −72 = 77 −72 = 5
 Upper outer fence = Q3 + 72 = 101 + 72 = 173
Because 144 is outside the upper inner fence but inside the upper outer fence, it is a mild 
outlier.
 
Using the box-and-whisker plot, we can conclude whether the distribution of our data is 
symmetric, skewed to the right, or skewed to the left. If the line representing the median is in the 
middle of the box and the two whiskers are of about the same length, then the data have a sym-
metric distribution. If the line representing the median is not in the middle of the box and/or the 
two whiskers are not of the same length, then the distribution of data values is skewed. The dis-
tribution is skewed to the right if the median is to the left of the center of the box with the right 

Uses and Misuses
115
side whisker equal to or longer than the whisker on the left side, or if the median is in the center 
of the box but the whisker on the right side is longer than the one on the left side. The distribution 
is skewed to the left if the median is to the right of the center of the box with the left side whisker 
equal to or longer than the whisker on the right side, or if the median is in the center of the box 
but the whisker on the left side is longer than the one on the right side.
EXERCISES
Prepare a box-and-whisker plot. Are these data skewed in any 
direction?
3.78 The following data give the total food expenditures (in dollars) 
for the past one month for a sample of 20 families.
1125
530 1234
595
427
872 1480
699 1274 1187
933 1127
716 1065
934 1630 1046 2199 1353
441
Prepare a box-and-whisker plot. Is the distribution of these data sym-
metric or skewed? Are there any outliers? If so, classify them as mild 
or extreme.
3.79 The following data give the annual salaries (in thousand 
dollars) of 20 randomly selected health care workers.
50
71
57
39
45
64
38
53
35
62
74
40
67
44
77
61
58
55
64
59
Prepare a box-and-whisker plot. Are these data skewed in any 
direction?
3.80 The following data give the number of patients who visited a 
walk-in clinic on each of 24 randomly selected days.
23
37
26
19
33
22
30
42
24
26
64
8
28
32
37
29
38
24
35
20
34
38
28
16
Prepare a box-and-whisker plot. Comment on the skewness of these 
data.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
3.74 Briefly explain what summary measures are used to construct 
a box-and-whisker plot.
3.75 Prepare a box-and-whisker plot for the following data:
36
43
28
52
41
59
47
61
24
55
63
73
32
25
35
49
31
22
61
42
58
65
98
34
Does this data set contain any outliers?
APPLICATIONS
3.76 The following data give the time (in minutes) that each of 20 
students selected from a university waited in line at their bookstore to 
pay for their textbooks in the beginning of the Fall 2015 semester.
15
8
23
21
5
17
31
22
34
6
5
10
14
17
16
25
30
3
31
19
Prepare a box-and-whisker plot. Comment on the skewness of these 
data.
3.77 The following data give the 2015 bonuses (in thousands of dol-
lars) of 15 randomly selected Wall Street managers.
107
122
175
89
53
361
67
258
61
781
136
208
391
247
71
USES AND MISUSES...
WHAT DOES IT REALLY “MEAN”?
People are fascinated by data and, as a result, there are statistical 
records on just about everything you can imagine. Weather is no 
exception. Annual precipitation data over many decades are available 
for most major cities. For example, Washington, DC has reliable pre-
cipitation data dating back to 1871. (Data source: Capital Climate, 
capitalclimate.blogspot.com.)
 
One of the most frequently used summary statistics is the mean 
or arithmetic average. This statistic has many interesting uses and is 
one of the most commonly reported summary statistics for quantita-
tive data. The mean allows us to summarize large sets of data into a 
single number that is readily understandable.
 
For example, examine the line graph of precipitation data for 
Washington, DC for the years 1871–2009 presented in Figure 3.15. 
Note that precipitation is measured in inches. The data points on the 
graph represent the mean precipitation for each decade. At first 
inspection, we see obvious differences in the mean precipitation from 
decade-to-decade. Overall, the points appear to be distributed ran-
domly and uniformly above and below about 40 inches. Hence, we 
might say that the annual precipitation in Washington, DC is, on aver-
age, about 40 inches, with some decades above 40 inches and some 
decades below 40 inches. However, can we also say that the mean 
precipitation was unusually high in 1880–1889 and unusually low in 
1960–1969? Caution must be taken when making such statements.
www.ebook3000.com

116
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
 
Even with the information presented in this graph, we are limited 
with regards to the interpretation of these data; there is important infor-
mation that we are missing. The problem is that the mean, by itself, 
oversimplifies the data. By summarizing the data into a single numeric 
value, it is easy to be deceived into thinking that the mean tells us eve-
rything we need to know about the data. This is an incorrect assumption.
 
The mean of a data set, of and by itself, provides limited informa-
tion. As an example, suppose that the average test score for a small class 
of three students was 50%. If the students’ scores were 45%, 50%, and 
55%, we might conclude that none of the students scored well on the 
exam. However, if the students’ scores were 0%, 50%, and 100%, we 
conclude that one student was totally unprepared, one student needs to 
study more, and one student did extremely well on the test. To provide a 
complete interpretation of the data, we need to have more information to 
gain context. We need to know more than just the center of the distribu-
tion. We need a measure of the variability of the data.
 
In Figure 3.15, we can see some degree of variability in the mean 
precipitation from decade-to-decade, but what about the 10-year 
pattern of precipitation within each decade? This information is not 
provided in the graph. Now consider an error bar plot as shown in 
Figure 3.16. This graph shows the mean precipitation for each decade 
(represented by a solid dot) together with bars representing an interval 
of values spanning one standard deviation on either side of the mean.
 
We now have more information to obtain the necessary context. 
First, even though the distribution of the 10-year mean precipitation 
varies from decade-to-decade, the error bars indicate there is over-
lap in the variability for each decade. Second, even though the mean 
precipitation appears to be unusually high in 1880–1889 and unusu-
ally low in 1960–1969, the variation in the mean shows that, overall, 
the pattern of precipitation was not significantly different from that of 
the other decades. Third, we can see that some decades had a rela-
tively consistent pattern of precipitation (1910–1919) while other 
decades experienced a wide variation in precipitation from year-to-
year (2000–2009 among others).
 
The take-home message is clear. A measure of center is of 
limited use without an accompanying measure of variation. Failure 
to do so easily misleads readers into potentially drawing poor or 
misinformed conclusions. Additionally, we should be wary when we 
read results that report only the mean. Without context, we really do 
not know what the results “mean.”
45
50
55
Decade
Precipitation
1871–1879
1880–1889
1890–1899
1900–1909
1910–1919
1920–1929
1930–1939
1940–1949
1950–1959
1960–1969
1970–1979
1980–1989
1990–1999
2000–2009
30
25
35
40
Figure 3.15 Mean precipitation by decade for Washington, DC from 1871 to 2009.
45
50
55
Decade
Mean precipitation (+/− 1 SD)
1871–1879
1880–1889
1890–1899
1900–1909
1910–1919
1920–1929
1930–1939
1940–1949
1950–1959
1960–1969
1970–1979
1980–1989
1990–1999
2000–2009
30
25
35
40
Figure 3.16 Mean precipitation in Washington, DC from 1871 to 2009.

Supplementary Exercises
117
Mode The value (or values) that occurs with highest frequency in 
a data set.
Multimodal distribution A distribution that has more than two 
modes.
Parameter A summary measure calculated for population data.
Percentile rank The percentile rank of a value gives the percentage 
of values in the data set that are smaller than this value.
Percentiles Ninety-nine values that divide a ranked data set into 
100 equal parts.
Quartiles Three summary measures that divide a ranked data set 
into four equal parts.
Range A measure of spread obtained by taking the difference 
between the largest and the smallest values in a data set.
Second quartile The middle or second of the three quartiles that 
divide a ranked data set into four equal parts. About 50% of the values 
in the data set are smaller and about 50% are larger than the second 
quartile. The second quartile is the same as the median.
Standard deviation A measure of spread that is given by the posi-
tive square root of the variance.
Statistic A summary measure calculated for sample data.
Third quartile The third of the three quartiles that divide a ranked 
data set into four equal parts. About 75% of the values in a data set are 
smaller than the value of the third quartile and about 25% are larger. 
It is the median of the values that are greater than the median of the 
whole data set.
Trimmed mean The k% trimmed mean is obtained by dropping k% 
of the smallest values and k% of the largest values from the given data 
and then calculating the mean of the remaining (100 − 2k)% of the 
values.
Unimodal distribution A distribution that has only one mode.
Upper inner fence The value in a data set that is 1.5 × IQR above 
the third quartile.
Upper outer fence The value in a data set that is 3.0 × IQR above 
the third quartile.
Variance A measure of spread.
Weighted mean Mean of a data set whose values are assigned dif-
ferent weights before the mean is calculated.
Bimodal distribution A distribution that has two modes.
Box-and-whisker plot A plot that shows the center, spread, and 
skewness of a data set with a box and two whiskers using the median, 
the first quartile, the third quartile, and the smallest and the largest 
values in the data set between the lower and the upper inner fences.
Chebyshev’s theorem For any number k greater than 1, at least 
(1 − 1/k2) of the values for any distribution lie within k standard devia-
tions of the mean.
Coefficient of variation A measure of relative variability that 
expresses standard deviation as a percentage of the mean.
Empirical rule For a specific bell-shaped distribution, about 68% 
of the observations fall in the interval (μ − σ) to (μ + σ), about 95% 
fall in the interval (μ − 2σ) to (μ + 2σ), and about 99.7% fall in the 
interval (μ − 3σ) to (μ + 3σ).
First quartile The first of the three quartiles that divide a ranked 
data set into four equal parts. The value in a ranked data set such that 
about 25% of the measurements are smaller than this value and about 
75% are larger. It is the median of the values that are smaller than the 
median of the whole data set.
Geometric mean Calculated by taking the nth root of the product 
of all values in a data set.
Interquartile range (IQR) The difference between the third and 
the first quartiles.
Lower inner fence The value in a data set that is 1.5 × IQR below 
the first quartile.
Lower outer fence The value in a data set that is 3.0 × IQR below 
the first quartile.
Mean A measure of center calculated by dividing the sum of all 
values by the number of values in the data set.
Measures of center Measures that describe the center of a distribu-
tion. The mean, median, and mode are three of the measures of center.
Measures of dispersion Measures that give the spread of a distri-
bution. The range, variance, and standard deviation are three such 
measures.
Measures of position Measures that determine the position of a 
single value in relation to other values in a data set. Quartiles, percen-
tiles, and percentile rank are examples of measures of position.
Median The value that divides a ranked data set into two equal parts.
Glossary
c. Compute the range, variance, standard deviation, and coeffi-
cient of variation for these data.
3.82 The following data give the number of driving citations received 
during the last three years by 12 drivers.
4
8
0
3
11
7
4
14
8
13
7
9
a. Find the mean, median, and mode for these data.
b. Calculate the range, variance, and standard deviation.
c. Are the values of the summary measures in parts a and b 
 population parameters or sample statistics?
3.81 The following data give the odometer mileage (rounded to 
the nearest thousand miles) for all 20 cars that are for sale at a 
dealership.
62
86
58
84
72
40
27
38
50
43
27
40
90
43
94
36
28
48
86
77
a. Calculate the mean and median. Do these data have a mode? 
Why or why not?
b. Calculate the 10% trimmed mean for these data.
Supplementary Exercises
www.ebook3000.com

118
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
3.83 An electronics store sold 4828 televisions last year. The follow-
ing table lists the number of different models of televisions sold and 
the prices for which they were sold.
Television 
Model
Number of 
TVs Sold
Price 
(dollars)
RRV5023
 483
1630
TSU7831
1324
 625
WEV4920
 856
 899
HEG7609
 633
1178
YOX6938
 394
1727
LXT2384
1138
 923
Calculate the weighted mean that represents the average price for 
which these 4828 televisions were sold.
3.84 A company makes five different models of cameras. Last month 
they sold 13,884 cameras of all five models. The following table lists 
the number of different models of cameras sold during the last month 
and the prices for which they were sold.
Camera 
Model
Number of 
Cameras Sold
Price 
(dollars)
B110
3216
 425
Z310
1828
1299
N450
4036
 369
J150
3142
 681
L601
1662
1999
Calculate the weighted mean that represents the average price for 
which these 13,884 cameras were sold.
3.85 The following table gives the distribution of the amounts of rain-
fall (in inches) for July 2015 for 50 cities.
Rainfall
Number of Cities
 0 to less than  2
 6
 2 to less than  4
10
 4 to less than  6
20
 6 to less than  8
 7
 8 to less than 10
 4
10 to less than 12
 3
Find the mean, variance, and standard deviation. Are the values 
of  these summary measures population parameters or sample 
statistics?
3.86 The mean time taken to learn the basics of a software pro-
gram by all students is 200 minutes with a standard deviation of 
20 minutes.
a. Using Chebyshev’s theorem, find the minimum percent-
age  of students who learn the basics of this software 
 program in
i. 160 to 240 minutes 
ii. 140 to 260 minutes
*b.  Using Chebyshev’s theorem, find the interval that contains the 
times taken by at least 84% of all students to learn this soft-
ware program.
3.87 The waiting times for patients at a walk-in clinic have a skewed 
distribution with a mean of 30 minutes and a standard deviation of 6 
minutes.
a. Using Chebyshev’s theorem, find the minimum percentage of 
patients at this walk-in clinic who will have to wait for:
i. 15 to 45 minutes  
ii. 12 to 48 minutes
*b. Using Chebyshev’s theorem, find the interval that contains 
waiting times of at least 75% of the patients.
3.88 The mean time taken to learn the basics of a software program 
by all students have a bell-shaped distribution with a mean of 200 
minutes and a standard deviation of 20 minutes.
a. Using the empirical rule, find the (approximate) percentage of 
students who learn the basics of this software program in
i. 180 to 220 minutes 
ii. 160 to 240 minutes
*b. Using the empirical rule, find the interval that contains the 
times taken by (approximate) 99.7% of all students to learn 
this software program.
3.89 Each year the faculty at Metro Business College chooses 
10 members from the current graduating class that they feel are most 
likely to succeed. The data below give the current annual incomes (in 
thousand dollars) of the 10 members of the class of 2009 who were 
voted most likely to succeed.
59
68
84
78
107
382
56
74
97
60
a. Determine the values of the three quartiles and the interquar-
tile range. Where does the value of 74 fall in relation to these 
quartiles?
b. Calculate the (approximate) value of the 70th percentile. Give 
a brief interpretation of this percentile.
c. Find the percentile rank of 97. Give a brief interpretation of 
this percentile rank.
3.90 The following data give the odometer mileage (rounded to 
the nearest thousand miles) for all 20 cars that are for sale at a 
dealership.
62
86
58
84
72
40
27
38
50
43
27
40
90
43
94
36
28
48
86
77
a. Calculate the values of the three quartiles and the interquar-
tile range. Where does the number 77 fall in relation to these 
quartiles?
b. Find the approximate value of the 18th percentile. Give a brief 
interpretation of this percentile.
c. Calculate the percentile rank of 72. Give a brief interpretation 
of this percentile rank.
3.91 A student washes her clothes at a laundromat once a week. The 
data below give the time (in minutes) she spent in the laundromat for 
each of 15 randomly selected weeks. Here, time spent in the laun-
dromat includes the time spent waiting for a machine to become 
available.
75
62
84
73
107
81
93
72
135
77
85
67
90
83
112
Prepare a box-and-whisker plot. Is the data set skewed in any direc-
tion? If yes, is it skewed to the right or to the left? Does this data set 
contain any outliers?

Advanced Exercises
119
countries. Which country has the lower death rate in this age 
group?
c. Calculate the death rate due to heart attack for the entire popu-
lation of Country A; then do the same for Country B. Which 
country has the lower overall death rate?
d. How can the country with lower death rate in both age groups 
have the higher overall death rate? (This phenomenon is 
known as Simpson’s paradox.)
3.97 The test scores for a large statistics class have an unknown dis-
tribution with a mean of 70 and a standard deviation of 10.
a. Find k so that at least 50% of the scores are within k standard 
deviations of the mean.
b. Find k so that at most 10% of the scores are more than k stand-
ard deviations above the mean.
3.98 The test scores for a large statistics class have a bell-shaped dis-
tribution with a mean of 70 points.
a. If 16% of all students in the class scored above 85, what is the 
standard deviation of the scores?
b. If 95% of the scores are between 60 and 80, what is the stand-
ard deviation?
3.99 Actuaries at an insurance company must determine a premium 
for a new type of insurance. A random sample of 40 potential purchas-
ers of this type of insurance were found to have incurred the following 
losses (in dollars) during the past year. These losses would have been 
covered by the insurance if it were available.
100
32
0
0
470
50
0
14,589
212
93
0
0
1127
421
0
87
135
420
0
250
12
0
309
0
177
295
501
0
143
0
167
398
54
0
141
0
3709
122
0
0
a. Find the mean, median, and mode of these 40 losses.
b. Which of the mean, median, or mode is largest?
c. Draw a box-and-whisker plot for these data, and describe the 
skewness, if any.
d. Which measure of center should the actuaries use to deter-
mine the premium for this insurance?
3.100 A local golf club has men’s and women’s summer leagues. The 
following data give the scores for a round of 18 holes of golf for 17 
men and 15 women randomly selected from their respective leagues.
Men
87
68
92
79
83
67
71
92
112
75
77
102
79
78
85
75
72
Women
101
100
87
95
98
81
117
107
103
97
90
100
99
94
94
a. Make a box-and-whisker plot for each of the data sets and use 
them to discuss the similarities and differences between the 
scores of the men and women golfers.
b. Compute the various descriptive measures you have learned 
for each sample. How do they compare?
3.101 Answer the following questions.
a. The total weight of all pieces of luggage loaded onto an air-
plane is 12,372 pounds, which works out to be an average of 
51.55 pounds per piece. How many pieces of luggage are on 
the plane?
3.92 Melissa’s grade in her math class is determined by three 100-point 
tests and a 200-point final exam. To determine the grade for a student in 
this class, the instructor will add the four scores together and divide this 
sum by 5 to obtain a percentage. This percentage must be at least 80 for a 
grade of B. If Melissa’s three test scores are 75, 69, and 87, what is the 
minimum score she needs on the final exam to obtain a B grade?
3.93 Jeffrey is serving on a six-person jury for a personal-injury 
lawsuit. All six jurors want to award damages to the plaintiff but 
cannot agree on the amount of the award. The jurors have decided 
that each of them will suggest an amount that he or she thinks should 
be awarded; then they will use the mean of these six numbers as the 
recommended amount to be awarded to the plaintiff.
a. Jeffrey thinks the plaintiff should receive $20,000, but he 
thinks the mean of the other five jurors’ recommendations 
will be about $12,000. He decides to suggest an inflated 
amount so that the mean for all six jurors is $20,000. What 
amount would Jeffrey have to suggest?
b. How might this jury revise its procedure to prevent a juror like 
Jeffrey from having an undue influence on the amount of 
damages to be awarded to the plaintiff?
3.94 On a 300-mile auto trip, Lisa averaged 52 mph for the first 100 
miles, 65 mph for the second 100 miles, and 58 mph for the last 100 
miles.
a. How long did the 300-mile trip take?
b. Could you find Lisa’s average speed for the 300-mile trip by 
calculating (52 + 65 + 58)/3? If not, find the correct average 
speed for the trip.
3.95 A survey of young people’s shopping habits in a small city dur-
ing the summer months of 2015 showed the following: Shoppers aged 
12 to 14 years took an average of 8 shopping trips per month and spent 
an average of $14 per trip. Shoppers aged 15 to 17 years took an aver-
age of 11 trips per month and spent an average of $18 per trip. Assume 
that this city has 1100 shoppers aged 12 to 14 years and 900 shoppers 
aged 15 to 17 years.
a. Find the total amount spent per month by all these 2000 shop-
pers in both age groups.
b. Find the mean number of shopping trips per person per month 
for these 2000 shoppers.
c. Find the mean amount spent per person per month by shop-
pers aged 12 to 17 years in this city.
3.96 The following table shows the total population and the number 
of deaths (in thousands) due to heart attack for two age groups (in 
years) in Countries A and B for 2015.
Age 30 and Under
Age 31 and Over
A
B
A
 
B
Population
40,000
25,000
20,000
35,000
Deaths due to heart attack
1000
500
2000
3000
a. Calculate the death rate due to heart attack per 1000 popula-
tion for the 30 years and under age group for each of the two 
countries. Which country has the lower death rate in this age 
group?
b. Calculate the death rates due to heart attack per 1000 popula-
tion for the 31 years and over age group for each of the two 
Advanced Exercises
www.ebook3000.com

120
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
b. A group of seven friends, having just gotten back a chemistry 
exam, discuss their scores. Six of the students reveal that they 
received grades of 81, 75, 93, 88, 82, and 85, respectively, but 
the seventh student is reluctant to say what grade she received. 
After some calculation she announces that the group averaged 
81 on the exam. What is her score?
3.102 The following data give the weights (in pounds) of a random 
sample of 44 college students. (Here F and M indicate female and 
male, respectively.)
123 F
195 M
138 M
115 F
179 M
119 F
148 F
147 F
180 M
146 F
179 M
189 M
175 M
108 F
193 M
114 F
179 M
147 M
108 F
128 F
164 F
174 M
128 F
159 M
193 M
204 M
125 F
133 F
115 F
168 M
123 F
183 M
116 F
182 M
174 M
102 F
123 F
 99 F
161 M
162 M
155 F
202 M
110 F
132 M
Compute the mean, median, and standard deviation for the weights 
of all students, of men only, and of women only. Of the mean and 
median, which is the more informative measure of center? Write a 
brief note comparing the three measures for all students, men only, 
and women only.
3.103 The following stem-and-leaf diagram gives the distances (in 
thousands of miles) driven during the past year by a sample of drivers 
in a city.
0
3 6 9
1
2 8 5 1 0 5
2
5 1 6
3
8
4
1
5
6
2
a. Compute the sample mean, median, and mode for the data on 
distances driven.
b. Compute the range, variance, and standard deviation for these 
data.
c. Compute the first and third quartiles.
d. Compute the interquartile range. Describe the properties of 
the interquartile range. When would the IQR be preferable to 
using the standard deviation when measuring variation?
3.104 Although the standard workweek is 40 hours a week, many 
people work a lot more than 40 hours a week. The following data give 
the numbers of hours worked last week by 50 people.
40.5
41.3
41.4
41.5
42.0
42.2
42.4
42.4
42.6
43.3
43.7
43.9
45.0
45.0
45.2
45.8
45.9
46.2
47.2
47.5
47.8
48.2
48.3
48.8
49.0
49.2
49.9
50.1
50.6
50.6
50.8
51.5
51.5
52.3
52.3
52.6
52.7
52.7
53.4
53.9
54.4
54.8
55.0
55.4
55.4
55.4
56.2
56.3
57.8
58.7
a. The sample mean and sample standard deviation for this data 
set are 49.012 and 5.080, respectively. Using Chebyshev’s 
theorem, calculate the intervals that contain at least 75%, 
88.89%, and 93.75% of the data.
b. Determine the actual percentages of the given data values that 
fall in each of the intervals that you calculated in part a. Also 
calculate the percentage of the data values that fall within one 
standard deviation of the mean.
c. Do you think the lower endpoints provided by Chebyshev’s 
theorem in part a are useful for this problem? Explain your 
answer.
d. Suppose that the individual with the first number (54.4) in the 
fifth row of the data is a workaholic who actually worked 84.4 
hours last week and not 54.4 hours. With this change, the sum-
mary statistics are now x = 49.61 and s = 7.10. Recalculate 
the intervals for part a and the actual percentages for part b. 
Did your percentages change a lot or a little?
e. How many standard deviations above the mean would you 
have to go to capture all 50 data values? Using Chebyshev’s 
theorem, what is the lower bound for the percentage of the 
data that should fall in the interval?
A3.1.1 BASIC FORMULAS FOR THE VARIANCE AND STANDARD 
DEVIATION FOR UNGROUPED DATA
Example 3–28 below illustrates how to use the basic formulas to calculate the variance and standard devia-
tion for ungrouped data. From Section 3.2.2, the basic formulas for variance for ungrouped data are
σ2 =
∑(x −μ)2
N
 and s2 =
∑(x −x)2
n −1
where σ2 is the population variance and s2 is the sample variance.
 
In either case, the standard deviation is obtained by taking the square root of the variance.
EXAMPLE 3–28 Compensations of Female CEOs
Refer to Example 3–14, where short-cut formula was used to compute the variance and standard deviation 
for the data on the 2014 compensations of 11 female CEOs of American companies. Calculate the variance 
and standard deviation for that data set using the basic formula.
Solution 
Let x denote the 2014 compensations (in millions of dollars) of female CEOs of American com-
panies. Table 3.16 shows all the required calculations to find the variance and standard deviation.
Calculating the variance and 
standard deviation for ungrouped 
data using basic formulas.
APPENDIX 3.1

Appendix 3.1
121
Table 3.16
x
 
x −x
 
(x −x)2
19.3
19.3 − 23.77 = −4.47
19.9809
16.2
16.2 − 23.77 = −7.57
57.3049
19.6
19.6 − 23.77 = −4.17
17.3889
19.3
19.3 − 23.77 = −4.47
19.9809
33.7
33.7 − 23.77 = 9.93
98.6049
21.0
21.0 − 23.77 = −2.77
7.6729
22.5
22.5 − 23.77 = −1.27
1.6129
16.9
16.9 − 23.77 = −6.87
47.1969
28.7
28.7 − 23.77 = 4.93
24.3049
42.1
42.1 − 23.77 = 18.33
335.9889
22.2
22.2 − 23.77 = −1.57
2.4649
∑x = 261.5
∑(x −x)2 =  632.5019
The following steps are performed to compute the variance and standard deviation.
Step 1. Find the mean as follows:
x =
∑x
n = 261.5
11
= 23.77
Step 2. Calculate x −x, the deviation of each value of x from the mean. The results are shown in the 
second column of Table 3.16.
Step 3. Square each of the deviations of x from x; that is, calculate each of the (x −x)2 values. These 
values are called the squared deviations, and they are recorded in the third column of Table 3.16.
Step 4. Add all the squared deviations to obtain ∑(x −x )2; that is, sum all the values given in the third 
column of Table 3.16. This gives
∑(x −x)2 = 632.5019
Step 5. Obtain the sample variance by dividing the sum of the squared deviations by n − 1. Thus
s 2 =
∑(x −x )2
n −1
= 632.5019
11 −1
= 63.25019
Step 6. Obtain the sample standard deviation by taking the positive square root of the variance. Hence,
 
s = √63.25019 = 7.95 = $7.95 million 
◼
A3.1.2 BASIC FORMULAS FOR THE VARIANCE AND 
STANDARD DEVIATION FOR GROUPED DATA
Example 3–29 demonstrates how to use the basic formulas to calculate the variance and standard deviation 
for grouped data. From Section 3.3.2, the basic formulas for these calculations are
σ2 =
∑f (m −μ)2
N
 and s2 =
∑f (m −x)2
n −1
where σ2 is the population variance, s2 is the sample variance, m is the midpoint of a class, and f is the 
frequency of a class.
 
In either case, the standard deviation is obtained by taking the square root of the variance.
EXAMPLE 3–29 In Example 3–20, we used the short-cut formula to compute the variance and standard 
deviation for the data on the number of orders received each day during the past 50 days at the offi ce of a 
mail-order company. Calculate the variance and standard deviation for those data using the basic formula.
Calculating the variance and 
standard deviation for grouped 
data using basic formulas.
www.ebook3000.com

122
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
Solution 
All the required calculations to find the variance and standard deviation appear in Table 3.17.
Table 3.17
Number of 
Orders
f
m
mf
m −x
(m −x)2
f(m −x)2
10–12
 4
11
 44
−5.64
31.8096
127.2384
13–15
12
14
168
−2.64
6.9696
83.6352
16–18
20
17
340
  .36
.1296
2.5920
19–21
14
20
280
 3.36
11.2896
158.0544
n = 50
∑mf = 832
∑f(m −x)2
= 371.5200
 
The following steps are performed to compute the variance and standard deviation using the basic 
formula.
Step 1. Find the midpoint of each class. Multiply the corresponding values of m and f. Find ∑mf . From 
Table 3.17, ∑mf  = 832.
Step 2. Find the mean as follows:
x =
∑mf
n
= 832
50 = 16.64
Step 3. Calculate m −x, the deviation of each value of m from the mean. These calculations are shown in 
the fifth column of Table 3.17.
Step 4. Square each of the deviations m −x ; that is, calculate each of the (m −x)2 values. These are 
called squared deviations, and they are recorded in the sixth column.
Step 5. Multiply the squared deviations by the corresponding frequencies (see the seventh column of 
Table 3.17). Adding the values of the seventh column, we obtain
∑f (m −x )2 = 371.5200
Step 6. Obtain the sample variance by dividing ∑f (m −x )2 by n − 1. Thus,
s2 =
∑f (m −x )2
n −1
= 371.5200
50 −1
= 7.5820
Step 7. Obtain the standard deviation by taking the positive square root of the variance.
 
s = √s2 = √7.5820 = 2.75 orders 
◼
 6. Which of the following is the mean of the squared deviations of 
x values from the mean?
a. standard deviation
b. population variance
c. sample variance
 7. The values of the variance and standard deviation are
a. never negative
b. always positive
c. never zero
 8. A summary measure calculated for the population data is called
a. a population parameter
b. a sample statistic
c. an outlier
 1. The value of the middle term in a ranked data set is called the
a. mean  b. median  c. mode
 2. Which of the following summary measures is/are influenced by 
extreme values?
a. mean  b. median  c. mode  d. range
 3. Which of the following summary measures can be calculated for 
qualitative data?
a. mean  b. median  c. mode
 4. Which of the following can have more than one value?
a. mean  b. median  c. mode
 5. Which of the following is obtained by taking the difference be-
tween the largest and the smallest values of a data set?
a. variance  b. range  c. mean
Self-Review Test

Self-Review Test
123
 9. A summary measure calculated for the sample data is called a
a. population parameter
b. sample statistic
c. box-and-whisker plot
10. Chebyshev’s theorem can be applied to
a. any distribution
b. bell-shaped distributions only
c. skewed distributions only
11. The empirical rule can be applied to
a. any distribution 
b. bell-shaped distributions only 
c. skewed distributions only
12. The first quartile is a value in a ranked data set such that about
a. 75% of the values are smaller and about 25% are larger than 
this value
b. 50% of the values are smaller and about 50% are larger than 
this value
c. 25% of the values are smaller and about 75% are larger than 
this value
13. The third quartile is a value in a ranked data set such that about
a. 75% of the values are smaller and about 25% are larger than 
this value
b. 50% of the values are smaller and about 50% are larger than 
this value
c. 25% of the values are smaller and about 75% are larger than 
this value
14. The 75th percentile is a value in a ranked data set such that about
a. 75% of the values are smaller and about 25% are larger than 
this value
b. 25% of the values are smaller and about 75% are larger than 
this value
15. Twenty randomly selected persons were asked to keep record of 
the number of times they used their debit cards during October 2015. 
The following data show their responses.
5 32 41 14 21 72 19 6 26 7 8 9 18 5 91 14 1 10 8 13
a. Calculate the mean, median, and mode for these data.
b. Compute the 10% trimmed mean for these data.
c. Calculate the range, variance, and standard deviation for these 
data.
d. Compute the coefficient of variation.
e. Are the values of these summary measure calculated above 
population parameters or sample statistics? Explain.
16. A company makes five different models of refrigerators. Last 
year they sold 16,652 refrigerators of all five models. The following 
table lists the number of different models of refrigerators sold last 
year and the prices for which they were sold.
Refrigerator 
Model
Number of 
Refrigerators Sold
Price 
(dollars)
VX569
2842
2055
AX255
4364
1165
YU490
3946
1459
MT810
1629
2734
PR920
3871
1672
Calculate the weighted mean that represents the average price for 
which these 16,652 refrigerators were sold.
17. The mean, as a measure of center, has the disadvantage of being 
influenced by extreme values. Illustrate this point with an example.
18. The range, as a measure of spread, has the disadvantage of being 
influenced by extreme values. Illustrate this point with an example.
19. When is the value of the standard deviation for a data set zero? 
Give one example of such a data set. Calculate the standard deviation 
for that data set to show that it is zero.
20. The following table gives the frequency distribution of the num-
bers of computers sold during each of the past 25 weeks at an elec-
tronics store.
Computers Sold
Frequency
 4 to  9
 2
10 to 15
 4
16 to 21
10
22 to 27
 6
28 to 33
 3
a. What does the frequency column in the table represent?
b. Calculate the mean, variance, and standard deviation.
21. The members of a very large health club were observed on a 
randomly selected day. The distribution of times they spent that 
day at the health club was found to have a mean of 91.8 minutes 
and a standard deviation of 16.2 minutes. Suppose these values of 
the mean and standard deviation hold true for all members of this 
club.
a. Using Chebyshev’s theorem, find the minimum percentage of 
this health club’s members who spend time at this health club 
between
 
i. 59.4 and 124.2 minutes 
ii. 51.3 and 132.3 minutes
*b. Using Chebyshev’s theorem, find the interval that contains 
the times spent at this health club by at least 89% of 
members.
22. The ages of cars owned by all people living in a city have a bell-
shaped distribution with a mean of 7.3 years and a standard deviation 
of 2.2 years.
a. Using the empirical rule, find the (approximate) percentage of 
cars in this city that are
 
i. 5.1 to 9.5 years old  
ii. .7 to 13.9 years old
*b. Using the empirical rule, find the interval that contains the 
ages of (approximate) 95% of the cars owned by all people in 
this city.
23. The following data give the number of hours worked last week 
by 18 randomly selected managers working for various Wall Street 
financial companies.
45
54
63
79
48
50
49
52
74
61
55
56
58
56
77
66
64
70
a.  Calculate the three quartiles and the interquartile range. 
Where does the value of 54 lie in relation to these quartiles?
b. Find the (approximate) value of the 60th percentile. Give a 
brief interpretation of this value.
c. Calculate the percentile rank of 64. Give a brief interpretation 
of this value.
www.ebook3000.com

124
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
24. Make a box-and-whisker plot for the data given in Problem 23. 
Comment on the skewness of this data set.
25. 
The mean weekly wages of a sample of 15 employees of a 
company are $1035. The mean weekly wages of a sample of 20 em-
ployees of another company are $1090. Find the combined mean for 
these 35 employees.
26. 
The mean GPA of five students is 3.21. The GPAs of four of 
these five students are, respectively, 3.85, 2.67, 3.45, and 2.91. Find 
the GPA of the fifth student.
*
*
27. 
Consider the following two data sets.
Data Set I:
8
16
20
35
Data Set II:
5
13
17
32
Note that each value of the second data set is obtained by subtracting 
3 from the corresponding value of the first data set.
a. Calculate the mean for each of these two data sets. Comment 
on the relationship between the two means.
b. Calculate the standard deviation for each of these two data 
sets. Comment on the relationship between the two standard 
deviations.
*
Note: The Mini-Projects are located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Mini-Projects
Note: The Decide for Yourself feature is located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Decide for Yourself
TI-84 COLOR / TI-84
CHAPTER 3
TECHNOLOGY 
INSTRUCTIONS
The TI-84 Color Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for the TI-84 Plus C 
color graphing calculator running the 4.0 operating system. Some screens, menus, and func-
tions will be slightly different in older operating systems. The TI-84+ can perform all of the 
same functions but does not have the “Color” option referenced in some of the menus.
The TI-84 calculator does not have functions to calculate the coefficient of variation and 
trimmed mean or to make a dotplot.
Calculating Summary Statistics for Example 3–2 of the Text
1. Enter the data from Example 3–2 of the text into L1.
2. Select STAT > CALC > 1-Var Stats.
3. Use the following settings in the 1-Var Stats menu:
• At the List prompt, select the name of the list L1 by pressing 2nd > STAT and scroll 
through the names until you get to your list name.
• Leave the FreqList prompt blank.
4. Highlight Calculate and press ENTER.
5. The calculator will display the output (see Screen 3.1 and 3.2).
6. To see all of the output, scroll down by pressing the down arrow. The output will be dis-
played in the following order:
The mean, the sum of the data values, the sum of the squares of the data values, the sample 
standard deviation, the population standard deviation (used if your data are from a census), the 
number of data values (also called the sample size or population size), the minimum data value, 
the first quartile, the median, the third quartile, and the maximum data value.
Note: Complete TI-84, Minitab, and Excel manuals are available for download at the textbook’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Screen 3.1
Screen 3.2

Technology Instructions
125
Coeffi cient of Variation
There is no function to calculate the coefficient of variation on the TI. First calculate the sample 
mean and sample standard deviation as shown above. Then divide the sample standard deviation 
by the sample mean on the home screen to calculate the coefficient of variation.
Trimmed Mean
There is no function to calculate the trimmed mean on the TI. To calculate the trimmed mean, 
eliminate the most extreme data values from the data set and then follow the instructions given 
above to compute the mean from the resulting (trimmed) data.
Weighted Mean
Enter the data into L1. Enter the corresponding weights into L2. Follow the instructions given 
above, but in step 3, enter L2 at the FreqList prompt.
Creating a Box-and-Whisker Plot for Example 3–27 of the Text
1. Enter the data from Example 3–27 of the text into L1.
2. Select 2nd > Y= (the STAT PLOT menu).
3. Select Plot 1.
4. Use the following settings in the Plot 1 menu (see Screen 3.3):
• Select On to turn the plot on.
• At the Type prompt, select either the box-and-whisker plot (the fifth choice) or the 
modified box-and-whisker plot (the fourth choice) which plots outliers as separate points.
• At the Xlist prompt, access the name of your list by pressing 2nd > STAT and scroll 
through the names until you get to your list name.
• At the Freq prompt, type 1.
• At the Color prompt, select BLUE .
    (Skip this step if you do not have the TI-84 Color calculator.)
5. Select ZOOM > ZoomStat to display the boxplot. This function will automatically choose 
window settings for the boxplot. (See Screen 3.4.)
The Minitab Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Minitab version 17. Some 
screens, menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Minitab.
Calculating Summary Statistics for 
Example 3–2 of the Text
1. Enter the data from Example 3–2 of the text into column C1. Click below C1 
in the blank column heading and name it Ages.
2. Select Stat > Basic Statistics > Display Descriptive Statistics.
3. In the dialog box that appears on screen, click inside the Variables box. 
Then either type C1 in this column or double click on C1 Ages on the left.
4. Click the Statistics button and check the boxes next to the summary 
statistics you wish to calculate. You can uncheck the boxes next to 
statistics that you do not want. (See Screen 3.5.)
Minitab
Screen 3.3
Screen 3.4
Screen 3.5
www.ebook3000.com

126
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
5. Click OK in both dialog boxes. The output will appear in the Session window. 
(See Screen 3.6.)
Screen 3.6
In the above summary measures, you can obtain the values of various summary measures 
including the coefficient of variation and the trimmed mean.
Weighted Mean
Enter the data values in C1 and the corresponding weights in C2. Select Calc > Calculator. 
Type C3 in the Store result in variable box. Type SUM(C1*C2)/SUM(C2) in the Expression 
box. Click OK.
Creating a Box-and-Whisker Plot for 
Example 3–27 of the Text
1. Enter the data from Example 3–27 of the text into column C1. Name the 
column Income.
2. Select Graph > Boxplot > Simple and click OK.
3. In the dialog box that appears on screen, click inside the Graph variables 
box. Then either type C1 in this column or double click on C1 Income on 
the left.
4.  Click OK and the box-and-whisker plot will appear in a new window. (See 
Screen 3.7.)
Screen 3.7
The Excel Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Excel 2013. Some screens, 
menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Excel. To enable some of the 
advanced Excel functions, you must enable the Data Analysis Add-In for Excel.
Calculating Summary Statistics for 
Example 3–2 of the Text
1. Enter the data from Example 3–2 of the text into cells A1 through A8.
2. Click the Data tab and then click Data Analysis in the Analysis group.
3. In the Data Analysis dialog box, select Descriptive Statistics. Click OK.
4.  In the Descriptive Statistics dialog box, click in the Input Range box. Select 
the cells where your data are located.
Note: The easiest way to do this is to click and drag from cell A1 to cell A8.
5. Select Columns since these data are grouped in columns.
6. Select New Worksheet Ply. (See Screen 3.8.)
7. Check Summary Statistics. Click OK.
Excel
Screen 3.8

Technology Assignments
127
8. Excel will place the output, including the mean, median, mode, sample standard deviation, 
sample variance, range, minimum, and maximum in a new worksheet ply. You may need to 
make one or both columns wider to reveal all of the output. (See Screen 3.9.)
9. The summary statistics do not include the first and third quartiles. To find these quartiles, 
use the following procedure.
• Click on an empty cell next to the original data.
• Type =quartile(
• Select the data by clicking and dragging from cell A1 to cell A8.
• Type a comma, followed by a 1 for the first quartile (or a 3 for the third quartile).
• Type a right parenthesis, and then press Enter.
To calculate the coefficient of variation, enter the data from Example 3–2 of the text into 
cells A1 through A8. Click in cell B1 and type =STDEV.S(A1:A8)/AVERAGE(A1:A8). 
Press Enter.
To calculate the trimmed mean, enter the data from Example 3–2 of the text into cells A1 
through A8. Click in cell B1 and type =TRIMMEAN(A1:A8,0.2). Press Enter.
Note: The 0.2 indicates that 20% of the total data set will be trimmed, 10% from each tail.
To calculate the weighted mean, enter the data from Example 3–2 of the text into cells A1 
through A8 and the desired weights in cells B1 through B8. Click in cell C1 and type 
=SUMPRODUCT(A1:A8,B1:B8)/SUM(B1:B8). Press Enter.
Creating a Box-and-Whisker Plot
There is no simple way to make a box-and-whisker plot with Excel.
Screen 3.9
b. Select a random sample of 20 closing prices. Calculate the 
mean, median, range, standard deviation, quartiles, and the 
interquartile range for these 20 closing prices. Are these val-
ues of summary measures different from the ones obtained 
in part a?
TA3.4 Refer to Data Set I which contains information on the prices 
of various products and services in different cities across the United 
States and accompanies this text (see Appendix A).
a. Calculate the mean, median, standard deviation, quartiles, and 
the interquartile range for the cost of a visit to a doctor’s office 
listed in column 14.
b. Create a box-and-whisker plot for the data on the cost of a 
visit to a doctor’s office.
c. Create dotplot for the data on the cost of a visit to a doctor’s 
office.
d. If the technology that you are using lets you calculate 
trimmed mean and coefficient of variation, find these 
summary measures for the data on the cost of a visit to a 
doctor’s office.
TA3.5 Refer to Data Set X which contains information on Major 
League Baseball and accompanies this text (see Appendix A). 
Construct a dotplot for the number of runs batted listed in 
column 11.
TA3.1 Refer to Data Set III which contains information on the NFL 
players for the 2014 football season and accompanies this text (see 
Appendix A).
a. Calculate the mean, median, range, standard deviation, quar-
tiles, and the interquartile range for the weights of the players 
listed in column 5.
b. Create a box-and-whisker plot for the weights of the players.
TA3.2 Refer to Data Set IX which contains information on Subway’s 
menu items and accompanies this text (see Appendix A).
a. Calculate the mean, median, range, standard deviation, quar-
tiles, and the interquartile range for the data on sodium con-
tent listed in column 11.
b. Create a box-and-whisker plot for the data on sodium content.
c. Create a dotplot for the data on sodium content.
d. If the technology that you are using lets you calculate 
trimmed mean and coefficient of variation, find these 
summary measures for the data on sodium content.
TA3.3 Refer to Data Set VI which contains information on the S&P 
500 companies and accompanies this text (see Appendix A).
a. Calculate the mean, median, range, standard deviation, quar-
tiles, and the interquartile range for the closing prices of 
stocks of the companies listed in column 3.
TECHNOLOGY ASSIGNMENTS
www.ebook3000.com

128
Chapter 3 Numerical Descriptive Measures
TA3.6 Refer to Data Set II which contains information on various 
variables for all 50 states of the United States and accompanies this 
text (see Appendix A).
a. Calculate the five-number summary (that is used to make a 
box-and-whisker plot) for the 2013 median household income 
listed in column 4.
b. Using the values of the summary measures obtained in part a, 
calculate the values of the upper and lower inner fences for the 
data on 2013 median household income.
c. Using the values of the summary measures obtained in part a, 
calculate the values of the upper and lower outer fences for the 
data on 2013 median household income.
d. Identify any outliers and classify them as mild or extreme.
e. Using technology, make a box-and-whisker plot for the data 
on 2013 median household income.
TA3.7 The following data give the total food expenditures (in dollars) 
for the past one month for a sample of 20 families.
1125
530 1234
595
427
872 1480
699 1274 1187
933 1127
716 1065
934 1630 1046 2199 1353
441
a. Calculate the mean, median, standard deviation, quartiles, and 
the interquartile range for these data.
b. Create a box-and-whisker plot for these data.
c. Create a dotplot for these data.
d. If the technology that you are using lets you calculate trimmed 
mean and coefficient of variation, find these summary 
measures for these data.
TA3.8 The following data give the odometer mileage (rounded to 
the nearest thousand miles) for all 20 cars that are for sale at a 
dealership.
62
86
58
84
72
40
27
38
50
43
27
40
90
43
94
36
28
48
86
77
a. Calculate the mean, median, standard deviation, quartiles, and 
the interquartile range for these data.
b. Create a box-and-whisker plot for these data.
c. Create a dotplot for these data.
d. If the technology that you are using lets you calculate trimmed 
mean and coefficient of variation, find these summary 
measures for these data.

129
129
CHAPTER4
We often make statements about probability. For example, a weather forecaster may predict that 
there is an 80% chance of rain tomorrow. A study may predict that a female, compared to a male, 
has a higher probability of being in favor of gun control. A college student may ask an instructor 
about the chances of passing a course or getting an A if he or she did not do well on the midterm 
examination.
Probability, which measures the likelihood that an event will occur, is an important part of statis-
tics. It is the basis of inferential statistics, which will be introduced in later chapters. In inferential 
statistics, we make decisions under conditions of uncertainty. Probability theory is used to evaluate 
the uncertainty involved in those decisions. For example, estimating next year’s sales for a company 
is based on many assumptions, some of which may happen to be true and others may not. Probabil-
ity theory will help us make decisions under such conditions of imperfect information and uncertainty. 
Combining probability and probability distributions (which are discussed in Chapters 5 through 7) 
with descriptive statistics will help us make decisions about populations based on information 
obtained from samples. This chapter presents the basic concepts of probability and the rules for 
computing probability.
Do you worry about your weight? According to a Gallup poll, 45% of American adults worry all or some 
of the time about their weight. The poll showed that more women than men worry about their weight all 
or some of the time. In this poll, 55% of adult women and 35% of adult men said that they worry all or 
some of the time about their weight. (See Case Study 4–1.)
© Robert Simon/iStockphoto
4.1 Experiment, Outcome, 
and Sample Space
4.2 Calculating Probability
4.3 Marginal Probability, 
Conditional Probability, 
and Related Probability 
Concepts
Case Study 4–1 Do You Worry 
About Your Weight?
4.4 Intersection of Events and 
the Multiplication Rule
4.5 Union of Events and the 
Addition Rule
4.6 Counting Rule, Factorials, 
Combinations, and 
Permutations
Case Study 4–2 Probability of 
Winning a Mega Millions 
Lottery Jackpot
Probability
www.ebook3000.com

130
Chapter 4 Probability
There are only a few things, if any, in life that have definite, certain, and sure outcomes. Most 
things in life have uncertain outcomes. For example, will you get an A grade in the statistics class 
that you are taking this semester? Suppose you recently opened a new business; will it be suc-
cessful? Your friend will be getting married next month. Will she be happily married for the rest 
of her life? You just bought a lottery ticket. Will it be a winning ticket? You are playing black jack 
at a casino. Will you be a winner after 20 plays of the game? In all these situations, the outcomes 
are random. You know the various outcomes for each of these games/statistical experiments, but 
you do not know which one of these outcomes will actually occur. As another example, suppose 
you are working as a quality control manager at a factory where they are making hockey pucks. 
You randomly select a few pucks from the production line and inspect them for being good or 
defective. This act of inspecting a puck is an example of a statistical experiment. The result of 
this inspection will be that the puck is either “good” or “defective.” Each of these two observa-
tions is called an outcome (also called a basic or final outcome) of the experiment, and these 
outcomes taken together constitute the sample space for this experiment. The elements of a 
sample space are called sample points.
4.1 Experiment, Outcome, and Sample Space
Table 4.1 Examples of Experiments, Outcomes, and Sample Spaces
Experiment 
Outcomes 
Sample Space
Toss a coin once 
Head, Tail 
{Head, Tail}
Roll a die once 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}
Toss a coin twice 
HH, HT, TH, TT 
{HH, HT, TH, TT}
Play lottery 
Win, Lose 
{Win, Lose}
Take a test 
Pass, Fail 
{Pass, Fail}
Select a worker 
Male, Female 
{Male, Female}
 
The sample space for an experiment can also be illustrated by drawing a tree diagram. In a 
tree diagram, each outcome is represented by a branch of the tree. Tree diagrams help us under-
stand probability concepts by presenting them visually. Examples 4–1 through 4–3 describe how 
to draw the tree diagrams for statistical experiments.
EXAMPLE 4–1 
One Toss of a Coin
Draw the tree diagram for the experiment of tossing a coin once.
Solution This experiment has two possible outcomes: head and tail. Consequently, the sample 
space is given by
 
Sample space = {H, T},  where H = Head and T = Tail
To draw a tree diagram, we draw two branches starting at the same point, one representing the 
head and the second representing the tail. The two final outcomes are listed at the ends of the 
branches as shown in Figure 4.1. 
◼
Experiment, Outcomes, and Sample Space An experiment is a process that, when performed, 
results in one and only one of many observations. These observations are called the outcomes 
of the experiment. The collection of all outcomes for an experiment is called a sample space.
 
Table 4.1 lists some examples of experiments, their outcomes, and their sample spaces.
Head
Tail
H
Outcomes
T
Figure 4.1 Tree diagram for 
one toss of a coin.
Drawing the tree diagram: 
one toss of a coin.

4.1 Experiment, Outcome, and Sample Space
131
EXAMPLE 4–2 
Two Tosses of a Coin
Draw the tree diagram for the experiment of tossing a coin twice.
Solution This experiment can be split into two parts: the first toss and the second toss. Suppose 
that the first time the coin is tossed, we obtain a head. Then, on the second toss, we can still obtain 
a head or a tail. This gives us two outcomes: HH (head on both tosses) and HT (head on the first 
toss and tail on the second toss). Now suppose that we observe a tail on the first toss. Again, either 
a head or a tail can occur on the second toss, giving the remaining two outcomes: TH (tail on the 
first toss and head on the second toss) and TT (tail on both tosses). Thus, the sample space for two 
tosses of a coin is
 
Sample space = {HH, HT, TH, TT}
The tree diagram is shown in Figure 4.2. This diagram shows the sample space for this 
experiment. 
◼
EXAMPLE 4–3 
Selecting Two Workers
Suppose we randomly select two workers from a company and observe whether the worker 
selected each time is a man or a woman. Write all the outcomes for this experiment. Draw the tree 
diagram for this experiment.
Solution Let us denote the selection of a man by M and that of a woman by W. We can com-
pare the selection of two workers to two tosses of a coin. Just as each toss of a coin can result in 
one of two outcomes, head or tail, each selection from the workers of this company can result in 
one of two outcomes, man or woman. As we can see from the tree diagram of Figure 4.3, there 
are four final outcomes: MM, MW, WM, WW. Hence, the sample space is written as
 
Sample space = {MM, MW, WM, WW} 
◼
Drawing the tree diagram: 
two tosses of a coin.
Figure 4.2 Tree diagram for 
two tosses of a coin.
HH
HT
H
T
TH
TT
H
T
First
toss
Second
toss
Final
outcomes
H
T
Figure 4.3 Tree diagram for 
selecting two workers.
MM
MW
M
W
WM
WW
M
W
First
selection
Second
selection
Final
outcomes
M
W
Event An event is a collection of one or more of the outcomes of an experiment.
4.1.1 Simple and Compound Events
An event consists of one or more of the outcomes of an experiment.
Drawing the tree diagram: 
two selections.
 
An event may be a simple event or a compound event. A simple event is also called an 
elementary event, and a compound event is also called a composite event.
Simple Event
Each of the final outcomes for an experiment is called a simple event. In other words, a simple 
event includes one and only one outcome. Usually, simple events are denoted by E1, E2, E3, and 
so forth. However, we can denote them by any other letter—that is, by A, B, C, and so forth. 
Many times we denote events by the same letter and use subscripts to distinguish them, as in 
A1, A2, A3, . . . .
Simple Event An event that includes one and only one of the (final) outcomes for an experi-
ment is called a simple event and is usually denoted by Ei.
 
Example 4–4 describes simple events.
www.ebook3000.com

132
Chapter 4 Probability
EXAMPLE 4–4 
Selecting Two Workers
Reconsider Example 4–3 on selecting two workers from a company and observing whether the 
worker selected each time is a man or a woman. Each of the final four outcomes (MM, MW, WM, 
and WW) for this experiment is a simple event. These four events can be denoted by E1, E2, E3, 
and E4, respectively. Thus,
 
E1 = {MM}, E2 = {MW}, E3 = {WM}, and E4 = {WW} 
◼
Compound Event
A compound event consists of more than one outcome.
Illustrating simple events.
Compound Event A compound event is a collection of more than one outcome for an experiment.
 
Compound events are denoted by A, B, C, D, . . . , or by A1, A2, A3, . . . , or by B1, B2, B3, . . . , 
and so forth. Examples 4–5 and 4–6 describe compound events.
EXAMPLE 4–5 
Selecting Two Workers
Reconsider Example 4–3 on selecting two workers from a company and observing whether the 
worker selected each time is a man or a woman. Let A be the event that at most one man is 
selected. Is event A a simple or a compound event?
Solution Here at most one man means one or no man is selected. Thus, event A will occur if 
either no man or one man is selected. Hence, the event A is given by
 
A = at most one man is selected = {MW, WM, WW}
Because event A contains more than one outcome, it is a compound event. The diagram in Figure 4.4 
gives a graphic presentation of compound event A. 
◼
Illustrating a compound event: 
two selections.
Figure 4.4 Diagram showing 
event A.
A
WW
MW
MM
WM
EXAMPLE 4–6 
Preference for Ice Tea
In a group of college students, some like ice tea and others do not. There is no student in this 
group who is indifferent or has no opinion. Two students are randomly selected from this group.
(a) How many outcomes are possible? List all the possible outcomes.
(b) Consider the following events. List all the outcomes included in each of these events. 
Mention whether each of these events is a simple or a compound event.
 
(i) Both students like ice tea.
 
(ii) At most one student likes ice tea.
 
(iii) At least one student likes ice tea.
 
(iv) Neither student likes ice tea.
Solution Let L denote the event that a student likes ice tea and N denote the event that a student 
does not like ice tea.
(a) This experiment has four outcomes, which are listed below and shown in Figure 4.5.
L L = Both students like ice tea
L N = The first student likes ice tea but the second student does not
NL = The first student does not like ice tea but the second student does
NN = Both students do not like ice tea
(b)  (i) The event both students like ice tea will occur if L L happens. Thus,
Both students like ice tea = {L L}
 
 Since this event includes only one of the four outcomes, it is a simple event.
Illustrating simple and compound 
events: two selections.
LL
LN
L
N
NL
NN
L
N
First
student
Second
student
Final
outcomes
L
N
Figure 4.5 Tree diagram.

4.2 Calculating Probability
133
 
(ii) The event at most one student likes ice tea will occur if one or none of the two 
students likes ice tea, which will include the events L N, NL, and NN. Thus,
At most one student likes ice tea = {L N, NL, N N}
 
 Since this event includes three outcomes, it is a compound event.
 
(iii) The event at least one student likes ice tea will occur if one or two of the two 
students like ice tea, which will include the events L N, NL, and L L. Thus,
At least one student likes ice tea = {LN, NL, LL}
 
 Since this event includes three outcomes, it is a compound event.
 
(iv) The event neither student likes ice tea will occur if neither of the two students 
likes ice tea, which will include the event NN. Thus,
Neither student likes ice tea = {NN}
 
 Since this event includes one outcome, it is a simple event. 
◼
EXERCISES
their opinions in favor or against raising such taxes are noted. How 
many total outcomes are possible? Write these outcomes in a sample 
space. Draw a tree diagram for this experiment.
4.8 Two students are randomly selected from a statistics class, and it 
is observed whether or not they suffer from math anxiety. List all the 
outcomes included in each of the following events. Indicate which are 
simple and which are compound events.
a. Both students suffer from math anxiety.
b. Exactly one student suffers from math anxiety.
c. The first student does not suffer and the second suffers from 
math anxiety.
d. None of the students suffers from math anxiety.
4.9 In a group of adults, some own iPads, and others do not. Two 
adults are randomly selected from this group. List all the outcomes 
included in each of the following events. Indicate which are simple 
and which are compound events.
a. One person owns an iPad and the other does not.
b. At least one person owns an iPad.
c. Not more than one person owns an iPad.
d. The first person owns an iPad and the second does not.
4.10 An automated teller machine at a local bank is stocked with $10 
and $20 bills. When a customer withdraws $40 from this machine, it 
dispenses either two $20 bills or four $10 bills. Two customers with-
draw $40 each. List all of the outcomes in each of the following events 
and mention which of these are simple and which are compound events.
a. Exactly one customer receives $20 bills.
b. Both customers receive $10 bills.
c. At most one customer receives $20 bills.
d. The first customer receives $10 bills and the second receives 
$20 bills.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
4.1 Define the following terms: experiment, outcome, sample space, 
simple event, and compound event.
4.2 List the simple events for each of the following statistical exper-
iments in a sample space.
a. One roll of a die 
b. Three tosses of a coin 
c. One toss of a coin and one roll of a die
4.3 A box contains three items that are labeled A, B, and C. Two items 
are selected at random (without replacement) from this box. List all the 
possible outcomes for this experiment. Write the sample space.
APPLICATIONS
4.4 Two students are randomly selected from a statistics class, and it 
is observed whether or not they suffer from math anxiety. How many 
total outcomes are possible? Draw a tree diagram for this experiment.
4.5 In a group of adults, some own iPads, and others do not. If two 
adults are randomly selected from this group, how many total out-
comes are possible? Draw a tree diagram for this experiment.
4.6 An automated teller machine at a local bank is stocked with $10 
and $20 bills. When a customer withdraws $40 from the machine, 
it dispenses either two $20 bills or four $10 bills. If two customers 
withdraw $40 each, how many outcomes are possible? Draw a tree 
diagram for this experiment.
4.7 In a group of people, some are in favor of a tax increase on rich 
people to reduce the federal deficit and others are against it. (Assume 
that there is no other outcome such as “no opinion” and “do not 
know.”) Three persons are selected at random from this group and 
Probability, which gives the likelihood of occurrence of an event, is denoted by P. The probabil-
ity that a simple event Ei will occur is denoted by P(Ei), and the probability that a compound 
event A will occur is denoted by P(A).
4.2 Calculating Probability
www.ebook3000.com

134
Chapter 4 Probability
4.2.1 Two Properties of Probability
There are two important properties of probability that we should always remember. These prop-
erties are mentioned below.
1. 
The probability of an event always lies in the range 0 to 1.
Whether it is a simple or a compound event, the probability of an event is never less than 0 or 
greater than 1. We can write this property as follows.
Probability Probability is a numerical measure of the likelihood that a specific event will occur.
First Property of Probability
 0 ≤P(Ei) ≤1
 0 ≤P(A) ≤1
 
An event that cannot occur has zero probability and is called an impossible (or null) event. 
An event that is certain to occur has a probability equal to 1 and is called a sure (or certain) event.
In the following examples, the first event is an impossible event and the second one is a sure 
event.
P(a tossed coin will stand on its edge) = 0
P(a child born today will eventually die) = 1.0
There are very few events in real life that have probability equal to either zero or 1.0. Most of the 
events in real life have probabilities that are between zero and 1.0. In other words, these proba-
bilities are greater than zero but less than 1.0. A higher probability such as .82 indicates that the 
event is more likely to occur. On the other hand, an event with a lower probability such as .12 is 
less likely to occur. Sometime events with very low (.05 or lower) probabilities are also called 
rare events.
2. 
The sum of the probabilities of all simple events (or final outcomes) for an experiment, 
denoted by ∑P(Ei), is always 1.
Second Property of Probability For an experiment with outcomes E1, E2, E3, . . . ,
∑P(Ei) = P(E1) + P(E2) + P(E3) + . . . = 1.0
For example, if you buy a lottery ticket, you may either win or lose. The probabilities of these two 
events must add to 1.0, that is:
P(you will win) + P(you will lose) = 1.0
Similarly, for the experiment of one toss of a coin,
P(Head) + P(Tail) = 1.0
For the experiment of two tosses of a coin,
P(HH) + P(HT) + P(TH) + P(TT) = 1.0
For one game of football by a professional team,
P(win) + P(loss) + P(tie) = 1.0

4.2 Calculating Probability
135
4.2.2 Three Conceptual Approaches to Probability
How do we assign probabilities to events? For example, we may say that the probability of 
obtaining a head in one toss of a coin is .50, or that the probability that a randomly selected 
family owns a home is .68, or that the Los Angeles Dodgers will win the Major League Baseball 
championship next year is .14. How do we obtain these probabilities? We will learn the proce-
dures that are used to obtain such probabilities in this section. There are three conceptual 
approaches to probability: (1) classical probability, (2) the relative frequency concept of proba-
bility, and (3) the subjective probability concept. These three concepts are explained next.
Classical Probability
Many times, various outcomes for an experiment may have the same probability of occurrence. 
Such outcomes are called equally likely outcomes. The classical probability rule is applied to 
compute the probabilities of events for an experiment for which all outcomes are equally likely. 
For example, head and tail are two equally likely outcomes when a fair coin is tossed once. Each 
of these two outcomes has the same chance of occurrence.
Equally Likely Outcomes Two or more outcomes that have the same probability of occurrence 
are said to be equally likely outcomes.
 
Earlier in this section, we learned that the total probability for all simple outcomes of an 
experiment is 1.0. This total probability is distributed over all the outcomes of the experiment. 
When all the outcomes of an experiment are equally likely, this total probability will be equally 
distributed over various outcomes. For example, for a fair coin, there are two equally likely 
outcomes—a head and a tail. Thus, if we distribute the total probability of 1.0 equally among 
these two outcomes, then each of these outcomes will have a probability of .50 of occurrence.
 
According to the classical probability rule, to find the probability of a simple event, we 
divide 1.0 by the total number of outcomes for the experiment. On the other hand, to find the 
probability of a compound event A, we divide the number of outcomes favorable to event A by 
the total number of outcomes for the experiment.
Classical Probability Rule to Find Probability Suppose Ei is a simple event and A is a com-
pound event for an experiment with equally likely outcomes. Then, applying the classical 
approach, the probabilities of Ei and A are:
 P(Ei) =
1
Total number of outcomes for the experiment
 P(A) =
Number of outcomes favorable to A
Total number of outcomes for the experiment
 
Examples 4–7 through 4–9 illustrate how probabilities of events are calculated using the 
classical probability rule.
EXAMPLE 4–7 
One Toss of a Coin
Find the probability of obtaining a head and the probability of obtaining a tail for one toss of a coin.
Solution If we toss a fair coin once, the two outcomes, head and tail, are equally likely outcomes. 
Hence, this is an example of a classical experiment. Therefore,1
 
P(head) =
1
Total number of outcomes = 1
2 = .50
Calculating the probability 
of a simple event.
1If the final answer for the probability of an event does not terminate within four decimal places, it will be rounded to 
four decimal places.
www.ebook3000.com

136
Chapter 4 Probability
Similarly,
 
P(tail) = 1
2 = .50
Since this experiment has only two outcomes, a head and a tail, their probabilities add 
to 1.0. 
◼
EXAMPLE 4–8 
One Roll of a Die
Find the probability of obtaining an even number in one roll of a die.
Solution This experiment of rolling a die once has a total of six outcomes: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. 
Given that the die is fair, these outcomes are equally likely. Let A be an event that an even number 
is observed on the die. Event A includes three outcomes: 2, 4, and 6; that is,
 
A = an even number is obtained = {2, 4, 6}
If any one of these three numbers is obtained, event A is said to occur. Since three out of six out-
comes are included in the event that an even number is obtained, its probability is:
 
P(A) = Number of outcomes included in A
Total number of outcomes
= 3
6 = .50 
◼
Calculating the probability 
of a compound event.
EXAMPLE 4–9 
Selecting One Out of Five Homes
Jim and Kim have been looking for a house to buy in New Jersey. They like five of the homes they 
have looked at recently and two of those are in West Orange. They cannot decide which of the 
five homes they should pick to make an offer. They put five balls (of the same size) marked 1 
through 5 (each number representing a home) in a box and asked their daughter to select one of 
these balls. Assuming their daughter’s selection is random, what is the probability that the 
selected home is in West Orange?
Solution With random selection, each home has the same probability of being selected and the 
five outcomes (one for each home) are equally likely. Two of the five homes are in West Orange. 
Hence,
 
P(selected home is in West Orange) = 2
5 = .40 
◼
Calculating the probability of a 
compound event.
Relative Frequency Concept of Probability
Suppose we want to calculate the following probabilities:
1. 
The probability that the next car that comes out of an auto factory is a “lemon”
2. 
The probability that a randomly selected family owns a home
3. 
The probability that a randomly selected woman is an excellent driver
4. 
The probability that an 80-year-old person will live for at least 1 more year
5. 
The probability that a randomly selected adult is in favor of increasing taxes to reduce the 
national debt
6. 
The probability that a randomly selected person owns a sport-utility vehicle (SUV)
These probabilities cannot be computed using the classical probability rule because the various 
outcomes for the corresponding experiments are not equally likely. For example, the next car 
manufactured at an auto factory may or may not be a lemon. The two outcomes, “the car is a 
lemon” and “the car is not a lemon,” are not equally likely. If they were, then (approximately) half 
the cars manufactured by this company would be lemons, and this might prove disastrous to the 
survival of the factory.

4.2 Calculating Probability
137
 
Although the various outcomes for each of these experiments are not equally likely, each of 
these experiments can be performed again and again to generate data. In such cases, to calculate 
probabilities, we either use past data or generate new data by performing the experiment a large 
number of times. Using these data, we calculate the frequencies and relative frequencies for 
various outcomes. The relative frequency of an event is used as an approximation for the proba-
bility of that event. This method of assigning a probability to an event is called the relative fre-
quency concept of probability. Because relative frequencies are determined by performing an 
experiment, the probabilities calculated using relative frequencies may change when an experi-
ment is repeated. For example, every time a new sample of 500 cars is selected from the produc-
tion line of an auto factory, the number of lemons in those 500 cars is expected to be different. 
However, the variation in the percentage of lemons will be small if the sample size is large. Note 
that if we are considering the population, the relative frequency will give an exact probability.
Using Relative Frequency as an Approximation of Probability If an experiment is repeated n 
times and an event A is observed f times where f is the frequency, then, according to the relative 
frequency concept of probability:
P(A) = f
n = Frequency of A
Sample size
 
Examples 4–10 and 4–11 illustrate how the probabilities of events are approximated using 
the relative frequencies.
EXAMPLE 4–10 
Lemons in Car Production
Ten of the 500 randomly selected cars manufactured at a certain auto factory are found to be 
lemons. Assuming that lemons are manufactured randomly, what is the probability that the next 
car manufactured at this auto factory is a lemon?
Solution Let n denote the total number of cars in the sample and f the number of lemons in n. 
Then, from the given information:
 
n = 500  and  f = 10
Using the relative frequency concept of probability, we obtain
 
P(next car is a lemon) = f
n = 10
500 = .02
 
This probability is actually the relative frequency of lemons in 500 cars. Table 4.2 lists the 
frequency and relative frequency distributions for this example.
Approximating probability by 
relative frequency: sample data.
Table 4.2  Frequency and Relative Frequency 
Distributions for the Sample of Cars
Car 
f 
Relative Frequency
Good 
490 
490/500 = .98
Lemon 
 10 
 10/500 = .02
 
n = 500 
        Sum = 1.00
 
The column of relative frequencies in Table 4.2 is used as the column of approximate prob-
abilities. Thus, from the relative frequency column,
 
 P(next car is a lemon)
 = .02
 
 P(next car is a good car) = .98 
◼ 
www.ebook3000.com

138
Chapter 4 Probability
 
Note that relative frequencies are not exact probabilities but are approximate probabil-
ities unless they are based on a census. However, if the experiment is repeated again and again, 
this approximate probability of an outcome obtained from the relative frequency will approach 
the actual probability of that outcome. This is called the Law of Large Numbers.
Law of Large Numbers If an experiment is repeated again and again, the probability of an event 
obtained from the relative frequency approaches the actual (or theoretical) probability.
We used Minitab to simulate the tossing of a coin with a different number of tosses. Table 4.3 lists 
the results of these simulations.
Table 4.3 Simulating the Tosses of a Coin
 Number of Tosses 
Number of Heads 
Number of Tails 
P(H) 
P(T)
 
3 
0 
3 
.00 
1.00
 
8 
6 
2 
.75 
.25
 
25 
9 
16 
.36 
.64
 
100 
61 
39 
.61 
.39
 
1000 
522 
478 
.522 
.478
 
10,000 
4962 
5038 
.4962 
.5038
 
1,000,000 
500,313 
499,687 
.5003 
.4997 
As we can observe from this table, when the coin was tossed three times, based on relative fre-
quencies, the probability of a head obtained from this simulation was .00 and that of a tail was 
1.00. When the coin was tossed eight times, the probability of a head obtained from this simulation 
was .75 and that of a tail was .25. Notice how these probabilities change. As the number of tosses 
increases, the probabilities of both a head and a tail converge toward .50. When the simulated 
tosses of the coin are 1,000,000, the relative frequencies of head and tail are almost equal. This is 
what is meant by the Law of Large Numbers. If the experiment is repeated only a few times, the 
probabilities obtained may not be close to the actual probabilities. As the number of repetitions 
increases, the probabilities of outcomes obtained become very close to the actual probabilities. 
Note that in the example of tossing a fair coin, the actual probability of head and tail is .50 each.
EXAMPLE 4–11 
Owning a Home
Allison wants to determine the probability that a randomly selected family from New York State 
owns a home. How can she determine this probability?
Solution There are two outcomes for a randomly selected family from New York State: “This 
family owns a home” and “This family does not own a home.” These two outcomes are not 
equally likely. (Note that these two outcomes will be equally likely if exactly half of the families 
in New York State own homes and exactly half do not own homes.) Hence, the classical probabil-
ity rule cannot be applied. However, we can repeat this experiment again and again. In other 
words, we can select a sample of families from New York State and observe whether or not each 
of them owns a home. Hence, we will use the relative frequency approach to probability.
 
Suppose Allison selects a random sample of 1000 families from New York State and observes 
that 730 of them own homes and 270 do not own homes. Then,
 
 n = sample size = 1000
 
 f = number of families who own homes = 730
Consequently,
 
P(a randomly selected family owns a home) = f
n = 730
1000 = .730
Approximating probability 
by relative frequency.
Law of Large Numbers 

4.2 Calculating Probability
139
 
Again, note that .730 is just an approximation of the probability that a randomly selected 
family from New York State owns a home. Every time Allison repeats this experiment she may 
obtain a different probability for this event. However, because the sample size (n = 1000) in this 
example is large, the variation is expected to be relatively small. 
◼ 
Subjective Probability
Many times we face experiments that neither have equally likely outcomes nor can be repeated 
to generate data. In such cases, we cannot compute the probabilities of events using the classical 
probability rule or the relative frequency concept. For example, consider the following probabil-
ities of events:
1. 
The probability that Carol, who is taking a statistics course, will earn an A in the course
2. 
The probability that the Dow Jones Industrial Average will be higher at the end of the next 
trading day
3. 
The probability that the New York Giants will win the Super Bowl next season
4. 
The probability that Joe will lose the lawsuit he has filed against his landlord
 
Neither the classical probability rule nor the relative frequency concept of probability can be 
applied to calculate probabilities for these examples. All these examples belong to experiments 
that have neither equally likely outcomes nor the potential of being repeated. For example, Carol, 
who is taking statistics, will take the test (or tests) only once, and based on that she will either 
earn an A or not. The two events “she will earn an A” and “she will not earn an A” are not equally 
likely. Also, she cannot take the test (or tests) again and again to calculate the relative frequency 
of getting or not getting an A grade. She will take the test (or tests) only once. The probability 
assigned to an event in such cases is called subjective probability. It is based on the individual’s 
judgment, experience, information, and belief. Carol may be very confident and assign a higher 
probability to the event that she will earn an A in statistics, whereas her instructor may be more 
cautious and assign a lower probability to the same event.
Subjective Probability Subjective probability is the probability assigned to an event based on 
subjective judgment, experience, information, and belief. There are no definite rules to assign 
such probabilities.
 
Subjective probability is assigned arbitrarily. It is usually influenced by the biases, prefer-
ences, and experience of the person assigning the probability.
EXERCISES
APPLICATIONS
4.16 An economist says that the probability is .47 that a randomly 
selected adult is in favor of keeping the Social Security system as it is, 
.32 that this adult is in favor of totally abolishing the Social Security 
system, and .21 that this adult does not have any opinion or is in favor 
of other options. Were these probabilities obtained using the classical 
approach, relative frequency approach, or the subjective probability 
approach? Explain your answer.
4.17 The president of a company has a hunch that there is a .80 
probability that the company will be successful in marketing a new 
brand of ice cream. Is this a case of classical, relative frequency, or 
subjective probability? Explain why.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
4.11 Briefly explain the two properties of probability.
4.12 Briefly describe an impossible event and a sure event. What is 
the probability of the occurrence of each of these two events?
4.13 Briefly explain the three approaches to probability. Give one 
example of each approach.
4.14 Briefly explain for what kind of experiments we use the classi-
cal approach to calculate probabilities of events and for what kind of 
experiments we use the relative frequency approach.
4.15 Which of the following values cannot be the probability of an 
event and why?
2.4  3/8  −.63  .55  9/4  −2/9  1.0  12/17
www.ebook3000.com

140
Chapter 4 Probability
4.18 A financial expert believes that the probability is .13 that the 
stock price of a specific technology company will double over the 
next year. Is this a case of classical, relative frequency, or subjective 
probability? Explain why.
4.19 A hat contains 40 marbles. Of them, 18 are red and 22 are 
green. If one marble is randomly selected out of this hat, what is the 
probability that this marble is
a. red? 
b. green?
4.20 A die is rolled once. What is the probability that
a. a number less than 5 is obtained?
b. a number 3 to 6 is obtained?
4.21 A random sample of 2000 adults showed that 1320 of them 
have shopped at least once on the Internet. What is the (approxi-
mate) probability that a randomly selected adult has shopped on the 
Internet?
4.22 In a group of 50 car owners, 8 own hybrid cars. If one car 
owner is selected at random from this group, what is the probability 
that this car owner owns a hybrid car?
4.23 Jane and Mike are planning to go on a two-week vacation next 
summer. They have selected six vacation resorts, two of which are in 
Canada and remaining four are in Caribbean countries. Jane prefers 
going to a Canadian resort, and Mike prefers to vacation in one of the 
Caribbean countries. After much argument, they decide that they will 
put six balls of the same size, each marked with one of the six vaca-
tion resorts, in a hat. Then they will ask their 8-year-old son to 
randomly choose one ball from these six balls. What is the probability 
that a vacation resort from the Caribbean countries is selected? Is this 
an example of the classical approach, relative frequency approach, or 
the subjective probability approach? Explain your answer.
Do these probabilities add to 1.0? If yes, why?
4.24 In a sample of 300 adults, 123 like chocolate ice cream and 
84 like vanilla ice cream. One adult is randomly selected from these 
adults.
a. What is the probability that this adult likes chocolate ice cream?
b. What is the probability that this adult likes vanilla ice cream?
Do these two probabilities add to 1.0? Why or why not? Explain.
4.25 A sample of 400 large companies showed that 130 of them 
offer free health fitness centers to their employees on the company 
premises. If one company is selected at random from this sample, 
what is the probability that this company offers a free health fitness 
center to its employees on the company premises? What is the prob-
ability that this company does not offer a free health fitness center to 
its employees on the company premises? Do these two probabilities 
add to 1.0? If yes, why?
4.26 In a large city, 15,000 workers lost their jobs last year. Of them, 
7400 lost their jobs because their companies closed down or moved, 
4600 lost their jobs due to insufficient work, and the remainder lost 
their jobs because their positions were abolished. If one of these 
15,000 workers is selected at random, find the probability that this 
worker lost his or her job
a. because the company closed down or moved
b. due to insufficient work
c. because the position was abolished
Do these probabilities add to 1.0? If so, why?
4.27 In a sample of 500 families, 50 have a yearly income of less 
than $40,000, 180 have a yearly income of $40,000 to $80,000, and 
the remaining families have a yearly income of more than $80,000. 
Write the frequency distribution table for this problem. Calculate the 
relative frequencies for all classes. Suppose one family is randomly 
selected from these 500 families. Find the probability that this family 
has a yearly income of
a. less than $40,000 
b. more than $80,000
4.28 Suppose you want to find the (approximate) probability that a 
randomly selected family from Los Angeles earns more than $175,000 
a year. How would you find this probability? What procedure would 
you use? Explain briefly.
In this section first we discuss marginal and conditional probabilities, and then we discuss the 
concepts (in that order) of mutually exclusive events, independent and dependent events, and 
complementary events.
4.3.1 Marginal and Conditional Probabilities
Suppose all 100 employees of a company were asked whether they are in favor of or against 
paying high salaries to CEOs of U.S. companies. Table 4.4 gives a two-way classification of the 
responses of these 100 employees. Assume that every employee responds either in favor or 
against.
4.3 Marginal Probability, Conditional Probability, 
and Related Probability Concepts
Table 4.4  Two-Way Classification of Employee 
Responses
 
In Favor 
Against
Male 
15 
45
Female 
 4 
36

4.3 Marginal Probability, Conditional Probability, and Related Probability Concepts
141
 
Table 4.4 shows the distribution of 100 employees based on two variables or characteristics: 
gender (male or female) and opinion (in favor or against). Such a table is called a contingency 
table or a two-way table. In Table 4.4, each box that contains a number is called a cell. Notice that 
there are four cells. Each cell gives the frequency for two characteristics. For example, 15 
employees in this group possess two characteristics: “male” and “in favor of paying high salaries 
to CEOs.” We can interpret the numbers in other cells the same way.
 
By adding the row totals and the column totals to Table 4.4, we write Table 4.5.
Table 4.5  Two-Way Classification of Employee 
Responses with Totals
 
In Favor 
Against 
Total
Male 
15 
45 
 60
Female 
 4 
36 
 40
Total 
19 
81 
100
 
Suppose one employee is selected at random from these 100 employees. This employee may 
be classified either on the basis of gender alone or on the basis of opinion alone. If only one 
characteristic is considered at a time, the employee selected can be a male, a female, in favor, 
or against. The probability of each of these four characteristics or events is called marginal 
probability. These probabilities are called marginal probabilities because they are calculated by 
dividing the corresponding row margins (totals for the rows) or column margins (totals for the 
columns) by the grand total.
Marginal Probability Marginal probability is the probability of a single event without consid-
eration of any other event.
 
For Table 4.5, the four marginal probabilities are calculated as follows:
P(male) =
Number of males
Total number of employees = 60
100 = .60
As we can observe, the probability that a male will be selected is obtained by dividing the total 
of the row labeled “Male” (60) by the grand total (100). Similarly,
 P(female) = 40100 = .40
 P(in favor) = 19100 = .19
 P(against) = 81100 = .81
 
These four marginal probabilities are shown along the right side and along the bottom of 
Table 4.6.
Table 4.6 Listing the Marginal Probabilities
 
In Favor 
Against
 
(A) 
(B) 
Total
Male (M) 
15 
45 
 60
Female (F) 
 4 
36 
 40
Total 
19 
81 
100
 
P(A) = 19∕100 
P(B) = 81∕100
 
  = .19 
  = .81
P(M) = 60∕100 = .60
 P(F) = 40∕100 = .40
www.ebook3000.com

142
Chapter 4 Probability
 
Now suppose that one employee is selected at random from these 100 employees. Further-
more, assume it is known that this (selected) employee is a male. In other words, the event that 
the employee selected is a male has already occurred. Given that this selected employee is a male, 
he can be in favor or against. What is the probability that the employee selected is in favor of 
paying high salaries to CEOs? This probability is written as follows:
P(in favor | male)
Read as “given”
This event has
already occurred
The event whose probability
is to be determined
 
This probability, P(in favor | male), is called the conditional probability of “in favor” given 
that the event “male” has already happened. It is read as “the probability that the employee 
selected is in favor given that this employee is a male.”
Conditional Probability Conditional probability is the probability that an event will occur 
given that another event has already occurred. If A and B are two events, then the conditional 
probability of A given B is written as
P(A ∣ B)
and read as “the probability of A given that B has already occurred.”
EXAMPLE 4–12 
Opinions of Employees
Compute the conditional probability P(in favor ∣ male) for the data on 100 employees given in 
Table 4.5.
Solution The probability P(in favor ∣ male) is the conditional probability that a randomly 
selected employee is in favor given that this employee is a male. It is known that the event “male” 
has already occurred. Based on the information that the employee selected is a male, we can infer 
that the employee selected must be one of the 60 males and, hence, must belong to the first row 
of Table 4.5. Therefore, we are concerned only with the first row of that table.
Calculating the conditional 
probability: two-way table.
 
In Favor 
Against 
Total
Male 
15 
45 
60
Males who 
are in favor
 Total number 
of males
There are 60 males, and 15 of them are in favor. Hence, the required conditional probability is 
calculated as follows:
P (in favor ∣ male) = Number of males who are in favor
Total number of males
= 15
60 = .25
 
As we can observe from this computation of conditional probability, the total number of 
males (the event that has already occurred) is written in the denominator and the number of males 
who are in favor (the event whose probability we are to find) is written in the numerator. Note that 
we are considering the row of the event that has already occurred. 
◼

EXAMPLE 4–13 
Opinions of Employees
For the data of Table 4.5, calculate the conditional probability that a randomly selected employee 
is a female given that this employee is in favor of paying high salaries to CEOs.
Solution Here one employee is selected and this employee happens to be in favor. Given that 
this employee is in favor, the employee can be either a male or a female. We are to find the prob-
ability of a female given that the selected employee is in favor, that is, we are to compute the 
probability P(female ∣ in favor). Because it is known that the employee selected is in favor of 
paying high salaries to CEOs, this employee must belong to the first column (the column labeled 
Calculating the conditional 
probability: two-way table.
DO YOU WORRY 
ABOUT YOUR 
WEIGHT?
CASE STUDY 4–1
A Gallup poll of 1013 American adults of age 18 years and older conducted July 7–10, 2014, asked them, 
“How often do you worry about your weight?” The accompanying chart shows the percentage of adults 
included in the poll who said that they worry all or some of the time about their weight. According to this 
information, 45% of the adults in the sample said that they worry all or some of the time about their weight. 
When broken down based on gender, this percentage is 35% for men and 55% for women.
 
Assume that these percentages are true for the current population of American adults. Suppose we 
randomly select one American adult. Based on the overall percentage, the probability that this adult worries 
all or some of the time about his/her weight is
P(a randomly selected adult worries all or some of the time about his∕her weight) = .45
This is a marginal probability because there is no condition imposed here.
 
Now suppose we randomly select one American adult. Then, given that this adult is a man, the probabil-
ity is .35 that he worries all or some of the time about his weight. If the selected adult is a woman, the prob-
ability is .55 that she worries all or some of the time about her weight. These are two conditional probabilities, 
which can be written as follows:
P(a randomly selected adult worries all or some of the time about his weight ∣ man) = .35
P(a randomly selected adult worries all or some of the time about her weight ∣ woman) = .55
Note that these are approximate probabilities because the percentages given in the chart are based on a 
sample survey of 1013 adults.
Source: http://www.gallup.com.
Data source: Gallup poll of 1013 adults aged 18 and older conducted July 7–10, 2014
DO YOU WORRY ABOUT YOUR WEIGHT?
All adults
Men
Women
55%
45%
35%
COLA
COLA
COLA
143
www.ebook3000.com

144
Chapter 4 Probability
4.3.2 Mutually Exclusive Events
Suppose you toss a coin once. You will obtain either a head or a tail, but not both, because, in one 
toss, the events head and tail cannot occur together. Such events are called mutually exclusive 
events. Such events do not have any common outcomes. If two or more events are mutually 
exclusive, then at most one of them will occur every time we repeat the experiment. Thus the 
occurrence of one event excludes the occurrence of the other event or events.
In Favor
15
 4
19
Females who are in favor
Total number of employees who are in favor
Hence, the required probability is
 
P (female ∣ in favor) =
Number of females who are in favor
Total number of employees who are in favor = 4
19 = .2105 
◼
“in favor”) and must be one of the 19 employees who are in favor. Of these 19 employees who 
are in favor, four are females.
Mutually Exclusive Events Events that cannot occur together are said to be mutually exclusive 
events.
 
For any experiment, the final outcomes are always mutually exclusive because one and only 
one of these outcomes is expected to occur in one repetition of the experiment. For example, 
consider tossing a coin twice. This experiment has four outcomes: HH, HT, TH, and TT. These 
outcomes are mutually exclusive because one and only one of them will occur when we toss this 
coin twice. As another example, suppose one student is selected at random from a statistics class 
and the gender of this student is observed. This student can be a male or a female. These are two 
mutually exclusive events. These events cannot happen together if only one student is selected. 
But now, if you observe whether the selected student is a math major or a business major, then 
these two events will not be mutually exclusive if there is at least one student in the class who is 
a double major in math and business. However, if there is no student with both majors, then these 
two events will be mutually exclusive events.
EXAMPLE 4–14 
One Roll of a Die
Consider the following events for one roll of a die:
 A = an even number is observed = {2, 4, 6}
 B = an odd number is observed = {1, 3, 5}
 C = a number less than 5 is observed = {1, 2, 3, 4}
Are events A and B mutually exclusive? Are events A and C mutually exclusive?
Solution Figures 4.6 and 4.7 show the diagrams of events A and B and of events A and C, 
respectively.
 
As we can observe from the definitions of events A and B and from Figure 4.6, events A and 
B have no common element. For one roll of a die, only one of the two events A and B can happen. 
Hence, these are two mutually exclusive events. 
Illustrating mutually exclusive and 
mutually nonexclusive events.

4.3 Marginal Probability, Conditional Probability, and Related Probability Concepts
145
 
We can observe from the definitions of events A and C and from Figure 4.7 that events 
A and C have two common outcomes: 2-spot and 4-spot. Thus, if we roll a die and obtain either 
a 2-spot or a 4-spot, then A and C happen at the same time. Hence, events A and C are not mutually 
exclusive. 
◼ 
Figure 4.7 Mutually nonexclusive 
events A and C.
A
C
6
2
3
1
5
4
A
B
6
4
2
5
3
1
Figure 4.6 Mutually exclusive 
events A and B.
EXAMPLE 4–15 
Shopping on the Internet
Consider the following two events for a randomly selected adult:
 Y = this adult has shopped on the Internet at least once
 N = this adult has never shopped on the Internet
Are events Y and N mutually exclusive?
Solution Note that event Y consists of all adults who have shopped on the Internet at least 
once, and event N includes all adults who have never shopped on the Internet. These two events 
are illustrated in the diagram in Figure 4.8.
Illustrating mutually 
exclusive events.
N
Y
Figure 4.8 Mutually exclusive events Y and N.
 
As we can observe from the definitions of events Y and N and from Figure 4.8, events Y and 
N have no common outcome. They represent two distinct sets of adults: the ones who have 
shopped on the Internet at least once and the ones who have never shopped on the Internet. 
Hence, these two events are mutually exclusive.  
◼
4.3.3 Independent versus Dependent Events
Consider two tosses of a coin. Does the outcome of the first toss affect the outcome of the second 
toss? In other words, whether we obtain a head or a tail in the first toss, will it change the prob-
ability of obtaining a head or a tail in the second toss? The answer is: No. The outcome of the first 
toss does not affect the outcome of the second toss. Whether we get a head or a tail in the first 
toss, the probability of obtaining a head in the second toss is still .50 and that of a tail is also .50. 
This is an example of a statistical experiment where the outcomes of two tosses are independent. 
In the case of two independent events, the occurrence of one event does not change the probabil-
ity of the occurrence of the other event.
Independent Events Two events are said to be independent if the occurrence of one event does not 
affect the probability of the occurrence of the other event. In other words, A and B are independent 
events if
either P(A ∣ B) = P(A) or P(B ∣ A) = P(B)
www.ebook3000.com

146
Chapter 4 Probability
 
Now consider one toss of a coin. Suppose you toss this coin and obtain a head. Did obtain-
ing a head affect the probability of obtaining a tail? Yes, it did. Before you tossed the coin, the 
probability of obtaining a tail was .50. But once you tossed the coin and obtained a head, the 
probability of obtaining a tail in that toss becomes zero. In other words, it is obvious that you 
did not obtain a tail. This is an example of two dependent events or outcomes. Thus, if the occur-
rence of one event affects the probability of the occurrence of the other event, then the two 
events are said to be dependent events. In probability notation, the two events are dependent if 
either P(A ∣ B) ≠ P(A) or P(B ∣ A) ≠ P(B).
EXAMPLE 4–16 
Opinions of Employees
Refer to the information on 100 employees given in Table 4.5 in Section 4.3.1. Are events in favor 
and female independent?
Solution To check whether events in favor and female are independent, we find the (marginal) 
probability of in favor, and then the conditional probability of in favor given that female has 
already happened. If these two probabilities are equal then these two events are independent, 
otherwise they are dependent.
 
From Table 4.5, there are 19 employees in favor out of 100 total employees. Hence,
 
P(in favor) = 19
100 = .19
Now we find the conditional probability of in favor given that the event female has already 
occurred. We know that the person selected is a female because this event has already happened. 
There are a total of 40 employees who are female and 4 of them are in favor. Hence,
 
P(in favor ∣ female) = 4
40 = .10
Because these two probabilities are not equal, the two events are dependent. Here, dependence of 
events means that the percentage of female employees who are in favor of paying high salaries to 
CEOs is different from the percentage of male employees who are in favor of this issue. This 
percentage of female employees who are in favor of paying high salaries to CEOs is also different 
from the overall percentage of employees who are in favor of paying high salaries to CEOs. ◼
Illustrating two dependent 
events: two-way table.
EXAMPLE 4–17 
Gender and Drinking Coffee 
with or without Sugar
In a survey, 500 randomly selected adults who drink coffee were asked whether they usually 
drink coffee with or without sugar. Of these 500 adults, 240 are men, and 175 drink coffee 
without sugar. Of the 240 men, 84 drink coffee without sugar. Are the events drinking coffee 
without sugar and man independent?
Solution To check if the events drinking coffee without sugar and man are independent, first 
we find the probability that a randomly selected adult from these 500 adults drinks coffee without 
sugar and then find the conditional probability that this selected adult drinks coffee without sugar 
given that this adult is a man. From the given information:
 
P(drinks coffee without sugar) = 175
500 = .35
Now to find the conditional probability that a randomly selected adult from these 500 adults 
drinks coffee without sugar given that this adult is a man, we divide the number of men in the 
adults who drink coffee without sugar by the total number of adults who drink coffee without 
sugar. There are a total of 175 adults who drink coffee without sugar and 84 of them are men. 
Also, there are a total of 240 men. Hence,
 
P(drinks coffee without sugar ∣ man) = 84
240 = .35
Illustrating two 
independent events.

4.3 Marginal Probability, Conditional Probability, and Related Probability Concepts
147
Since the two probabilities are equal, the two events drinking coffee without sugar and man are 
independent. In this example, independence of these events means that men and women have the 
same preferences in regard to drinking coffee with or without sugar. Table 4.7 has been written 
using the given information. The numbers in the shaded cells are given to us. If we calculate the 
percentages of men and women who drink coffee with and without sugar, they are the same. 
Sixty-five percent of both, men and women, drink coffee with sugar and 35% of both drink coffee 
without sugar. If the percentages of men and women who drink coffee with and without sugar are 
different, then these events will be dependent.
We can make the following two important observations about mutually exclusive, independent, 
and dependent events.
1. 
Two events are either mutually exclusive or independent.2
a. Mutually exclusive events are always dependent.
b. Independent events are never mutually exclusive.
2. 
Dependent events may or may not be mutually exclusive.
4.3.4 Complementary Events
Consider one roll of a fair six-sided die. Let A be the event that an even number is obtained and 
B be the event that an odd number is obtained. Then event A includes outcomes 2, 4, and 6, and 
event B includes outcomes 1, 3, and 5. As we can notice, events A and B are mutually exclusive 
events as they do not contain any common outcomes. Taken together, events A and B include all 
six outcomes of this experiment. In this case, events A and B are called complementary events. 
Thus, we can state that two mutually exclusive events that taken together include all the outcomes 
for an experiment are called complementary events. Note that two complementary events are 
always mutually exclusive.
2The exception to this rule occurs when at least one of the two events has a zero probability.
Complementary Events The complement of event A, denoted by A and read as “A bar” or “A 
complement,” is the event that includes all the outcomes for an experiment that are not in A.
 
Events A and A are complements of each other. The diagram in Figure 4.9 shows the com-
plementary events A and A.
A
A
–
Figure 4.9 Two complementary events.
 
Because two complementary events, taken together, include all the outcomes for an experi-
ment and because the sum of the probabilities of all outcomes is 1, it is obvious that
P(A) + P(A) = 1.0
  Two Important 
Observations
◼
Table 4.7 Gender and Drinking Coffee with or without Sugar
 
With Sugar 
Without Sugar 
Total
Men 
156 
 84 
240
Women 
169 
 91 
260
Total 
325 
175 
500
www.ebook3000.com

148
Chapter 4 Probability
From this equation, we can deduce that
P(A) = 1 −P(A) and P(A) = 1 −P(A)
 
Thus, if we know the probability of an event, we can find the probability of its complemen-
tary event by subtracting the given probability from 1.
EXAMPLE 4–18 
Taxpayers Audited by IRS
In a group of 2000 taxpayers, 400 have been audited by the IRS at least once. If one taxpayer is 
randomly selected from this group, what are the two complementary events for this experiment, 
and what are their probabilities?
Solution The two complementary events for this experiment are
 
 A = the selected taxpayer has been audited by the IRS at least once
 
 A = the selected taxpayer has never been audited by the IRS
Note that here event A includes the 400 taxpayers who have been audited by the IRS at least once, 
and A includes the 1600 taxpayers who have never been audited by the IRS. Hence, the probabil-
ities of events A and A are
 
P(A) = 4002000 = .20 and P(A) = 16002000 = .80
As we can observe, the sum of these two probabilities is 1. Figure 4.10 shows the two comple-
mentary events A and A for this example.
Calculating probability of 
complementary events.
A
A
–
Figure 4.10 Complementary events A and A.
◼
EXAMPLE 4–19 
Gender and Drinking Coffee with or without Sugar
Refer to the information given in Table 4.7. Of the 500 adults, 325 drink coffee with sugar. Sup-
pose one adult is randomly selected from these 500 adults, and let A be the event that this adult 
drinks coffee with sugar. What is the complement of event A? What are the probabilities of the 
two events?
Solution For this experiment, the two complementary events are:
A = the selected adult drinks coffee with sugar
A = the selected adult drinks coffee without sugar
Note that here A includes 175 adults who drink coffee without sugar. The two events A and A are 
complements of each other. The probabilities of the two events are:
P(A) = P(selected adult drinks coffee with sugar) = 325
500 = .65
P(A) = P(selected adult drinks coffee without sugar) = 175
500 = .35
As we can observe, the sum of these two probabilities is 1, which should be the case with two 
complementary events. Also, once we find P(A), we can find P(A) as:
 
P(A) = 1 −P(A) = 1 −.65 = .35
Figure 4.11 shows these two complementary events. 
◼
Calculating probabilities of 
complementary events.
A
A
–
Figure 4.11 Complementary 
events drinking coffee with or 
without sugar.

4.3 Marginal Probability, Conditional Probability, and Related Probability Concepts
149
EXERCISES
a. If one adult is randomly selected from these 700 adults, find 
the probability that this adult
 
i. likes chocolate ice cream
 
ii. is a woman
 
iii. likes vanilla ice cream given that this adult is a woman
 
iv. is a man given that this adult likes chocolate ice cream
b. Are events men and vanilla ice cream mutually exclusive? 
What about chocolate ice cream and vanilla ice cream?
c. Are events women and chocolate ice cream independent? 
Why or why not?
4.36 Six hundred adults were asked whether or not they watch for 
calories and fat content when they buy groceries. The following table 
gives the two-way classification of their responses, where yes means 
that an adult watches for calories and fat content and no means he/she 
does not watch.
Yes
No
No Opinion
Men
 74
168
58
Women
106
124
70
a. If one adult is randomly selected from these 600 adults, find 
the probability that this adult
 
i. is a man
 
ii. does not watch for calories and fat content
 
iii. watches for calories and fat content given that this adult 
is a woman
 
iv. is a man given that this adult has no opinion
b. Are events men and yes mutually exclusive? What about yes 
and no opinion?
c. Are events men and no independent? Why or why not?
4.37 In a survey, 500 randomly selected adults who drink coffee 
were asked whether they usually drink coffee with or without sugar. 
Of these 500 adults, 290 are men and 200 drink coffee without sugar. 
Of the 200 who drink coffee without sugar, 130 are men. Are the events 
man and drinking coffee without sugar independent? (Note: Compare 
this exercise to Example 4–17.)
4.38 There are 142 people participating in a local 5K road race. 
Sixty-five of these runners are females. Of the female runners, 19 
are participating in their first 5K road race. Of the male runners, 28 
are participating in their first 5K road race. Are the events female 
and participating in their first 5K road race independent? Are they 
mutually exclusive? Explain why or why not.
4.39 Define the following two events for two tosses of a coin:
 A = at least one head is obtained
 B = two tails are obtained
a. Are A and B mutually exclusive events? Are they independent? 
Explain why or why not.
b. Are A and B complementary events? If yes, first calculate the 
probability of B and then calculate the probability of A using 
the complementary event rule.
4.40 Let A be the event that a number less than 3 is obtained if you 
roll a die once. What is the probability of A? What is the complemen-
tary event of A, and what is its probability?
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
4.29 Briefly explain the difference between the marginal and condi-
tional probabilities of events. Give one example of each.
4.30 What is meant by two mutually exclusive events? Give one 
example of two mutually exclusive events and another example of two 
events that are not mutually exclusive.
4.31 Briefly explain the meaning of independent and dependent 
events. Suppose A and B are two events. What formula will you use to 
prove whether A and B are independent or dependent?
4.32 What is the complement of an event? What is the sum of the 
probabilities of two complementary events?
4.33 A statistical experiment has 11 equally likely outcomes that 
are denoted by a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, and k. Consider three events: 
A = {b, d, e, j}, B = {a, c, f, j}, and C = {c, g, k}.
a. Are events A and B independent events? What about events 
A and C?
b. Are events A and B mutually exclusive events? What about 
A and C? What about B and C?
c. What are the complements of events A, B, and C, respectively, 
and what are their probabilities?
APPLICATIONS
4.34 Two thousand randomly selected adults were asked whether or 
not they have ever shopped on the Internet. The following table gives 
a two-way classification of the responses.
Have Shopped
Have Never Shopped
Male
500
700
Female
300
500
a. If one adult is selected at random from these 2000 adults, find 
the probability that this adult
 
i. has never shopped on the Internet
 
ii. is a male
 
iii. has shopped on the Internet given that this adult is a 
female
 
iv. is a male given that this adult has never shopped on the 
Internet
b. Are the events male and female mutually exclusive? What 
about the events have shopped and male? Why or why not?
c. Are the events female and have shopped independent? Why 
or why not?
4.35 Seven hundred adults who eat ice cream regularly were asked 
about their favorite ice cream. The following table gives the two-way 
classification of their responses.
Chocolate
Vanilla
Other
Men
 98
 79
123
Women
109
143
148
www.ebook3000.com

150
Chapter 4 Probability
4.41 Thirty percent of last year’s graduates from a university 
received job offers during their last semester in school. What are the 
two complementary events here and what are their probabilities?
4.42 The probability that a randomly selected college student attended 
at least one major league baseball game last year is .12. What is the com-
plementary event? What is the probability of this complementary event?
This section discusses the intersection of two events and the application of the multiplication rule 
to compute the probability of the intersection of events.
4.4.1 Intersection of Events
Refer to the information given in Table 4.7. Suppose one adult is selected at random from this 
group of 500 adults. Consider the events a woman and drinking coffee without sugar. Then, 91 
women in this group who drink coffee without sugar give the intersection of the events woman 
and drinking coffee without sugar. Note that the intersection of two events is given by the out-
comes that are common to both events.
4.4 Intersection of Events and the Multiplication Rule
Intersection of Events Let A and B be two events defined in a sample space. The intersection 
of A and B represents the collection of all outcomes that are common to both A and B and is 
denoted by
(A and B)
 
The intersection of events A and B is also denoted by either A ∩B or AB. Let
A = event that a woman is selected from the 500 adults in Table 4.7
B = event that an adult who drinks coffee without sugar is selected
Figure 4.12 illustrates the intersection of events A and B. The shaded area in this figure gives the 
intersection of events A and B, and it includes all the women who drink coffee without sugar.
B
A
A
and
B
Intersection of A and B
Figure 4.12 Intersection of events A and B.
4.4.2 Multiplication Rule for Independent Events
Sometime we may need to find the probability that two or more events happen together, and this 
probability is called the joint probability of these events.
Joint Probability The probability of the intersection of two events is called their joint proba-
bility. It is written as
P(A and B)
 
If two events are independent, then they do not affect each other. To find the probability that 
two independent events happen together, we multiply their marginal probabilities. For example, 

4.4 Intersection of Events and the Multiplication Rule
151
to find the probability of obtaining two heads in two tosses of a coin, we multiply the probability 
of obtaining a head in the first toss by the probability of obtaining a head in the second toss, since 
the outcomes of the two tosses are independent of each other.
Multiplication Rule to Calculate the Probability of Independent Events The probability of the 
intersection of two independent events A and B is
P(A and B) = P(A) × P(B)
EXAMPLE 4–20 
Two Fire Detectors
An office building has two fire detectors. The probability is .02 that any fire detector of this type 
will fail to go off during a fire. Find the probability that both of these fire detectors will fail to go 
off in case of a fire. Assume that these two fire detectors are independent of each other.
Solution In this example, the two fire detectors are independent because whether or not one 
fire detector goes off during a fire has no effect on the second fire detector. We define the follow-
ing two events:
 A = the first fire detector fails to go off during a fire
 B = the second fire detector fails to go off during a fire
Then, the joint probability of A and B is
 
P(A and B) = P(A) × P(B) = (.02) × (.02) = .0004 
◼ 
Calculating the joint probability 
of two independent events. 
The multiplication rule can be extended to calculate the joint probability of more than two events. 
Example 4–21 illustrates such a case for independent events.
EXAMPLE 4–21 
Three Students Getting Jobs
The probability that a college graduate will find a full-time job within three months after gradu-
ation from college is .27. Three college students, who will be graduating soon, are randomly 
selected. What is the probability that all three of them will find full-time jobs within three months 
after graduation from college?
Solution Let:
A =  the event that the first student finds a full-time job within three months after graduation 
from college
B =  the event that the second student finds a full-time job within three months after gradua-
tion from college
C =  the event that the third student finds a full-time job within three months after graduation 
from college
 
These three events, A, B, and C, are independent events because one student getting a full-
time job within three months after graduation from college does not affect the probabilities of the 
other two students getting full-time jobs within three months after graduation from college. This 
is a reasonable assumption since the population of students graduating from colleges is very large 
and the students are randomly selected. Hence, the probability that all three students will find 
full-time jobs within three months after graduation from college is:
 
P(A and B and C) = P(A) × P(B) × P(C) = (.27) × (.27) × (.27) = .0197 
◼
Calculating the joint probability 
of three independent events.
www.ebook3000.com

152
Chapter 4 Probability
4.4.3 Multiplication Rule for Dependent Events
We know that when the occurrence of one event affects the occurrence of another event, these 
events are said to be dependent events. For example, in the two-way Table 4.5, events female and 
in favor are dependent. Suppose we randomly select one person from the 100 persons included 
in Table 4.5 and we want to find the joint probability of female and in favor. To obtain this prob-
ability, we will not multiply the marginal probabilities of these two events. Here, to find the joint 
probability of these two events, we will multiply the marginal probability of female by the con-
ditional probability of in favor given that a female has been selected.
 
Thus, the probability of the intersection of two dependent events is obtained by multiplying 
the marginal probability of one event by the conditional probability of the second event. This rule 
is called the multiplication rule.
Multiplication Rule to Find Joint Probability of Two Dependent Events The probability of the 
intersection of two dependent events A and B is
P(A and B) = P(A) × P(B ∣ A) or P(B) × P(A ∣ B)
The joint probability of events A and B can also be denoted by P(A ∩ B) or P(AB).
EXAMPLE 4–22 
Gender and College Degree
Table 4.8 gives the classification of all employees of a company by gender and college degree.
Calculating the joint probability 
of two events: two-way table.
Table 4.8 Classification of Employees by Gender and Education
 
College 
Not a College
 
Graduate 
Graduate 
Total
Male 
 7 
20 
27
Female 
 4 
 9 
13
Total 
11 
29 
40
If one of these employees is selected at random for membership on the employee–management 
committee, what is the probability that this employee is a female and a college graduate?
Solution We are to calculate the probability of the intersection of the events female and college 
graduate. This probability may be computed using the formula
 
P(female and college graduate) = P(female) × P(college graduate  ∣ female)
The shaded area in Figure 4.13 shows the intersection of the events female and college graduate. 
There are four females who are college graduates in 40 employees.
4
Females
College
graduates
Females and college
graduates
Figure 4.13 Intersection of events female 
and college graduate.

4.4 Intersection of Events and the Multiplication Rule
153
 
Notice that there are 13 females among 40 employees. Hence, the probability that a female 
is selected is
 
P(female) = 13
40
To calculate the probability P(college graduate ∣ female), we know that the event female has 
already occurred. Consequently, the employee selected is one of the 13 females. In the table, 
there are 4 college graduates among 13 female employees. Hence, the conditional probability of 
the event college graduate given that the event female has already happened is
 
P(college graduate ∣ female) = 4
13
The joint probability of the events female and college graduate is
P(female and college graduate) = P(female) × P(college graduate ∣ female)
        = 13
40 × 4
13 = .10
Thus, the probability is .10 that a randomly selected employee is a female and a college graduate.
 
The probability in this example can also be calculated without using the above multiplication 
rule. As we notice from Table 4.8:
 
Total employees = 40
 
Number of employees who are females and college graduates = 4
Hence, the joint probability of the events female and college graduate is obtained by dividing 
4 by 40:
 
P(female and college graduate) = 4
40 = .10 
◼
EXAMPLE 4–23 
Liking Ice Tea
In a group of 20 college students, 7 like ice tea and others do not. Two students are randomly 
selected from this group.
(a) Find the probability that both of the selected students like ice tea.
(b) Find the probability that the first student selected likes ice tea and the second does not.
Solution In these 20 students, 7 like ice tea and 13 do not. We find the required probabilities 
as follows.
(a) There are 7 students in 20 who like ice tea. Hence, the probability that the first student 
likes ice tea is:
 
P(first student likes ice tea) = 7
20 = .35
 
Now we have 19 students left in the group, of whom 6 like ice tea. Hence,
 
P(second student likes ice tea ∣  first student likes ice tea) = 6
19 = .3158
 
Thus, the joint probability of the two events is:
P(both students like ice tea) =
P(first student likes ice tea) × P(second student likes ice tea ∣  first student likes ice tea)
  = (.35) × (.3158) = .1105
Calculating the joint probability 
of two events.
www.ebook3000.com

154
Chapter 4 Probability
(b) We find the probability that the first student selected likes ice tea and the second does 
not as follows.
P(first student likes ice tea) = 7
20 = .35
Now we have 19 students left in the group, of whom 13 do not like ice tea. Hence,
P(second student does not like ice tea ∣  first student likes ice tea) = 13
19 = .6842
Thus, the joint probability of the two events is:
P(first student likes ice tea and second student does not like ice tea) =
P( first student likes ice tea) × P(second student does not like ice tea ∣  first student likes ice tea)
= (.35) × (.6842) = .2395
◼
 
Conditional probability was discussed in Section 4.3.1. It is obvious from the formula for 
joint probability that if we know the probability of an event A and the joint probability of events 
A and B, then we can calculate the conditional probability of B given A.
Calculating Conditional Probability If A and B are two events, then,
P(B ∣ A) = P(A and B)
P(A)  and P(A ∣ B) = P(A and B)
P(B)
given that P(A) ≠0 and P(B) ≠0.
EXAMPLE 4–24 
Major and Status of a Student
The probability that a randomly selected student from a college is a senior is .20, and the joint 
probability that the student is a computer science major and a senior is .03. Find the conditional 
probability that a student selected at random is a computer science major given that the student is 
a senior.
Solution From the given information, the probability that a randomly selected student is a 
senior is:
 
P(senior) = .20
The probability that the selected student is a senior and computer science major is:
 
P(senior and computer science major) = .03
Hence, the conditional probability that a randomly selected student is a computer science major 
given that he or she is a senior is:
P(computer science major ∣ senior) = P(senior and computer science major)∕P(senior)
      = .03
.20 = .15
Thus, the (conditional) probability is .15 that a student selected at random is a computer science 
major given that he or she is a senior. 
◼
Calculating the conditional 
probability of an event.
4.4.4 Joint Probability of Mutually Exclusive Events
We know from an earlier discussion that two mutually exclusive events cannot happen together. 
Consequently, their joint probability is zero.

4.4 Intersection of Events and the Multiplication Rule
155
EXAMPLE 4–25 
Car Loan Application
Consider the following two events for an application filed by a person to obtain a car loan:
 A = event that the loan application is approved
 R = event that the loan application is rejected
What is the joint probability of A and R?
Solution The two events A and R are mutually exclusive. Either the loan application will be 
approved or it will be rejected. Hence,
 
P(A and R) = 0 
◼
Illustrating the joint probability of 
two mutually exclusive events.
Joint Probability of Mutually Exclusive Events The joint probability of two mutually exclusive 
events is always zero. If A and B are two mutually exclusive events, then,
P(A and B) = 0
EXERCISES
Yes
No
No Opinion
Men
 74
168
58
Women
106
124
70
One adult is randomly selected from these 600 adults. Find the follow-
ing probabilities.
a. Probability of the intersection of events yes and woman.
b. Probability of the intersection of events no opinion and 
man.
4.54 Two thousand randomly selected adults were asked whether or 
not they have ever shopped on the Internet. The following table gives 
a two-way classification of the responses obtained.
Have Shopped
Have Never Shopped
Male
500
700
Female
300
500
a. Suppose one adult is selected at random from these 2000 
adults. Find the following probabilities.
 
i. P(has never shopped on the Internet and is a male)
 
ii. P(has shopped on the Internet and is a female)
b. Mention what other joint probabilities you can calculate for 
this table and then find those.
4.55 Seven hundred adults who eat ice cream regularly were asked 
about their favorite ice cream. The following table gives the two-way 
classification of their responses.
Chocolate
Vanilla
Other
Men
 98
 79
123
Women
109
143
148
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
4.43 Explain the meaning of the intersection of two events. Give 
one example.
4.44 What is meant by the joint probability of two or more events? 
Give one example.
4.45 How is the multiplication rule of probability for two dependent 
events different from the rule for two independent events?
4.46 What is the joint probability of two mutually exclusive events? 
Give one example.
4.47 Find the joint probability of A and B for the following.
a. P(A) = .36 and P(B ∣ A) = .87
b. P(B) = .53 and P(A ∣ B) = .22
4.48 Given that A and B are two independent events, find their joint 
probability for the following.
a. P(A) = .29 and P(B) = .65
b. P(A) = .03 and P(B) = .28
4.49 Given that A, B, and C are three independent events, find their 
joint probability for the following.
a. P(A) = .81, P(B) = .49, and P(C) = .36
b. P(A) = .02, P(B) = .03, and P(C) = .05
4.50 Given that P(B) = .29 and P(A and B) = .24, find P(A ∣ B).
4.51 Given that P(A ∣ B) = .44 and P(A and B) = .33, find P(B).
4.52 Given that P(B ∣ A) = .70 and P(A and B) = .35, find P(A).
APPLICATIONS
4.53 Six hundred adults were asked whether or not they watch for 
calories and fat content when they buy groceries. The following table 
gives the two-way classification of their responses where yes means 
that an adult watches for calories and fat content and no means he/she 
does not watch.
www.ebook3000.com

156
Chapter 4 Probability
a. One adult is randomly selected from these 700 adults. Find 
the following probabilities.
 
i. P(man and vanilla)
 
ii. P(other and woman)
b. Find the joint probability of the events chocolate and other. Is 
this probability zero? Explain why or why not.
4.56 In a statistics class of 42 students, 28 have volunteered for 
community service in the past. If two students are selected at random 
from this class, what is the probability that both of them have volun-
teered for community service in the past?
4.57 A company is to hire two new employees. They have prepared 
a final list of eight candidates, all of whom are equally qualified. Of 
these eight candidates, five are women. If the company decides to 
select two persons randomly from these eight candidates, what is the 
probability that both of them are women?
4.58 Of the 35 students in a class, 22 are taking the class because it is 
a major requirement, and the other 13 are taking it as an elective. If two 
students are selected at random from this class, what is the probability 
that the first student is taking the class as an elective and the second is 
taking it because it is a major requirement? How does this probability 
compare to the probability that the first student is taking the class because 
it is a major requirement and the second is taking it as an elective?
4.59 The probability that a student graduating from Suburban 
State University has student loans to pay off after graduation is .60. 
If two students are randomly selected from this university, what is 
the probability that neither of them has student loans to pay off after 
graduation?
4.60 Five percent of all items sold by a mail-order company are 
returned by customers for a refund. Find the probability that of two 
items sold during a given hour by this company,
a. both will be returned for a refund
b. neither will be returned for a refund
4.61 In a survey of adults, 40% hold the opinion that there will be 
another housing bubble in the next four to six years. Three adults are 
selected at random.
a. What is the probability that all three adults hold the opinion that 
there will be another housing bubble in the next four to six years?
b. What is the probability that none of the three adults hold the 
opinion that there will be another housing bubble in the next 
four to six years?
4.62 The probability that a student graduating from Suburban State 
University has student loans to pay off after graduation is .60. The prob-
ability that a student graduating from this university has student loans to 
pay off after graduation and is a male is .24. Find the conditional prob-
ability that a randomly selected student from this university is a male 
given that this student has student loans to pay off after graduation.
4.63 The probability that an employee at a company is a female is 
.36. The probability that an employee is a female and married is .19. 
Find the conditional probability that a randomly selected employee 
from this company is married given that she is a female.
4.64 Recent uncertain economic conditions have forced many peo-
ple to change their spending habits. In a recent telephone poll of 1000 
adults, 629 stated that they were cutting back on their daily spending. 
Suppose that 322 of the 629 people who stated that they were cutting 
back on their daily spending said that they were cutting back somewhat 
and 97 stated that they were cutting back somewhat and delaying the 
purchase of a new car by at least 6 months. If one of the 629 people who 
are cutting back on their spending is selected at random, what is the 
probability that he/she is delaying the purchase of a new car by at least 
6 months given that he/she is cutting back on spending somewhat?
4.65 Suppose that 20% of all adults in a small town live alone, and 
8% of the adults live alone and have at least one pet. What is the prob-
ability that a randomly selected adult from this town has at least one 
pet given that this adult lives alone?
This section discusses the union of events and the addition rule that is applied to compute the 
probability of the union of events.
4.5.1 Union of Events
Suppose one student is randomly selected from a statistics class. Consider the event that this 
student is a female or junior. Here, a female or junior means that this student is either a female or 
junior or both. This is called the union of events female and junior and is written as:
(  female or junior)
Thus, the union of two events A and B includes all outcomes that are either in A or in B or in both 
A and B.
4.5 Union of Events and the Addition Rule
Union of Events Let A and B be two events defined in a sample space. The union of events A 
and B is the collection of all outcomes that belong either to A or to B or to both A and B and is 
denoted by
(A or B)

4.5 Union of Events and the Addition Rule
157
 
The union of events A and B is also denoted by A ∪ B. Example 4–26 illustrates the union of 
events A and B.
EXAMPLE 4–26 
Gender and Hot Drinks
All 440 employees of a company were asked what hot drink they like the most. Their responses 
are listed in Table 4.9.
Illustrating the union of 
two events.
Table 4.9 Hot Drinks Employees Like
 
Regular Coffee 
Regular Tea 
Other 
Total
Male 
110 
 70 
110 
290
Female 
 60 
 50 
 40 
150
Total 
170 
120 
150 
440
Describe the union of events female and likes regular coffee.
Solution The union of events female and likes regular coffee includes those employees who 
are either female or like regular coffee or both. As we can observe from Table 4.9, there are a total 
of 150 females in these employees, and 170 of all employees like regular coffee. However, 60 
females are counted in each of these two numbers and, hence, are counted twice. To find the exact 
number of employees who are either female, or like regular coffee, or are both, we add 150 and 
170 and then subtract 60 from this sum to avoid double counting. Thus, the number of employees 
who are either female or like regular coffee or both is:
 
150 + 170 −60 = 260
These 260 employees give the union of events female and likes regular coffee, which is shown in 
Figure 4.14.
Females
Like
regular
coffee
Area shaded in red gives the
union of events female and likes
regular coffee, and includes
260 employees who are
either female or like
regular coffee or both.
Figure 4.14 Union of events female 
and likes regular coffee.
◼
4.5.2 Addition Rule for Mutually Nonexclusive Events
When two events are not mutually exclusive, which means that they can occur together, then the 
probability of the union of these events is given by the sum of their marginal probabilities minus 
their joint probability. We subtract the joint probability of the two events from the sum of their 
marginal probabilities due to the problem of double counting. For example, refer to Table 4.9 in 
Example 4–26. Suppose one employee is randomly selected from these 440 employees, and we 
want to find the probability of the union of events female and likes regular coffee. In other words, 
we are to find the probability P( female or regular coffee), which means that the selected employee 
is a female or likes regular coffee or both. If we add the number of females and the number of 
employees who like regular coffee, then the employees who are female and like regular coffee 
(which is 60 in Table 4.9) are counted twice, once in females and then in like regular coffee. To 
avoid this double counting, we subtract the joint probability of the two events from the sum of the 
Monkey Business Images/Shutterstock
www.ebook3000.com

158
Chapter 4 Probability
two marginal probabilities. This method of calculating the probability of the union of events is 
called the addition rule.
Addition Rule to Find the Probability of Union of Two Mutually Nonexclusive Events The prob-
ability of the union of two mutually nonexclusive events A and B is
P(A or B) = P(A) + P(B) −P(A and B)
 
Thus, to calculate the probability of the union of two events A and B, we add their mar-
ginal probabilities and subtract their joint probability from this sum. We must subtract the 
joint probability of A and B from the sum of their marginal probabilities to avoid double 
counting because of common outcomes in A and B. This is the case where events A and B are 
not mutually exclusive.
EXAMPLE 4–27 
Taking a Course in Ethics
A university president proposed that all students must take a course in ethics as a requirement for 
graduation. Three hundred faculty members and students from this university were asked about 
their opinions on this issue. Table 4.10 gives a two-way classification of the responses of these 
faculty members and students.
Calculating the probability 
of the union of two events: 
two-way table.
Table 4.10 Two-Way Classification of Responses
 
Favor 
Oppose 
Neutral 
Total
Faculty 
 45 
 15 
10 
 70
Student 
 90 
110 
30 
230
Total 
135 
125 
40 
300
Find the probability that if one person is selected at random from these 300 persons, this person 
is a faculty member or is in favor of this proposal.
Solution To find the probability of the union of events faculty and in favor, we will use the 
formula:
P(faculty or in favor) = P(faculty) + P(in favor) −P(faculty and in favor)
As we can observe from Table 4.10, there are a total of 70 faculty members and a total of 135 in 
favor of the proposal out of 300 total persons. Hence, the marginal probabilities of the events 
faculty and in favor are:
P(faculty) = 70
300 = .2333
P(in favor) = 135
300 = .4500
We also know from the table that there are a total of 45 faculty members who are in favor out of 
a total of 300 persons. (Note that these 45 faculty members are counted twice.) Hence, the joint 
probability of the two events faculty and in favor is:
P(  faculty and in favor) = 45
300 = .1500
The required probability is:
P(  faculty or in favor) = P(  faculty) + P(in favor) −P(  faculty and in favor)
   = .2333 + .4500 −.1500 = .5333

4.5 Union of Events and the Addition Rule
159
Thus, the probability that a randomly selected person from these 300 persons is a faculty member 
or is in favor of this proposal is .5333.
 
The probability in this example can also be calculated without using the addition rule. The total 
number of persons in Table 4.10 who are either faculty members or in favor of this proposal or both is
45 + 15 + 10 + 90 = 160
Hence, the required probability is
 
P(faculty or in favor) = 160∕300 = .5333 
◼
EXAMPLE 4–28 
Gender and Vegetarian
In a group of 2500 persons, 1400 are female, 600 are vegetarian, and 400 are female and vegetarian. 
What is the probability that a randomly selected person from this group is a male or vegetarian?
Solution From the given information, we know that there are a total of 2500 persons in the 
group, 1400 of them are female, 600 are vegetarian, and 400 are female and vegetarian. Using 
this information, we can write Table 4.11. In this table, the numbers in the shaded cells are given 
to us. The remaining numbers are calculated by doing some arithmetic manipulations.
Calculating the probability 
of the union of two events.
Table 4.11 Two-Way Classification Table
 
Vegetarian 
Nonvegetarian 
Total
Female 
400 
1000 
1400
Male 
200 
 900 
1100
Total 
600 
1900 
2500
We are to find the probability P(male or vegetarian). To find this probability, we will use the fol-
lowing addition rule formula:
P(male or vegetarian) = P(male) + P(vegetarian) −P(male and vegetarian)
We find the marginal probabilities of the two events and their joint probability as follows:
P(male) = 1100
2500 = .44
P(vegetarian) = 600
2500 = .24
P(male and vegetarian) = 200
2500 = .08
Thus, the required probability is:
P(male or vegetarian) = P(male) + P(vegetarian) −P(male and vegetarian)
  = .44 + .24 −.08 = .60
We can also calculate this probability as follows. From Table 4.11:
 
Total number of persons who are male or vegetarian or both = 1100 + 600 −200 = 1500
Hence, the probability of the union of events male and vegetarian is:
 
P(male or vegetarian) = 1500
2500 = .60 
◼
4.5.3 Addition Rule for Mutually Exclusive Events
We know from an earlier discussion that the joint probability of two mutually exclusive events is 
zero. When A and B are mutually exclusive events, the term P(A and B) in the addition rule 
www.ebook3000.com

160
Chapter 4 Probability
becomes zero and is dropped from the formula. Thus, the probability of the union of two mutually 
exclusive events is given by the sum of their marginal probabilities.
EXAMPLE 4–29 
Taking a Course in Ethics
Refer to Example 4–27. A university president proposed that all students must take a course in 
ethics as a requirement for graduation. Three hundred faculty members and students from this 
university were asked about their opinion on this issue. The following table, reproduced from 
Table 4.10 in Example 4–27, gives a two-way classification of the responses of these faculty 
members and students.
Calculating the probability of 
the union of two mutually 
exclusive events: two-way table.
 
Favor 
Oppose 
Neutral 
Total
Faculty 
 45 
 15 
10 
 70
Student 
 90 
110 
30 
230
Total 
135 
125 
40 
300
What is the probability that a randomly selected person from these 300 faculty members and 
students is in favor of the proposal or is neutral?
Solution As is obvious from the information given in the table, the events in favor and neutral 
are mutually exclusive, as they cannot happen together. Hence, their joint probability is zero. 
There are a total of 135 persons in favor and 40 neutral in 300 persons. The marginal probabilities 
of the events in favor and neutral are:
P(in favor) = 135
300 = .4500
P(neutral) = 40
300 = .1333
The probability of the union of events in favor and neutral is:
P(in favor or neutral) = .4500 + .1333 = .5833
Also, from the information given in the table, we observe that there are a total of 135 + 40 = 175 
persons who are in favor or neutral to this proposal. Hence, the required probability is:
 
P(in favor or neutral) = 175
300 = .5833 
◼
EXAMPLE 4–30 
Rolling a Die
Consider the experiment of rolling a die once. What is the probability that a number less than 3 
or a number greater than 4 is obtained?
Solution Here, the event a number less than 3 is obtained happens if either 1 or 2 is rolled on 
the die, and the event a number greater than 4 is obtained happens if either 5 or 6 is rolled on the 
die. Thus, these two events are mutually exclusive as they do not have any common outcome and 
Calculating the probability of 
the union of two mutually 
exclusive events.
Addition Rule to Find the Probability of the Union of Mutually Exclusive Events The probability 
of the union of two mutually exclusive events A and B is
P(A or B) = P(A) + P(B)

4.5 Union of Events and the Addition Rule
161
cannot happen together. Hence, their joint probability is zero. The marginal probabilities of these 
two events are:
P(a number less than 3 is obtained) = 2
6
P(a number greater than 4 is obtained) = 2
6
The probability of the union of these two events is:
 P(a number less than 3 is obtained or a number greater than 4 is obtained) = 2
6 + 2
6 = .6667 
EXERCISES
4.73 Two thousand randomly selected adults were asked whether or 
not they have ever shopped on the Internet. The following table gives 
a two-way classification of the responses.
Have Shopped
Have Never Shopped
Male
500
700
Female
300
500
Suppose one adult is selected at random from these 2000 adults. Find 
the following probabilities.
a. P(has never shopped on the Internet or is a female)
b. P(is a male or has shopped on the Internet)
c. P(has shopped on the Internet or has never shopped on the 
Internet)
4.74 Two thousand randomly selected adults were asked if they think 
they are financially better off than their parents. The following table 
gives the two-way classification of the responses based on the educa-
tion levels of the persons included in the survey and whether they are 
financially better off, the same as, or worse off than their parents.
Less Than 
High School
High 
School
More Than 
High School
Better off
140
450
420
Same
 60
250
110
Worse off
200
300
 70
Suppose one adult is selected at random from these 2000 adults. Find 
the following probabilities.
a. P(better off or high school)
b. P(more than high school or worse off)
c. P(better off or worse off)
4.75 There is an area of free (but illegal) parking near an inner-city 
sports arena. The probability that a car parked in this area will be 
ticketed by police is .35, that the car will be vandalized is .15, and that 
it will be ticketed and vandalized is .10. Find the probability that a car 
parked in this area will be ticketed or vandalized.
4.76 Jason and Lisa are planning an outdoor reception following 
their wedding. They estimate that the probability of bad weather is 
.25, that of a disruptive incident (a fight breaks out, the limousine is 
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
4.66 Explain the meaning of the union of two events. Give one 
example.
4.67 How is the addition rule of probability for two mutually exclu-
sive events different from the rule for two events that are not mutually 
exclusive?
4.68 Consider the following addition rule to find the probability of 
the union of two events A and B:
P(A or B) = P(A) + P(B) −P(A and B)
When and why is the term P(A and B) subtracted from the sum of 
P(A) and P(B)? Give one example where you might use this formula.
4.69 When is the following addition rule used to find the probability 
of the union of two events A and B?
P(A or B) = P(A) + P(B)
Give one example where you might use this formula.
4.70 Given that A and B are two mutually exclusive events, find P(A 
or B) for the following.
a. P(A) = .38 and P(B) = .59
b. P(A) = .15 and P(B) = .23
4.71 Given that A and B are two mutually exclusive events, find P(A 
or B) for the following.
a. P(A) = .71 and P(B) = .03
b. P(A) = .44 and P(B) = .38
APPLICATIONS
4.72 Six hundred adults were asked whether or not they watch for 
calories and fat content when they buy groceries. The following table 
gives the two-way classification of their responses, where yes means 
that an adult watches for calories and fat content and no means he/she 
does not watch.
Yes
No
No Opinion
Men
 74
168
58
Women
106
124
70
If one adult is randomly selected from these 600 adults, find the fol-
lowing probabilities.
a. P(man or no) b. P(yes or woman) c. P(no opinion or yes)
◼
www.ebook3000.com

162
Chapter 4 Probability
late, etc.) is .15, and that bad weather and a disruptive incident will 
occur is .08. Assuming these estimates are correct, find the probability 
that their reception will suffer bad weather or a disruptive incident.
4.77 The probability that a randomly selected elementary or second-
ary school teacher from a city is a female is .68, holds a second job is 
.38, and is a female and holds a second job is .29. Find the probability 
that an elementary or secondary school teacher selected at random 
from this city is a female or holds a second job.
4.78 According to a survey of 2000 home owners, 800 of them own 
homes with three bedrooms, and 600 of them own homes with four 
bedrooms. If one home owner is selected at random from these 2000 
home owners, find the probability that this home owner owns a home 
that has three or four bedrooms. Explain why this probability is not 
equal to 1.0.
4.79 According to the Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index Survey 
conducted January 2–December 20, 2014, 35.2% of the adults are 
overweight and 27.7% are obese. What is the probability that a 
randomly selected adult is overweight or obese? Explain why this 
probability is not 1.0.
4.80 Twenty percent of a town’s voters favor letting a major dis-
count store move into their neighborhood, 63% are against it, and 
17% are indifferent. What is the probability that a randomly selected 
voter from this town will either be against it or be indifferent? Explain 
why this probability is not equal to 1.0.
4.81 The probability that a corporation makes charitable contribu-
tions is .72. Two corporations are selected at random, and it is noted 
whether or not they make charitable contributions. Find the probabil-
ity that at most one corporation makes charitable contributions.
4.82 The probability that an open-heart operation is successful is 
.84. What is the probability that in two randomly selected open-heart 
operations at least one will be successful?
In this section, first we discuss the counting rule that helps us calculate the total number of 
outcomes for experiments, and then we learn about factorials, combinations, and permutations, 
respectively.
4.6.1 Counting Rule
The experiments dealt with so far in this chapter have had only a few outcomes, which were easy 
to list. However, for experiments with a large number of outcomes, it may not be easy to list all 
outcomes. In such cases, we may use the counting rule to find the total number of outcomes.
4.6  Counting Rule, Factorials, Combinations, and Permutations
Counting Rule to Find Total Outcomes If an experiment consists of three steps, and if the first 
step can result in m outcomes, the second step in n outcomes, and the third step in k outcomes, then
Total outcomes for the experiment = m · n · k
 
The counting rule can easily be extended to apply to an experiment that has fewer or more 
than three steps.
EXAMPLE 4–31 
Three Tosses of a Coin
Consider three tosses of a coin. How many total outcomes this experiment has?
Solution This experiment of tossing a coin three times has three steps: the first toss, the second 
toss, and the third toss. Each step has two outcomes: a head and a tail. Thus,
Total outcomes for three tosses of a coin = 2 × 2 × 2 = 8
The eight outcomes for this experiment are HHH, HHT, HTH, HTT, THH, THT, TTH, and TTT. ◼
Applying the counting 
rule: 3 steps.
EXAMPLE 4–32 
Taking a Car Loan
A prospective car buyer can choose between a fixed and a variable interest rate and can also 
choose a payment period of 36 months, 48 months, or 60 months. How many total outcomes are 
possible?
Applying the counting 
rule: 2 steps.

4.6 Counting Rule, Factorials, Combinations, and Permutations
163
Solution This experiment is made up of two steps: choosing an interest rate and selecting a loan 
payment period. There are two outcomes (a fixed or a variable interest rate) for the first step and three 
outcomes (a payment period of 36 months, 48 months, or 60 months) for the second step. Hence,
 
Total outcomes = 2 × 3 = 6 
◼
EXAMPLE 4–33 
Outcomes of a Football Game
A National Football League team will play 16 games during a regular season. Each game can 
result in one of three outcomes: a win, a loss, or a tie. How many total outcomes are possible?
Solution The total possible outcomes for 16 games are calculated as follows:
 Total outcomes = 3 ⋅3 ⋅3 ⋅3 ⋅3 ⋅3 ⋅3 ⋅3 ⋅3 ⋅3 ⋅3 ⋅3 ⋅3 ⋅3 ⋅3 ⋅3
 = 316 = 43,046,721
One of the 43,046,721 possible outcomes is all 16 wins. 
◼
Applying the counting rule: 
16 steps.
PhotoDisc, Inc./Getty Images
4.6.2 Factorials
The symbol ! (read as factorial) is used to denote factorials. The value of the factorial of a num-
ber is obtained by multiplying all the integers from that number to 1. For example, 7! is read as 
“seven factorial” and is evaluated by multiplying all the integers from 7 to 1.
Factorials The symbol n!, read as “n factorial,” represents the product of all the integers from 
n to 1. In other words,
n! = n(n −1)(n −2)(n −3) · · ·  3 · 2 · 1
By definition,
0! = 1
Note that some calculators use r! instead of n! on the factorial key.
Thus, the factorial of a number is given by the product of all integers from that number to 1.
EXAMPLE 4–34 
Factorial of a Number
Evaluate 7!.
Solution To evaluate 7!, we multiply all the integers from 7 to 1.
 
7! = 7 ⋅6 ⋅5 ⋅4 ⋅3 ⋅2 ⋅1 = 5040
Thus, the value of 7! is 5040. 
◼
Evaluating a factorial.
EXAMPLE 4–35 
Factorial of a Number
Evaluate 10!.
Solution The value of 10! is given by the product of all the integers from 10 to 1. Thus,
 
10! = 10 · 9 · 8 · 7 · 6 · 5 · 4 · 3 · 2 · 1 = 3,628,800 
◼
Evaluating a factorial.
EXAMPLE 4–36 
Factorial of the Difference of Two Numbers
Evaluate (12 − 4)!.
Solution The value of (12 − 4)! is
 
(12 −4)! = 8! = 8 ⋅7 ⋅6 ⋅5 ⋅4 ⋅3 ⋅2 ⋅1 = 40,320 
◼
Evaluating a factorial of the 
difference between two numbers.
www.ebook3000.com

164
Chapter 4 Probability
EXAMPLE 4–37 
Factorial of Zero
Evaluate (5 − 5)!.
Solution The value of (5 − 5)! is 1.
(5 −5)! = 0! = 1
Note that 0! is always equal to 1. 
◼
Evaluating a factorial of zero.
 
Statistical software and most calculators can be used to find the values of factorials. Check 
if your calculator can evaluate factorials.
4.6.3 Combinations
Quite often we face the problem of selecting a few elements from a group of distinct elements. 
For example, a student may be required to attempt any two questions out of four in an examina-
tion. As another example, the faculty in a department may need to select 3 professors from 20 to 
form a committee, or a lottery player may have to pick 6 numbers from 49. The question arises: 
In how many ways can we make the selections in each of these examples? For instance, how 
many possible selections exist for the student who is to choose any two questions out of four? The 
answer is six. Suppose the four questions are denoted by the numbers 1, 2, 3, and 4. Then the six 
selections are
(1 and 2) (1 and 3) (1 and 4) (2 and 3) (2 and 4) (3 and 4)
The student can choose questions 1 and 2, or 1 and 3, or 1 and 4, and so on. Note that in combina-
tions, all selections are made without replacement.
 
Each of the possible selections in the above list is called a combination. All six combina-
tions are distinct; that is, each combination contains a different set of questions. It is important to 
remember that the order in which the selections are made is not important in the case of combina-
tions. Thus, whether we write (1 and 2) or (2 and 1), both of these arrangements represent only 
one combination.
Combinations Notation Combinations give the number of ways x elements can be selected 
from n elements. The notation used to denote the total number of combinations is
nCx
which is read as “the number of combinations of n elements selected x at a time.”
Note that some calculators use r instead of x, so that the combinations notation then reads nCr .
 
Suppose there are a total of n elements from which we want to select x elements. Then,
           n denotes the total number of elements
nCx = the number of combinations of n elements selected x at a time
           x denotes the number of elements selected per selection
Number of Combinations The number of combinations for selecting x from n distinct 
elements is given by the formula
nCx =
n!
x!(n −x)!
where n!, x!, and (n −x)! are read as “n factorial,” “x factorial,” and “n minus x factorial,” 
respectively.

4.6 Counting Rule, Factorials, Combinations, and Permutations
165
In the combinations formula, n represents the total items and x is the number of items selected 
out of n. Note that in combinations, n is always greater than or equal to x. If n is less than x, then 
we cannot select x distinct elements from n.
EXAMPLE 4–38 
Choosing Ice Cream Flavors
An ice cream parlor has six flavors of ice cream. Kristen wants to buy two flavors of ice cream. 
If she randomly selects two flavors out of six, how many combinations are possible?
Solution For this example,
 n = total number of ice cream flavors = 6
 x = number of ice cream flavors to be selected = 2
Therefore, the number of ways in which Kristen can select two flavors of ice cream out of six is
6C2 =
6!
2!(6 −2)! =
6!
2! 4! = 6 · 5 · 4 · 3 · 2 · 1
2 · 1 · 4 · 3 · 2 · 1 = 15
Thus, there are 15 ways for Kristen to select two ice cream flavors out of six. 
◼
Finding the number of 
combinations using the formula.
EXAMPLE 4–39 
Selecting a Committee
Three members of a committee will be randomly selected from five people. How many different 
combinations are possible?
Solution There are a total of five persons, and we are to select three of them. Hence,
n = 5 and x = 3
Applying the combinations formula, we get
5C3 =
5!
3!(5 −3)! =
5!
3! 2! = 120
6 · 2 = 10
 
If we assume that the five persons are A, B, C, D, and E, then the 10 possible combinations 
for the selection of three members of the committee are
 
ABC ABD ABE ACD ACE ADE BCD BCE BDE CDE 
◼
Finding the number of 
combinations and listing them.
Note that the number of combinations of n items selecting x at a time gives the number of samples 
of size x that can be selected from a population with n members. For example, in Example 4–39, 
the population is made of five people, and we are to select a sample of three to form a committee. 
There are 10 possible samples of three people each that can be selected from this population of 
five people.
EXAMPLE 4–40 
Selecting Candidates for an Interview
Marv & Sons advertised to hire a financial analyst. The company has received applications from 
10 candidates who seem to be equally qualified. The company manager has decided to call only 
3 of these candidates for an interview. If she randomly selects 3 candidates from the 10, how 
many total selections are possible?
Solution The total number of ways to select 3 applicants from 10 is given by 10C3. Here, 
n = 10 and x = 3. We find the number of combinations as follows:
10C3 =
10!
3! (10 −3)! = 10!
3! 7! = 3,628,800
(6)(5040) = 120
 
Thus, the company manager can select 3 applicants from 10 in 120 ways. 
◼
Using the combinations formula.
Case Study 4–2 describes the probability of winning a Mega Million Lottery jackpot.
www.ebook3000.com

PROBABILITY OF 
WINNING A MEGA 
MILLIONS LOTTERY 
JACKPOT
CASE STUDY 4–2
Large jackpot lotteries became popular in the United State during the 1970s and 1980s. The introduction of 
the Powerball lottery in 1992 resulted in the growth of multi-jurisdictional lotteries, as well as the development 
of a second extensive multi-jurisdictional game called Mega Millions in 2002. Both of these games are offered 
in many states, the District of Columbia, and the U.S. Virgin Islands, which has resulted in multiple jackpots 
of more than $300 million.
 
Both games operate on a similar premise. There are two bins—one containing white balls, and one 
containing red (Powerball) or gold (Mega Millions) balls. When a player fills out a ticket, he or she selects five 
numbers from the set of white balls (1–69 for Powerball, 1–75 for Mega Millions) and one number from the set 
of red (1–26) or gold (1–15) balls, depending on the game. Prizes awarded to players are based on how many 
balls of each color are matched. If all five white ball numbers and the colored ball number are matched, the 
player wins the jackpot. If more than one player matches all of the numbers, then the jackpot is divided 
among them. The following table lists the various prizes for the Mega Millions lottery.
Number of 
white balls 
matched
Number of 
gold balls 
matched
Prize
Number of 
white balls 
matched
Number of 
gold balls 
matched
Prize
5
1
Jackpot
3
0
$5
5
0
$1,000,000
2
1
$5
4
1
$5,000
1
1
$2
4
0
$500
0
1
$1
3
1
$50
 
The probability of winning each of the various prizes listed in the table for the Mega Millions lottery can 
be calculated using combinations. To find the probability of winning the jackpot, first we need to calculate the 
number of ways to draw five white ball numbers from 75 and one gold ball number from 15. These combina-
tions are, respectively,
75C5 = 17,259,390  and  
15C1 = 15
To obtain the total number of ways to select six numbers (five white ball numbers and one gold ball number), 
we multiply the two numbers obtained above, which gives us 17,259,390 × 15 = 258,890,850. Thus, there 
are 258,890,850 different sets of five white ball numbers and one gold ball number that can be drawn. Then, 
the probability that a player with one ticket wins the jackpot is
P(winning the jackpot) = 1∕258,890,850 = .00000000386
To calculate the probability of winning each of the other prizes, we calculate the number of ways any prize 
can be won and divide it by 258,890,850. For example, to win a prize of $5,000, a player needs to match four 
white ball numbers and the gold ball number. As shown below, there are 350 ways to match four white ball 
numbers and one gold ball number.
5C4 × 70C1 × 1C1 × 14C0 = 5 × 70 × 1 × 1 = 350
 
Here 5C4 gives the number of ways to match four of the five winning white ball numbers, 70C1 gives the 
number of ways to match one of the 70 nonwinning white ball numbers, 1C1 gives the number of ways to 
match the winning gold ball number, and 14C0 gives the number of ways to match none of the 14 nonwinning 
gold ball numbers. Then, the probability of winning a prize of $5,000 is
P(winning a 5,000 prize) = 350∕258,890,850 = .00000135
We can calculate the probabilities of winning the other prizes listed in the table in the same way.
 
Statistical software and many calculators can be used to find combinations. Check to see 
whether your calculator can do so.
 
If the total number of elements and the number of elements to be selected are the same, then 
there is only one combination. In other words,
nCn = 1
Remember 
166

Permutations Notation Permutations give the total number of selections of x elements from n 
(different) elements in such a way that the order of selection is important. The notation used to 
denote the permutations is
n Px
which is read as “the number of permutations of selecting x elements from n elements.” 
Permutations are also called arrangements.
Number of Permutations The following formula is used to find the number of permutations or 
arrangements of selecting x items out of n items. Note that here, the n items must all be different.
n Px =
n!
(n −x)!
 
Example 4–41 shows how to apply this formula.
EXAMPLE 4–41 
Selecting Office Holders of a Club
A club has 20 members. They are to select three office holders—president, secretary, and treasurer—
for next year. They always select these office holders by drawing 3 names randomly from the names 
of all members. The first person selected becomes the president, the second is the secretary, and the 
third one takes over as treasurer. Thus, the order in which 3 names are selected from the 20 names is 
important. Find the total number of arrangements of 3 names from these 20.
Solution For this example,
 n = total members of the club = 20
x = number of names to be selected = 3
Finding the number of 
permutations using the formula.
4.6 Counting Rule, Factorials, Combinations, and Permutations
167
Also, the number of combinations for selecting zero items from n is 1; that is,
nC0 = 1
For example,
 5C5 =
5!
5!(5 −5)! =
5!
5! 0! =
120
(120)(1) = 1
 8C0 =
8!
0!(8 −0)! =
8!
0! 8! =
40,320
(1)(40,320) = 1
4.6.4 Permutations
The concept of permutations is very similar to that of combinations but with one major difference—
here the order of selection is important. Suppose there are three marbles in a jar—red, green, and 
purple—and we select two marbles from these three. When the order of selection is not important, 
as we know from the previous section, there are three ways (combinations) to do so. Those three 
ways are RG, RP, and GP, where R represents that a red marble is selected, G means a green marble 
is selected, and P indicates a purple marble is selected. In these three combinations, the order of 
selection is not important, and, thus, RG and GR represent the same selection. However, if the order 
of selection is important, then RG and GR are not the same selections, but they are two different 
selections. Similarly, RP and PR are two different selections, and GP and PG are two different 
selections. Thus, if the order in which the marbles are selected is important, then there are six selec-
tions—RG, GR, RP, PR, GP, and PG. These are called six permutations or arrangements.
www.ebook3000.com

168
Chapter 4 Probability
Since the order of selections is important, we find the number of permutations or arrangements 
using the following formula:
20P3 =
20!
(20 −3)! = 20!
17! = 6840
Thus, there are 6840 permutations or arrangements for selecting 3 names out of 20. 
◼
 
Statistical software and many calculators can find permutations. Check to see whether your 
calculator can do it.
EXERCISES
selection is important. How many arrangements are possible in this 
case?
4.89 An ice cream shop offers 25 flavors of ice cream. How many 
ways are there to select 2 different flavors from these 25 flavors? How 
many permutations are possible?
4.90 A veterinarian assigned to a racetrack has received a tip that 
one or more of the 12 horses in the third race have been doped. She 
has time to test only 3 horses. How many ways are there to randomly 
select 3 horses from these 12 horses? How many permutations are 
possible?
4.91 An investor will randomly select 6 stocks from 20 for an invest-
ment. How many total combinations are possible? If the order in 
which stocks are selected is important, how many permutations will 
there be?
4.92 A company employs a total of 16 workers. The management 
has asked these employees to select 2 workers who will negotiate a 
new contract with management. The employees have decided to select 
these 2 workers randomly. How many total selections are possible? 
Considering that the order of selection is important, find the number 
of permutations.
4.93 In how many ways can a sample (without replacement) of 
5 items be selected from a population of 15 items?
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
4.83 How many different outcomes are possible for four rolls 
of a die?
4.84 How many different outcomes are possible for 10 tosses of a 
coin?
4.85 Determine the value of each of the following using the appro-
priate formula.
6!    11!  (7 − 2)!  (15 − 5)!  
8C2
5C0  5C5  6C4    
11C7     9P6 
12P8
APPLICATIONS
4.86 A small ice cream shop has 10 flavors of ice cream and 
5 kinds of toppings for its sundaes. How many different selections of 
one flavor of ice cream and one kind of topping are possible?
4.87 A restaurant menu has four kinds of soups, eight kinds of main 
courses, five kinds of desserts, and six kinds of drinks. If a customer 
randomly selects one item from each of these four categories, how 
many different outcomes are possible?
4.88 A ski patrol unit has nine members available for duty, and two 
of them are to be sent to rescue an injured skier. In how many ways 
can two of these nine members be selected? Now suppose the order of 
USES AND MISUSES...
ODDS AND PROBABILITY
One of the first things we learn in probability is that the sum of the 
probabilities of all outcomes for an experiment must equal 1.0. We 
also learn about the probabilities that are developed from relative fre-
quencies and about subjective probabilities. In the latter case, many 
of the probabilities involve personal opinions of experts in the field. 
Still, both scenarios (probabilities obtained from relative frequencies 
and subjective probabilities) require that all probabilities must be non-
negative and the sum of the probabilities of all (simple) outcomes for 
an experiment must equal 1.0.
 
Although probabilities and probability models are all around us—
in weather prediction, medicine, financial markets, and so forth—they 
are most obvious in the world of gaming and gambling. Sports betting 
agencies publish odds of each team winning a specific game or 
championship. The following table gives the odds, as of June 12, 
2015, of each National Football League team winning Super Bowl 50 
to be held on February 7, 2016. These odds were obtained from the 
Web site www.vegas.com.
 
Note that the odds listed in this table are called the odds in favor 
of winning the Super Bowl. For example, the defending champion 
New England Patriots had 1:8 (which is read as 1 to 8) odds of win-
ning Super Bowl 50. If we switch the numbers around, we can state 
that the odds were 8:1 (or 8 to 1) against the Patriots winning Super 
Bowl 50.

Glossary
169
 
How do we convert these odds into probabilities? Let us 
consider the New England Patriots. Odds of 1:8 imply that out of 9 
chances, there is 1 chance that the Patriots would win Super Bowl 50 
and 8 chances that the Patriots would not win Super Bowl 50. Thus, 
the probability that the Patriots would win Super Bowl 50 is 
1
1 + 8 = 1
9 = .1111 and the probability that Patriots would not win 
Super Bowl 50 is 
8
1 + 8 = 8
9 = .8889. Similarly, for the Chicago 
Bears, 
the 
probability 
of 
winning 
Super 
Bowl 
50 
was 
1
1 + 55 = 1
56 = .0179 and the probability of not winning Super Bowl 
50 is  
55
1 + 55 = 55
56 = .9821. We can calculate these probabilities for 
all teams listed in the table by using this procedure.
 
Note that here the 32 outcomes (that each team would win 
Super Bowl 50) are mutually exclusive events because it is impossible 
for two or more teams to win the Super Bowl during the same year. 
Hence, if we add the probabilities of winning Super Bowl 50 for all 
teams, we should obtain a value of 1.0 according to the second prop-
erty of probability. However, if you calculate the probability of winning 
Super Bowl 50 for each of the 32 teams using the odds given in the 
table and then add all these probabilities, the sum is 1.588759461. 
So, what happened? Did these odds makers flunk their statistics and 
probability courses? Probably not.
 
Casinos and odds makers, who are in the business of making 
money, are interested in encouraging people to gamble. These prob-
abilities, which seem to violate the basic rule of probability theory, still 
obey the primary rule for the casinos, which is that, on average, a 
casino is going to make a profit.
Note: When casinos create odds for sports betting, they recognize 
that many people will bet on one of their favorite teams, such as the 
Dallas Cowboys or the Pittsburgh Steelers. To meet the rule that the 
sum of all of the probabilities is 1.0, the probabilities for the teams 
more likely to win would have to be lowered. Lowering a probability 
corresponds to lowering the odds. For example, if the odds for the 
New England Patriots had been lowered from 1:8 to 1:20, the prob-
ability for them to win would have decreased from .1111 to .0476. If 
the Patriots had remained as one of the favorites, many people 
would have bet on them. However, if they had won, the casino would 
have paid $20, instead of $8, for every $1 bet. The casinos do not 
want to do this and, hence, they ignore the probability rule in order 
to make more money. However, the casinos cannot do this with their 
traditional games, which are bound by the standard rules. From a 
mathematical standpoint, it is not acceptable to ignore the rule 
that the probabilities of all final outcomes for an experiment must 
add to 1.0. (The reader should check who won Super Bowl 50 on 
February 7, 2016.)
Team 
Odds 
Team 
Odds
Arizona Cardinals 
1:30 
Miami Dolphins 
1:40
Atlanta Falcons 
1:40 
Minnesota Vikings 
1:55
Baltimore Ravens 
1:25 
New York Giants 
1:32
Buffalo Bills 
1:40 
New York Jets 
1:50
Carolina Panthers 
1:40 
New England Patriots 
1:8
Chicago Bears 
1:55 
New Orleans Saints 
1:40
Cincinnati Bengals 
1:35 
Oakland Raiders 
1:100
Cleveland Browns 
1:100 
Philadelphia Eagles 
1:25
Dallas Cowboys 
1:12 
Pittsburgh Steelers 
1:30
Denver Broncos 
1:12 
San Diego Chargers 
1:45
Detroit Lions 
1:40 
San Francisco 49ers 
1:45
Green Bay Packers 
1:6.5 
Seattle Seahawks 
1:6
Houston Texans 
1:50 
St. Louis Rams 
1:40
Indianapolis Colts 
1:8.5 
Tampa Bay Buccaneers 
1:90
Jacksonville Jaguars 
1:50 
Tennessee Titans 
1:200
Kansas City Chiefs 
1:38 
Washington Redskins 
1:125
Complementary events Two events that taken together include all the 
outcomes for an experiment but do not contain any common outcome.
Compound event An event that contains more than one outcome of 
an experiment. It is also called a composite event.
Classical probability rule The method of assigning probabilities 
to outcomes or events of an experiment with equally likely outcomes.
Combinations The number of ways x elements can be selected 
from n elements. Here order of selection is not important.
Glossary
www.ebook3000.com

170
Chapter 4 Probability
Conditional probability The probability of an event subject to the 
condition that another event has already occurred.
Dependent events Two events for which the occurrence of one 
changes the probability of the occurrence of the other.
Equally likely outcomes Two (or more) outcomes or events that 
have the same probability of occurrence.
Event A collection of one or more outcomes of an experiment.
Experiment A process with well-defined outcomes that, when per-
formed, results in one and only one of the outcomes per repetition.
Factorial Denoted by the symbol !. The product of all the integers 
from a given number to 1. For example, n! (read as “n factorial”) 
represents the product of all the integers from n to 1.
Impossible event An event that cannot occur.
Independent events Two events for which the occurrence of one 
does not change the probability of the occurrence of the other.
Intersection of events The intersection of events is given by the 
outcomes that are common to two (or more) events.
Joint probability The probability that two (or more) events occur 
together.
Law of Large Numbers If an experiment is repeated again and 
again, the probability of an event obtained from the relative frequency 
approaches the actual or theoretical probability.
Marginal probability The probability of one event or characteristic 
without consideration of any other event.
Mutually exclusive events Two or more events that do not contain 
any common outcome and, hence, cannot occur together.
Outcome The result of the performance of an experiment.
Permutations Number of arrangements of x items selected from 
n items. Here order of selection is important.
Probability A numerical measure of the likelihood that a specific 
event will occur.
Relative frequency as an approximation of probability Probabil-
ity assigned to an event based on the results of an experiment or based 
on historical data.
Sample point An outcome of an experiment.
Sample space The collection of all sample points or outcomes of 
an experiment.
Simple event An event that contains one and only one outcome of 
an experiment. It is also called an elementary event.
Subjective probability The probability assigned to an event based 
on the information and judgment of a person.
Sure event An event that is certain to occur.
Tree diagram A diagram in which each outcome of an experiment 
is represented by a branch of a tree.
Union of two events Given by the outcomes that belong either to 
one or to both events.
 
Favors Capital  
Opposes Capital
 
Punishment 
Punishment
Male 
32 
24
Female 
13 
11
a. If one lawyer is randomly selected from this group, find the 
probability that this lawyer
 
i. favors capital punishment
 
ii. is a female
 
iii.  opposes capital punishment given that the lawyer is a 
female
 
iv. is a male given that he favors capital punishment
 
v. is a female and favors capital punishment
 
vi. opposes capital punishment or is a male
b. Are the events female and opposes capital punishment inde-
pendent? Are they mutually exclusive? Explain why or why not.
4.97 A random sample of 400 college students was asked if college 
athletes should be paid. The following table gives a two-way classifi-
cation of the responses.
 
Should Be Paid 
Should Not Be Paid
Student athlete 
 90 
10
Student nonathlete 
210 
90
a. If one student is randomly selected from these 400 students, 
find the probability that this student
4.94 A car rental agency currently has 44 cars available, 28 of which 
have a GPS navigation system. One of the 44 cars is selected at 
random. Find the probability that this car
a. has a GPS navigation system
b. does not have a GPS navigation system
4.95 A random sample of 250 adults was taken, and they were asked 
whether they prefer watching sports or opera on television. The fol-
lowing table gives the two-way classification of these adults.
 
Prefer Watching  
Prefer Watching
 
Sports 
Opera
Male 
96 
24
Female 
45 
85
a. If one adult is selected at random from this group, find the 
probability that this adult
 
i. prefers watching opera
 
ii. is a male
 
iii. prefers watching sports given that the adult is a female
 
iv. is a male given that he prefers watching sports
 
v. is a female and prefers watching opera
 
vi. prefers watching sports or is a male
b. Are the events female and prefers watching sports independent? 
Are they mutually exclusive? Explain why or why not.
4.96 A random sample of 80 lawyers was taken, and they were asked 
if they are in favor of or against capital punishment. The following 
table gives the two-way classification of their responses.
Supplementary Exercises

Advanced Exercises
171
 
i. is in favor of paying college athletes
 
ii.  favors paying college athletes given that the student 
selected is a nonathlete
 
iii. is an athlete and favors paying student athletes
 
iv. is a nonathlete or is against paying student athletes
b. Are the events student athlete and should be paid inde-
pendent? Are they mutually exclusive? Explain why or 
why not.
4.98 In a Gallup Annual Economy and Personal Finance poll, con-
ducted April 3–6, 2014, 21% of adults aged 18 to 29 said that college 
costs and loans were the biggest financial problem their families were 
dealing with. Suppose two adults aged 18 to 29 are selected. Find the 
following probabilities.
a. Both adults will say that college costs and loans are the biggest 
financial problem their families are dealing with.
b. Exactly one adult will say that college costs and loans are the 
biggest financial problem their families are dealing with.
4.99 A car rental agency currently has 44 cars available, 28 of which 
have a GPS navigating system. Two cars are selected at random from 
these 44 cars. Find the probability that both of these cars have GPS 
navigation systems.
4.100 A company has installed a generator to back up the power in 
case there is a power failure. The probability that there will be a power 
failure during a snowstorm is .30. The probability that the generator 
will stop working during a snowstorm is .09. What is the probability 
that during a snowstorm the company will lose both sources of power? 
Assume that the two sources of power are independent.
4.101 Terry & Sons makes bearings for autos. The production system 
involves two independent processing machines so that each bearing 
passes through these two processes. The probability that the first 
processing machine is not working properly at any time is .08, and the 
probability that the second machine is not working properly at any 
time is .06. Find the probability that both machines will not be work-
ing properly at any given time.
b. If a player’s first five numbers match the numbers on the five 
white balls drawn by the lottery organization, the player wins 
about $1,000,000. Find the probability that a player who buys 
one ticket will win this prize.
4.105 A box contains 10 red marbles and 10 green marbles.
a. Sampling at random from this box five times with replace-
ment, you have drawn a red marble all five times. What is the 
probability of drawing a red marble the sixth time?
b. Sampling at random from this box five times without replace-
ment, you have drawn a red marble all five times. Without 
replacing any of the marbles, what is the probability of draw-
ing a red marble the sixth time?
c. You have tossed a fair coin five times and have obtained heads 
all five times. A friend argues that according to the law of 
averages, a tail is due to occur and, hence, the probability of 
obtaining a head on the sixth toss is less than .50. Is he right? 
Is coin tossing mathematically equivalent to the procedure 
mentioned in part a or the procedure mentioned in part b 
above? Explain.
4.106 A thief has stolen Roger’s automatic teller machine (ATM) card. 
The card has a four-digit personal identification number (PIN). The 
thief knows that the first two digits are 3 and 5, but he does not know the 
last two digits. Thus, the PIN could be any number from 3500 to 3599. 
To protect the customer, the automatic teller machine will not allow 
more than three unsuccessful attempts to enter the PIN. After the third 
wrong PIN, the machine keeps the card and allows no further attempts.
a. What is the probability that the thief will find the correct PIN 
within three tries? (Assume that the thief will not try the same 
wrong PIN twice.)
b. If the thief knew that the first two digits were 3 and 5 and that 
the third digit was either 1 or 7, what is the probability of the 
thief guessing the correct PIN in three attempts?
4.107 Consider the following games with two dice.
a. A gambler is going to roll a die four times. If he rolls at least 
one 6, you must pay him $5. If he fails to roll a 6 in four tries, 
he will pay you $5. Find the probability that you must pay the 
gambler. Assume that there is no cheating.
4.102 A player plays a roulette game in a casino by betting on a 
single number each time. Because the wheel has 38 numbers, the 
probability that the player will win in a single play is 1∕38. Note that 
each play of the game is independent of all previous plays.
a. Find the probability that the player will win for the first time 
on the 10th play.
b. Find the probability that it takes the player more than 50 plays 
to win for the first time.
c. A gambler claims that because he has 1 chance in 38 of win-
ning each time he plays, he is certain to win at least once if he 
plays 38 times. Does this sound reasonable to you? Find the 
probability that he will win at least once in 38 plays.
4.103 A certain state’s auto license plates have three letters of the 
alphabet followed by a three-digit number.
a. How many different license plates are possible if all three-
letter sequences are permitted and any number from 000 to 
999 is allowed?
b. Arnold witnessed a hit-and-run accident. He knows that the 
first letter on the license plate of the offender’s car was a B, 
that the second letter was an O or a Q, and that the last 
number was a 5. How many of this state’s license plates fit 
this description?
4.104 Powerball is a game of chance that has generated intense inter-
est because of its large jackpots. To play this game, a player selects 
five different numbers from 1 through 69, and then picks a Powerball 
number from 1 through 26. The lottery organization randomly draws 
5 different white balls from 69 balls numbered 1 through 69, and then 
randomly picks a red Powerball number from 1 through 26. Note that 
it is possible for the Powerball number to be the same as one of the 
first five numbers.
a. If a player’s first five numbers match the numbers on the five 
white balls drawn by the lottery organization and the player’s 
red Powerball number matches the Powerball number drawn 
by the lottery organization, the player wins the jackpot. Find 
the probability that a player who buys one ticket will win the 
jackpot. (Note that the order in which the five white balls are 
drawn is unimportant.)
Advanced Exercises
www.ebook3000.com

172
Chapter 4 Probability
of ovens is purchased. (Note: In Chapter 5 you will learn another 
method to solve this problem.)
4.111 A production system has two production lines; each production 
line performs a two-part process, and each process is completed by a 
different machine. Thus, there are four machines, which we can iden-
tify as two first-level machines and two second-level machines. Each 
of the first-level machines works properly 98% of the time, and each 
of the second-level machines works properly 96% of the time. All 
four machines are independent in regard to working properly or 
breaking down. Two products enter this production system, one in 
each production line.
a. Find the probability that both products successfully complete 
the two-part process (i.e., all four machines are working 
properly).
b. Find the probability that neither product successfully com-
pletes the two-part process (i.e., at least one of the machines 
in each production line is not working properly).
4.112 A Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) key is a security code that 
one must enter in order to access a secure WiFi network. The charac-
ters in the key are used from the numbers 0 to 9 and letters from A to 
F, which gives 16 possibilities for each character of the key. Note that 
repeats are allowed, that is, the same letter or number can be used 
more than once in a key. A WEP key for a WiFi network with 64-bit 
security is 10 characters long.
a. How many different 64-bit WEP keys can be made by using 
the given numbers and letters?
b. A specific 64-bit network has a WEP key in which the 2nd, 
5th, 8th, and 9th characters are numbers and the other 6 char-
acters are letters. How many different WEP keys are possible 
for this network?
c. A hacker has determined that the WiFi network mentioned 
in part b will lock him out if he makes 20,000 unsuccessful 
attempts to break into the network. What is the probability 
that the hacker will be locked out of the network?
b. The same gambler offers to let you roll a pair of dice 24 
times. If you roll at least one double 6, he will pay you $10. 
If you fail to roll a double 6 in 24 tries, you will pay him $10. 
The gambler says that you have a better chance of winning 
because your probability of success on each of the 24 rolls is 
1∕36 and you have 24 chances. Thus, he says, your probabil-
ity of winning $10 is 24(1∕36) = 2∕3. Do you agree with 
this analysis? If so, indicate why. If not, point out the fallacy 
in his argument, and then find the correct probability that you 
will win.
4.108 A screening test for a certain disease is prone to giving false 
positives or false negatives. If a patient being tested has the disease, 
the probability that the test indicates a (false) negative is .13. If the 
patient does not have the disease, the probability that the test indicates 
a (false) positive is .10. Assume that 3% of the patients being tested 
actually have the disease. Suppose that one patient is chosen at random 
and tested. Find the probability that
a. this patient has the disease and tests positive
b. this patient does not have the disease and tests positive
c. this patient tests positive
d. this patient has the disease given that he or she tests positive
(Hint: A tree diagram may be helpful in part c.)
4.109 A pizza parlor has 12 different toppings available for its pizzas, 
and 2 of these toppings are pepperoni and anchovies. If a customer 
picks 2 toppings at random, find the probability that
a. neither topping is anchovies
b. pepperoni is one of the toppings
4.110 A restaurant chain is planning to purchase 100 ovens from a 
manufacturer, provided that these ovens pass a detailed inspection. 
Because of high inspection costs, 5 ovens are selected at random for 
inspection. These 100 ovens will be purchased if at most 1 of the 5 
selected ovens fails inspection. Suppose that there are 8 defective 
ovens in this batch of 100 ovens. Find the probability that this batch 
a. Classical probability 
b. Empirical probability
c. Subjective probability
6. 
Two mutually exclusive events
a. have the same probability
b. cannot occur together
c. have no effect on the occurrence of each other
7. 
Two independent events
a. have the same probability
b. cannot occur together
c. have no effect on the occurrence of each other
8. 
The probability of an event is always
a. less than 0 
b. in the range 0 to 1.0
c. greater than 1.0
9. 
The sum of the probabilities of all final outcomes of an experi-
ment is always
a. 100   b. 1.0   c. 0
1. 
The collection of all outcomes for an experiment is called
a. a sample space
b. the intersection of events
c. joint probability
2. 
A final outcome of an experiment is called
a. a compound event
b. a simple event
c. a complementary event
3. 
A compound event includes
a. all final outcomes
b. exactly two outcomes
c. more than one outcome for an experiment
4. 
Two equally likely events
a. have the same probability of occurrence
b. cannot occur together
c. have no effect on the occurrence of each other
5. 
Which of the following probability approaches can be applied 
only to experiments with equally likely outcomes?
Self-Review Test

Technology Instructions
173
10. The joint probability of two mutually exclusive events is always
a. 1.0   b. between 0 and 1   c. 0
11. Two independent events are
a. always mutually exclusive
b. never mutually exclusive
c. always complementary
12. A couple is planning their wedding reception. The bride’s 
parents have given them a choice of four reception facilities, three 
caterers, five DJs, and two limo services. If the couple randomly selects 
one reception facility, one caterer, one DJ, and one limo service, how 
many different outcomes are possible?
13. Lucia graduated this year with an accounting degree from a univer-
sity. She has received job offers from an accounting firm, an insur-
ance company, and an airline. She cannot decide which of the three job 
offers she should accept. Suppose she decides to randomly select one of 
these three job offers. Find the probability that the job offer selected is
a. from the insurance company
b. not from the accounting firm
14. There are 200 students in a particular graduate program at a state 
university. Of them, 110 are females and 125 are out-of-state students. 
Of the 110 females, 70 are out-of-state students.
a. Are the events female and out-of-state student independent? 
Are they mutually exclusive? Explain why or why not.
b. If one of these 200 students is selected at random, what is the 
probability that the student selected is
 
i. a male?
 
ii. an out-of-state student given that this student is a female?
15. Reconsider Problem 14. If one of these 200 students is selected 
at random, what is the probability that the selected student is a female 
or an out-of-state student?
16. Reconsider Problem 14. If two of these 200 students are selected at 
random, what is the probability that both of them are out-of-state students?
17. The probability that an adult has ever experienced a migraine 
headache is .35. If two adults are randomly selected, what is the 
probability that neither of them has ever experienced a migraine 
headache?
18. A hat contains five green, eight red, and seven blue marbles. Let 
A be the event that a red marble is drawn if we randomly select one 
marble out of this hat. What is the probability of A? What is the com-
plementary event of A, and what is its probability?
19. The probability that a randomly selected student from a college 
is a female is .55 and the probability that a student works for more 
than 10 hours per week is .62. If these two events are independent, 
find the probability that a randomly selected student is a
a. male and works for more than 10 hours per week
b. female or works for more than 10 hours per week
20. A sample was selected of 506 workers who currently receive two 
weeks of paid vacation per year. These workers were asked if they 
were willing to accept a small pay cut to get an additional week of 
paid vacation a year. The following table shows the responses of these 
workers.
 
Yes 
No 
No Response
Men 
 77 
140 
32
Women 
104 
119 
34
a. If one person is selected at random from these 506 workers, 
find the following probabilities.
 
i. P(yes)
 
ii. P(yes ∣ woman)
 
iii. P(woman and no)
 
iv. P(no response or man)
b. Are the events woman and yes independent? Are they mutu-
ally exclusive? Explain why or why not.
Note: The Mini-Projects are located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Mini-Projects
Note: The Decide for Yourself feature is located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Decide for Yourself
TI-84 Color/TI-84
CHAPTER 4
TECHNOLOGY 
INSTRUCTIONS
The TI-84 Color Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for the TI-84 Plus C 
color graphing calculator running the 4.0 operating system. Some screens, menus, and func-
tions will be slightly different in older operating systems. The TI-84 and TI-84 Plus can perform 
all of the same functions but will not have the “Color” option referenced in some of the menus.
Note: Complete TI-84, Minitab, and Excel manuals are available for download at the textbook’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
www.ebook3000.com

174
Chapter 4 Probability
Screen 4.1
Generating Random Numbers
To Generate Random Integers Uniformly Distributed between 1 and 50
1. Select MATH > PROB > randInt.
2. Use the following settings in the randInt menu:
• Type 1 at the lower prompt.
• Type 50 at the upper prompt.
• Type 10 at the n prompt. 
3. Highlight Paste and press ENTER twice. (See Screen 4.1.)
4. The output is 10 randomly chosen integers between 1 and 50. (See Screen 4.1.)
5. You may use any lower bound, upper bound, and number of integers.
6. To store these numbers in a list (see Screen 4.1):
• Press STO.
• Press 2nd > STAT and select the name of the list.
• Press ENTER twice.
Simulating Tosses of a Coin
Follow the instructions shown above, but generate random integers between 0 and 1. Assign 0 
to be a tail and 1 to be a head (you can switch these if you prefer). To simulate 500 tosses, type 
500 at the n prompt. To see a graph of the resulting distribution, store these values in a list and 
make a histogram of that list.
Simulating Tosses of a Die
Follow the instructions shown above, but generate random integers between 1 and 6. To 
simulate 500 tosses, type 500 at the n prompt. To see a graph of the resulting distribution, 
store these values in a list and make a histogram of that list.
Calculating 10! for Example 4–35 of the Text
1. Type 10.
2. Select MATH > PROB > !.
3. Press ENTER. (See Screen 4.2.)
Calculating 5C3 for Example 4–39 of the Text
1. Type 5.
2. Select MATH > PROB > nCr.
3. Type 3.
4. Press ENTER. (See Screen 4.2.)
Calculating 20P3 for Example 4–41 of the Text
1. Type 20.
2. Select MATH > PROB > nPr.
3. Type 3.
4. Press ENTER. (See Screen 4.2.)
Screen 4.2

Technology Instructions
175
Minitab
The Minitab Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Minitab version 17. Some 
screens, menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Minitab.
Generating Random Numbers
Generating 10 random Integers Uniformly Distributed between 1 and 50
1. Select Calc > Random Data > Integer.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Type 10 in the Number of rows of data to generate box.
• Type C1 in the Store in column(s) box.
• Type 1 in the Minimum value box.
• Type 50 in the Maximum value box.
3. Click OK. Minitab will list 10 random integers between 1 and 50 in column C1.
Simulating Tosses of a Coin
Follow the instructions shown above, but generate random integers between 0 and 1. Assign 0 
to be a tail and 1 to be a head (you can switch these if you prefer). To simulate 500 tosses, type 
500 in the Number of rows of data to generate box. To see a graph of the resulting distribution, 
store these values in C1 and make a histogram of C1.
Simulating Tosses of a Die
Follow the instructions shown above, but generate random integers between 1 and 6. To simu-
late 500 tosses, type 500 in the Number of rows of data to generate box. To see a graph of the 
resulting distribution, store these values in C1 and make a histogram of C1.
Calculating 10! for Example 4–35 of the Text
1. Select CALC > Calculator.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on 
screen (see Screen 4.3):
• In the Store result in variable box, type C1.
• In the Expression box, type factorial(10).
3. Click OK. Minitab will list the value of 10! in row 1 of 
column C1.
Calculating 5C3 for Example 4–39 of the Text
1. Select CALC > Calculator.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on 
screen (see Screen 4.4):
• In the Store result in variable box, type C1.
• In the Expression box, type combinations(5,3).
Screen 4.3
www.ebook3000.com

176
Chapter 4 Probability
3. Click OK. Minitab will list the value of 5C3 in row 1 of column C1.
Calculating 20P3 for Example 4–41 of the Text
1. Select CALC > Calculator.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• In the Store result in variable box, type C1.
• In the Expression box, type permutations(20,3).
3. Click OK. Minitab will list the value of 20P3 in row 1 of column C1.
Excel
The Excel Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Excel 2013. Some screens, 
menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Excel. To enable some of the 
advanced Excel functions, you must enable the Data Analysis Add-In for Excel.
Generating Random Numbers
Generating Random Integers Uniformly Distributed between 1 and 50
1. Click on cell A1.
2. Type =randbetween(1,50). (See Screen 4.5.)
3. Press ENTER.
4. A randomly chosen integer between 1 and 50 will appear in cell A1.
Screen 4.4

Technology Instructions
177
5. To generate more than one such random number, copy and paste the formula into as many 
cells as you require.
Simulating Tosses of a Coin
Follow the instructions shown above, but generate random integers between 0 and 1. Assign 0 
to be a tail and 1 to be a head (you can switch these if you prefer). To simulate 500 tosses, copy 
the formula to 500 cells. To see a graph of the resulting distribution, make a histogram of these 
500 values.
Simulating Tosses of a Die
Follow the instructions shown above, but generate random integers between 1 and 6. To simulate 
500 tosses, copy the formula to 500 cells. To see a graph of the resulting distribution, make a 
histogram of these values.
Calculating 10! for Example 4–35 of the Text
1. Click on cell A1.
2. Type =FACT(10).
3. Press ENTER.
Calculating 5C3 for Example 4–39 of the Text
1. Click on cell A1.
2. Type =COMBIN(5,3).
3. Press ENTER. (See Screen 4.6.)
Screen 4.5
Calculating 20P3 for Example 4–41 of the Text
1. Click on cell A1.
2. Type =PERMUT(20,3).
3. Press ENTER.
Screen 4.6
www.ebook3000.com

178
Chapter 4 Probability
a. Simulate births of 50 children by generating 50 random 
integers equal to 0 and 1. Make a histogram for the out-
comes of these 50 random numbers. Create a frequency 
table showing the simulated (actual) frequencies obtained 
and the expected (theoretical) frequencies for the two out-
comes. How many of these 50 children are boys and how 
many are girls in the simulated data?
b. Repeat part a, but simulate births of 500 children.
c. Repeat part a, but simulate births of 5000 children.
d. For which simulation of parts a to c were the simulated 
frequencies closest to the theoretical frequencies?
TA4.4 Using a technology of your choice, find 6!, 9!, and 15!.
TA4.5 Using a technology of your choice, find the number of combi-
nations of 16 items selecting 7 at a time.
TA4.6 Using a technology of your choice, find the number of ways 
to select 9 items out of 24.
TA4.7 Using a technology of your choice, find the number of samples 
of size 9 each that can be selected from a population of 36 cars.
TA4.8 Using a technology of your choice, find the number of permu-
tations of 16 items selecting 7 at a time.
TA4.9 Using a technology of your choice, find the number of permu-
tations of 24 items selecting 9 at a time.
TA4.1 You want to simulate the tossing of a coin. Assign a value of 
0 (zero) to Head and a value of 1 to Tail.
a. Simulate 50 tosses of the coin by generating 50 random integer 
numbers between 0 and 1. Then calculate the mean of these 
50 numbers. This mean gives you the proportion of 50 tosses 
that resulted in tails. Using this proportion, calculate the 
number of heads and tails you obtained in 50 simulated tosses. 
Prepare the frequency tables for the expected (theoretical) 
frequencies and for the actual frequencies you obtained.
b. Repeat part a by simulating 600 tosses.
c. Repeat part a by simulating 4000 tosses.
 
 Comment on the percentage of Tails obtained as the number of 
tosses is increased.
TA4.2 You want to simulate the rolling of a die. Assign the values 1 
through 6 to the outcomes from 1-spot through 6-spots on the die, 
respectively.
a. Simulate 200 rolls of the die by generating 200 random 
integer numbers between 1 and 6. Then make a histogram 
for these 200 numbers. Prepare the frequency tables for 
the expected (theoretical) frequencies and for the actual 
frequencies you obtained.
b. Repeat part a by simulating 1000 rolls of the die.
c. Repeat part a by simulating 6000 rolls of the die.
 
Comment on the histograms obtained in parts a through c.
TA4.3 Suppose each child born has equal chance of being a boy or a 
girl. Assign a value of 0 to boy and a value of 1 to girl.
TECHNOLOGY ASSIGNMENTS

179
179
CHAPTER5
Chapter 4 discussed the concepts and rules of probability. This chapter extends the concept of prob-
ability to explain probability distributions. As we saw in Chapter 4, any given statistical experiment 
has more than one outcome. It is impossible to predict with certainty which of the many possible 
outcomes will occur if an experiment is performed. Consequently, decisions are made under uncer-
tain conditions. For example, a lottery player does not know in advance whether or not he is going to 
win that lottery. If he knows that he is not going to win, he will definitely not play. It is the uncertainty 
about winning (some positive probability of winning) that makes him play. This chapter shows that if 
the outcomes and their probabilities for a statistical experiment are known, we can find out what will 
happen, on average, if that experiment is performed many times. For the lottery example, we can find 
out how much a lottery player can expect to win (or lose), on average, if he continues playing this 
lottery again and again.
In this chapter, random variables and types of random variables are explained. Then, the con-
cept of a probability distribution and its mean and standard deviation for a discrete random variable 
are discussed. Finally, three special probability distributions for a discrete random variable—the 
binomial probability distribution, the hypergeometric probability distribution, and the Poisson probability 
distribution—are developed.
© Michael Holahan/The Augusta Chronicle/Alamy Limited
5.1 Random Variables
5.2 Probability Distribution 
of a Discrete Random 
Variable
5.3 Mean and Standard 
Deviation of a Discrete 
Random Variable
Case Study 5–1 All State 
Lottery
5.4 The Binomial Probability 
Distribution
5.5 The Hypergeometric 
Probability Distribution
5.6 The Poisson Probability 
Distribution
Case Study 5–2 Global Birth 
and Death Rates
Discrete Random Variables and 
Their Probability Distributions
Now that you know a little about probability, do you feel lucky enough to play the lottery? If you have $20 
to spend on lunch today, are you willing to spend it all on four $5 lottery tickets to increase your chance 
of winning? Do you think you will profit, on average, if you continue buying lottery tickets over time? Can 
lottery players beat the state, on average? Not a chance! (See Case Study 5–1 for answers.)
www.ebook3000.com

180
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
Randomness plays an important part in our lives. Most things happen randomly. For example, 
consider the following events: winning a lottery, your car breaking down, getting sick, getting 
involved in an accident, losing a job, making money in the stock market, and so on. We cannot 
predict when, where, and to whom these things can or will happen. Who will win a lottery and 
when? Who will get sick and when? Where, when, and who will get involved in an accident? 
All these events are uncertain, and they happen randomly to people. In other words, there is no 
definite time, place, and person for these events to happen. Similarly, consider the following 
events: how many customers will visit a bank, a grocery store, or a gas station on a given day? 
How many cars will pass a bridge on a given day? How many students will be absent from a 
class on a given day? In all these examples, the number of customers, cars, and students are 
random; that is, each of these can assume any value within a certain interval.
 
Suppose Table 5.1 gives the frequency and relative frequency distributions of the number of 
vehicles owned by all 2000 families living in a small town.
Table 5.1  Frequency and Relative Frequency Distributions of the 
Number of Vehicles Owned by Families
Number of Vehicles Owned 
Frequency 
Relative Frequency
0
 30
 30∕2000 = .015
1
320
320∕2000 = .160
2
910
910∕2000 = .455
3
580
580∕2000 = .290
4
160
160∕2000 = .080
N = 2000
Sum = 1.000
 
Suppose one family is randomly selected from this population. The process of randomly 
selecting a family is called a random or chance experiment. Let x denote the number of vehicles 
owned by the selected family. Then x can assume any of the five possible values (0, 1, 2, 3, and 4) 
listed in the first column of Table 5.1. The value assumed by x depends on which family is selected. 
Thus, this value depends on the outcome of a random experiment. Consequently, x is called a 
random variable or a chance variable. In general, a random variable is denoted by x or y.
Random Variable A random variable is a variable whose value is determined by the outcome 
of a random experiment.
 
As will be explained next, a random variable can be discrete or continuous.
5.1.1 Discrete Random Variable
A discrete random variable assumes values that can be counted. In other words, the consecutive 
values of a discrete random variable are separated by a certain gap.
Discrete Random Variable A random variable that assumes countable values is called a discrete 
random variable.
 
In Table 5.1, the number of vehicles owned by a family is an example of a discrete random 
variable because the values of the random variable x are countable: 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4. Here are a 
few other examples of discrete random variables:
1. 
The number of cars sold at a dealership during a given month
2. 
The number of houses in a certain block
5.1 Random Variables

5.1 Random Variables
181
3. 
The number of fish caught on a fishing trip
4. 
The number of complaints received at the office of an airline on a given day
5. 
The number of customers who visit a bank during any given hour
6. 
The number of heads obtained in three tosses of a coin
5.1.2 Continuous Random Variable
A random variable whose values are not countable is called a continuous random variable. 
A continuous random variable can assume any value over an interval or intervals.
Continuous Random Variable A random variable that can assume any value contained in one 
or more intervals is called a continuous random variable.
 
Because the number of values contained in any interval is infinite, the possible number of 
values that a continuous random variable can assume is also infinite. Moreover, we cannot count 
these values. Consider the life of a battery. We can measure it as precisely as we want. For 
instance, the life of this battery may be 40 hours, or 40.25 hours, or 40.247 hours. Assume that 
the maximum life of a battery is 200 hours. Let x denote the life of a randomly selected battery 
of this kind. Then, x can assume any value in the interval 0 to 200. Consequently, x is a continu-
ous random variable. As shown in the diagram below, every point on the line representing the 
interval 0 to 200 gives a possible value of x.
0
200
Every point on this line represents a possible value of x that denotes the 
life of a battery. There is an infinite number of points on this line. The 
values represented by points on this line are uncountable.
 
The following are a few other examples of continuous random variables:
1. 
The length of a room
2. 
The time taken to commute from home to work
3. 
The amount of milk in a gallon (note that we do not expect “a gallon” to contain exactly one 
gallon of milk but either slightly more or slightly less than one gallon).
4. 
The weight of a letter
5. 
The price of a house
 
Note that money is often treated as a continuous random variable, specifically when there are 
a large number of unique values.
 
This chapter is limited to the discussion of discrete random variables and their probability 
distributions. Continuous random variables will be discussed in Chapter 6.
EXERCISES
e. The number of cars crossing a bridge on a given day
f. The time spent by a physician examining a patient
g. The number of books in a student’s bag
APPLICATIONS
5.3 In a group of households, the national news is watched on one 
of the following three networks—ABC, CBS, or NBC. On a certain 
day, five households from this group randomly and independently 
decide which of these channels to watch. Let x be the number of 
households among these five that decide to watch news on ABC. Is x 
a discrete or a continuous random variable? Explain. What are the 
possible values that x can assume?
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
5.1 Explain the meaning of a random variable, a discrete random 
variable, and a continuous random variable. Give one example each of 
a discrete random variable and a continuous random  variable.
5.2 Classify each of the following random variables as discrete or 
continuous.
a. The time left on a parking meter
b. The number of bats broken by a major league baseball team in 
a season
c. The number of cars in a parking lot at a given time
d. The price of a car
www.ebook3000.com

182
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
Let x be a discrete random variable. The probability distribution of x describes how the proba-
bilities are distributed over all the possible values of x.
Probability Distribution of a Discrete Random Variable The probability distribution of a 
discrete random variable lists all the possible values that the random variable can assume and 
their corresponding probabilities.
We learned in Chapter 4 about the classical and the relative frequency approaches to probability. 
Depending on the type of the statistical experiment, we can use one of these two approaches to 
write the probability distribution of a random variable. Example 5–1 uses the relative frequency 
approach to write the probability distribution.
EXAMPLE 5–1 
Number of Vehicles Owned by Families
Recall the frequency and relative frequency distributions of the number of vehicles owned by 
families given in Table 5.1. That table is reproduced here as Table 5.2. Let x be the number of 
vehicles owned by a randomly selected family. Write the probability distribution of x and make a 
histogram for this probability distribution.
Table 5.2  Frequency and Relative Frequency Distributions 
of the Number of Vehicles Owned by Families
Number of 
Vehicles Owned
 
Frequency
 
Relative 
Frequency
0
 30
.015
1
320
.160
2
910
.455
3
580
.290
4
160
.080
N = 2000
Sum = 1.000
Solution In Chapter 4, we learned that the relative frequencies obtained from an experiment 
or a sample can be used as approximate probabilities. However, when the relative frequencies 
represent the population, as in Table 5.2, they give the actual (theoretical) probabilities of out-
comes. Using the relative frequencies of Table 5.2, we can write the probability distribution of 
the discrete random variable x in Table 5.3. Note that the values of x listed in Table 5.3 are pair-
wise mutually exclusive events.
Table 5.3  Probability Distribution of the Number 
of Vehicles Owned by Families
Number of Vehicles Owned 
x
 
Probability 
P(x)
0
.015
1
.160
2
.455
3
.290
4
.080
∑P(x) = 1.000
Writing the probability distribution 
of a discrete random variable.
5.2 Probability Distribution of a Discrete Random Variable

5.2 Probability Distribution of a Discrete Random Variable
183
Using the probability distribution of Table 5.3, we make the histogram given in Figure 5.1. Such 
a histogram can show whether the probability distribution is symmetric or skewed, and if skewed 
then whether it is skewed to the left or right.
 
0.50
0.30
0.20
0.10
0
0.40
0
1
2
3
4
x
P(x)
Figure 5.1 Histogram for the probability 
distribution of Table 5.3.
 
◼
From the probability distribution listed in Table 5.3, we observe two characteristics:
1. 
Each probability listed in the P(x) column is in the range zero to 1.0.
2. 
The sum of all the probabilities listed in the P(x) column is 1.0.
These two characteristics are always true for a valid probability distribution. These two 
characteristics are the same that we discussed in Chapter 4, and can be written as in the 
following box.
Two Characteristics of a Probability Distribution The probability distribution of a discrete 
random variable possesses the following two characteristics.
1. 0 ≤ P(x) ≤ 1  for each value of x
2. ∑P(x) = 1
 
These two characteristics are also called the two conditions that a probability distribution 
must satisfy. Notice that in Table 5.3 each probability listed in the column labeled P(x) is between 
0 and 1. Also, ∑P(x) = 1.0. Because both conditions are satisfied, Table 5.3 represents the prob-
ability distribution of x.
 
Using the probability distribution listed in Table 5.3, we can find the probability of any out-
come or event. Example 5–2 illustrates this.
EXAMPLE 5–2 
Number of Vehicles Owned by Families
Using the probability distribution listed in Table 5.3 of Example 5–1, find the following probabilities:
(a) The probability that a randomly selected family owns two vehicles
(b) The probability that a randomly selected family owns at least two vehicles
(c) The probability that a randomly selected family owns at most one vehicle
(d) The probability that a randomly selected family owns three or more vehicles
Solution Using the probabilities listed in Table 5.3, we find the required probabilities as follows.
(a) P(selected family owns two vehicles) =  P(2) = .455
(b) P(selected family owns at least two vehicles) = P(2 or 3 or 4) = P(2) + P(3) + P(4)
 
= .455 + .290 + .080 = .825
Finding probabilities of events 
using Table 5.3.
www.ebook3000.com

184
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
(c) P(selected family owns at most one vehicle) = P(0 or 1) = P(0) + P(1)
 
= .015 + .160 = .175
(d) P(selected family owns three or more vehicles) = P(3 or 4) = P(3) + P(4)
 
= .290 + .080 = .370  
◼
EXAMPLE 5–3
Each of the following tables lists certain values of x and their probabilities. Determine whether 
or not each table represents a valid probability distribution.
(a) x
P(x)
0
.08
1
.11
2
.39
3
.27
 
(b) x
P(x)
2
.25
3
.34
4
.28
5
.13
 
(c) x
P(x)
7
.70
8
.50
9
−.20
Solution
(a) Because each probability listed in this table is in the range 0 to 1, it satisfies the first condi-
tion of a probability distribution. However, the sum of all probabilities is not equal to 1.0 
because ∑P(x) = .08 + .11 + .39 + .27 = .85. Therefore, the second condition is not satis-
fied. Consequently, this table does not represent a valid probability distribution.
(b) Each probability listed in this table is in the range 0 to 1. Also, ∑P(x) = .25 + .34 + 
.28 + .13 = 1.0. Consequently, this table represents a valid probability distribution.
(c) Although the sum of all probabilities listed in this table is equal to 1.0, one of the 
probabilities is negative. This violates the first condition of a probability distribution. 
Therefore, this table does not represent a valid probability distribution. 
◼ 
EXAMPLE 5–4 
Number of Breakdowns for a Machine
The following table lists the probability distribution of the number of breakdowns per week for a 
machine based on past data.
Breakdowns per week
0
1
2
3
Probability
.15
.20
.35
.30
Find the probability that the number of breakdowns for this machine during a given week is
(a) exactly 2 
(b) 0 to 2
(c) more than 1 
(d) at most 1
Solution Let x denote the number of breakdowns for this machine during a given week. 
Table 5.4 lists the probability distribution of x.
Table 5.4  Probability Distribution of the Number 
of Breakdowns
x  
P(x)
0
.15
1
.20
2
.35
3
.30
∑P(x) = 1.00
Using Table 5.4, we can calculate the required probabilities as follows.
(a) The probability of exactly two breakdowns is
P(exactly 2 breakdowns) = P(x = 2) = P(2) = .35
Verifying the conditions of a 
probability distribution.
Finding the probabilities of events 
for a discrete random variable.

5.2 Probability Distribution of a Discrete Random Variable
185
(b) The probability of 0 to 2 breakdowns is given by the sum of the probabilities of 0, 1, and 
2 breakdowns:
 P(0 to 2 breakdowns) = P(0 ≤x ≤2) = P(0 or 1 or 2)
 = P(0) + P(1) + P(2)
 = .15 + .20 + .35 = .70
(c) The probability of more than 1 breakdown is obtained by adding the probabilities of 
2 and 3 breakdowns:
 P(more than 1 breakdown) = P(x > 1) = P(2 or 3)
 = P(2) + P(3)
 = .35 + .30 = .65
(d) The probability of at most 1 breakdown is given by the sum of the probabilities of 0 
and 1 breakdown:
 
 P(at most 1 breakdown) = P(x ≤1) = P(0 or 1)
 
 = P(0) + P(1)
 
 = .15 + .20 = .35
 
◼
EXAMPLE 5–5 
Students Suffering from Math Anxiety
According to a survey, 60% of all students at a large university suffer from math anxiety. Two 
students are randomly selected from this university. Let x denote the number of students in this 
sample who suffer from math anxiety. Construct the probability distribution of x.
Solution Let us define the following two events:
 N = the student selected does not suffer from math anxiety
 M = the student selected suffers from math anxiety
 
As we can observe from the tree diagram of Figure 5.2, there are four possible outcomes for 
this experiment: NN (neither of the students suffers from math anxiety), NM (the first student 
does not suffer from math anxiety and the second does), MN (the first student suffers from math 
anxiety and the second does not), and MM (both students suffer from math anxiety). The proba-
bilities of these four outcomes are listed in the tree diagram. Because 60% of the students suffer 
from math anxiety and 40% do not, the probability is .60 that any student selected suffers from 
math anxiety and .40 that he or she does not.
Constructing a probability 
distribution.
Figure 5.2 Tree diagram.
P(NN) = (.40) (.40) = .16
P(NM) = (.40) (.60) = .24
First student
Second student
Final outcomes and
their probabilities
.40
.40
.60
N
N
.60
M
M
.40
.60
M
N
P(MN) = (.60) (.40) = .24
P(MM) = (.60) (.60) = .36
www.ebook3000.com

186
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
 
In a sample of two students, the number who suffer from math anxiety can be 0 (given by 
NN), 1 (given by NM or MN), or 2 (given by MM). Thus, x can assume any of three possible 
values: 0, 1, or 2. The probabilities of these three outcomes are calculated as follows:
 P(0) = P(NN) = .16
 P(1) = P(NM or MN) = P(NM) + P(MN) = .24 + .24 = .48
 P(2) = P(MM) = .36
Using these probabilities, we can write the probability distribution of x as in Table 5.5.
 
Table 5.5  Probability Distribution of the Number 
of Students with Math Anxiety
x  
P(x)
0
.16
1
.48
2
.36
∑P(x) = 1.00 
◼
EXERCISES
Patients 
per hour
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Probability
.2725
.3543
.2303
.0998
.0324
.0084
.0023
a. Make a histogram for this probability distribution.
b. Determine the probability that the number of patients enter-
ing the emergency room during a randomly selected 1-hour 
period is
i. 2 or more ii. exactly 5 iii. fewer than 3 iv. at most 1
5.9 One of the most profitable items at A1’s Auto Security Shop is 
the remote starting system. Let x be the number of such systems 
installed on a given day at this shop. The following table lists the fre-
quency distribution of x for the past 80 days.
x
1
2
3
4
5
f
8
20
24
16
12
a. Construct a probability distribution table for the number of 
remote starting systems installed on a given day.
b. Are the probabilities listed in the table of part a exact or 
approximate probabilities of various outcomes? Explain.
c. Find the following probabilities.
i. P(3) ii. P(x ≥ 3) iii. P(2 ≤ x ≤ 4) iv. P(x < 4)
5.10 Five percent of all cars manufactured at a large auto company 
are lemons. Suppose two cars are selected at random from the produc-
tion line of this company. Let x denote the number of lemons in this 
sample. Write the probability distribution of x. Draw a tree diagram 
for this problem.
5.11 According to a survey, 14% of motorists in a large city are 
uninsured. Suppose that currently 14% of all motorists in this city are 
uninsured. Two motorists are selected at random from this city. Let x 
denote the number of motorists in this sample of two who are unin-
sured. Construct the probability distribution table of x. Draw a tree 
diagram for this problem.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
5.4 Explain the meaning of the probability distribution of a discrete 
random variable. Give one example of such a probability distribution.
5.5 Briefly explain the two characteristics (conditions) of the prob-
ability distribution of a discrete random variable.
5.6 Each of the following tables lists certain values of x and their 
probabilities. Verify whether or not each represents a valid probability 
distribution and explain why.
a. x
P(x)
0
.10
1
.05
2
.45
3
.40
  
b. x
P(x)
2
.35
3
.28
4
.20
5
.14
  
c. x
P(x)
7
 −.25
8
 
.85
9
 
.40
5.7 The following table gives the probability distribution of a discrete 
random variable x.
x
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
P(x)
.11
.19
.28
.15
.12
.09
.06
 Find the following probabilities.
a. P(3)  b. P(x ≤ 2)  c. P(x ≥ 4)  d. P(1 ≤ x ≤ 4)
e. Probability that x assumes a value less than 4
f. Probability that x assumes a value greater than 2
g. Probability that x assumes a value in the interval 2 to 5
APPLICATIONS
5.8 A review of emergency room records at rural Millard Fellmore 
Memorial Hospital was performed to determine the probability distri-
bution of the number of patients entering the emergency room during 
a 1-hour period. The following table lists this probability distribution.

5.3 Mean and Standard Deviation of a Discrete Random Variable
187
5.12 According to a survey, 30% of adults are against using animals 
for research. Assume that this result holds true for the current popula-
tion of all adults. Let x be the number of adults who are against using 
animals for research in a random sample of two adults. Obtain the 
probability distribution of x. Draw a tree diagram for this problem.
5.13 According to a survey, 35% of employees working at a very 
large company are happy with their jobs. Suppose that two employees 
are selected at random from this company. Let x denote the number 
of employees in this sample of two who are happy with their jobs. 
Construct the probability distribution table of x. Draw a tree diagram 
for this problem.
*5.14 In a group of 12 persons, 3 are left-handed. Suppose that 
2 persons are randomly selected from this group. Let x denote the 
number of left-handed persons in this sample. Write the probability 
distribution of x. You may draw a tree diagram and use it to write the 
probability distribution. (Hint: Note that the selections are made with-
out replacement from a small population. Hence, the probabilities of 
outcomes do not remain constant for each selection.)
In this section, we will learn how to calculate the mean and standard deviation of a discrete 
random variable and how to interpret them.
5.3.1 Mean of a Discrete Random Variable
The mean of a discrete random variable, denoted by μ, is actually the mean of its probability 
distribution. The mean of a discrete random variable x is also called its expected value and is 
denoted by E(x). The mean (or expected value) of a discrete random variable is the value that we 
expect to observe per repetition, on average, if we perform an experiment a large number of 
times. For example, we may expect a car salesperson to sell, on average, 2.4 cars per week. This 
does not mean that every week this salesperson will sell exactly 2.4 cars. (Obviously one cannot 
sell exactly 2.4 cars.) This simply means that if we observe for many weeks, this salesperson will 
sell a different number of cars during different weeks; however, the average for all these weeks 
will be 2.4 cars per week.
 
To calculate the mean of a discrete random variable x, we multiply each value of x by the 
corresponding probability and sum the resulting products. This sum gives the mean (or expected 
value) of the discrete random variable x.
Mean of a Discrete Random Variable The mean of a discrete random variable x is the value 
that is expected to occur per repetition, on average, if an experiment is repeated a large number 
of times. It is denoted by μ and calculated as
μ = ∑xP(x)
The mean of a discrete random variable x is also called its expected value and is denoted by E(x); 
that is,
E(x) =∑xP(x)
 
Example 5–6 illustrates the calculation of the mean of a discrete random variable.
EXAMPLE 5–6 
Machine Breakdowns per Week
The following table lists the number of breakdowns per week and their probabilities for a machine 
based on past data.
Breakdowns
Probability
0
.15
1
.20
2
.35
3
.30
Find the mean number of breakdowns per week for this machine.
Calculating and interpreting 
the mean of a discrete random 
variable.
5.3 Mean and Standard Deviation of a Discrete Random Variable
www.ebook3000.com

188
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
Solution Let x represent the number of breakdowns per week and P(x) be the probability of x 
breakdowns. To find the mean number of breakdowns per week for this machine, we multiply 
each value of x by its probability and add these products. This sum gives the mean of the proba-
bility distribution of x. The products xP(x) are listed in the third column of Table 5.6. The sum of 
these products gives ∑xP(x), which is the mean of x.
Table 5.6  Calculating the Mean for the Probability 
Distribution of Breakdowns
x
 
P(x) 
xP(x)
0
.15
0(.15) = .00
1
.20
1(.20) = .20
2
.35
2(.35) = .70
3
 
.30
3(.30) = .90
∑xP(x) = 1.80
The mean is
μ = ∑xP(x) = 1.80
Thus, on average, this machine is expected to break down 1.80 times per week over a period of 
time. In other words, if this machine is used for many weeks, then for certain weeks we will 
observe no breakdowns; for some other weeks we will observe one breakdown per week; and for 
still other weeks we will observe two or three breakdowns per week. The mean number of break-
downs is expected to be 1.80 per week for the entire period.
 
Note that μ = 1.80 is also the expected value of x. It can also be written as
E(x) = 1.80
Again, this expected value of x means that we will expect an average of 1.80 breakdowns per 
week for this machine. 
◼ 
 
Case Study 5–1 illustrates the calculation of the mean amount that an instant lottery player 
is expected to win.
5.3.2 Standard Deviation of a Discrete Random Variable
The standard deviation of a discrete random variable, denoted by σ, measures the spread of 
its probability distribution. A higher value for the standard deviation of a discrete random varia-
ble indicates that x can assume values over a larger range about the mean. In contrast, a smaller 
value for the standard deviation indicates that most of the values that x can assume are clustered 
closely about the mean. The basic formula to compute the standard deviation of a discrete random 
variable is
 
σ = √∑[(x −μ)2 · P(x)]
 
However, it is more convenient to use the following shortcut formula to compute the standard 
deviation of a discrete random variable.
Standard Deviation of a Discrete Random Variable The standard deviation of a discrete 
random variable x measures the spread of its probability distribution and is computed as
σ = √∑ x2P(x) −μ2

 x (dollars) 
P(x) 
x P(x)
 
−5 
18,000,000/20,000,000 = .9000000 
−4.5000000
 
5 
1,620,000/20,000,000 = .0810000 
.4050000
 
15 
364,000/20,000,000 = .0182000 
.2730000
 
45 
10,000/20,000,000 = .0005000 
.0225000
 
95 
5000/20,000,000 = .0002500 
.0237500
 
995 
730/20,000,000 = .0000365 
.0363175
 
9995 
200/20,000,000 = .0000100 
.0999500
 499,995 
70/20,000,000 = .0000035 
1.7499825
 
∑xP(x) = −1.8895000
ALL STATE 
LOTTERY
CASE STUDY 5–1
A hypothetical country has an instant lottery game called All State Lottery. The cost of each ticket for this 
lottery game is $5. A player can instantly win $500,000, $10,000, $1000, $100, $50, $20, and $10. Each ticket 
has seven spots that are covered by latex coating. The top one of these spots, labeled Prize, contains the 
winning prize. The remaining six spots labeled Player’s Spots belong to the player. A player will win if any of 
the Player’s Spots contains the prize amount that matches the winning prize in the top spot. If none of the six 
spots contains a dollar amount that matches the winning prize, the player loses.
 
Initially a total of 20,000,000 tickets are printed for this lottery. The following table lists the prizes and the 
number of tickets with those prizes. As is obvious from this table, out of a total of 20,000,000 tickets, 18,000,000 
are non-winning tickets (the ones with a prize of $0 in this table). Of the remaining 2,000,000 tickets with prizes, 
1,620,000 tickets have a prize of $10 each, 364,000 tickets contain a prize of $20 each, and so forth.
Prize (dollars)
Number of Tickets
 
0
 
18,000,000
 
10
 
1,620,000
 
20
 
364,000
 
50
 
10,000
 
100
 
5000
 
1000
 
730
 
10,000
 
200
 
500,000
 
70
Total = 20,000,000
 
The net amount a player wins for each of the winning tickets is equal to the amount of the prize minus $5, 
which is the cost of the ticket. Thus, the net gain for each of the non-winning tickets is −$5, which is the cost 
of the ticket. Let
x = the net amount a player wins by playing this lottery game
 
The following table shows the probability distribution of x, and all the calculations required to compute 
the mean of x for this probability distribution. The probability of an outcome (net winnings) is calculated by 
dividing the number of tickets with that outcome (prize) by the total number of tickets.
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
PLAYER’S SPOTS
$
PLAYER’S SPOTS
PLAYER’S SPOTS
$
Win up to
$500,000!
Win up to
$500,000!
Be an instant winner!
Be an instant winner!
$
t
p
W
$
o
0!
0!
o
p
up
up toto
up
up
up toto
W
ototototototototototo
0!
0!
0!!
189
www.ebook3000.com

 
Note that the variance σ2 of a discrete random variable is obtained by squaring its standard 
deviation.
 
Example 5–7 illustrates how to use the shortcut formula to compute the standard deviation 
of a discrete random variable.
EXAMPLE 5–7 
Defective Computer Parts
Baier’s Electronics manufactures computer parts that are supplied to many computer companies. 
Despite the fact that two quality control inspectors at Baier’s Electronics check every part for 
defects before it is shipped to another company, a few defective parts do pass through these 
inspections undetected. Let x denote the number of defective computer parts in a shipment of 
400. The following table gives the probability distribution of x.
x
0
1
2
3
4
5
P(x)
.02
.20
.30
.30
.10
.08
Compute the standard deviation of x.
Solution Table 5.7 shows all the calculations required for the computation of the standard 
deviation of x.
Table 5.7 Computations to Find the Standard Deviation
x  
P(x) 
xP(x)
 
x2 
x2P(x)
0
.02
.00
0
 .00
1
.20
.20
1
 .20
2
.30
.60
4
1.20
3
.30
.90
9
2.70
4
.10
.40
16
1.60
5
.08
.40
25
2.00
∑xP(x) = 2.50
∑x2P(x) = 7.70
 
We perform the steps listed next to compute the standard deviation of x.
Calculating the standard deviation 
of a discrete random variable.
Corbis Digital Stock
Hence, the mean or expected value of x is
μ = ∑xP(x) = −$1.8895000 ≈−$1.89
This value of the mean gives the expected value of the random variable x, that is,
E(x) = ∑xP(x) = −$1.89
Thus, the mean of net winnings for this lottery game is −$1.89. In other words, all players taken together will 
lose an average of $1.89 per ticket. That is, out of every $5 (the price of a ticket), $3.11 will be returned to 
players in the form of prizes and $1.89 will go to the government, which will cover the costs of operating the 
lottery, the commission paid to agents, and profit to the government. Note that $1.89 is 37.8% of $5. Thus, 
we can also state that 37.8% of the total money spent by players on this lottery game will go to the government 
and 100 − 37.8 = 62.2% will be returned to the players in the form of prizes.
190

5.3 Mean and Standard Deviation of a Discrete Random Variable
191
Step 1. Compute the mean of the discrete random variable.
 
The sum of the products xP(x), recorded in the third column of Table 5.7, gives the 
mean of x.
μ = ∑xP(x) = 2.50 defective computer parts in 400
Step 2. Compute the value of ∑x2P(x).
 
First we square each value of x and record it in the fourth column of Table 5.7. Then we 
multiply these values of x2 by the corresponding values of P(x). The resulting values of x2P(x) are 
recorded in the fifth column of Table 5.7. The sum of this column is
∑x2P(x) = 7.70
Step 3. Substitute the values of μ and ∑x2P(x) in the formula for the standard deviation of 
x and simplify.
 
By performing this step, we obtain
 σ = √∑x 2P(x) −μ2 = √7.70 −(2.50)2 = √1.45
 = 1.204 defective computer parts
 
Thus, a given shipment of 400 computer parts is expected to contain an average of 2.50 
defective parts with a standard deviation of 1.204 defective parts. 
◼ 
Because the standard deviation of a discrete random variable is obtained by taking the positive 
square root, its value is never negative.
EXAMPLE 5–8 
Profits from New Makeup Product
Loraine Corporation is planning to market a new makeup product. According to the analysis 
made by the financial department of the company, it will earn an annual profit of $4.5 million if 
this product has high sales, it will earn an annual profit of $1.2 million if the sales are mediocre, 
and it will lose $2.3 million a year if the sales are low. The probabilities of these three scenarios 
are .32, .51, and .17, respectively.
(a) Let x be the profits (in millions of dollars) earned per annum from this product by the 
company. Write the probability distribution of x.
(b) Calculate the mean and standard deviation of x.
Solution
(a) The table below lists the probability distribution of x. Note that because x denotes profits 
earned by the company, the loss is written as a negative profit in the table.
x  
P(x)
4.5
.32
1.2
.51
−2.3
.17
(b) Table 5.8 shows all the calculations that are required for the computation of the mean 
and standard deviation of x.
Table 5.8 Computations to Find the Mean and Standard Deviation
x
 
P(x)
 
xP(x)
 
x2
 
x2P(x)
4.5
.32
1.440
20.25
6.4800
1.2
.51
.612
1.44
 .7344
−2.3
.17
−.391
5.29
 .8993
∑xP(x) = 1.661
∑x2P(x) = 8.1137
 Remember
Writing the probability distribution 
of a discrete random variable.
Calculating the mean and 
standard deviation of a discrete
random variable.
www.ebook3000.com

192
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
 
The mean of x is
μ = ∑xP(x) = $1.661 million
 
The standard deviation of x is
σ = √∑x2P(x) −μ2 = √8.1137 −(1.661)2 = $2.314 million
Thus, it is expected that Loraine Corporation will earn an average of $1.661 million in profits per 
year from the new product, with a standard deviation of $2.314 million. 
◼ 
Interpretation of the Standard Deviation
The standard deviation of a discrete random variable can be interpreted or used the same way as 
the standard deviation of a data set in Section 3.4 of Chapter 3. In that section, we learned that 
according to Chebyshev’s theorem, at least [1 − (1∕k2)] × 100% of the total area under a curve 
lies within k standard deviations of the mean, where k is any number greater than 1. Thus, if k = 2, 
then at least 75% of the area under a curve lies between μ − 2σ and μ + 2σ. In Example 5–7,
μ = 2.50 and σ = 1.204
Hence,
μ −2σ = 2.50 −2(1.204) = .092
μ + 2σ = 2.50 + 2(1.204) = 4.908
Using Chebyshev’s theorem, we can state that at least 75% of the shipments (each containing 400 
computer parts) are expected to contain .092 to 4.908 defective computer parts each.
EXERCISES
Calculate the mean and standard deviation of this probability distribu-
tion. Give a brief interpretation of the value of the mean.
5.19 The following table lists the probability distribution of the 
number of patients entering the emergency room during a 1-hour 
period at Millard Fellmore Memorial Hospital.
Patients per hour
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Probability
.2725 .3543 .2303 .0998 .0324 .0084 .0023
Calculate the mean and standard deviation of this probability distribution.
5.20 Let x be the number of houses sold per month by a real estate 
agent. The following table lists the probability distribution of x.
x
0
1
2
3
4
5
P(x)
.08
.12
.32
.28
.12
.08
Calculate the mean and standard deviation of this probability 
distribution and give a brief interpretation of the value of the mean.
5.21 A limousine has eight tires on it. A fleet of such limos was fit 
with a batch of tires that mistakenly passed quality testing. The follow-
ing table lists the probability distribution of the number of defective 
tires on this fleet of limos where x represents the number of defective 
tires on a limo and P(x) is the corresponding probability.
x
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
P(x) .0454 .1723 .2838 .2669 .1569 .0585 .0139 .0015 .0008
Calculate the mean and standard deviation of this probability distribution. 
Give a brief interpretation of the values of the mean and standard deviation. 
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
5.15 Briefly explain the concept of the mean and standard deviation 
of a discrete random variable.
5.16 Find the mean and standard deviation for each of the following 
probability distributions.
a. x
P(x)
0
.16
1
.27
2
.39
3
.18
 
b. x
P(x)
6
.40
7
.26
8
.21
9
.13
APPLICATIONS
5.17 Let x be the number of errors that appear on a randomly 
selected page of a book. The following table lists the probability 
distribution of x.
x
0
1
2
3
4
P(x)
.73
.16
.06
.04
.01
Find the mean and standard deviation of x.
5.18 The following table gives the probability distribution of the 
number of camcorders sold on a given day at an electronics store.
Camcorders sold
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Probability
.05
.12
.19
.30
.20
.10
.04

5.4 The Binomial Probability Distribution
193
5.22 One of the most profitable items at A1 Auto Security Shop is 
the remote starting system. The following table lists the probability 
distribution of x, where x represents the number of such systems 
installed on a given day at this shop and P(x) is the corresponding 
probability. 
x
1
2
3
4
5
P(x)
.10
.25
.30
.20
.15
Find the mean and standard deviation of this probability distribution. 
Give a brief interpretation of the values of the mean and standard 
deviation.
5.23 A contractor has submitted bids on three state jobs: an office 
building, a theater, and a parking garage. State rules do not allow a 
contractor to be offered more than one of these jobs. If this contractor 
is awarded any of these jobs, the profits earned from these contracts 
are $10 million from the office building, $5 million from the theater, 
and $2 million from the parking garage. His profit is zero if he gets no 
contract. The contractor estimates that the probabilities of getting the 
office building contract, the theater contract, the parking garage con-
tract, or nothing are .15, .30, .45, and .10, respectively. Let x be the 
random variable that represents the contractor’s profits in millions 
of dollars. Write the probability distribution of x. Find the mean and 
standard deviation of x. Give a brief interpretation of the values of the 
mean and standard deviation.
5.24 An instant lottery ticket costs $2. Out of a total of 10,000 tickets 
printed for this lottery, 1000 tickets contain a prize of $5 each, 100 
tickets have a prize of $10 each, 5 tickets have a prize of $1000 each, 
and 1 ticket has a prize of $5000. Let x be the random variable that 
denotes the net amount a player wins by playing this lottery. Write the 
probability distribution of x. Determine the mean and standard devia-
tion of x. How will you interpret the values of the mean and standard 
deviation of x?
5.25 In a group of 12 persons, 3 are left-handed. Let x denote the 
number of left-handed persons in 2 randomly selected persons from 
these 12 persons. The following table lists the probability distribu-
tion of x. (Because of rounding, probabilities add to 1.0001.)
x
0
1
2
P(x)
.5455
.4091
.0455
Calculate the mean and standard deviation of x for this distribution.
The binomial probability distribution is one of the most widely used discrete probability 
distributions. It is applied to find the probability that an outcome will occur x times in n per-
formances of an experiment. For example, given that 75% of students at a college use Insta-
gram, we may want to find the probability that in a random sample of five students at this 
college, exactly three use Instagram. As a second example, we may be interested in finding 
the probability that a baseball player with a batting average of .250 will have no hits in 10 
trips to the plate.
 
To apply the binomial probability distribution, the random variable x must be a discrete 
dichotomous random variable. In other words, the variable must be a discrete random 
variable, and each repetition of the experiment must result in one of two possible outcomes. 
The binomial distribution is applied to experiments that satisfy the four conditions of a 
binomial experiment. (These conditions are discussed next.) Each repetition of a binomial 
experiment is called a trial or a Bernoulli trial (after Jacob Bernoulli). For example, if an 
experiment is defined as one toss of a coin and this experiment is repeated 10 times, then 
each repetition (toss) is called a trial. Consequently, there are 10 total trials for this 
experiment.
5.4.1 The Binomial Experiment
An experiment that satisfies the following four conditions is called a binomial experiment.
1. There are n identical trials. In other words, the given experiment is repeated n times, 
where n is a positive integer. All of these repetitions are performed under identical 
conditions.
2. Each trial has two and only two outcomes. These outcomes are usually called a success and 
a failure, respectively. In case there are more than two outcomes for an experiment, we can 
combine outcomes into two events and then apply binomial probability distribution.
3. The probability of success is denoted by p and that of failure by q, and p + q = 1. The prob-
abilities p and q remain constant for each trial.
4. 
The trials are independent. In other words, the outcome of one trial does not affect the 
outcome of another trial.
5.4 The Binomial Probability Distribution
www.ebook3000.com

194
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
Conditions of a Binomial Experiment A binomial experiment must satisfy the following four 
conditions.
1. There are n identical trials.
2. Each trial has only two possible outcomes (or events). In other words, the outcomes of a trial 
are divided into two mutually exclusive events.
3. The probabilities of the two outcomes (or events) remain constant.
4. The trials are independent.
 
Note that one of the two outcomes (or events) of a trial is called a success and the other a 
failure. Notice that a success does not mean that the corresponding outcome is considered favora-
ble or desirable. Similarly, a failure does not necessarily refer to an unfavorable or undesirable 
outcome. Success and failure are simply the names used to denote the two possible outcomes of 
a trial. The outcome to which the question refers is usually called a success; the outcome to which 
it does not refer is called a failure. For example, if we are to find the probability of four heads in 
10 tosses of a coin, we will call the head a success and the tail a failure. But if the question asks 
to find the probability of six tails in 10 tosses of a coin, we will call the tail a success and the head 
a failure.
EXAMPLE 5–9 
Ten Tosses of a Coin
Consider the experiment consisting of 10 tosses of a coin. Determine whether or not it is a binomial 
experiment.
Solution The experiment consisting of 10 tosses of a coin satisfies all four conditions of a 
binomial experiment as explained below.
1. 
There are a total of 10 trials (tosses), and they are all identical. All 10 tosses are performed 
under identical conditions. Here, n = 10.
2. Each trial (toss) has only two possible outcomes: a head and a tail. Let a head be called a 
success and a tail be called a failure.
3. 
The probability of obtaining a head (a success) is 1∕2 and that of a tail (a failure) is 1∕2 for 
any toss. That is,
p = P(H) = 1∕2 and q = P(T ) = 1∕2
 
 The sum of these two probabilities is 1.0. Also, these probabilities remain the same for each 
toss.
4. The trials (tosses) are independent. The result of any preceding toss has no bearing on the 
result of any succeeding toss.
Since this experiment satisfies all four conditions, it is a binomial experiment. 
◼ 
EXAMPLE 5–10 
Students Using Instagram
(a) Seventy five percent of students at a college with a large student population use Insta-
gram. A sample of five students from this college is selected, and these students are 
asked whether or not they use Instagram. Is this experiment a binomial experiment?
(b) In a group of 12 students at a college, 9 use Instagram. Five students are selected from 
this group of 12 and are asked whether or not they use Instagram. Is this experiment a 
binomial experiment?
Solution
(a) Below we check whether all four conditions of a binomial experiment are satisfied.
1. 
This example consists of fi ve identical trials. A trial represents the selection of a 
student.
Verifying the conditions of a 
binomial experiment.
Verifying the conditions of a 
binomial experiment.

5.4 The Binomial Probability Distribution
195
2. 
Each trial has two outcomes: a student uses Instagram or a student does not use 
Instagram. Let us call the outcome a success if a student uses Instagram and a failure 
if he/she does not use Instagram.
3. 
Seventy fi ve percent of students at this college use Instagram. Hence, the prob-
ability p that a student uses Instagram is .75, and the probability q that a student 
does not use Instagram is .25. These probabilities, p and q, remain constant for each 
selection of a student. Also, these two probabilities add to 1.0.
4. Each trial (student) is independent. In other words, if one student uses Insta-
gram, it does not affect the outcome of another student using or not using Ins-
tagram. This is so because the size of the population is very large compared to 
the sample size.
 
Since all four conditions are satisfied, this is an example of a binomial experiment.
(b) Below we check whether all four conditions of a binomial experiment are satisfied.
1. 
This example consists of fi ve identical trials. A trial represents the selection of a 
student.
2. 
Each trial has two outcomes: a student uses Instagram or a student does not use 
Instagram. Let us call the outcome a success if a student uses Instagram and a 
failure if he/she does not use Instagram.
3. 
There are a total of 12 students, and 9 of them use Instagram. Let p be the probabil-
ity that a student uses Instagram and q be the probability that a student does not use 
Instagram. These two probabilities, p and q, do not remain constant for each selec-
tion of a student because of the limited number (12) of students. The probability 
of each outcome changes with each selection depending on what happened in the 
previous selections.
4. 
Because p and q do not remain constant for each selection, the trials are not inde-
pendent. The outcome of the fi rst selection affects the outcome of the second selec-
tion, and so on.
Since the third and fourth conditions of a binomial experiment are not satisfied, this 
is not an example of a binomial experiment. 
◼
5.4.2 The Binomial Probability Distribution and Binomial Formula
The random variable x that represents the number of successes in n trials for a binomial experi-
ment is called a binomial random variable. The probability distribution of x in such experiments 
is called the binomial probability distribution or simply the binomial distribution. Thus, the 
binomial probability distribution is applied to find the probability of x successes in n trials for 
a binomial experiment. The number of successes x in such an experiment is a discrete random 
variable. Consider Example 5–10a. Let x be the number of college students in a sample of five 
who use Instagram. Because the number of students who use Instagram in a sample of five can 
be any number from zero to five, x can assume any of the values 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. Since the 
values of x are countable, x is a discrete random variable.
Binomial Formula For a binomial experiment, the probability of exactly x successes in n trials 
is given by the binomial formula
P(x) = nCx  p x q n−x
where
 n = total number of trials
 p = probability of success
 q = 1 −p = probability of failure
 x = number of successes in n trials
 n −x = number of failures in n trials
www.ebook3000.com

196
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
 
In the binomial formula, n is the total number of trials and x is the total number of successes. 
The difference between the total number of trials and the total number of successes, n − x, gives 
the total number of failures in n trials. The value of nCx gives the number of ways to obtain x suc-
cesses in n trials. As mentioned earlier, p and q are the probabilities of success and failure, respec-
tively. Again, although it does not matter which of the two outcomes is called a success and which 
a failure, usually the outcome to which the question refers is called a success.
 
To solve a binomial problem, we determine the values of n, x, n − x, p, and q and then sub-
stitute these values in the binomial formula. To find the value of nCx, we can use either the com-
binations formula from Section 4.6.3 or a calculator.
 
To find the probability of x successes in n trials for a binomial experiment, the only values 
needed are those of n and p. These are called the parameters of the binomial probability distribu-
tion or simply the binomial parameters. The value of q is obtained by subtracting the value of 
p from 1.0. Thus, q = 1 − p.
 
Next we solve a binomial problem by using the binomial formula.
EXAMPLE 5–11 
Students Using Instagram
Seventy five percent of students at a college with a large student population use the social media 
site Instagram. Three students are randomly selected from this college. What is the probability 
that exactly two of these three students use Instagram?
Solution Here, there are three trials (students selected), and we are to find the probability of 
two successes (two students using Instagram) in these three trials. We can find the probability of 
two successes in three trials using the procedures learned in Chapter 4, but that will be a time-
consuming and complex process. First, we will have to write all the possible outcomes that give 
two successes in three trials, and then we will have to find the probability that any one of those 
outcomes occurs using the union of events. But using the binomial probability distribution to find 
this probability is very easy, as described below. Here, we are given that:
n = total number of trials = number of students selected = 3
x = number of successes = number of students in three who use Instagram = 2
p = probability of success = probability that a student uses Instagram = .75
From this given information, we can calculate the values of n − x and q as follows:
n −x = number of failures = number of students not using Instagram = 3 −2 = 1
q = probability of failure = probability that a student does not use Instagram = 1 −.75 = .25
 
The probability of two successes is denoted by P(x = 2) or simply by P(2). By substituting 
all of the values in the binomial formula, we obtain
Number of ways to 
obtain 2 success in 
3 trials
Number of 
successes
Number of 
failures
P(2) = 3C2 (.75)2 (.25)1 = (3)(.5625) (.25) = .4219
Probability 
of success
Probability 
of failure
 
Note that the value of 3C2 in the formula can either be obtained from a calculator or be 
computed as follows:
3C2 =
3!
2! (3 −2)! = 3 · 2 · 1
2 · 1 · 1 = 3
In the above computation, 3C2 = 3 gives the number of ways to select two students who use Ins-
tagram in a random sample of three students. Suppose I denotes a student who uses Instagram 
and N denotes a student who does not use Instagram. The three ways to select two students who 
use Instagram are IIN, INI, and NII. 
◼ 
Calculating the probability 
of one success in three trials 
using the binomial formula.

5.4 The Binomial Probability Distribution
197
EXAMPLE 5–12 
Home Delivery Service
At the Express House Delivery Service, providing high-quality service to customers is the top 
priority of the management. The company guarantees a refund of all charges if a package it is 
delivering does not arrive at its destination by the specified time. It is known from past data that 
despite all efforts, 2% of the packages mailed through this company do not arrive at their destina-
tions within the specified time. Suppose a corporation mails 10 packages through Express House 
Delivery Service on a certain day.
(a) Find the probability that exactly one of these 10 packages will not arrive at its destina-
tion within the specified time.
(b) Find the probability that at most one of these 10 packages will not arrive at its destina-
tion within the specified time.
Solution Let us call an event a success if a package does not arrive at its destination within the 
specified time and a failure if a package does arrive within the specified time. Note that because 
we are to find the probability that one package will not arrive within the specified time, we will 
call not arriving a success. Then,
 n = total number of packages mailed = 10
 p = P(success) = .02
 q = P(failure) = 1 −.02 = .98
(a) For this part,
 x = number of successes = 1
 n −x = number of failures = 10 −1 = 9
 
Substituting all values in the binomial formula, we obtain
 P(1) = 10C1 (.02)1 (.98)9 =
10!
1! (10 −1)!
 (.02)1 (.98)9
 = (10) (.02) (.83374776) = .1667
Thus, there is a .1667 probability that exactly one of the 10 packages mailed will not 
arrive at its destination within the specified time.
(b) The probability that at most one of the 10 packages will not arrive at its destination 
within the specified time is given by the sum of the probabilities of x = 0 and x = 1. 
Thus,
 P(x ≤1) = P(0) + P(1)
 = 10C0 (.02)0 (.98)10 + 10C1 (.02)1 (.98)9
 = (1) (1) (.81707281) + (10) (.02) (.83374776)
 = .8171 + .1667 = .9838
Thus, the probability that at most one of the 10 packages will not arrive at its destination 
within the specified time is .9838. 
◼ 
EXAMPLE 5–13 
Employees Changing Their Jobs
According to a survey, 33% of American employees do not plan to change their jobs in the near 
future. Let x denote the number of employees in a random sample of three American employees 
who do not plan to change their jobs in the near future. Write the probability distribution of x and 
draw a histogram for this probability distribution.
Solution Let x be the number of employees who do not plan to change their jobs in the near 
future in a random sample of three American employees. Then, n − x is the number of American 
employees who do plan to change their jobs in the near future. (We have included the employees 
Calculating the probability using 
the binomial formula.
Constructing a binomial 
probability distribution 
and its graph.
PhotoDisc, Inc./Getty Images
www.ebook3000.com

198
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
who are uncertain or have no opinion in this later group of n − x employees.) From the given 
information,
 
n = total employees in the sample = 3
 
p = P(an employee does not plan to change his/her job in the near future) = .33
 
q = P(an employee does plan to change his/her job in the near future) = 1 − .33 = .67
 
The possible values that x can assume are 0, 1, 2, and 3. In other words, the number of 
employees in this sample of three who do not plan to change their jobs in the near future can be 
0, 1, 2, or 3. The probability of each of these four outcomes is calculated as follows.
 
If x = 0, then n − x = 3. Using the binomial formula, we obtain the probability of x = 0 as 
follows:
P(0) = 3C0 (.33)0 (.67)3 = (1)(1)(.300763) = .3008
Note that 3C0 is equal to 1 by definition and (.33)0 is equal to 1 because any (nonzero) number 
raised to the power zero is always 1.
 
If x = 1, then n − x = 2. Using the binomial formula, the probability of x = 1 is
P(1) = 3C1(.33)1 (.67)2 = (3)(.33)(.4489) = .4444
Similarly, if x = 2, then n − x = 1, and if x = 3, then n − x = 0. The probabilities of x = 2 and 
x = 3 are, respectively,
 P(2) = 3C2 (.33)2 (.67)1 = (3)(.1089)(.67) = .2189
 P(3) = 3C3 (.33)3 (.67)0 = (1)(.035937)(1) = .0359
These probabilities are written in Table 5.9. Figure 5.3 shows the histogram for the probability 
distribution of Table 5.9.
Table 5.9  Probability 
Distribution of x
x 
P(x)
0 
.3008
1 
.4444
2 
.2189
3 
.0359
.50
.30
.20
.10
0
.40
0
1
2
3
x
P(x)
Figure 5.3 Histogram for the probability 
distribution of Table 5.9.
 
◼
5.4.3 Using the Table of Binomial Probabilities
The probabilities for a binomial experiment can also be read from Table I, the table of binomial 
probabilities, in Appendix B. This table lists the probabilities of x for n = 1 to n = 25 and for 
selected values of p. Example 5–14 illustrates how to read Table I.
EXAMPLE 5–14 
Time Spent on Facebook by College Students
According to a survey, 30% of college students said that they spend too much time on Facebook. 
(The remaining 70% said that they do not spend too much time on Facebook or had no opinion.) 
Suppose this result holds true for the current population of all college students. A random sample 
of six college students is selected. Using Table I of Appendix B, answer the following.
(a) Find the probability that exactly three of these six college students will say that they 
spend too much time on Facebook.
(b) Find the probability that at most two of these six college students will say that they 
spend too much time on Facebook.
Using the binomial table to find 
probabilities and to construct the 
probability distribution and graph.

5.4 The Binomial Probability Distribution
199
(c) Find the probability that at least three of these six college students will say that they 
spend too much time on Facebook.
(d) Find the probability that one to three of these six college students will say that they 
spend too much time on Facebook.
(e) Let x denote the number in a random sample of six college students who will say that 
they spend too much time on Facebook. Write the probability distribution of x and draw 
a histogram for this probability distribution.
Solution
(a) To read the required probability from Table I of Appendix B, we first determine the 
values of n, x, and p. For this example,
 n = number of students in the sample = 6
 x = number of students in this sample who spend too much time on Facebook = 3
 p = P(a student spends too much time on Facebook) = .30
Then we locate n = 6 in the column labeled n in Table I of Appendix B. The relevant 
portion of Table I with n = 6 is reproduced as Table 5.10 here. Next, we locate 3 in the 
column for x in the portion of the table for n = 6 and locate p = .30 in the row for p at the 
top of the table. The entry at the intersection of the row for x = 3 and the column for p = .30 
gives the probability of three successes in six trials when the probability of success is .30. 
From Table I of Appendix B or Table 5.10,
P(3) = .1852
Using Table I of Appendix B or Table 5.10, we write Table 5.11, which can be used to 
answer the remaining parts of this example.
(b) The event that at most two students will say that they spend too much time on Facebook 
will occur if x is equal to 0, 1, or 2. From Table I of Appendix B or from Table 5.11, the 
required probability is
 P(at most 2) = P(0 or 1 or 2) = P(0) + P(1) + P(2)
 = .1176 + .3025 + .3241 = .7442
(c) The probability that at least three students will say that they spend too much time on 
Facebook is given by the sum of the probabilities of 3, 4, 5, or 6. Using Table I of 
Appendix B or from Table 5.11, we obtain
 P(at least 3) = P(3 or 4 or 5 or 6)
 = P(3) + P(4) + P(5) + P(6)
 = .1852 + .0595 + .0102 + .0007 = .2556
Table 5.11  Portion of Table I 
for n = 6 and p = .30
 
 
p
n 
x 
.30
6 
0 
.1176
 
1 
.3025
 
2 
.3241
 
3 
.1852
 
4 
.0595
 
5 
.0102
 
6 
.0007
n = 6
x = 3
Table 5.10 Determining P(x = 3) for n = 6 and p = .30
 
p
n 
x 
.05 
.10 
.20 
.30 
. . . 
.95
6 
0 
.7351 
.5314 
.2621 
.1176 
. . . 
.0000
 
1 
.2321 
.3543 
.3932 
.3025 
. . . 
.0000
 
2 
.0305 
.0984 
.2458 
.3241 
. . . 
.0001
 
3 
.0021 
.0146 
.0819 
.1852 
. . . 
.0021
 
4 
.0001 
.0012 
.0154 
.0595 
. . . 
.0305
 
5 
.0000 
.0001 
.0015 
.0102 
. . . 
.2321
 
6 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0007 
. . . 
.7351
 
P(x = 3) = .1852
p = .30
www.ebook3000.com

200
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
(d) The probability that one to three students will say that they spend too much time on 
Facebook is given by the sum of the probabilities of x = 1, 2, and 3. Using Table I of 
Appendix B or from Table 5.11, we obtain
 P(1 to 3) = P(1) + P(2) + P(3)
 = .3025 + .3241 + .1852 = .8118
(e) Using Table I of Appendix B or from Table 5.11, we list the probability distribution of x 
for n = 6 and p = .30 in Table 5.12. Figure 5.4 shows the histogram of the probability 
distribution of x.
5.4.4  Probability of Success and the Shape 
of the Binomial Distribution
For any number of trials n:
1. 
The binomial probability distribution is symmetric if p = .50.
2. 
The binomial probability distribution is skewed to the right if p is less than .50.
3. 
The binomial probability distribution is skewed to the left if p is greater than .50.
These three cases are illustrated next with examples and graphs.
1. 
Let n = 4 and p = .50. Using Table I of Appendix B, we have written the probability distribu-
tion of x in Table 5.13 and plotted the distribution in Figure 5.5. As we can observe from 
Table 5.13 and Figure 5.5, the probability distribution of x is symmetric.
Table 5.12  Probability Distribution 
of x for n = 6 and p = .30
x 
P(x)
0 
.1176
1 
.3025
2 
.3241
3 
.1852
4 
.0595
5 
.0102
6 
.0007
Figure 5.4 Histogram for the probability 
distribution of Table 5.12.
.35
.15
.10
.05
0
.20
.25
.30
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
x
P(x)
 
◼
Table 5.13  Probability 
Distribution 
of x for n = 4 
and p = .50
x 
P(x)
0 
.0625
1 
.2500
2 
.3750
3 
.2500
4 
.0625
Figure 5.5 Histogram for the probability 
distribution of Table 5.13.
.40
.30
.20
.10
0
0
1
2
3
4
x
P(x)

5.4 The Binomial Probability Distribution
201
2. 
Let n = 4 and p = .30 (which is less than .50). Table 5.14, which is written by using Table I 
of Appendix B, and the graph of the probability distribution in Figure 5.6 show that the 
probability distribution of x for n = 4 and p = .30 is skewed to the right.
3. 
Let n = 4 and p = .80 (which is greater than .50). Table 5.15, which is written by using 
Table I of Appendix B, and the graph of the probability distribution in Figure 5.7 show that 
the probability distribution of x for n = 4 and p = .80 is skewed to the left.
5.4.5 Mean and Standard Deviation of the Binomial Distribution
Section 5.3 explained how to compute the mean and standard deviation, respectively, for a prob-
ability distribution of a discrete random variable. When a discrete random variable has a binomial 
distribution, the formulas learned in Section 5.3 could still be used to compute its mean and 
standard deviation. However, it is simpler and more convenient to use the following formulas to 
find the mean and standard deviation of a binomial distribution.
Table 5.14  Probability 
Distribution 
of x for n = 4 
and p = .30
x 
P(x)
0 
.2401
1 
.4116
2 
.2646
3 
.0756
4 
.0081
.40
.50
.30
.20
.10
0
0
1
2
3
4
x
P(x)
Figure 5.6 Histogram for the probability 
distribution of Table 5.14.
Table 5.15  Probability 
Distribution of 
x for n = 4 and 
p = .80
x 
P(x)
0 
.0016
1 
.0256
2 
.1536
3 
.4096
4 
.4096
.50
.40
.30
.20
.10
0
0
1
2
3
4
x
P(x)
Figure 5.7 Histogram for the probability 
distribution of Table 5.15.
Mean and Standard Deviation of a Binomial Distribution The mean and standard deviation 
of a binomial distribution are, respectively,
μ = np and σ = √npq
where n is the total number of trials, p is the probability of success, and q is the probability of 
failure.
www.ebook3000.com

202
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
 
Example 5–15 describes the calculation of the mean and standard deviation of a binomial 
distribution.
EXAMPLE 5–15 
U.S. Adults with No Religious Affiliation
According to a Pew Research Center survey released on May 12, 2015, 22.8% of U.S. adults do 
not have a religious affiliation (Time, May 25, 2015). Assume that this result is true for the current 
population of U.S. adults. A sample of 50 U.S. adults is randomly selected. Let x be the number 
of adults in this sample who do not have a religious affiliation. Find the mean and standard 
deviation of the probability distribution of x.
Solution This is a binomial experiment with a total of 50 trials (U.S. adults). Each trial has two 
outcomes: (1) the selected adult does not have a religious affiliation, (2) the selected adult has a 
religious affiliation or does not want to answer the question. The probabilities p and q for these 
two outcomes are .228 and .772, respectively. Thus,
n = 50,  p = .228  and  q = .772
Using the formulas for the mean and standard deviation of the binomial distribution, we obtain
μ = np = 50(.228) = 11.4
σ = √npq = √(50)(.228)(.772) = 2.9666
Thus, the mean of the probability distribution of x is 11.4, and the standard deviation is 2.9666. 
The value of the mean is what we expect to obtain, on average, per repetition of the experiment. 
In this example, if we select many samples of 50 U.S. adults each, we expect that each sample 
will contain an average of 11.4 adults, with a standard deviation of 2.9666, who will not have a 
religious affiliation. 
◼ 
Calculating the mean and 
standard deviation of a 
binomial distribution.
EXERCISES
5.30 Let x be a discrete random variable that possesses a binomial 
distribution. Using the binomial formula, find the following proba-
bilities.
a. P(5) for n = 8 and p = .70
b. P(3) for n = 4 and p = .40
c. P(2) for n = 6 and p = .30
Verify your answers by using Table I of Appendix B.
5.31 Let x be a discrete random variable that possesses a binomial 
distribution.
a. Using Table I of Appendix B, write the probability distribu-
tion of x for n = 5 and p = .80 and graph it.
b. What are the mean and standard deviation of the probability 
distribution developed in part a?
5.32 The binomial probability distribution is symmetric for p = .50, 
skewed to the right for p < .50, and skewed to the left for p > .50. 
Illustrate each of these three cases by writing a probability distribu-
tion table and drawing a graph. Choose any values of n (equal to 4 or 
higher) and p and use the table of binomial probabilities (Table I of 
Appendix B) to write the probability distribution tables.
APPLICATIONS
5.33 According to a survey, 70% of households said that they have 
never purchased organic fruits or vegetables. Suppose that this result 
is true for the current population of households.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
5.26 Briefly explain the following.
a. A binomial experiment  
b. A trial  
c. A binomial random variable
5.27 What are the parameters of the binomial probability distribu-
tion, and what do they mean?
5.28 Which of the following are binomial experiments? Explain why.
a. Rolling a die 10 times and observing the number of spots
b. Rolling a die 12 times and observing whether the number 
obtained is even or odd
c. Selecting a few voters from a very large population of voters 
and observing whether or not each of them favors a certain 
proposition in an election when 54% of all voters are known 
to be in favor of this proposition.
5.29 Which of the following are binomial experiments? Explain why.
a. Drawing 3 balls with replacement from a box that contains 10 
balls, 6 of which are red and 4 are blue, and observing the 
colors of the drawn balls
b. Drawing 3 balls without replacement from a box that contains 
10 balls, 6 of which are red and 4 are blue, and observing the 
colors of the drawn balls
c. Selecting a few households from New York City and observ-
ing whether or not they own stocks when it is known that 28% 
of all households in New York City own stocks

5.5 The Hypergeometric Probability Distribution
203
all kickers in the upcoming NFL season. Find the probability that a 
randomly selected kicker who will try 4 field goal attempts in a 
game will
a. convert all 4 field goal attempts
b. miss all 4 field goal attempts
5.38 A professional basketball player makes 85% of the free throws 
he tries. Assuming this percentage holds true for future attempts, use 
the binomial formula to find the probability that in the next eight tries, 
the number of free throws he will make is
a. exactly 8  b. exactly 5
5.39 An office supply company conducted a survey before market-
ing a new paper shredder designed for home use. In the survey, 80% 
of the people who used the shredder were satisfied with it. Because of 
this high acceptance rate, the company decided to market the new 
shredder. Assume that 80% of all people who will use the new shred-
der will be satisfied. On a certain day, seven customers bought this 
shredder.
a. Let x denote the number of customers in this sample of 
seven who will be satisfied with this shredder. Using the 
binomial probabilities table (Table I, Appendix B), obtain 
the probability distribution of x and draw a histogram of the 
probability distribution. Find the mean and standard devia-
tion of x.
b. Using the probability distribution of part a, find the probability 
that exactly four of the seven customers will be satisfied.
5.40 Johnson Electronics makes calculators. Consumer satisfac-
tion is one of the top priorities of the company’s management. The 
company guarantees a refund or a replacement for any calculator 
that malfunctions within 2 years from the date of purchase. It is 
known from past data that despite all efforts, 5% of the calculators 
manufactured by the company malfunction within a 2-year period. 
The company mailed a package of 10 randomly selected calculators 
to a store.
a. Let x denote the number of calculators in this package of 10 
that will be returned for refund or replacement within a 2-year 
period. Using the binomial probabilities table, obtain the prob-
ability distribution of x and draw a histogram of the probability 
distribution. Determine the mean and standard deviation of x.
b. Using the probability distribution of part a, find the probabil-
ity that exactly 2 of the 10 calculators will be returned for 
refund or replacement within a 2-year period.
a. Let x be a binomial random variable that denotes the number 
of households in a random sample of 10 who have never pur-
chased organic fruits or vegetables. What are the possible values 
that x can assume?
b. Find the probability that exactly 6 households in a random sam-
ple of 10 will say that they have never purchased organic fruits 
or vegetables. Use the binomial probability distribution formula.
5.34 According to a survey, 18% of the car owners said that they get 
the maintenance service done on their cars according to the schedule 
recommended by the auto company. Suppose that this result is true for 
the current population of car owners.
a. Let x be a binomial random variable that denotes the number 
of car owners in a random sample of 12 who get the mainte-
nance service done on their cars according to the schedule 
recommended by the auto company. What are the possible 
values that x can assume?
b. Find the probability that exactly 3 car owners in a random 
sample of 12 get the maintenance service done on their cars 
according to the schedule recommended by the auto company. 
Use the binomial probability distribution formula.
5.35 In a poll, adult men aged 25–35 were asked, “If you go bald, 
will you consider hair transplant if you can afford it?” Thirty percent 
of them said, “Definitely.” Suppose that this result is true for the 
current population of adult men aged 25–35. A random sample of 15 
adult men aged 25–35 is selected. Use the binomial probabilities table 
(Table I of Appendix B) or technology to find the probability that the 
number of men in this sample of 15 who will say definitely in response 
to the said question is
a. at least 4  b. 1 to 3  c. at most 5
5.36 According to a survey conducted at the local DMV, 50% of 
drivers who drive to work stated that they regularly exceed the posted 
speed limit on their way to work. Suppose that this result is true for 
the population of drivers who drive to work. A random sample of 13 
drivers who drive to work is selected. Use the binomial probabilities 
table (Table I of Appendix B) or technology to find the probability 
that the number of drivers in this sample of 13 who regularly exceed 
the posted speed limit on their way to work is
a. at most 5  b. 6 to 9  c. at least 7
5.37 During the 2014 NFL regular season, kickers converted 88% 
of the field goals attempted. Assume that this percentage is true for 
In Section 5.4, we learned that one of the conditions required to apply the binomial probability 
distribution is that the trials are independent, so that the probabilities of the two outcomes or 
events (success and failure) remain constant. If the trials are not independent, we cannot apply the 
binomial probability distribution to find the probability of x successes in n trials. In such cases we 
replace the binomial probability distribution by the hypergeometric probability distribution. 
Such a case occurs when a sample is drawn without replacement from a finite population.
 
As an example, suppose 20% of all auto parts manufactured at a company are defective. Four 
auto parts are selected at random. What is the probability that three of these four parts are good? 
Note that we are to find the probability that three of the four auto parts are good and one is defec-
tive. In this case, the population is very large and the probability of the first, second, third, and 
fourth auto parts being defective remains the same at .20. Similarly, the probability of any of the 
parts being good remains unchanged at .80. Consequently, we will apply the binomial probability 
distribution to find the probability of three good parts in four.
5.5 The Hypergeometric Probability Distribution
www.ebook3000.com

204
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
 
Now suppose this company shipped 25 auto parts to a dealer. Later, it finds out that 5 of those 
parts were defective. By the time the company manager contacts the dealer, 4 auto parts from that 
shipment have already been sold. What is the probability that 3 of those 4 parts were good parts 
and 1 was defective? Here, because the 4 parts were selected without replacement from a small 
population, the probability of a part being good changes from the first selection to the second 
selection, to the third selection, and to the fourth selection. In this case we cannot apply the bino-
mial probability distribution. In such instances, we use the hypergeometric probability distribu-
tion to find the required probability.
Examples 5–16 and 5–17 provide applications of the hypergeometric probability distribution.
EXAMPLE 5–16 
Defective Auto Parts in a Shipment
Brown Manufacturing makes auto parts that are sold to auto dealers. Last week the company 
shipped 25 auto parts to a dealer. Later, it found out that 5 of those parts were defective. By the 
time the company manager contacted the dealer, 4 auto parts from that shipment had already been 
sold. What is the probability that 3 of those 4 parts were good parts and 1 was defective?
Solution Let a good part be called a success and a defective part be called a failure. From the 
given information,
 N = total number of elements (auto parts) in the population = 25
 r = number of successes (good parts) in the population = 20
 N −r = number of failures (defective parts) in the population = 5
 n = number of trials (sample size) = 4
 x = number of successes in four trials = 3
 n −x = number of failures in four trials = 1
Using the hypergeometric formula, we calculate the required probability as follows:
 P(3) =
rCx × N−rCn−x
NCn
=
20C3 × 5C1
25C4
=
20!
3! (20 −3)! · 
5!
1! (5 −1)!
25!
4! (25 −4)!
 = (1140) (5)
12,650
= .4506
 
Thus, the probability that 3 of the 4 parts sold are good and 1 is defective is .4506.
 
In the above calculations, the values of combinations can either be calculated using the for-
mula learned in Section 4.6.3 (as done here) or by using a calculator. 
◼ 
Calculating the probability 
using the hypergeometric 
distribution formula.
Hypergeometric Probability Distribution
Let
 N = total number of elements in the population
 r = number of successes in the population
 N −r = number of failures in the population
 n = number of trials (sample size)
 x = number of successes in n trials
 n −x = number of failures in n trials
The probability of x successes in n trials is given by
P(x) =
rCx × N−rCn−x
NCn

5.5 The Hypergeometric Probability Distribution
205
EXAMPLE 5–17 
Selecting Employees from a Group
Dawn Corporation has 12 employees who hold managerial positions. Of them, 7 are females and 
5 are males. The company is planning to send 3 of these 12 managers to a conference. If 3 managers 
are randomly selected out of 12,
(a) find the probability that all 3 of them are females
(b) find the probability that at most 1 of them is a female
Solution Let the selection of a female be called a success and the selection of a male be called 
a failure.
(a) From the given information,
 N = total number of managers in the population = 12
 r = number of successes (females) in the population = 7
 N −r = number of failures (males) in the population = 5
 n = number of selections (sample size) = 3
 x = number of successes (females) in three selections = 3
 n −x = number of failures (males) in three selections = 0
Using the hypergeometric formula, we calculate the required probability as follows:
P(3) =
rCx × N−rCn−x
NCn
=
7C3 × 5C0
12C3
= (35) (1)
220
= .1591
Thus, the probability that all 3 of the managers selected are females is .1591.
(b) The probability that at most 1 of them is a female is given by the sum of the probabilities 
that either none or 1 of the selected managers is a female.
To find the probability that none of the selected managers is a female, we use
 N = total number of managers in the population = 12
 r = number of successes (females) in the population = 7
 N −r = number of failures (males) in the population = 5
 n = number of selections (sample size) = 3
 x = number of successes (females) in three selections = 0
 n −x = number of failures (males) in three selections = 3
Using the hypergeometric formula, we calculate the required probability as follows:
P(0) =
rCx × N−rCn−x
NCn
=
7C0 × 5C3
12C3
= (1) (10)
220
= .0455
To find the probability that 1 of the selected managers is a female, we use
 N = total number of managers in the population = 12
 r = number of successes (females) in the population = 7
 N −r = number of failures (males) in the population = 5
 n = number of selections (sample size) = 3
 x = number of successes (females) in three selections = 1
 n −x = number of failures (males) in three selections = 2
Using the hypergeometric formula, we obtain the required probability as follows:
P(1) =
rCx × N−rCn−x
NCn
=
7C1 × 5C2
12C3
= (7) (10)
220
= .3182
 
The probability that at most 1 of the 3 managers selected is a female is
 
P(x ≤1) = P(0) + P(1) = .0455 + .3182 = .3637 
◼ 
Calculating the probability 
using the hypergeometric 
distribution formula.
www.ebook3000.com

206
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
EXERCISES
process. If 6 jurors are selected at random from this group of 20, find 
the probability that the number of potentially prejudiced jurors among 
the 6 selected jurors is
a. exactly 1  b. none  c. at most 2
5.45 A really bad carton of 18 eggs contains 7 spoiled eggs. An 
unsuspecting chef picks 4 eggs at random for his “Mega-Omelet 
Surprise.” Find the probability that the number of unspoiled eggs 
among the 4 selected is
a. exactly 4  b. 2 or fewer  c. more than 1
5.46 Bender Electronics buys keyboards for its computers from 
another company. The keyboards are received in shipments of 100 
boxes, each box containing 20 keyboards. The quality control depart-
ment at Bender Electronics first randomly selects one box from each 
shipment and then randomly selects 5 keyboards from that box. The 
shipment is accepted if not more than 1 of the 5 keyboards is defec-
tive. The quality control inspector at Bender Electronics selected a 
box from a recently received shipment of keyboards. Unknown to the 
inspector, this box contains 6 defective keyboards.
a. What is the probability that this shipment will be accepted?
b. What is the probability that this shipment will not be accepted?
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
5.41 Explain the hypergeometric probability distribution. Under 
what conditions is this probability distribution applied to find the 
probability of a discrete random variable x? Give one example of an 
application of the hypergeometric probability distribution.
5.42 Let N = 8, r = 3, and n = 4. Using the hypergeometric proba-
bility distribution formula, find
a. P(2)  b. P(0) 
c. P(x ≤ 1)
5.43 Let N = 11, r = 4, and n = 4. Using the hypergeometric 
probability distribution formula, find
a. P(2)  b. P(4)  c. P(x ≤ 1)
APPLICATIONS
5.44 Six jurors are to be selected from a pool of 20 potential candi-
dates to hear a civil case involving a lawsuit between two families. 
Unknown to the judge or any of the attorneys, 4 of the 20 prospective 
jurors are potentially prejudiced by being acquainted with one or more 
of the litigants. They will not disclose this during the jury selection 
The Poisson probability distribution, named after the French mathematician Siméon-Denis 
Poisson, is another important probability distribution of a discrete random variable that has a 
large number of applications. Suppose a washing machine in a laundromat breaks down an aver-
age of three times a month. We may want to find the probability of exactly two breakdowns 
during the next month. This is an example of a Poisson probability distribution problem. Each 
breakdown is called an occurrence in Poisson probability distribution terminology. The Poisson 
probability distribution is applied to experiments with random and independent occurrences. 
The occurrences are random in the sense that they do not follow any pattern, and, hence, they 
are unpredictable. Independence of occurrences means that one occurrence (or nonoccurrence) 
of an event does not influence the successive occurrences or nonoccurrences of that event. The 
occurrences are always considered with respect to an interval. In the example of the washing 
machine, the interval is one month. The interval may be a time interval, a space interval, or a 
volume interval. The actual number of occurrences within an interval is random and independent. 
If the average number of occurrences for a given interval is known, then by using the Poisson 
probability distribution, we can compute the probability of a certain number of occurrences, x, in 
that interval. Note that the number of actual occurrences in an interval is denoted by x.
 
The following are three examples of discrete random variables for which the occurrences are 
random and independent. Hence, these are examples to which the Poisson probability distribu-
tion can be applied.
5.6 The Poisson Probability Distribution
Conditions to Apply the Poisson Probability Distribution The following three conditions must 
be satisfi ed to apply the Poisson probability distribution.
1. x is a discrete random variable.
2. The occurrences are random.
3. The occurrences are independent.

5.6 The Poisson Probability Distribution
207
1. Consider the number of telemarketing phone calls received by a household during a given 
day. In this example, the receiving of a telemarketing phone call by a household is called an 
occurrence, the interval is one day (an interval of time), and the occurrences are random (that 
is, there is no specified time for such a phone call to come in) and discrete. The total number 
of telemarketing phone calls received by a household during a given day may be 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 
and so forth. The independence of occurrences in this example means that the telemarketing 
phone calls are received individually and none of two (or more) of these phone calls are 
related.
2. Consider the number of defective items in the next 100 items manufactured on a machine. In 
this case, the interval is a volume interval (100 items). The occurrences (number of defective 
items) are random and discrete because there may be 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , 100 defective items in 
100 items. We can assume the occurrence of defective items to be independent of one another.
3. Consider the number of defects in a 5-foot-long iron rod. The interval, in this example, is 
a space interval (5 feet). The occurrences (defects) are random because there may be any 
number of defects in a 5-foot iron rod. We can assume that these defects are independent of 
one another.
 
The following examples also qualify for the application of the Poisson probability distribution.
1. 
The number of accidents that occur on a given highway during a 1-week period
2. 
The number of customers entering a grocery store during a 1-hour interval
3. 
The number of television sets sold at a department store during a given week
 
In contrast, consider the arrival of patients at a physician’s office. These arrivals are nonran-
dom if the patients have to make appointments to see the doctor. The arrival of commercial air-
planes at an airport is nonrandom because all planes are scheduled to arrive at certain times, and 
airport authorities know the exact number of arrivals for any period (although this number may 
change slightly because of late or early arrivals and cancellations). The Poisson probability dis-
tribution cannot be applied to these examples.
 
In the Poisson probability distribution terminology, the average number of occurrences in an 
interval is denoted by λ (Greek letter lambda). The actual number of occurrences in that interval 
is denoted by x. Then, using the Poisson probability distribution, we find the probability of x 
occurrences during an interval given that the mean number of occurrences during that interval is λ.
Poisson Probability Distribution Formula According to the Poisson probability distribution, the 
probability of x occurrences in an interval is
P(x) = λx e−λ
x!
where λ (pronounced lambda) is the mean number of occurrences in that interval and the value 
of e is approximately 2.71828.
 
The mean number of occurrences in an interval, denoted by λ, is called the parameter of 
the Poisson probability distribution or the Poisson parameter. As is obvious from the Poisson 
probability distribution formula, we need to know only the value of λ to compute the prob-
ability of any given value of x. We can read the value of e−λ for a given λ from Table II of 
Appendix B. Examples 5–18 through 5–20 illustrate the use of the Poisson probability distri-
bution formula.
EXAMPLE 5–18 
Telemarketing Phone Calls Received
On average, a household receives 9.5 telemarketing phone calls per week. Using the Poisson 
probability distribution formula, find the probability that a randomly selected household receives 
exactly 6 telemarketing phone calls during a given week.
Using the Poisson formula: 
x equals a specific value.
www.ebook3000.com

208
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
Solution Let λ be the mean number of telemarketing phone calls received by a household per 
week. Then, λ = 9.5. Let x be the number of telemarketing phone calls received by a household 
during a given week. We are to find the probability of x = 6. Substituting all of the values in the 
Poisson formula, we obtain
P(6) = λx  e−λ
x!
= (9.5)6  e−9.5
6!
= (735,091.8906) (.00007485)
720
= .0764
 
To do these calculations, we can find the value of 6! either by using the factorial key on a 
calculator or by multiplying all integers from 1 to 6, and we can find the value of e−9.5 by using 
the ex key on a calculator or from Table II in Appendix B. 
◼ 
EXAMPLE 5–19 
Washing Machine Breakdowns
A washing machine in a laundromat breaks down an average of three times per month. Using the 
Poisson probability distribution formula, find the probability that during the next month this 
machine will have
(a) exactly two breakdowns
(b) at most one breakdown
Solution Let λ be the mean number of breakdowns per month, and let x be the actual number 
of breakdowns observed during the next month for this machine. Then,
λ = 3
(a) The probability that exactly two breakdowns will be observed during the next month is
P(2) = λx e−λ
x!
= (3)2 e−3
2!
= (9) (.04978707)
2
= .2240
(b) The probability that at most one breakdown will be observed during the next month is 
given by the sum of the probabilities of zero and one breakdown. Thus,
 P(at most 1 breakdown) = P(0 or 1 breakdown) = P(0) + P(1)
 = (3)0 e−3
0!
+ (3)1 e−3
1!
 = (1) (.04978707)
1
+ (3) (.04978707)
1
 
 = .0498 + .1494 = .1992
 
◼
One important point about the Poisson probability distribution is that the intervals for λ and x 
must be equal. If they are not, the mean λ should be redefined to make them equal. Example 5–20 
illustrates this point.
EXAMPLE 5–20 
Returning the Purchased Items
Cynthia’s Mail Order Company provides free examination of its products for 7 days. If not 
completely satisfied, a customer can return the product within that period and get a full refund. 
According to past records of the company, an average of 2 of every 10 products sold by this 
company are returned for a refund. Using the Poisson probability distribution formula, find the 
probability that exactly 6 of the 40 products sold by this company on a given day will be returned 
for a refund.
Solution Let x denote the number of products in 40 that will be returned for a refund. We are 
to find P(x = 6), which is usually written as P(6). The given mean is defined per 10 products, but 
Calculating probabilities 
using the Poisson formula.
Remember 
Calculating probability using 
the Poisson formula.

5.6 The Poisson Probability Distribution
209
x is defined for 40 products. As a result, we should first find the mean for 40 products. Because, 
on average, 2 out of 10 products are returned, the mean number of products returned out of 
40 will be 8. Thus, λ = 8. Substituting x = 6 and λ = 8 in the Poisson probability distribution 
formula, we obtain
P(6) = λx e−λ
x!
= (8)6 e−8
6!
= (262,144) (.00033546)
720
= .1221
Thus, the probability is .1221 that exactly 6 products out of 40 sold on a given day will be 
returned. 
◼ 
 
Note that Example 5–20 is actually a binomial problem with p = 2/10 = .20, n = 40, and 
x = 6. In other words, the probability of success (that is, the probability that a product is returned) 
is .20 and the number of trials (products sold) is 40. We are to find the probability of six successes 
(returns). However, we used the Poisson distribution to solve this problem. This is referred to as 
using the Poisson distribution as an approximation to the binomial distribution. We can also use 
the binomial distribution to find this probability as follows:
 P(6) = 40C6 (.20)6 (.80)34 =
40!
6!(40 −6)! (.20)6 (.80)34
 = (3,838,380) (.000064) (.00050706) = .1246
 
Thus the probability P(6) is .1246 when we use the binomial distribution.
 
As we can observe, simplifying the above calculations for the binomial formula is a little 
complicated when n is large. It is much easier to solve this problem using the Poisson probability 
distribution. As a general rule, if it is a binomial problem with n > 25 but μ ≤ 25, then we can use 
the Poisson probability distribution as an approximation to the binomial distribution. However, if 
n > 25 and μ > 25, we prefer to use the normal distribution as an approximation to the binomial 
distribution. The latter case will be discussed in Chapter 6. However, if you are using technology, 
it does not matter how large n is. You can always use the binomial probability distribution if it is 
a binomial problem.
 
Case Study 5–2 presents an application of the Poisson probability distribution.
5.6.1 Using the Table of Poisson Probabilities
The probabilities for a Poisson distribution can also be read from Table III in Appendix B, the 
table of Poisson probabilities. The following example describes how to read that table.
EXAMPLE 5–21 
New Bank Accounts Opened per Day
On average, two new accounts are opened per day at an Imperial Savings Bank branch. Using 
Table III of Appendix B, find the probability that on a given day the number of new accounts 
opened at this bank will be
(a) exactly 6  (b) at most 3  (c) at least 7
Solution Let
 λ = mean number of new accounts opened per day at this bank
 x = number of new accounts opened at this bank on a given day
(a) The values of λ and x are
λ = 2 and x = 6
In Table III of Appendix B, we first locate the column that corresponds to λ = 2. In this 
column, we then read the value for x = 6. The relevant portion of that table is shown here 
Using the table of Poisson 
probabilities.
www.ebook3000.com

GLOBAL BIRTH 
AND DEATH RATES
CASE STUDY 5–2
The accompanying graph shows the average global birth and death rates. According to this information, on 
average, 4.3 children are born per second and 1.8 persons die per second in the world. If we assume that the 
global birth and death rates follow the Poisson probability distribution, we can find the probability of any 
given number of global births or deaths for a given time interval. For example, if x is the actual number of 
global births during a given 1-second interval, then x can assume any (nonnegative integer) value, such as 
0, 1, 2, 3, . . . . The same is true for the number of global deaths during a given 1-second interval. For example, 
if y is the actual number of global deaths during a given 1-second interval, then y can assume any (nonnega-
tive integer) value, such as 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . . Here x and y are both discrete random variables.
 
Using the Poisson formula or Table III of Appendix B, we can find the probability of any values of x and y. 
For example, if we want to find the probability of at most three global births during any given 1-second interval, 
then, using λ = 4.3, we find this probability from Table III as
P(x ≤3) = P(0) + P(1) + P(2) + P(3) = .0136 + .0583 + .1254 + .1798 = .3771
 
Now suppose we want to find the probability of exactly six global births using the Poisson formula. This 
probability is
P(6) = λx e−λ
x!
= 4.36 e−4.3
6!
= .1191
 
As mentioned earlier, let y be the number of global deaths in a given 1-second interval. If we want to find 
the probability of at most two global deaths during any given 1-second interval, then, using λ = 1.8, we find 
this probability from Table III as
P( y ≤2) = P(0) + P(1) + P(2) = .1653 + .2975 + .2678 = .7306
Now suppose we want to find the probability of exactly three global deaths in a given 1-second interval using 
the Poisson formula. This probability is
P(3) = λy e−λ
y!
= 1.83 e−1.8
3!
= .1607
Using Table III of Appendix B, we can prepare the probability distributions of x and y.
GLOBAL BIRTH AND DEATH RATES 
BIRTH RATE
4.3 per second
DEATH RATE
1.8 per second
Congratulations,
It’s a boy!
Congratulations
It’s a girl!
Data source: The International Data Base and U.S. Census Bureau
210

5.6 The Poisson Probability Distribution
211
as Table 5.16. The probability that exactly 6 new accounts will be opened on a given day 
is .0120. Therefore,
P(6) = .0120
Actually, Table 5.16 gives the probability distribution of x for λ = 2.0. Note that the 
sum of the 10 probabilities given in Table 5.16 is .9999 and not 1.0. This is so for two 
reasons. First, these probabilities are rounded to four decimal places. Second, on a given 
day more than 9 new accounts might be opened at this bank. However, the probabilities 
of 10, 11, 12, . . . new accounts are very small, and they are not listed in the table.
(b) The probability that at most three new accounts are opened on a given day is obtained 
by adding the probabilities of 0, 1, 2, and 3 new accounts. Thus, using Table III of 
Appendix B or Table 5.16, we obtain
 P(at most 3) = P(0) + P(1) + P(2) + P(3)
 = .1353 + .2707 + .2707 + .1804 = .8571
(c) The probability that at least 7 new accounts are opened on a given day is obtained by 
adding the probabilities of 7, 8, and 9 new accounts. Note that 9 is the last value of x for 
λ = 2.0 in Table III of Appendix B or Table 5.16. Hence, 9 is the last value of x whose 
probability is included in the sum. However, this does not mean that on a given day more 
than 9 new accounts cannot be opened. It simply means that the probability of 10 or 
more accounts is close to zero. Thus,
 P(at least 7) = P(7) + P(8) + P(9)
 
 = .0034 + .0009 + .0002 = .0045 
◼
EXAMPLE 5–22 
Cars Sold per Day by a Salesman
An auto salesperson sells an average of .9 car per day. Let x be the number of cars sold by this 
salesperson on any given day. Using the Poisson probability distribution table, write the probabil-
ity distribution of x. Draw a graph of the probability distribution.
Solution Let λ be the mean number of cars sold per day by this salesperson. Hence, λ = .9. 
Using the portion of Table III of Appendix B that corresponds to λ = .9, we write the probability 
distribution of x in Table 5.17. Figure 5.8 shows the histogram for the probability distribution of 
Table 5.17.
Constructing a Poisson 
probability distribution 
and graphing it.
x = 6
P(6)
Table 5.16 Portion of Table III for λ = 2.0
 
 
 
λ
x 
1.1 
1.2 
. . . 
2.0
0 
 
 
 
.1353
1 
 
 
 
.2707
2 
 
 
 
.2707
3 
 
 
 
.1804
4 
 
 
 
.0902
5 
 
 
 
.0361
6 
 
 
 
.0120
7 
 
 
 
.0034
8 
 
 
 
.0009
9 
 
 
 
.0002
λ = 2.0
www.ebook3000.com

212
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
 
Note that 6 is the largest value of x for λ = .9 listed in Table III for which the probability 
is greater than zero. However, this does not mean that this salesperson cannot sell more than 
six cars on a given day. What this means is that the probability of selling seven or more cars 
is very small. Actually, the probability of x = 7 for λ = .9 calculated by using the Poisson 
formula is .000039. When rounded to four decimal places, this probability is .0000, as listed 
in Table III. 
◼ 
5.6.2  Mean and Standard Deviation of the Poisson 
Probability Distribution
For the Poisson probability distribution, the mean and variance both are equal to λ, and the stand-
ard deviation is equal to √λ. That is, for the Poisson probability distribution,
μ = λ, σ2 = λ, and σ = √λ
 
For Example 5–22, λ = .9. Therefore, for the probability distribution of x in Table 5.17, the 
mean, variance, and standard deviation are, respectively,
 μ = λ = .9 car
 σ2 = λ = .9
 σ = √λ = √.9 = .949 car
Table 5.17  Probability 
Distribution of x 
for λ = .9
x 
P(x)
0 
.4066
1 
.3659
2 
.1647
3 
.0494
4 
.0111
5 
.0020
6 
.0003
Figure 5.8 Histogram for the probability 
distribution of Table 5.17.
.40
.50
.10
0
.20
.30
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
x
P(x)
EXERCISES
APPLICATIONS
5.51 On average, 5.4 shoplifting incidents occur per week at an 
electronics store. Find the probability that exactly 3 such incidents 
will occur during a given week at this store. Use the Poisson probabil-
ity distribution formula.
5.52 On average, 12.5 rooms stay vacant per day at a large hotel in 
a city. Find the probability that on a given day exactly 3 rooms will be 
vacant. Use the Poisson probability distribution formula.
5.53 A university police department receives an average of 3.7 
reports per week of lost student ID cards.
a. Find the probability that at most 1 such report will be received 
during a given week by this police department. Use the Poisson 
probability distribution formula.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
5.47 What are the conditions that must be satisfied to apply the 
Poisson probability distribution?
5.48 What is the parameter of the Poisson probability distribution, 
and what does it mean?
5.49 Using the Poisson formula, find the following probabilities.
a. P(x ≤ 1) for λ = 5 
b. P(2) for λ = 2.5
Verify these probabilities using Table III of Appendix B.
5.50 Let x be a Poisson random variable. Using the Poisson proba-
bilities table, write the probability distribution of x for each of the 
following. Find the mean, variance, and standard deviation for each of 
these probability distributions. Draw a graph for each of these proba-
bility distributions.
a. λ = 1.3 
 
b. λ = 2.1

Uses and Misuses
213
b. Using the Poisson probabilities table, find the probability that 
during a given week the number of such reports received by 
this police department is
i. 1 to 4   ii. at least 6   iii. at most 3
5.54 A large proportion of small businesses in the United States fail 
during the first few years of operation. On average, 1.6 businesses file 
for bankruptcy per day in a particular large city.
a. Using the Poisson probability distribution formula, find the 
probability that exactly 3 businesses will file for bankruptcy 
on a given day in this city.
b. Using the Poisson probabilities table, find the probability that 
the number of businesses that will file for bankruptcy on a 
given day in this city is
i. 2 to 3   ii. more than 3   iii. less than 3
5.55 The number of students who log in to a randomly selected 
computer in a college computer lab follows a Poisson probability 
distribution with a mean of 19 students per day.
a. Using the Poisson probability distribution formula, determine 
the probability that exactly 12 students will log in to a ran-
domly selected computer at this lab on a given day.
b. Using the Poisson probability distribution table, determine the 
probability that the number of students who will log in to a 
randomly selected computer at this lab on a given day is
i. from 13 to 16   ii. fewer than 8
5.56 Although Borok’s Electronics Company has no openings, it 
still receives an average of 3.2 unsolicited applications per week from 
people seeking jobs.
a. Using the Poisson formula, find the probability that this com-
pany will receive no applications next week.
b. Let x denote the number of applications this company will receive 
during a given week. Using the Poisson probabilities table from 
Appendix B, write the probability distribution table of x.
c. Find the mean, variance, and standard deviation of the proba-
bility distribution developed in part b.
5.57 An average of .8 accident occur per day in a particular large city.
a. Find the probability that no accident will occur in this city on 
a given day.
b. Let x denote the number of accidents that will occur in this 
city on a given day. Write the probability distribution of x.
c. Find the mean, variance, and standard deviation of the proba-
bility distribution developed in part b.
*5.58 On average, 20 households in 50 own fax machines at home.
a. Using the Poisson formula, find the probability that in a 
random sample of 50 households, exactly 25 will own fax 
machines.
b. Using the Poisson probabilities table, find the probability that 
the number of households in 50 who own fax machines is
i. at most 12   ii. 13 to 17   iii. at least 30
*5.59 Twenty percent of the cars passing through a school zone are 
exceeding the speed limit by more than 10 mph.
a. Using the Poisson formula, find the probability that in a ran-
dom sample of 100 cars passing through this school zone, 
exactly 25 will exceed the speed limit by more than 10 mph.
b. Using the Poisson probabilities table, find the probability that 
the number of cars exceeding the speed limit by more than 10 
mph in a random sample of 100 cars passing through this 
school zone is
i. at most 8   ii. 15 to 20   iii. at least 30
USES AND MISUSES...
BATTER UP!
In all of sport, there is no other sports that has the history and reputa-
tion for the use of statistics than baseball. The book and movie adap-
tion of Moneyball: The Art of Winning an Unfair Game by Michael 
Lewis brought to light the importance of statistics in baseball to the 
general public. Of course, this is nothing new to true fans of the game 
who participate in “Fantasy Baseball” and have become experts in 
sabermetrics, the term coined by Bill James for the statistical analysis 
of baseball in-game activity—the term derives from the acronym 
SABR (Society for American Baseball Research). In fact, there is 
quite a following for data published by the Player Empirical Com-
parison and Optimization Test Algorithm (PECOTA) for projecting 
baseball player performance.
 
One of the most commonly reported baseball statistics is the 
batting average. Even though this is often considered to be a some-
what weak measure of player ability overall because of its singular 
dependence on one facet of the game, there is still keen interest in 
this statistic. In baseball, the batting average is defined as the num-
ber of hits divided by the number of times at bat. For example, if a 
batter goes to the plate 10 times and gets a hit on 3 of those occa-
sions, then the batting average is 3/10 = .3. In baseball parlance, this 
is translated to three decimal places, so we would report this batting 
average to be .300.
 
One would think that most players, inasmuch as batting is such 
an important part of the game, would have very high batting averages. 
However, Ty Cobb, who holds the record for highest career batting 
average, only hit .366; the lowest career average was recorded for Bill 
Bergen (.170). The highest single season average in the modern era 
was .426, which was achieved in 1901 by Napoleon Lajoie. Hitting a 
.400 is a goal of many players, though it is extraordinarily rare even for 
short periods of time, let alone an entire season or over a career.
 
To see an example of this, it is important to consider that it is not 
uncommon for an average player who plays regularly to have over 600 
at-bats in a given season. Hence, such a player would have to get 240 
hits in order to reach the elusive .400. We can perform some quick 
calculations to see just how rare it would be for a player of a given bat-
ting average to hit .400 or higher. For example, if a player normally bats 
a .350, how likely would he be able to maintain a batting average of .400 
or higher over several at-bats? We can use the binomial distribution to 
answer this question. For example, we could calculate the probability of 
hitting .400 or higher over 10 chances at the plate. Out of 10 at-bats, this 
would be equivalent to calculating P(x ≥4) = 1 −P(x ≤3). Using the 
www.ebook3000.com

214
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
binomial formula from this chapter, this probability works out to be 
.4862, or about a 48.62% chance that a regular .350 hitter will bat .400 
or higher in 10 batting opportunities. If we repeat this calculation for a 
.300 average batter, a .250 average batter, and a .200 average batter, 
we can complete the following table:
Regular Season 
Batting Average
 
Probability of batting at 
least .400 in 10 at-bats
.350
.4862
.300
.3504
.250
.2241
.200
.1209
As can be seen, the probability of hitting a .400 or better for the average 
batter, even over a relatively small number of bats, is very low. We can 
easily repeat this procedure for any number of batting opportunities.
 
In the table below, we examine up to 100 at-bats (or about 1/6 of 
a standard season) for players with a batting average ranging from 
.200 to .350.
Probability of Batting at Least .400
Number 
of at-bats
Regular Season Batting Average
.350
.300
.250
.200
5
.572
.472
.367
.263
10
.486
.350
.224
.121
15
.436
.278
.148
.061
20
.399
.228
.102
.032
25
.370
.189
.071
.017
30
.345
.159
.051
.009
35
.324
.135
.036
.005
40
.305
.115
.026
.003
45
.289
.099
.019
.002
50
.274
.085
.014
.001
55
.260
.073
.010
.001
60
.247
.063
.007
<.001
65
.235
.055
.006
<.001
70
.225
.048
.004
<.001
75
.214
.041
.003
<.001
80
.205
.036
.002
<.001
85
.196
.031
.002
<.001
90
.188
.027
.001
<.001
95
.180
.024
.001
<.001
100
.172
.021
.001
<.001
 
It is clear that reaching .400 happens with very low probability. 
Even for a very good hitter (.350 average), maintaining a .400 or higher 
average declines very rapidly as the number of at-bats increases.
 
Here we have seen that the binomial distribution can be used 
to make projections of reaching the nearly unattainable .400 batting 
average. Of course, there are players who manage to exceed a batting 
average of .400 but just not for very long. There are many other factors 
that could play into high batting average (e.g., who is pitching, a player 
having a good batting day just by chance, etc.). But can a player main-
tain a high batting average for long? We should not bet on it.
Mean of a discrete random variable The mean of a discrete random 
variable x is the value that is expected to occur per repetition, on aver-
age, if an experiment is repeated a large number of times. The mean of 
a discrete random variable is also called its expected value.
Poisson parameter The average occurrences, denoted by λ, during 
an interval for a Poisson probability distribution.
Poisson probability distribution The probability distribution that 
gives the probability of x occurrences in an interval when the average 
number of occurrences in that interval is λ.
Probability distribution of a discrete random variable A list of 
all the possible values that a discrete random variable can assume and 
their corresponding probabilities.
Random variable A variable, denoted by x, whose value is deter-
mined by the outcome of a random experiment. Also called a chance 
variable.
Standard deviation of a discrete random variable A measure 
of spread for the probability distribution of a discrete random 
variable.
Bernoulli trial One repetition of a binomial experiment. Also 
called a trial.
Binomial experiment An experiment that contains n identical trials 
such that each of these n trials has only two possible outcomes (or 
events), the probabilities of these two outcomes (or events) remain 
constant for each trial, and the trials are independent.
Binomial parameters The total trials n and the probability of 
success p for the binomial probability distribution.
Binomial probability distribution The probability distribution 
that gives the probability of x successes in n trials when the probabil-
ity of success is p for each trial of a binomial experiment.
Continuous random variable A random variable that can assume 
any value in one or more intervals.
Discrete random variable A random variable whose values are 
countable.
Hypergeometric probability distribution The probability distri-
bution that is applied to determine the probability of x successes in n 
trials when the trials are not independent.
Glossary

Advanced Exercises
215
Corporation. The motors are received in large shipments. The qual-
ity control department at Maine Corporation randomly selects 20 
motors from each shipment and inspects them for being good or 
defective. If this sample contains more than two defective motors, 
the entire shipment is rejected.
a. Using the appropriate probabilities table from Appendix B, 
find the probability that a given shipment of motors received 
by Maine Corporation will be accepted. Assume that 5% of all 
motors received are defective.
b. Using the appropriate probabilities table from Appendix B, 
find the probability that a given shipment of motors received 
by Maine Corporation will be rejected.
5.66 In a list of 15 households, 9 own homes and 6 do not own homes. 
Four households are randomly selected from these 15 households. 
Find the probability that the number of households in these 4 who 
own homes is
a. exactly 3  b. at most 1  c. exactly 4
5.67 Alison Bender works for an accounting firm. To make sure her 
work does not contain errors, her manager randomly checks on her 
work. Alison recently filled out 12 income tax returns for the company’s 
clients. Unknown to anyone, two of these 12 returns have minor 
errors. Alison’s manager randomly selects three returns from these 12 
returns. Find the probability that
a. exactly 1 of them contains errors
b. none of them contains errors
c. exactly 2 of them contain errors
5.68 An average of 6.3 robberies occur per day in a large city.
a. Using the Poisson formula, find the probability that on a given 
day exactly 3 robberies will occur in this city.
b. Using the appropriate probabilities table from Appendix B, 
find the probability that on a given day the number of robberies 
that will occur in this city is
 
i. at least 12  ii. at most 3  iii. 2 to 6
5.69 An average of 1.4 private airplanes arrive per hour at an airport.
a. Find the probability that during a given hour no private air-
plane will arrive at this airport.
b. Let x denote the number of private airplanes that will arrive at this 
airport during a given hour. Write the probability distribution 
of x. Use the appropriate probabilities table from Appendix B.
5.70 A high school boys’ basketball team averages 1.2 technical 
fouls per game.
a. Using the appropriate formula, find the probability that in a given 
basketball game this team will commit exactly 3 technical fouls.
b. Let x denote the number of technical fouls that this team will 
commit during a given basketball game. Using the appropriate 
probabilities table from Appendix B, write the probability 
distribution of x.
5.60 Let x be the number of cars that a randomly selected auto 
mechanic repairs on a given day. The following table lists the proba-
bility distribution of x.
x
2
3
4
5
6
P(x)
.05
.22
.40
.23
.10
Find the mean and standard deviation of x. Give a brief interpretation 
of the value of the mean.
5.61 Let x be the number of emergency root canal surgeries per-
formed by Dr. Sharp on a given Monday. The following table lists the 
probability distribution of x.
x
0
1
2
3
4
5
P(x)
.13
.28
.30
.17
.08
.04
Calculate the mean and standard deviation of x. Give a brief interpre-
tation of the value of the mean.
5.62 Based on its analysis of the future demand for its products, the 
financial department at Tipper Corporation has determined that there 
is a .17 probability that the company will lose $1.2 million during the 
next year, a .21 probability that it will lose $.7 million, a .37 probabil-
ity that it will make a profit of $.9 million, and a .25 probability that it 
will make a profit of $2.3 million.
a. Let x be a random variable that denotes the profit earned by 
this corporation during the next year. Write the probability 
distribution of x.
b. Find the mean and standard deviation of the probability distribu-
tion of part a. Give a brief interpretation of the value of the mean.
5.63 Spoke Weaving Corporation has eight weaving machines of the 
same kind and of the same age. The probability is .04 that any weav-
ing machine will break down at any time. Find the probability that at 
any given time
a. all eight weaving machines will be broken down
b. exactly two weaving machines will be broken down
c. none of the weaving machines will be broken down
5.64 At the Bank of California, past data show that 8% of all credit 
card holders default at some time in their lives. On one recent day, this 
bank issued 12 credit cards to new customers. Find the probability 
that of these 12 customers, eventually
a. exactly 3 will default 
b. exactly 1 will default 
c. none will default
5.65 Maine Corporation buys motors for electric fans from another 
company that guarantees that at most 5% of its motors are defective 
and that it will replace all defective motors at no cost to Maine 
Supplementary Exercises
you? Should you accept this offer? Support your conclusion with 
appropriate calculations.
5.72 Suppose the owner of a salvage company is considering rais-
ing a sunken ship. If successful, the venture will yield a net profit of 
5.71 Scott offers you the following game: You will roll two fair dice. 
If the sum of the two numbers obtained is 2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 11, or 12, 
Scott will pay you $20. However, if the sum of the two numbers is 5, 
6, 7, or 8, you will pay Scott $20. Scott points out that you have seven 
winning numbers and only four losing numbers. Is this game fair to 
Advanced Exercises
www.ebook3000.com

216
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
$10 million. Otherwise, the owner will lose $4 million. Let p denote 
the probability of success for this venture. Assume the owner is 
willing to take the risk to go ahead with this project provided the 
expected net profit is at least $500,000.
a. If p = .40, find the expected net profit. Will the owner be will-
ing to take the risk with this probability of success?
b. What is the smallest value of p for which the owner will take 
the risk to undertake this project?
5.73 York Steel Corporation produces a special bearing that must 
meet rigid specifications. When the production process is running 
properly, 10% of the bearings fail to meet the required specifica-
tions. Sometimes problems develop with the production process that 
cause the rejection rate to exceed 10%. To guard against this higher 
rejection rate, samples of 15 bearings are taken periodically and 
carefully inspected. If more than 2 bearings in a sample of 15 fail to 
meet the required specifications, production is suspended for neces-
sary adjustments.
a. If the true rate of rejection is 10% (that is, the production 
process is working properly), what is the probability that 
the production will be suspended based on a sample of 15 
bearings?
b. What assumptions did you make in part a?
5.74 Residents in an inner-city area are concerned about drug 
dealers entering their neighborhood. Over the past 14 nights, they 
have taken turns watching the street from a darkened apartment. 
Drug deals seem to take place randomly at various times and loca-
tions on the street and average about three per night. The residents 
of this street contacted the local police, who informed them that 
they do not have sufficient resources to set up surveillance. The 
police suggested videotaping the activity on the street, and if 
the residents are able to capture five or more drug deals on tape, 
the police will take action. Unfortunately, none of the residents on 
this street owns a video camera and, hence, they would have to 
rent the equipment. Inquiries at the local dealers indicated that the 
best available rate for renting a video camera is $75 for the first 
night and $40 for each additional night. To obtain this rate, the 
residents must sign up in advance for a specified number of 
nights. The residents hold a neighborhood meeting and invite you 
to help them decide on the length of the rental period. Because it 
is difficult for them to pay the rental fees, they want to know the 
probability of taping at least five drug deals on a given number of 
nights of videotaping.
a. Which of the probability distributions you have studied might 
be helpful here?
b. What assumption(s) would you have to make?
c. If the residents tape for two nights, what is the probability 
they will film at least five drug deals?
d. For how many nights must the camera be rented so that there 
is at least .90 probability that five or more drug deals will be 
taped?
5.75 A high school history teacher gives a 50-question multiple-
choice examination in which each question has four choices. The 
scoring includes a penalty for guessing. Each correct answer is 
worth 1 point, and each wrong answer costs 1∕2 point. For example, 
if a student answers 35 questions correctly, 8 questions incorrectly, 
and does not answer 7 questions, the total score for this student will 
be 35 − (1∕2)(8) = 31.
a. What is the expected score of a student who answers 38 ques-
tions correctly and guesses on the other 12 questions? Assume 
that the student randomly chooses one of the four answers for 
each of the 12 guessed questions.
b. Does a student increase his expected score by guessing on a 
question if he has no idea what the correct answer is? Explain.
c. Does a student increase her expected score by guessing on a 
question for which she can eliminate one of the wrong 
answers? Explain.
5.76 A baker who makes fresh cheesecakes daily sells an average of 
five such cakes per day. How many cheesecakes should he make each 
day so that the probability of running out and losing one or more sales 
is less than .10? Assume that the number of cheesecakes sold each day 
follows a Poisson probability distribution. You may use the Poisson 
probabilities table from Appendix B.
5.77 Consider the following three games. Which one would you be 
most likely to play? Which one would you be least likely to play? 
Explain your answer mathematically.
Game I: 
 You toss a fair coin once. If a head appears you 
receive $3, but if a tail appears you have to pay $1.
Game II: 
 You buy a single ticket for a raffle that has a total of 
500 tickets. Two tickets are chosen without 
replacement from the 500. The holder of the first 
ticket selected receives $300, and the holder of the 
second ticket selected receives $150.
Game III: 
 You toss a fair coin once. If a head appears you 
receive $1,000,002, but if a tail appears you have to 
pay $1,000,000.
5.78 The number of calls that come into a small mail-order company 
follows a Poisson distribution. Currently, these calls are serviced by 
a single operator. The manager knows from past experience that an 
additional operator will be needed if the rate of calls exceeds 20 per 
hour. The manager observes that 9 calls came into the mail-order 
company during a randomly selected 15-minute period.
a. If the rate of calls is actually 20 per hour, what is the probabil-
ity that 9 or more calls will come in during a given 15-minute 
period?
b. If the rate of calls is really 30 per hour, what is the probability 
that 9 or more calls will come in during a given 15-minute 
period?
c. Based on the calculations in parts a and b, do you think that 
the rate of incoming calls is more likely to be 20 or 30 per 
hour?
d. Would you advise the manager to hire a second operator? 
Explain.
5.79 Many of you probably played the game “Rock, Paper, Scis-
sors” as a child. Consider the following variation of that game. 
Instead of two players, suppose three players play this game, and 
let us call these players A, B, and C. Each player selects one of 
these three items—Rock, Paper, or Scissors—independent of each 
other. Player A will win the game if all three players select the same 
item, for example, rock. Player B will win the game if exactly two 
of the three players select the same item and the third player selects 
a different item. Player C will win the game if every player selects 
a different item. If Player B wins the game, he or she will be paid 
$1. If Player C wins the game, he or she will be paid $3. Assuming 
that the expected winnings should be the same for each player to 
make this a fair game, how much should Player A be paid if he or 
she wins the game?

Decide for Yourself
217
15. According to a survey, 60% of adults believe that all college stu-
dents should be required to perform a specified number of hours of 
community service to graduate. Assume that this percentage is true 
for the current population of adults.
a. Find the probability that the number of adults in a random 
sample of 12 who hold this view is
 
i. exactly 8 (use the appropriate formula)
 
ii. at least 6 (use the appropriate table from Appendix B)
 
iii. less than 4 (use the appropriate table from Appendix B)
b. Let x be the number of adults in a random sample of 12 who 
believe that all college students should be required to perform 
a specified number of hours of community service to gradu-
ate. Using the appropriate table from Appendix B, write 
the probability distribution of x. Find the mean and standard 
deviation of x.
16. The Red Cross honors and recognizes its best volunteers from 
time to time. One of the Red Cross offices has received 12 nomina-
tions for the next group of 4 volunteers to be recognized. Eight of 
these 12 nominated volunteers are females. If the Red Cross office 
decides to randomly select 4 names out of these 12 nominated volun-
teers, find the probability that of these 4 volunteers
a. exactly 3 are females
b. exactly 1 is female
c. at most 1 is female
17. The police department in a large city has installed a traffic camera 
at a busy intersection. Any car that runs a red light will be photographed 
with its license plate visible, and the driver will receive a citation. Sup-
pose that during the morning rush hour of weekdays, an average of 10 
drivers are caught running the red light per day by this system.
a. Find the probability that during the morning rush hour on a 
given weekday this system will catch
 i. exactly 14 drivers (use the appropriate formula)
 ii.  at most 7 drivers (use the appropriate table from 
Appendix B)
 iii.  13 to 18 drivers (use the appropriate table from 
Appendix B)
b. Let x be the number of drivers caught by this system during 
the morning rush hour on a given weekday. Write the prob-
ability distribution of x. Use the appropriate table from 
Appendix B.
18. The binomial probability distribution is symmetric when p = .50, 
it is skewed to the right when p < .50, and it is skewed to the left 
when p > .50. Illustrate these three cases by writing three probabil-
ity distributions and graphing them. Choose any values of n (4 or 
higher) and p and use the table of binomial probabilities (Table I of 
Appendix B).
 1. Briefly explain the meaning of a random variable, a discrete 
random variable, and a continuous random variable. Give one example 
each of a discrete and a continuous random variable.
 2. What name is given to a table that lists all of the values that 
a discrete random variable x can assume and their corresponding 
probabilities?
 3. For the probability distribution of a discrete random variable, the 
probability of any single value of x is always
a. in the range 0 to 1  b. 1.0  c. less than zero
 4. For the probability distribution of a discrete random variable, the 
sum of the probabilities of all possible values of x is always
a. greater than 1  b. 1.0  c. less than 1.0
 5. State the four conditions of a binomial experiment. Give one 
example of such an experiment.
 6. The parameters of the binomial probability distribution are
a. n, p, and q  b. n and p  c. n, p, and x
 7. The mean and standard deviation of a binomial probability distri-
bution with n = 25 and p = .20 are
a. 5 and 2  b. 8 and 4  c. 4 and 3
 8. The binomial probability distribution is symmetric if
a. p < .5  b. p = .5  c. p > .5
 9. The binomial probability distribution is skewed to the right if
a. p < .5  b. p = .5  c. p > .5
10. The binomial probability distribution is skewed to the left if
a. p < .5  b. p = .5  c. p > .5
11. Briefly explain when a hypergeometric probability distribu-
tion is used. Give one example of a hypergeometric probability 
distribution.
12. The parameter/parameters of the Poisson probability distribution 
is/are
a. λ  b. λ and x  c. λ and e
13. Describe the three conditions that must be satisfied to apply the 
Poisson probability distribution.
14. Let x be the number of homes sold per week by all four real 
estate agents who work at a realty office. The following table lists the 
probability distribution of x.
x
0
1
2
3
4
5
P(x)
.15
.24
.29
.14
.10
.08
Calculate the mean and standard deviation of x. Give a brief interpre-
tation of the value of the mean.
Self-Review Test
Note: The Mini-Projects are located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Mini-Projects
Note: The Decide for Yourself feature is located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Decide for Yourself
www.ebook3000.com

218
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
TI-84 Color/TI-84
CHAPTER 5
TECHNOLOGY 
INSTRUCTIONS
The TI-84 Color Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for the TI-84 Plus C 
color graphing calculator running the 4.0 operating system. Some screens, menus, and func-
tions will be slightly different in older operating systems. The TI-84 and TI-84 Plus can perform 
all of the same functions but will not have the “Color” option referenced in some of the menus.
Calculating a Binomial Probability for Example 5–14(a) of the Text
1. Select 2nd > VARS > binompdf(.
2. Use the following settings in the binompdf menu (see Screen 5.1):
• At the trials prompt, type 6.
• At the p prompt, type 0.3.
• At the x value prompt, type 3.
3. Highlight Paste and press ENTER twice.
4. The output P(3) = .18522 will appear on the screen.
Calculating a Cumulative Binomial Probability for Example 5–14(b) 
of the Text
1. Select 2nd > VARS > binomcdf(.
2. Use the following settings in the binomcdf menu:
• At the trials prompt, type 6.
• At the p prompt, type 0.3.
• At the x value prompt, type 2.
3. Highlight Paste and press ENTER twice.
4. The output P(x ≤ 2) = .74431 will appear on the screen.
Note: The difference between binompdf and binomcdf is that binompdf calculates the probability 
P(2) while binomcdf calculates the cumulative probability P(x ≤ 2).
Preparing a Binomial Probability Distribution for Example 5–14(e) 
of the Text
 1. Select STAT > EDIT > Edit.
 2.  Type 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 into L1. These are all possible values of x for a binomial 
probability distribution when n = 6. (See Screen 5.3.)
 3. Select 2nd > MODE to return to the home screen.
 4. Select 2nd > VARS > binompdf(.
 5. Use the following settings in the binompdf menu:
• At the trials prompt, type 6.
• At the p prompt, type 0.3.
• At the x value prompt, select 2nd > STAT > L1. (See Screen 5.2.)
Note: Complete TI-84, Minitab, and Excel manuals are available for download at the textbook’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Screen 5.1
Screen 5.2

Technology Instructions
219
 6. Highlight Paste and press ENTER.
 7. Press STO.
 8. Select 2nd > STAT > L2.
 9. Press ENTER.
 10. Select STAT > EDIT > Edit… to see the probability distribution. (See Screen 5.3.)
Calculating a Hypergeometric Probability for Example 5–17(a) 
of the Text
1. Access the Home screen.
2. Enter 20C3 by following these steps (see Screen 5.4):
• Type (20.
• Select MATH > PROB > nCr.
• Type 3).
3. Press ×.
4. Enter 5C1 by following these steps (see Screen 5.4):
• Type (5.
• Select MATH > PROB > nCr.
• Type 1).
5. Press ÷.
6. Enter 25C4 by following these steps (see Screen 5.4):
• Type 25.
• Select MATH > PROB > nCr.
• Type 4.
7. Press ENTER. P(3) = .4505928854 will appear on the screen.
Calculating a Poisson Probability for Example 5–21(a) of the Text
1. Select 2nd > VARS > poissonpdf(.
2. Use the following settings in the poissonpdf menu (see Screen 5.5):
• At the λ prompt, type 2.
• At the x value prompt, type 6.
3. Highlight Paste and press ENTER twice.
4. The output P(6) = .012029803 will appear on the screen.
Calculating a Cumulative Poisson Probability for Example 5–21(b) 
of the Text
1. Select 2nd > VARS > poissoncdf(.
2. Use the following settings in the poissoncdf menu:
• At the λ prompt, type 2.
• At the x value prompt, type 3.
Screen 5.3
Screen 5.4
Screen 5.5
www.ebook3000.com

220
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
3. Highlight Paste and press ENTER twice.
4. The output P(x ≤ 3) = .8571234606 will appear on the screen.
Note: The difference between poissonpdf and poissoncdf is that poissonpdf calculates the probability 
P(x = 3) while poissoncdf calculates the cumulative probability P(x ≤ 3).
The Minitab Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Minitab version 17. Some 
screens, menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Minitab.
Calculating a Binomial Probability for Example 5–14(a) of the Text
1. Select Calc > Probability Distributions > Binomial.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen (see Screen 5.6):
• Select Probability.
• In the Number of trials box, type 6.
• In the Event probability box, type 0.3
• Select Input constant and type 3 in the input column box.
3. Click OK. The output P(3) = .18522 will appear in the Session window. 
(See Screen 5.7.)
Minitab
Screen 5.6

Technology Instructions
221
Calculating a Cumulative Binomial Probability for Example 5–14(b) 
of the Text
1. Select Calc > Probability Distributions > Binomial.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Select Cumulative probability.
• Type 6 in the Number of trials box.
• Type 0.3 in the Event probability box.
• Select Input constant and type 2 in the Input constant box.
3. Click OK. The output P(x ≤ 2) = .74431 will appear in the Session window. (See Screen 5.7.)
Preparing a Binomial Probability Distribution for Example 5–14(e) 
of the Text
1. Type 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 into column C1. These are all possible values of x for a binomial 
probability distribution when n = 6.
2. Select Calc > Probability Distributions > Binomial.
3. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen (see Screen 5.8):
• Select Probability.
• Type 6 in the Number of trials box.
• Type 0.3 in the Event probability box.
• Select Input column and type C1 in the Input column box.
• Type C2 in the Optional storage box.
4. Click OK. The output will appear in the Worksheet window.
Screen 5.7
www.ebook3000.com

222
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
Calculating a Hypergeometric Probability for Example 5–17(a) 
of the Text
1. Select Calc > Probability Distributions > Hypergeometric.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Select Probability.
• In the Population size box, type 12.
• In the Event count in population box, type 7.
• In the Sample size box, type 3.
• Select Input constant and type 3 in the Input constant box.
3. Click OK. The output P(3) = .159091 will appear in the Session window.
Calculating a Cumulative Hypergeometric Probability 
for Example 5–17(b) of the Text
1. Select Calc > Probability Distributions > Hypergeometric.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Select Cumulative probability.
• In the Population size box, type 12.
• In the Event count in population box, type 7.
• In the Sample size box, type 3.
• Select Input constant and type 1 in the Input constant box.
3. Click OK. The output P(x ≤ 1) = .363636 will appear in the Session window.
Screen 5.8

Technology Instructions
223
Calculating a Poisson Probability for Example 5–21(a) of the Text
1. Select Calc > Probability Distributions > Poisson.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Select Probability.
• In the Mean box, type 2.
• Select Input constant and type 6 in the Input constant box.
3. Click OK. The output P(6) = .0120298 will appear in the Session window.
Calculating a Cumulative Poisson Probability for Example 5–21(b) 
of the Text
1. Select Calc > Probability Distributions > Poisson.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Select Cumulative probability.
• In the Mean box, type 2.
• Select Input constant and type 3 in the Input constant box.
3. Click OK. The output P(x ≤ 3) = .857123 will appear in the Session window.
The Excel Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Excel 2013. Some screens, 
menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Excel. To enable some 
of the advanced Excel functions, you must enable the Data Analysis Add-In for Excel. For 
Excel 2007 and older versions of Excel, replace the function BINOM.DIST with the function 
BINOMDIST.
Calculating a Binomial Probability for Example 5–14(a) of the Text
1. Click on cell A1.
2. Type =BINOM.DIST(3, 6, 0.3, 0). (See Screen 5.9.)
Note: Entering a 0 as the fourth value in this function causes Excel to calculate the probability P(0).
3. Press ENTER. The probability P(3) = .18522 will appear in cell A1.
Calculating a Cumulative Binomial Probability for Example 5–14(b) 
of the Text
1. Click on cell A1.
2. Type =BINOM.DIST(2, 6, 0.3, 1).
Excel
Screen 5.9
www.ebook3000.com

224
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
Note: Entering a 1 as the fourth value in this function causes Excel to calculate the cumulative 
probability P(x ≤ 2).
3. Press ENTER. The probability P(x ≤ 2) = .74431 will appear in cell A1.
Preparing a Binomial Probability Distribution for Example 5–14(e) 
of the Text
1. Type 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 into cells A1 to A7. These are all possible values of x for a 
binomial probability distribution when n = 6.
2. Click on cell B1.
3. Type =BINOM.DIST(A1, 6, 0.3, 0). (See Screen 5.10.)
4. Press ENTER.
5. Copy and paste the formula from cell B1 into cells B2 to B7.
Calculating a Hypergeometric Probability for Example 5–17(a) 
of the Text
1. Click on cell A1.
2. Type =HYPGEOM.DIST(3, 3, 7, 12, 0).
Note: Entering a 1 as the fifth value in this function causes Excel to calculate the probability P(3).
3. Press ENTER. The probability P(3) = .159091 will appear in cell A1.
Calculating a Cumulative Hypergeometric Probability 
for Example 5–17(b) of the Text
1. Click on cell A1.
2. Type =HYPGEOM.DIST(1, 3, 7, 12, 1).
Note: Entering a 1 as the fifth value in this function causes Excel to calculate the cumulative 
probability P(x ≤ 1).
3. Press ENTER. The probability P(x ≤ 1) = .363636 will appear in cell A1.
Screen 5.10

Technology Assignments
225
Calculating a Poisson Probability for Example 5–21(a) of the Text
1. Click on cell A1.
2. Type =POISSON.DIST(6,2,0).
3. Press ENTER. The probability P(6) = .01203 will appear in cell A1.
Calculating a Cumulative Poisson Probability for Example 5–21(b) 
of the Text
1. Click on cell A1.
2. Type =POISSON.DIST(3,2,1).
Note: Entering a 1 as the third value in this function causes Excel to calculate the cumulative 
 probability P(x ≤ 1).
3. Press ENTER. The probability P(x ≤ 1) = .857123 will appear in cell A1.
c. Create the probability distribution of x. Report the probability 
distribution in table form and display it in a histogram.
d. From the probability distribution in part c, find the probability 
that at least 9 of the 15 employees drink coffee daily.
e. From the probability distribution in part c, find the probability 
that at most 7 of the 15 employees drink coffee daily.
TA5.4 A friend has a coin that he believes is unfair (not balanced). 
He suspects that the coin will land heads 70% of the time it is tossed.
a. Assume for a moment that your friend’s claim is correct. What 
is the probability that in 20 tosses, the coin would land heads 
12 or fewer times?
b. If your friend actually tossed the coin 20 times and obtained 12 
or fewer heads, would you have good reason to doubt that your 
friend’s claim (that the coin lands heads 70% of the time) is true?
c. Let x be the number of heads in 20 tosses of this coin with a 
70% chance of lending heads. Obtain the probability distribu-
tion of x.
d. Assuming that your friend’s claim is true, what is the proba-
bility that in 100 tosses, the coin would land heads 60 or fewer 
times?
e. If your friend actually tossed the coin 100 times and obtained 
60 or fewer heads, would you have good reason to doubt that 
your friend’s claim (that the coin lands heads 70% of the time) 
is true?
TA5.5 The purpose of this assignment is to investigate some of the 
properties of the binomial probability distribution.
a. Suppose that for a binomial experiment with n = 10 trials, the 
probability of success is p = .10, and x is the number of successes. 
Obtain the probability distribution of x. Make a histogram for 
the probability distribution and comment on its shape. Find the 
mean and standard deviation of x.
TA5.1 Forty-five percent of the adult population in a particular large 
city are women. A court is to randomly select a jury of 12 adults from 
the population of all adults of this city.
a. Find the probability that none of the 12 jurors is a woman.
b. Find the probability that at most 4 of the 12 jurors are women.
c. Let x denote the number of women in 12 adults selected for 
this jury. Obtain the probability distribution of x.
d. Using the probability distribution obtained in part c, find the 
following probabilities.
i. P(x > 6)  ii. P(x ≤ 3)  iii. P(2 ≤ x ≤ 7)
TA5.2 According to a Pew Research Center survey released on 
May 12, 2015, 22.8% of U.S. adults do not have a religious affiliation 
(Time, May 25, 2015). Assume that this result is true for the current 
population of U.S. adults.
a. Find the probability that in a random sample of 50 U.S. adults, 
exactly 15 do not have a religious affiliation.
b. Find the probability that in a random sample of 100 U.S. 
adults, at most 33 do not have a religious affiliation.
c. Find the probability that in a random sample of 80 U.S. adults, 
at least 18 do not have a religious affiliation.
d. Find the probability that in a random sample of 60 U.S. adults, 
10 to 20 adults do not have a religious affiliation.
e. Let x denote the number of adults in a random sample of 15 
U.S. adults who do not have a religious affiliation. Prepare the 
probability distribution of x.
TA5.3 Suppose that 85% of the employees at a large company drink 
coffee daily. A manager takes a random sample of 15 employees.
a. Find the probability that all 15 employees drink coffee daily.
b. Find the probability that 10 of the 15 employees drink coffee 
daily.
TECHNOLOGY ASSIGNMENTS
www.ebook3000.com

226
Chapter 5 Discrete Random Variables and Their Probability Distributions
TA5.7 A mail-order company receives an average of 40 orders per 
day.
a. Find the probability that it will receive exactly 55 orders on a 
certain day.
b. Find the probability that it will receive at most 29 orders on a 
certain day.
c. Let x denote the number of orders received by this company 
on a given day. Obtain the probability distribution of x.
d. Using the probability distribution obtained in part c, find the 
following probabilities.
i. P(x ≥ 45)  ii. P(x < 33)  iii. P(36 < x < 52)
TA5.8 A commuter airline receives an average of 13 complaints per 
week from its passengers. Let x denote the number of complaints 
received by this airline during a given week.
a. Find P(x = 0). If your answer is zero, does it mean that this 
cannot happen? Explain.
b. Find P(x ≤ 10).
c. Obtain the probability distribution of x.
d. Using the probability distribution obtained in part c, find the 
following probabilities.
i. P(x > 18)  ii. P(x ≤ 9)  iii. P(10 ≤ x ≤ 17)
b. Suppose that for a binomial experiment with n = 10 trials, the 
probability of success is p = .50, and x is the number of suc-
cesses. Obtain the probability distribution of x. Make a histo-
gram for the probability distribution and comment on its shape. 
Find the mean and standard deviation of x.
c. Suppose that for a binomial experiment with n = 10 trials, the 
probability of success is p = .80, and x is the number of suc-
cesses. Obtain the probability distribution of x. Make a histo-
gram for the probability distribution and comment on its 
shape. Find the mean and standard deviation of x.
d. Which of the distributions in parts a–c had the greatest varia-
bility in the number of successes? Why does this make sense?
TA5.6 An Internal Revenue Service inspector is to select 3 corpora-
tions from a list of 15 for tax audit purposes. Of the 15 corporations, 
6 earned profits and 9 incurred losses during the year for which the tax 
returns are to be audited. If the IRS inspector decides to select 3 corpo-
rations randomly, find the probability that the number of corporations 
in these 3 that incurred losses during the year for which the tax returns 
are to be audited is
a. exactly 2
b. none
c. at most 1

227
227
CHAPTER6
Discrete random variables and their probability distributions were presented in Chapter 5. Section 5.1 
defined a continuous random variable as a variable that can assume any value in one or more 
intervals.
The possible values that a continuous random variable can assume are infinite and uncountable. 
For example, the variable that represents the time taken by a worker to commute from home to work 
is a continuous random variable. Suppose 5 minutes is the minimum time and 130 minutes is the 
maximum time taken by all workers to commute from home to work. Let x be a continuous random 
variable that denotes the time taken to commute from home to work by a randomly selected worker. 
Then x can assume any value in the interval 5 to 130 minutes. This interval contains an infinite number 
of values that are uncountable.
A continuous random variable can possess one of many probability distributions. In this chapter, 
we discuss the normal probability distribution and the normal distribution as an approximation to the 
binomial distribution.
© Mauritius/SuperStock
Continuous Random Variables 
and the Normal Distribution
Have you ever participated in a road race? If you have, where did you stand in comparison to the other 
runners? Do you think the time taken to finish a road race varies as much among runners as the runners 
themselves? See Case Study 6–1 for the distribution of times for runners who completed the Manchester 
(Connecticut) Road Race in 2014.
6.1 Continuous Probability 
Distribution and the 
Normal Probability 
Distribution
Case Study 6–1 Distribution 
of Time Taken to Run a 
Road Race
6.2 Standardizing a Normal 
Distribution
6.3 Applications of the 
Normal Distribution
6.4 Determining the z and x 
Values When an Area 
Under the Normal 
Distribution Curve Is 
Known
6.5 The Normal 
Approximation to the 
Binomial Distribution
Appendix 6–1 Normal 
Quantile Plots
www.ebook3000.com

228
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
In this section we will learn about the continuous probability distribution and its properties and 
then discuss the normal probability distribution.
 
In Chapter 5, we defined a continuous random variable as a random variable whose values 
are not countable. A continuous random variable can assume any value over an interval or inter-
vals. Because the number of values contained in any interval is infinite, the possible number of 
values that a continuous random variable can assume is also infinite. Moreover, we cannot count 
these values. In Chapter 5, it was stated that the life of a battery, heights of people, time taken to 
complete an examination, amount of milk in a gallon container, weights of babies, and prices of 
houses are all examples of continuous random variables. Note that although money can be 
counted, variables involving money are often represented by continuous random variables. This 
is so because a variable involving money often has a very large number of outcomes.
6.1.1 Continuous Probability Distribution
Suppose 5000 female students are enrolled at a university, and x is the continuous random 
variable that represents the height of a randomly selected female student. Table 6.1 lists the 
frequency and relative frequency distributions of x.
Table 6.1  Frequency and Relative Frequency Distributions 
of Heights of Female Students
Height of a Female 
Student (inches) 
x
 
f
 
Relative 
Frequency
60 to less than 61
 90
.018
61 to less than 62
170
.034
62 to less than 63
460
.092
63 to less than 64
750
.150
64 to less than 65
970
.194
65 to less than 66
760
.152
66 to less than 67
640
.128
67 to less than 68
440
.088
68 to less than 69
320
.064
69 to less than 70
220
.044
70 to less than 71
180
.036
N = 5000
Sum = 1.0
 
The relative frequencies given in Table 6.1 can be used as the probabilities of the respective 
classes. Note that these are exact probabilities because we are considering the population of all 
female students enrolled at the university.
 
Figure 6.1 displays the histogram and polygon for the relative frequency distribution of 
Table 6.1. Figure 6.2 shows the smoothed polygon for the data of Table 6.1. The smoothed 
polygon is an approximation of the probability distribution curve of the continuous random 
variable x. Note that each class in Table 6.1 has a width equal to 1 inch. If the width of classes 
is more (or less) than 1 unit, we first obtain the relative frequency densities and then graph 
these relative frequency densities to obtain the distribution curve. The relative frequency density 
of a class is obtained by dividing the relative frequency of that class by the class width. The 
relative frequency densities are calculated to make the sum of the areas of all rectangles in the 
histogram equal to 1.0. Case Study 6–1, which appears later in this section, illustrates this 
procedure. The probability distribution curve of a continuous random variable is also called its 
probability density function.
6.1 Continuous Probability Distribution and the Normal 
Probability Distribution

6.1 Continuous Probability Distribution and the Normal Probability Distribution
229
Relative frequency
60
.04
.12
.16
.20
61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70
x
.08
71
Figure 6.1 Histogram and polygon for Table 6.1.
60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70
x
71
Figure 6.2 Probability distribution curve for heights.
 
The probability distribution of a continuous random variable possesses the following two 
characteristics.
1. 
The probability that x assumes a value in any interval lies in the range 0 to 1.
2. The total probability of all the (mutually exclusive) intervals within which x can assume a 
value is 1.0.
 
The first characteristic states that the area under the probability distribution curve of a con-
tinuous random variable between any two points is between 0 and 1, as shown in Figure 6.3. The 
second characteristic indicates that the total area under the probability distribution curve of a 
continuous random variable is always 1.0, or 100%, as shown in Figure 6.4.
x = a
x = b
x
Shaded area is
between 0 and 1
Figure 6.3 Area under a curve between two points.
x
Shaded area is
1.0 or 100%
Figure 6.4 Total area under a probability distribution curve.
 
The probability that a continuous random variable x assumes a value within a certain interval 
is given by the area under the curve between the two limits of the interval, as shown in Figure 6.5. 
The shaded area under the curve from a to b in this figure gives the probability that x falls in the 
interval a to b; that is,
P(a ≤ x ≤ b) = Area under the curve from a to b
 
Note that the interval a ≤ x ≤ b states that x is greater than or equal to a but less than or 
equal to b.
a
b
x
Shaded area gives
the probability
P(a ≤ x ≤ b)
Figure 6.5 Area under the curve as probability.
 
Reconsider the example on the heights of all female students at a university. The probabil-
ity that the height of a randomly selected female student from this university lies in the interval 
65 to 68 inches is given by the area under the distribution curve of the heights of all female 
students from x = 65 to x = 68, as shown in Figure 6.6. This probability is written as
P(65 ≤ x ≤ 68)
which states that x is greater than or equal to 65 but less than or equal to 68.
www.ebook3000.com

230
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
65
68
x
Shaded area gives
the probability
P(65 ≤ x ≤ 68)
Figure 6.6 Probability that x lies 
in the interval 65 to 68.
 
For a continuous probability distribution, the probability is always calculated for an interval. 
For example, in Figure 6.6, the interval representing the shaded area is from 65 to 68. Conse-
quently, the shaded area in that figure gives the probability for the interval 65 ≤ x ≤ 68. In other 
words, this shaded area gives the probability that the height of a randomly selected female student 
from this university is in the interval 65 to 68 inches.
 
The probability that a continuous random variable x assumes a single value is always 
zero. This is so because the area of a line, which represents a single point, is zero. For example, 
if x is the height of a randomly selected female student from that university, then the probability 
that this student is exactly 66.8 inches tall is zero; that is,
P(x = 66.8) = 0
This probability is shown in Figure 6.7. Similarly, the probability for x to assume any other single 
value is zero.
 
In general, if a and b are two of the values that x can assume, then
P(a) = 0 and P(b) = 0
66.8
x
P(x = 66.8) = 0
Figure 6.7 The probability of a single 
value of x is zero.
From this we can deduce that for a continuous random variable,
P(a ≤x ≤b) = P(a < x ≤b) = P(a ≤x < b) = P(a < x < b)
In other words, the probability that x assumes a value in the interval a to b is the same whether 
or not the values a and b are included in the interval. For the example on the heights of female 
students, the probability that a randomly selected female student is between 65 and 68 inches tall 
is the same as the probability that this female is 65 to 68 inches tall. This is shown in Figure 6.8.
x
65
68
Shaded area gives
the probability
P(65 ≤ x ≤ 68)
as well as
P(65 < x < 68)
Figure 6.8 Probability “from 65 to 
68” and “between 65 and 68.”
 
Note that the interval “between 65 and 68” represents “65 < x < 68” and it does not include 
65 and 68. On the other hand, the interval “from 65 to 68” represents “65 ≤ x ≤ 68” and it does 
include 65 and 68. However, as mentioned previously, in the case of a continuous random varia-
ble, both of these intervals contain the same probability or area under the curve.
 
Case Study 6–1 on the next page describes how we obtain the probability distribution curve 
of a continuous random variable.

DISTRIBUTION 
OF TIME TAKEN 
TO RUN A ROAD 
RACE
CASE STUDY 6–1
The following table gives the frequency and relative frequency distributions for the time (in minutes) taken to 
complete the Manchester Road Race (held on November 27, 2014) by a total of 11,682 participants who 
finished that race. This event is held every year on Thanksgiving Day in Manchester, Connecticut. The total 
distance of the course is 4.748 miles. The relative frequencies in the following table are used to construct the 
histogram and polygon in Figure 6.9.
Class
Frequency
Relative Frequency
20 to less than 25
53
.0045
25 to less than 30
246
.0211
30 to less than 35
763
.0653
35 to less than 40
1443
.1235
40 to less than 45
1633
.1398
45 to less than 50
1906
.1632
50 to less than 55
2164
.1852
55 to less than 60
1418
.1214
60 to less than 65
672
.0575
65 to less than 70
380
.0325
70 to less than 75
230
.0197
75 to less than 80
176
.0151
80 to less than 85
186
.0159
85 to less than 90
130
.0111
90 to less than 95
113
.0097
95 to less than 100
90
.0077
100 to less than 105
33
.0028
105 to less than 110
36
.0031
110 to less than 115
9
.0008
115 to less than 120
1
.0001
∑f = 11,682
Sum = 1.000
.05
.10
.15
.20
Relative frequency
22.5
37.5
52.5
67.5
82.5
97.5
112.5
Time (in minutes)
Figure 6.9 Histogram and polygon for the road race data.
To derive the probability distribution curve for these data, we calculate the relative frequency densities by 
dividing the relative frequencies by the class widths. The width of each class in the above table is 5. By divid-
ing the relative frequencies by 5, we obtain the relative frequency densities, which are recorded in the next 
table. Using the relative frequency densities, we draw a histogram and a smoothed polygon, as shown in 
Figure 6.10. The curve in this figure is the probability distribution curve for the road race data.
 
Note that the areas of the rectangles in Figure 6.9 do not give probabilities (which are approximated by 
relative frequencies). Rather here the heights of the rectangles give the probabilities. This is so because the 
base of each rectangle is 5 in this histogram. Consequently, the area of any rectangle is given by its height 
231
www.ebook3000.com

6.1.2 The Normal Distribution
The normal distribution is one of the many probability distributions that a continuous random 
variable can possess. The normal distribution is the most important and most widely used of all 
probability distributions. A large number of phenomena in the real world are approximately nor-
mally distributed. The continuous random variables representing heights and weights of people, 
multiplied by 5. Thus the total area of all the rectangle in Figure 6.9 is 5.0, not 1.0. However, in Figure 6.10, it 
is the areas, not the heights, of rectangles that give the probabilities of the respective classes. Thus, if we add 
the areas of all the rectangles in Figure 6.10, we obtain the sum of all probabilities equal to 1.0. Consequently 
the total area under the curve is equal to 1.0.
Class
Relative Frequency Density
20 to less than 25
.00090
25 to less than 30
.00422
30 to less than 35
.01306
35 to less than 40
.02470
40 to less than 45
.02796
45 to less than 50
.03264
50 to less than 55
.03704
55 to less than 60
.02428
60 to less than 65
.01150
65 to less than 70
.00650
70 to less than 75
.00394
75 to less than 80
.00302
80 to less than 85
.00318
85 to less than 90
.00222
90 to less than 95
.00194
95 to less than 100
.00154
100 to less than 105
.00056
105 to less than 110
.00062
110 to less than 115
.00016
115 to less than 120
.00002
Figure 6.10 Probability distribution curve for the road race data.
.01
.02
.03
.04
Relative frequency density
22.5
37.5
52.5
67.5
82.5
97.5
112.5
Time (in minutes)
The probability distribution of a continuous random variable has a mean and a standard deviation, which are 
denoted by μ and σ, respectively. The mean and standard deviation of the probability distribution given in the 
above table and Figure 6.10 are 50.873 and 14.011 minutes, respectively. These values of μ and σ are calcu-
lated by using the data on all 11,682 participants.
Source: This case study is based on 
data published on the official Web site 
of the Manchester Road Race.
232

6.1 Continuous Probability Distribution and the Normal Probability Distribution
233
scores on an examination, weights of packages (e.g., cereal boxes, boxes of cookies), amount of 
milk in a gallon, life of an item (such as a light-bulb or a television set), and time taken to com-
plete a certain job have all been observed to have an approximate normal distribution.
 
A normal probability distribution or a normal curve is a bell-shaped (symmetric) curve. 
Such a curve is shown in Figure 6.11. Its mean is denoted by μ and its standard deviation by σ. 
A continuous random variable x that has a normal distribution is called a normal random variable. 
Note that not all bell-shaped curves represent a normal distribution curve. Only a specific kind of 
bell-shaped curve represents a normal curve.
x
Mean = μ
Standard
deviation = σ
Figure 6.11 Normal 
distribution with mean μ 
and standard deviation σ.
Normal Probability Distribution A normal probability distribution, when plotted, gives a bell-
shaped curve such that:
1. The total area under the curve is 1.0.
2. The curve is symmetric about the mean.
3. The two tails of the curve extend indefi nitely.
 
A normal distribution possesses the following three characteristics:
1. 
The total area under a normal distribution curve is 1.0, or 100%, as shown in Figure 6.12.
x
The shaded area
is 1.0 or 100%
μ
Figure 6.12 Total area 
under a normal curve.
2. 
A normal distribution curve is symmetric about the mean, as shown in Figure 6.13. Con-
sequently, 50% of the total area under a normal distribution curve lies on the left side of the 
mean, and 50% lies on the right side of the mean.
x
Each of the two
 shaded areas
is .5 or 50%
.5
.5
μ
Figure 6.13 A normal curve 
is symmetric about the mean
3. The tails of a normal distribution curve extend indefinitely in both directions without touch-
ing or crossing the horizontal axis. Although a normal distribution curve never meets the 
horizontal axis, beyond the points represented by μ − 3σ and μ + 3σ it becomes so close to 
www.ebook3000.com

234
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
this axis that the area under the curve beyond these points in both directions is very small and 
can be taken as very close to zero (but not zero). The actual area in each tail of the standard 
normal distribution curve beyond three standard deviations of the mean is .0013. These areas 
are shown in Figure 6.14.
x
μ + 3σ
μ − 3σ
Each of the two shaded areas is
very close to zero but not zero.
Actually, each of these two areas is .0013.
μ
Figure 6.14 Areas of the 
normal curve beyond μ ± 3σ.
 
The mean, μ, and the standard deviation, σ, are the parameters of the normal distribu-
tion. Given the values of these two parameters, we can find the area under a normal distribu-
tion curve for any interval. Remember, there is not just one normal distribution curve but a 
family of normal distribution curves. Each different set of values of μ and σ gives a normal 
distribution curve with different height and/or spread. The value of μ determines the center of 
a normal distribution curve on the horizontal axis, and the value of σ gives the spread of the 
normal distribution curve. The three normal distribution curves shown in Figure 6.15 have the 
same mean but different standard deviations. By contrast, the three normal distribution curves 
in Figure 6.16 have different means but the same standard deviation.
x
μ = 50
σ = 16
σ = 5
σ = 10
Figure 6.15 Three normal distribution curves with 
the same mean but different standard deviations.
x
μ = 20
μ = 30
μ = 40
σ = 5
σ = 5
σ = 5
Figure 6.16 Three normal distribution curves with 
different means but the same standard deviation.
 
Like the binomial and Poisson probability distributions discussed in Chapter 5, the normal 
probability distribution can also be expressed by a mathematical equation.1 However, we will not 
use this equation to find the area under a normal distribution curve. Instead, we will use Table IV 
of Appendix B.
6.1.3 The Standard Normal Distribution
The standard normal distribution is a special case of the normal distribution. For the standard 
normal distribution, the value of the mean is equal to zero and the value of the standard deviation 
is equal to 1.
1The equation of the normal distribution is
f (x) =
1
σ√2π
 e−(1∕2)[(x −μ)∕σ] 2
where e = 2.71828 and π = 3.14159 approximately; f(x), called the probability density function, gives the vertical dis-
tance between the horizontal axis and the curve at point x. For the information of those who are familiar with integral 
calculus, the definite integral of this equation from a to b gives the probability that x assumes a value between a and b.

6.1 Continuous Probability Distribution and the Normal Probability Distribution
235
Standard Normal Distribution The normal distribution with μ = 0 and σ = 1 is called the 
standard normal distribution.
 
Figure 6.17 displays the standard normal distribution curve. The random variable that 
possesses the standard normal distribution is denoted by z. In other words, the units for the 
standard normal distribution curve are denoted by z and are called the z values or z scores. They 
are also called standard units or standard scores.
z
−1
0
−2
−3
3
2
1
σ = 1
μ = 0
Figure 6.17 The standard normal 
distribution curve.
z Values or z Scores The units marked on the horizontal axis of the standard normal curve are 
denoted by z and are called the z values or z scores. A specific value of z gives the distance 
between the mean and the point represented by z in terms of the standard deviation.
 
In Figure 6.17, the horizontal axis is labeled z. The z values on the right side of the mean are 
positive and those on the left side are negative. The z value for a point on the horizontal axis 
gives the distance between the mean and that point in terms of the standard deviation. For 
example, a point with a value of z = 2 is two standard deviations to the right of the mean. Simi-
larly, a point with a value of z = −2 is two standard deviations to the left of the mean.
 
The standard normal distribution table, Table IV of Appendix B, lists the areas under the 
standard normal curve to the left of z values from −3.49 to 3.49. To read the standard normal 
distribution table, we look for the given z value in the table and record the area corresponding to 
that z value. As shown in Figure 6.18, Table IV gives what is called the cumulative probability to 
the left of any z value.
z
z = a
Area given
in Table IV
Figure 6.18 Area under the 
standard normal curve.
Although the values of z on the left side of the mean are negative, the area under the curve is 
always positive.
 
The area under the standard normal curve between any two points can be interpreted as the 
probability that z assumes a value within that interval. Examples 6–1 through 6–4 describe how 
to read Table IV of Appendix B to find areas under the standard normal curve.
EXAMPLE 6–1 
Find the area under the standard normal curve to the left of z = 1.95.
Solution We divide the given number 1.95 into two portions: 1.9 (the digit before the decimal and 
one digit after the decimal) and .05 (the second digit after the decimal). (Note that 1.95 = 1.9 + .05.) 
To find the required area under the standard normal curve, we locate 1.9 in the column for z on the 
 Remember
Finding the area to 
the left of a positive z.
www.ebook3000.com

236
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
left side of Table IV of Appendix B and .05 in the row for z at the top of Table IV. The entry where 
the row for 1.9 and the column for .05 intersect gives the area under the standard normal curve to the 
left of z = 1.95. The relevant portion of Table IV is reproduced here as Table 6.2. From Table IV 
or Table 6.2, the entry where the row for 1.9 and the column for .05 cross is .9744. Consequently, the 
area under the standard normal curve to the left of z = 1.95 is .9744. This area is shown in 
Figure 6.19. (It is always helpful to sketch the curve and mark the area you are determining.)
Table 6.2 Area Under the Standard Normal Curve to the Left of z = 1.95
z
.00
.01
. . .
.05
. . .
.09
−3.4
.0003
.0003
. . .
.0003
. . .
.0002
−3.3
.0005
.0005
. . .
.0004
. . .
.0003
−3.2
.0007
.0007
. . .
.0006
. . .
.0005
.
.
.
. . .
.
. . .
.
.
.
.
. . .
.
. . .
.
.
.
.
. . .
.
. . .
.
1.9
.9713
.9719
. . .
.9744
. . .
.9767
.
.
.
. . .
.
. . .
.
.
.
.
. . .
.
. . .
.
.
.
.
. . .
.
. . .
.
3.4
.9997
.9997
. . .
.9997
. . .
.9998
Required area
 
The area to the left of z = 1.95 can be interpreted as the probability that z assumes a value 
less than 1.95; that is,
 
Area to the left of 1.95 = P(z < 1.95) = .9744 
◼
 
As mentioned in Section 6.1, the probability that a continuous random variable assumes a 
single value is zero. Therefore, the probability that z is exactly equal to 1.95 is zero, that is:
P(z = 1.95) = 0
Hence,
P(z < 1.95) = P(z ≤1.95) = .9744
EXAMPLE 6–2 
Find the area under the standard normal curve from z = −2.17 to z = 0.
Solution To find the area from z = −2.17 to z = 0, which is the shaded area in Figure 6.20, 
first we find the areas to the left of z = 0 and to the left of z = −2.17 in the standard normal 
distribution table (Table IV). As shown in Table 6.3, these two areas are .5000 and .0150, respec-
tively. Next we subtract .0150 from .5000 to find the required area.
Finding the area between a 
negative z and z = 0.
z
0
1.95
Shaded area
is .9744
Figure 6.19 Area to the left of z = 1.95.

6.1 Continuous Probability Distribution and the Normal Probability Distribution
237
 
The area from z = −2.17 to z = 0 gives the probability that z lies in the interval −2.17 to 0 
(see Figure 6.20); that is,
 
Area from −2.17 to 0 = P(−2.17 ≤z ≤0) = .5000−.0150 = .4850
EXAMPLE 6–3 
Find the following areas under the standard normal curve.
(a) Area to the right of z = 2.32
(b) Area to the left of z = −1.54
Solution
(a) Here we are to find the area that is shaded in Figure 6.21. As mentioned earlier, the normal 
distribution table gives the area to the left of a z value. To find the area to the right of 
z = 2.32, first we find the area to the left of z = 2.32. Then we subtract this area from 1.0, 
which is the total area under the curve. From Table IV, the area to the left of z = 2.32 is 
.9898. Consequently, the required area is 1.0 −.9898 = .0102, as shown in Figure 6.21.
Finding the area in the right 
and left tails.
Figure 6.20 Area from z = −2.17 to z = 0.
z
0
Shaded area
is .4850
−2.17
 
◼
z
0
2.32
Shaded area
is 1.0 − .9898
= .0102
.9898
Figure 6.21 Area to the right of z = 2.32.
Table 6.3 Area Under the Standard Normal Curve
 z 
00 
.01 
. . . 
.07 
. . . 
.09
 −3.4 
.0003 
.0003 
. . . 
.0003 
. . . 
.0002
 −3.3 
.0005 
.0005 
. . . 
.0004 
. . . 
.0003
 −3.2 
.0007 
.0007 
. . . 
.0005 
. . . 
.0005
 
. 
. 
. 
. . . 
. 
. . . 
.
 
. 
. 
. 
. . . 
. 
. . . 
.
 −2.1 
.0179 
.0174 
. . . 
.0150 
. . . 
.0143
 
. 
. 
. 
. . . 
. 
. . . 
.
 
. 
. 
. 
. . . 
. 
. . . 
.
 0.0 
.5000 
.5040 
. . . 
.5279 
. . . 
.5359
 
. 
. 
. 
. . . 
. 
. . . 
.
 
. 
. 
. 
. . . 
. 
. . . 
.
 3.4 
.9997 
.9997 
. . . 
.9997 
. . . 
.9998
Area to the left of z = 0
Area to the left of z = −2.17
www.ebook3000.com

238
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
 
Note that the area to the right of z = 2.32 gives the probability that z is greater than 2.32. 
Thus,
Area to the right of 2.32 = P(z > 2.32) = 1.0 −.9898 = .0102
(b) To find the area under the standard normal curve to the left of z = −1.54, we find the 
area in Table IV that corresponds to −1.5 in the z column and .04 in the top row. This 
area is .0618. This area is shown in Figure 6.22.
The area to the left of z = −1.54 gives the probability that z is less than −1.54. Thus,
 
Area to the left of −1.54 = P(z < −1.54) = .0618 
◼
To find the area between z = 1.19 and z = 2.12, first we find the areas to the left of 
z = 1.19 and z = 2.12. Then we subtract the smaller area (to the left of z = 1.19) from 
the larger area (to the left of z = 2.12).
From Table IV for the standard normal distribution, we find
Area to the left of 1.19 = .8830
Area to the left of 2.12 = .9830
Then, the required probability is
 P(1.19 < z < 2.12) = Area between 1.19 and 2.12
 = .9830 −.8830 = .1000
(b) The probability P(−1.56 < z < 2.31) is given by the area under the standard normal 
curve between z = −1.56 and z = 2.31, which is the shaded area in Figure 6.24.
Finding the area between a 
positive and a negative value of z.
EXAMPLE 6–4 
Find the following probabilities for the standard normal curve.
(a) P(1.19 < z < 2.12)  (b) P(−1.56 < z < 2.31)  (c) P(z > −.75)
Solution
(a) The probability P(1.19 < z < 2.12) is given by the area under the standard normal 
curve between z = 1.19 and z = 2.12, which is the shaded area in Figure 6.23.
Finding the area between two 
positive values of z.
z
0
−1.54
Shaded area is
.0618
Figure 6.22 Area to the left of z = −1.54.
z
1.19
2.12
0
Shaded area =
.9830 − .8830
= .1000
Figure 6.23 Finding P(1.19 < z < 2.12).

6.1 Continuous Probability Distribution and the Normal Probability Distribution
239
From Table IV for the standard normal distribution, we have
Area to the left of −1.56 = .0594
Area to the left of 2.31 = .9896
The required probability is
 P(−1.56 < z < 2.31) = Area between −1.56 and 2.31
 = .9896 −.0594 = .9302
(c) The probability P(z > −.75) is given by the area under the standard normal curve to the 
right of z = −.75, which is the shaded area in Figure 6.25.
Finding the area to the right 
of a negative value of z.
From Table IV for the standard normal distribution,
Area to the left of −.75 = .2266
 
The required probability is
 
P(z > −.75) = Area to the right of −.75 = 1.0 −.2266 = .7734 
◼
 
In the discussion in Section 3.4 of Chapter 3 on the use of the standard deviation, we 
discussed the empirical rule for a bell-shaped curve. That empirical rule is based on the standard 
normal distribution. By using the normal distribution table, we can now verify the empirical 
rule as follows.
1. The total area within one standard deviation of the mean is 68.26%. This area is given by the 
difference between the area to the left of z = 1.0 and the area to the left of z = −1.0. As 
shown in Figure 6.26, this area is .8413 −.1587 = .6826, or 68.26%.
2. The total area within two standard deviations of the mean is 95.44%. This area is given by 
the difference between the area to the left of z = 2.0 and the area to the left of z = −2.0. As 
shown in Figure 6.27, this area is .9772 −.0228 = .9544, or 95.44%.
z
−1.56
2.31
0
Shaded area
= .9896 − .0594
= .9302
Figure 6.24 Finding P(−1.56 < z < 2.31).
z
−.75
0
Shaded area
= 1.0 − .2266
= .7734
.2266
Figure 6.25 Finding P(z > −.75).
z
−1.0
1.0
0
Total shaded area is
.8413 – .1587
  = .6826 or 68.26%
.6826
Figure 6.26 Area within one standard deviation of the mean.
www.ebook3000.com

240
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
3. The total area within three standard deviations of the mean is 99.74%. This area is given by 
the difference between the area to the left of z = 3.0 and the area to the left of z = −3.0. As 
shown in Figure 6.28, this area is .9987 −.0013 = .9974, or 99.74%.
 
Again, as mentioned earlier, only a specific bell-shaped curve represents the normal 
distribution. Now we can state that a bell-shaped curve that contains (about) 68.26% of the total 
area within one standard deviation of the mean, (about) 95.44% of the total area within two stand-
ard deviations of the mean, and (about) 99.74% of the total area within three standard deviations 
of the mean represents a normal distribution curve.
 
The standard normal distribution table, Table IV of Appendix B, goes from z = −3.49 to 
z = 3.49. Consequently, if we need to find the area to the left of z = −3.50 or a smaller value of z, 
we can assume it to be approximately 0.0. If we need to find the area to the left of z = 3.50 or a 
larger number, we can assume it to be approximately 1.0. Example 6–5 illustrates this procedure.
EXAMPLE 6–5 
Find the following probabilities for the standard normal curve.
(a) P(0 < z < 5.67)  (b) P(z < −5.35)
Solution
(a) The probability P(0 < z < 5.67) is given by the area under the standard normal curve 
between z = 0 and z = 5.67. Because z = 5.67 is greater than 3.49 and is not in Table IV, 
the area under the standard normal curve to the left of z = 5.67 can be approximated 
by 1.0. Also, the area to the left of z = 0 is .5. Hence, the required probability is
P(0 < z < 5.67) = Area between 0 and 5.67 = 1.0 −.5 = .5 approximately
Note that the area between z = 0 and z = 5.67 is not exactly .5 but very close to .5. This 
area is shown in Figure 6.29.
Finding the area between z = 0 
and a value of z greater than 3.49.
z
0
2.0
−2.0
Total shaded area is
.9772 – .0228
  = .9544 or 95.44%
.9544
Figure 6.27 Area within two standard deviations of the mean.
−3.0
0
z
Total shaded area is
.9887 – .0013
  = .9974 or 99.74%
3.0
.9974
Figure 6.28 Area within three standard deviations of the mean.
z
5.67
0
Shaded area is
approximately .5
Figure 6.29 Area between z = 0 and z = 5.67.

6.1 Continuous Probability Distribution and the Normal Probability Distribution
241
(b) The probability P(z < −5.35) represents the area under the standard normal curve to 
the left of z = −5.35. Since z = −5.35 is not in the table, we can assume that this area 
is approximately .00. This is shown in Figure 6.30.
The required probability is
P(z < −5.35) = Area to the left of −5.35 = .00 approximately
Again, note that the area to the left of z = −5.35 is not exactly .00 but very close to .00.
We can find the exact areas for parts (a) and (b) of this example by using technol-
ogy. The reader should do that. 
◼
z
0
−5.35
Shaded area is
approximately .00
Figure 6.30 Area to the left of z = −5.35.
Finding the area to the left 
of a z that is less than −3.49.
EXERCISES
6.13 Find the area under the standard normal curve
a. between z = 0 and z = 1.95 
b. between z = 0 and z = −2.05
c. between z = 1.15 and z = 2.37 
d. from z = −1.53 to z = −2.88
e. from z = −1.67 to z = 2.24
6.14 Find the area under the standard normal curve
a. to the right of z = 1.36 
b. to the left of z = −1.97
c. to the right of z = −2.05 
d. to the left of z = 1.76
6.15 Obtain the area under the standard normal curve
a. to the right of z = 1.43 
b. to the left of z = −1.65
c. to the right of z = −.65 
d. to the left of z = .89
6.16 Determine the following probabilities for the standard normal 
distribution.
a. P(−1.83 ≤ z ≤ 2.57) 
b. P(0 ≤ z ≤ 2.02)
c. P(−1.99 ≤ z ≤ 0) 
d. P(z ≥ 1.48)
6.17 Find the following probabilities for the standard normal 
distribution.
a. P(z < −2.34) 
b. P(.67 ≤ z ≤ 2.59)
c. P(−2.07 ≤ z ≤ −.93) 
d. P(z < 1.78)
6.18 Obtain the following probabilities for the standard normal 
distribution.
a. P(z > −.98) 
b. P(−2.47 ≤ z ≤ 1.29)
c. P(0 ≤ z ≤ 4.25) 
d. P(−5.36 ≤ z ≤ 0)
e. P(z > 6.07) 
f. P(z < −5.27)
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
6.1 What is the difference between the probability distribution of a 
discrete random variable and that of a continuous random variable? 
Explain.
6.2 Let x be a continuous random variable. What is the probability 
that x assumes a single value, such as a?
6.3 For a continuous probability distribution, explain why the fol-
lowing holds true.
P(a < x < b) = P (a < x ≤b) = P(a ≤x < b) = P(a ≤x ≤b)
6.4 Briefly explain the main characteristics of a normal distribution. 
Illustrate with the help of graphs.
6.5 Briefly describe the standard normal distribution curve.
6.6 What are the parameters of the normal distribution?
6.7 How do the width and height of a normal distribution change 
when its mean remains the same but its standard deviation decreases?
6.8 Do the width and/or height of a normal distribution change 
when its standard deviation remains the same but its mean increases?
6.9 For the standard normal distribution, what does z represent?
6.10 For the standard normal distribution, find the area within one 
standard deviation of the mean—that is, the area between μ − σ and 
μ + σ.
6.11 For the standard normal distribution, what is the area within 
2.5 standard deviations of the mean?
6.12 For the standard normal distribution, what is the area within 
three standard deviations of the mean?
www.ebook3000.com

242
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
As was shown in the previous section, Table IV of Appendix B can be used to find areas under 
the standard normal curve. However, in real-world applications, a (continuous) random variable 
may have a normal distribution with values of the mean and standard deviation that are different 
from 0 and 1, respectively. The first step in such a case is to convert the given normal distribution 
to the standard normal distribution. This procedure is called standardizing a normal distribu-
tion. The units of a normal distribution (which is not the standard normal distribution) are denoted 
by x. We know from Section 6.1.3 that units of the standard normal distribution are denoted by z.
 
Thus, to find the z value for an x value, we calculate the difference between the given x value 
and the mean, μ, and divide this difference by the standard deviation, σ. If the value of x is equal 
to μ, then its z value is equal to zero. Note that we will always round z values to two decimal places.
 
The z value for the mean of a normal distribution is always zero. The z value for an x value 
greater than the mean is positive and the z value for an x value smaller than the mean is negative.
 
Examples 6–6 through 6–10 describe how to convert x values to the corresponding z values 
and how to find areas under a normal distribution curve.
EXAMPLE 6–6 
Let x be a continuous random variable that has a normal distribution with a mean of 50 and a 
standard deviation of 10. Convert the following x values to z values and find the probability to the 
left of these points.
(a) x = 55  (b) x = 35
Solution For the given normal distribution, μ = 50 and σ = 10.
(a) The z value for x = 55 is computed as follows:
z = x −μ
σ
= 55 −50
10
= .50
Thus, the z value for x = 55 is .50. The z values for μ = 50 and x = 55 are shown in 
Figure 6.31. Note that the z value for μ = 50 is zero. The value z = .50 for x = 55 indi-
cates that the distance between μ = 50 and x = 55 is 1∕2 of the standard deviation, which 
is 10. Consequently, we can state that the z value represents the distance between μ and 
x in terms of the standard deviation. Because x = 55 is greater than μ = 50, its z value is 
positive.
From this point on, we will usually show only the z axis below the x axis and not the 
standard normal curve itself.
To find the probability to the left of x = 55, we find the area to the left of z = .50 
from Table IV. This area is .6915. Therefore,
P(x < 55) = P(z < .50) = .6915
Remember 
Converting x values to the 
corresponding z values.
6.2 Standardizing a Normal Distribution
Converting an x Value to a z Value For a normal random variable x, a particular value of x can be 
converted to its corresponding z value by using the formula
z = x −μ
σ
where μ and σ are the mean and standard deviation of the normal distribution of x, respectively. 
When x follows a normal distribution, z follows the standard normal distribution.

6.2 Standardizing a Normal Distribution
243
(b) The z value for x = 35 is computed as follows and is shown in Figure 6.32:
z = x −μ
σ
= 35 −50
10
= −1.50
Because x = 35 is on the left side of the mean (i.e., 35 is less than μ = 50), its z value 
is negative. As a general rule, whenever an x value is less than the value of μ, its z value 
is negative.
To find the probability to the left of x = 35, we find the area under the normal curve 
to the left of z = −1.50. This area from Table IV is .0668. Hence,
P(x < 35) = P(z < −1.50) = .0668
The z value for an x value that is greater than μ is positive, the z value for an x value that is equal 
to μ is zero, and the z value for an x value that is less than μ is negative.
 
To find the area between two values of x for a normal distribution, we first convert both 
values of x to their respective z values. Then we find the area under the standard normal curve 
between those two z values. The area between the two z values gives the area between the cor-
responding x values. Example 6–7 illustrates this case.
z
0 .50
x
Normal distribution
with    = 50 and
σ  = 10
Standard normal
distribution
Shaded area
is .6915
x = 55
z value for x = 55
μ = 50
μ
Figure 6.31 Area to the left of x = 55.
Figure 6.32 Area to the left of x = 35.
x
35
z
−1.50
0
Shaded area
is .0668
μ = 50
σ  = 10
 
◼
 Remember
www.ebook3000.com

244
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
EXAMPLE 6–7 
Let x be a continuous random variable that is normally distributed with a mean of 25 and a 
standard deviation of 4. Find the area
(a) between x = 25 and x = 32  (b) between x = 18 and x = 34
Solution For the given normal distribution, μ = 25 and σ = 4.
(a) The first step in finding the required area is to standardize the given normal distribution 
by converting x = 25 and x = 32 to their respective z values using the formula
z = x −μ
σ
The z value for x = 25 is zero because it is the mean of the normal distribution. The 
z value for x = 32 is
z = 32 −25
4
= 1.75
The area between x = 25 and x = 32 under the given normal distribution curve is 
equivalent to the area between z = 0 and z = 1.75 under the standard normal curve. From 
Table IV, the area to the left of z = 1.75 is .9599, and the area to the left of z = 0 is .50. 
Hence, the required area is .9599 − .50 = .4599, which is shown in Figure 6.33.
The area between x = 25 and x = 32 under the normal curve gives the probability 
that x assumes a value between 25 and 32. This probability can be written as
P(25 < x < 32) = P(0 < z < 1.75) = .9599 −.50 = .4599
Finding the area between the 
mean and a point to its right.
(b) First, we calculate the z values for x = 18 and x = 34 as follows:
 For x = 18: z = 18 −25
4
= −1.75
 For x = 34: z = 34 −25
4
= 2.25
The area under the given normal distribution curve between x = 18 and x = 34 is given 
by the area under the standard normal curve between z = −1.75 and z = 2.25. From 
Table IV, the area to the left of z = 2.25 is .9878, and the area to the left of z = −1.75 
is .0401. Hence, the required area is
P(18 < x < 34) = P(−1.75 < z < 2.25) = .9878 −.0401 = .9477
This area is shown in Figure 6.34.
Finding the area between 
two points on different 
sides of the mean
25
32
Shaded area
is .4599
x
z
0
1.75
Figure 6.33 Area between 
x = 25 and x = 32.
x
25
34
18
Shaded area
= .9477
z
−1.75
0
2.25
Figure 6.34 Area between 
x = 18 and x = 34.
 
◼

6.2 Standardizing a Normal Distribution
245
EXAMPLE 6–8 
Let x be a normal random variable with its mean equal to 40 and standard deviation equal to 5. 
Find the following probabilities for this normal distribution.
(a) P(x > 55)  (b) P(x < 49)
Solution For the given normal distribution, μ = 40 and σ = 5.
(a) The probability that x assumes a value greater than 55 is given by the area under the 
normal distribution curve to the right of x = 55, as shown in Figure 6.35. This area is 
calculated by subtracting the area to the left of x = 55 from 1.0, which is the total area 
under the curve.
For x = 55: z = 55 −40
5
= 3.00
Calculating the probability to the 
right of a value of x.
The required probability is given by the area to the right of z = 3.00. To find this area, 
first we find the area to the left of z = 3.00, which is .9987. Then we subtract this area 
from 1.0. Thus,
P(x > 55) = P(z > 3.00) = 1.0 −.9987 = .0013
(b) The probability that x will assume a value less than 49 is given by the area under the 
normal distribution curve to the left of 49, which is the shaded area in Figure 6.36. This 
area is obtained from Table IV as follows.
For x = 49: z = 49 −40
5
= 1.80
Calculating the probability to 
the left of a value of x.
The required probability is given by the area to the left of z = 1.80. This area from 
Table IV is .9641. Therefore, the required probability is
 
P(x < 49) = P(z < 1.80) = .9641 
◼
x
40
55
Shaded area
= .0013
z
3.00
0
Figure 6.35 Finding P(x > 55).
x
40
49
Shaded area
= .9641
.9641
z
1.80
0
Figure 6.36 Finding P(x < 49).
www.ebook3000.com

246
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
EXAMPLE 6–9 
Let x be a continuous random variable that has a normal distribution with μ = 50 and σ = 8. Find 
the probability P(30 ≤ x ≤ 39).
Solution For this normal distribution, μ = 50 and σ = 8. The probability P(30 ≤ x ≤ 39) is 
given by the area from x = 30 to x = 39 under the normal distribution curve. As shown in 
Figure 6.37, this area is given by the difference between the area to the left of x = 30 and the area 
to the left of x = 39.
 For x = 30: z = 30 −50
8
= −2.50
 For x = 39: z = 39 −50
8
= −1.38
Finding the area between 
two x values that are less 
than the mean.
 
To find the required area, we first find the area to the left of z = −2.50, which is .0062. Then, 
we find the area to the left of z = −1.38, which is .0838. The difference between these two areas 
gives the required probability, which is
 
P(30 ≤x ≤39) = P(−2.50 ≤z ≤−1.38) = .0838 −.0062 = .0776 
◼
EXAMPLE 6–10 
Let x be a continuous random variable that has a normal distribution with a mean of 80 and a 
standard deviation of 12. Find the area under the normal distribution curve
(a) from x = 70 to x = 135  (b) to the left of 27
Solution For the given normal distribution, μ = 80 and σ = 12.
(a) The z values for x = 70 and x = 135 are:
For x = 70:   z = 70 −80
12
= −.83
For x = 135:  z = 135 −80
12
= 4.58
Finding the area between 
two x values that are on different 
sides of the mean.
x
z
50
Shaded area
is = .0776
39
30
0
−2.50
−1.38
Figure 6.37 Finding P(30 ≤ x ≤ 39).
x
z
80
135
70
0
Shaded area
is approximately
= .7967
−.83
4.58
Figure 6.38 Area between x = 70 and x = 135.

6.3 Applications of the Normal Distribution
247
Thus, to find the required area we find the areas to the left of z = −.83 and to the left of 
z = 4.58 under the standard normal curve. From Table IV, the area to the left of z = −.83 
is .2033 and the area to the left of z = 4.58 is approximately 1.0. Note that z = 4.58 is 
not in Table IV.
Hence,
 P(70 ≤x ≤135) = P(−.83 ≤z ≤4.58)
 = 1.0 −.2033 = .7967 approximately
Figure 6.38 shows this area.
(b) First we find the z value for x = 27.
For x = 27: z = 27 −80
12
= −4.42
As shown in Figure 6.39, the required area is given by the area under the standard 
normal distribution curve to the left of z = −4.42. This area is approximately zero.
 P(x < 27) = P(z < −4.42) = .00 approximately
Finding an area in the left tail.
x
z
80
27
0
−4.42
Shaded area is
approximately
.00
Figure 6.39 Area to the left of x = 27.
 
◼
EXERCISES
6.22 Let x be a continuous random variable that is normally distrib-
uted with a mean of 25 and a standard deviation of 6. Find the proba-
bility that x assumes a value
a. between 29 and 36  b. between 22 and 35
6.23 Let x be a continuous random variable that has a normal distri-
bution with a mean of 117.6 and a standard deviation of 14.6. Find the 
probability that x assumes a value
a. between 77.9 and 98.3 
b. between 85.3 and 142.6
6.24 Let x be a continuous random variable that is normally distrib-
uted with a mean of 65 and a standard deviation of 15. Find the prob-
ability that x assumes a value
a. less than 45 
b. greater than 79
c. greater than 54 
d. less than 70
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
6.19 Find the z value for each of the following x values for a normal 
distribution with μ = 30 and σ = 5.
a. x = 39  b. x = 19  c. x = 24  d. x = 44
6.20 Find the following areas under a normal distribution curve with 
μ = 20 and σ = 4.
a. Area between x = 20 and x = 27
b. Area from x = 23 to x = 26
c. Area between x = 9.5 and x = 17
6.21 Determine the area under a normal distribution curve with 
μ = 55 and σ = 7
a. to the right of x = 58 
b. to the right of x = 43
c. to the left of x = 68 
d. to the left of x = 22
6.3 Applications of the Normal Distribution
Sections 6.1 and 6.2 discussed the normal distribution, how to convert a normal distribution to 
the standard normal distribution, and how to find areas under a normal distribution curve. This 
section presents examples that illustrate the applications of the normal distribution.
www.ebook3000.com

248
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
EXAMPLE 6–11 
Earnings of Internal Medicine Physicians
According to the 2015 Physician Compensation Report by Medscape (a subsidiary of WebMD), 
American internal medicine physicians earned an average of $196,000 in 2014. Suppose that the 
2014 earnings of all American internal medicine physicians are normally distributed with a 
mean of $196,000 and a standard deviation of $20,000. Find the probability that the 2014 
earnings of a randomly selected American internal medicine physician are between $169,400 
and $206,800.
Solution Let x denote the 2014 earnings of a randomly selected American internal medicine 
physician. Then, x is normally distributed with
μ = $196,000 and σ = $20,000
The probability that the 2014 earnings of a randomly selected American internal medicine phy-
sician are between $169,400 and $206,800 is given by the area under the normal distribution 
curve of x that falls between x = $169,400 and x = $206,800 as shown in Figure 6.40. To find 
this area, first we find the areas to the left of x = $169,400 and x = $206,800, respectively, and 
then take the difference between these two areas. We find the z values for the two x values as 
follows.
For x = $169,400:  z = 169,400 −196,000
20,000
= −1.33
For x = $206,800:  z = 206,800 −196,000
20,000
= .54
Using the normal distribution: 
the area between two points on 
different sides of the mean.
Thus, the required probability is given by the difference between the areas under the standard 
normal curve to the left of z = −1.33 and to the left of z =.54. From Table IV in Appendix B, the 
area to the left of z = −1.33 is .0918, and the area to the left of z = .54 is .7054. Hence, the 
required probability is
P($169,400 < x < $206,800) = P(−1.33 < z < .54) = .7054 −.0918 = .6136
Thus, the probability is .6136 that the 2014 earnings of a randomly selected American internal 
medicine physician are between $169,400 and $206,800. Converting this probability into a per-
centage, we can also state that (about) 61.36% of American internal medicine physicians earned 
between $169,400 and $206,800 in 2014. 
◼
EXAMPLE 6–12 
Time Taken to Assemble a Toy
A racing car is one of the many toys manufactured by the Mack Corporation. The assembly 
times for this toy follow a normal distribution with a mean of 55 minutes and a standard devia-
tion of 4 minutes. The company closes at 5 p.m. every day. If one worker starts to assemble a 
racing car at 4 p.m., what is the probability that she will finish this job before the company closes 
for the day?
Using the normal distribution: 
probability that x is less 
than a value that is to the right 
of the mean.
Shaded area
is .6136
x
z
0
$206,800
$196,000
$169,400
−1.33
.54
Figure 6.40 Area between x = $169,400 and x = $206,800.

6.3 Applications of the Normal Distribution
249
Solution Let x denote the time this worker takes to assemble a racing car. Then, x is normally 
distributed with
μ = 55 minutes and σ = 4 minutes
We are to find the probability that this worker can assemble this car in 60 minutes or less (between 
4 and 5 p.m.). This probability is given by the area under the normal curve to the left of x = 60 
minutes as shown in Figure 6.41. First we find the z value for x = 60 as follows.
For x = 60: z = 60 −55
4
= 1.25
The required probability is given by the area under the standard normal curve to the left of 
z = 1.25, which is .8944 from Table IV of Appendix B. Thus, the required probability is
P(x ≤60) = P(z ≤1.25) = .8944
Thus, the probability is .8944 that this worker will finish assembling this racing car before the 
company closes for the day.
EXAMPLE 6–13 
Amount of Soda in a Can
Hupper Corporation produces many types of soft drinks, including Orange Cola. The filling 
machines are adjusted to pour 12 ounces of soda into each 12-ounce can of Orange Cola. How-
ever, the actual amount of soda poured into each can is not exactly 12 ounces; it varies from can 
to can. It has been observed that the net amount of soda in such a can has a normal distribution 
with a mean of 12 ounces and a standard deviation of .015 ounce.
(a) What is the probability that a randomly selected can of Orange Cola contains 11.97 to 
11.99 ounces of soda?
(b) What percentage of the Orange Cola cans contain 12.02 to 12.07 ounces of soda?
Solution Let x be the net amount of soda in a can of Orange Cola. Then, x has a normal distri-
bution with μ = 12 ounces and σ = .015 ounce.
(a) The probability that a randomly selected can contains 11.97 to 11.99 ounces of soda is 
given by the area under the normal distribution curve from x = 11.97 to x = 11.99. This 
area is shown in Figure 6.42. First we convert the two values of x to the corresponding 
z values.
 For x = 11.97: z = 11.97 −12
.015
= −2.00
 For x = 11.99: z = 11.99 −12
.015
= −.67
Using the normal distribution.
Calculating the probability 
between two points that are 
to the left of the mean.
PhotoDisc, Inc./Getty Images
x
Shaded area is
.8944
55
60
.8944
z
1.25
0
Figure 6.41 Area to the left of x = 60.
◼
www.ebook3000.com

250
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
The required probability is given by the area under the standard normal curve between 
z = −2.00 and z = −.67. From Table IV of Appendix B, the area to the left of z = −2.00 
is .0228, and the area to the left of z = −.67 is .2514. Hence, the required probability is
P(11.97 ≤x ≤11.99) = P(−2.00 ≤z ≤−.67) = .2514 −.0228 = .2286
Thus, the probability is .2286 that a randomly selected can of Orange Cola will 
contain 11.97 to 11.99 ounces of soda. We can also state that about 22.86% of Orange 
Cola cans contain 11.97 to 11.99 ounces of soda.
(b) The percentage of Orange Cola cans that contain 12.02 to 12.07 ounces of soda is given 
by the area under the normal distribution curve from x = 12.02 to x = 12.07, as shown 
in Figure 6.43.
 For x = 12.02: z = 12.02 −12
.015
= 1.33
 For x = 12.07: z = 12.07 −12
.015
= 4.67
Calculating the probability 
between two points that are to 
the right of the mean.
Figure 6.42 Area between x = 11.97 and x = 11.99.
x
12
11.99
11.97
Shaded area
= .2514 − .0228
= .2286
z
−2.00
−.67
0
x
Shaded area is
.0918 or 9.18%
12.02
12.07
μ = 12
z
1.33
0
4.67
Figure 6.43 Area from x = 12.02 to x = 12.07.
The required probability is given by the area under the standard normal curve between 
z = 1.33 and z = 4.67. From Table IV of Appendix B, the area to the left of z = 1.33 
is .9082, and the area to the left of z = 4.67 is approximately 1.0. Hence, the required 
probability is
P(12.02 ≤x ≤12.07) = P(1.33 ≤z ≤4.67) = 1.0 −.9082 = .0918
Converting this probability to a percentage, we can state that approximately 9.18% 
of all Orange Cola cans are expected to contain 12.02 to 12.07 ounces of soda. 
◼

6.3 Applications of the Normal Distribution
251
EXAMPLE 6–14 
Life Span of a Calculator
Suppose the life span of a calculator manufactured by the Calculators Corporation has a normal 
distribution with a mean of 54 months and a standard deviation of 8 months. The company guar-
antees that any calculator that starts malfunctioning within 36 months of the purchase will be 
replaced by a new one. About what percentage of calculators made by this company are expected 
to be replaced?
Solution Let x be the life span of such a calculator. Then x has a normal distribution with μ = 
54 and σ = 8 months. The probability that a randomly selected calculator will start to malfunction 
within 36 months is given by the area under the normal distribution curve to the left of x = 36, as 
shown in Figure 6.44.
For x = 36: z = 36 −54
8
= −2.25
Finding the area to the left of x 
that is less than the mean.
© jsemeniuk/iStockphoto
x
Shaded area
is .0122 or 1.22%
36
μ = 54
z
0
−2.25
Figure 6.44 Area to the left of x = 36.
The required percentage is given by the area under the standard normal curve to the left of 
z = −2.25. From Table IV of Appendix B, this area is .0122. Hence, the required probability is
P(x < 36) = P(z < −2.25) = .0122
 
The probability that any randomly selected calculator manufactured by the Calculators 
Corporation will start to malfunction within 36 months is .0122. Converting this probability to a 
percentage, we can state that approximately 1.22% of all calculators manufactured by this 
company are expected to start malfunctioning within 36 months. Hence, 1.22% of the calculators 
are expected to be replaced. 
◼
EXERCISES
per hour and a standard deviation of 4 miles per hour. Find the per-
centage of vehicles passing through this construction zone that are
a. exceeding the posted speed limit
b. traveling at speeds between 50 and 57 miles per hour
6.28 The Bank of Connecticut issues Visa and MasterCard credit 
cards. It is estimated that the balances on all Visa credit cards issued 
by the Bank of Connecticut have a mean of $845 and a standard devi-
ation of $270. Assume that the balances on all these Visa cards follow 
a normal distribution.
a. What is the probability that a randomly selected Visa card 
issued by this bank has a balance between $1000 and $1440?
b. What percentage of the Visa cards issued by this bank have a 
balance of $730 or more?
6.29 According to the records of an electric company serving the 
Boston area, the mean electricity consumption for all households dur-
ing winter is 1650 kilowatt-hours per month. Assume that the monthly 
APPLICATIONS
6.25 Let x denote the time taken to run a road race. Suppose x is 
approximately normally distributed with a mean of 190 minutes and a 
standard deviation of 21 minutes. If one runner is selected at random, 
what is the probability that this runner will complete this road race
a. in less than 160 minutes?  b. in 215 to 245 minutes?
6.26 Tommy Wait, a minor league baseball pitcher, is notorious for 
taking an excessive amount of time between pitches. In fact, his times 
between pitches are normally distributed with a mean of 36 seconds 
and a standard deviation of 2.5 seconds. What percentage of his times 
between pitches are
a. longer than 39 seconds?  b. between 29 and 34 seconds?
6.27 A construction zone on a highway has a posted speed limit 
of 40 miles per hour. The speeds of vehicles passing through this 
construction zone are normally distributed with a mean of 46 miles 
www.ebook3000.com

252
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
paid by homeowners in this city follow an approximate normal distri-
bution with a mean of $2850 and a standard deviation of $420. Find 
the probability that the monthly mortgage paid by a randomly selected 
homeowner from this city is
a. less than $1200 
b. between $2300 and $3140
c. more than $3600 
d. between $3200 and $3700
6.33 Fast Auto Service guarantees that the maximum waiting time 
for its customers is 20 minutes for oil and lube service on their cars. It 
also guarantees that any customer who has to wait longer than 20 
minutes for this service will receive a 50% discount on the charges. It 
is estimated that the mean time taken for oil and lube service at this 
garage is 15 minutes per car and the standard deviation is 2.4 minutes. 
Suppose the time taken for oil and lube service on a car follows a 
normal distribution.
a. What percentage of customers will receive a 50% discount on 
their charges?
b. Is it possible that it may take longer than 25 minutes for oil 
and lube service? Explain.
6.34 The lengths of 3-inch nails manufactured on a machine are 
normally distributed with a mean of 3.0 inches and a standard devia-
tion of .009 inch. The nails that are either shorter than 2.98 inches or 
longer than 3.02 inches are unusable. What percentage of all the nails 
produced by this machine are unusable?
6.35 The pucks used by the National Hockey League for ice hockey 
must weigh between 5.5 and 6.0 ounces. Suppose the weights of 
pucks produced at a factory are normally distributed with a mean of 
5.75 ounces and a standard deviation of .11 ounce. What percentage 
of the pucks produced at this factory cannot be used by the National 
Hockey League?
electricity consumptions during winter by all households in this area 
have a normal distribution with a mean of 1650 kilowatt-hours and a 
standard deviation of 320 kilowatt-hours.
a. Find the probability that the monthly electricity consumption 
during winter by a randomly selected household from this 
area is less than 1950 kilowatt-hours.
b. What percentage of the households in this area have a monthly 
electricity consumption of 900 to 1300 kilowatt-hours?
6.30 The management of a supermarket wants to adopt a new pro-
motional policy of giving a free gift to every customer who spends 
more than a certain amount per visit at this supermarket. The expecta-
tion of the management is that after this promotional policy is adver-
tised, the expenditures for all customers at this supermarket will be 
normally distributed with a mean of $95 and a standard deviation of 
$20. If the management decides to give free gifts to all those custom-
ers who spend more than $130 at this supermarket during a visit, what 
percentage of the customers are expected to receive free gifts?
6.31 One of the cars sold by Walt’s car dealership is a very popular 
subcompact car called the Rhino. The final sale price of the basic 
model of this car varies from customer to customer depending on the 
negotiating skills and persistence of the customer. Assume that these 
sale prices of this car are normally distributed with a mean of $19,800 
and a standard deviation of $350.
a. Dolores paid $19,445 for her Rhino. What percentage of 
Walt’s customers paid less than Dolores for a Rhino?
b. Cuthbert paid $20,300 for a Rhino. What percentage of Walt’s 
customers paid more than Cuthbert for a Rhino?
6.32 The average monthly mortgage payment for all homeowners in 
a city is $2850. Suppose that the distribution of monthly mortgages 
So far in this chapter we have discussed how to find the area under a normal distribution curve 
for an interval of z or x. Now we invert this procedure and learn how to find the corresponding 
value of z or x when an area under a normal distribution curve is known. Examples 6–15 through 
6–17 describe this procedure for finding the z value.
EXAMPLE 6–15 
Find the value of z such that the area under the standard normal curve to the left of z is .9251.
Solution As shown in Figure 6.45, we are to find the z value such that the area to the left of z 
is .9251. Since this area is greater than .50, z is positive and lies to the right of zero.
Finding z when the area to the 
left of z is known.
6.4 Determining the z and x Values When an Area Under the Normal 
Distribution Curve Is Known
z
0
Shaded area
is given to be .9251
To find this z
z = a
Figure 6.45 Finding the z value.

6.4 Determining the z and x Values When an Area Under the Normal Distribution Curve Is Known
253
 
To find the required value of z, we locate .9251 in the body of the normal distribution table, 
Table IV of Appendix B. The relevant portion of that table is reproduced as Table 6.4 here. Next 
we read the numbers in the column and row for z that correspond to .9251. As shown in Table 6.4, 
these numbers are 1.4 and .04, respectively. Combining these two numbers, we obtain the required 
value of z = 1.44. Thus, the area to the left of z = 1.44 is .9251.
EXAMPLE 6–16 
Find the value of z such that the area under the standard normal curve in the right tail is .0050.
Solution To find the required value of z, we first find the area to the left of z by subtracting 
.0050 from 1.0. Hence,
Area to the left of z = 1.0 −.0050 = .9950
This area is shown in Figure 6.46.
 
Now we look for .9950 in the body of the normal distribution table. Table IV does not con-
tain .9950. So we find the value closest to .9950, which is either .9949 or .9951. We can use either 
of these two values. If we choose .9951, the corresponding z value is 2.58. Hence, the required 
value of z is 2.58, and the area to the right of z = 2.58 is approximately .0050. Note that there is 
no apparent reason to choose .9951 and not to choose .9949. We can use either of the two values. 
If we choose .9949, the corresponding z value will be 2.57.
Finding z when the area in 
the right tail is known.
z
0
Shaded area is
given to be
.0050
1 − .0050 = .9950
To find
this z value
z = a
Figure 6.46 Finding the z value.
 
◼
Table 6.4 Finding the z Value When Area Is Known
 z 
.00 
.01 
. . . 
.04 
. . . 
.09
−3.4 
.0003 
.0003 
. . . 
 
. . . 
.0002
−3.3 
.0005 
.0005 
. . . 
 
. . . 
.0003
−3.2 
.0007 
.0007 
. . . 
 
. . . 
.0005
 · 
· 
· 
. . . 
 
. . . 
·
 · 
· 
· 
. . . 
 
. . . 
·
 · 
· 
· 
. . . 
 
. . . 
·
 1.4 
 
 
 
.9251 
. . . 
. . .
 · 
· 
· 
. . . 
· 
. . . 
·
 · 
· 
· 
. . . 
· 
. . . 
·
 · 
· 
· 
. . . 
· 
. . . 
·
  3.4 
.9997 
.9997 
. . . 
.9997 
. . . 
.9998
We locate this 
value in Table IV 
of Appendix B
 
◼
www.ebook3000.com

254
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
EXAMPLE 6–17 
Find the value of z such that the area under the standard normal curve in the left tail is .05.
Solution Because .05 is less than .5 and it is the area in the left tail, the value of z is negative. 
This area is shown in Figure 6.47.
Finding z when the area 
in the left tail is known.
 
Next, we look for .0500 in the body of the normal distribution table. The value closest to 
.0500 in the normal distribution table is either .0505 or .0495. Suppose we use the value .0495. 
The corresponding z value is −1.65. Thus, the required value of z is −1.65 and the area to the left 
of z = −1.65 is approximately .05. 
◼
 
To find an x value when an area under a normal distribution curve is given, first we find 
the z value corresponding to that x value from the normal distribution table. Then, to find 
the x value, we substitute the values of μ, σ, and z in the following formula, which is 
obtained from z = (x − μ)∕σ by doing some algebraic manipulations. Also, if we know the 
values of x, z, and σ, we can find μ using this same formula. 
z
Shaded area is
given to be .05
To find this z value
0
z = a
Figure 6.47 Finding the z value.
Finding an x Value for a Normal Distribution For a normal curve with known values of μ and 
σ and for a given area under the curve to the left of x, the x value is calculated as
x = μ + z σ
 
Examples 6–18 and 6–19 illustrate how to find an x value when an area under a normal dis-
tribution curve is known.
EXAMPLE 6–18 
Life Span of a Calculator
Recall Example 6–14. It is known that the life of a calculator manufactured by Calculators 
 Corporation has a normal distribution with a mean of 54 months and a standard deviation of 
8 months. What should the warranty period be to replace a malfunctioning calculator if the 
company does not want to replace more than 1% of all the calculators sold?
Solution Let x be the life of a calculator. Then, x follows a normal distribution with μ = 54 
months and σ = 8 months. The calculators that would be replaced are the ones that start malfunc-
tioning during the warranty period. The company’s objective is to replace at most 1% of all the 
calculators sold. The shaded area in Figure 6.48 gives the proportion of calculators that are 
replaced. We are to find the value of x so that the area to the left of x under the normal curve is 
1%, or .01.
Finding x when the area in 
the left tail is known.
© jsemeniuk/iStockphoto

6.4 Determining the z and x Values When an Area Under the Normal Distribution Curve Is Known
255
 
In the first step, we find the z value that corresponds to the required x value.
 
We find the z value from the normal distribution table for .0100. Table IV of Appendix B 
does not contain a value that is exactly .0100. The value closest to .0100 in the table is .0099, and 
the z value for .0099 is −2.33. Hence,
z = −2.33
Substituting the values of μ, σ, and z in the formula x = μ + zσ, we obtain
x = μ + z σ = 54 + (−2.33) (8) = 54 −18.64 = 35.36
 
Thus, the company should replace all the calculators that start to malfunction within 
35.36 months (which can be rounded to 35 months) of the date of purchase so that they will not 
have to replace more than 1% of the calculators. 
◼
EXAMPLE 6–19 
Earnings of Internal Medicine Physicians
According to the 2015 Physician Compensation Report by Medscape (a subsidiary of WebMD), 
American internal medicine physicians earned an average of $196,000 in 2014. Suppose that the 
2014 earnings of all American internal medicine physicians are normally distributed with a mean 
of $196,000 and a standard deviation of $20,000. Dr. Susan Garcia practices internal medicine in 
New Jersey. What were Dr. Garcia’s 2014 earnings if 10% of all American internal medicine 
physicians earned more than Dr. Susan Garcia in 2014?
Solution Let x denote the 2014 earnings of a randomly selected American internal medicine 
physician. Then, x is normally distributed with
μ = $196,000  and σ = $20,000
We are to find the value of x such that the area under the normal distribution curve to the right of 
x is 10%, as shown in Figure 6.49.
Finding x when the area in 
the right tail is known.
x
z
0
−2.33
Shaded area is
given as .01
From Table IV, this value
of z is approximately −2.33
x = a
To find this
x value
μ = 54
Figure 6.48 Finding an x value.
x
Shaded area is
given to be .10
x = a
To find this x value
μ = $196,000
z
1.28
0
From normal distribution table,
this value of z is approximately 1.28
Figure 6.49 Finding an x value.
www.ebook3000.com

256
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
 
First, we find the area under the normal distribution curve to the left of the x value.
Area to the left of the x value = 1.0 −.10 = .9000
To find the z value that corresponds to the required x value, we look for .9000 in the body of the 
normal distribution table. The value closest to .9000 in Table IV is .8997, and the corresponding 
z value is 1.28. Hence, the value of x is computed as
x = μ + zσ = 196,000 + 1.28(20,000) = 196,000 + 25,600 = $221,600
Thus, we can state that Dr. Garcia earned (approximately) $221,600 in 2014. 
◼
EXERCISES
management wants to promote the business by guaranteeing a maxi-
mum waiting time for its customers. If a customer’s car is not serviced 
within that period, the customer will receive a 50% discount on the 
charges. The company wants to limit this discount to at most 5% of 
the customers. What should the maximum guaranteed waiting time 
be? Assume that the times taken for oil and lube service for all cars 
have a normal distribution.
6.41 The management of a supermarket wants to adopt a new pro-
motional policy of giving a free gift to every customer who spends 
more than a certain amount per visit at this supermarket. The expecta-
tion of the management is that after this promotional policy is adver-
tised, the expenditures for all customers at this supermarket will be 
normally distributed with a mean of $95 and a standard deviation of 
$20. If the management wants to give free gifts to at most 10% of the 
customers, what should the amount be above which a customer would 
receive a free gift?
6.42 According to the records of an electric company serving the 
Boston area, the mean electricity consumption during winter for all 
households is 1650 kilowatt-hours per month. Assume that the 
monthly electric consumptions during winter by all households in this 
area have a normal distribution with a mean of 1650 kilowatt-hours 
and a standard deviation of 320 kilowatt-hours. The company sent a 
notice to Bill Johnson informing him that about 90% of the house-
holds use less electricity per month than he does. What is Bill Johnson’s 
monthly electricity consumption?
6.43 A study has shown that 20% of all college textbooks have a 
price of $250 or higher. It is known that the standard deviation of the 
prices of all college textbooks is $50. Suppose the prices of all college 
textbooks have a normal distribution. What is the mean price of all 
college textbooks?
6.44 A machine at Keats Corporation fills 64-ounce detergent jugs. 
The machine can be adjusted to pour, on average, any amount of 
detergent into these jugs. However, the machine does not pour 
exactly the same amount of detergent into each jug; it varies from jug 
to jug. It is known that the net amount of detergent poured into each 
jug has a normal distribution with a standard deviation of .35 ounce. 
The quality control inspector wants to adjust the machine such that at 
least 95% of the jugs have more than 64 ounces of detergent. What 
should the mean amount of detergent poured by this machine into 
these jugs be?
*
*
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
6.36 Find the value of z so that the area under the standard normal curve
a. from 0 to z is .4772 and z is positive
b. between 0 and z is (approximately) .4785 and z is negative
c. in the left tail is (approximately) .3565
d. in the right tail is (approximately) .1530
6.37 Determine the value of z so that the area under the standard 
normal curve
a. in the right tail is .0500
b. in the left tail is .0250
c. in the left tail is .0100
d. in the right tail is .0050
6.38 Determine the value of z so that the area under the standard 
normal curve
a. in the right tail is .0250
b. in the left tail is .0500
c. in the left tail is .0010
d. in the right tail is .0100
6.39 Let x be a continuous random variable that follows a normal 
distribution with a mean of 550 and a standard deviation of 75.
a. Find the value of x so that the area under the normal curve to 
the left of x is .0250.
b. Find the value of x so that the area under the normal curve to 
the right of x is .9345.
c. Find the value of x so that the area under the normal curve to 
the right of x is approximately .0275.
d. Find the value of x so that the area under the normal curve to 
the left of x is approximately .9600.
e. Find the value of x so that the area under the normal curve 
between μ and x is approximately .4700 and the value of x is 
less than μ.
f. Find the value of x so that the area under the normal curve 
between μ and x is approximately .4100 and the value of x is 
greater than μ.
APPLICATIONS
6.40 Fast Auto Service provides oil and lube service for cars. It is 
known that the mean time taken for oil and lube service at this garage 
is 15 minutes per car and the standard deviation is 2.4 minutes. The 

6.5 The Normal Approximation to the Binomial Distribution
257
Recall from Chapter 5 that:
1. 
The binomial distribution is applied to a discrete random variable.
2. Each repetition, called a trial, of a binomial experiment results in one of two possible out-
comes (or events), either a success or a failure.
3. The probabilities of the two (possible) outcomes (or events) remain the same for each repeti-
tion of the experiment.
4. 
The trials are independent.
 
The binomial formula, which gives the probability of x successes in n trials, is
P(x) = nCx p xq n−x
 
The use of the binomial formula becomes very tedious when n is large. In such cases, the 
normal distribution can be used to approximate the binomial probability. Note that for a binomial 
problem, the exact probability is obtained by using the binomial formula. If we apply the normal 
distribution to solve a binomial problem, the probability that we obtain is an approximation to the 
exact probability. The approximation obtained by using the normal distribution is very close to 
the exact probability when n is large and p is very close to .50. However, this does not mean that 
we should not use the normal approximation when p is not close to .50. The reason the approxi-
mation is closer to the exact probability when p is close to .50 is that the binomial distribution is 
symmetric when p = .50. The normal distribution is always symmetric. Hence, the two distribu-
tions are very close to each other when n is large and p is close to .50. However, this does not 
mean that whenever p = .50, the binomial distribution is the same as the normal distribution 
because not every symmetric bell-shaped curve is a normal distribution curve.
6.5 The Normal Approximation to the Binomial Distribution
Normal Distribution as an Approximation to Binomial Distribution Usually, the normal distri-
bution is used as an approximation to the binomial distribution when np and nq are both greater 
than 5, that is, when
np > 5 and nq > 5
 
Table 6.5 gives the binomial probability distribution of x for n = 12 and p = .50. This table 
is written using Table I of Appendix B. Figure 6.50 shows the histogram and the smoothed poly-
gon for the probability distribution of Table 6.5. As we can observe, the histogram in Figure 6.50 
is symmetric, and the curve obtained by joining the upper midpoints of the rectangles is approx-
imately bell shaped.
Table 6.5  The Binomial 
Probability 
Distribution for 
n = 12 and p = .50
x
 
P(x)
0
.0002
1
.0029
2
.0161
3
.0537
4
.1208
5
.1934
6
.2256
7
.1934
8
.1208
9
.0537
10
.0161
11
.0029
12
.0002
x
.05
.10
.15
.20
.25
P(x)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12
Figure 6.50 Histogram for the probability distribution 
of Table 6.5.
 
Examples 6–20 through 6–22 illustrate the application of the normal distribution as an 
approximation to the binomial distribution.
www.ebook3000.com

258
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
EXAMPLE 6–20 
Number of Credit Cards People Have
According to an estimate, 50% of people in the United States have at least one credit card. If a 
random sample of 30 persons is selected, what is the probability that 19 of them will have at least 
one credit card?
Solution Let n be the total number of persons in the sample, x be the number of persons in the 
sample who have at least one credit card, and p be the probability that a person has at least one 
credit card. Then, this is a binomial problem with
 n = 30, p = .50, q = 1 −p = .50,
 x = 19, n −x = 30 −19 = 11
Using the binomial formula, the exact probability that 19 persons in a sample of 30 have at least 
one credit card is
P(19) = 30C19 (.50)19 (.50)11 = .0509
 
Now let us solve this problem using the normal distribution as an approximation to the bino-
mial distribution. For this example,
np = 30 (.50) = 15 and nq = 30 (.50) = 15
Because np and nq are both greater than 5, we can use the normal distribution as an approxima-
tion to solve this binomial problem. We perform the following three steps.
Step 1. Compute μ and σ for the binomial distribution.
To use the normal distribution, we need to know the mean and standard deviation of the 
distribution. Hence, the first step in using the normal approximation to the binomial distribution 
is to compute the mean and standard deviation of the binomial distribution. As we know from 
Chapter 5, the mean and standard deviation of a binomial distribution are given by np and √npq, 
respectively. Using these formulas, we obtain
 μ = np = 30(.50) = 15
 σ = √npq = √30(.50)(.50) = 2.73861279
Step 2. Convert the discrete random variable into a continuous random variable.
 
The normal distribution applies to a continuous random variable, whereas the binomial dis-
tribution applies to a discrete random variable. The second step in applying the normal approxi-
mation to the binomial distribution is to convert the discrete random variable to a continuous 
random variable by making the correction for continuity.
Using the normal approximation 
to the binomial distribution: 
x equals a specific value.
Continuity Correction Factor The addition of .5 and/or subtraction of .5 from the value(s) of x 
when the normal distribution is used as an approximation to the binomial distribution, where x 
is the number of successes in n trials, is called the continuity correction factor.
 
As shown in Figure 6.51, the probability of 19 successes in 30 trials is given by the area 
of the rectangle for x = 19. To make the correction for continuity, we use the interval 18.5 to 
19.5 for 19 persons. This interval is actually given by the two boundaries of the rectangle for 
x = 19, which are obtained by subtracting .5 from 19 and by adding .5 to 19. Thus, P(x = 19) 
for the binomial problem will be approximately equal to P(18.5 ≤ x ≤ 19.5) for the normal 
distribution.

6.5 The Normal Approximation to the Binomial Distribution
259
Step 3. Compute the required probability using the normal distribution.
 
As shown in Figure 6.52, the area under the normal distribution curve between x = 18.5 and 
x = 19.5 will give us the (approximate) probability that 19 persons have at least one credit card. 
We calculate this probability as follows:
 For x = 18.5: z = 18.5 −15
2.73861279 = 1.28
 For x = 19.5: z = 19.5 −15
2.73861279 = 1.64
19.5
18.5
x
x
19
The area contained by the rectangle for 
x = 19 is approximated by the area under 
the normal curve between 18.5 and 19.5.
μ = 15
μ = 15
Figure 6.51
19.5
18.5
15
x
z
0
1.64
1.28
Shaded area is
.0498
Figure 6.52 Area between x = 18.5 and x = 19.5.
The required probability is given by the area under the standard normal curve between z = 1.28 
and z = 1.64. This area is obtained by subtracting the area to the left of z = 1.28 from the area to 
the left of z = 1.64. From Table IV of Appendix B, the area to the left of z = 1.28 is .8997 and the 
area to the left of z = 1.64 is .9495. Hence, the required probability is
P(18.5 ≤x ≤19.5) = P(1.28 ≤z ≤1.64) = .9495 −.8997 = .0498
 
Thus, based on the normal approximation, the probability that 19 persons in a sample of 30 
will have at least one credit card is approximately .0498. Earlier, using the binomial formula, we 
obtained the exact probability .0509. The error due to using the normal approximation is .0509 − 
.0498 = .0011. Thus, the exact probability is underestimated by .0011 if the normal approxima-
tion is used. 
◼
When applying the normal distribution as an approximation to the binomial distribution, always 
make a correction for continuity. The continuity correction is made by subtracting .5 from the 
lower limit of the interval and/or by adding .5 to the upper limit of the interval. For example, the 
binomial probability P(7 ≤ x ≤ 12) will be approximated by the probability P(6.5 ≤ x ≤ 12.5) for 
the normal distribution; the binomial probability P(x ≥ 9) will be approximated by the proba-
bility P(x ≥ 8.5) for the normal distribution; and the binomial probability P(x ≤ 10) will be 
 Remember
www.ebook3000.com

260
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
approximated by the probability P(x ≤ 10.5) for the normal distribution. Note that the probability 
P(x ≥ 9) has only the lower limit of 9 and no upper limit, and the probability P(x ≤ 10) has only 
the upper limit of 10 and no lower limit.
EXAMPLE 6–21 
Advantage of Working from Home
According to a survey, 32% of people working from home said that the biggest advantage of 
working from home is that there is no commute. Suppose that this result is true for the current 
population of people who work from home. What is the probability that in a random sample of 
400 people who work from home, 108 to 122 will say that the biggest advantage of working from 
home is that there is no commute?
Solution Let n be the number of people in the sample who work from home, x be the number 
of people in the sample who say that the biggest advantage of working from home is that there 
is no commute, and p be the probability that a person who works from home says that the big-
gest advantage of working from home is that there is no commute. Then, this is a binomial 
problem with
n = 400, p = .32, and q = 1 −.32 = .68
We are to find the probability of 108 to 122 successes in 400 trials. Because n is large, it is easier 
to apply the normal approximation than to use the binomial formula. We can check that np and 
nq are both greater than 5. The mean and standard deviation of the binomial distribution are, 
respectively,
 μ = np = 400 (.32) = 128
 σ = √npq = √400(.32)(.68) = 9.32952303
 
To make the continuity correction, we subtract .5 from 108 and add .5 to 122 to obtain the 
interval 107.5 to 122.5. Thus, the probability that 108 to 122 out of a sample of 400 people who 
work from home will say that the biggest advantage of working from home is that there is no 
commute is approximated by the area under the normal distribution curve from x = 107.5 to 
x = 122.5. This area is shown in Figure 6.53. The z values for x = 107.5 and x = 122.5 are calcu-
lated as follows:
 
For x = 107.5:  z = 107.5 −128
9.32952303 = −2.20
 
For x = 122.5:  z = 122.5 −128
9.32952303 = −.59
Using the normal approximation 
to the binomial probability: 
x assumes a value in an interval.
x
128
122.5
107.5
Shaded area
is .2637
z
0
−2.20
−.59
Figure 6.53 Area between x = 107.5 and x = 122.5.
The required probability is given by the area under the standard normal curve between z = −2.20 
and z = −.59. This area is obtained by taking the difference between the areas under the standard 
normal curve to the left of z = −2.20 and to the left of z = −.59. From Table IV of Appendix B, 

6.5 The Normal Approximation to the Binomial Distribution
261
the area to the left of z = −2.20 is .0139, and the area to the left of z = −.59 is .2776. Hence, the 
required probability is
P(107.5 ≤x ≤122.5) = P(−2.20 ≤z ≤−.59) = .2776 −.0139 = .2637
Thus, the probability that 108 to 122 people in a sample of 400 who work from home will 
say that the biggest advantage of working from home is that there is no commute is approx-
imately .2637. 
◼
EXAMPLE 6–22 
Women Supporting Red Light Cameras 
at Intersections
According to a FindLaw.com survey of American adults women, 61% support red light 
cameras at intersections (USA TODAY, January 7, 2015). Assume that this percentage is true for 
the current population of adult American women. What is the probability that 500 or more such 
women in a random sample of 800 women will support red light cameras at intersections?
Solution Let n be the sample size, x be the number of women in the sample who support red 
light cameras at intersections, and p be the probability that a randomly selected American adult 
woman supports red light cameras at intersections. Then, this is a binomial problem with
n = 800,  p = .61, and q = 1 −.61 = .39
We are to find the probability of 500 or more successes in 800 trials. The mean and standard 
deviation of the binomial distribution are
μ = np = 800 (.61) = 488
σ = √npq = √800(.61)(.39) = 13.79565149
For the continuity correction, we subtract .5 from 500, which gives 499.5. Thus, the probability 
that 500 or more women in a random sample of 800 support red light cameras at intersections is 
approximated by the area under the normal distribution curve to the right of x = 499.5, as shown 
in Figure 6.54. The z-value for x = 499.5 is calculated as follows.
For x = 499.5:  z = 499.5 −488
13.79565149 = .83
Using the normal approximation 
to the binomial probability: x is 
greater than or equal to a value.
x
499.5
488
Shaded area
is .2033
z
0
.83
Figure 6.54 Area to the right of x = 499.5.
To find the required probability, we find the area to the left of z = .83 and subtract this area from 
1.0. From Table IV of Appendix B, the area to the left of z = .83 is .7967. Hence,
P(x ≥499.5) = P(z ≥.83) = 1.0 −.7967 = .2033
Thus, the probability that 500 or more adult American women in a random sample of 800 will 
support red light cameras at intersections is approximately .2033. 
◼
www.ebook3000.com

262
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
EXERCISES
6.51 An office supply company conducted a survey before market-
ing a new paper shredder designed for home use. In the survey, 80% 
of the people who tried the shredder were satisfied with it. Because of 
this high satisfaction rate, the company decided to market the new 
shredder. Assume that 80% of all people are satisfied with this shred-
der. During a certain month, 100 customers bought this shredder. Find 
the probability that of these 100 customers, the number who are satis-
fied is
a. exactly 75  b. 73 or fewer  c. 74 to 85
6.52 Johnson Electronics makes calculators. Consumer satisfac-
tion is one of the top priorities of the company’s management. The 
company guarantees the refund of money or a replacement for any 
calculator that malfunctions within two years from the date of pur-
chase. It is known from past data that despite all efforts, 5% of the 
calculators manufactured by this company malfunction within a 
2-year period. The company recently mailed 500 such calculators to 
its customers.
a. Find the probability that exactly 29 of the 500 calculators will 
be returned for refund or replacement within a 2-year period.
b. What is the probability that 27 or more of the 500 calculators 
will be returned for refund or replacement within a 2-year 
period?
c. What is the probability that 15 to 22 of the 500 calculators 
will be returned for refund or replacement within a 2-year 
period?
6.53 Hurbert Corporation makes font cartridges for laser printers 
that it sells to Alpha Electronics Inc. The cartridges are shipped to 
Alpha Electronics in large volumes. The quality control department at 
Alpha Electronics randomly selects 100 cartridges from each ship-
ment and inspects them for being good or defective. If this sample 
contains 7 or more defective cartridges, the entire shipment is rejected. 
Hurbert Corporation promises that of all the cartridges, only 5% are 
defective.
a. Find the probability that a given shipment of cartridges 
received by Alpha Electronics will be accepted.
b. Find the probability that a given shipment of cartridges 
received by Alpha Electronics will not be accepted.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
6.45 Under what conditions is the normal distribution usually used 
as an approximation to the binomial distribution?
6.46 For a binomial probability distribution, n = 25 and p = .40.
a. Find the probability P(8 ≤ x ≤ 13) by using the table of binomial 
probabilities (Table I of Appendix B).
b. Find the probability P(8 ≤ x ≤ 13) by using the normal distri-
bution as an approximation to the binomial distribution. What 
is the difference between this approximation and the exact 
probability calculated in part a?
6.47 For a binomial probability distribution, n = 120 and p = .60. 
Let x be the number of successes in 120 trials.
a. Find the mean and standard deviation of this binomial distri-
bution.
b. Find P(x ≤ 69) using the normal approximation.
c. Find P(67 ≤ x ≤ 73) using the normal approximation.
6.48 Find the following binomial probabilities using the normal 
approximation.
a. n = 140, p = .45, P(x = 67)
b. n = 100, p = .55, P(52 ≤ x ≤ 60)
c. n = 90,  p = .42, P(x ≥ 40)
d. n = 104, p = .75, P(x ≤ 72)
APPLICATIONS
6.49 According to a U.S. Census American Community Survey, 
5.44% of workers in Portland, Oregon, commute to work on their 
bicycles. Find the probability that in a sample of 400 workers from 
Portland, Oregon, the number who commute to work on their bicycles 
is 23 to 27.
6.50 According to a survey, 15% of U.S. adults with online services 
currently read e-books. Assume that this percentage is true for the 
current population of U.S. adults with online services. Find the prob-
ability that in a random sample of 600 U.S. adults with online ser-
vices, the number who read e-books is
a. exactly 97  b. at most 106  c. 76 to 99
USES AND MISUSES...
(1) DON’T LOSE YOUR MEMORY
As discussed in the previous chapter, the Poisson distribution gives 
the probability of a specified number of events occurring in a time 
interval. The Poisson distribution provides a model for the number of 
emails a server might receive during a certain time period or the number 
of people arriving in line at a bank during lunch hour. These are nice to 
know for planning purposes, but sometimes we want to know the 
specific times at which emails or customers arrive. These times are 
governed by a special continuous probability distribution with certain 
unusual properties. This distribution is called the exponential distribu-
tion, and it is derived from the Poisson probability distribution.
 
Suppose you are a teller at a bank, and a customer has just 
arrived. You know that the customers arrive according to a Poisson 
process with a rate of 𝜆 customers per hour. Your boss might care 
how many customers arrive on average during a given time interval 
to ensure there are enough tellers available to handle the customers 
efficiently; you are more concerned with the time when the next cus-
tomer will arrive. Remember that the probability that x customers 
arrive in an interval of length t is
P(x) =
(λt)xe−λt
x!

Supplementary Exercises
263
The probability that at least one customer arrives within time t is 
1 minus the probability that no customer arrives within time t. Hence,
 
P (at least one customer arrives within time t) = 1 − P(0)
 
= 1 −
(λt)0e−λt
0!
 
= 1 −e−λt
If the bank receives an average of 15 customers per hour—an aver-
age of one every 4 minutes—and a customer has just arrived, the 
probability that a customer arrives within 4 minutes is 1 − e−λt = 1 − 
e−(15/60)4 = .6321. In the same way, the probability that a customer 
arrives within 8 minutes is .8647.
 
Let us say that a customer arrived and went to your co-worker’s 
window. No additional customer arrived within the next 2 minutes—
an event with probability .6065—and you dozed off for 2 more min-
utes. When you open your eyes, you see that a customer has not 
arrived yet. What is the probability that a customer arrives within the 
next 4 minutes? From the calculation above, you might say that the 
answer is .8647. After all, you know that a customer arrived 8 minutes 
earlier. But .8647 is not the correct answer.
 
The exponential distribution, which governs the time between 
arrivals of a Poisson process, has a property called the memoryless 
property. For you as a bank teller, this means that if you know a cus-
tomer has not arrived during the past 4 minutes, then the clock is 
reset to zero, as if the previous customer had just arrived. So even 
after your nap, the probability that a customer arrives within 4 minutes 
is .6321. This interesting property reminds us again that we should be 
careful when we use mathematics to model real-world phenomena.
(2) QUALITY IS JOB 1
During the early 1980s, Ford Motor Company adopted a new market-
ing slogan: “Quality Is Job 1.” The new slogan coincided with Ford’s 
release of the Taurus and the Mercury Sable, but the groundwork that 
resulted in Ford’s sudden need to improve quality was laid some 30 
years earlier by an American statistician—not in Detroit, but in Japan.
 
W. Edwards Deming is one of the most famous statisticians, if 
not the most famous statistican, in the field of statistical process con-
trol, a field that debunked the myth that you could not improve quality 
and lower costs simultaneously. After World War II, Deming was 
asked by the U.S. Armed Forces to assist with planning for the 1951 
census in Japan. While there, he taught statistical process control and 
quality management to the managers and engineers at many of 
Japan’s largest companies. After adopting Deming’s principles, the 
quality of and the demand for Japanese products, including Japanese 
automobiles, increased tremendously.
 
Ford’s interest in Japanese quality resulted from the fact that 
Ford was having a specific transmission produced simultaneously in 
Japan and the United States. Ford’s U.S. customers were requesting 
cars with Japanese-produced transmissions, even if it required them 
to wait longer for the car. Despite the fact that the transmissions were 
made to the same specifications in the two countries, the parts used 
in the Japanese transmissions were much closer to the desired size 
than those used in the transmissions made in America. Knowing that 
Deming had done a great deal of work with Japanese companies, 
Ford hired him as a consultant. The result of Deming’s work in statisti-
cal process control and proper management methods, along with 
Ford’s willingness to implement his recommendations, was the pro-
duction of Ford’s Taurus and Mercury Sable lines of automobiles, 
which resulted in Ford earning a profit after numerous years of losses.
 
W. Edwards Deming died in 1993 at the age of 93 years, but he 
left a legacy. Japan introduced the Deming Prize in 1950. The Deming 
Prize is awarded annually to individuals and companies whose work 
has advanced knowledge in the statistical process control area. More 
information about Deming and The W. Edwards Deming Institute is 
available at www.deming.org.
Source: The W. Edwards Deming Institute (www.deming.org), and 
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/W._Edwards_Deming.
bell-shaped curve. The parameters of the normal distribution are the 
mean μ and the standard deviation σ.
Standard normal distribution The normal distribution with μ = 0 
and σ = 1. The units of the standard normal distribution are denoted 
by z.
z value or z score The units of the standard normal distribution that 
are denoted by z.
Continuity correction factor Addition of .5 and/or subtraction of 
.5 from the value(s) of x when the normal distribution is used as an 
approximation to the binomial distribution, where x is the number of 
successes in n trials.
Continuous random variable A random variable that can assume 
any value in one or more intervals.
Normal probability distribution The probability distribution of 
a continuous random variable that, when plotted, gives a specific 
Glossary
a. Find the probability that a randomly selected customer who 
pays by check spends more than $114 on groceries.
b. What percentage of customers paying by check spend between 
$40 and $60 on groceries?
6.54 A company that has a large number of supermarket grocery 
stores claims that customers who pay by personal checks spend an 
average of $87 on groceries at these stores with a standard deviation 
of $22. Assume that the expenses incurred on groceries by all such 
customers at these stores are normally distributed.
Supplementary Exercises
www.ebook3000.com

264
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
28 minutes and a standard deviation of 5 minutes. Jenn has to be at 
work by 8:30 a.m. every morning. By what time must she leave home 
in the morning so that she is late for work at most 1% of the time?
6.58 Major League Baseball rules require that the balls used in base-
ball games must have circumferences between 9 and 9.25 inches. 
Suppose the balls produced by the factory that supplies balls to Major 
League Baseball have circumferences normally distributed with a 
mean of 9.125 inches and a standard deviation of .06 inch. What per-
centage of these baseballs fail to meet the circumference requirement?
6.59 Mong Corporation makes auto batteries. The company claims 
that 80% of its LL70 batteries are good for 70 months or longer.
a. What is the probability that in a sample of 100 such batteries, 
exactly 85 will be good for 70 months or longer?
b. Find the probability that in a sample of 100 such batteries, at 
most 74 will be good for 70 months or longer.
c. What is the probability that in a sample of 100 such batteries, 
75 to 87 will be good for 70 months or longer?
d. Find the probability that in a sample of 100 such batteries, 72 
to 77 will be good for 70 months or longer.
6.60 Stress on the job is a major concern of a large number of people 
who go into managerial positions. It is estimated that 80% of the man-
agers of all companies suffer from job-related stress.
a. What is the probability that in a sample of 200 managers of 
companies, exactly 150 suffer from job-related stress?
b. Find the probability that in a sample of 200 managers of com-
panies, at least 170 suffer from job-related stress.
c. What is the probability that in a sample of 200 managers of 
companies, 165 or fewer suffer from job-related stress?
d. Find the probability that in a sample of 200 managers of com-
panies, 164 to 172 suffer from job-related stress.
c. What percentage of customers paying by check spend between 
$70 and $105?
d. Is it possible for a customer paying by check to spend more 
than $185? Explain.
6.55 At Jen and Perry Ice Cream Company, the machine that fills 
1-pound cartons of Top Flavor ice cream is set to dispense 16 ounces 
of ice cream into every carton. However, some cartons contain slightly 
less than and some contain slightly more than 16 ounces of ice cream. 
The amounts of ice cream in all such cartons have a normal distribu-
tion with a mean of 16 ounces and a standard deviation of .18 ounce.
a. Find the probability that a randomly selected carton contains 
16.20 to 16.50 ounces of ice cream.
b. What percentage of such cartons contain less than 15.70 
ounces of ice cream?
c. Is it possible for a carton to contain less than 15.20 ounces of 
ice cream? Explain.
6.56 A machine at Kasem Steel Corporation makes iron rods that are 
supposed to be 50 inches long. However, the machine does not make 
all rods of exactly the same length. It is known that the probability 
distribution of the lengths of rods made on this machine is normal 
with a mean of 50 inches and a standard deviation of .06 inch. The 
rods that are either shorter than 49.85 inches or longer than 50.15 
inches are discarded. What percentage of the rods made on this 
machine are discarded?
6.57 Jenn Bard, who lives in the San Francisco Bay area, commutes 
by car from home to work. She knows that it takes her an average of 
28 minutes for this commute in the morning. However, due to the 
variability in the traffic situation every morning, the standard devia-
tion of these commutes is 5 minutes. Suppose the population of her 
morning commute times has a normal distribution with a mean of 
inherent in the manufacturing process, management is satisfied if 
each pint contains between 18% and 22% air. Currently two of Jen 
and Perry’s plants are making gourmet ice cream. At Plant A, the 
mean amount of air per pint is 20% with a standard deviation of 2%. 
At Plant B, the mean amount of air per pint is 19% with a standard 
deviation of 1%. Assuming the amount of air is normally distributed 
at both plants, which plant is producing the greater proportion of pints 
that contain between 18% and 22% air?
6.65 Ashley knows that the time it takes her to commute to work is 
approximately normally distributed with a mean of 45 minutes and 
a standard deviation of 3 minutes. What time must she leave home 
in the morning so that she is 95% sure of arriving at work by 9 a.m.?
6.66 Alpha Corporation is considering two suppliers to secure the large 
amounts of steel rods that it uses. Company A produces rods with a mean 
diameter of 8 mm and a standard deviation of .15 mm and sells 10,000 
rods for $400. Company B produces rods with a mean diameter of 8 mm 
and a standard deviation of .12 mm and sells 10,000 rods for $460. A rod 
is usable only if its diameter is between 7.8 mm and 8.2 mm. Assume 
that the diameters of the rods produced by each company have a normal 
distribution. Which of the two companies should Alpha Corporation use 
as a supplier? Justify your answer with appropriate calculations.
6.67 A gambler is planning to make a sequence of bets on a roulette 
wheel. Note that a roulette wheel has 38 numbers, of which 18 are red, 
18 are black, and 2 are green. Each time the wheel is spun, each of the 
38 numbers is equally likely to occur. The gambler will choose one of 
the following two sequences.
6.61 At Jen and Perry Ice Cream Company, a machine fills 1-pound 
cartons of Top Flavor ice cream. The machine can be set to dispense, 
on average, any amount of ice cream into these cartons. However, the 
machine does not put exactly the same amount of ice cream into each 
carton; it varies from carton to carton. It is known that the amount of 
ice cream put into each such carton has a normal distribution with a 
standard deviation of .18 ounce. The quality control inspector wants 
to set the machine such that at least 90% of the cartons have more than 
16 ounces of ice cream. What should be the mean amount of ice cream 
put into these cartons by this machine?
6.62 Two companies, A and B, drill wells in a rural area. Company A 
charges a flat fee of $3500 to drill a well regardless of its depth. Com-
pany B charges $1000 plus $12 per foot to drill a well. The depths of 
wells drilled in this area have a normal distribution with a mean of 
250 feet and a standard deviation of 40 feet.
a. What is the probability that Company B would charge more 
than Company A to drill a well?
b. Find the mean amount charged by Company B to drill a well.
6.63 Lori just bought a new set of four tires for her car. The life of 
each tire is normally distributed with a mean of 45,000 miles and a 
standard deviation of 2000 miles. Find the probability that all four 
tires will last for at least 46,000 miles. Assume that the life of each of 
these tires is independent of the lives of other tires.
6.64 The Jen and Perry Ice Cream company makes a gourmet ice 
cream. Although the law allows ice cream to contain up to 50% air, 
this product is designed to contain only 20% air. Because of variability 
Advanced Exercises

Appendix 6.1
265
6.69 Suppose you are conducting a binomial experiment that has 15 
trials and the probability of success of .02. According to the sample size 
requirements, you cannot use the normal distribution to approximate the 
binomial distribution in this situation. Use the mean and standard devia-
tion of this binomial distribution and the empirical rule to explain why 
there is a problem in this situation. (Note: Drawing the graph and marking 
the values that correspond to the empirical rule is a good way to start.)
6.70 A variation of a roulette wheel has slots that are not of equal 
size. Instead, the width of any slot is proportional to the probability 
that a standard normal random variable z takes on a value between a 
and (a + .1), where a = −3.0, −2.9, −2.8, . . . , 2.9, 3.0. In other 
words, there are slots for the intervals (−3.0, −2.9), (−2.9, −2.8), 
(−2.8, −2.7) through (2.9, 3.0). There is one more slot that represents 
the probability that z falls outside the interval (−3.0, 3.0). Find the 
following probabilities.
a. The ball lands in the slot representing (.3, .4).
b. The ball lands in any of the slots representing (−.1, .4).
c. In at least one out of five games, the ball lands in the slot rep-
resenting (−.1, .4).
d. In at least 100 out of 500 games, the ball lands in the slot 
representing (.4, .5).
Single-number bet: The gambler will bet $5 on a particular number 
before each spin. He will win a net amount of $175 if that number 
comes up and lose $5 otherwise.
Color bet: The gambler will bet $5 on the red color before each spin. 
He will win a net amount of $5 if a red number comes up and lose $5 
otherwise.
a. If the gambler makes a sequence of 25 bets, which of the two 
betting schemes offers him a better chance of coming out 
ahead (winning more money than losing) after the 25 bets?
b. Now compute the probability of coming out ahead after 25 
single-number bets of $5 each and after 25 color bets of $5 
each. Do these results confirm your guess in part a? (Before 
using an approximation to find either probability, be sure to 
check whether it is appropriate.)
6.68 The amount of time taken by a bank teller to serve a randomly 
selected customer has a normal distribution with a mean of 2 minutes 
and a standard deviation of .5 minute.
a. What is the probability that both of two randomly selected 
customers will take less than 1 minute each to be served?
b. What is the probability that at least one of four randomly selected 
customers will need more than 2.25 minutes to be served?
NORMAL QUANTILE PLOTS
Many of the methods that are used in statistics require that the sampled data come from a normal distribu-
tion. While it is impossible to determine if this holds true without taking a census (i.e., looking at the popula-
tion data), there are statistical tools that can be used to determine if this is a reasonable assumption. One of 
the simplest tools to use is called a normal quantile plot. The idea of the plot is to compare the values in a 
data set with the corresponding values one would predict for a standard normal distribution.
 
Although normal quantile plots are typically created using technology, it is helpful to see an example 
to understand how they are created and what the various numbers represent. To demonstrate, consider the 
data in the following table, which contains the 2001 salaries of the mayors of 10 large cities.
City
Mayor’s Salary ($)
City
Mayor’s Salary ($)
Chicago, IL
170,000
Newark, NJ
147,000
New York, NY
165,000
San Francisco, CA
146,891
Houston, TX
160,500
Jacksonville, FL
127,230
Detroit, MI
157,300
Baltimore, MD
125,000
Los Angeles, CA
147,390
Boston, MA
125,000
Each data point represents 1/10 of the distribution, with the smallest value representing the smallest 10%, 
the next representing the 10%–20% interval, and so on. In each case, we estimate that the data points fall in 
the middle of their respective intervals. For these 10 data points, these midpoints would be at the 5%, 15%, 
25%, and so on, locations, while if we have 20 data points, these locations would be at 2.5%, 7.5%, 12.5%, 
and so on. Next we determine the z scores for these locations. The following table shows the z scores for the 
10–data point scenario and for the 20–data point scenario.
APPENDIX 6.1
Ten data points
Location (%)
5
15
25
35
45
55
65
75
85
95
z Score
−1.645
−1.036
−0.674
−0.385
−0.126
0.126
0.385
0.674
1.036
1.645
Twenty data points
Location (%)
 
2.5
 
7.5
 12.5
 17.5
 22.5
 27.5
 32.5
 37.5
 42.5
 47.5
z Score
 −1.960
 −1.440
 −1.150
 −0.935
 −0.755
 −0.598
 −0.454
 −0.319
 −0.189
 −0.063
Location (%)
 52.5
 57.5
 62.5
 67.5
 72.5
 77.5
 82.5
 87.5
 92.5
 97.5
z Score
 
0.063
 
0.189
 
0.319
 
0.454
 
0.598
 
0.755
 
0.935
 
1.150
 
1.440
 1.960
www.ebook3000.com

266
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
 
Next we make a two-dimensional plot that places the data on the horizontal axis and the z scores on the 
vertical axis.
 
If the data are in complete agreement with a normal distribution, the points will lie on the line displayed 
in the graph. As the likelihood that the given data come from a normal distribution decreases, the plot of data 
points will become less linear.
 
So, how do we interpret the plot of 10 salaries in the graph? There are a couple of features that we can 
point out. There are two groups of points that are stacked almost vertically (near $125,000 and $147,000). 
Depending on the software, multiple data points of the same value will be stacked or will appear as one 
point. In addition, there is a fairly big gap between these two groups. This is not unusual with small data 
sets, even if the data come from a normal distribution. Most times, in order to state that a very small data 
set does not come from a normal distribution, many people will be able to see that the data are very strongly 
skewed or have an outlier simply by looking at a sorted list of the data.
 
To understand the correspondence between the shape of a data set and its normal quantile plot, it is 
useful to look at a dotplot or histogram side by side with the normal quantile plot. We will consider a few 
common cases here.
(1). First, following are the two graphs for 20 data points randomly selected from a normal distribution.
Score
Salary
Probability Plot of Salary
Normal
−2
−1
0
100000
1
2
110000 120000 130000 140000 150000 160000 170000 180000 190000
Frequency
1
7.2
Normal
Histogram of Normal
8.4
9.6
10.8
0
2
3
4
6
Normal
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Score
−2
−1
0
1
2
Probability Plot of Normal
Normal
As you can see, just because data come from a normal distribution does not imply that they will be 
perfectly linear. In general, the points are close to the line, but small patterns such as in the upper right 
or the gap in the lower left can occur without invalidating the normality assumption.
(2).  In the next case, we consider data that come from a distribution that is heavy tailed, which means that 
the distribution has higher percentages of values in its tails than one would expect in a normal distribu-
tion. For example, the Empirical Rule states that a normal distribution has approximately 2.5% of the 
observations below μ − 2σ and 2.5% of the observations above μ + 2σ. If a data set has 10% of the 

Appendix 6.1
267
observations below μ − 2σ and 10% of the observations above μ + 2σ, it would be classifi ed as being 
heavy-tailed. The resulting shape of the normal quantile plot will look somewhat like a playground 
slide. As the tails get heavier, the ends of the plot become steeper and the middle gets fl atter.
(3).  Skewed distributions have normal quantile plots that are shaped somewhat like a boomerang, which 
has a rounded V shape, with one end of the boomerang stretched out more than the other side. Just 
like all other graphs of skewed distributions, the side that is stretched out identifi es the direction of 
the skew. Again, as the distribution becomes more skewed, the bend in the quantile plot will become 
more severe.
Frequency
1
0.2
Heavy tails
Histogram of Heavy Tails
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
0
2
3
5
4
0.0
Heavy tails
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Score
−2
−1
0
1
2
Probability Plot of Heavy Tails
Normal
Frequency
1
0.70
Skewed left
Histogram of Skewed Left
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
0
2
3
9
5
6
7
8
4
Skewed left
Probability Plot of Skewed Left
Normal
Score
−2
−1
0
0.7
1
2
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Histogram of Skewed Right
Skewed right
Frequency
1
0
0
2
3
5
4
2
4
6
8
−4
Skewed right
10
8
6
4
2
0
−2
Score
−2
−1
0
1
2
Probability Plot of Skewed Right
Normal
www.ebook3000.com

268
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
(4).  Our last example involves an outlier. As in other graphs, potential outliers are fairly easy to identify, basi-
cally by fi nding a large horizontal jump in the left or right tail. However, you need to be careful when dis-
tinguishing a skewed distribution from one that has an outlier. In our skewed-to-the-right example, there 
is an approximate difference of 2 between the two largest values, yet the largest data value is still fairly 
close to the line in a vertical direction. In our outlier example, there is a substantial vertical distance 
between the largest data value and the line. Moreover, we do not see the bow shape in the latter plot.
Frequency
1
4
Outlier
Histogram of Outlier
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
2
3
9
5
6
7
8
4
2
Outlier
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
Score
−2
−1
0
1
2
Probability Plot of Outlier
Normal
It is important to remember that these plots contain examples of a variety of common features. However, it 
is also important to remember that some of these features are not mutually exclusive. As one example, it is 
possible for a distribution to have heavy tails and an outlier. Identifying issues that would reject the notion 
of normality will be important in determining the types of inference procedures that can be used, which we 
will begin examining in Chapter 8.
 8. Usually the normal distribution is used as an approximation to 
the binomial distribution when
a. n ≥ 30  b. np > 5 and nq > 5  c. n > 20 and p = .50
 9. Find the following probabilities for the standard normal distribution.
a. P(.85 ≤ z ≤ 2.33) 
b. P(−2.97 ≤ z ≤ 1.49)  
c. P(z ≤ −1.29) 
d. P(z > −.74)
10. Find the value of z for the standard normal curve such that the area
a. in the left tail is .1000 
b. between 0 and z is .2291 and z is positive
c. in the right tail is .0500 
d. between 0 and z is .3571 and z is negative
11. In a National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) 
report, data provided to the NHTSA by Goodyear stated that the average 
tread life of properly inflated automobile tires is 45,000 miles (Source: 
http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/cars/rules/rulings/TPMS_FMVSS_No138/
part5.5.html). Suppose that the current distribution of tread life of 
properly inflated automobile tires is normally distributed with a mean 
of 45,000 miles and a standard deviation of 2360 miles.
a. Find the probability that a randomly selected automobile tire 
has a tread life between 42,000 and 46,000 miles.
b. What is the probability that a randomly selected automobile 
tire has a tread life of less than 38,000 miles?
c. What is the probability that a randomly selected automobile 
tire has a tread life of more than 50,000 miles?
d. Find the probability that a randomly selected automobile tire 
has a tread life between 46,500 and 47,500 miles.
 1. The normal probability distribution is applied to
a. a continuous random variable  
b. a discrete random variable  
c. any random variable
 2. For a continuous random variable, the probability of a single 
value of x is always
a. zero  b. 1.0  c. between 0 and 1
 3. Which of the following is not a characteristic of the normal 
distribution?
a. The total area under the curve is 1.0.
b. The curve is symmetric about the mean.
c. The two tails of the curve extend indefinitely.
d. The value of the mean is always greater than the value of the 
standard deviation.
 4. The parameters of a normal distribution are
a. μ, z, and σ  b. μ and σ  c. μ, x, and σ
 5. For the standard normal distribution,
a. μ = 0 and σ = 1 
b. μ = 1 and σ = 0
c. μ = 100 and σ = 10
 6. The z value for μ for a normal distribution curve is always
a. positive  b. negative  c. 0
 7. For a normal distribution curve, the z value for an x value that is 
less than μ is always
a. positive  b. negative  c. 0
Self-Review Test

Technology Instructions
269
which has much more severe reactions (Source: http://www.foodintol.
com/wheat.asp). A random sample of 800 individuals is selected.
a. Find the probability that the number of individuals in this 
sample who have wheat intolerance is
 i. exactly 115  ii. 103 to 142  iii. at least 107
iv. at most 100  v. between 111 and 123
b. Find the probability that at least 675 of the individuals in this 
sample do not have wheat intolerance.
c. Find the probability that 682 to 697 of the individuals in this 
sample do not have wheat intolerance.
12. Refer to Problem 11.
a. Suppose that 6% of all automobile tires with the longest 
tread life have a tread life of at least x miles. Find the value 
of x.
b. Suppose that 2% of all automobile tires with the shortest 
tread life have a tread life of at most x miles. Find the value 
of x.
13. Gluten sensitivity, which is also known as wheat intolerance, 
affects approximately 15% of people. The condition involves great 
difficulty in digesting wheat, but is not the same as wheat allergy, 
Note: The Mini-Projects are located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Mini-Projects
Note: The Decide for Yourself feature is located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Decide for Yourself
TI-84 Color/TI-84
CHAPTER 6
TECHNOLOGY 
INSTRUCTIONS
The TI-84 Color Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for the TI-84 Plus 
C color graphing calculator running the 4.0 operating system. Some screens, menus, and 
functions will be slightly different in older operating systems. The TI-84+ can perform 
all of the same functions but does not have the “Color” option referenced in some of the 
menus.
Calculating a Left-Tail Probability for Example 6–6(b) 
of the Text
1. Select 2nd > VARS > normalcdf(.
2. Use the following settings in the normalcdf menu 
(see Screen 6.1):
• At the lower prompt, type -1E99. (The “E” symbol means scientific notation. 
Press 2nd followed by the comma key to get the “E” symbol. -1E99 is calculator 
notation for the number −1 × 1099, which indicates that there is no lower limit 
of the interval.)
• At the upper prompt , type 35.
• At the μ prompt, type 50.
• At the σ prompt, type 10.
Note: Complete TI-84, Minitab, and Excel manuals are available for download at the textbook’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Screen 6.1
www.ebook3000.com

270
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
3. Highlight Paste and press ENTER twice.
4.  The output gives the probability of .0668072287 that x is less than 35 for a 
normal distribution with μ = 50 and σ = 10 (see Screen 6.2).
Calculating a Probability Between Two Values 
for Example 6–7(b) of the Text
1. Select 2nd > VARS > normalcdf(.
2. Use the following settings in the normalcdf menu:
• At the lower prompt, type 18.
• At the upper prompt, type 34.
• At the μ prompt, type 25.
• At the σ prompt, type 4.
3. Highlight Paste and press ENTER twice.
4. The output gives the probability of .9477164531 that x is between 18 and 34 for a normal 
distribution with μ = 25 and σ = 4. (See Screen 6.2.)
Calculating a Right-Tail Probability for Example 6–8(a) of the Text
1. Select 2nd > VARS > normalcdf(.
2. Use the following settings in the normalcdf menu:
• At the lower prompt, type 55.
• At the upper prompt, type 1E99. (The “E” symbol means scientific notation. Press 2nd 
followed by the comma key to get the “E” symbol. 1E99 is calculator notation for the 
number 1 × 1099, which indicates that there is no upper limit of the interval.)
• At the μ prompt, type 40.
• At the σ prompt, type 5.
3. Highlight Paste and press ENTER twice.
4. The output gives the probability of .0013499672 that x is greater than 55 for a normal distri-
bution with μ = 40 and σ = 5. (See Screen 6.2.)
Determining z When a Probability Is Known 
for Example 6–17 of the Text
1. Select 2nd > VARS > invNorm(.
2.  Use the following settings in the invNorm menu 
(see Screen 6.3):
• At the area prompt, type 0.05.
• At the μ prompt, type 0.
• At the σ prompt, type 1.
3. Highlight Paste and press ENTER twice.
4.  The output is −1.644853626, the value of z such that the area under the 
standard normal curve in the left tail is 0.05. (See Screen 6.2.)
Screen 6.2
Screen 6.3

Technology Instructions
271
The Minitab Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Minitab version 17. 
Some screens, menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Minitab.
Calculating a Left-Tail Probability for Example 6–6(b) of the Text
1. Select Graph > Probability Distribution Plot.
2. In the dialog box that appears on screen, select View Probability and click OK.
3. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen 
(see Screen 6.4):
• Select Normal in the Distribution box.
• Type 50 in the Mean box.
• Type 10 in the Standard deviation box.
4.  Click on the Shaded Area tab, and then use the 
following settings (see Screen 6.5):
• Select X Value under Define Shaded Area By.
• Select Left Tail.
• Type 35 in the X value box.
5. Click OK.
6.  A new window will appear showing the shaded area of 0.06681 (see Screen 6.6).
Calculating a Probability Between Two Values 
for Example 6–7(b) of the Text
1. Select Graph > Probability Distribution Plot.
2. In the dialog box that appears on screen, select View Probability and click OK.
3. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Select Normal in the Distribution box.
• Type 25 in the Mean box.
• Type 4 in the Standard deviation box.
4. Click on the Shaded Area tab, and then use the following settings:
• Select X Value under Define Shaded Area By.
• Select Middle.
• Type 18 in the X value 1 box.
• Type 34 in the X value 2 box.
5. Click OK.
6. A new window will appear showing the shaded area of 0.9477.
Calculating a Right-Tail Probability for Example 6–8(a) 
of the Text
1. Select Graph > Probability Distribution Plot.
2. In the dialog box that appears on screen, select View Probability and click OK.
Minitab
Screen 6.4
Screen 6.5
Screen 6.6
www.ebook3000.com

272
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
3. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Select Normal in the Distribution box.
• Type 40 in the Mean box.
• Type 5 in the Standard deviation box.
4. Click on the Shaded Area tab, and then use the following settings:
• Select X Value under Define Shaded Area By.
• Select Right Tail.
• Type 55 in the X value box.
5. Click OK.
6. A new window will appear showing the shaded area of 0.001350.
Determining z When a Probability Is Known for 
Example 6–17 of the Text
1. Select Graph > Probability Distribution Plot.
2.  In the dialog box that appears on screen, select View Probability and 
click OK.
3. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Select Normal in the Distribution box.
• Type 0.0 in the Mean box.
• Type 1.0 in the Standard deviation box.
4.  Click on the Shaded Area tab, then use the following  settings (see 
Screen 6.7):
• Select Probability under Define Shaded Area By.
• Select Left Tail.
• Type 0.05 in the Probability box.
5. Click OK.
6.  A new window will appear showing the z value of −1.645 (see Screen 6.8).
Screen 6.7
Screen 6.8

Technology Instructions
273
The Excel Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Excel 2013. Some screens, 
menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Excel. To enable some of the 
advanced Excel functions, you must enable the Data Analysis Add-In for Excel.
Calculating a Left-Tail Probability for Example 6–6(b) 
of the Text
1. Click on cell A1.
2.  Type =NORM.DIST(35,50,10,1) (see Screen 6.9).
Note: Entering a 1 as the fourth value in this function will cause Excel to calculate the 
cumulative probability, which we will always do for the normal probability distribution.
3.  Press ENTER. The probability of 0.066807 will appear in cell A1.
Calculating a Probability Between Two Values 
for Example 6–7(b) of the Text
1. Click on cell A1.
2. Type =NORM.DIST(34,25,4,1)–NORM.DIST(18,25,4,1).
 
 Note: Entering a 1 as the fourth value in these functions will cause Excel to calculate the cumulative 
probability, which we will always do for the normal probability distribution.
3. Press ENTER. The probability of 0.947716 will appear in cell A1.
Calculating a Right-Tail Probability for Example 6–8(a) 
of the Text
1. Click on cell A1.
2. Type =1–NORM.DIST(55,40,5,1).
Note: Entering a 1 as the fourth value in this function will cause Excel to calculate the cumulative 
probability, which we will always do for the normal probability distribution.
3. Press ENTER. The probability of 0.00135 will appear in cell A1.
Determining z When a Probability Is Known for 
Example 6–17 of the Text
1. Click on cell A1.
2. Type =NORM.INV(0.05,0,1) (see Screen 6.10).
3. Press ENTER. The z value of −1.64485 will appear in cell A1.
Excel
Screen 6.9
Screen 6.10
www.ebook3000.com

274
Chapter 6 Continuous Random Variables and the Normal Distribution
d. What score would a student need to obtain to be in the top 
15% of all test takers?
TA6.5 Refer to Data Set X on Major League Baseball that accompa-
nies this text (see Appendix A). Consider the data on batting averages 
given in column 16. The mean and standard deviation of these aver-
ages are .249 and .036, respectively. Suppose these batting averages 
are approximately normally distributed. We randomly select one 
player from this list of players.
a. What is the probability that the batting average for this player 
is less than .175?
b. What is the probability that the batting average for this player 
is more than .310?
c. What is the probability that the batting average for this player 
is between .200 and .290?
d. What is the probability that the batting average for this player 
is between .340 and .400?
TA6.6 According to the CDC (http:\\www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/
sr_11/sr11_252.pdf), American women age 20 and over have a mean 
height of 63.8 inches. The standard deviation of their heights is 
about 2.3 inches. Suppose these heights have an approximate normal 
distribution.
a. What percentage of women age 20 and over are shorter than 
62 inches?
b. What proportion of women age 20 and over are taller than 
70 inches?
c. What proportion of women age 20 and over are between 59 
and 65 inches tall?
d. The tallest 10% of women age 20 and over are at least how tall?
TA6.7 Suppose that systolic blood pressures of adults are normally 
distributed with a mean of 122 millimeters of mercury (mmHg) and a 
standard deviation of 6 mmHg.
a. According to one definition, a systolic blood pressure over 
140 mmHg means that the person is suffering from hyperten-
sion. What percentage of adults have hypertension?
b. What percentage of adults have systolic blood pressure less 
than 108 mmHg?
c. What percentage of adults have systolic blood pressure 
between 120 and 130 mmHg?
d. The lowest 5% of adult systolic blood pressures are lower 
than what mmHg?
TA6.1 Find the area under the standard normal curve
a. to the left of z = −1.94
b. to the left of z = .83
c. to the right of z = 1.45
d. to the right of z = −1.65
e. between z = .75 and z = 1.90
f. between z = −1.20 and z = 1.55
TA6.2 Find the following areas under a normal curve with μ = 86 
and σ = 14.
a. Area to the left of x = 71
b. Area to the left of x = 96
c. Area to the right of x = 90
d. Area to the right of x = 75
e. Area between x = 65 and x = 75
f. Area between x = 72 and x = 95
TA6.3 The transmission on a particular model of car has a  warranty 
for 40,000 miles. It is known that the life of such a transmission has 
a normal distribution with a mean of 72,000 miles and a standard 
deviation of 12,000 miles. Answer the following  questions.
a. What percentage of the transmissions will fail before the end 
of the warranty period?
b. What percentage of the transmissions will be good for more 
than 100,000 miles?
c. What percentage of the transmissions will be good for 80,000 
to 100,000 miles?
TA6.4 Of all the high school seniors who graduated in 2012, 
1,664,479 took the SAT exam some time during their high school 
years 
(http://media.collegeboard.com/digitalServices/pdf/research/
TotalGroup-2012.pdf). According to the College Board (the organiza-
tion that administers this exam), the mean score on the mathematics 
exam was 514 with a standard deviation of 117. Assume that the dis-
tribution of scores is approximately normal.
a. What percentage of seniors scored above 600 on the mathe-
matics exam?
b. What percentage of seniors scored above 700 on the mathe-
matics exam?
c. Based on your answer to part b, how many students scored 
over 700 on the mathematics exam?
TECHNOLOGY ASSIGNMENTS

275
275
CHAPTER7
Chapters 5 and 6 discussed probability distributions of discrete and continuous random variables. 
This chapter extends the concept of probability distribution to that of a sample statistic. As we dis-
cussed in Chapter 3, a sample statistic is a numerical summary measure calculated for sample data. 
The mean, median, mode, and standard deviation calculated for sample data are called sample 
statistics. On the other hand, the same numerical summary measures calculated for population data 
are called population parameters. A population parameter is always a constant (at a given point in 
time), whereas a sample statistic is always a random variable. Because every random variable must 
possess a probability distribution, each sample statistic possesses a probability distribution. The 
probability distribution of a sample statistic is more commonly called its sampling distribution. This 
chapter discusses the sampling distributions of the sample mean and the sample proportion. The 
concepts covered in this chapter are the foundation of the inferential statistics discussed in succeed-
ing chapters.
© Steve Cole/iStockphoto
Sampling Distributions
You read about opinion polls in newspapers, magazines, and on the Web every day. These polls are based 
on sample surveys. Have you heard of sampling and nonsampling errors? It is good to be aware of such 
errors while reading these opinion poll results. Sound sampling methods are essential for opinion poll 
results to be valid and to minimize effects of such errors.
7.1 Sampling Distribution, 
Sampling Error, and 
Nonsampling Errors
7.2 Mean and Standard 
Deviation of x
7.3 Shape of the Sampling 
Distribution of x
7.4 Applications of the 
Sampling Distribution of x
7.5 Population and Sample 
Proportions; and the 
Mean, Standard Deviation, 
and Shape of the Sampling 
Distribution of p
̭
7.6 Applications of the 
Sampling Distribution 
of p
̭
www.ebook3000.com

276
Chapter 7 Sampling Distributions
This section introduces the concepts of sampling distribution, sampling error, and nonsampling 
errors. Before we discuss these concepts, we will briefly describe the concept of a population 
distribution.
 
If we have information on all members of a population and we use this information to pre-
pare a probability distribution, this will be called the population probability distribution.
 
Suppose there are only five students in an advanced statistics class and the midterm scores 
of these five students are
70  78  80  80  95
Let x denote the score of a student. Using single-valued classes (because there are only five data 
values, and there is no need to group them), we can write the frequency distribution of scores as 
in Table 7.1 along with the relative frequencies of the classes, which are obtained by dividing the 
frequencies of the classes by the population size. Table 7.2, which lists the probabilities of vari-
ous x values, presents the probability distribution of the population. Note that these probabilities 
are the same as the relative frequencies.
 
The values of the mean and standard deviation calculated for the probability distribution of 
Table 7.2 give the values of the population parameters μ and σ. These values are μ = 80.60 and 
σ = 8.09. The values of μ and σ for the probability distribution of Table 7.2 can be calculated 
using the formulas given in Section 5.3 of Chapter 5. We can also obtain these values of μ and 
σ by using the five scores and the appropriate formulas from Chapter 3.
7.1.1 Sampling Distribution
As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, the value of a population parameter is always 
constant. For example, for any population data set, there is only one value of the population 
mean, μ. However, we cannot say the same about the sample mean, x. We would expect different 
samples of the same size drawn from the same population to yield different values of the sample 
mean, x. The value of the sample mean for any one sample will depend on the elements included 
in that sample. Consequently, the sample mean, x, is a random variable. Therefore, like other 
random variables, the sample mean possesses a probability distribution, which is more com-
monly called the sampling distribution of x. Other sample statistics, such as the median, mode, 
and standard deviation, also possess sampling distributions.
7.1 Sampling Distribution, Sampling Error, and Nonsampling Errors
Population Probability Distribution The population probability distribution is the probability 
distribution of the population data.
Table 7.1  Population Frequency and Relative 
Frequency Distributions
x 
f 
Relative Frequency
70 
1 
1∕5 =  .20
78 
1 
1∕5 =  .20
80 
2 
2∕5 =  .40
95 
1 
1∕5 =  .20
 
N = 5 
Sum = 1.00
Table 7.2  Population Probability 
Distribution
x 
P(x)
70 
.20
78 
.20
80 
.40
95 
.20
 
∑P(x) = 1.00

7.1 Sampling Distribution, Sampling Error, and Nonsampling Errors
277
 
Remember that randomness does not play any role in the calculation of a population param-
eter, but randomness plays a significant role in obtaining the values of a sample statistic. For 
example, if we calculate the mean μ of a population data set, there will be no randomness 
involved, as all the data values in the population are included in the calculation of mean μ. How-
ever, if we select a sample from this population and calculate the sample mean x, it will assume 
one of the numerous (in most cases millions) possible values. Assuming we select this sample 
randomly, the value of x depends on which values from the population are included in the sample.
 
Reconsider the population of midterm scores of five students given in Table 7.1. Consider all 
possible samples of three scores each that can be selected, without replacement, from that popu-
lation. The total number of possible samples, given by the combinations formula discussed in 
Chapter 4, is 10; that is,
Total number of samples = 5C3 =
5!
3!(5 −3)! = 5 · 4 · 3 · 2 · 1
3 · 2 · 1 · 2 · 1 = 10
 
Suppose we assign the letters A, B, C, D, and E to the scores of the five students, so that
A = 70, B = 78, C = 80, D = 80, E = 95
Then, the 10 possible samples of three scores each are
ABC, ABD, ABE, ACD, ACE, ADE, BCD, BCE, BDE, CDE
 
These 10 samples and their respective means are listed in Table 7.3. Note that the first two 
samples have the same three scores. The reason for this is that two of the students (C and D) have 
the same score of 80, and, hence, the samples ABC and ABD contain the same values. The mean 
of each sample is obtained by dividing the sum of the three scores included in that sample by 3. 
For instance, the mean of the first sample is (70 + 78 + 80)∕3 = 76. Note that the values of the 
means of the samples in Table 7.3 are rounded to two decimal places.
 
By using the values of x given in Table 7.3, we record the frequency distribution of x in 
Table 7.4. By dividing the frequencies of the various values of x by the sum of all frequencies, 
we obtain the relative frequencies of the classes, which are listed in the third column of Table 7.4. 
These relative frequencies are used as probabilities and listed in Table 7.5. This table gives the 
sampling distribution of x.
Sampling Distribution of x The probability distribution of x is called its sampling distribution. 
It lists the various values that x can assume and the probability of each value of x.
 
In general, the probability distribution of a sample statistic is called its sampling distribution.
Table 7.3  All Possible Samples and 
Their Means When the 
Sample Size is 3
 
 
Scores in 
 Sample 
the Sample 
x
 ABC 
70, 78, 80 
76.00
 ABD 
70, 78, 80 
76.00
 ABE 
70, 78, 95 
81.00
 ACD 
70, 80, 80 
76.67
 ACE 
70, 80, 95 
81.67
 ADE 
70, 80, 95 
81.67
 BCD 
78, 80, 80 
79.33
 BCE 
78, 80, 95 
84.33
 BDE 
78, 80, 95 
84.33
 CDE 
80, 80, 95 
85.00
Table 7.4  Frequency and Relative 
Frequency Distributions of x 
When the Sample Size is 3
 
 
 
Relative 
 x 
f 
Frequency
 76.00 
2 
2∕10 =  .20
 76.67 
1 
1∕10 =  .10
 79.33 
1 
1∕10 =  .10
 81.00 
1 
1∕10 =  .10
 81.67 
2 
2∕10 =  .20
 84.33 
2 
2∕10 =  .20
 85.00 
1 
1∕10 =  .10
 
 
Σf = 10 
Sum = 1.00
Table 7.5  Sampling Distribution 
of x When the Sample 
Size is 3
   x 
P(x)
76.00 
.20
76.67 
.10
79.33 
.10
81.00 
.10
81.67 
.20
84.33 
.20
85.00 
.10
 
ΣP(x) = 1.00
www.ebook3000.com

278
Chapter 7 Sampling Distributions
 
However, in the real world, it is not possible to find the sampling error because μ is not 
known. If μ is known then we do not need to find x. But the concept of sampling error is very 
important in making inferences in later chapters.
 
It is important to remember that a sampling error occurs because of chance. The errors 
that occur for other reasons, such as errors made during collection, recording, and tabulation of 
data, are called nonsampling errors. These errors occur because of human mistakes, and not 
chance. Note that there is only one kind of sampling error—the error that occurs due to chance. 
However, there is not just one nonsampling error, but there are many nonsampling errors that may 
occur for different reasons.
 
The following paragraph, reproduced from the Current Population Reports of the U.S. 
Bureau of the Census, explains how nonsampling errors can occur.
Nonsampling errors can be attributed to many sources, e.g., inability to obtain information 
about all cases in the sample, definitional difficulties, differences in the interpretation of ques-
tions, inability or unwillingness on the part of the respondents to provide correct information, 
inability to recall information, errors made in collection such as in recording or coding the 
data, errors made in processing the data, errors made in estimating values for missing data, 
biases resulting from the differing recall periods caused by the interviewing pattern used, and 
failure of all units in the universe to have some probability of being selected for the sample 
(undercoverage).
 
The following are the main reasons for the occurrence of nonsampling errors.
1. If a sample is nonrandom (and, hence, most likely nonrepresentative), the sample results 
may be too different from the census results. Even a randomly selected sample can become 
nonrandom if some of the members included in the sample cannot be contacted. A very good 
Sampling Error Sampling error is the difference between the value of a sample statistic and 
the value of the corresponding population parameter. In the case of the mean,
Sampling error = x −μ
assuming that the sample is random and no nonsampling error has been made. The sampling 
error occurs only in a sample survey, and not in a census.
Nonsampling Errors The errors that occur in the collection, recording, and tabulation of data 
are called nonsampling errors. The nonsampling errors can occur both in a sample survey and 
in a census.
 
If we select just one sample of three scores from the population of five scores, we may draw 
any of the 10 possible samples. Hence, the sample mean, x, can assume any of the values listed 
in Table 7.5 with the corresponding probability. For instance, the probability that the mean of a 
randomly selected sample of three scores is 81.67 is .20. This probability can be written as
P (x = 81.67) = .20
7.1.2 Sampling and Nonsampling Errors
Usually, different samples selected from the same population will give different results because 
they contain different elements. This is obvious from Table 7.3, which shows that the mean of a 
sample of three scores depends on which three of the five scores are included in the sample. The 
result obtained from any one sample will generally be different from the result obtained from the 
corresponding population. The difference between the value of a sample statistic obtained from 
a sample and the value of the corresponding population parameter obtained from the population 
is called the sampling error. Note that this difference represents the sampling error only if the 
sample is random and no nonsampling error has been made. Otherwise, only a part of this differ-
ence will be due to the sampling error.

7.1 Sampling Distribution, Sampling Error, and Nonsampling Errors
279
example of this comes from an article published in a magazine in 1988. As reported in a 
July 11, 1988, article in U.S. News & World Report (“The Numbers Racket: How Polls and 
Statistics Lie”), during the 1984 presidential election a test poll was conducted in which the 
only subjects interviewed were those who could be reached on the first try. The results of this 
poll indicated that the Republican incumbant Ronald Reagan had a 3 percentage point lead 
over the Democratic challenger Walter Mondale. However, when interviewers made an effort 
to contact everyone on their lists (calling some households up to 30 times before reaching 
someone), Reagan’s lead increased to 13%. It turned out that this 13% lead was much closer 
to the actual election results. Apparently, people who planned to vote Republican spent less 
time at home.
2. 
The questions may be phrased in such a way that they are not fully understood by the mem-
bers of the sample or population. As a result, the answers obtained are not accurate.
3. 
The respondents may intentionally give false information in response to some sensitive ques-
tions. For example, people may not tell the truth about their drinking habits, incomes, or 
opinions about minorities. Sometimes the respondents may give wrong answers because of 
ignorance. For example, a person may not remember the exact amount he or she spent on 
clothes last year. If asked in a survey, he or she may give an inaccurate answer.
4. 
The poll taker may make a mistake and enter a wrong number in the records or make an error 
while entering the data on a computer.
 
As mentioned earlier, the nonsampling errors can occur both in a sample survey and in a 
census, whereas sampling error occurs only when a sample survey is conducted. Nonsampling 
errors can be minimized by preparing the survey questionnaire carefully and handling the data 
cautiously. However, it is impossible to avoid sampling error.
 
Example 7–1 illustrates the sampling and nonsampling errors using the mean.
EXAMPLE 7–1 
Scores of Students
Reconsider the population of five scores given in Table 7.1. Suppose one sample of three scores 
is selected from this population, and this sample includes the scores 70, 80, and 95. Find the 
sampling error.
Solution The scores of the five students are 70, 78, 80, 80, and 95. The population mean is
μ = 70 + 78 + 80 + 80 + 95
5
= 80.60
Now a random sample of three scores from this population is taken and this sample includes the 
scores 70, 80, and 95. The mean for this sample is
x = 70 + 80 + 95
3
= 81.67
Consequently,
Sampling error = x −μ = 81.67 −80.60 = 1.07
That is, the mean score estimated from the sample is 1.07 higher than the mean score of the 
population. Note that this difference occurred due to chance—that is, because we used a sample 
instead of the population. 
◼ 
 
Now suppose, when we select the sample of three scores, we mistakenly record the second 
score as 82 instead of 80. As a result, we calculate the sample mean as
x = 70 + 82 + 95
3
= 82.33
Consequently, the difference between this sample mean and the population mean is
x −μ = 82.33 −80.60 = 1.73
Illustrating sampling and 
nonsampling errors.
www.ebook3000.com

280
Chapter 7 Sampling Distributions
However, this difference between the sample mean and the population mean does not entirely 
represent the sampling error. As we calculated earlier, only 1.07 of this difference is due to the 
sampling error. The remaining portion, which is equal to 1.73 − 1.07 = .66, represents the 
nonsampling error because it occurred due to the error we made in recording the second score in 
the sample. Thus, in this case,
 Sampling error = 1.07
 Nonsampling error = .66
Figure 7.1 shows the sampling and nonsampling errors for these calculations.
 
Thus, the sampling error is the difference between the correct value of x and the value of μ, 
where the correct value of x is the value of x that does not contain any nonsampling errors. In 
contrast, the nonsampling error(s) is (are) obtained by subtracting the correct value of x from the 
incorrect value of x, where the incorrect value of x is the value that contains the nonsampling 
error(s). For our example,
 Sampling error = x −μ = 81.67 −80.60 = 1.07
 Nonsampling error = Incorrect x −Correct x = 82.33 −81.67 = .66
 
As mentioned earlier, in the real world we do not know the mean of a population. Hence, we 
select a sample to use the sample mean as an estimate of the population mean. Consequently, we 
never know the size of the sampling error.
Sampling error
Nonsampling error
μ = 80.60
81.67
82.33
Figure 7.1 Sampling and nonsampling errors.
EXERCISES
d. List all samples of nine numbers (without replacement) that 
can be selected from this population. Calculate the sample 
mean and sampling error for each of these samples.
APPLICATIONS
7.5 Using the formulas of Section 5.3 of Chapter 5 for the mean and 
standard deviation of a discrete random variable, verify that the mean 
and standard deviation for the population probability distribution of 
Table 7.2 are 80.60 and 8.09, respectively.
7.6 The following data give the ages (in years) of all six members of 
a family.
55  53  28  25  21  15
a. Let x denote the age of a member of this family. Write the 
population probability distribution of x.
b. List all the possible samples of size four (without replace-
ment) that can be selected from this population. Calculate the 
mean for each of these samples. Write the sampling distribu-
tion of x.
c. Calculate the mean for the population data. Select one random 
sample of size four and calculate the sample mean x. Com-
pute the sampling error.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
7.1 Briefly explain the meaning of a population probability distribu-
tion and a sampling distribution. Give an example of each.
7.2 Explain briefly the meaning of a sampling error. Give an exam-
ple. Does such an error occur only in a sample survey, or can it occur 
in both a sample survey and a census?
7.3 Explain briefly the meaning of nonsampling errors. Give an 
example. Do such errors occur only in a sample survey, or can they 
occur in both a sample survey and a census?
7.4 Consider the following population of 10 numbers.
20  25  13  19  9  15  11  7  17  30
a. Find the population mean.
b. Rich selected one sample of nine numbers from this popula-
tion. The sample included the numbers 20, 25, 13, 9, 15, 11, 7, 
17, and 30. Calculate the sample mean and sampling error for 
this sample.
c. Refer to part b. When Rich calculated the sample mean, he 
mistakenly used the numbers 20, 25, 13, 9, 15, 11, 17, 17, and 
30 to calculate the sample mean. Find the sampling and non-
sampling errors in this case.

7.2 Mean and Standard Deviation of x
281
7.2 Mean and Standard Deviation of x
The mean and standard deviation calculated for the sampling distribution of x are called the 
mean and standard deviation of x. Actually, the mean and standard deviation of x are, respec-
tively, the mean and standard deviation of the means of all samples of the same size selected from 
a population. The standard deviation of x is also called the standard error of x.
 
If we calculate the mean and standard deviation of the 10 values of x listed in Table 7.3, we 
obtain the mean, μx and the standard deviation, σx of x. Alternatively, we can calculate the mean 
and standard deviation of the sampling distribution of x listed in Table 7.5. These will also be the 
values of μx and σx. From these calculations, we will obtain μx = 80.60 and σx = 3.30.
 
The mean of the sampling distribution of x is always equal to the mean of the population.
 
Thus, if we select all possible samples (of the same size) from a population and calculate 
their means, the mean of all these sample means (μx) will be the same as the mean of the popula-
tion (μ). If we calculate the mean for the population probability distribution of Table 7.2 and the 
mean for the sampling distribution of Table 7.5 by using the formula learned in Section 5.3 of 
Chapter 5, we get the same value of 80.60 for μ and μx.
 
The sample mean, x, is called an estimator of the population mean, μ. When the expected 
value (or mean) of a sample statistic is equal to the value of the corresponding population param-
eter, that sample statistic is said to be an unbiased estimator. For the sample mean x, μx = μ. 
Hence, x is an unbiased estimator of μ. This is a very important property that an estimator should 
possess.
 
However, the standard deviation of x, σx, is not equal to the standard deviation of the popula-
tion probability distribution, σ. The standard deviation of x is equal to the standard deviation of 
the population divided by the square root of the sample size; that is,
σx =
σ
√n
This formula for the standard deviation of x holds true only when the sampling is done either 
with replacement from a finite population or with or without replacement from an infinite popu-
lation. These two conditions can be replaced by the condition that the above formula holds true 
if the sample size is small in comparison to the population size. The sample size is considered to 
be small compared to the population size if the sample size is equal to or less than 5% of the 
population size; that is, if
n
N ≤.05
If this condition is not satisfied, we use the following formula to calculate σ x:
σx =
σ
√n
 A
N −n
N −1
where the factor A
N −n
N −1 is called the finite population correction factor.
Mean and Standard Deviation of x The mean and standard deviation of the sampling distribution 
of x are called the mean and standard deviation of x and are denoted by μx and σ x, respectively.
Mean of the Sampling Distribution of x The mean of the sampling distribution of x is always 
equal to the mean of the population. Thus,
μx = μ
www.ebook3000.com

282
Chapter 7 Sampling Distributions
 
In most practical applications, the sample size is small compared to the population size. 
Consequently, in most cases, the formula used to calculate σ x is σ x = σ∕√n.
 
Following are two important observations regarding the sampling distribution of x.
1. 
The spread of the sampling distribution of x is smaller than the spread of the corresponding 
population distribution. In other words, σ x < σ. This is obvious from the formula for σ x. 
When n is greater than 1, which is usually true, the denominator in σ∕√n is greater than 1. 
Hence, σ x is smaller than σ.
2. 
The standard deviation of the sampling distribution of x decreases as the sample size 
increases. This feature of the sampling distribution of x is also obvious from the formula
σ x =
σ
√n
 
If the standard deviation of a sample statistic decreases as the sample size is increased, that 
statistic is said to be a consistent estimator. This is another important property that an estimator 
should possess. It is obvious from the above formula for σ x that as n increases, the value of √n 
also increases and, consequently, the value of σ∕√n decreases. Thus, the sample mean x is a 
consistent estimator of the population mean μ. Example 7–2 illustrates this feature.
EXAMPLE 7–2 
Wages of Employees
The mean wage per hour for all 5000 employees who work at a large company is $27.50, and the 
standard deviation is $3.70. Let x be the mean wage per hour for a random sample of certain employ-
ees selected from this company. Find the mean and standard deviation of x for a sample size of
(a) 30  (b) 75  (c) 200
Solution From the given information, for the population of all employees,
N = 5000, μ = $27.50, and σ = $3.70
(a) The mean of the sampling distribution of x, μx, is
μx = μ = $27.50
In this case, n = 30, N = 5000, and n∕N = 30∕5000 = .006. Because n∕N is less than .05, the 
standard deviation of x is obtained by using the formula σ∕√n. Hence,
σ x =
σ
√n
= 3.70
√30
= $.676
Thus, we can state that if we take all possible samples of size 30 from the population of all 
employees of this company and prepare the sampling distribution of x, the mean and stand-
ard deviation of this sampling distribution of x will be $27.50 and $.676, respectively.
(b) In this case, n = 75 and n∕N = 75∕5000 = .015, which is less than .05. The mean and 
standard deviation of x are
μx = μ = $27.50 and σ x =
σ
√n
= 3.70
√75
= $.427
Finding the mean and 
standard deviation of x.
Standard Deviation of the Sampling Distribution of x The standard deviation of the sampling 
distribution of x is
σ x =
σ
√n
where σ is the standard deviation of the population and n is the sample size. This formula is used 
when n∕N ≤ .05, where N is the population size.
Image Source/GettyImages, Inc.

7.3 Shape of the Sampling Distribution of x
283
(c) In this case, n = 200 and n∕N = 200∕5000 = .04, which is less than .05. Therefore, the 
mean and standard deviation of x are
μx = μ = $27.50 and σ x =
σ
√n
= 3.70
√200
= $.262
From the preceding calculations we observe that the mean of the sampling distribu-
tion of x is always equal to the mean of the population whatever the size of the sample. 
However, the value of the standard deviation of x decreases from $.676 to $.427 and 
then to $.262 as the sample size increases from 30 to 75 and then to 200. 
◼
Note that in Example 7–2, μx = μ in all three parts indicates that x is an unbiased estimator of μ. 
We also observe that σx decreases in this example as the sample size increases. This demonstrates 
that x is a consistent estimator of μ.
EXERCISES
city. Find the mean and standard deviation of the sampling distribu-
tion of x.
7.15 According to the 2015 Physician Compensation Report by 
Medscape (a subsidiary of WebMD), American orthopedists earned 
an average of $421,000 in 2014. Suppose that the mean and standard 
deviation of the 2014 earnings of all American orthopedists are 
$421,000 and $90,000, respectively. Let x be the mean 2014 earnings 
of a random sample of 200 American orthopedists. Find the mean and 
standard deviation of the sampling distribution of x. Assume n∕N ≤ .05.
 *7.16 The standard deviation of the 2014 gross sales of all corpora-
tions is known to be $16.06 billion. Let x be the mean of the 2014 gross 
sales of a sample of corporations. What sample size will produce the 
standard deviation of x equal to $2.15 billion? Assume n∕N ≤ .05.
 *7.17 Consider the sampling distribution of x given in Table 7.5.
a. Calculate the value of μx using the formula μx = ∑x P(x). Is 
the value of μ = 80.60 calculated earlier the same as the value 
of μx calculated here?
b. Calculate the value of σx by using the formula
σ x = √∑x 2P(x) −(μx)2
c. For the five scores, 𝜎 = 8.09. Also, our sample size is 3, so that 
n = 3. Therefore, σ∕√n = 8.09∕√3 = 4.67. From part b, you 
should get σ x = 3.30. Why does σ∕√n not equal σ x in this case?
d. In our example (given in the beginning of Section 7.1) on 
scores, N = 5 and n = 3. Hence, n∕N = 3∕5 = .60. Because 
n∕N is greater than .05, the appropriate formula to find σ x is
σ x =
σ
√n
 A
N −n
N −1
 
 
 Show that the value of σx calculated by using this formula 
gives the same value as the one calculated in part b above.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
7.7 Let x be the mean of a sample selected from a population.
a. What is the mean of the sampling distribution of x equal to?
b. What is the standard deviation of the sampling distribution of 
x equal to? Assume n∕N ≤ .05.
7.8 What is an estimator? When is an estimator unbiased? Is the 
sample mean, x, an unbiased estimator of μ? Explain.
7.9 When is an estimator said to be consistent? Is the sample mean, 
x, a consistent estimator of μ? Explain.
7.10 How does the value of σx change as the sample size increases? 
Explain.
7.11 Consider a large population with μ = 60 and σ = 10. Assuming 
n∕N ≤ .05, find the mean and standard deviation of the sample mean, 
x, for a sample size of
a. 18  b. 90
7.12 A population of N = 5000 has σ = 25. In each of the following 
cases, which formula will you use to calculate σ x and why? Using the 
appropriate formula, calculate σ x for each of these cases.
a. n = 300  b. n = 100
 
*7.13 For a population, μ = 125 and σ = 36.
a. For a sample selected from this population, μx = 125 and 
σ x = 3.6. Find the sample size. Assume n∕N ≤ .05.
b. For a sample selected from this population, μx = 125 and 
σ x = 2.25. Find the sample size. Assume n∕N ≤ .05.
APPLICATIONS
7.14 The living spaces of all homes in a city have a mean of 2300 
square feet and a standard deviation of 500 square feet. Let x be the 
mean living space for a random sample of 25 homes selected from this 
7.3 Shape of the Sampling Distribution of x
The shape of the sampling distribution of x relates to the following two cases:
1. 
The population from which samples are drawn has a normal distribution.
2. 
The population from which samples are drawn does not have a normal distribution.
www.ebook3000.com

284
Chapter 7 Sampling Distributions
7.3.1 Sampling from a Normally Distributed Population
When the population from which samples are drawn is normally distributed with its mean equal 
to μ and standard deviation equal to σ, then:
1. 
The mean of x, μx, is equal to the mean of the population, μ.
2. 
The standard deviation of x, σ x, is equal to σ∕√n, assuming n∕N ≤ .05.
3. 
The shape of the sampling distribution of x is normal, whatever the value of n.
For σ x = σ∕√n to be true, n∕N must be less than or equal to .05.
 
Figure 7.2a shows the probability distribution curve for a population. The distribution curves 
in Figure 7.2b through Figure 7.2e show the sampling distributions of x for different sample sizes 
taken from the population of Figure 7.2a. As we can observe, the population has a normal distri-
bution. Because of this, the sampling distribution of x is normal for each of the four cases illus-
trated in Figure 7.2b through Figure 7.2e. Also notice from Figure 7.2b through Figure 7.2e that 
the spread of the sampling distribution of x decreases as the sample size increases.
Remember 
Sampling Distribution of x When the Population Has a Normal Distribution If the population 
from which the samples are drawn is normally distributed with mean μ and standard deviation σ, 
then the sampling distribution of the sample mean, x, will also be normally distributed with the 
following mean and standard deviation, regardless of the sample size:
μx = μ and σ x =
σ
√n
Normal
distribution
(a) Population distribution.
Normal
distribution
(b) Sampling distribution of x for n = 5.
Normal
distribution
(c) Sampling distribution of x for n = 16.
Normal
distribution
Normal
distribution
(e) Sampling distribution of x for n = 100.
(d) Sampling distribution of x for n = 30.
x
x
x
x
x
Figure 7.2 Population distribution and sampling distributions of x.

7.3 Shape of the Sampling Distribution of x
285
 
Example 7–3 illustrates the calculation of the mean and standard deviation of x and the 
description of the shape of its sampling distribution.
EXAMPLE 7–3 
Earnings of Internal Medicine Physicians
According to the 2015 Physician Compensation Report by Medscape (a subsidiary of WebMD), 
American internal medicine physicians earned an average of $196,000 in 2014. Suppose that the 
2014 earnings of all American internal medicine physicians are approximately normally distrib-
uted with a mean of $196,000 and a standard deviation of $20,000. Let x be the mean 2014 earn-
ings of a random sample of American internal medicine physicians. Calculate the mean and 
standard deviation of x and describe the shape of its sampling distribution when the sample size is
(a) 16  (b) 50  (c) 1000
Solution Let μ and σ be the mean and standard deviation of the 2014 earnings of all American 
internal medicine physicians, and μx and σ x be the mean and standard deviation of the sampling 
distribution of x, respectively. Then, from the given information,
μ = $196,000 and σ = $20,000
(a) The mean and standard deviation of x are, respectively,
μx = μ = $196,000 and σ x =
σ
√n
= $20,000
√16
= $5000
 
 Because the 2014 earnings of all American internal medicine physicians are approxi-
mately normally distributed, the sampling distribution of x for samples of 16 such physi-
cians is also approximately normally distributed. Figure 7.3 shows the population distri-
bution and the sampling distribution of x. Note that because σ is greater than σ x, the 
population distribution has a wider spread but smaller height than the sampling distribu-
tion of x in Figure 7.3.
Finding the mean, standard 
deviation, and sampling 
distribution of x: normally 
distributed population.
Population
distribution
2014 earnings
Sampling distribution
of x for n = 16
μx = μ = $196,000
σx = $5000
σ = $20,000
Figure 7.3
(b) The mean and standard deviation of x are, respectively,
μx = μ = $196,000 and σ x =
σ
√n
= $20,000
√50
= $2828.427
 
 Again, because the 2014 earnings of all American internal medicine physicians are 
approximately normally distributed, the sampling distribution of x for samples of 50 
such physicians is also approximately normally distributed. The population distribution 
and the sampling distribution of x are shown in Figure 7.4.
Population
distribution
2014 earnings
Sampling distribution
of x for n = 50
μx = μ = $196,000
σ = $20,000
σx = $2828.427
Figure 7.4
www.ebook3000.com

286
Chapter 7 Sampling Distributions
(c) The mean and standard deviation of x are, respectively,
μx = μ = $196,000 and σ x =
σ
√n
= $20,000
√1000
= $632.456
 
Again, because the 2014 earnings of all American internal medicine physicians are 
approximately normally distributed, the sampling distribution of x for samples of 1000 
such physicians is also approximately normally distributed. The two distributions are 
shown in Figure 7.5.
 
Thus, whatever the sample size, the sampling distribution of x is normal when the 
population from which the samples are drawn is normally distributed. 
◼ 
Population
distribution
2014 earnings
Sampling distribution
of x for n = 1000
μx = μ = $196,000
σ = $20,000
σx = $632.456
Figure 7.5
7.3.2 Sampling from a Population That Is Not Normally Distributed
Most of the time the population from which the samples are selected is not normally distributed. 
In such cases, the shape of the sampling distribution of x is inferred from a very important theo-
rem called the central limit theorem.
 
Note that when the population does not have a normal distribution, the shape of the sampling 
distribution is not exactly normal, but it is approximately normal for a large sample size. The 
approximation becomes more accurate as the sample size increases. Another point to remember 
is that the central limit theorem applies to large samples only. Usually, in case of the mean, if the 
sample size is 30 or larger, it is considered sufficiently large so that the central limit theorem can 
be applied to the sampling distribution of x. Thus:
1. 
When n ≥ 30, the shape of the sampling distribution of x is approximately normal irrespec-
tive of the shape of the population distribution. This is so due to the central limit theorem.
2. 
The mean of x, μx, is equal to the mean of the population, μ.
3. 
The standard deviation of x, σ x, is equal to σ∕√n if n∕N ≤ .05.
Again, remember that for σ x = σ∕√n to apply, n∕N must be less than or equal to .05, otherwise 
we multiply σ∕√n by the finite population correction factor explained earlier in this chapter.
 
Figure 7.6a shows the probability distribution curve for a population. The distribution curves 
in Figure 7.6b through Figure 7.6e show the sampling distributions of x for different sample sizes 
Central Limit Theorem According to the central limit theorem, for a large sample size, the 
sampling distribution of x is approximately normal, irrespective of the shape of the population 
distribution. The mean and standard deviation of the sampling distribution of x are, respectively,
μx = μ and σ x =
σ
√n
In case of the mean, the sample size is usually considered to be large if n ≥ 30.

7.3 Shape of the Sampling Distribution of x
287
taken from the population of Figure 7.6a. As we can observe, the population is not normally 
distributed. The sampling distributions of x shown in parts b and c, when n < 30, are also not 
normal. However, the sampling distributions of x shown in parts d and e, when n ≥ 30, are 
(approximately) normal. Also notice that the spread of the sampling distribution of x decreases 
as the sample size increases.
 
Example 7–4 illustrates the calculation of the mean and standard deviation of x and describes 
the shape of the sampling distribution of x when the sample size is large.
EXAMPLE 7–4 
Rents Paid by Tenants in a City
The mean rent paid by all tenants in a small city is $1550 with a standard deviation of $225. 
However, the population distribution of rents for all tenants in this city is skewed to the right. 
Calculate the mean and standard deviation of x and describe the shape of its sampling distribution 
when the sample size is
(a) 30  (b) 100
Solution Although the population distribution of rents paid by all tenants is not normal, in each 
case the sample size is large (n ≥ 30). Hence, the central limit theorem can be applied to infer the 
shape of the sampling distribution of x.
(a) Let x be the mean rent paid by a sample of 30 tenants. Then, the sampling distribu-
tion of x is approximately normal with the values of the mean and standard deviation 
given as
μx = μ = $1550 and σ x =
σ
√n
= 225
√30
= $41.079
Figure 7.7 shows the population distribution and the sampling distribution of x.
Finding the mean, standard 
deviation, and sampling 
distribution of x: population not 
normally distributed.
(a) Population distribution.
(b) Sampling distribution of x for n = 4.
(c) Sampling distribution of x for n = 15.
Approximately
normal
distribution
Approximately
normal
distribution
(e) Sampling distribution of x for n = 80.
(d) Sampling distribution of x for n = 30.
x
x
x
x
x
Figure 7.6 Population distribution and sampling distributions of x.
www.ebook3000.com

288
Chapter 7 Sampling Distributions
(b) Let x be the mean rent paid by a sample of 100 tenants. Then, the sampling distribu-
tion of x is approximately normal with the values of the mean and standard deviation 
given as
μx = μ = $1550 and σ x =
σ
√n
=
225
√100
= $22.50
Figure 7.8 shows the population distribution and the sampling distribution of x.
(a)  Population distribution.
(b)  Sampling distribution of x for n = 30.
μ = $1550
σ = $225
σx = $41.079
μx = $1550
x
x
Figure 7.7
(a)  Population distribution.
(b)  Sampling distribution of x for n = 100.
μ = $1550
σ = $225
σx = $22.50
μx = $1550
x
x
Figure 7.8
 
◼
EXERCISES
APPLICATIONS
7.23 The delivery times for all food orders at a fast-food restaurant 
during the lunch hour are approximately normally distributed with a 
mean of 7.7 minutes and a standard deviation of 2.1 minutes. Let x be 
the mean delivery time for a random sample of 16 orders at this res-
taurant. Calculate the mean and standard deviation of x, and describe 
the shape of its sampling distribution.
7.24 The amounts of electricity bills for all households in a particu-
lar city have an approximate normal distribution with a mean of 
$140 and a standard deviation of $30. Let x be the mean amount of 
electricity bills for a random sample of 25 households selected from 
this city. Find the mean and standard deviation of x, and comment on 
the shape of its sampling distribution.
7.25 The GPAs of all 5540 students enrolled at a university have 
an approximate normal distribution with a mean of 3.02 and a 
standard deviation of .29. Let x be the mean GPA of a random sam-
ple of 48 students selected from this university. Find the mean and 
standard deviation of x, and comment on the shape of its sampling 
distribution.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
7.18 What condition or conditions must hold true for the sampling 
distribution of the sample mean to be normal when the sample size is 
less than 30?
7.19 Explain the central limit theorem.
7.20 A population has a distribution that is skewed to the left. Indi-
cate in which of the following cases the central limit theorem will 
apply to describe the sampling distribution of the sample mean.
a. n = 400  b. n = 25  c. n = 36
7.21 A population has a distribution that is skewed to the right. A 
sample of size n is selected from this population. Describe the shape 
of the sampling distribution of the sample mean for each of the fol-
lowing cases.
a. n = 25  b. n = 80  c. n = 29
7.22 A population has a normal distribution. A sample of size n is 
selected from this population. Describe the shape of the sampling dis-
tribution of the sample mean for each of the following cases.
a. n = 94  b. n = 11

7.4 Applications of the Sampling Distribution of x
289
7.4 Applications of the Sampling Distribution of x
7.26 According to the National Association of Colleges and 
Employers Spring 2015 Salary Survey, the average starting salary for 
2014 college graduates was $48,127. Suppose that the mean starting 
salary of all 2014 college graduates was $48,127 with a standard devi-
ation of $9200, and that this distribution was strongly skewed to the 
right. Let x be the mean starting salary of 25 randomly selected 2014 
college graduates. Find the mean and the standard deviation of the 
sampling distribution of x. What are the mean and the standard devia-
tion of the sampling distribution of x if the sample size is 100? How 
do the shapes of the sampling distributions differ for the two sample 
sizes?
7.27 According to the American Time Use Survey results released 
by the Bureau of Labor Statistics on June 24, 2015, Americans age 15 
and over watched television for an average of 168 minutes per day. 
Suppose that the current distribution of times spent watching televi-
sion per day by all Americans age 15 and over has a mean of 168 
minutes and a standard deviation of 20 minutes. Let x be the average 
time spent watching television per day by 400 randomly selected 
Americans age 15 and over. Find the mean and the standard deviation 
of the sampling distribution of x. What is the shape of the sampling 
distribution of x? Do you need to know the shape of the population 
distribution in order to make this conclusion? Explain why or why not.
From the central limit theorem, for large samples, the sampling distribution of x is approximately 
normal with mean μx = μ and standard deviation σ x = σ∕√n. Based on this result, we can make 
the following statements about x for large samples. Note that if the population is normally dis-
tributed, then sample does not have to be large. The areas under the curve of x mentioned in these 
statements are found from the normal distribution table.
1. 
If we take all possible samples of the same (large) size from a population and calculate the 
mean for each of these samples, then about 68.26% of the sample means will be within one 
standard deviation (σ x ) of the population mean. Alternatively, we can state that if we take 
one sample (of n ≥ 30) from a population and calculate the mean for this sample, the prob-
ability that this sample mean will be within one standard deviation (σ x ) of the population 
mean is .6826. That is,
P (μ −1σ x ≤x ≤μ + 1σ x) = .8413 −.1587 = .6826
 
This probability is shown in Figure 7.9.
Shaded area
is .6826
μ
μ − 1σx
μ + 1σx
x
Figure 7.9 P(μ −1σ x ≤x ≤μ + 1σ x).
2. 
If we take all possible samples of the same (large) size from a population and calculate the 
mean for each of these samples, then about 95.44% of the sample means will be within two 
standard deviations (σx) of the population mean. Alternatively, we can state that if we take 
one sample (of n ≥ 30) from a population and calculate the mean for this sample, the prob-
ability that this sample mean will be within two standard deviations (σ x) of the population 
mean is .9544. That is,
P(μ −2σ x ≤x ≤μ + 2σ x) = .9772 −.0228 = .9544
 
This probability is shown in Figure 7.10.
μ
Shaded area
is .9544
μ − 2σx
μ + 2σx
x
Figure 7.10 P(μ −2σ x ≤x ≤μ + 2σ x).
www.ebook3000.com

290
Chapter 7 Sampling Distributions
3. 
If we take all possible samples of the same (large) size from a population and calculate the 
mean for each of these samples, then about 99.74% of the sample means will be within three 
standard deviations (σ x ) of the population mean. Alternatively, we can state that if we take 
one sample (of n ≥ 30) from a population and calculate the mean for this sample, the prob-
ability that this sample mean will be within three standard deviations (σ x ) of the population 
mean is .9974. That is,
P(μ −3σ x ≤x ≤μ + 3σ x) = .9987 −.0013 = .9974
 
This probability is shown in Figure 7.11.
Shaded area
is .9974
μ
μ − 3σx
μ + 3σx
x
Figure 7.11 P(μ −3σ x ≤x ≤μ + 3σ x).
 
When conducting a survey, we usually select one sample and compute the value of x based 
on that sample. We never select all possible samples of the same size and then prepare the sam-
pling distribution of x. Rather, we are more interested in finding the probability that the value of 
x computed from one sample falls within a given interval. Examples 7–5 and 7–6 illustrate this 
procedure.
EXAMPLE 7–5 
Weights of Packages of Cookies
Assume that the weights of all packages of a certain brand of cookies are approximately normally 
distributed with a mean of 32 ounces and a standard deviation of .3 ounce. Find the probability 
that the mean weight, x, of a random sample of 20 packages of this brand of cookies will be 
between 31.8 and 31.9 ounces.
Solution Although the sample size is small (n < 30), the shape of the sampling distribution of 
x is approximately normal because the population is approximately normally distributed. The 
mean and standard deviation of x are, respectively,
μx = μ = 32 ounces and σ x =
σ
√n
=
.3
√20
= .06708204 ounce
We are to compute the probability that the value of x calculated for one randomly drawn sample 
of 20 packages is between 31.8 and 31.9 ounces; that is,
P (31.8 < x < 31.9)
This probability is given by the area under the normal distribution curve for x between the points 
x = 31.8 and x = 31.9. The first step in finding this area is to convert the two x values to their 
respective z values.
Calculating the probability of x in 
an interval: normal population.
z Value for a Value of x The z value for a value of x is calculated as
z = x −μ
σ x
© Burwell and BurwellPhotography/
iStockphoto

7.4 Applications of the Sampling Distribution of x
291
The z values for x = 31.8 and x = 31.9 are computed below, and they are shown on the z scale 
below the normal distribution curve for x in Figure 7.12.
 For x = 31.8: z = 31.8 −32
.06708204 = −2.98
 For x = 31.9: z = 31.9 −32
.06708204 = −1.49
The probability that x is between 31.8 and 31.9 is given by the area under the standard normal 
curve between z = −2.98 and z = −1.49, which is obtained by subtracting the area to the left of 
z = −2.98 from the area to the left of z = −1.49. Thus, the required probability is
 P(31.8 < x < 31.9) = P(−2.98 < z < −1.49)
 = P(z < −1.49) −P(z < −2.98)
 = .0681 −.0014 = .0667
Therefore, the probability that the mean weight of a sample of 20 packages will be between 31.8 
and 31.9 ounces is .0667. 
◼ 
EXAMPLE 7–6 
Cost of a Checking Account at U.S. Banks
According to Moebs Services Inc., an individual checking account at major U.S. banks costs the 
banks between $350 and $450 per year. Suppose that the current average cost of all checking 
accounts at major U.S. banks is $400 per year with a standard deviation of $30. Let x be the cur-
rent average annual cost of a random sample of 225 individual checking accounts at major banks 
in America.
(a) What is the probability that the average annual cost of the checking accounts in this 
sample is within $4 of the population mean?
(b) What is the probability that the average annual cost of the checking accounts in this 
sample is less than the population mean by $2.70 or more?
Solution From the given information, for the annual costs of all individual checking accounts 
at major banks in America,
μ = $400  and  σ = $30
 
Although the shape of the probability distribution of the population (annual costs of all indi-
vidual checking accounts at major U.S. banks) is unknown, the sampling distribution of x is 
approximately normal because the sample is large (n ≥ 30). Remember that when the sample is 
large, the central limit theorem applies. The mean and standard deviation of the sampling distri-
bution of x are, respectively,
μx = μ = $400  and  σ x =
σ
√n
=
30
√225
= $2.00
Calculating the probability of x in 
an interval: n ≥ 30.
31.8
31.9
−2.98
0
−1.49
z
Shaded area
is .0667
μx = 32
x
Figure 7.12 P(31.8 < x < 31.9).
www.ebook3000.com

292
Chapter 7 Sampling Distributions
(a) The probability that the mean of the annual costs of checking accounts in this sample is 
within $4 of the population mean is written as
P(396 ≤x ≤404)
 
This probability is given by the area under the normal distribution curve for x between 
x = $396 and x = $404, as shown in Figure 7.13. We find this area as follows:
 
For x = $396:  z = x −μ
σ x
= 396 −400
2.00
= −2.00
 
For x = $404:  z = x −μ
σ x
= 404 −400
2.00
= 2.00
Hence, the required probability is
 P($396 ≤x ≤$404) = P(−2.00 ≤z ≤2.00)
 = P(z ≤2.00) −P(z ≤−2.00)
 = .9772 −.0228 = .9544
Therefore, the probability that the average annual cost of the 225 checking accounts in 
this sample is within $4 of the population mean is .9544.
(b) The probability that the average annual cost of the checking accounts in this sample is 
less than the population mean by $2.70 or more is written as
P(x ≤397.30)
This probability is given by the area under the normal curve for x to the left of 
x = $397.30, as shown in Figure 7.14. We find this area as follows:
For x = $397.30:  z = x −μ
σ x
= 397.30 −400
2.00
= −1.35
$396
$404
−2.00
2.00
0
Shaded area
is .9544
μx = $400
z
x
Figure 7.13 P($396 ≤x ≤$400).
$397.30
0
−1.35
Shaded area
is .0885
   μ = $400
z
x
Figure 7.14 P(x ≤$397.30).
Hence, the required probability is
P(x ≤397.30) = P(z ≤−1.35) = .0885
Thus, the probability that the average annual cost of the checking accounts in this 
sample is less than the population mean by $2.70 or more is .0885. 
◼ 

7.5 Population and Sample Proportions; and the Mean, Standard Deviation, and Shape of the Sampling Distribution of p
̭ 
293
EXERCISES
a standard deviation of 2.7 hours. Find the probability that the mean 
time spent studying per week for a random sample of 45 students 
would be
a. between 8 and 9 hours  
b. less than 8 hours
7.37 According to the American Time Use Survey results released 
by the Bureau of Labor Statistics on June 24, 2015, Americans age 15 
and over watched television for an average of 168 minutes per day. 
Suppose that the current distribution of times spent watching televi-
sion per day by all Americans age 15 and over has a mean of 168 
minutes and a standard deviation of 20 minutes. Find the probability 
that the average time spent per day watching television by a random 
sample of 400 Americans age 15 and over is
a. 165.70 to 167 minutes  
b. more than 169.8 minutes  
c. at most 163 minutes
7.38 The amounts of electricity bills for all households in a city have a 
skewed probability distribution with a mean of $140 and a standard devi-
ation of $30. Find the probability that the mean amount of electric bills for 
a random sample of 75 households selected from this city will be
a. between $132 and $136
b. within $6 of the population mean
c. more than the population mean by at least $4
7.39 According to nerdwallet.com, the average household mortgage 
debt was $156,333 in August 2015. Suppose that the current distribution 
of mortgage debts of all U.S. households has a mean of $156,333 and a 
standard deviation of $36,000. Find the probability that the current aver-
age mortgage debt of a random sample of 144 U.S. households is
a. less than $152,400  
b. more than $160,000  
c. $152,000 to $160,000
7.40 Johnson Electronics Corporation makes electric tubes. It is 
known that the standard deviation of the lives of these tubes is 150 
hours. The company’s research department takes a sample of 100 such 
tubes and finds that the mean life of these tubes is 2250 hours. What 
is the probability that this sample mean is within 25 hours of the mean 
life of all tubes produced by this company?
7.41 A machine at Katz Steel Corporation makes 3-inch-long nails. 
The probability distribution of the lengths of these nails is approxi-
mately normal with a mean of 3 inches and a standard deviation of 
.1 inch. The quality control inspector takes a sample of 25 nails once 
a week and calculates the mean length of these nails. If the mean of 
this sample is either less than 2.95 inches or greater than 3.05 inches, 
the inspector concludes that the machine needs an adjustment. What 
is the probability that based on a sample of 25 nails, the inspector will 
conclude that the machine needs an adjustment?
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
7.28 If all possible samples of the same (large) size are selected 
from a population, what percentage of all the sample means will be 
within 2.5 standard deviations (σ x ) of the population mean?
7.29 If all possible samples of the same (large) size are selected 
from a population, what percentage of all the sample means will be 
within 1.5 standard deviations (σ x ) of the population mean?
7.30 For a population, N = 10,000, μ = 124, and σ = 18. Find the z 
value for each of the following for n = 36.
a. x = 128.60  b. x = 119.30  
c. x = 116.88  d. x = 132.05
7.31 Let x be a continuous random variable that has a normal distri-
bution with μ = 75 and σ = 14. Assuming n∕N ≤ .05, find the proba-
bility that the sample mean, x, for a random sample of 20 taken from 
this population will be
a. between 68.5 and 77.3  b. less than 72.4
7.32 Let x be a continuous random variable that has a normal distri-
bution with μ = 48 and σ = 8. Assuming n∕N ≤ .05, find the probabil-
ity that the sample mean, x, for a random sample of 16 taken from this 
population will be
a. between 49.6 and 52.2  b. more than 45.7
7.33 Let x be a continuous random variable that follows a distribu-
tion skewed to the left with μ = 90 and σ = 18. Assuming n∕N ≤ .05, 
find the probability that the sample mean, x, for a random sample of 
64 taken from this population will be
a. less than 82.3  b. greater than 86.7
APPLICATIONS
7.34 The GPAs of all students enrolled at a large university have an 
approximately normal distribution with a mean of 3.02 and a standard 
deviation of .29. Find the probability that the mean GPA of a random 
sample of 20 students selected from this university is
a. 3.10 or higher  b. 2.90 or lower  c. 2.95 to 3.11
7.35 According to a Bureau of Labor Statistics release of March 25, 
2015, financial analysts earn an average of $110,510 a year. Suppose 
that the current annual earnings of all financial analysts have the mean 
and standard deviation of $110,510 and $30,000, respectively. Find 
the probability that the average annual salary of a random sample of 
400 financial analysts is
a. more than $112,610  
b. less than $108,100  
c. $109,300 to $113,350
7.36 The times that college students spend studying per week have 
a distribution that is skewed to the right with a mean of 8.4 hours and 
7.5 Population and Sample Proportions; and the Mean, Standard 
Deviation, and Shape of the Sampling Distribution of p
̭
The concept of proportion is the same as the concept of relative frequency discussed in Chapter 2 
and the concept of probability of success in a binomial experiment. The relative frequency of a 
category or class gives the proportion of the sample or population that belongs to that category or 
class. Similarly, the probability of success in a binomial experiment represents the proportion of 
the sample or population that possesses a given characteristic.
www.ebook3000.com

294
Chapter 7 Sampling Distributions
 
In this section, first we will learn about the population and sample proportions. Then we will 
discuss the mean, standard deviation, and shape of the sampling distribution of pˆ.
7.5.1 Population and Sample Proportions
The population proportion, denoted by p, is obtained by taking the ratio of the number of ele-
ments in a population with a specific characteristic to the total number of elements in the popula-
tion. The sample proportion, denoted by pˆ (pronounced p hat), gives a similar ratio for a sample.
Example 7–7 illustrates the calculation of the population and sample proportions.
EXAMPLE 7–7 
Families Owning Homes
Suppose a total of 789,654 families live in a particular city and 563,282 of them own homes. A 
sample of 240 families is selected from this city, and 158 of them own homes. Find the proportion 
of families who own homes in the population and in the sample.
Solution For the population of this city,
 N = population size = 789,654
 X = number of families in the population who own homes = 563,282
The population proportion of families in this city who own homes is
p = X
N = 563,282
789,654 = .71
 
Now, a sample of 240 families is taken from this city, and 158 of them are home-owners. 
Then,
 n = sample size = 240
 x = number of families in the sample who own homes = 158
The sample proportion is
 
pˆ = x
n = 158
240 = .66 
◼
 
As in the case of the mean, the difference between the sample proportion and the corre-
sponding population proportion gives the sampling error, assuming that the sample is random 
and no nonsampling error has been made. Thus, in the case of the proportion,
Sampling error = pˆ −p
For instance, for Example 7–7,
Sampling error = pˆ −p = .66 −.71 = −.05
Calculating the population 
and sample proportions.
Population and Sample Proportions The population and sample proportions, denoted by p 
andpˆ, respectively, are calculated as
p = X
N    and     pˆ = x
n
where
 
N = total number of elements in the population
 
n = total number of elements in the sample
 
X = number of elements in the population that possess a specific characteristic
 
x = number of elements in the sample that possess the same specific characteristic

7.5 Population and Sample Proportions; and the Mean, Standard Deviation, and Shape of the Sampling Distribution of p
̭ 
295
Here, the sampling error being equal to −.05 means that the sample proportion underestimates 
the population proportion by .05.
7.5.2 Sampling Distribution of p
̭
Just like the sample mean x, the sample proportion pˆ is a random variable. In other words, the 
population proportion p is a contant as it assumes one and only one value. However, the sample 
proportion pˆ can assume one of a large number of possible values depending on which sample is 
selected. Hence, pˆ is a random variable and it possesses a probability distribution, which is called 
its sampling distribution.
 
The value of pˆ calculated for a particular sample depends on what elements of the popula-
tion are included in that sample. Example 7–8 illustrates the concept of the sampling distribution 
of pˆ.
EXAMPLE 7–8 
Employees’ Knowledge of Statistics
Boe Consultant Associates has five employees. Table 7.6 gives the names of these five employees 
and information concerning their knowledge of statistics.
Illustrating the sampling 
distribution of pˆ .
 
If we define the population proportion, p, as the proportion of employees who know statis-
tics, then
p = 3∕5 = .60
Note that this population proportion, p = .60, is a constant. As long as the population does not 
change, this value of p will not change.
 
Now, suppose we draw all possible samples of three employees each and compute the pro-
portion of employees, for each sample, who know statistics. The total number of samples of size 
three that can be drawn from the population of five employees is
Total number of samples = 5C3 =
5!
3!(5 −3)! = 5 · 4 · 3 · 2 · 1
3 · 2 · 1 · 2 · 1 = 10
Table 7.7 lists these 10 possible samples and the proportion of employees who know statistics for 
each of those samples. Note that we have rounded the values of pˆ to two decimal places.
Sampling Distribution of the Sample Proportion, p
̭ The probability distribution of the sample 
proportion, pˆ, is called its sampling distribution. It gives the various values that pˆ can assume 
and their probabilities.
Table 7.6  Information on the Five 
Employees of Boe Consultant 
Associates
Name 
Knows Statistics
Ally 
Yes
John 
No
Susan 
No
Lee 
Yes
Tom 
Yes
www.ebook3000.com

296
Chapter 7 Sampling Distributions
 
Using Table 7.7, we prepare the frequency distribution of pˆ as recorded in Table 7.8, along 
with the relative frequencies of classes, which are obtained by dividing the frequencies of classes 
by the total number of possible samples. The relative frequencies are used as probabilities and 
listed in Table 7.9. This table gives the sampling distribution of pˆ.
7.5.3 Mean and Standard Deviation of p
̭
The mean of pˆ, which is the same as the mean of the sampling distribution of pˆ, is always equal 
to the population proportion, p, just as the mean of the sampling distribution of x is always equal 
to the population mean, μ.
 
In Example 7–8, p = .60. If we calculate the mean of the 10 values of pˆ listed in Table 7.7, 
it will give us μpˆ = .60.
Table 7.7  All Possible Samples of Size 3 and 
the Value of pˆ for Each Sample
 
Proportion Who 
Sample 
Know Statistics pˆ
Ally, John, Susan 
1∕3 =  .33
Ally, John, Lee 
2∕3 =  .67
Ally, John, Tom 
2∕3 =  .67
Ally, Susan, Lee 
2∕3 =  .67
Ally, Susan, Tom 
2∕3 =  .67
Ally, Lee, Tom 
3∕3 = 1.00
John, Susan, Lee 
1∕3 =  .33
John, Susan, Tom 
1∕3 =  .33
John, Lee, Tom 
2∕3 =  .67
Susan, Lee, Tom 
2∕3 =  .67
Table 7.8  Frequency and Relative 
Frequency Distributions of pˆ 
When the Sample Size is 3
 
 
Relative 
  pˆ 
f 
Frequency
 .33 
3 
3∕10 =  .30
 .67 
6 
6∕10 =  .60
1.00 
1 
1∕10 =  .10
 
Σf = 10 
Sum = 1.00
Table 7.9  Sampling Distribution 
of pˆ When the Sample 
Size is 3
  pˆ 
P( pˆ)
 .33 
.30
 .67 
.60
1.00 
.10
 
ΣP(pˆ) = 1.00
 
◼
Mean of the Sample Proportion The mean of the sample proportion, pˆ, is denoted by μpˆ and 
is equal to the population proportion, p. Thus,
μpˆ = p
 
The sample proportion, pˆ, is called an estimator of the population proportion, p. As men-
tioned earlier, when the expected value (or mean) of a sample statistic is equal to the value of the 
corresponding population parameter, that sample statistic is said to be an unbiased estimator. 
Since for the sample proportion μpˆ = p, pˆ is an unbiased estimator of p.

7.5 Population and Sample Proportions; and the Mean, Standard Deviation, and Shape of the Sampling Distribution of p
̭ 
297
 
The standard deviation of pˆ, denoted by σpˆ, is given by the following formula. This 
formula is true only when the sample size is small compared to the population size. As we know 
from Section 7.2, the sample size is said to be small compared to the population size if n∕N ≤ .05.
 
However, if n∕N is greater than .05, then σpˆ  is calculated as follows:
σpˆ = A
pq
n   A
N −n
N −1
where the factor
A
N −n
N −1
is called the finite population correction factor.
 
In almost all cases, the sample size is small compared to the population size and, conse-
quently, the formula used to calculate σ pˆ  is √pq∕n.
 
As mentioned earlier, if the standard deviation of a sample statistic decreases as the sample 
size is increased, that statistic is said to be a consistent estimator. It is obvious from the above 
formula for σpˆ that as n increases, the value of √pq∕n decreases. Thus, the sample proportion, 
pˆ, is a consistent estimator of the population proportion, p.
7.5.4 Shape of the Sampling Distribution of p
̭
The shape of the sampling distribution of pˆ is inferred from the central limit theorem.
Standard Deviation of the Sample Proportion The standard deviation of the sample propor-
tion pˆ is denoted by σpˆ  and is given by the formula
σpˆ = A
pq
n
where p is the population proportion, q = 1 − p, and n is the sample size. This formula is used 
when n∕N ≤ .05, where N is the population size.
Central Limit Theorem for Sample Proportion According to the central limit theorem, the sam-
pling distribution of pˆ is approximately normal for a sufficiently large sample size. In the case 
of proportion, the sample size is considered to be sufficiently large if np and nq are both greater 
than 5; that is, if
np > 5 and nq > 5
 
Note that the sampling distribution of pˆ will be approximately normal if np > 5 and nq > 5. 
This is the same condition that was required for the application of the normal approximation to 
the binomial probability distribution in Chapter 6.
 
Example 7–9 shows the calculation of the mean and standard deviation of pˆ and describes 
the shape of its sampling distribution.
EXAMPLE 7–9 
Owning a Home: an American Dream
According to a recent New York Times/CBS News poll, 55% of adults polled said that owning a 
home is a very important part of the American Dream. Assume that this result is true for the cur-
rent population of American adults. Let pˆ be the proportion of American adults in a random 
sample of 2000 who will say that owning a home is a very important part of the American Dream. 
Find the mean and standard deviation of pˆ and describe the shape of its sampling distribution.
Finding the mean and standard 
deviation, and describing the 
shape of the sampling 
distribution of pˆ .
www.ebook3000.com

298
Chapter 7 Sampling Distributions
Solution Let p be the proportion of all American adults who will say that owning a home is a 
very important part of the American Dream. Then,
p = .55,  q = 1 −p = 1 −.55 = .45,   and  n = 2000
The mean of the sampling distribution of pˆ is
μpˆ = p = .55
The standard deviation of pˆ is
σpˆ = B
pq
n = B
(.55)(.45)
2000
= .0111
The values of np and nq are
np = 2000(.55) = 1100  and  nq = 2000(.45) = 900
 
Because np and nq are both greater than 5, we can apply the central limit theorem to make 
an inference about the shape of the sampling distribution of pˆ. Thus, the sampling distribution of 
pˆ is approximately normal with a mean of .55 and a standard deviation of .0111, as shown in 
Figure 7.15.
EXERCISES
7.47 For a population, N = 2800 and p = .29. A random sample of 
80 elements selected from this population gave pˆ = .33. Find the 
sampling error.
7.48 What is the estimator of the population proportion? Is this esti-
mator an unbiased estimator of p? Explain why or why not.
7.49 Is the sample proportion a consistent estimator of the popula-
tion proportion? Explain why or why not.
7.50 How does the value of σpˆ  change as the sample size increases? 
Explain. Assume n∕N ≤ .05.
7.51 Consider a large population with p = .21. Assuming n∕N ≤ .05, 
find the mean and standard deviation of the sample proportion pˆ for a 
sample size of
a. 400  b. 750
7.52 A population of N = 1400 has a population proportion equal to 
.47. In each of the following cases, which formula will you use to 
calculate σpˆ  and why? Using the appropriate formula, calculate σpˆ  for 
each of these cases.
a. n = 90 
b. n = 50
7.53 According to the central limit theorem, the sampling distribu-
tion of pˆ is approximately normal when the sample is large. What is 
considered a large sample in the case of the proportion? Briefly 
explain.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
7.42 In a population of 1000 subjects, 640 possess a certain charac-
teristic. In a sample of 40 subjects selected from this population, 24 
possess the same characteristic. What are the values of the population 
and sample proportions?
7.43 In a population of 5000 subjects, 600 possess a certain charac-
teristic. In a sample of 120 subjects selected from this population, 18 
possess the same characteristic. What are the values of the population 
and sample proportions?
7.44 In a population of 18,700 subjects, 30% possess a certain char-
acteristic. In a sample of 250 subjects selected from this population, 
25% possess the same characteristic. How many subjects in the popu-
lation and sample, respectively, possess this characteristic?
7.45 Let pˆ be the proportion of elements in a sample that possess a 
characteristic.
a. What is the mean of pˆ?
b. What is the formula to calculate the standard deviation of pˆ? 
Assume n∕N ≤ .05.
c. What condition(s) must hold true for the sampling distribution 
of pˆ to be approximately normal?
7.46 For a population, N = 12,000 and p = .71. A random sample of 
900 elements selected from this population gave pˆ = .66. Find the 
sampling error.
p^
p^
μ   = .55
p^
σ   = .0111
Approximately
normal
Figure 7.15 Sampling distribution of pˆ.
 
◼

7.6 Applications of the Sampling Distribution of p
̭ 
299
7.6 Applications of the Sampling Distribution of p
̭
7.57 According to a Gallup poll conducted January 5–8, 2014, 67% 
of American adults were dissatisfied with the way income and wealth 
are distributed in America. Assume that this percentage is true for the 
current population of American adults. Let pˆ be the proportion in a 
random sample of 400 American adults who hold the above opinion. 
Find the mean and standard deviation of the sampling distribution of 
pˆ and describe its shape.
7.58 According to a Gallup poll conducted April 3–6, 2014, 21% 
of Americans aged 18 to 29 said that college loans and/or expenses 
were the top financial problem facing their families. Assume that 
this percentage is true for the current population of Americans aged 
18 to 29. Let pˆ be the proportion in a random sample of 900 
Americans aged 18 to 29 who hold the above opinion. Find the 
mean and standard deviation of the sampling distribution of pˆ and 
describe its shape.
7.59 In a January 2014 survey conducted by the Associated Press-
We TV, 68% of American adults said that owning a home is the most 
important thing or a very important but not the most important thing 
(opportunityagenda.org). Assume that this percentage is true for the 
current population of American adults. Let pˆ be the proportion in a 
random sample of 1000 American adults who hold the above opinion. 
Find the mean and standard deviation of the sampling distribution of 
pˆ and describe its shape.
7.54 Indicate in which of the following cases the central limit theorem 
will apply to describe the sampling distribution of the sample proportion.
a. n = 400 and p = .28 b. n = 80 and p = .05
c. n = 60 and p = .12 
d. n = 100 and p = .035
7.55 Indicate in which of the following cases the central limit 
 theorem will apply to describe the sampling distribution of the sample 
proportion.
a. n = 20 and p = .45 
b. n = 75 and p = .22
c. n = 350 and p = .01 d. n = 200 and p = .022
APPLICATIONS
7.56 An investigation of all five major fires in a western desert 
during one of the recent summers found the following causes.
Arson  Accident  Accident  Arson  Accident
a. What proportion of those fires were due to arson?
b. How many total samples (without replacement) of size three 
can be selected from this population?
c. List all the possible samples of size three that can be selected 
from this population and calculate the sample proportion pˆ of 
the fires due to arson for each sample. Prepare the table that 
gives the sampling distribution of pˆ.
d. For each sample listed in part c, calculate the sampling error.
As mentioned in Section 7.4, when we conduct a study, we usually take only one sample and 
make all decisions or inferences on the basis of the results of that one sample. We use the con-
cepts of the mean, standard deviation, and shape of the sampling distribution of pˆ to determine 
the probability that the value of pˆ computed from one sample falls within a given interval. Exam-
ples 7–10 and 7–11 illustrate this application.
EXAMPLE 7–10 
College Education Too Expensive
In a recent Pew Research Center nationwide telephone survey of American adults, 75% of adults 
said that college education has become too expensive for most people. Suppose that this result is 
true for the current population of American adults. Let pˆ be the proportion in a random sample 
of 1400 adult Americans who will hold the said opinion. Find the probability that 76.5% to 78% 
of adults in this sample will hold this opinion.
Solution From the given information,
n = 1400,  p = .75,   and  q = 1 −p = 1 −.75 = .25
where p is the proportion of all adult Americans who hold the said opinion.
 
The mean of the sample proportion pˆ is
μpˆ = p = .75
 
The standard deviation of pˆ is
σ pˆ = B
pq
n = B
(.75)(.25)
1400
= .01157275
 
The values of np and nq are
np = 1400 (.75) = 1050  and  nq = 1400 (.25) = 350
Calculating the probability 
that pˆ  is in an interval.
www.ebook3000.com

300
Chapter 7 Sampling Distributions
 
Because np and nq are both greater than 5, we can infer from the central limit theorem that 
the sampling distribution of pˆ is approximately normal. The probability that pˆ is between .765 
and .78 is given by the area under the normal curve for pˆ between pˆ = .765 and pˆ = .78, as 
shown in Figure 7.16.
 
The first step in finding the area under the normal distribution curve between pˆ = .765 and 
pˆ = .78 is to convert these two values to their respective z values. The z value for pˆ is computed 
using the following formula
 
The two values of pˆ are converted to their respective z values, and then the area under the 
normal curve between these two points is found using the normal distribution table.
 
For pˆ = .765:  z = .765 −.75
.01157275 = 1.30
 
For pˆ = .78:  z = .78 −.75
.01157275 = 2.59
 
Thus, the probability that pˆ is between .765 and .78 is given by the area under the standard 
normal curve between z = 1.30 and z = 2.59. This area is shown in Figure 7.17. The required 
probability is
 P(.765 < pˆ < .78) = P(1.30 < z < 2.59) = P(z < 2.59) −P(z < 1.30)
 = .9952 −.9032 = .0920
z Value for a Value of pˆ The z value for a value of pˆ is calculated as
z = pˆ −p
σpˆ
Approximately
normal distribution
.765
.78
p^
σ   = .01157275
p^
p^
μ   = .75
Figure 7.16 P(.765 < pˆ < .78).
.765
.78
p^
Shaded area
is .0920
z
0
2.59
1.30
.75
Figure 7.17 P(.765 < pˆ < .78).
 
Thus, the probability that 76.5% to 78% of American adults in a random sample of 1400 will 
say that college education has become too expensive for most people is .0920. 
◼ 

7.6 Applications of the Sampling Distribution of p
̭ 
301
EXAMPLE 7–11 
Voting in an Election
Maureen Webster, who is running for mayor in a large city, claims that she is favored by 53% of 
all eligible voters of that city. Assume that this claim is true. What is the probability that in a 
random sample of 400 registered voters taken from this city, less than 49% will favor Maureen 
Webster?
Solution Let p be the proportion of all eligible voters who favor Maureen Webster. Then,
p = .53 and q = 1 −p = 1 −.53 = .47
 
The mean of the sampling distribution of the sample proportion pˆ is
μpˆ = p = .53
 
The population of all voters is large (because the city is large) and the sample size is small 
compared to the population. Consequently, we can assume that n∕N ≤ .05. Hence, the standard 
deviation of pˆ is calculated as
σpˆ = B
pq
n = B
(.53)(.47)
400
= .02495496
 
From the central limit theorem, the shape of the sampling distribution of pˆ is approximately 
normal. (The reader should check that np > 5 and nq > 5 and, hence, the sample size is large.) 
The probability that pˆ is less than .49 is given by the area under the normal distribution curve for 
pˆ to the left of pˆ = .49, as shown in Figure 7.18. The z value for pˆ = .49 is
z = pˆ −p
σpˆ
= .49 −.53
.02495496 = −1.60
Calculating the probability that 
pˆ  is less than a certain value.
Shaded area
is .0548
.49
p^
−1.60
0
z
p^
μ   = .53
Figure 7.18 P(pˆ < .49).
Thus, the required probability from Table IV is
 P( pˆ < .49) = P(z < −1.60)
 = .0548
Hence, the probability that less than 49% of the voters in a random sample of 400 will favor 
Maureen Webster is .0548. 
◼ 
EXERCISES
7.62 For a population, N = 18,000 and p = .25. Find the z value for 
each of the following for n = 70.
a. pˆ = .26  b. pˆ = .32
c. pˆ = .17  d. pˆ = .20
APPLICATIONS
7.63 A survey of all medium- and large-sized corporations showed 
that 64% of them offer retirement plans to their employees. Let pˆ be 
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
7.60 If all possible samples of the same (large) size are selected 
from a population, what percentage of all sample proportions will be 
within 2.0 standard deviations (σpˆ) of the population proportion?
7.61 If all possible samples of the same (large) size are selected 
from a population, what percentage of all sample proportions will be 
within 3.0 standard deviations (σpˆ) of the population proportion?
www.ebook3000.com

302
Chapter 7 Sampling Distributions
the proportion in a random sample of 50 such corporations that offer 
retirement plans to their employees. Find the probability that the value 
of pˆ will be
a. between .54 and .61  b. greater than .71
7.64 Dartmouth Distribution Warehouse makes deliveries of a large 
number of products to its customers. It is known that 85% of all the 
orders it receives from its customers are delivered on time. Let pˆ be 
the proportion of orders in a random sample of 100 that are delivered 
on time. Find the probability that the value of pˆ will be
a. between .81 and .88  b. less than .87
7.65 Brooklyn Corporation manufactures DVDs. The machine 
that is used to make these DVDs is known to produce 6% defective 
DVDs. The quality control inspector selects a sample of 150 DVDs 
every week and inspects them for being good or defective. If 8% or 
more of the DVDs in the sample are defective, the process is stopped 
and the machine is adjusted. What is the probability that based on a 
sample of 150 DVDs, the process will be stopped to adjust the 
machine?
7.66 Mong Corporation makes auto batteries. The company claims 
that 80% of its LL70 batteries are good for 70 months or longer. 
Assume that this claim is true. Let pˆ be the proportion in a sample of 
100 such batteries that are good for 70 months or longer.
a. What is the probability that this sample proportion is within 
.05 of the population proportion?
b. What is the probability that this sample proportion is less than 
the population proportion by .06 or more?
c. What is the probability that this sample proportion is greater 
than the population proportion by .07 or more?
USES AND MISUSES...
BEWARE OF BIAS
Mathematics tells us that the sample mean, x, is an unbiased and 
consistent estimator for the population mean, μ. This is great news 
because it allows us to estimate properties of a population based on 
those of a sample; this is the essence of statistics. But statistics 
always makes a number of assumptions about the sample from which 
the mean and standard deviation are calculated. Failure to respect 
these assumptions can introduce bias in your calculations. In statis-
tics, bias means a deviation of the expected value of a statistical esti-
mator from the parameter it is intended to estimate.
 
Let’s say you are a quality control manager for a refrigerator 
parts company. One of the parts that you manufacture has a specifi-
cation that the length of the part be 2.0 centimeters plus or minus 
.025 centimeter. The manufacturer expects that the parts it receives 
have a mean length of 2.0 centimeters and a small variation around 
that mean. The manufacturing process is to mold the part to some-
thing a little bit bigger than necessary—say, 2.1 centimeters—and 
finish the process by hand. Because the action of cutting material is 
irreversible, the machinists tend to miss their target by approximately 
.01 centimeter, so the mean length of the parts is not 2.0 centimeters, 
but rather 2.01 centimeters. It is your job to catch this.
 
One of your quality control procedures is to select completed 
parts randomly and test them against specification. Unfortunately, 
your measurement device is also subject to variation and might con-
sistently underestimate the length of the parts. If your measurements 
are consistently .01 centimeter too short, your sample mean will not 
catch the manufacturing error in the population of parts.
 
The solution to the manufacturing problem is relatively straight-
forward: Be certain to calibrate your measurement instrument. Cali-
bration becomes very difficult when working with people. It is known 
that people tend to overestimate the number of times that they vote 
and underestimate the time it takes to complete a project. Basing 
statistical results on this type of data can result in distorted estimates 
of the properties of your population. It is very important to be careful 
to weed out bias in your data because once it gets into your calcula-
tions, it is very hard to get it out.
Nonsampling errors The errors that occur during the collection, 
recording, and tabulation of data.
Population probability distribution The probability distribution 
of the population data.
Population proportion p The ratio of the number of elements 
in a population with a specific characteristic to the total number of 
elements in the population.
Sample proportion pˆ The ratio of the number of elements in a 
sample with a specific characteristic to the total number of elements 
in that sample.
Sampling distribution of pˆ The probability distribution of all the 
values of pˆ calculated from all possible samples of the same size 
selected from a population.
Central limit theorem The theorem from which it is inferred that 
for a large sample size (n ≥ 30), the shape of the sampling distribution 
of x is approximately normal. Also, by the same theorem, the shape of 
the sampling distribution of pˆ is approximately normal for a sample 
for which np > 5 and nq > 5.
Consistent estimator A sample statistic with a standard deviation 
that decreases as the sample size increases.
Estimator The sample statistic that is used to estimate a population 
parameter.
Mean of pˆ The mean of the sampling distribution of pˆ, denoted by 
μpˆ is equal to the population proportion p.
Mean of x The mean of the sampling distribution of x, denoted by 
μx, is equal to the population mean μ.
Glossary

Advanced Exercises
303
Standard deviation of pˆ The standard deviation of the sampling 
distribution of pˆ, denoted by σpˆ, is equal to √pq∕n when n∕N ≤ .05.
Standard deviation of x The standard deviation of the sampling 
distribution of x, denoted by σ x, is equal to σ∕√n when n∕N ≤ .05.
Unbiased estimator An estimator with an expected value (or mean) 
that is equal to the value of the corresponding population parameter.
Sampling distribution of x The probability distribution of all the 
values of x calculated from all possible samples of the same size 
selected from a population.
Sampling error The difference between the value of a sample 
statistic calculated from a random sample and the value of the cor-
responding population parameter. This type of error occurs due to 
chance.
If the mean of this sample is either less than 63.75 ounces or greater 
than 64.25 ounces, the inspector concludes that the machine needs an 
adjustment. What is the probability that based on a sample of 16 jugs, 
the inspector will conclude that the machine needs an adjustment 
when actually it does not?
7.71 In a large city, 88% of the cases of car burglar alarms that go off 
are false. Let pˆ be the proportion of false alarms in a random sample 
of 80 cases of car burglar alarms that go off in this city. Calculate the 
mean and standard deviation of pˆ, and describe the shape of its 
sampling distribution.
7.72 According to the American Time Use Survey results released by 
the Bureau of Labor Statistics on June 24, 2015, on a typical day, 65% 
of American men age 15 and over spent some time doing household 
activities such as housework, cooking, lawn care, or financial and 
other household management. Assume that this percentage is true for 
the current population of all American men age 15 and over. Let pˆ be 
the proportion of American men age 15 and over in a random sample 
of 600 who, on a typical day, spend some time doing household activ-
ities mentioned above. Find the mean and standard deviation of the 
sampling distribution of pˆ and describe its shape.
7.73 According to the American Time Use Survey results released 
by the Bureau of Labor Statistics on June 24, 2015, on a typical 
day, 65% of American men age 15 and over spent some time doing 
household activities such as housework, cooking, lawn care, or 
financial and other household management. Assume that this per-
centage is true for the current population of all American men age 
15 and over. A random sample of 600 American men age 15 and 
over is selected.
a.  Find the probability that the sample proportion is
 
i. less than .68 
ii. between .63 and .69
b.  What is the probability that the sample proportion is within 
.025 of the population proportion?
c.  What is the probability that the sample proportion is greater 
than the population proportion by .03 or more?
7.67 The package of Ecosmart Led 75-watt replacement bulbs that 
use only 14 watts claims that these bulbs have an average life of 
24,966 hours. Assume that the lives of all such bulbs have an approx-
imate normal distribution with a mean of 24,966 hours and a standard 
deviation of 2000 hours. Let x be the average life of 25 randomly 
selected such bulbs. Find the mean and standard deviation of x, and 
comment on the shape of its sampling distribution.
7.68 The package of Ecosmart Led 75-watt replacement bulbs that 
use only 14 watts claims that these bulbs have an average life of 
24,966 hours. Assume that the lives of all such bulbs have an approx-
imate normal distribution with a mean of 24,966 hours and a standard 
deviation of 2000 hours. Find the probability that the mean life of a 
random sample of 25 such bulbs is
a. less than 24,400 hours
b. between 24,300 and 24,700 hours
c. within 650 hours of the population mean
d. less than the population mean by 700 hours or more
7.69 The Toyota Prius hybrid car is estimated to get an average of 
50 miles per gallon (mpg) of gas. However, the gas mileage varies 
from car to car due to a variety of conditions, driving styles, and other 
factors and has been reported to be as high as 70 mpg. Suppose that 
the distribution of miles per gallon for Toyota Prius hybrid cars has a 
mean of 50 mpg and a standard deviation of 5.9 mpg. Find the prob-
ability that the average miles per gallon for 38 randomly selected 
Prius hybrid cars is
a. more than 51.5 
b. between 48 and 51
c. less than 53 
d. greater than the population mean by 2.5 or more
7.70 A machine at Keats Corporation fills 64-ounce detergent jugs. 
The probability distribution of the amount of detergent in these jugs is 
approximately normal with a mean of 64 ounces and a standard devia-
tion of .4 ounce. The quality control inspector takes a sample of 16 
jugs once a week and measures the amount of detergent in these jugs. 
Supplementary Exercises
after they vote) to make an early prediction of the outcome. Assume 
that the eventual winner of the election will get 60% of the votes.
a. What is the probability that a prediction based on an exit poll 
of a random sample of 25 voters will be correct? In other 
words, what is the probability that 13 or more of the 25 voters 
in the sample will have voted for the eventual winner?
b. How large a sample would the reporter have to take so that the 
probability of correctly predicting the outcome would be .95 
or higher?
7.74 The test scores for 300 students were entered into a computer, 
analyzed, and stored in a file. Unfortunately, someone accidentally 
erased a major portion of this file from the computer. The only 
information that is available is that 30% of the scores were below 
65 and 15% of the scores were above 90. Assuming the scores are 
approximately normally distributed, find their mean and standard 
deviation.
7.75 A television reporter is covering the election for mayor of a large 
city and will conduct an exit poll (interviews with voters immediately 
Advanced Exercises
www.ebook3000.com

304
Chapter 7 Sampling Distributions
7.76 A certain elevator has a maximum legal carrying capacity of 
6000 pounds. Suppose that the population of all people who ride this 
elevator have a mean weight of 160 pounds with a standard devia-
tion of 25 pounds. If 35 of these people board the elevator, what is 
the probability that their combined weight will exceed 6000 pounds? 
Assume that the 35 people constitute a random sample from the 
population.
7.77 Refer to the sampling distribution discussed in Section 7.1. 
Calculate and replace the sample means in Table 7.3 with the sample 
medians, and then calculate the average of these sample medians. 
Does this average of the medians equal the population mean? If yes, 
why does this make sense? If no, how could you change exactly two 
of the five data values in this example so that the average of the 
sample medians equals the population mean?
13. Briefly state and explain the central limit theorem.
14. According to a 2014 Kaiser Family Foundation Health Benefits 
Survey released in 2015, the total mean cost of employer-sponsored 
family health coverage was $16,834 per family per year, of which 
workers were paying an average of $4823. Suppose that currently the 
distribution of premiums paid by all workers who have employer-
sponsored family health coverage is approximately normal with the 
mean and standard deviation of $4823 and $700, respectively. Let x 
be the average premium paid by a random sample of certain workers 
who have employer-sponsored family health coverage. Calculate the 
mean and standard deviation of x and describe the shape of its 
sampling distribution when the sample size is
a. 20  b. 100  c. 800
15. According to a Bureau of Labor Statistics release of March 25, 
2015, statisticians earn an average of $84,010 a year. Suppose that the 
current annual earnings of all statisticians have the mean and stand-
ard deviation of $84,010 and $20,000, respectively, and the shape of 
this distribution is skewed to the right. Let x be the average earnings 
of a random sample of a certain number of statisticians. Calculate 
the mean and standard deviation of x and describe the shape of its 
sampling distribution when the sample size is
a. 20 
b. 100 
 
c. 800
16. According to a Bureau of Labor Statistics release of March 25, 
2015, statisticians earn an average of $84,010 a year. Suppose that the 
current annual earnings of all statisticians have the mean and standard 
deviation of $84,010 and $20,000, respectively, and the shape of this 
distribution is skewed to the right. Find the probability that the mean 
earnings of a random sample of 256 statisticians is
a. between $81,400 and $82,600 
b. within $1500 of the population mean
c. $85,300 or more
d. not within $1600 of the population mean
e. less than $83,000 
f. less than $85,000
g. more than $86,000
h. between $83,000 and 85,500
17. At Jen and Perry Ice Cream Company, the machine that fills 
1-pound cartons of Top Flavor ice cream is set to dispense 16 ounces 
of ice cream into every carton. However, some cartons contain slightly 
less than and some contain slightly more than 16 ounces of ice cream. 
The amounts of ice cream in all such cartons have an approximate 
normal distribution with a mean of 16 ounces and a standard deviation 
of .18 ounce.
a. Find the probability that the mean amount of ice cream in a 
random sample of 16 such cartons will be
 i. between 15.90 and 15.95 ounces
 ii. less than 15.95 ounces
 iii. more than 15.97 ounces
 1. A sampling distribution is the probability distribution of
a. a population parameter
b. a sample statistic
c. any random variable
 2. Nonsampling errors are
a. the errors that occur because the sample size is too large in 
relation to the population size
b. the errors made while collecting, recording, and tabulating 
data
c. the errors that occur because an untrained person conducts the 
survey
 3. A sampling error is
a. the difference between the value of a sample statistic based on 
a random sample and the value of the corresponding popula-
tion parameter
b. the error made while collecting, recording, and tabulating data
c. the error that occurs because the sample is too small
 4. The mean of the sampling distribution of x is always equal to
a. μ  b. μ − 5  c. σ∕√n
 5. The condition for the standard deviation of the sample mean to 
be σ∕√n is that
a. np > 5  b. n∕N ≤ .05  c. n > 30
 6. The standard deviation of the sampling distribution of the sample 
mean decreases when
a. x increases  b. n increases  c. n decreases
 7. When samples are selected from a normally distributed popu-
lation, the sampling distribution of the sample mean has a normal 
distribution
a. if n ≥ 30  b. if n∕N ≤ .05  c. all the time
 8. When samples are selected from a nonnormally distributed 
population, the sampling distribution of the sample mean has an 
approximately normal distribution
a. if n ≥ 30  b. if n∕N ≤ .05  c. always
 9. In a sample of 200 customers of a mail-order company, 174 are 
found to be satisfied with the service they receive from the company. 
The proportion of customers in this sample who are satisfied with the 
company’s service is
a. .87  b. .174  c. .148
10. The mean of the sampling distribution of pˆ is always equal to
a. p  b. μ  c. pˆ
11. The condition for the standard deviation of the sampling distri-
bution of the sample proportion to be √pq∕n is
a. np > 5 and nq > 5  b. n > 30  c. n∕N ≤ .05
12. The sampling distribution of pˆ is approximately normal if
a. np > 5 and nq > 5  b. n > 30  c. n∕N ≤ .05
Self-Review Test

Technology Instructions
305
b. What is the probability that the mean amount of ice cream in 
a random sample of 16 such cartons will be within .10 ounce 
of the population mean?
c. What is the probability that the mean amount of ice cream in 
a random sample of 16 such cartons will be less than the pop-
ulation mean by .135 ounce or more?
18. According to a Pew Research survey conducted in February 
2014, 24% of American adults said they trust the government in Wash-
ington, D.C., always or most of the time. Suppose that this result is true 
for the current population of American adults. Let pˆ be the proportion 
of American adults in a random sample who hold the aforementioned 
opinion. Find the mean and standard deviation of the sampling distri-
bution of pˆ and describe its shape when the sample size is:
a. 30  b. 300  c. 3000
19. According to a Gallup poll conducted August 7–10, 2014, 48% 
of American workers said that they were completely satisfied with 
their jobs. Assume that this result is true for the current population of 
American workers.
a. Find the probability that in a random sample of 1150 American 
workers, the proportion who will say they are completely satis-
fied with their jobs is
 i. greater than .50 
ii. between .46 and .51
 iii. less than .45 
iv. between .495 and .515
 v. less than .49 
vi. more than .47
b. What is the probability that in a random sample of 1150 
American workers, the proportion who will say they are 
completely satisfied with their jobs is within .025 of the 
population proportion?
c. What is the probability that in a random sample of 1150 
American workers, the proportion who will say they are 
completely satisfied with their jobs is not within .03 of the 
population proportion?
d. What is the probability that in a random sample of 1150 
American workers, the proportion who will say they are 
completely satisfied with their jobs is greater than the popu-
lation proportion by .02 or more?
Note: The Mini-Projects are located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Mini-Projects
Note: The Decide for Yourself feature is located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Decide for Yourself
TI-84 Color/TI-84
CHAPTER 7
TECHNOLOGY 
INSTRUCTIONS
The TI-84 Color Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for the TI-84 Plus C color 
graphing calculator running the 4.0 operating system. Some screens, menus, and functions will 
be slightly different in older operating systems. The TI-84+ can perform all of the same func-
tions but does not have the “Color” option referenced in some of the menus.
Approximating the Sampling Distribution of x– 
for Example 7–3(a) of the Text
1. Select 2nd > STAT > OPS > seq(.
2. Use the following settings in the seq menu (see Screen 7.1 and Screen 7.2):
• Use the following settings at the Expr prompt:
• Select 2nd > STAT > MATH > mean(.
• Select MATH > PROB > randNorm(.
• Type 196000, 20000, 16)). Be sure to include two right parentheses in this step.
Note: Complete TI-84, Minitab, and Excel manuals are available for download at the textbook’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Screen 7.1
www.ebook3000.com

306
Chapter 7 Sampling Distributions
• At the Variable prompt, type X.
• At the start prompt, type 1.
• At the end prompt, type 100.
• At the step prompt, type 1.
• Highlight Paste and press ENTER.
3. Select STO.
4. Select 2nd > 1.
5. Press ENTER.
 
Note: This process will take a little while to complete. Be patient.
6. There should now be 100 sample means stored in list 1 of your calculator. You can create a 
histogram of the values in list 1 and compute statistics as described in previous chapters.
 
 Note: You have only created an approximate sampling distribution. To create the complete sampling 
distribution, you would need to have each sample mean from every possible sample of 16 American 
internal medicine physicians.
 
 Note: You can complete parts (b) and (c) of this example by changing the number 16 in step 2 to 50 
and 1000, respectively.
Approximating the Sampling Distribution of p
̭
 
for Example 7–9 of the Text
1. Select 2nd > STAT > OPS > seq(.
2. Use the following settings in the seq menu (see Screen 7.3):
• Use the following settings at the Expr prompt:
• Select MATH > PROB > randBin(.
• Type 2000,0.55)/2000.
• At the Variable prompt, type X.
• At the start prompt, type 1.
• At the end prompt, type 100.
• At the step prompt, type 1.
• Highlight Paste and press ENTER.
3. Select STO.
4. Select 2nd > 1.
5. Press ENTER.
 
Note: This process will take a little while to complete. Be patient.
6. There should now be 100 sample proportions stored in list 1 of your calculator. You can 
create a histogram of the values in list 1 and compute statistics as described in previous 
chapters.
 
 Note: You have only created an approximate sampling distribution. To create the complete sampling 
distribution, you would need to have each sample proportion from every possible sample of size 
2000 from this population.
Screen 7.2
Screen 7.3

Technology Instructions
307
The Minitab Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Minitab version 17. Some 
screens, menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Minitab.
Approximating the Sampling Distribution 
of x– for Example 7–3(a) of the Text
1. Select Calc > Random Data > Normal.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen 
(see Screen 7.4):
• In the Number of rows of data to generate box, type 100.
• In the Store in column(s) box, type C1-C16.
• In the Mean box, type 196000.
• In the Standard deviation box, type 20000.
3. Click OK.
4. Select Calc > Row Statistics.
5. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen 
(see Screen 7.5):
• In the Statistic box, select Mean.
• In the Input variables box, type C1-C16.
• In the Store result in box, type C17.
6. Click OK.
7. There should now be 100 sample means stored in C17. You can create a 
histogram of the values in C17 and compute statistics as described in previous 
chapters.
 
 Note:  You have only created an approximate sampling distribution. To create the complete 
sampling distribution, you would need to have each sample mean from every possible sample 
of 16 American internal medicine physicians.
 
 Note:  You can complete parts (b) and (c) of this example by changing the number 16 
in step 2 to 50 and 1000, respectively, and the number 17 in step 5 to 51 and 1001, 
respectively.
Approximating the Sampling Distribution 
of p
̭
 for Example 7–9 of the Text
1. Select Calc > Random Data > Binomial.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen 
(see Screen 7.6):
• In the Number of rows of data to generate box, type 100.
• In the Store in column(s) box, type C1.
• In the Number of trials box, type 2000.
• In the Event probability box, type 0.55.
Minitab
Screen 7.4
Screen 7.5
Screen 7.6
www.ebook3000.com

308
Chapter 7 Sampling Distributions
3. Click OK.
4.  Each row in C1 should now contain a number of successes from a sample of size 
2000. We need to convert these numbers of successes into sample proportions of 
successes.
5. Select Calc > Calculator.
6.  Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen (see Screen 7.7):
• In the Store result in variable box, type C2.
• In the Expression box, type C1/2000.
7. Click OK.
8.  There should now be 100 sample proportions stored in C2. You can create a 
histogram of the values in C2 and compute statistics as described in previous 
chapters. (See Screen 7.8.)
 
 Note: You have only created an approximate sampling distribution. To create the complete sampling 
distribution, you would need to have each sample proportion from every possible sample of size 2000 
from this population.
Excel
Screen 7.7
Screen 7.8
The Excel Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Excel 2013. Some screens, 
menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Excel. To enable some of the 
advanced Excel functions, you must enable the Data Analysis Add-In for Excel.
Approximating the Sampling Distribution of x– 
for Example 7–3(a) of the Text
1. Click on cell A1.
2. Click DATA and then click Data Analysis Tools from the Analysis group.
3. Select Random Number Generation from the dialog box that appears on screen.

Technology Instructions
309
4. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen (see Screen 7.9):
• In the Number variables box, type 100.
• In the Number of Random Numbers box, type 16.
• From the Distribution dropdown menu, select Normal.
• In the Mean box, type 196000.
• In the Standard deviation box, type 20000.
5. Click OK.
6. Click on cell A17 and type =AVERAGE(A1:A16).
7. Copy the formula from cell A17 to cells B17 through CV17.
8. There should now be 100 sample means stored in row 17 of the spreadsheet. You can 
create a histogram of the values in row 17 and compute statistics as described in previous 
chapters.
 
 Note:  You have only created an approximate sampling distribution. To create the complete sampling 
distribution, you would need to have every sample mean from every possible sample of 16 American 
internal medicine physicians.
 
 Note:  You can complete parts (b) and (c) of this example by changing the number 16 in steps 4 
and 6 to 50 and 1000, respectively, and changing the number 17 in steps 6 and 7 to 51 and 1001, 
respectively.
Approximating the Sampling Distribution of p
̭
 
for Example 7–9 of the Text
1. Click on cell A1.
2. Click DATA and then click Data Analysis Tools from the Analysis group.
3. Select Random Number Generation from the dialog box that appears on screen.
4. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen (see Screen 7.10):
• In the Number variables box, type 1.
• In the Number of Random Numbers box, type 100.
• From the Distribution drop-down menu, select Binomial.
• In the p Value box, type 0.55.
• In the Number of trials box, type 2000.
5. Click OK.
6. Each cell in column A should now contain a number of successes from a sample of 
size 2000. We need to convert these numbers of successes into sample proportions of 
successes.
7. Click on cell B1 and type = A1/2000.
8. Copy the formula from cell B1 to cells B2 through B100.
9. There should now be 100 sample proportions stored in column B. You can create a histogram 
of the values in column B and compute statistics as described in previous chapters.
 
 Note:  You have only created an approximate sampling distribution. To create the complete sampling 
distribution, you would need to have every sample proportion from every possible sample of size 2000 
from this population.
Screen 7.9
Screen 7.10
www.ebook3000.com

310
Chapter 7 Sampling Distributions
for themselves or a family member during the last 12 months. Use 
technology to simulate 500 binomial experiments with 50 trials each 
and with a probability of success of .30. Calculate the sample propor-
tion of successes for each of the 500 experiments.
a. Find the mean of these 500 sample proportions.
b. Find the standard deviation of the 500 sample proportions.
c. Create a histogram of the 500 sample proportions. Describe 
the shape revealed by the histogram.
TA7.4 It has been conjectured that 10% of all people are left-handed. 
Use technology to simulate 200 binomial experiments with 20 trials 
each and a probability of success (observing a left-handed person) of 
.10. Calculate the sample proportion of successes for each of the 200 
experiments.
a. Find the mean of these 200 sample proportions.
b. Find the standard deviation of the 200 sample proportions.
c. Create a histogram of the 200 sample proportions. Describe 
the shape revealed by the histogram.
TA7.1 In this assignment, you will simulate rolling a six-sided die. 
Use technology to generate 200 samples of 30 rolls of a six-sided die. 
Now use technology to find the sample mean for each set of 30 rolls.
a. Find the mean of the 200 sample means.
b. Find the standard deviation of the 200 sample means.
c. Create a histogram of the 200 sample means. Describe the 
shape revealed by the histogram.
TA7.2 In this assignment, you will simulate selecting random integers 
from 1 to 100. Use technology to generate 150 samples of 40 integers 
each from 1 to 100. Now, use technology to find the sample mean of 
each of 40 integers.
a. Find the mean of the 150 sample means.
b. Find the standard deviation of the 150 sample means.
c. Create a histogram of the 150 sample means. Describe the 
shape revealed by the histogram.
TA7.3 In December 2013, the Gallup Poll reported that the high cost 
of health care caused 30% of Americans to delay getting health care 
TECHNOLOGY ASSIGNMENTS

311
311
CHAPTER8
Now we are entering that part of statistics called inferential statistics. In Chapter 1 inferential statistics 
was defined as the part of statistics that helps us make decisions about some characteristics of a 
population based on sample information. In other words, inferential statistics uses the sample results 
to make decisions and draw conclusions about the population from which the sample is drawn. 
Estimation is the first topic to be considered in our discussion of inferential statistics. Estimation 
and hypothesis testing (discussed in Chapter 9) taken together are usually referred to as inference 
making. This chapter explains how to estimate the population mean and population proportion for a 
single population.
© Steve Debenport/iStockphoto
Estimation of the Mean and Proportion
Do you plan to become a registered nurse? If you do, do you know how much registered nurses earn a 
year? According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, registered nurses earned an average of $69,790 
in 2014. The earnings of registered nurses varied greatly from state to state. Whereas the 2014 average 
earnings of registered nurses was $98,400 in California, it was $62,720 in Florida. (See Case Study 8–1.)
8.1 Estimation, Point 
Estimate, and Interval 
Estimate
8.2 Estimation of a Population 
Mean: σ Known
Case Study 8–1 Annual 
Salaries of Registered 
Nurses, 2014 
8.3 Estimation of a Population 
Mean: σ Not Known
8.4 Estimation of a Population 
Proportion: Large 
Samples
Case Study 8–2 Americans’ 
Efforts to Lose Weight 
Still Trail Desires
www.ebook3000.com

312
Chapter 8 Estimation of the Mean and Proportion
In this section, first we discuss the concept of estimation and then the concepts of point and inter-
val estimates.
8.1.1 Estimation: An Introduction
Estimation is a procedure by which a numerical value or values are assigned to a population 
parameter based on the information collected from a sample.
Estimation The assignment of value(s) to a population parameter based on a value of the 
corresponding sample statistic is called estimation.
 
In inferential statistics, μ is called the true population mean and p is called the true popu-
lation proportion. There are many other population parameters, such as the median, mode, 
variance, and standard deviation.
 
The following are a few examples of estimation: an auto company may want to estimate the 
mean fuel consumption for a particular model of a car; a manager may want to estimate the 
average time taken by new employees to learn a job; the U.S. Census Bureau may want to find 
the mean housing expenditure per month incurred by households; and a polling agency may want 
to find the proportion or percentage of adults who are in favor of raising taxes on rich people to 
reduce the budget deficit.
 
The examples about estimating the mean fuel consumption, estimating the average time 
taken to learn a job by new employees, and estimating the mean housing expenditure per month 
incurred by households are illustrations of estimating the true population mean, μ. The example 
about estimating the proportion (or percentage) of all adults who are in favor of raising taxes on 
rich people is an illustration of estimating the true population proportion, p.
 
If we can conduct a census (a survey that includes the entire population) each time we want 
to find the value of a population parameter, then the estimation procedures explained in this and 
subsequent chapters are not needed. For example, if the U.S. Census Bureau can contact every 
household in the United States to find the mean housing expenditure incurred by households, 
the result of the survey (which is actually a census) will give the value of μ, and the procedures 
learned in this chapter will not be needed. However, it is too expensive, very time consuming, or 
virtually impossible to contact every member of a population to collect information to find the 
true value of a population parameter. Therefore, we usually take a sample from the population 
and calculate the value of the appropriate sample statistic. Then we assign a value or values to the 
corresponding population parameter based on the value of the sample statistic. This chapter (and 
subsequent chapters) explains how to assign values to population parameters based on the values 
of sample statistics.
 
For example, to estimate the mean time taken to learn a certain job by new employees, the 
manager will take a sample of new employees and record the time taken by each of these 
employees to learn the job. Using this information, he or she will calculate the sample mean, x. 
Then, based on the value of x, he or she will assign certain values to μ. As another example, to 
estimate the mean housing expenditure per month incurred by all households in the United 
States, the Census Bureau will take a sample of certain households, collect the information on 
the housing expenditure that each of these households incurs per month, and compute the value 
of the sample mean, x. Based on this value of x, the bureau will then assign values to the popu-
lation mean, μ. Similarly, the polling agency who wants to find the proportion or percentage of 
adults who are in favor of raising taxes on rich people to reduce the budget deficit will take a 
sample of adults and determine the value of the sample proportion, pˆ, which represents the 
proportion of adults in the sample who are in favor of raising taxes on rich people to reduce the 
budget deficit. Using this value of the sample proportion, pˆ, the agency will assign values to 
the population proportion, p.
8.1 Estimation, Point Estimate, and Interval Estimate

8.1 Estimation, Point Estimate, and Interval Estimate
313
 
The value(s) assigned to a population parameter based on the value of a sample statistic is 
called an estimate of the population parameter. For example, suppose the manager takes a sample 
of 40 new employees and finds that the mean time, x, taken to learn this job for these employees 
is 5.5 hours. If he or she assigns this value to the population mean, then 5.5 hours is called an 
estimate of μ. The sample statistic used to estimate a population parameter is called an estimator. 
Thus, the sample mean, x, is an estimator of the population mean, μ; and the sample proportion, 
pˆ, is an estimator of the population proportion, p.
Estimate and Estimator The value(s) assigned to a population parameter based on the value of 
a sample statistic is called an estimate. The sample statistic used to estimate a population param-
eter is called an estimator.
 
The estimation procedure involves the following steps.
1. 
Select a sample.
2. 
Collect the required information from the members of the sample.
3. 
Calculate the value of the sample statistic.
4. 
Assign value(s) to the corresponding population parameter.
 
Remember, the procedures to be learned in this chapter assume that the sample taken 
is a simple random sample. If the sample is not a simple random sample, then the procedures to 
be used to estimate a population mean or proportion become more complex. These procedures 
are outside the scope of this book.
8.1.2 Point and Interval Estimates
An estimate may be a point estimate or an interval estimate. These two types of estimates are 
described in this section.
A Point Estimate
If we select a sample and compute the value of a sample statistic for this sample, then this value 
gives the point estimate of the corresponding population parameter.
Point Estimate The value of a sample statistic that is used to estimate a population parameter 
is called a point estimate.
 
Thus, the value computed for the sample mean, x, from a sample is a point estimate of the 
corresponding population mean, μ. For the example mentioned earlier, suppose the Census 
Bureau takes a random sample of 10,000 households and determines that the mean housing 
expenditure per month, x, for this sample is $2970. Then, using x as a point estimate of μ, the 
Bureau can state that the mean housing expenditure per month, μ, for all households is about 
$2970. Thus,
Point estimate of a population parameter = Value of the corresponding sample statistic
 
Each sample selected from a population is expected to yield a different value of the sample 
statistic. Thus, the value assigned to a population mean, μ, based on a point estimate depends on 
which of the samples is drawn. Consequently, the point estimate assigns a value to μ that almost 
always differs from the true value of the population mean.
An Interval Estimate
In the case of interval estimation, instead of assigning a single value to a population parameter, 
an interval is constructed around the point estimate, and then a probabilistic statement that this 
interval contains the corresponding population parameter is made.
www.ebook3000.com

314
Chapter 8 Estimation of the Mean and Proportion
Interval Estimation In interval estimation, an interval is constructed around the point estimate, 
and it is stated that this interval contains the corresponding population parameter with a certain 
confidence level.
 
For the example about the mean housing expenditure, instead of saying that the mean 
housing expenditure per month for all households is $2970, we may obtain an interval by sub-
tracting a number from $2970 and adding the same number to $2970. Then we state that this 
interval contains the population mean, μ. For purposes of illustration, suppose we subtract 
$340 from $2970 and add $340 to $2970. Consequently, we obtain the interval ($2970 − $340) 
to ($2970 + $340), or $2630 to $3310. Then we state that the interval $2630 to $3310 is likely 
to contain the population mean, μ, and that the mean housing expenditure per month for all 
households in the United States is between $2630 and $3310. This procedure is called interval 
estimation. The value $2630 is called the lower limit of the interval, and $3310 is called the 
upper limit of the interval. The number we add to and subtract from the point estimate is 
called the margin of error or the maximum error of the estimate. Figure 8.1 illustrates the 
concept of interval estimation.
x =
μ
μ
$3310
$2630
= $2970
x
x
Figure 8.1 Interval estimation.
 
The question arises: What number should we subtract from and add to a point estimate to 
obtain an interval estimate? The answer to this question depends on two considerations:
1. 
The standard deviation σx– of the sample mean, x
2. 
The level of confidence to be attached to the interval
 
First, the larger the standard deviation of x, the greater is the number subtracted from and 
added to the point estimate. Thus, it is obvious that if the range over which x can assume values 
is larger, then the interval constructed around x must be wider to include μ.
 
Second, the quantity subtracted and added must be larger if we want to have a higher confi-
dence in our interval. We always attach a probabilistic statement to the interval estimation. This 
probabilistic statement is given by the confidence level. An interval constructed based on this 
confidence level is called a confidence interval.
Confidence Level and Confidence Interval Each interval is constructed with regard to a given 
confidence level and is called a confidence interval. The confidence interval is given as
Point estimate ± Margin of error
The confidence level associated with a confidence interval states how much confidence we 
have that this interval contains the true population parameter. The confidence level is denoted by 
(1 − α)100%.
 
As mentioned above, the confidence level is denoted by (1 − α)100%, where α is the 
Greek letter alpha. When expressed as probability, it is called the confidence coefficient and 
is denoted by 1 − α. In passing, note that α is called the significance level, which will be 
explained in detail in Chapter 9.

8.2 Estimation of a Population Mean: σ Known
315
 
Although any value of the confidence level can be chosen to construct a confidence interval, 
the more common values are 90%, 95%, and 99%. The corresponding confidence coefficients are 
.90, .95, and .99, respectively. The next section describes how to construct a confidence interval 
for the population mean when the population standard deviation, σ, is known.
 
Sections 8.2 and 8.3 discuss the procedures that are used to estimate a population mean μ. In 
Section 8.2 we assume that the population standard deviation σ is known, and in Section 8.3 we do 
not assume that the population standard deviation σ is known. In the latter situation, we use the 
sample standard deviation s instead of σ. In the real world, the population standard deviation σ is 
almost never known. Consequently, we (almost) always use the sample standard deviation s.
EXERCISES
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
8.1 Briefly explain the meaning of an estimator and an estimate.
8.2 Explain the meaning of a point estimate and an interval estimate.
This section explains how to construct a confidence interval for the population mean μ when the 
population standard deviation σ is known. Here, there are three possible cases, as follows.
Case I. If the following three conditions are fulfilled:
1. 
The population standard deviation σ is known
2. 
The sample size is small (i.e., n < 30)
3. 
 The population from which the sample is selected is approximately normally distributed, 
then we use the normal distribution to make the confidence interval for μ because from Sec-
tion 7.3.1 of Chapter 7 the sampling distribution of x is normal with its mean equal to μ and the 
standard deviation equal to σx = σ∕√n, assuming that n∕N ≤.05.
Case II. If the following two conditions are fulfilled:
1. 
The population standard deviation σ is known
2. 
The sample size is large (i.e., n ≥30),
then, again, we use the normal distribution to make the confidence interval for μ because from 
Section 7.3.2 of Chapter 7, due to the central limit theorem, the sampling distribution of x is 
(approximately) normal with its mean equal to μ and the standard deviation equal to σx = σ∕√n, 
assuming that n∕N ≤.05.
Case III. If the following three conditions are fulfilled:
1. 
The population standard deviation σ is known
2. 
The sample size is small (i.e., n < 30)
3.  The population from which the sample is selected is not normally distributed (or its distribu-
tion is unknown),
then we use a nonparametric method to make the confidence interval for μ. Such procedures are 
covered in Chapter 15, which is on the Web site of the text.
 
This section will cover the first two cases. The procedure for making a confidence interval 
for μ is the same in both these cases. Note that in Case I, the population does not have to be 
exactly normally distributed. As long as it is close to the normal distribution without any outli-
ers, we can use the normal distribution procedure. In Case II, although 30 is considered a large 
sample, if the population distribution is very different from the normal distribution, then 30 may 
8.2 Estimation of a Population Mean: σ Known
www.ebook3000.com

316
Chapter 8 Estimation of the Mean and Proportion
not be a large enough sample size for the sampling distribution of x to be normal and, hence, to 
use the normal distribution.
 
The following chart summarizes the above three cases.
Use the normal distribution 
to estimate μ
Use a nonparametric method 
to estimate μ
Case I
1. n < 30
2.  Population is approximately normal
Case II
n ≥ 30
Case III
1. n < 30
2.  Population is not normal
σ Is Known
Confidence Interval for μ The (1 − α)100% confidence interval for μ under Cases I and II is
 x ± zσx
where 
σx =
σ
√n
The value of z used here is obtained from the standard normal distribution table (Table IV of 
Appendix B) for the given confidence level.
Confidence Interval for μ The (1 − α)100% confidence interval for μ under Cases I and II is
 x ± zσx
where 
σx =
σ
√n
The value of z used here is obtained from the standard normal distribution table (Table IV of 
Appendix B) for the given confidence level.
Confidence Interval for μ The (1 − α)100% confidence interval for μ under Cases I and II is
 x ± zσx
where 
σx =
σ
√n
The value of z used here is obtained from the standard normal distribution table (Table IV of 
Appendix B) for the given confidence level.
Confidence Interval for μ The (1 − α)100% confidence interval for μ under Cases I and II is
 x ± zσ x
where 
σ x =
σ
√n
The value of z used here is obtained from the standard normal distribution table (Table IV of 
Appendix B) for the given confidence level.
 
The quantity zσx in the confidence interval formula is called the margin of error and is 
denoted by E.
Margin of Error The margin of error for the estimate of μ, denoted by E, is the quantity that is 
subtracted from and added to the value of x to obtain a confidence interval for μ. Thus,
E = zσ x
 
The value of z in the confidence interval formula is obtained from the standard normal dis-
tribution table (Table IV of Appendix B) for the given confidence level. To illustrate, suppose we 
want to construct a 95% confidence interval for μ. A 95% confidence level means that the total 
area under the standard normal curve between two points (at the same distance) on different sides 
of μ is 95%, or .95, as shown in Figure 8.2. Note that we have denoted these two points by −z and 
z in Figure 8.2. To find the value of z for a 95% confidence level, we first find the areas to the left 
of these two points, −z and z. Then we find the z values for these two areas from the normal 
distribution table. Note that these two values of z will be the same but with opposite signs. To find 
these values of z, we perform the following two steps:
z
z
−z
.9500
.025
.025
μ = 0
Figure 8.2 Finding z for a 95% 
confidence level.

8.2 Estimation of a Population Mean: σ Known
317
1. 
The first step is to find the areas to the left of −z and z, respectively. Note that the area 
between −z and z is denoted by 1 −α. Hence, the total area in the two tails is α because the 
total area under the curve is 1.0. Therefore, the area in each tail, as shown in Figure 8.3, is 
α∕2. In our example, 1 −α = .95. Hence, the total area in both tails is α = 1 −.95 = .05. 
Consequently, the area in each tail is α∕2 = .05∕2 = .025. Then, the area to the left of −z is 
.0250, and the area to the left of z is .0250 + .95 = .9750.
2. 
Now find the z values from Table IV of Appendix B such that the areas to the left of −z and 
z are .0250 and .9750, respectively. These z values are −1.96 and 1.96, respectively.
Thus, for a confidence level of 95%, we will use z = 1.96 in the confidence interval formula.
 
Table 8.1 lists the z values for some of the most commonly used confidence levels. Note that 
we always use the positive value of z in the formula.
z
0
2
(1 − α ) = .95
−z = −1.96
z = 1.96
α = .025
2
α = .025
Figure 8.3 Area in the tails.
Table 8.1 z Values for Commonly Used Confidence Levels
Confidence Level 
Areas to Look for in Table IV 
z Value
 
90% 
.0500 and .9500 
1.64 or 1.65
 
95% 
.0250 and .9750 
1.96
 
96% 
.0200 and .9800 
2.05
 
97% 
.0150 and .9850 
2.17
 
98% 
.0100 and .9900 
2.33
 
99% 
.0050 and .9950 
2.57 or 2.58
EXAMPLE 8–1 
Prices of Textbooks
A publishing company has just published a new college textbook. Before the company decides 
the price at which to sell this textbook, it wants to know the average price of all such textbooks 
in the market. The research department at the company took a random sample of 25 comparable 
textbooks and collected information on their prices. This information produced a mean price of 
$145 for this sample. It is known that the standard deviation of the prices of all such textbooks is 
$35 and the population distribution of such prices is approximately normal.
(a) What is the point estimate of the mean price of all such college textbooks?
(b) Construct a 90% confidence interval for the mean price of all such college textbooks.
Solution Here, σ is known and, although n < 30, the population is approximately normally 
distributed. Hence, we can use the normal distribution. From the given information,
n = 25, x = $145, and σ = $35
Finding the point estimate and 
confidence interval for μ: σ known, 
n < 30, and population normal.
 
Example 8–1 describes the procedure used to construct a confidence interval for μ when σ is 
known, the sample size is small, but the population from which the sample is drawn is approxi-
mately normally distributed.
www.ebook3000.com

318
Chapter 8 Estimation of the Mean and Proportion
The standard deviation of x is
σx =
σ
√n
=
35
√25
= $7.00
(a) The point estimate of the mean price of all such college textbooks is $145; that is,
Point estimate of μ = x = $145
(b) The confidence level is 90%, or .90. First we find the z value for a 90% confidence level. 
Here, the area in each tail of the normal distribution curve is α∕2 = (1 − .90)∕2 = .05. 
Now in Table IV of Appendix B, look for the areas .0500 and .9500 and find the corre-
sponding values of z. These values are (approximately) z = −1.65 and z = 1.65.1
Next, we substitute all the values in the confidence interval formula for μ. The 90% 
confidence interval for μ is
 x ± zσx = 145 ± 1.65(7.00) = 145 ± 11.55
 = (145 −11.55) to (145 + 11.55) = $133.45 to $156.55
Thus, we are 90% confident that the mean price of all such college textbooks is 
between $133.45 and $156.55. Note that we cannot say for sure whether the interval 
$133.45 to $156.55 contains the true population mean or not. Since μ is a constant, we 
cannot say that the probability is .90 that this interval contains μ because either it con-
tains μ or it does not. Consequently, the probability that this interval contains μ is either 
1.0 or 0. All we can say is that we are 90% confident that the mean price of all such 
college textbooks is between $133.45 and $156.55.
In the above estimate, $11.55 is called the margin of error or give-and-take 
figure. 
◼ 
 
How do we interpret a 90% confidence level? In terms of Example 8–1, if we take all pos-
sible samples of 25 such college textbooks each and construct a 90% confidence interval for μ 
around each sample mean, we can expect that 90% of these intervals will include μ and 10% will 
not. In Figure 8.4 we show means x1, x2, and x3 of three different samples of the same size drawn 
from the same population. Also shown in this figure are the 90% confidence intervals constructed 
around these three sample means. As we observe, the 90% confidence intervals constructed 
around x1 and x2 include μ, but the one constructed around x3 does not. We can state for a 90% 
confidence level that if we take many samples of the same size from a population and construct 
90% confidence intervals around the means of these samples, then we expect 90% of these con-
fidence intervals will be like the ones around x1 and x2 in Figure 8.4, which include μ, and 10% 
will be like the one around x3, which does not include μ.
© Oleg Prikhodko/iStockphoto
1Note that there is no apparent reason for choosing .0495 and .9505 and not choosing .0505 and .9495 in Table IV. If we 
choose .0505 and .9495, the z values will be −1.64 and 1.64. An alternative is to use the average of 1.64 and 1.65, 
which is 1.645, which we will not do in this text.
x3
x2
x1
x3
x3 + 1.65  x
x3 − 1.65  x
x
x2
x2 + 1.65  x
x2 − 1.65  x
x1
x1 + 1.65  x
x1 − 1.65  x
μ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
Figure 8.4 Confidence intervals.

ANNUAL SALARIES 
OF REGISTERED 
NURSES, 2014
CASE STUDY 8–1
As shown in the accompanying chart, according to the May 2014 Occupational Employment and Wages 
report by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, registered nurses in the United States earned an average of 
$69,790 in 2014. The average earnings of registered nurses varied greatly from state to state. Whereas the 
2014 average earnings of registered nurses was $98,400 in California, it was only $53,970 in South Dakota 
(which is not shown in the graph). The 2014 earnings of registered nurses also varied greatly among different 
metropolitan areas. Whereas such average earnings was $128,190 in the San Francisco–San Mateo–
Redwood City (California) metropolitan area, it was $94,140 in the Los Angeles–Long Beach–Glendale met-
ropolitan division. This average was $63,130 for the Greenville, North Carolina, metropolitan area. (Note that 
these numbers for metropolitan areas are not shown in the accompanying graph.) As we know, such esti-
mates are based on sample surveys. If we know the sample size and the population standard deviation for 
any state or metropolitan area, we can find a confidence interval for the 2014 average earnings of registered 
nurses for that state or metropolitan area. For example, if we know the sample size and the population stand-
ard deviation of the 2014 earnings of registered nurses in Texas, we can make a confidence interval for the 
2014 average earnings of all registered nurses in Texas using the following formula:
x ± z σ x
In this formula, we can substitute the values of x, z, and σ x to obtain the confidence interval. Remember that 
σ x = σ∕√n. Suppose we want to find a 98% confidence interval for the 2014 average earnings of all registered 
nurses in Texas. Suppose that the 2014 average earnings of registered nurses in Texas (given in the graph) is 
based on a random sample of 1600 registered nurses and that the population standard deviation for such 
2014 earnings is $6240. Then the 98% confidence interval for the corresponding population mean is calcu-
lated as follows:
σ x =
σ
√n
=
6240
√1600
= $156.00
x ± zσ x = 68,590 ± 2.33 (156.00) = 68,590 ± 363.48 = $68,226.52 to $68,953.48
 
Thus, we can state with 98% confidence that the 2014 average earnings of all registered nurses in Texas 
is in the interval $68,226.52 to $68,953.48. We can find the confidence intervals for the other states men-
tioned in the graph the same way. Note that the sample means given in the graph are the point estimates of 
the corresponding population means.
 
In practice, we typically do not know the value of the population standard deviation, but we do know the 
value of the sample standard deviation, which is calculated from the sample data. In this case, we will find a 
confidence interval for the population mean using the t distribution procedure, which is explained in the next 
section.
Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, May 2014; http://www.bls.
gov/oes/current/oes291141.htm.
Data source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, May 2014
ANNUAL SALARIES OF REGISTERED NURSES, 2014
California    $98,400
$69,790
New York    $77,110
U.S. AVERAGE
U.S. AVERAGE
Texas    $68,590
Florida    $62,720
Pennsylvania    $66,570
319
www.ebook3000.com

320
Chapter 8 Estimation of the Mean and Proportion
 
Example 8–2 illustrates how to obtain a confidence interval for μ when σ is known and the 
sample size is large (n ≥ 30).
EXAMPLE 8–2 
Cost of a Checking Account to Banks
According to a 2013 study by Moebs Services Inc., an individual checking account at major U.S. 
banks costs the banks more than $380 per year. A recent random sample of 600 such checking 
accounts produced a mean annual cost of $500 to major U.S. banks. Assume that the standard devia-
tion of annual costs to major U.S. banks of all such checking accounts is $40. Make a 99% confi-
dence interval for the current mean annual cost to major U.S. banks of all such checking accounts.
Solution From the given information,
n = 600,  x = $500,  σ = $40,
Confidence level = 99% or .99
In this example, although the shape of the population distribution is unknown, the population 
standard deviation is known, and the sample size is large (n ≥ 30). Hence, we can use the normal 
distribution to make a confidence interval for μ. To make this confidence interval, first we find 
the standard deviation of x. The value of σ x is
σ x =
σ
√n
=
40
√600
= 1.63299316
To find z for a 99% confidence level, first we find the area in each of the two tails of the normal 
distribution curve, which is (1 − .99)∕2 = .0050. Then, we look for areas .0050 and .0050 + .99 = 
.9950 in the normal distribution table to find the two z values. These two z values are (approxi-
mately) −2.58 and 2.58. Thus, we will use z = 2.58 in the confidence interval formula. Substitut-
ing all the values in the formula, we obtain the 99% confidence interval for μ,
x ± z σ x = 500 ± 2.58 (1.63299316) = 500 ± 4.21 = $495.79 to $504.21
Thus, we can state with 99% confidence that the current mean annual cost to major U.S. banks of 
all individual checking accounts is between $495.79 and $504.21. 
◼ 
 
The width of a confidence interval depends on the size of the margin of error, zσ x, which 
depends on the values of z, σ, and n because σ x = σ∕√n. However, the value of σ is not under the 
control of the investigator. Hence, the width of a confidence interval can be controlled using
1. 
The value of z, which depends on the confidence level
2. 
The sample size n
 
The confidence level determines the value of z, which in turn determines the size of the 
margin of error. The value of z increases as the confidence level increases, and it decreases as the 
confidence level decreases. For example, the value of z is approximately 1.65 for a 90% confi-
dence level, 1.96 for a 95% confidence level, and approximately 2.58 for a 99% confidence level. 
Hence, the higher the confidence level, the larger the width of the confidence interval as long as 
σ and n remain the same.
 
For the same confidence level and the same value of σ, an increase in the sample size 
decreases the value of σ x, which in turn decreases the size of the margin of error. Therefore, an 
increase in the sample size decreases the width of the confidence interval.
 
Thus, if we want to decrease the width of a confidence interval, we have two choices:
1. 
Lower the confidence level
2. 
Increase the sample size
Lowering the confidence level is not a good choice because a lower confidence level may give 
less reliable results. Therefore, we should always prefer to increase the sample size if we want to 
decrease the width of a confidence interval. Next we illustrate, using Example 8–2, how either a 
Constructing a confidence 
interval for μ: σ known and n ≥ 30.

8.2 Estimation of a Population Mean: σ Known
321
decrease in the confidence level or an increase in the sample size decreases the width of the con-
fidence interval.
➊ Confidence Level and the Width of the Confidence Interval
Reconsider Example 8–2. Suppose all the information given in that example remains the same. 
First, let us decrease the confidence level to 95%. From the normal distribution table, z = 1.96 for a 
95% confidence level. Then, using z = 1.96 in the confidence interval for Example 8–2, we obtain
x ± z σ x = 500 ± 1.96 (1.63299316) = 500 ± 3.20 = $496.80 to $503.20
 
Comparing this confidence interval to the one obtained in Example 8–2, we observe that the 
width of the confidence interval for a 95% confidence level is smaller than the one for a 99% 
confidence level.
➋ Sample Size and the Width of the Confidence Interval
Consider Example 8–2 again. Now suppose the information given in that example is based on a 
sample size of 1000. Further assume that all other information given in that example, including 
the confidence level, remains the same. First, we calculate the standard deviation of the sample 
mean using n = 1000:
σ x =
σ
√n
=
40
√1000
= 1.26491106
Then, the 99% confidence interval for μ is
x ± z σ x = 500 ± 2.58 (1.26491106) = 500 ± 3.26 = $496.74 to $503.26
 
Comparing this confidence interval to the one obtained in Example 8–2, we observe that the 
width of the 99% confidence interval for n = 1000 is smaller than the 99% confidence interval 
for n = 600.
8.2.1 Determining the Sample Size for the Estimation of Mean
One reason we usually conduct a sample survey and not a census is that almost always we have 
limited resources at our disposal. In light of this, if a smaller sample can serve our purpose, then we 
will be wasting our resources by taking a larger sample. For instance, suppose we want to estimate 
the mean life of a certain auto battery. If a sample of 40 batteries can give us the desired margin of 
error, then we will be wasting money and time if we take a sample of a much larger size—say, 500 
batteries. In such cases, if we know the confidence level and the margin of error that we want, then 
we can find the (approximate) size of the sample that will produce the required result.
 
From earlier discussion, we learned that E = z σ x is called the margin of error of the interval 
estimate for μ. As we know, the standard deviation of the sample mean is equal to σ∕√n. There-
fore, we can write the margin of error of estimate for μ as
E = z · σ
√n
 
Suppose we predetermine the size of the margin of error, E, and want to find the size of the 
sample that will yield this margin of error. From the above expression, the following formula is 
obtained that determines the required sample size n.
Determining the Sample Size for the Estimation of μ Given the confidence level and the standard 
deviation of the population, the sample size that will produce a predetermined margin of error E 
of the confidence interval estimate of μ is
n = z2σ2
E2
www.ebook3000.com

322
Chapter 8 Estimation of the Mean and Proportion
 
If we do not know σ, we can take a preliminary sample (of any arbitrarily determined size) 
and find the sample standard deviation, s. Then we can use s for σ in the formula. However, note 
that using s for σ may give a sample size that eventually may produce an error much larger (or 
smaller) than the predetermined margin of error. This will depend on how close s and σ are.
 
Example 8–3 illustrates how we determine the sample size that will produce the margin of 
error of estimate for μ to within a certain limit.
EXAMPLE 8–3 
Student Loan Debt of College Graduates
An alumni association wants to estimate the mean debt of this year’s college graduates. It is 
known that the population standard deviation of the debts of this year’s college graduates is 
$11,800. How large a sample should be selected so that a 99% confidence interval of the estimate 
is within $800 of the population mean?
Solution The alumni association wants the 99% confidence interval for the mean debt of this 
year’s college graduates to be
x ± 800
Hence, the maximum size of the margin of error of estimate is to be $800; that is,
E = $800
The value of z for a 99% confidence level is 2.58. The value of σ is given to be $11,800. There-
fore, substituting all values in the formula and simplifying, we obtain
n = z2σ2
E2 = (2.58)2(11,800)2
(800)2
= 1448.18 ≈1449
 
Thus, the minimum required sample size is 1449. If the alumni association takes a random 
sample of 1449 of this year’s college graduates, computes the mean debt for this sample, and then 
makes a 99% confidence interval around this sample mean, the margin of error of estimate will 
be approximately $800. Note that we have rounded the final answer for the sample size to the 
next higher integer. This is always the case when determining the sample size because rounding 
down to 1448 will result in a margin of error slightly greater than $800. 
◼ 
Determining the sample size for 
the estimation of μ.
© Christopher Futcher/iStockphoto
EXERCISES
8.11 For a data set obtained from a random sample, n = 81 and 
x = 48.25. It is known that σ = 4.8.
a. What is the point estimate of μ?
b. Make a 95% confidence interval for μ.
c. What is the margin of error of estimate for part b?
8.12 The standard deviation for a population is σ = 14.8. A random 
sample of 25 observations selected from this population gave a 
mean equal to 143.72. The population is known to have a normal 
distribution.
a. Make a 99% confidence interval for μ.
b. Construct a 95% confidence interval for μ.
c. Determine a 90% confidence interval for μ.
d. Does the width of the confidence intervals constructed in parts 
a through c decrease as the confidence level decreases? 
Explain your answer.
8.13 The standard deviation for a population is σ = 7.14. A random 
sample selected from this population gave a mean equal to 48.52.
a. Make a 95% confidence interval for μ assuming n = 196.
b. Construct a 95% confidence interval for μ assuming n = 100.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
8.3 What is the point estimator of the population mean, μ? How 
would you calculate the margin of error for an estimate of μ?
8.4 Explain the various alternatives for decreasing the width of a 
confidence interval. Which is the best alternative?
8.5 Briefly explain how the width of a confidence interval decreases 
with an increase in the sample size. Give an example.
8.6 Briefly explain how the width of a confidence interval decreases 
with a decrease in the confidence level. Give an example.
8.7 Briefly explain the difference between a confidence level and a 
confidence interval.
8.8 What is the margin of error of estimate for μ when σ is known? 
How is it calculated?
8.9 How will you interpret a 99% confidence interval for μ? Explain.
8.10 Find z for each of the following confidence levels.
a. 90%  b. 95%  c. 96%  
d. 97%  e. 98%  
f. 99%

8.2 Estimation of a Population Mean: σ Known
323
recent sample of 20 rods produced a mean length of 36.02 inches. 
Based on this sample, will you conclude that the machine needs an 
adjustment? Assume that the lengths of all such rods have an approxi-
mate normal distribution.
8.21 At Farmer’s Dairy, a machine is set to fill 32-ounce milk car-
tons. However, this machine does not put exactly 32 ounces of milk 
into each carton; the amount varies slightly from carton to carton. It is 
known that when the machine is working properly, the mean net 
weight of these cartons is 32 ounces. The standard deviation of the 
amounts of milk in all such cartons is always equal to .15 ounce. The 
quality control department takes a random sample of 25 such cartons 
every week, calculates the mean net weight of these cartons, and 
makes a 99% confidence interval for the population mean. If either the 
upper limit of this confidence interval is greater than 32.15 ounces or 
the lower limit of this confidence interval is less than 31.85 ounces, 
the machine is stopped and adjusted. A recent sample of 25 such car-
tons produced a mean net weight of 31.94 ounces. Based on this sample, 
will you conclude that the machine needs an adjustment? Assume that 
the amounts of milk put in all such cartons have an approximate 
normal distribution.
8.22 A bank manager wants to know the mean amount of mortgage 
paid per month by homeowners in an area. A random sample of 120 
homeowners selected from this area showed that they pay an average 
of $1575 per month for their mortgages. The population standard 
deviation of all such mortgages is $215.
a. Find a 97% confidence interval for the mean amount of mort-
gage paid per month by all homeowners in this area.
b. Suppose the confidence interval obtained in part a is too wide. 
How can the width of this interval be reduced? Discuss all 
possible alternatives. Which alternative is the best?
8.23 A company that produces detergents wants to estimate the 
mean amount of detergent in 64-ounce jugs at a 99% confidence level. 
The company knows that the standard deviation of the amounts of 
detergent in all such jugs is .20 ounce. How large a sample should the 
company select so that the estimate is within .04 ounce of the popula-
tion mean?
8.24 A department store manager wants to estimate the mean 
amount spent by all customers at this store at a 98% confidence level. 
The manager knows that the standard deviation of amounts spent by 
all customers at this store is $31. What minimum sample size should 
he choose so that the estimate is within $3 of the population mean?
8.25 A city planner wants to estimate the average monthly residen-
tial water usage in the city at a 97% confidence level. Based on earlier 
data, the population standard deviation of the monthly residential 
water usage in this city is 389.60 gallons. How large a sample should 
be selected so that the estimate for the average monthly residential 
water usage in this city is within 100 gallons of the population mean?
 *8.26 You are interested in estimating the mean commuting time 
from home to school for all commuter students at your school. Briefly 
explain the procedure you will follow to conduct this study. Collect 
the required data from a sample of 30 or more such students and then 
estimate the population mean at a 99% confidence level. Assume that 
the population standard deviation for all such times is 5.5 minutes.
 *8.27 You are interested in estimating the mean age of cars owned by 
all people in the United States. Briefly explain the procedure you will 
follow to conduct this study. Collect the required data on a sample of 
30 or more cars and then estimate the population mean at a 95% confi-
dence level. Assume that the population standard deviation is 2.4 years.
c. Determine a 95% confidence interval for μ assuming n = 49.
d. Does the width of the confidence intervals constructed in parts 
a through c increase as the sample size decreases? Explain.
8.14 For a population, the value of the standard deviation is 2.65. 
A random sample of 35 observations taken from this population 
produced the following data.
42
51
42
31
28
36
49
29
46
37
32
27
33
41
47
41
28
46
34
39
48
26
35
37
38
46
48
39
29
31
44
41
37
38
46
a. What is the point estimate of μ?
b. Make a 98% confidence interval for μ.
c. What is the margin of error of estimate for part b?
8.15 For a population data set, σ = 12.5.
a. How large a sample should be selected so that the margin of 
error of estimate for a 99% confidence interval for μ is 2.50?
b. How large a sample should be selected so that the margin of 
error of estimate for a 96% confidence interval for μ is 3.20?
8.16 For a population data set, σ = 14.50.
a. What should the sample size be for a 98% confidence interval 
for μ to have a margin of error of estimate equal to 5.50?
b. What should the sample size be for a 95% confidence interval 
for μ to have a margin of error of estimate equal to 4.25?
8.17 Determine the sample size for the estimate of μ for the 
following.
a. E = 2.3, 
σ = 15.40, 
confidence level = 99%
b. E = 4.1, 
σ = 23.45, 
confidence level = 95%
c. E = 25.9, 
σ = 122.25, 
confidence level = 90%
8.18 Determine the sample size for the estimate of μ for the 
following.
a. E = .17, 
σ = .90, 
confidence level = 99%
b. E = 1.45, 
σ = 5.82, 
confidence level = 95%
c. E = 5.65, 
σ = 18.20, 
confidence level = 90%
APPLICATIONS
8.19 A city planner wants to estimate the average monthly residen-
tial water usage in the city. He selected a random sample of 40 house-
holds from the city, which gave a mean water usage of 3415.70 gallons 
over a 1-month period. Based on earlier data, the population standard 
deviation of the monthly residential water usage in this city is 389.60 
gallons. Make a 95% confidence interval for the average monthly 
residential water usage for all households in this city.
8.20 Lazurus Steel Corporation produces iron rods that are sup-
posed to be 36 inches long. The machine that makes these rods does 
not produce each rod exactly 36 inches long; the lengths of the rods 
vary slightly. It is known that when the machine is working properly, 
the mean length of the rods made on this machine is 36 inches. The 
standard deviation of the lengths of all rods produced on this machine 
is always equal to .10 inch. The quality control department takes a 
random sample of 20 such rods every week, calculates the mean 
length of these rods, and makes a 99% confidence interval for the 
population mean. If either the upper limit of this confidence interval is 
greater than 36.05 inches or the lower limit of this confidence interval 
is less than 35.95 inches, the machine is stopped and adjusted. A 
www.ebook3000.com

324
Chapter 8 Estimation of the Mean and Proportion
This section explains how to construct a confidence interval for the population mean μ when the 
population standard deviation σ is not known. Here, again, there are three possible cases:
Case I. If the following three conditions are fulfilled:
1. 
The population standard deviation σ is not known
2. 
The sample size is small (i.e., n < 30)
3. 
The population from which the sample is selected is approximately normally distributed, 
then we use the t distribution (explained in Section 8.3.1) to make the confidence interval for μ.
Case II. If the following two conditions are fulfilled:
1. 
The population standard deviation σ is not known
2. 
The sample size is large (i.e., n ≥30), 
then again we use the t distribution to make the confidence interval for μ.
Case III. If the following three conditions are fulfilled:
1. 
The population standard deviation σ is not known
2. 
The sample size is small (i.e., n < 30)
3. 
 The population from which the sample is selected is not normally distributed (or its distribu-
tion is unknown), 
then we use a nonparametric method to make the confidence interval for μ. Such procedures are 
covered in Chapter 15, which is on the Web site for this text.
 
The following chart summarizes the above three cases.
Use the t distribution 
to estimate μ
Use a nonparametric method 
to estimate μ
Case I
1. n < 30
2.  Population is approximately normal
Case II
n ≥ 30
Case III
1. n < 30
2.  Population is not normal
σ Is Not Known
 
In the next subsection, we discuss the t distribution, and then in Section 8.3.2 we show how 
to use the t distribution to make a confidence interval for μ when σ is not known and conditions 
of Cases I or II are satisfied.
8.3.1 The t Distribution
The t distribution was developed by W. S. Gosset in 1908 and published under the pseudonym 
Student. As a result, the t distribution is also called Student’s t distribution. The t distribution is 
similar to the normal distribution in some respects. Like the normal distribution curve, the t dis-
tribution curve is symmetric (bell shaped) about the mean and never meets the horizontal axis. 
The total area under a t distribution curve is 1.0, or 100%. However, the t distribution curve is 
flatter and wider than the standard normal distribution curve. In other words, the t distribution 
curve has a lower height and a greater spread (or, we can say, a larger standard deviation) than the 
8.3 Estimation of a Population Mean: σ Not Known

8.3 Estimation of a Population Mean: σ Not Known
325
standard normal distribution. However, as the sample size increases, the t distribution approaches 
the standard normal distribution. The units of a t distribution are denoted by t.
 
The shape of a particular t distribution curve depends on the number of degrees of freedom 
(df). For the purpose of this chapter and Chapter 9, the number of degrees of freedom for a t 
distribution is equal to the sample size minus one, that is,
df = n −1
The number of degrees of freedom is the only parameter of the t distribution. There is a different 
t distribution for each number of degrees of freedom. Like the standard normal distribution, the 
mean of the t distribution is 0. But unlike the standard normal distribution, whose standard devi-
ation is 1, the standard deviation of a t distribution is √df∕(df −2) for df > 2. Thus, the standard 
deviation of a t distribution is always greater than 1 and, hence, is larger than the standard devia-
tion of the standard normal distribution.
The t Distribution The t distribution is a specific type of bell-shaped distribution with a lower 
height and a greater spread than the standard normal distribution. As the sample size becomes 
larger, the t distribution approaches the standard normal distribution. The t distribution has only 
one parameter, called the degrees of freedom (df). The mean of the t distribution is equal to 0, 
and its standard deviation is √df∕(df −2).
 
Figure 8.5 shows the standard normal distribution and the t distribution for 9 degrees of 
freedom. The standard deviation of the standard normal distribution is 1.0, and the standard 
deviation of the t distribution is √df∕(df −2) = √9∕(9 −2) = 1.134.
 
As stated earlier, the number of degrees of freedom for a t distribution for the purpose of 
this chapter is n − 1. The number of degrees of freedom is defined as the number of observa-
tions that can be chosen freely. As an example, suppose we know that the mean of four values 
is 20. Consequently, the sum of these four values is 20(4) = 80. Now, how many values out of 
four can we choose freely so that the sum of these four values is 80? The answer is that we 
can freely choose 4 − 1 = 3 values. Suppose we choose 27, 8, and 19 as the three values. 
Given these three values and the information that the sum of the four values is 20 × 4 = 80, 
the fourth value is 80 − 27 − 8 − 19 = 26. Thus, once we have chosen three values, the fourth 
value is automatically determined. Consequently, the number of degrees of freedom for this 
example is
df = n −1 = 4 −1 = 3
We subtract 1 from n because we lose 1 degree of freedom to calculate the mean.
 
Table V of Appendix B lists the values of t for the given number of degrees of freedom and 
areas in the right tail of a t distribution. Because the t distribution is symmetric, these are also the 
values of −t for the same number of degrees of freedom and the same areas in the left tail of the 
t distribution. Example 8–4 describes how to read Table V of Appendix B.
The standard deviation
of the standard normal
distribution is 1.0
The standard deviation
of the t distribution with
9 df is 9/(9 − 2) =
√ 
1.134
μ = 0
Figure 8.5 The t distribution for df = 9 and the standard 
normal distribution.
www.ebook3000.com

326
Chapter 8 Estimation of the Mean and Proportion
EXAMPLE 8–4
Find the value of t for 16 degrees of freedom and .05 area in the right tail of a t distribution curve.
Solution In Table V of Appendix B, we locate 16 in the column of degrees of freedom (labeled df ) 
and .05 in the row of Area in the right tail under the t distribution curve at the top of the table. 
The entry at the intersection of the row of 16 and the column of .05, which is 1.746, gives the 
required value of t. The relevant portion of Table V of Appendix B is shown here as Table 8.2. The 
value of t read from the t distribution table is shown in Figure 8.6.
Reading the t distribution table.
The required value of t for 16 df 
and .05 area in the right tail
Area in the right tail
Table 8.2 Determining t for 16 df and .05 Area in the Right Tail
 
Area in the Right Tail Under the t Distribution Curve
 
df 
.10 
.05 
.025 
. . . 
.001
 
1 
3.078 
6.314 
12.706 
. . . 
318.309
 
2 
1.886 
2.920 
4.303 
. . . 
22.327
 
3 
1.638 
2.353 
3.182 
. . . 
10.215
 
. 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
 
. 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
 
. 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
         16 
1.337 
1.746 
2.120 
. . . 
3.686
 
. 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
 
. 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
 
. 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
 
75 
1.293 
1.665 
1.992 
. . . 
3.202
 
∞ 
1.282 
1.645 
1.960 
. . . 
3.090
df
 
Because of the symmetric shape of the t distribution curve, the value of t for 16 degrees of 
freedom and .05 area in the left tail is −1.746. Figure 8.7 illustrates this case.
t
−1.746
0
.05
df  = 16
Figure 8.7 The value of t for 16 df and .05 area in the 
left tail.
0
.05
1.746
t
df = 16
This is the required 
value of t
Figure 8.6 The value of t for 16 df and .05 area in the right tail.
◼
− − − − − −− − →

8.3 Estimation of a Population Mean: σ Not Known
327
8.3.2 Confidence Interval for μ Using the t Distribution
To reiterate, when the conditions mentioned under Cases I or II in the beginning of this 
section hold true, we use the t distribution to construct a confidence interval for the popula-
tion mean μ.
 
When the population standard deviation σ is not known, then we replace it by the sample 
standard deviation s, which is its estimator. Consequently, for the standard deviation of x, 
we use
sx =
s
√n
for σ x = σ∕√n. Note that the value of sx is a point estimate of σ x.
 
Examples 8–5 and 8–6 describe the procedure of constructing a confidence interval for μ 
using the t distribution.
EXAMPLE 8–5 
Premium for Health Insurance Coverage
According to a 2014 Kaiser Family Foundation Health Benefits Survey released in 2015, the total 
mean cost of employer-sponsored family health coverage was $16,834 per family per year, of 
which workers were paying an average of $4823. A recent random sample of 25 workers from 
New York City who have employer-provided health insurance coverage paid an average premium 
of $6600 for family health insurance coverage with a standard deviation of $800. Make a 95% 
confidence interval for the current average premium paid for family health insurance coverage by 
all workers in New York City who have employer-provided health insurance coverage. Assume 
that the distribution of premiums paid for family health insurance coverage by all workers in New 
York City who have employer-provided health insurance coverage is approximately normally 
distributed.
Solution Here, σ is not known, n < 30, and the population is normally distributed. All condi-
tions mentioned in Case I of the chart given in the beginning of this section are satisfied. There-
fore, we will use the t distribution to make a confidence interval for μ. From the given information,
n = 25,  x = $6600,  s = $800,  Confidence level = 95% or .95
The value of sx is
sx =
s
√n
= 800
√25
= $160
 
To find the value of t from Table V of Appendix B, we need to know the degrees of freedom 
and the area under the t distribution curve in each tail.
Degrees of freedom = n −1 = 25 −1 = 24
Constructing a 95% confidence 
interval for μ using the 
t distribution.
Confidence Interval for μ Using the t Distribution The (1 − α)100% confidence interval for μ is
x ± t sx
where 
sx =
s
√n
The value of t is obtained from the t distribution table for n − 1 degrees of freedom and the given 
confidence level. Here t sx is the margin of error or the maximum error of the estimate; that is,
E = t sx
www.ebook3000.com

328
Chapter 8 Estimation of the Mean and Proportion
 
To find the area in each tail, we divide the confidence level by 2 and subtract the number 
obtained from .5. Thus,
Area in each tail = .5 −(.95∕2) = .5 −.4750 = .025
 
From the t distribution table, Table V of Appendix B, the value of t for df = 24 and .025 area 
in the right tail is 2.064. The value of t is shown in Figure 8.8.
 
By substituting all values in the formula for the confidence interval for μ, we obtain the 95% 
confidence interval as
x ± t sx = 6600 ± 2.064 (160) = 6600 ± 330.24 = $6269.76 to $6930.24
 
Thus, we can state with 95% confidence that the current average premium paid for family 
health insurance coverage by all workers in New York City who have employer-provided health 
insurance coverage is between $6269.76 and $6930.24.
 
Note that x = $6600 is a point estimate of μ in this example, and $330.24 is the margin 
of error.  
◼
EXAMPLE 8–6 
Annual Expenses on Books
Sixty-four randomly selected adults who buy books for general reading were asked how much 
they usually spend on books per year. This sample produced a mean of $1450 and a standard 
deviation of $300 for such annual expenses. Determine a 99% confidence interval for the corre-
sponding population mean.
Solution From the given information,
n = 64, x = $1450, s = $300,
and 
Confidence level = 99% or .99
Here σ is not known, but the sample size is large (n ≥30). Hence, we will use the t distribution 
to make a confidence interval for μ. First we calculate the standard deviation of x, the number of 
degrees of freedom, and the area in each tail of the t distribution.
 sx =
s
√n
= 300
√64
= $37.50
 df = n −1 = 64 −1 = 63
 Area in each tail = .5 −(.99∕2) = .5 −.4950 = .005
From the t distribution table, t = 2.656 for 63 degrees of freedom and .005 area in the right tail. 
The 99% confidence interval for μ is
 x ± tsx = $1450 ± 2.656(37.50)
 = $1450 ± $99.60 = $1350.40 to $1549.60
 
Thus, we can state with 99% confidence that based on this sample the mean annual expend-
iture on books by all adults who buy books for general reading is between $1350.40 and 
$1549.60. 
◼ 
Constructing a 99% confidence 
interval for μ using the 
t distribution.
.025
−2.064
df = 24
.4750
.4750
0
2.064
t
.025
Figure 8.8 The value of t.
PhotoDisc, Inc./Getty Images

8.3 Estimation of a Population Mean: σ Not Known
329
 
Again, we can decrease the width of a confidence interval for μ either by lowering the con-
fidence level or by increasing the sample size, as was done in Section 8.2. However, increasing 
the sample size is the better alternative.
Note: What If the Sample Size Is Large and the Number 
of df Is Not in the t Distribution Table?
In the above section, when σ is not known, we used the t distribution to make a confidence inter-
val for μ in Cases I and II. Note that in Case II, the sample size must be large. If we have access 
to technology, it does not matter how large (greater than 30) the sample size is; we can use the t 
distribution. However, if we are using the t distribution table (Table V of Appendix B), this may 
pose a problem. Usually such a table goes only up to a certain number of degrees of freedom. For 
example, Table V in Appendix B goes only up to 75 degrees of freedom. Thus, if the sample size 
is larger than 76, we cannot use Table V to find the t value for the given confidence level to use 
in the confidence interval. In such a situation when n is large (for example, 500) and the number 
of df is not included in the t distribution table, there are two options:
1. 
Use the t value from the last row (the row of ∞) in Table V.
2. 
Use the normal distribution as an approximation to the t distribution.
 
Note that the t values you will obtain from the last row of the t distribution table are the same 
as obtained from the normal distribution table for the same confidence levels, the only difference 
being the decimal places. To use the normal distribution as an approximation to the t distribution 
to make a confidence interval for μ, the procedure is exactly like the one in Section 8.2, except 
that now we replace σ by s, and σ x by sx.
 
Again, note that here we can use the normal distribution as a convenience and as an approx-
imation, but if we can, we should use the t distribution by using technology.
EXERCISES
8.35 a.  Find the value of t from the t distribution table for a sample 
size of 22 and a confidence level of 95%.
b. Find the value of t from the t distribution table for 60 degrees 
of freedom and a 90% confidence level.
c. Find the value of t from the t distribution table for a sample 
size of 24 and a confidence level of 99%.
8.36 A random sample of 18 observations taken from a normally 
distributed population produced the following data:
28.4 
27.3 25.5 
25.5 31.1 
23.0 
26.3 
24.6 
28.4
37.2 
23.9 28.7 
27.9 25.1 
27.2 
25.3 
22.6 
22.7
a. What is the point estimate of μ?
b. Make a 99% confidence interval for μ.
c. What is the margin of error of estimate for μ in part b?
8.37 A random sample of 11 observations taken from a normally 
distributed population produced the following data:
−7.1 10.3 8.7 −3.6 −6.0 −7.5 5.2 3.7 9.8 −4.4 6.4
a. What is the point estimate of μ?
b. Make a 95% confidence interval for μ.
c. What is the margin of error of estimate for μ in part b?
8.38 Suppose, for a random sample selected from a normally dis-
tributed population, x = 68.50 and s = 8.9.
a. Construct a 95% confidence interval for μ assuming n = 16.
b. Construct a 90% confidence interval for μ assuming n = 16. 
Is the width of the 90% confidence interval smaller than the 
width of the 95% confidence interval calculated in part a? If 
yes, explain why.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
8.28 Briefly explain the similarities and the differences between the 
standard normal distribution and the t distribution.
8.29 What are the parameters of a normal distribution and a t distri-
bution? Explain.
8.30 Briefly explain the meaning of the degrees of freedom for a t 
distribution. Give one example.
8.31 What assumptions must hold true to use the t distribution to 
make a confidence interval for μ?
8.32 Find the value of t for the t distribution for each of the following.
a. Area in the right tail = .05 and df = 12 
b. Area in the left tail = .025 and n = 66
c. Area in the left tail = .001 and df = 49 
d. Area in the right tail = .005 and n = 24
8.33   a.  Find the value of t for the t distribution with a sample size of 
21 and area in the left tail equal to .10.
b. Find the value of t for the t distribution with a sample size of 
14 and area in the right tail equal to .025.
c. Find the value of t for the t distribution with 45 degrees of 
freedom and .001 area in the right tail.
d. Find the value of t for the t distribution with 37 degrees of 
freedom and .005 area in the left tail.
8.34 For each of the following, find the area in the appropriate tail 
of the t distribution.
a. t = −1.302 and df = 42 
b. t = 2.797 and n = 25
c. t = 1.397 and n = 9 
d. t = −2.383 and df = 67
www.ebook3000.com

330
Chapter 8 Estimation of the Mean and Proportion
c. Find a 95% confidence interval for μ assuming n = 25. Is the 
width of the 95% confidence interval for μ with n = 25 
smaller than the width of the 95% confidence interval for μ 
with n = 16 calculated in part a? If so, why? Explain.
8.39 a.  A random sample of 400 observations taken from a population 
produced a sample mean equal to 92.45 and a standard devia-
tion equal to 12.20. Make a 98% confidence interval for μ.
b. Another sample of 400 observations taken from the same 
population produced a sample mean equal to 91.75 and a 
standard deviation equal to 14.50. Make a 98% confidence 
interval for μ.
c. A third sample of 400 observations taken from the same 
population produced a sample mean equal to 89.63 and a 
standard deviation equal to 13.40. Make a 98% confidence 
interval for μ.
d. The true population mean for this population is 90.65. Which 
of the confidence intervals constructed in parts a through c 
cover this population mean and which do not?
APPLICATIONS
8.40 According to the 2015 Physician Compensation Report by 
Medscape (a subsidiary of WebMD), American orthopedists earned 
an average of $421,000 in 2014. Suppose that this mean is based on a 
random sample of 200 American orthopaedists, and the standard devi-
ation for this sample is $90,000. Make a 90% confidence interval for 
the population mean μ.
8.41 Almost all employees working for financial companies in New 
York City receive large bonuses at the end of the year. A random 
sample of 65 employees selected from financial companies in New 
York City showed that they received an average bonus of $55,000 last 
year with a standard deviation of $18,000. Construct a 95% confi-
dence interval for the average bonus that all employees working for 
financial companies in New York City received last year.
8.42 The high price of medicines is a source of major expense for 
those seniors in the United States who have to pay for these medicines 
themselves. A random sample of 2000 seniors who pay for their 
medicines showed that they spent an average of $4600 last year on 
medicines with a standard deviation of $800. Make a 98% confidence 
interval for the corresponding population mean.
8.43 A random sample of 36 mid-sized cars tested for fuel con-
sumption gave a mean of 26.4 miles per gallon with a standard devia-
tion of 2.3 miles per gallon.
a. Find a 99% confidence interval for the population mean, μ.
b. Suppose the confidence interval obtained in part a is too 
wide. How can the width of this interval be reduced? 
Describe all possible alternatives. Which alternative is the 
best and why?
8.44 The mean time taken to design a house plan by 40 architects 
was found to be 23 hours with a standard deviation of 3.75 hours.
a. Construct a 98% confidence interval for the population mean μ.
b. Suppose the confidence interval obtained in part a is too 
wide. How can the width of this interval be reduced? 
Describe all possible alternatives. Which alternative is the 
best and why?
8.45 A company randomly selected nine office employees and 
secretly monitored their computers for one month. The times (in hours) 
spent by these employees using their computers for non–job-related 
activities (playing games, personal communications, etc.) during this 
month are as follows:
7
12
9
8
11
4
14
1
6
Assuming that such times for all employees are approximately nor-
mally distributed, make a 95% confidence interval for the correspond-
ing population mean for all employees of this company.
8.46 A businesswoman is considering whether to open a coffee shop 
in a local shopping center. Before making this decision, she wants to 
know how much money, on average, people spend per week at coffee 
shops in that area. She took a random sample of 26 customers from 
the area who visit coffee shops and asked them to record the amount 
of money (in dollars) they would spend during the next week at coffee 
shops. At the end of the week, she obtained the following data (in dollars) 
from these 26 customers:
 16.96 38.83 15.28 14.84 
5.99 64.50 12.15 14.68 33.37
 37.10 18.15 67.89 12.17 40.13 
5.51 
8.80 34.53 35.54
 8.51 37.18 41.52 13.83 12.96 22.78 
5.29 
9.09
Assume that the distribution of weekly expenditures at coffee shops 
by all customers who visit coffee shops in this area is approximately 
normal.
a. What is the point estimate of the corresponding population 
mean?
b. Make a 95% confidence interval for the average amount of 
money spent per week at coffee shops by all customers who 
visit coffee shops in this area.
8.47 A random sample of 34 participants in a Zumba dance class 
had their heart rates measured before and after a moderate 10-minute 
workout. The following data correspond to the increase in each indi-
vidual’s heart rate (in beats per minute):
59 
70 
57 
42 
57 
59 
41 
54 
44 
36 
59 
61
52 
42 
41 
32 
60 
54 
52 
53 
51 
47 
62 
62
44 
69 
50 
37 
50 
54 
48 
52 
61 
45
a. What is the point estimate of the corresponding population 
mean?
b. Make a 98% confidence interval for the average increase in a 
person’s heart rate after a moderate 10-minute Zumba workout.
8.48 The following data give the one-way commuting times (in 
minutes) from home to work for a random sample of 30 workers.
 
23 
17 
34 
26 
18 
33 
46 
42 
12 
37
 
44 
15 
22 
19 
28 
32 
18 
39 
40 
48
 
25 
36 
23 
39 
42 
46 
29 
17 
24 
31
a. Calculate the value of the point estimate of the mean one-way 
commuting time from home to work for all workers.
b. Construct a 99% confidence interval for the mean one-way 
commuting time from home to work for all workers.
 *8.49 You are working for a supermarket. The manager has asked you 
to estimate the mean time taken by a cashier to serve customers at this 
supermarket. Briefly explain how you will conduct this study. Collect 
data on the time taken by any supermarket cashier to serve 40 customers. 
Then estimate the population mean. Choose your own confidence level.
 *8.50 You are working for a bank. The bank manager wants to know 
the mean waiting time for all customers who visit this bank. She has 
asked you to estimate this mean by taking a sample. Briefly explain 
how you will conduct this study. Collect data on the waiting times for 
45 customers who visit a bank. Then estimate the population mean. 
Choose your own confidence level.

8.4 Estimation of a Population Proportion: Large Samples
331
8.4 Estimation of a Population Proportion: Large Samples
Often we want to estimate the population proportion or percentage. (Recall that a percentage is 
obtained by multiplying the proportion by 100.) For example, the production manager of a 
company may want to estimate the proportion of defective items produced on a machine. A bank 
manager may want to find the percentage of customers who are satisfied with the service pro-
vided by the bank.
 
Again, if we can conduct a census each time we want to find the value of a population pro-
portion, there is no need to learn the procedures discussed in this section. However, we usually 
derive our results from sample surveys. Hence, to take into account the variability in the results 
obtained from different sample surveys, we need to know the procedures for estimating a popula-
tion proportion.
 
Recall from Chapter 7 that the population proportion is denoted by p, and the sample propor-
tion is denoted by pˆ. This section explains how to estimate the population proportion, p, using the 
sample proportion, pˆ. The sample proportion, pˆ, is a sample statistic, and it possesses a sampling 
distribution. From Chapter 7, we know that:
1. The sampling distribution of the sample proportion pˆ is approximately normal for a large 
sample.
2. 
The mean of the sampling distribution of pˆ, μpˆ, is equal to the population proportion, p.
3. 
The standard deviation of the sampling distribution of pˆ is σpˆ = √pq∕n, where q = 1 − p, 
 
given that n
N ≤.05.
In the case of a proportion, a sample is considered to be large if np and nq are both greater than 5. 
If p and q are not known, then npˆ and nqˆ should each be greater than 5 for the sample to be large.
 
When estimating the value of a population proportion, we do not know the values of p and q. 
Consequently, we cannot compute σpˆ . Therefore, in the estimation of a population proportion, 
we use the value of spˆ as an estimate of σpˆ. The value of spˆ is calculated using the following 
formula.
 Remember
Estimator of the Standard Deviation of pˆ The value of spˆ, which gives a point estimate of σpˆ, is 
calculated as follows. Here, spˆ is an estimator of σpˆ.
spˆ = B
pˆqˆ
n
Note that the condition n
N ≤.05 must hold true to use this formula.
Confidence Interval for the Population Proportion, p For a large sample, the (1 − α)100% 
confidence interval for the population proportion, p, is
pˆ ± z spˆ
The value of z is obtained from the standard normal distribution table for the given confidence 
level, and spˆ = √pˆ qˆ∕n. The term z spˆ is called the margin of error, or the maximum error of 
the estimate, and is denoted by E.
 
The sample proportion, pˆ, is the point estimator of the corresponding population proportion p. 
Then to find the confidence interval for p, we add to and subtract from pˆ a number that is called 
the margin of error, E.
 
Examples 8–7 and 8–8 illustrate the procedure for constructing a confidence interval for p.
www.ebook3000.com

332
Chapter 8 Estimation of the Mean and Proportion
EXAMPLE 8–7 
Having Basic Needs Met as the American Dream
PolicyInteractive of Eugene, Oregon, conducted a study in April 2014 for the Center for a New 
American Dream that included a sample of 1821 American adults. Seventy five percent of the 
people included in this study said that having basic needs met is very or extremely important in 
their vision of the American dream (www.newdream.org).
(a) What is the point estimate of the corresponding population proportion?
(b) Find, with a 99% confidence level, the percentage of all American adults who will say 
that having basic needs met is very or extremely important in their vision of the American 
dream. What is the margin of error of this estimate?
Solution Let p be the proportion of all American adults who will say that having basic needs 
met is very or extremely important in their vision of the American dream, and let pˆ be the 
corresponding sample proportion. From the given information,
n = 1821,  
pˆ =.75,  and  qˆ = 1 − pˆ = 1 − .75 = .25
First, we calculate the value of the standard deviation of the sample proportion as follows:
 
spˆ = B
pˆqˆ
n = B
(.75)(.25)
1821
= .010147187
Note that npˆ and nqˆ are both greater than 5. (The reader should check this condition.) Conse-
quently, the sampling distribution of pˆ is approximately normal and we will use the normal dis-
tribution to make a confidence interval about p.
(a) The point estimate of the proportion of all American adults who will say that having 
basic needs met is very or extremely important in their vision of the American dream is 
equal to .75; that is,
Point estimate of p = pˆ = .75
(b) The confidence level is 99%, or .99. To find z for a 99% confidence level, first we find 
the area in each of the two tails of the normal distribution curve, which is (1 − .99)/2 = 
.0050. Then, we look for .0050 and .0050 + .99 = .9950 areas in the normal distribution 
table to find the two values of z. These two z values are (approximately) −2.58 and 2.58. 
Thus, we will use z = 2.58 in the confidence interval formula. Substituting all the values 
in the confidence interval formula for p, we obtain
 pˆ ± z spˆ = .75 ± 2.58 (.010147187) = .75 ± .026
 = .724 to .776 or 72.4% to 77.6%
Thus, we can state with 99% confidence that .724 to .776 or 72.4% to 77.6% of all 
American adults will say that having basic needs met is very or extremely important in 
their vision of the American dream.
The margin of error associated with this estimate of p is .026 or 2.6%, that is,
 
Margin of error = z spˆ = .026 or 2.6% 
◼
EXAMPLE 8–8 
Excited About Learning in College
According to a Gallup-Purdue University study of college graduates conducted during February 4 
to March 7, 2014, 63% of college graduates polled said that they had at least one college profes-
sor who made them feel excited about learning (www.gallup.com). Suppose that this study was 
based on a random sample of 2000 college graduates. Construct a 97% confidence interval for the 
corresponding population proportion.
Solution Let p be the proportion of all college graduates who would say that they had at least 
one college professor who made them feel excited about learning, and let pˆ be the corresponding 
sample proportion. From the given information,
n = 2000,  
pˆ = .63,  qˆ = 1 − pˆ = 1 − .63 = .37
Finding the point estimate and 
99% confidence interval for p: 
large sample.
Constructing a 97% confidence 
interval for p: large sample.

8.4 Estimation of a Population Proportion: Large Samples
333
and
Confidence level = 97% or .97
The standard deviation of the sample proportion is
 
spˆ = B
pˆqˆ
n = B
(.63)(.37)
2000
= .01079583
Note that if we check npˆ and nqˆ, both will be greater than 5. Consequently, we can use the normal 
distribution to make a confidence interval for p.
 
From the normal distribution table, the value of z for the 97% confidence level is 2.17. Note 
that to find this z value, you will look for the areas .0150 and .9850 in Table IV of Appendix B. 
Substituting all the values in the formula, the 97% confidence interval for p is
 pˆ ± z spˆ = .63 ± 2.17(.01079583) = .63 ± .023
 = .607 to .653 or 60.7% to 65.3%
 
Thus, we can state with 97% confidence that the proportion of all college graduates who 
would say that they had at least one college professor who made them feel excited about learning 
is between .607 and .653 or between 60.7% and 65.3%. 
◼
 
Again, we can decrease the width of a confidence interval for p either by lowering the con-
fidence level or by increasing the sample size. However, lowering the confidence level is not a 
good choice because it simply decreases the likelihood that the confidence interval contains p. 
Hence, to decrease the width of a confidence interval for p, we should always choose to increase 
the sample size.
8.4.1 Determining the Sample Size for the Estimation of Proportion
Just as we did with the mean, we can also determine the minimum sample size for estimating the 
population proportion to within a predetermined margin of error, E. By knowing the sample size 
that can give us the required results, we can save our scarce resources by not taking an unneces-
sarily large sample. From earlier discussion in this section, the margin of error, E, of the interval 
estimate of the population proportion is
E = z spˆ = z × B
pˆqˆ
n
By manipulating this expression algebraically, we obtain the following formula to find the 
required sample size given E, pˆ, qˆ, and z.
Determining the Sample Size for the Estimation of p Given the confidence level and the values 
of pˆ and qˆ, the sample size that will produce a predetermined margin of error E of the confidence 
interval estimate of p is
n = z2pˆqˆ
E2
 
We can observe from this formula that to find n, we need to know the values of pˆ and qˆ. 
However, the values of pˆ and qˆ are not known to us. In such a situation, we can choose one of the 
following two alternatives.
1. 
We make the most conservative estimate of the sample size n by using pˆ = .50 and qˆ = .50. 
For a given E, these values of pˆ and qˆ will give us the largest sample size in comparison to 
any other pair of values of pˆ and qˆ because the product of pˆ = .50 and qˆ = .50 is greater 
than the product of any other pair of values for pˆ and qˆ.
2. 
We take a preliminary sample (of arbitrarily determined size) and calculate pˆ and qˆ for this 
sample. Then, we use these values of pˆ and qˆ to find n.
www.ebook3000.com

 
Examples 8–9 and 8–10 illustrate how to determine the sample size that will produce the 
error of estimation for the population proportion within a predetermined margin of error value. 
Example 8–9 gives the most conservative estimate of n, and Example 8–10 uses the results from 
a preliminary sample to determine the required sample size.
AMERICANS’ 
EFFORTS TO LOSE 
WEIGHT STILL 
TRAIL DESIRES
CASE STUDY 8–2
The Gallup polling agency conducted a poll of 828 American adults aged 18 and over on the issue of weight. 
These adults were asked if they want to lose weight and if they were seriously trying to lose weight. As shown 
in the graph, 51% of these adults said that they want to lose weight but only 26% said that they were seri-
ously trying to lose weight. The poll was conducted November 6 to 9, 2014. As these percentages are based 
on a sample, using the procedure learned in this section, we can make a confidence interval for each of the 
two population proportions as shown in the table below.
Category 
Sample Proportion 
Conﬁ dence Interval
Adults who want to lose weight 
.51 
.51 ± z spˆ
Adults who are seriously trying to lose weight 
.26 
.26 ± z spˆ
For each of the two confidence intervals listed in the table, we can substitute the value of z and the value of spˆ, 
which is calculated as B
pˆqˆ
n . For example, suppose we want to find a 96% confidence interval for the 
proportion of all adults who will say that they want to lose weight. Then this confidence interval is determined 
as follows.
 spˆ = B
pˆqˆ
n = B
(.51)(.49)
828
= .01737273
 pˆ ± z spˆ = .51 ± 2.05 (.01737273) = .51 ± .036 = .474 to .546
Thus, we can state with 96% confidence that 47.4% to 54.6% of all adults will say that they want to lose 
weight. Here the margin of error is .036 or 3.6%.
 
In the same way, we can find the confidence interval for the population proportion of all adults who will 
say that they are seriously trying to lose weight.
Source: http://www.gallup.com/
poll/179771/americans-effort-lose-
weight-trails-desire.aspx.
AMERICANS’ EFFORTS TO LOSE WEIGHT STILL TRAIL DESIRES
Want to lose weight
26%
Seriously trying to lose weight
Data source: www.gallup.com
51%
Fine Chocolates
334

8.4 Estimation of a Population Proportion: Large Samples
335
EXAMPLE 8–9 
Proportion of Parts That Are Defective
Lombard Electronics Company has just installed a new machine that makes a part that is used in 
clocks. The company wants to estimate the proportion of these parts produced by this machine 
that are defective. The company manager wants this estimate to be within .02 of the population 
proportion for a 95% confidence level. What is the most conservative estimate of the sample size 
that will limit the margin of error to within .02 of the population proportion?
Solution The company manager wants the 95% confidence interval to be
pˆ ± .02
Therefore,
E = .02
The value of z for a 95% confidence level is 1.96. For the most conservative estimate of the 
sample size, we will use pˆ = .50 and qˆ = .50. Hence, the required sample size is
n = z2pˆqˆ
E2 = (1.96)2(.50)(.50)
(.02)2
= 2401
 
Thus, if the company takes a sample of 2401 parts, there is a 95% chance that the estimate 
of p will be within .02 of the population proportion. 
◼ 
EXAMPLE 8–10 
Proportion of Parts That Are Defective
Consider Example 8–9 again. Suppose a preliminary sample of 200 parts produced by this 
machine showed that 7% of them are defective. How large a sample should the company select 
so that the 95% confidence interval for p is within .02 of the population proportion?
Solution Again, the company wants the 95% confidence interval for p to be
pˆ ± .02
Hence,
E = .02
The value of z for a 95% confidence level is 1.96. From the preliminary sample,
pˆ = .07  and  qˆ = 1 −.07 = .93
Using these values of pˆ and qˆ, we obtain
n = z2pˆqˆ
E2 = (1.96)2(.07)(.93)
(.02)2
= (3.8416)(.07)(.93)
.0004
= 625.22 ≈626
 
Note that if the value of n is not an integer, we always round it up.
 
Thus, if the company takes a sample of 626 items, there is a 95% chance that the estimate of 
p will be within .02 of the population proportion. However, we should note that this sample size 
will produce the margin of error within .02 only if pˆ is .07 or less for the new sample. If pˆ for the 
new sample happens to be much higher than .07, the margin of error will not be within .02. There-
fore, to avoid such a situation, we may be more conservative and take a sample much larger than 
626 items. 
◼ 
Determining the most 
conservative estimate of n for 
the estimation of p.
Determining n for the estimation 
of p using preliminary sample 
results.
EXERCISES
8.53 Check if the sample size is large enough to use the normal 
distribution to make a confidence interval for p for each of the follow-
ing cases.
a. n = 50   and 
pˆ = .25 
b. n = 160 and 
pˆ = .03
c. n = 400 and 
pˆ = .65 
d. n = 75   and 
pˆ = .06
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
8.51 What assumption(s) must hold true to use the normal distribu-
tion to make a confidence interval for the population proportion, p?
8.52 What is the point estimator of the population proportion, p?
www.ebook3000.com

336
Chapter 8 Estimation of the Mean and Proportion
b. Construct a 98% confidence interval for the proportion of all 
American adults who are dissatisfied with the way income 
and wealth are distributed in America. What is the margin of 
error for this estimate?
8.62 According to a Gallup poll conducted April 3–6, 2014, 21% of 
Americans aged 18 to 29 said that college loans and/or expenses were 
the top financial problem facing their families. Suppose that this poll 
was based on a random sample of 1450 Americans aged 18 to 29.
a. What is the point estimate of the corresponding population 
proportion?
b. Construct a 95% confidence interval for the proportion of all 
Americans aged 18 to 29 who will say that college loans 
and/or expenses were the top financial problem facing their 
families. What is the margin of error for this estimate?
8.63 It is said that happy and healthy workers are efficient and pro-
ductive. A company that manufactures exercising machines wanted to 
know the percentage of large companies that provide on-site health 
club facilities. A random sample of 240 such companies showed that 
96 of them provide such facilities on site.
a. What is the point estimate of the percentage of all such com-
panies that provide such facilities on site?
b. Construct a 97% confidence interval for the percentage of all 
such companies that provide such facilities on site. What is 
the margin of error for this estimate?
8.64 A mail-order company promises its customers that the prod-
ucts ordered will be mailed within 72 hours after an order is placed. 
The quality control department at the company checks from time to 
time to see if this promise is fulfilled. Recently the quality control 
department took a random sample of 50 orders and found that 35 of 
them were mailed within 72 hours of the placement of the orders.
a. Construct a 98% confidence interval for the percentage of all 
orders that are mailed within 72 hours of their placement.
b. Suppose the confidence interval obtained in part a is too wide. 
How can the width of this interval be reduced? Discuss all 
possible alternatives. Which alternative is the best?
8.65 In a January 2014 survey conducted by the Associated Press-
We TV, 68% of American adults said that owning a home is the most 
important thing or a very important but not the most important thing 
(opportunityagenda.org). Assume that this survey was based on a 
random sample of 900 American adults.
a. Construct a 95% confidence interval for the proportion of all 
American adults who will say that owning a home is the most 
important thing or a very important but not the most impor-
tant thing.
b. Explain why we need to construct a confidence interval. Why 
can we not simply say that 68% of all American adults would 
say that owning a home is the most important thing or a very 
important but not the most important thing?
8.66 A researcher wanted to know the percentage of judges who are 
in favor of the death penalty. He took a random sample of 15 judges 
and asked them whether or not they favor the death penalty. The 
responses of these judges are given here.
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
a. What is the point estimate of the population proportion?
b. Make a 95% confidence interval for the percentage of all 
judges who are in favor of the death penalty.
8.54 Check if the sample size is large enough to use the normal 
distribution to make a confidence interval for p for each of the follow-
ing cases.
a. n = 80 and 
pˆ = .85 
b. n = 110 and 
pˆ = .98
c. n = 35 and 
pˆ = .40 
d. n = 200 and 
pˆ = .08
8.55 a.  A random sample of 1100 observations taken from a popula-
tion produced a sample proportion of .32. Make a 90% confi-
dence interval for p.
b. Another sample of 1100 observations taken from the same 
population produced a sample proportion of .36. Make a 90% 
confidence interval for p.
c. A third sample of 1100 observations taken from the same 
population produced a sample proportion of .30. Make a 90% 
confidence interval for p.
d. The true population proportion for this population is .34. 
Which of the confidence intervals constructed in parts a 
through c cover this population proportion and which do not?
8.56 A random sample of 200 observations selected from a popula-
tion produced a sample proportion equal to .91.
a. Make a 90% confidence interval for p.
b. Construct a 95% confidence interval for p.
c. Make a 99% confidence interval for p.
d. Does the width of the confidence intervals constructed in parts 
a through c increase as the confidence level increases? If yes, 
explain why.
8.57 A random sample selected from a population gave a sample 
proportion equal to .73.
a. Make a 99% confidence interval for p assuming n = 100.
b. Construct a 99% confidence interval for p assuming n = 600.
c. Make a 99% confidence interval for p assuming n = 1500.
d. Does the width of the confidence intervals constructed in parts 
a through c decrease as the sample size increases? If yes, 
explain why.
8.58 a.  How large a sample should be selected so that the margin of 
error of estimate for a 99% confidence interval for p is .035 
when the value of the sample proportion obtained from a 
preliminary sample is .29?
b. Find the most conservative sample size that will produce 
the margin of error for a 99% confidence interval for p equal 
to .035.
8.59 a.  How large a sample should be selected so that the margin of 
error of estimate for a 98% confidence interval for p is .045 
when the value of the sample proportion obtained from a 
preliminary sample is .53?
b. Find the most conservative sample size that will produce the 
margin of error for a 98% confidence interval for p equal to .045.
8.60 Determine the most conservative sample size for the estimation 
of the population proportion for the following.
a. E = .025, confidence level = 95%
b. E = .05, 
confidence level = 90%
c. E = .015, confidence level = 99%
APPLICATIONS
8.61 According to a Gallup poll conducted January 5–8, 2014, 67% 
of American adults were dissatisfied with the way income and wealth 
are distributed in America. Assume that this poll is based on a random 
sample of 1500 American adults.
a. What is the point estimate of the corresponding population 
proportion?

Glossary
337
8.67 The management of a health insurance company wants to 
know the percentage of its policyholders who have tried alternative 
treatments (such as acupuncture, herbal therapy, etc.). A random sample 
of 24 of the company’s policyholders were asked whether or not they 
have ever tried such treatments. The following are their responses.
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
a. What is the point estimate of the corresponding population 
proportion?
b. Construct a 99% confidence interval for the percentage 
of this company’s policyholders who have tried alternative 
treatments.
8.68 A consumer agency wants to estimate the proportion of all 
drivers who wear seat belts while driving. Assume that a preliminary 
study has shown that 76% of drivers wear seat belts while driving. 
How large should the sample size be so that the 99% confidence inter-
val for the population proportion has a margin of error of .03?
8.69 A consumer agency wants to estimate the proportion of all 
drivers who wear seat belts while driving. What is the most conserva-
tive estimate of the minimum sample size that would limit the margin 
of error to within .03 of the population proportion for a 99% confi-
dence interval?
 *8.70 You want to estimate the proportion of students at your 
college who hold off-campus (part-time or full-time) jobs. Briefly 
explain how you will make such an estimate. Collect data from 40 
students at your college on whether or not they hold off-campus jobs. 
Then calculate the proportion of students in this sample who hold off-
campus jobs. Using this information, estimate the population propor-
tion. Select your own confidence level.
 *8.71 You want to estimate the percentage of students at your college 
or university who are satisfied with the campus food services. Briefly 
explain how you will make such an estimate. Select a sample of 30 stu-
dents and ask them whether or not they are satisfied with the campus food 
services. Then calculate the percentage of students in the sample who are 
satisfied. Using this information, find the confidence interval for the cor-
responding population percentage. Select your own confidence level.
USES AND MISUSES...
NATIONAL VERSUS LOCAL 
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE
Reading a newspaper article, you learn that the national unemploy-
ment rate is 5.1%. The next month you read another article that states 
that a recent survey in your area, based on a random sample of the 
labor force, estimates that the local unemployment rate is 4.7% with 
a margin of error of .5%. Thus, you conclude that the unemployment 
rate in your area is somewhere between 4.2% and 5.2%.
 
So, what does this say about the local unemployment picture in 
your area versus the national unemployment situation? Since a major 
portion of the interval for the local unemployment rate is below 5.1%, 
is it reasonable to conclude that the local unemployment rate is below 
the national unemployment rate? Not really. When looking at the 
confidence interval, you have some degree of confidence, usually 
between 90% and 99%. If we use z = 1.96 to calculate the margin of 
error, which is the z value for a 95% confidence level, we can state 
that we are 95% confident that the local unemployment rate falls in 
the interval we obtain by using the margin of error. However, since 
5.1% is in the interval for the local unemployment rate, the one thing 
that you can say is that it appears reasonable to conclude that the 
local and national unemployment rates are not different. However, if 
the national rate was 5.3%, then a conclusion that the two rates differ 
is reasonable because we are confident that the local unemployment 
rate falls between 4.2% and 5.2%.
 
When making conclusions based on the types of confidence 
intervals you have learned and will learn in this course, you will only 
be able to conclude that either there is a difference or there is not a 
difference. However, the methods you will learn in Chapter 9 will also 
allow you to determine the validity of a conclusion that states that the 
local rate is lower (or higher) than the national rate.
Estimator The sample statistic that is used to estimate a population 
parameter.
Interval estimate An interval constructed around the point estimate 
that is likely to contain the corresponding population parameter. Each 
interval estimate has a confidence level.
Margin of error The quantity that is subtracted from and added to 
the value of a sample statistic to obtain a confidence interval for the 
corresponding population parameter.
Point estimate The value of a sample statistic assigned to the cor-
responding population parameter.
t distribution A continuous probability distribution with a  specific 
type of bell-shaped curve with its mean equal to 0 and standard 
 deviation equal to √df∕(df −2) for df  > 2.
Confidence interval An interval constructed around the value of a 
sample statistic to estimate the corresponding population parameter.
Confidence level Confidence level, denoted by (1 − α)100%, that 
states how much confidence we have that a confidence interval con-
tains the true population parameter.
Degrees of freedom (df) The number of observations that can be 
chosen freely. For the estimation of μ using the t distribution, the 
degrees of freedom is n − 1.
Estimate The value of a sample statistic that is used to find the 
corresponding population parameter.
Estimation A procedure by which a numerical value or values are 
assigned to a population parameter based on the information collected 
from a sample.
Glossary
www.ebook3000.com

338
Chapter 8 Estimation of the Mean and Proportion
per year with a standard deviation of $74. Assuming that the life 
insurance policy premiums for all life insurance policyholders have 
an approximate normal distribution, make a 99% confidence interval 
for the population mean, μ.
8.77 A survey of 500 randomly selected adult men showed that 
the mean time they spend per week watching sports on television is 
9.75 hours with a standard deviation of 2.2 hours. Construct a 90% 
confidence interval for the population mean, μ.
8.78 A random sample of 300 female members of health clubs in Los 
Angeles showed that they spend, on average, 4.5 hours per week 
doing physical exercise with a standard deviation of .75 hour. Find a 
98% confidence interval for the population mean.
8.79 A computer company that recently developed a new software 
product wanted to estimate the mean time taken to learn how to use 
this software by people who are somewhat familiar with computers. A 
random sample of 12 such persons was selected. The following data 
give the times (in hours) taken by these persons to learn how to use 
this software.
1.75
2.25
2.40
1.90
1.50
2.75
2.15
2.25
1.80
2.20
3.25
2.60
Construct a 95% confidence interval for the population mean. Assume 
that the times taken by all persons who are somewhat familiar with 
computers to learn how to use this software are approximately nor-
mally distributed.
8.80 An insurance company selected a random sample of 50 auto 
claims filed with it and investigated those claims carefully. The com-
pany found that 12% of those claims were fraudulent.
a. What is the point estimate of the percentage of all auto claims 
filed with this company that are fraudulent?
b. Make a 99% confidence interval for the percentage of all auto 
claims filed with this company that are fraudulent.
8.81 A random sample of 20 managers was taken, and they were 
asked whether or not they usually take work home. The responses of 
these managers are given below, where yes indicates they usually take 
work home and no means they do not.
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Make a 99% confidence interval for the percentage of all managers 
who take work home.
8.82 A researcher wants to determine a 99% confidence interval for 
the mean number of hours that adults spend per week doing commu-
nity service. How large a sample should the researcher select so that 
the estimate is within 1.2 hours of the population mean? Assume that 
the standard deviation for time spent per week doing community 
service by all adults is 3 hours.
8.83 An economist wants to find a 90% confidence interval for the 
mean sale price of houses in a state. How large a sample should she 
select so that the estimate is within $3500 of the population mean? 
Assume that the standard deviation for the sale prices of all houses in 
this state is $31,500.
8.84 A large city with chronic economic problems is considering 
legalizing casino gambling. The city council wants to estimate the 
8.72 A bank manager wants to know the mean amount owed on credit 
card accounts that become delinquent. A random sample of 100 delin-
quent credit card accounts taken by the manager produced a mean 
amount owed on these accounts equal to $2640. The population stand-
ard deviation was $578.
a. What is the point estimate of the mean amount owed on all 
delinquent credit card accounts at this bank?
b. Construct a 97% confidence interval for the mean amount 
owed on all delinquent credit card accounts for this bank.
8.73 York Steel Corporation produces iron rings that are supplied 
to other companies. These rings are supposed to have a diameter of 
24 inches. The machine that makes these rings does not produce each 
ring with a diameter of exactly 24 inches. The diameter of each of the 
rings varies slightly. It is known that when the machine is working 
properly, the rings made on this machine have a mean diameter of 
24 inches. The standard deviation of the diameters of all rings pro-
duced on this machine is always equal to .06 inch. The quality control 
department takes a random sample of 25 such rings every week, 
calculates the mean of the diameters for these rings, and makes a 99% 
confidence interval for the population mean. If either the lower limit 
of this confidence interval is less than 23.975 inches or the upper limit 
of this confidence interval is greater than 24.025 inches, the machine 
is stopped and adjusted. A recent such sample of 25 rings produced a 
mean diameter of 24.015 inches. Based on this sample, can you con-
clude that the machine needs an adjustment? Explain. Assume that the 
population distribution is approximately normal.
8.74 Yunan Corporation produces bolts that are supplied to other 
companies. These bolts are supposed to be 4 inches long. The machine 
that makes these bolts does not produce each bolt exactly 4 inches 
long but the length of each bolt varies slightly. It is known that when 
the machine is working properly, the mean length of the bolts made on 
this machine is 4 inches. The standard deviation of the lengths of all 
bolts produced on this machine is always equal to .04 inch. The qual-
ity control department takes a random sample of 20 such bolts every 
week, calculates the mean length of these bolts, and makes a 98% 
confidence interval for the population mean. If either the upper limit 
of this confidence interval is greater than 4.02 inches or the lower 
limit of this confidence interval is less than 3.98 inches, the machine 
is stopped and adjusted. A recent such sample of 20 bolts produced a 
mean length of 3.99 inches. Based on this sample, will you conclude 
that the machine needs an adjustment? Assume that the population 
distribution is approximately normal.
8.75 A hospital administration wants to estimate the mean time spent 
by patients waiting for treatment at the emergency room. The waiting 
times (in minutes) recorded for a random sample of 35 such patients 
are given below. The population standard deviation is not known.
30
 7
68
76
47
 60
51
64
 25
35
29
30
 35
62
96
104
58
32
32
102
27
45
 11
64
62
72
 39
92
84
 47
12
33
55
 84
36
Construct a 99% confidence interval for the corresponding population 
mean.
8.76 A random sample of 25 life insurance policyholders showed that 
the average premium they pay on their life insurance policies is $685 
Supplementary Exercises

Self-Review Test
339
proportion of all adults in the city who favor legalized casino gam-
bling. What is the most conservative estimate of the minimum sample 
size that would limit the margin of error to be within .05 of the popu-
lation proportion for a 95% confidence interval?
8.85 A large city with chronic economic problems is considering 
legalizing casino gambling. The city council wants to estimate the 
proportion of all adults in the city who favor legalized casino gam-
bling. Assume that a preliminary sample has shown that 63% of the 
adults in this city favor legalized casino gambling. How large should 
the sample size be so that the 95% confidence interval for the popula-
tion proportion has a margin of error of .05?
the attendant decides to ask the next 200 gasoline customers how many 
vehicles their households own. To obtain an estimate of p, the attendant 
counts the number of customers who say there are more than two vehi-
cles in their households and then divides this number by 200. How 
would you critique this estimation procedure? Is there anything wrong 
with this procedure that would result in sampling and/or nonsampling 
errors? If so, can you suggest a procedure that would reduce this error?
8.90 The U.S. Senate just passed a bill by a vote of 55–45 (with all 
100 senators voting). A student who took an elementary statistics 
course last semester says, “We can use these data to make a confi-
dence interval about p. We have n = 100 and pˆ = 55∕100 = .55.” 
Hence, according to him, a 95% confidence interval for p is
pˆ ± z σpˆ = .55 ± 1.96 B
(.55)(.45)
100
= .55 ± .098 = .452 to .648
Does this make sense? If not, what is wrong with the student’s 
reasoning?
8.91 When calculating a confidence interval for the population mean 
μ with a known population standard deviation σ, describe the effects 
of the following two changes on the confidence interval: 
(1) doubling the sample size, (2) quadrupling (multiplying by 4) the 
sample size. Give two reasons why this relationship does not hold true 
if you are calculating a confidence interval for the population mean μ 
with an unknown population standard deviation.
8.92 Calculating a confidence interval for the proportion requires a 
minimum sample size. Calculate a confidence interval, using any con-
fidence level of 90% or higher, for the population proportion for each 
of the following.
a. n = 200 and 
pˆ = .01
b. n = 160 and 
pˆ = .9875
Explain why these confidence intervals reveal a problem when the 
conditions for using the normal approximation do not hold.
8.86 Let μ be the hourly wage (excluding tips) for workers who pro-
vide hotel room service in a large city. A random sample of a number 
(more than 30) of such workers yielded a 95% confidence interval 
for μ of $8.46 to $9.86 using the normal distribution with a known 
population standard deviation.
a. Find the value of x for this sample.
b. Find a 99% confidence interval for μ based on this sample.
8.87 In an online poll conducted by the St. Louis Post-Dispatch 
during September 2014, people were asked about their favorite sports 
to watch on television. Of the respondents, 42% selected baseball, 
18% mentioned hockey, 36% liked football, and 4% selected basket-
ball (www.stltoday.com). Using these results, find a 98% confidence 
interval for the population percentage that corresponds to each 
response. Write a one-page report to present your results to a group of 
college students who have not taken statistics. Your report should 
answer questions such as the following: (1) What is a confidence 
interval? (2) Why is a range of values (interval) more informative than 
a single percentage (point estimate)? (3) What does 98% confidence 
mean in this context? (4) What assumptions, if any, are you making 
when you construct each confidence interval?
8.88 When one is attempting to determine the required sample size 
for estimating a population mean, and the information on the popula-
tion standard deviation is not available, it may be feasible to take a 
small preliminary sample and use the sample standard deviation to 
estimate the required sample size, n. Suppose that we want to estimate 
μ, the mean commuting distance for students at a community college, 
to a margin of error within 1 mile with a confidence level of 95%. A 
random sample of 20 students yields a standard deviation of 4.1 miles. 
Use this value of the sample standard deviation, s, to estimate the 
required sample size, n. Assume that the corresponding population 
has an approximate normal distribution.
8.89 A gas station attendant would like to estimate p, the proportion of 
all households that own more than two vehicles. To obtain an estimate, 
Advanced Exercises
 2. A 95% confidence interval for μ can be interpreted to mean that 
if we take 100 samples of the same size and construct 100 such confi-
dence intervals for μ, then
a. 95 of them will not include μ
b. 95 will include μ
c. 95 will include x
 3. The confidence level is denoted by
a. (1 − α)100%  b. 100α%  c. α
 1. Complete the following sentences using the terms population 
parameter and sample statistic.
a. Estimation means assigning values to a ___________ based 
on the value of a ___________.
b. An estimator is a ___________ used to estimate a 
___________.
c. The value of a ___________ is called the point estimate of the 
corresponding ___________.
Self-Review Test
www.ebook3000.com

340
Chapter 8 Estimation of the Mean and Proportion
 4. The margin of error of estimate for μ is
a. z σx (or  t sx)  b. σ∕√n (or s∕√n)  c. σx (or sx)
 5. Which of the following assumptions is not required to use the 
t distribution to make a confidence interval for μ?
a. Either the population from which the sample is taken is 
(approximately) normally distributed or n ≥30.
b. The population standard deviation, σ, is not known.
c. The sample size is at least 10.
 6. The parameter(s) of the t distribution is (are)
a. n
b. degrees of freedom
c. μ and degrees of freedom
 7. A random sample of 36 vacation homes built during the past 
2 years in a coastal resort region gave a mean construction cost of 
$159,000 with a population standard deviation of $27,000.
a. What is the point estimate of the corresponding population mean?
b. Make a 99% confidence interval for the mean construction 
cost for all vacation homes built in this region during the past 
2 years. What is the margin of error here?
 8. A random sample of 25 malpractice lawsuits filed against doc-
tors showed that the mean compensation awarded to the plaintiffs was 
$610,425 with a standard deviation of $94,820. Find a 95% confi-
dence interval for the mean compensation awarded to plaintiffs of all 
such lawsuits. Assume that the compensations awarded to plaintiffs of 
all such lawsuits are approximately normally distributed.
 9. Harris Interactive conducted an online poll of 2097 American 
adults between July 17 and 21, 2014, on the topic “Who are we lying 
to?” In response to one of the questions, 37% of American adults said 
that they have lied to get out of work (www.harrisinteractive.com).
a. What is the point estimate of the corresponding population 
proportion?
b. Construct a 99% confidence interval for the proportion of all 
American adults who will say that they have lied to get out of 
work.
10. A company that makes toaster ovens has done extensive testing 
on the accuracy of its temperature-setting mechanism. For a previous 
toaster model of this company, the standard deviation of the temperatures 
when the mechanism is set for 350°F is 5.78°. Assume that this is the 
population standard deviation for a new toaster model that uses the 
same temperature mechanism. How large a sample must be taken so 
that the estimate of the mean temperature when the mechanism is set 
for 350°F is within 1.25° of the population mean temperature? Use a 
95% confidence level.
11. A college registrar has received numerous complaints about the 
online registration procedure at her college, alleging that the system 
is slow, confusing, and error prone. She wants to estimate the propor-
tion of all students at this college who are dissatisfied with the online 
registration procedure. What is the most conservative estimate of the 
minimum sample size that would limit the margin of error to be within 
.05 of the population proportion for a 90% confidence interval?
12. Refer to Problem 11. Assume that a preliminary study has shown 
that 70% of the students surveyed at this college are dissatisfied with 
the current online registration system. How large a sample should be 
taken in this case so that the margin of error is within .05 of the popu-
lation proportion for a 90% confidence interval?
13. Dr. Garcia estimated the mean stress score before a statistics test 
for a random sample of 25 students. She found the mean and standard 
deviation for this sample to be 7.1 (on a scale of 1 to 10) and 1.2, 
respectively. She used a 97% confidence level. However, she thinks 
that the confidence interval is too wide. How can she reduce the width 
of the confidence interval? Describe all possible alternatives. Which 
alternative do you think is best and why?
 
*14. You want to estimate the mean number of hours that students at 
your college work per week. Briefly explain how you will conduct 
this study using a small sample. Take a sample of 12 students from 
your college who hold a job. Collect data on the number of hours that 
these students spent working last week. Then estimate the population 
mean. Choose your own confidence level. What assumptions will you 
make to estimate this population mean?
 
*15. You want to estimate the proportion of people who are happy 
with their current jobs. Briefly explain how you will conduct this 
study. Take a sample of 35 persons and collect data on whether or not 
they are happy with their current jobs. Then estimate the population 
proportion. Choose your own confidence level.
Note: The Mini-Projects are located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Mini-Projects
Note: The Decide for Yourself feature is located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Decide for Yourself
TI-84 Color/TI-84
CHAPTER 8
TECHNOLOGY 
INSTRUCTIONS
The TI-84 Color Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for the TI-84 Plus C color 
graphing calculator running the 4.0 operating system. Some screens, menus, and functions will 
Note: Complete TI-84, Minitab, and Excel manuals are available for download at the textbook’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.

Technology Instructions
341
be slightly different in older operating systems. The TI-84 and TI-84 Plus can perform all of the 
same functions but will not have the “Color” option referenced in some of the menus.
Estimating a Population Mean, σ Known 
for Example 8–1(b) of the Text
1. Select STAT > TESTS > ZInterval.
2. Use the following settings in the Zinterval menu (see Screen 8.1):
• Select Stats at the Inpt prompt.
    Note: If you have the data in a list, select Data at the Inpt prompt.
• At the σ prompt, type 35.
• At the x prompt, type 145.
• At the n prompt, type 25.
• At the C-Level prompt, type 0.90.
3. Highlight Calculate and press ENTER.
4. The output includes the confidence interval. (See Screen 8.2.)
Note: The confidence interval from your calculator may differ slightly from the one in the text since 
the calculator uses a more precise value for z.
Estimating a Population Mean, σ Unknown 
for Example 8–6 of the Text
1. Select STAT > TESTS > TInterval.
2. Use the following settings in the Tinterval menu (see Screen 8.3):
• At the Inpt prompt, select Stats.
    Note: If you have the data in a list, select Data at the Inpt prompt.
• At the x prompt, type 1450.
• At the Sx prompt, type 300.
• At the n prompt, type 64.
• At the C-Level prompt, type 0.99.
3. Highlight Calculate and press ENTER.
4. The output includes the confidence interval. (See Screen 8.4.)
Note: The confidence interval from your calculator may differ slightly from the one in the text since 
the calculator uses a more precise value for t.
Estimating a Population Proportion for Example 8–7 of the Text
1. Select STAT > TESTS > 1-PropZInt.
2. Use the following settings in the 1-PropZInt menu (see Screen 8.5):
• At the x prompt, type 1366.
     Note: The value of x is the number of successes in the sample, and it must be a whole number or the 
calculator will return an error message. If x is not given, multiply n by pˆ to obtain x and round the 
result to the nearest whole number.
Screen 8.1
Screen 8.3
Screen 8.2
Screen 8.4
Screen 8.5
www.ebook3000.com

342
Chapter 8 Estimation of the Mean and Proportion
• At the n prompt, type 1821.
• At the C-Level prompt, type 0.99.
3. Highlight Calculate and press ENTER.
4. The output includes the confidence interval. (See Screen 8.6.)
Note: The confidence interval from your calculator may differ slightly from the one in the text since 
the calculator uses a more precise value for z.
Screen 8.6
The Minitab Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Minitab version 17. 
Some screens, menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Minitab.
Estimating a Population Mean, σ Known 
for Example 8–1(b) of the Text
1. Select Stat > Basic Statistics > 1-Sample Z.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen 
(see Screen 8.7):
• From the dropdown box, select Summarized Data.
     Note: If you have the data in a column, select One or more samples, each in a column, 
type the column name(s) in the box, and move to step 3 below.
• In the Sample size box, type 25.
• In the Sample mean box, type 145.
• In the Known standard deviation box, type 35.
3. Select Options and type 90 in the Confidence level box when the dialog box 
 appears on screen. (See Screen 8.8.)
4. Click OK in both dialog boxes.
5. The confidence interval will be displayed in the Session window. (See Screen 8.9.)
Note: The confidence interval from Minitab may differ slightly from the one in the text since 
Minitab uses a more precise critical value for z.
Estimating a Population Mean, σ Unknown 
for Example 8–6 of the Text
1. Select Stat > Basic Statistics > 1-Sample t.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen 
(see Screen 8.10):
• Select Summarized Data.
     Note: If you have the data in a column, select Samples in columns, type the 
column name(s) in the box, and move to step 3 below.
• In the Sample size box, type 64.
• In the Sample mean box, type 1450.
• In the Standard deviation box, type 300.
Minitab
Screen 8.7
Screen 8.9
Screen 8.8

Technology Instructions
343
3. Select Options and type 99 in the Confidence level box when the dialog box ap-
pears on screen.
4. Click OK in both dialog boxes.
5. The confidence interval will be displayed in the Session window. 
(See Screen 8.9.)
Note: The confidence interval from Minitab may differ slightly from the one in the text since 
Minitab uses a more precise value for t.
Estimating a Population Proportion 
for Example 8–7 of the Text
1. Select Stat > Basic Statistics > 1 Proportion.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen (see Screen 
8.11):
• From the drop-down box, select Summarized Data.
     Note: If you have the data in a column, select One or more samples, each in a column, 
type the column name(s) in the box, and move to step 3 below.
• In the Number of events box, type 1366.
     Note: The value 1366 is the number of successes in the sample, and it must be a whole number 
or the calculator will return an error message. If the number of successes is not given, multiply n 
by pˆ to obtain the number of successes and round the result to the nearest whole number.
• In the Number of trials box, type 1821.
3. Select Options. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• In the Confidence level box, type 99.
• In the Method box, select Normal approximation from the drop-down menu.
4. Click OK in both dialog boxes.
5. The confidence interval will be displayed in the Session window. (See Screen 8.9.)
Note: The confidence interval from Minitab may differ slightly from the one in the text since Minitab 
uses a more precise value for z.
Screen 8.10
Screen 8.11
The Excel Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Excel 2013. Some screens, 
menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Excel. To enable some of the 
advanced Excel functions, you must enable the Data Analysis Add-In for Excel. For example, 
in Excel 2007 and older versions of Excel, replace the function CONFIDENCE.NORM 
with the function CONFIDENCE and replace the function NORM.S.INV with the function 
NORMSINV. For Excel 2007 and older versions of Excel, there is no function that corre-
sponds to CONFIDENCE.T.
Estimating a Population Mean, σ Known for 
Example 8–1(b) of the Text
1. Click on cell A1.
2. Type =CONFIDENCE.NORM(0.10,35,25). This function calculates the 
margin of error for the confidence interval. (See Screen 8.12.)
Excel
Screen 8.12
www.ebook3000.com

344
Chapter 8 Estimation of the Mean and Proportion
Note: The first number in this function, denoted alpha, is calculated by subtracting the confidence level 
(as a decimal) from 1. The second number is the population standard deviation σ, and the third number 
is the sample size.
3. Click on cell A2 and type =145 – A1 to calculate the lower bound for the confidence interval. 
(See Screen 8.12.)
4. Click on cell A3 and type =145 + A1 to calculate the upper bound for the confidence interval. 
(See Screen 8.12.)
Note: The confidence interval from Excel may differ slightly from the one in the text since Excel uses a 
more precise value for z.
Estimating a Population Mean, σ Unknown for Example 8–6 of the Text
1. Click on cell A1.
2. Type =CONFIDENCE.T(0.01,300,64). This function calculates the margin of error for the 
confidence interval.
Note: The first number in this function, denoted alpha, is calculated by subtracting the confidence level 
(as a decimal) from 1. The second number is the sample standard deviation s, and the third number is the 
sample size.
3. Click on cell A2 and type =1450 – A1 to calculate the lower bound for the confidence interval.
4. Click on cell A3 and type =1450 + A1 to calculate the upper bound for the confidence interval.
Note: The confidence interval from Excel may differ slightly from the one in the text since Excel uses a 
more precise value for t.
Estimating a Population Proportion for Example 8–7 of the Text
1. There is no native Excel function that can be used to create a confidence interval for a popula-
tion proportion, so we must enter a few calculations in sequence. To make our work easier to 
understand, type the following text into the corresponding spreadsheet cells (see Screen 8.13):
• Type “p-hat” in cell A1.
• Type “n” in cell A2.
• Type “SE of p-hat” in cell A3.
• Type “Critical z” in cell A4.
• Type “Lower Bound” in cell A5.
• Type “Upper Bound” in cell A6.
2. Click on cell B1 and type 0.75.
3. Click on cell B2 and type 1821.
4. Click on cell B3 and type =SQRT(B1*(1-B1)/B2).
5. Click on cell B4 and type =NORM.S.INV(0.995).
Note: The value 0.995 is calculated by adding the confidence level (as a decimal) to the area in the left 
tail (as a decimal).
6. Click on cell B5 and type =B1–B4*B3.
7. Click on cell B6 and type =B1+B4*B3.
8. The lower bound of the interval is in cell B5 and the upper bound of the interval is in cell B6. 
(See Screen 8.13.)
 
 Note: The confidence interval from Excel may differ slightly from the one in the text since Excel uses a 
more precise value for z.
Screen 8.13

Technology Assignments
345
TA8.7 A researcher wanted to estimate the mean contributions made 
to charitable causes by major companies. A random sample of 18 
companies produced the following data on contributions (in millions 
of dollars) made by them.
1.8
.6
1.2
.3
2.6
1.9
3.4
2.6
.2
2.4
1.4
2.5
3.1
.9
1.2
2.0
.8
1.1
Make a 98% confidence interval for the mean contributions made to 
charitable causes by all major companies. Assume that the contributions 
made to charitable causes by all major companies have an approximate 
normal distribution.
TA8.8 A mail-order company promises its customers that their orders 
will be processed and mailed within 72 hours after an order is placed. 
The quality control department at the company checks from time to 
time to see if this promise is kept. Recently the quality control depart-
ment took a sample of 200 orders and found that 176 of them were 
processed and mailed within 72 hours of the placement of the orders. 
Make a 98% confidence interval for the corresponding population 
proportion.
TA8.9 One of the major problems faced by department stores is a 
high percentage of returns. The manager of a department store wanted 
to estimate the percentage of all sales that result in returns. A random 
sample of 500 sales showed that 95 of them had products returned 
within the time allowed for returns. Make a 99% confidence interval 
for the corresponding population proportion.
TA8.10 One of the major problems faced by auto insurance compa-
nies is the filing of fraudulent claims. An insurance company carefully 
investigated 1000 auto claims filed with it and found 108 of them to 
be fraudulent. Make a 96% confidence interval for the corresponding 
population proportion.
TA 8.11 A manufacturer of contact lenses must ensure that each con-
tact lens is properly manufactured with no flaws, since flaws lead to 
poor vision or even eye damage. In a recent quality control check, 48 
of 5000 lenses were found to have flaws.
a. Construct a 98% confidence interval for the population pro-
portion of lenses that have flaws.
b. The company advertises that less than 1% of all its lenses have 
flaws. Based on the interval you constructed in part a, do you 
have reason to doubt this claim?
TA 8.12 Chicken eggs are graded AA, A, or B according to strict 
guidelines set by the USDA. A producer of chicken eggs selects a random 
sample of 500 eggs and finds that 463 of these are grade A. Construct 
a 92% confidence interval for the relevant population parameter.
TA8.1 The following data give the annual incomes (in thousands of 
dollars) before taxes for a sample of 36 randomly selected families 
from a city:
61.6
33.0
25.6
37.9
80.0
148.1
50.1
21.5
70.0
72.8
58.2
85.4
91.2
57.0
72.2
45.0
95.0
47.8
92.8
79.4
45.3
76.0
48.6
69.3
40.6
69.0
75.5
57.5
159.7
75.1
96.3
74.5
84.0
43.0
61.7
126.0
Construct a 99% confidence interval for μ assuming that the popula-
tion standard deviation is $23.75 thousand.
TA8.2 The following data give the checking account balances (in dol-
lars) on a certain day for a randomly selected sample of 30 households:
500
100
650 1917 2200
500
180 3000 1500 1300
319 1500 1102
405
124 1000
134 2000
150
800
200
750
300 2300
40 1200
500
900
20
160
Construct a 97% confidence interval for μ assuming that the popula-
tion standard deviation is unknown.
TA8.3 Refer to Data Set I that accompanies this text on the prices of 
various products in different cities across the country (see Appendix A). 
Using the data on the cost of going to the dentist’s office given in 
 column 15, make a 98% confidence interval for the population mean μ.
TA8.4 Refer to the Manchester Road Race data set (Data Set IV) for 
all participants that accompanies this text (see Appendix A). Take a 
sample of 100 observations from this data set.
a. Using the sample data, make a 95% confidence interval for 
the mean time (listed in column 3) taken to complete this race 
by all participants.
b. Now calculate the mean time taken to run this race by all par-
ticipants. Does the confidence interval made in part a include 
this population mean?
TA8.5 Repeat Technology Assignment TA8.4 for a sample of 25 
observations. Assume that the distribution of times taken to run this 
race by all participants is approximately normal.
TA8.6 The following data give the prices (in thousands of dollars) of 
16 recently sold houses in an area.
341
163
327
204
197
203
313
279
456
228
383
289
533
399
271
381
Construct a 99% confidence interval for the mean price of all houses 
in this area. Assume that the distribution of prices of all houses in the 
given area is approximately normal.
TECHNOLOGY ASSIGNMENTS
www.ebook3000.com

346
CHAPTER9
This chapter introduces the second topic in inferential statistics: tests of hypotheses. In a test of 
hypothesis, we test a certain given theory or belief about a population parameter. We may want to 
find out, using some sample information, whether or not a given claim (or statement) about a popula-
tion parameter is true. This chapter discusses how to make such tests of hypotheses about the 
population mean, μ, and the population proportion, p.
As an example, a soft-drink company may claim that, on average, its cans contain 12 ounces of 
soda. A government agency may want to test whether or not such cans do contain, on average, 12 
ounces of soda. As another example, in a Gallup poll conducted April 9–12, 2015, American adults 
were asked, “Do you feel that the distribution of money and wealth in this country today is fair, or do 
you feel that the money and wealth in this country should be more evenly distributed among a larger 
percentage of the people?” Of the adults included in the poll, 63% said that money and wealth in this 
country should be more evenly distributed among a larger percentage of the people. A researcher 
wants to check if this percentage is still true. In the first of these two examples we are to test a 
hypothesis about the population mean, μ, and in the second example we are to test a hypothesis 
about the population proportion, p.
Will you graduate from college with debt? If yes, how much money do you think you will owe? Do you 
know that students who graduated from public and nonprofit colleges in 2013 with loans had an average 
debt of $28,400? The average debt of the class of 2013 varied a great deal from state to state, with the high-
est average debt for students who graduated from colleges in New Hampshire at $32,795 and the lowest 
average for students who graduated from colleges in New Mexico at $18,656. (See Case Study 9–1.)
© Mash Audio Visuals Pvt. Ltd. Agency/iStockphoto
9.1 Hypothesis Tests: 
An Introduction
9.2 Hypothesis Tests 
About μ : σ Known
Case Study 9–1 Average 
Student Loan Debt for 
the Class of 2013
9.3 Hypothesis Tests About 
μ : σ Not Known
9.4 Hypothesis Tests About 
a Population Proportion: 
Large Samples
Case Study 9–2 Are Upper-
Income People Paying 
Their Fair Share in 
Federal Taxes?
Hypothesis Tests About the Mean 
and Proportion

9.1 Hypothesis Tests: An Introduction
347
9.1 Hypothesis Tests: An Introduction
Why do we need to perform a test of hypothesis? Reconsider the example about soft-drink cans. 
Suppose we take a sample of 100 cans of the soft drink under investigation. We then find out that 
the mean amount of soda in these 100 cans is 11.89 ounces. Based on this result, can we state 
that all such cans contain, on average, less than 12 ounces of soda and that the company is lying 
to the public? Not until we perform a test of hypothesis can we make such an accusation. The 
reason is that the mean, x = 11.89 ounces, is obtained from a sample. The difference between 
12 ounces (the required average amount for the population) and 11.89 ounces (the observed 
average amount for the sample) may have occurred only because of the sampling error (assum-
ing that no nonsampling errors have been committed). Another sample of 100 cans may give us 
a mean of 12.04 ounces. Therefore, we perform a test of hypothesis to find out how large the 
difference between 12 ounces and 11.89 ounces is and whether or not this difference has 
occurred as a result of chance alone. Now, if 11.89 ounces is the mean for all cans and not for 
just 100 cans, then we do not need to make a test of hypothesis. Instead, we can immediately 
state that the mean amount of soda in all such cans is less than 12 ounces. We perform a test of 
hypothesis only when we are making a decision about a population parameter based on the 
value of a sample statistic.
9.1.1 Two Hypotheses
Consider as a nonstatistical example a person who has been indicted for committing a crime and 
is being tried in a court. Based on the available evidence, the judge or jury will make one of two 
possible decisions:
1. 
The person is not guilty.
2. 
The person is guilty.
At the outset of the trial, the person is presumed not guilty. The prosecutor’s job is to prove that 
the person has committed the crime and, hence, is guilty.
 
In statistics, the person is not guilty is called the null hypothesis and the person is 
guilty is called the alternative hypothesis. The null hypothesis is denoted by H0, and the 
alternative hypothesis is denoted by H1. In the beginning of the trial it is assumed that the 
person is not guilty. The null hypothesis is usually the hypothesis that is assumed to be true 
to begin with. The two hypotheses for the court case are written as follows (notice the colon 
after H0 and H1):
 
Null hypothesis:       H0: The person is not guilty
 
Alternative hypothesis:  H1: The person is guilty
 
In a statistics example, the null hypothesis states that a given claim (or statement) about a 
population parameter is true. Reconsider the example of the soft-drink company’s claim that its 
cans contain, on average, 12 ounces of soda. In reality, this claim may or may not be true. How-
ever, we will initially assume that the company’s claim is true (that is, the company is not guilty 
of cheating and lying). To test the claim of the soft-drink company, the null hypothesis will be 
that the company’s claim is true. Let μ be the mean amount of soda in all cans. The company’s 
claim will be true if μ = 12 ounces. Thus, the null hypothesis will be written as
H0: μ = 12 ounces (The company’s claim is true)
In this example, the null hypothesis can also be written as μ ≥ 12 ounces because the claim of 
the company will still be true if the cans contain, on average, more than 12 ounces of soda. The 
company will be accused of cheating the public only if the cans contain, on average, less than 
12 ounces of soda. However, it will not affect the test whether we use an = or a ≥ sign in the null 
hypothesis as long as the alternative hypothesis has a < sign. Remember that in the null hypoth-
esis (and in the alternative hypothesis also) we use a population parameter (such as μ or p) and 
not a sample statistic (such as x or pˆ).
www.ebook3000.com

348
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
 
The alternative hypothesis in our statistics example will be that the company’s claim is false 
and its soft-drink cans contain, on average, less than 12 ounces of soda—that is, μ < 12 ounces. 
The alternative hypothesis will be written as
H1: μ < 12 ounces (The company’s claim is false)
Null Hypothesis A null hypothesis is a claim (or statement) about a population parameter that 
is assumed to be true until it is declared false.
Alternative Hypothesis An alternative hypothesis is a claim about a population parameter that 
will be declared true if the null hypothesis is declared to be false.
 
Let us return to the example of the court trial. The trial begins with the assumption that the 
null hypothesis is true—that is, the person is not guilty. The prosecutor assembles all the possible 
evidence and presents it in court to prove that the null hypothesis is false and the alternative 
hypothesis is true (that is, the person is guilty). In the case of our statistics example, the informa-
tion obtained from a sample will be used as evidence to decide whether or not the claim of the 
company is true. In the court case, the decision made by the judge (or jury) depends on the 
amount of evidence presented by the prosecutor. At the end of the trial, the judge (or jury) will 
consider whether or not the evidence presented by the prosecutor is sufficient to declare the 
person guilty. The amount of evidence that will be considered to be sufficient to declare the 
person guilty depends on the discretion of the judge (or jury).
9.1.2 Rejection and Nonrejection Regions
In Figure 9.1, which represents the court case, the point marked 0 indicates that there is no evi-
dence against the person being tried. The farther we move toward the right on the horizontal axis, 
the more convincing the evidence is that the person has committed the crime. We have arbitrarily 
marked a point C on the horizontal axis. Let us assume that a judge (or jury) considers any 
amount of evidence from point C to the right of it to be sufficient and any amount of evidence to 
the left of C to be insufficient to declare the person guilty. Point C is called the critical value or 
critical point in statistics. If the amount of evidence presented by the prosecutor falls in the area 
to the left of point C, the verdict will reflect that there is not enough evidence to declare the per-
son guilty. Consequently, the accused person will be declared not guilty. In statistics, this deci-
sion is stated as do not reject H0 or failing to reject H0. It is equivalent to saying that there is not 
enough evidence to declare the null hypothesis false. The area to the left of point C is called the 
nonrejection region; that is, this is the region where the null hypothesis is not rejected. However, 
if the amount of evidence falls at point C or to the right of point C, the verdict will be that there 
is sufficient evidence to declare the person guilty. In statistics, this decision is stated as reject H0 
or the null hypothesis is false. Rejecting H0 is equivalent to saying that the alternative hypothesis 
is true. The area to the right of point C (including point C) is called the rejection region; that is, 
this is the region where the null hypothesis is rejected.
Critical point
C
Rejection region
Nonrejection region
0
Level of
evidence
Not enough evidence to
declare the person guilty and,
hence, the null hypothesis is
not rejected in this region.
Enough evidence to declare
the person guilty and,
hence, the null hypothesis 
is rejected in this region.
Figure 9.1 Nonrejection and rejection regions for the court case.

9.1 Hypothesis Tests: An Introduction
349
9.1.3 Two Types of Errors
We all know that a court’s verdict is not always correct. If a person is declared guilty at the end 
of a trial, there are two possibilities.
1. 
The person has not committed the crime but is declared guilty (because of what may be false 
evidence).
2. 
The person has committed the crime and is rightfully declared guilty.
In the first case, the court has made an error by punishing an innocent person. In statistics, this 
kind of error is called a Type I or an α (alpha) error. In the second case, because the guilty person 
has been punished, the court has made the correct decision. The second row in the shaded portion 
of Table 9.1 shows these two cases. The two columns of Table 9.1, corresponding to the person 
is not guilty and the person is guilty, give the two actual situations. Which one of these is true is 
known only to the person being tried. The two rows in this table, corresponding to the person is 
not guilty and the person is guilty, show the two possible court decisions.
Type I Error A Type I error occurs when a true null hypothesis is rejected. The value of α 
represents the probability of committing this type of error; that is,
α = P(H0 is rejected  ⃒H0 is true)
The value of α represents the significance level of the test.
Table 9.1 Four Possible Outcomes for a Court Case
Actual Situation
The Person Is 
Not Guilty
The Person 
Is Guilty
Court’s decision
The person 
is not guilty
Correct 
decision
Type II or 
β error
The person 
is guilty
Type I or 
α error
Correct 
decision
 
In our statistics example, a Type I error will occur when H0 is actually true (that is, the 
cans do contain, on average, 12 ounces of soda), but it just happens that we draw a sample 
with a mean that is much less than 12 ounces and we wrongfully reject the null hypothesis, 
H0. The value of α, called the significance level of the test, represents the probability of mak-
ing a Type I error. In other words, α is the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis, H0, 
when in fact H0 is true.
 
The size of the rejection region in a statistics problem of a test of hypothesis depends on the 
value assigned to α. In one approach to the test of hypothesis, we assign a value to α before 
making the test. Although any value can be assigned to α, commonly used values of α are .01, 
.025, .05, and .10. Usually the value assigned to α does not exceed .10 (or 10%).
 
Now, suppose that in the court trial case the person is declared not guilty at the end of the 
trial. Such a verdict does not indicate that the person has indeed not committed the crime. It is 
possible that the person is guilty but there is not enough evidence to prove the guilt. Conse-
quently, in this situation there are again two possibilities.
1. 
The person has not committed the crime and is declared not guilty.
2. 
The person has committed the crime but, because of the lack of enough evidence, is declared 
not guilty.
www.ebook3000.com

350
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
In the first case, the court’s decision is correct. In the second case, however, the court has com-
mitted an error by setting a guilty person free. In statistics, this type of error is called a Type II 
or a β (the Greek letter beta) error. These two cases are shown in the first row of the shaded 
portion of Table 9.1.
 
In our statistics example, a Type II error will occur when the null hypothesis, H0, is actually 
false (that is, the soda contained in all cans is, on average, less than 12 ounces), but it happens 
by chance that we draw a sample with a mean that is close to or greater than 12 ounces and we 
wrongfully conclude do not reject H0. The value of β represents the probability of making a 
Type II error. It represents the probability that H0 is not rejected when actually H0 is false. The 
value of 1 − β is called the power of the test. It represents the probability of not making a 
Type II error. In other words, 1 − β is the probability that H0 is rejected when it is false.
Type II Error A Type II error occurs when a false null hypothesis is not rejected. The value 
of β represents the probability of committing a Type II error; that is,
β = P(H0 is not rejected ∣ H0 is false)
The value of 1 − β is called the power of the test. It represents the probability of rejecting H0 
when it is false.
 
The two types of errors that occur in tests of hypotheses depend on each other. We cannot 
lower the values of α and β simultaneously for a test of hypothesis for a fixed sample size. Low-
ering the value of α will raise the value of β, and lowering the value of β will raise the value of α. 
However, we can decrease both α and β simultaneously by increasing the sample size. The expla-
nation of how α and β are related and the computation of β are not within the scope of this text.
 
Table 9.2, which is similar to Table 9.1, is written for the statistics problem of a test of 
hypothesis. In Table 9.2 the person is not guilty is replaced by H0 is true, the person is guilty by 
H0 is false, and the court’s decision by decision.
Table 9.2 Four Possible Outcomes for a Test of Hypothesis
Actual Situation
H0 Is True
H0 Is False
Decision
Do not reject H0
Correct 
decision
Type II or 
β error
Reject H0
Type I or 
α error
Correct 
decision
9.1.4 Tails of a Test
The statistical hypothesis-testing procedure is similar to the trial of a person in court but with two 
major differences. The first major difference is that in a statistical test of hypothesis, the partition 
of the total region into rejection and nonrejection regions is not arbitrary. Instead, it depends on 
the value assigned to α (Type I error). As mentioned earlier, α is also called the significance level 
of the test.
 
The second major difference relates to the rejection region. In the court case, the rejection 
region is at and to the right side of the critical point, as shown in Figure 9.1. However, in statis-
tics, the rejection region for a hypothesis-testing problem can be on both sides, with the nonrejec-
tion region in the middle, or it can be on the left side or right side of the nonrejection region. 
These possibilities are explained in the next three parts of this section. A test with two rejection 
regions is called a two-tailed test, and a test with one rejection region is called a one-tailed 
test. The one-tailed test is called a left-tailed test if the rejection region is in the left tail of the 

9.1 Hypothesis Tests: An Introduction
351
distribution curve, and it is called a right-tailed test if the rejection region is in the right tail of 
the distribution curve.
Tails of the Test A two-tailed test has rejection regions in both tails, a left-tailed test has the 
rejection region in the left tail, and a right-tailed test has the rejection region in the right tail of 
the distribution curve.
A Two-Tailed Test
According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, workers in the United States who were 
employed earned an average of $47,230 a year in 2014. Suppose an economist wants to check 
whether this mean has changed since 2014. The key word here is changed. The mean annual 
earnings of employed Americans has changed if it has either increased or decreased since 2014. 
This is an example of a two-tailed test. Let μ be the mean annual earnings of employed Ameri-
cans. The two possible decisions are as follows:
1. 
The mean annual earnings of employed Americans has not changed since 2014, that is, 
currently μ = $47,230.
2.  The mean annual earnings of employed Americans has changed since 2014, that is, currently 
μ ≠ $47,230.
We will write the null and alternative hypotheses for this test as follows:
 
H0: μ = $47,230  (The mean annual earnings of employed 
Americans has not changed)
 
H1: μ ≠$47,230  (The mean annual earnings of employed 
Americans has changed)
 
To determine whether a test is two-tailed or one-tailed, we look at the sign in the alternative 
hypothesis. If the alternative hypothesis has a not equal to (≠) sign, as in this example, it is a 
two-tailed test. As shown in Figure 9.2, a two-tailed test has two rejection regions, one in each 
tail of the distribution curve. Figure 9.2 shows the sampling distribution of x, assuming it has a 
normal distribution. Assuming H0 is true, x has a normal distribution with its mean equal to 
$47,230 (the value of μ in H0). In Figure 9.2, the area of each of the two rejection regions is α∕2
and the total area of both rejection regions is α (the significance level). As shown in this figure, a 
two-tailed test of hypothesis has two critical values that separate the two rejection regions from 
the nonrejection region. We will reject H0 if the value of x obtained from the sample falls in either 
of the two rejection regions. We will not reject H0 if the value of x lies in the nonrejection region. 
By rejecting H0, we are saying that the difference between the value of μ stated in H0 and the 
value of x obtained from the sample is too large to have occurred because of the sampling error 
alone. Consequently, this difference appears to be real. By not rejecting H0, we are saying that the 
difference between the value of μ stated in H0 and the value of x obtained from the sample is 
small and may have occurred because of the sampling error alone.
This shaded
area is α/2
Rejection
region
Nonrejection region
These two values are
called the critical values
C1
C2
This shaded
area is α/2
Rejection
region
μ = $47,230
x
Figure 9.2 A two-tailed test.
www.ebook3000.com

352
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
A Left-Tailed Test
Reconsider the example of the mean amount of soda in all soft-drink cans produced by a com-
pany. The company claims that these cans contain, on average, 12 ounces of soda. However, if 
these cans contain less than the claimed amount of soda, then the company can be accused of 
underfilling the cans. Suppose a consumer agency wants to test whether the mean amount of soda 
per can is less than 12 ounces. Note that the key phrase this time is less than, which indicates a 
left-tailed test. Let μ be the mean amount of soda in all cans. The two possible decisions are as 
follows:
1. 
The mean amount of soda in all cans is equal to 12 ounces, that is, μ = 12 ounces.
2. 
The mean amount of soda in all cans is less than 12 ounces, that is, μ < 12 ounces.
The null and alternative hypotheses for this test are written as
 H0: μ = 12 ounces (The mean is equal to 12 ounces)
 H1: μ < 12 ounces (The mean is less than 12 ounces)
In this case, we can also write the null hypothesis as H0: μ ≥ 12. This will not affect the result of 
the test as long as the sign in H1 is less than (<).
 
When the alternative hypothesis has a less than (<) sign, as in this case, the test is always 
left-tailed. In a left-tailed test, the rejection region is in the left tail of the distribution curve, as 
shown in Figure 9.3, and the area of this rejection region is equal to α (the significance level). We 
can observe from this figure that there is only one critical value in a left-tailed test.
 
Assuming H0 is true, the sampling distribution of x has a mean equal to 12 ounces (the value 
of μ in H0). We will reject H0 if the value of x obtained from the sample falls in the rejection 
region; we will not reject H0 otherwise.
A Right-Tailed Test
To illustrate the third case, according to www.city-data.com, the average price of detached homes 
in West Orange, New Jersey, was $471,257 in 2013. Suppose a real estate researcher wants to 
check whether the current mean price of homes in this town is higher than $471,257. The key 
phrase in this case is higher than, which indicates a right-tailed test. Let μ be the current mean 
price of homes in this town. The two possible decisions are as follows:
1. The current mean price of homes in this town is not higher than $471,257, that is, currently 
μ = $471,257.
2. 
The current mean price of homes in this town is higher than $471,257, that is, currently 
μ > $471,257.
 
We write the null and alternative hypotheses for this test as follows:
H0: μ = $471,257 (The current mean price of homes in this town is not higher than $471,257)
H1: μ > $471,257 (The current mean price of homes in this town is higher than $471,257)
μ = 12
C
Nonrejection region
Critical value
Rejection
region
Shaded
area is α
x
Figure 9.3 A left-tailed test.

9.1 Hypothesis Tests: An Introduction
353
Note that here we can also write the null hypothesis as H1: μ ≤ $471,257, which states that the 
current mean price of homes in this area is either equal to or less than $471,257. Again, the result 
of the test will not be affected by whether we use an equal to (=) or a less than or equal to (≤) 
sign in H0 as long as the alternative hypothesis has a greater than (>) sign.
 
When the alternative hypothesis has a greater than (>) sign, the test is always right-tailed. 
As shown in Figure 9.4, in a right-tailed test, the rejection region is in the right tail of the distribu-
tion curve. The area of this rejection region is equal to α, the significance level. Like a left-tailed 
test, a right-tailed test has only one critical value.
 
Again, assuming H0 is true, the sampling distribution of x has a mean equal to $471,257 (the 
value of μ in H0). We will reject H0 if the value of x obtained from the sample falls in the rejection 
region. Otherwise, we will not reject H0.
 
Table 9.3 summarizes the foregoing discussion about the relationship between the signs in 
H0 and H1 and the tails of a test.
 
Note that the null hypothesis always has an equal to (=) or a greater than or equal to (≥) or 
a less than or equal to (≤) sign, and the alternative hypothesis always has a not equal to (≠) or a 
less than (<) or a greater than (>) sign.
 
In this text we will use the following two procedures to make tests of hypothesis:
1. 
The p-value approach. Under this procedure, we calculate what is called the p-value for the 
observed value of the sample statistic. If we have a predetermined significance level, then we 
compare the p-value with this significance level and make a decision. Note that here p 
stands for probability.
2. 
The critical-value approach. In this approach, we find the critical value(s) from a table 
(such as the normal distribution table or the t distribution table) and find the value of the test 
statistic for the observed value of the sample statistic. Then we compare these two values and 
make a decision.
Remember, the procedures to be learned in this chapter assume that data are obtained from a 
simple random sample. Also, remember that the critical point is included in the rejection region.
 Remember
Shaded
area is α
Nonrejection region
Rejection
region
Critical value
C
μ = $471,257
xx
Figure 9.4 A right-tailed test.
Table 9.3 Signs in H0 and H1 and Tails of a Test
 
Two-Tailed  
Left-Tailed 
Right-Tailed
 
Test 
Test 
Test
Sign in the null 
hypothesis H0 
= 
= or ≥ 
= or ≤
Sign in the alternative 
hypothesis H1 
≠ 
< 
>
Rejection region 
In both tails 
In the left tail 
In the right tail
www.ebook3000.com

354
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
9.2 Hypothesis Tests About μ: σ Known
EXERCISES
APPLICATIONS
9.7 Write the null and alternative hypotheses for each of the follow-
ing examples. Determine if each is a case of a two-tailed, a left-tailed, 
or a right-tailed test.
a. To test if the mean number of hours spent working per week 
by college students who hold jobs is different from 20 hours
b. To test whether or not a bank’s ATM is out of service for an 
average of more than 10 hours per month
c. To test if the mean length of experience of airport security 
guards is different from 3 years
d. To test if the mean credit card debt of college seniors is less 
than $1000
e. To test if the mean time a customer has to wait on the phone 
to speak to a representative of a mail-order company about 
unsatisfactory service is more than 12 minutes
9.8 Write the null and alternative hypotheses for each of the follow-
ing examples. Determine if each is a case of a two-tailed, a left-tailed, 
or a right-tailed test.
a. To test if the mean amount of time spent per week watching 
sports on television by all adult men is different from 9.5 hours
b. To test if the mean amount of money spent by all customers at 
a supermarket is less than $105
c. To test whether the mean starting salary of college graduates 
is higher than $47,000 per year
d. To test if the mean waiting time at the drive-through 
window at a fast food restaurant during rush hour differs from 
10 minutes
e. To test if the mean time spent per week on house chores by all 
housewives is less than 30 hours
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
9.1 Briefly explain the meaning of each of the following terms.
a. Null hypothesis 
b. Alternative hypothesis
c. Critical point(s) 
d. Significance level
e. Nonrejection region 
f. Rejection region
g. Tails of a test 
h. Two types of errors
9.2 What are the four possible outcomes for a test of hypothesis? 
Show these outcomes by writing a table. Briefly describe the Type I 
and Type II errors.
9.3 Explain how the tails of a test depend on the sign in the alterna-
tive hypothesis. Describe the signs in the null and alternative hypoth-
eses for a two-tailed, a left-tailed, and a right-tailed test, respectively.
9.4 Explain which of the following is a two-tailed test, a left-tailed 
test, or a right-tailed test.
a. H0: μ = 12, H1: μ < 12
b. H0: μ ≤ 85, H1: μ > 85
c. H0: μ = 33, H1: μ ≠ 33
Show the rejection and nonrejection regions for each of these cases by 
drawing a sampling distribution curve for the sample mean, assuming 
that it is normally distributed.
9.5 Which of the two hypotheses (null and alternative) is initially 
assumed to be true in a test of hypothesis?
9.6 Consider H0: μ = 55 versus H1: μ ≠ 55.
a. What type of error would you make if the null hypothesis is 
actually false and you fail to reject it?
b. What type of error would you make if the null hypothesis is 
actually true and you reject it?
This section explains how to perform a test of hypothesis for the population mean μ when the 
population standard deviation σ is known. As in Section 8.2 of Chapter 8, here also there are three 
possible cases as follows.
Case I. If the following three conditions are fulfilled:
1. 
The population standard deviation σ is known
2. 
The sample size is small (i.e., n < 30)
3. 
The population from which the sample is selected is approximately normally distributed, 
then we use the normal distribution to perform a test of hypothesis about μ because from 
Section 7.3.1 of Chapter 7 the sampling distribution of x is normal with its mean equal to μ and 
the standard deviation equal to σx = σ∕√n, assuming that n∕N ≤.05.
Case II. If the following two conditions are fulfilled:
1. 
The population standard deviation σ is known
2. 
The sample size is large (i.e., n ≥30),
then, again, we use the normal distribution to perform a test of hypothesis about μ because from 
Section 7.3.2 of Chapter 7, due to the central limit theorem, the sampling distribution of x is 
(approximately) normal with its mean equal to μ and the standard deviation equal to σx = σ∕√n, 
assuming that n∕N ≤.05.

9.2 Hypothesis Tests About μ: σ Known
355
Case III. If the following three conditions are fulfilled:
1. 
The population standard deviation σ is known
2. 
The sample size is small (i.e., n < 30)
3. The population from which the sample is selected is not normally distributed (or the shape 
of its distribution is unknown), 
then we use a nonparametric method (explained in Chapter 15) to perform a test of hypothesis 
about μ.
 
This section will cover the first two cases. The procedure for performing a test of hypoth-
esis about μ is the same in both these cases. Note that in Case I, the population does not have to 
be exactly normally distributed. As long as it is close to the normal distribution without any 
outliers, we can use the normal distribution procedure. In Case II, although 30 is considered a 
large sample, if the population distribution is very different from the normal distribution, then 
30 may not be a large enough sample size for the sampling distribution of x to be normal and, 
hence, to use the normal distribution.
 
The following chart summarizes the above three cases.
 
Below we explain two procedures, the p-value approach and the critical-value approach, to 
test hypotheses about μ under Cases I and II. We will use the normal distribution to perform such 
tests.
 
Note that the two approaches—the p-value approach and the critical-value approach—are 
not mutually exclusive. We do not need to use one or the other. We can use both at the same time.
9.2.1 The p-Value Approach
In this procedure, we find a probability value such that a given null hypothesis is rejected for any 
α (significance level) greater than or equal to this value and it is not rejected for any α less than 
this value. The probability-value approach, more commonly called the p-value approach, gives 
such a value. In this approach, we calculate the p-value for the test, which is defined as the small-
est level of significance at which the given null hypothesis is rejected. Using this p-value, we state 
the decision. If we have a predetermined value of α, then we compare the value of p with α and 
make a decision.
p-Value Assuming that the null hypothesis is true, the p-value can be defined as the probability 
that a sample statistic (such as the sample mean) is at least as far away from the hypothesized 
value of the parameter in the direction of the alternative hypothesis as the one obtained from the 
sample data under consideration. Note that the p-value is the smallest significance level at which 
the null hypothesis is rejected.
Use the normal distribution 
to test a hypothesis about μ
Use a nonparametric method 
to test a hypothesis about μ
Case I
1. n < 30
2.  Population is 
approximately normal
Case II
n ≥ 30
Case III
1. n < 30
2.  Population is not normal
σ Is Known
www.ebook3000.com

356
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
Using the p-value approach, we reject the null hypothesis if
p-value ≤α or α ≥p-value
and we do not reject the null hypothesis if
p-value > α or α < p-value
 
For a one-tailed test, the p-value is given by the area in the tail of the sampling distribution 
curve beyond the observed value of the sample statistic. Figure 9.5 shows the p-value for a 
right-tailed test about μ. For a left-tailed test, the p-value will be the area in the lower tail of the 
sampling distribution curve to the left of the observed value of x.
 
For a two-tailed test, the p-value is twice the area in the tail of the sampling distribution 
curve beyond the observed value of the sample statistic. Figure 9.6 shows the p-value for a two-
tailed test. Each of the areas in the two tails gives one-half the p-value.
 
To find the area under the normal distribution curve beyond the sample mean x, we first find 
the z value for x using the following formula.
p-value
Value of  observed
from the sample
x
x
x
μ
Figure 9.5 The p-value for a right-tailed test.
The sum of these two
areas gives the p-value
Value of  observed
from the sample
x
x
x
μ
Figure 9.6 The p-value for a two-tailed test.
Calculating the z Value for x When using the normal distribution, the value of z for x for a 
test of hypothesis about μ is computed as follows:
z = x −μ
σ x  where σ x =
σ
√n
The value of z calculated for x using this formula is also called the observed value of z.
 
Then we find the area under the tail of the normal distribution curve beyond this value of z. 
This area gives the p-value or one-half the p-value, depending on whether the test is a one-tailed 
test or a two-tailed test.

9.2 Hypothesis Tests About μ: σ Known
357
 
A test of hypothesis procedure that uses the p-value approach involves the following four 
steps.
 
Examples 9–1 and 9–2 illustrate the calculation and use of the p-value to test a hypothesis 
using the normal distribution.
EXAMPLE 9–1 
Learning a Food Processing Job
At Canon Food Corporation, it used to take an average of 90 minutes for new workers to learn a 
food processing job. Recently the company installed a new food processing machine. The super-
visor at the company wants to find if the mean time taken by new workers to learn the food pro-
cessing procedure on this new machine is different from 90 minutes. A random sample of 20 
workers showed that it took, on average, 85 minutes for them to learn the food processing proce-
dure on the new machine. It is known that the learning times for all new workers are approxi-
mately normally distributed with a population standard deviation of 7 minutes. Find the p-value 
for the test that the mean learning time for the food processing procedure on the new machine is 
different from 90 minutes. What will your conclusion be if α = .01?
Solution Let μ be the mean time (in minutes) taken to learn the food processing procedure on 
the new machine by all workers, and let x be the corresponding sample mean. From the given 
information,
n = 20, x = 85 minutes, σ = 7 minutes, and α = .01
To calculate the p-value and perform the test, we apply the following four steps.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 H0: μ = 90 minutes
 H1: μ ≠90 minutes
Note that the null hypothesis states that the mean time for learning the food processing procedure 
on the new machine is 90 minutes, and the alternative hypothesis states that this time is different 
from 90 minutes.
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
Here, the population standard deviation σ is known, the sample size is small (n < 30), but 
the population distribution is approximately normal. Hence, the sampling distribution of x is 
approximately normal with its mean equal to μ and the standard deviation equal to σ x = σ∕√n. 
Consequently, we will use the normal distribution to find the p-value and make the test.
Step 3. Calculate the p-value.
 
The ≠ sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates that the test is two-tailed. The p-value is 
equal to twice the area in the tail of the sampling distribution curve of x to the left of x = 85, as 
shown in Figure 9.7 on page 358. To find this area, we first find the z value for x = 85 as follows:
 σ x =
σ
√n
=
7
√20
= 1.56524758 minutes
 z = x −μ
σ x
=
85 −90
1.56524758 = −3.19
Performing a hypothesis test 
using the p-value approach for 
a two-tailed test with the normal 
distribution.
Steps to Perform a Test of Hypothesis Using the p-Value Approach
1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
2. Select the distribution to use.
3. Calculate the p-value.
4. Make a decision.
www.ebook3000.com

358
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
The area to the left of x = 85 is equal to the area under the standard normal curve to the left of 
z = −3.19. From the normal distribution table, the area to the left of z = −3.19 is .0007.
Consequently, the p-value is
p-value = 2(.0007) = .0014
Step 4. Make a decision.
 
Thus, based on the p-value of .0014, we can state that for any α (significance level) greater 
than or equal to .0014, we will reject the null hypothesis stated in Step 1, and for any α less than 
.0014, we will not reject the null hypothesis.
 
Because α = .01 is greater than the p-value of .0014, we reject the null hypothesis at this 
significance level. Therefore, we conclude that the mean time for learning the food processing 
procedure on the new machine is different from 90 minutes. 
◼ 
EXAMPLE 9–2 
Losing Weight by Joining a Health Club
The management of Priority Health Club claims that its members lose an average of 10 pounds 
or more within the first month after joining the club. A consumer agency that wanted to check 
this claim took a random sample of 36 members of this health club and found that they lost an 
average of 9.2 pounds within the first month of membership. The population standard deviation 
is known to be 2.4 pounds. Find the p-value for this test. What will your decision be if α = .01? 
What if α = .05?
Solution Let μ be the mean weight lost during the first month of membership by all mem-
bers of this health club, and let x be the corresponding mean for the sample. From the given 
information,
n = 36, x = 9.2 pounds, and σ = 2.4 pounds
The claim of the club is that its members lose, on average, 10 pounds or more within the first 
month of membership. To perform the test using the p-value approach, we apply the following 
four steps.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 H0: μ ≥10 (The mean weight lost is 10 pounds or more.)
 H1: μ < 10 (The mean weight lost is less than 10 pounds.)
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
Here, the population standard deviation σ is known, and the sample size is large (n ≥ 30). 
Hence, the sampling distribution of x is normal (due to the central limit theorem) with its mean 
equal to μ and the standard deviation equal to σ x = σ∕√n. Consequently, we will use the normal 
distribution to find the p-value and perform the test.
Performing a hypothesis test 
using the p-value approach for 
a one-tailed test with the normal 
distribution.
z value for  = 85
μ = 90
 = 85
 −3.19
z
0
.0007
The sum of these two
areas gives the p-value
.0007
x
x
x
Figure 9.7 The p-value for a two-tailed test.
© Christopher Futcher/iStockphoto

9.2 Hypothesis Tests About μ: σ Known
359
Step 3. Calculate the p-value.
 
The < sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates that the test is left-tailed. The p-value is 
given by the area to the left of x = 9.2 under the sampling distribution curve of x, as shown in 
Figure 9.8. To find this area, we first find the z value for x = 9.2 as follows:
 σ x =
σ
√n
= 2.4
√36
= .40
 z = x −μ
σ x
= 9.2 −10
.40
= −2.00
The area to the left of x = 9.2 under the sampling distribution of x is equal to the area under the 
standard normal curve to the left of z = −2.00. From the normal distribution table, the area to the 
left of z = −2.00 is .0228. Consequently,
p-value = .0228
Step 4. Make a decision.
 
Thus, based on the p-value of .0228, we can state that for any α (significance level) greater 
than or equal to .0228 we will reject the null hypothesis stated in Step 1, and for any α less than 
.0228 we will not reject the null hypothesis.
 
Since α = .01 is less than the p-value of .0228, we do not reject the null hypothesis at this 
significance level. Consequently, we conclude that there is not significant evidence to reject the 
claim that the mean weight lost within the first month of membership by the members of this club 
is 10 pounds or more.
 
Now, because α = .05 is greater than the p-value of .0228, we reject the null hypothesis at 
this significance level. In this case we conclude that the mean weight lost within the first month 
of membership by the members of this club is less than 10 pounds. 
◼ 
9.2.2 The Critical-Value Approach
In this procedure, we have a predetermined value of the significance level α. The value of α gives 
the total area of the rejection region(s). First we find the critical value(s) of z from the normal 
distribution table for the given significance level. Then we find the value of the test statistic z for 
the observed value of the sample statistic x. Finally we compare these two values and make a 
decision. Remember, if the test is one-tailed, there is only one critical value of z, and it is obtained 
by using the value of α which gives the area in the left or right tail of the normal distribution curve 
depending on whether the test is left-tailed or right-tailed, respectively. However, if the test is 
two-tailed, there are two critical values of z and they are obtained by using α∕2 area in each tail 
of the normal distribution curve. The value of the test statistic is obtained as follows.
z value for
 = 9.2
 = 9.2
z
0
−2.00
p = .0228
μ = 10
x
x
x
Figure 9.8 The p-value for a 
left-tailed test.
Test Statistic In tests of hypotheses about μ using the normal distribution, the random variable
z = x −μ
σx  where σx =
σ
√n
is called the test statistic. The test statistic can be defined as a rule or criterion that is used to 
make the decision on whether or not to reject the null hypothesis.
www.ebook3000.com

360
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
 
A test of hypothesis procedure that uses the critical-value approach involves the following 
five steps.
 
Examples 9–3 and 9–4 illustrate the use of these five steps to perform tests of hypotheses 
about the population mean μ. Example 9–3 is concerned with a two-tailed test, and Example 9–4 
describes a one-tailed test.
EXAMPLE 9–3 
Lengths of Long-Distance Calls
The TIV Telephone Company provides long-distance telephone service in an area. According to 
the company’s records, the average length of all long-distance calls placed through this company 
in 2015 was 12.44 minutes. The company’s management wanted to check if the mean length of 
the current long-distance calls is different from 12.44 minutes. A sample of 150 such calls placed 
through this company produced a mean length of 13.71 minutes. The standard deviation of all 
such calls is 2.65 minutes. Using a 2% significance level, can you conclude that the mean length 
of all current long-distance calls is different from 12.44 minutes?
Solution Let μ be the mean length of all current long-distance calls placed through this 
company and x be the corresponding mean for the sample. From the given information,
n = 150, x = 13.71 minutes, and σ = 2.65 minutes
We are to test whether or not the mean length of all current long-distance calls is different from 
12.44 minutes. The significance level α is .02; that is, the probability of rejecting the null hypoth-
esis when it actually is true should not exceed .02. This is the probability of making a Type I error. 
We perform the test of hypothesis using the five steps as follows.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
Notice that we are testing to find whether or not the mean length of all current long-distance 
calls is different from 12.44 minutes. We write the null and alternative hypotheses as follows.
 
 H0: μ = 12.44 (The mean length of all current long-distance calls is 12.44 minutes.)
 
 H1: μ ≠12.44  (The mean length of all current long-distance calls is different from 
12.44 minutes.)
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
Here, the population standard deviation σ is known, and the sample size is large (n ≥ 30). 
Hence, the sampling distribution of x is (approximately) normal (due to the central limit 
theorem) with its mean equal to μ and the standard deviation equal to σx = σ∕√n. Consequently, 
we will use the normal distribution to perform the test.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The significance level is .02. The ≠ sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates that the test 
is two-tailed with two rejection regions, one in each tail of the normal distribution curve of x. 
Because the total area of both rejection regions is .02 (the significance level), the area of the 
rejection region in each tail is .01; that is,
Area in each tail = α∕2 = .02∕2 = .01
Conducting a two-tailed test 
of hypothesis about μ using the 
critical-value approach: 
σ known and n ≥ 30.
Steps to Perform a Test of Hypothesis with the Critical-Value Approach
1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
2. Select the distribution to use.
3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
5. Make a decision.

9.2 Hypothesis Tests About μ: σ Known
361
These areas are shown in Figure 9.9. Two critical points in this figure separate the two rejection 
regions from the nonrejection region. Next, we find the z values for the two critical points using 
the area of the rejection region. To find the z values for these critical points, we look for .0100 and 
.9900 areas in the normal distribution table. From Table IV of Appendix B, the z values of the two 
critical points, as shown in Figure 9.9, are approximately −2.33 and 2.33.
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
The decision to reject or not to reject the null hypothesis will depend on whether the evi-
dence from the sample falls in the rejection or the nonrejection region. If the value of x falls in 
either of the two rejection regions, we reject H0. Otherwise, we do not reject H0. The value of x 
obtained from the sample is called the observed value of x. To locate the position of x = 13.71 
on the sampling distribution curve of x in Figure 9.9, we first calculate the z value for x = 13.71. 
This is called the value of the test statistic. Then, we compare the value of the test statistic with 
the two critical values of z, −2.33 and 2.33, shown in Figure 9.9. If the value of the test statistic 
is between −2.33 and 2.33, we do not reject H0. If the value of the test statistic is either greater 
than or equal to 2.33 or less than or equal to −2.33, we reject H0.
 
The value of x from the sample is 13.71. We calculate the z value as follows:
 σ x =
σ
√n
= 2.65
√150
= .21637159
 z = x −μ
σ x
= 13.71 −12.44
.21637159
= 5.87
The value of μ in the calculation of the z value is substituted from the null hypothesis. The value 
of z = 5.87 calculated for x is called the computed value of the test statistic z. This is the value 
of z that corresponds to the value of x observed from the sample. It is also called the observed 
value of z.
From H0
Calculating the Value of the Test Statistic When using the normal distribution, the value of 
the test statistic z for x for a test of hypothesis about μ is computed as follows:
 z = x −μ
σ x
where 
 σ x =
σ
√n
This value of z for x is also called the observed value of z.
0
2.33
−2.33
Two critical values of z
z
/2 = .01
/2 = .01
x
α
α
μ = 12.44
Do not reject H0
Reject H0
Reject H0
Figure 9.9 Rejection and nonrejection regions.
www.ebook3000.com

362
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
In the final step we make a decision based on the location of the value of the test statistic z 
computed for x in Step 4. This value of z = 5.87 is greater than the critical value of z = 2.33, and 
it falls in the rejection region in the right tail in Figure 9.9. Hence, we reject H0 and conclude that 
based on the sample information, it appears that the current mean length of all such calls is not 
equal to 12.44 minutes.
 
By rejecting the null hypothesis, we are stating that the difference between the sample mean, 
x = 13.71 minutes, and the hypothesized value of the population mean, μ = 12.44 minutes, is too 
large and may not have occurred because of chance or sampling error alone. This difference 
seems to be real and, hence, the mean length of all such calls is currently different from 12.44 
minutes. Note that the rejection of the null hypothesis does not necessarily indicate that the mean 
length of all such calls is currently definitely different from 12.44 minutes. It simply indicates 
that there is strong evidence (from the sample) that the current mean length of such calls is not 
equal to 12.44 minutes. There is a possibility that the current mean length of all such calls is equal 
to 12.44 minutes, but by the luck of the draw we selected a sample with a mean that is too far 
from the hypothesized mean of 12.44 minutes. If so, we have wrongfully rejected the null hypoth-
esis H0. This is a Type I error and its probability is .02 in this example. 
◼ 
 
We can use the p-value approach to perform the test of hypothesis in Example 9–3. In this 
example, the test is two-tailed. The p-value is equal to twice the area under the sampling distribu-
tion of x to the right of x = 13.71. As calculated in Step 4 above, the z value for x = 13.71 is 5.87. 
From the normal distribution table, the area to the right of z = 5.87 is (approximately) zero. 
Hence, the p-value is (approximately) zero. (If you use technology, you will obtain the p-value of 
.000000002.) As we know from earlier discussions, we will reject the null hypothesis for any α 
(significance level) that is greater than or equal to the p-value. Consequently, in this example, we 
will reject the null hypothesis for any α > 0 approximately. Since α = .02 here, which is greater 
than zero, we reject the null hypothesis.
EXAMPLE 9–4 
Net Worth of Families in a City
The mayor of a large city claims that the average net worth of families living in this city is at least 
$300,000. A random sample of 25 families selected from this city produced a mean net worth of 
$288,000. Assume that the net worths of all families in this city have an approximate normal 
distribution with the population standard deviation of $80,000. Using a 2.5% significance level, 
can you conclude that the mayor’s claim is false?
Solution Let μ be the mean net worth of families living in this city and x be the corresponding 
mean for the sample. From the given information,
n = 25, x = $288,000, and σ = $80,000
The significance level is α = .025.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
We are to test whether or not the mayor’s claim is false. The mayor’s claim is that the average 
net worth of families living in this city is at least $300,000. Hence, the null and alternative 
hypotheses are as follows:
 
 H0: μ ≥$300,000  (The mayor’s claim is true. The mean net worth 
is at least $300,000.)
 
 H1: μ < $300,000  (The mayor’s claim is false. The mean net worth 
is less than $300,000.)
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
Here, the population standard deviation σ is known, the sample size is small (n < 30), but 
the population distribution is approximately normal. Hence, the sampling distribution of x is 
approximately normal with its mean equal to μ and the standard deviation equal to σx = σ∕√n. 
Consequently, we will use the normal distribution to perform the test.
Conducting a left-tailed test 
of hypothesis about μ using the 
critical-value approach: σ known, 
n < 30, and population normal.

9.2 Hypothesis Tests About μ: σ Known
363
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The significance level is .025. The < sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates that the test 
is left-tailed with the rejection region in the left tail of the sampling distribution curve of x. The 
critical value of z, obtained from the normal table for .0250 area in the left tail, is −1.96, as shown 
in Figure 9.10.
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
The value of the test statistic z for x = $288,000 is calculated as follows:
 σ x =
σ
√n
= 80,000
√25
= $16,000
 z = x −μ
σ x
= 288,000 −300,000
16,000
= −.75
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
The value of the test statistic z = −.75 is greater than the critical value of z = −1.96, and it 
falls in the nonrejection region. As a result, we fail to reject H0. Therefore, we can state that based 
on the sample information, it appears that the mean net worth of families in this city is not less 
than $300,000. Note that we are not concluding that the mean net worth is definitely not less than 
$300,000. By not rejecting the null hypothesis, we are saying that the information obtained from 
the sample is not strong enough to reject the null hypothesis and to conclude that the mayor’s 
claim is false. 
◼ 
 
We can use the p-value approach to perform the test of hypothesis in Example 9–4. In this 
example, the test is left-tailed. The p-value is given by the area under the sampling distribution of 
x to the left of x = $288,000. As calculated in Step 4 above, the z value for x = $288,000 is −.75. 
From the normal distribution table, the area to the left of z = −.75 is .2266. Hence, the p-value is 
.2266. We will reject the null hypothesis for any α (significance level) that is greater than or equal 
to the p-value. Consequently, we will reject the null hypothesis in this example for any α ≥.2266. 
Since in this example α = .025, which is less than .2266, we fail to reject the null hypothesis.
 
In studies published in various journals, authors usually use the terms significantly different 
and not significantly different when deriving conclusions based on hypothesis tests. These 
terms are short versions of the terms statistically significantly different and statistically not sig-
nificantly different. The expression significantly different means that the difference between the 
observed value of the sample mean x and the hypothesized value of the population mean μ is so 
large that it probably did not occur because of the sampling error alone. Consequently, the null 
hypothesis is rejected. In other words, the difference between x and μ is statistically significant. 
Thus, the statement significantly different is equivalent to saying that the null hypothesis is 
rejected. In Example 9–3, we can state as a conclusion that the observed value of x = 13.71 min-
utes is significantly different from the hypothesized value of μ = 12.44 minutes. That is, the 
mean length of all current long-distance calls is different from 12.44 minutes.
Do not reject H0
Critical value of z
 = .025
Reject H0
−1.96
z
0
μ = $300,000
x
α
Figure 9.10 Rejection and nonrejection regions.
From H0
www.ebook3000.com

AVERAGE STUDENT 
LOAN DEBT FOR 
THE CLASS OF 
2013
CASE STUDY 9–1
According to estimates by the Project on Student Debt study, 69% of college students who graduated in 
2013 had loans to pay. The accompanying chart lists the U.S. average and the averages of such debts for a 
few selected states for students in the class of 2013 who graduated with loans. Remember that each of 
these averages is based on a survey of students who graduated in 2013 with debt. For example, U.S. college 
graduates in 2013 owed an average of $28,400. Students who graduated with loans from colleges in New 
Hampshire in 2013 had the highest average debt of $32,795, and those who graduated with loans from col-
leges in New Mexico had the lowest average debt of $18,656. Note that these averages are based on sample 
surveys. Suppose we want to find out if the average debt for students in Ohio was higher than the U.S. aver-
age of $28,400. Suppose that the average debt for Ohio college students in the class of 2013 is based on a 
random sample of 900 students who graduated with loans. Assume that the standard deviation of the loans 
for all Ohio students in the class of 2013 was $4800 and the significance level is 1%. The test is right-tailed 
because we are testing the hypothesis that the average debt for the class of 2013 in Ohio (which was 
$29,090) was higher than $28,400. The null and alternative hypotheses are
H0: μ = $28,400
H1: μ > $28,400
Here, n = 900, x = $29,090, σ = $4800, and α = .01. The population standard deviation is known, and the 
sample is large. Hence, we can use the normal distribution to perform this test. Using the normal distribution 
to perform the test, we find that the critical value of z is 2.33 for .01 area in the right tail of the normal curve. 
We find the observed value of z as follows.
 σ x =
σ
√n
= 4800
√900
= $160
 z =
x −μ
σ x
= 29,090 −28,400
160
= 4.31
 
The value of the test statistic z = 4.31 for x is larger than the critical value of z = 2.33, and it falls in the 
rejection region. Consequently, we reject H0 and conclude that the average debt of students who graduated 
in 2013 from colleges in Ohio is higher than $28,400, which is the average for the United States.
 
To use the p-value approach, we find the area under the normal curve to the right of z = 4.31 from the 
normal distribution table. This area is (approximately) .0000. Therefore, the p-value is .0000. Since α = .01 is 
larger than the p-value = .0000, we reject the null hypothesis.
Source: http://projectonstudentdebt.
org/files/pub/classof2013.pdf.
AVERAGE STUDENT LOAN DEBT FOR THE CLASS OF 2013
Data source: The Project on Student Debt, The Institute for College Access & Success
Texas       
 
       $25,244
California     
        $20,340
New Mexico     
    $18,656
New York     
 
           $26,381
New Hampshire      
 
 
$32,795
Pennsylvania       
 
             $32,528
Ohio       
 
 
    $29,090
      $28,400
U. S. AVERAGE
U. S. AVERAGE
DEBT
Tuition
Bill
364

9.2 Hypothesis Tests About μ: σ Known
365
 
On the other hand, the statement not significantly different means that the difference between 
the observed value of the sample mean x and the hypothesized value of the population mean μ is 
so small that it may have occurred just because of chance. Consequently, the null hypothesis is 
not rejected. Thus, the expression not significantly different is equivalent to saying that we fail to 
reject the null hypothesis. In Example 9–4, we can state as a conclusion that the observed value 
of x = $288,000 is not significantly less than the hypothesized value of μ = $300,000. In other 
words, the current mean net worth of households in this city is not less than $300,000.
 
Note that here significant does not mean that results are of practical importance to us. 
Significant here is related to rejecting or not rejecting the null hypothesis.
EXERCISES
of the population mean and the observed value of the sample mean is 
“statistically significant” or would you state that this difference is “statis-
tically not significant?” Explain.
9.19 For each of the following significance levels, what is the prob-
ability of making a Type I error?
a. α = .025  b. α = .05  c. α = .01
9.20 A random sample of 18 observations produced a sample 
mean of 9.24. Find the critical and observed values of z for each of 
the following tests of hypothesis using α = .05. The population 
standard deviation is known to be 5.40 and the population distribu-
tion is normal.
a. H0: μ = 8.5 versus H1: μ ≠ 8.5
b. H0: μ = 8.5 versus H1: μ > 8.5
9.21 Consider the null hypothesis H0: μ = 625. Suppose that a ran-
dom sample of 29 observations is taken from a normally distributed 
population with σ = 32. Using a significance level of .01, show the 
rejection and nonrejection regions on the sampling distribution curve 
of the sample mean and find the critical value(s) of z when the alterna-
tive hypothesis is as follows.
a. H1: μ ≠ 625  b. H1: μ > 625  c. H1: μ < 625
9.22 Consider H0: μ = 100 versus H1: μ ≠ 100.
a. A random sample of 64 observations produced a sample mean 
of 98. Using α = .01, would you reject the null hypothesis? 
The population standard deviation is known to be 12.
b. Another random sample of 64 observations taken from the 
same population produced a sample mean of 104. Using 
α = .01, would you reject the null hypothesis? The population 
standard deviation is known to be 12.
Comment on the results of parts a and b.
9.23 Consider H0: μ = 45 versus H1: μ < 45.
a. A random sample of 25 observations produced a sample 
mean of 41.8. Using α = .025, would you reject the null 
hypothesis? The population is known to be normally distrib-
uted with σ = 6.
b. Another random sample of 25 observations taken from the 
same population produced a sample mean of 43.8. Using α = 
.025, would you reject the null hypothesis? The population is 
known to be normally distributed with σ = 6.
Comment on the results of parts a and b.
9.24 Make the following tests of hypotheses.
a. H0: μ = 80, H1: μ ≠ 80, n = 33, x = 76.5, σ = 15, α = .10
b. H0: μ = 32, H1: μ < 32,  n = 75, x = 26.5,  σ = 7.4, α = .01
c. H0: μ = 55, H1: μ > 55, n = 40, x = 60.5, σ = 4,   α = .05
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
9.9 What are the five steps of a test of hypothesis using the critical 
value approach? Explain briefly.
9.10 What does the level of significance represent in a test of 
hypothesis? Explain.
9.11 By rejecting the null hypothesis in a test of hypothesis example, 
are you stating that the alternative hypothesis is true?
9.12 What is the difference between the critical value of z and the 
observed value of z?
9.13 Briefly explain the procedure used to calculate the p-value for 
a two-tailed and for a one-tailed test, respectively.
9.14 Find the p-value for each of the following hypothesis tests.
a. H0 : μ = 23, H1: μ ≠23, n = 50, 
x = 21.25, σ = 5
b. H0 : μ = 15, H1: μ < 15, n = 80, 
x = 13.25, σ = 5.5
c. H0: μ = 38, H1: μ > 38, n = 35, 
x = 40.25, σ = 7.2
9.15 Consider H0: μ = 72 versus H1: μ > 72. A random sample of 
16 observations taken from this population produced a sample mean 
of 75.2. The population is normally distributed with σ = 6.
a. Calculate the p-value.
b. Considering the p-value of part a, would you reject the null 
hypothesis if the test were made at a significance level of .01?
c. Considering the p-value of part a, would you reject the null 
hypothesis if the test were made at a significance level of .025?
9.16 For each of the following examples of tests of hypotheses 
about μ, show the rejection and nonrejection regions on the sampling 
distribution of the sample mean assuming that it is normal.
a. A two-tailed test with  α = .05 and n = 40
b. A left-tailed test with  α = .01 and n = 20
c. A right-tailed test with α = .02 and n = 55
9.17 Consider the following null and alternative hypotheses:
H0: μ = 25 versus H1: μ ≠25
Suppose you perform this test at α = .05 and reject the null hypothe-
sis. Would you state that the difference between the hypothesized 
value of the population mean and the observed value of the sample 
mean is “statistically significant” or would you state that this differ-
ence is “statistically not significant?” Explain.
9.18 Consider the following null and alternative hypotheses:
H0: μ = 60 versus H1: μ > 60
Suppose you perform this test at α = .01 and fail to reject the null hypoth-
esis. Would you state that the difference between the hypothesized value 
www.ebook3000.com

366
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
control department at the company takes a sample of 20 such rods 
every week, calculates the mean length of these rods, and tests the 
null hypothesis, μ = 36 inches, against the alternative hypothesis, 
μ ≠36 inches. If the null hypothesis is rejected, the machine is 
stopped and adjusted. A recent sample of 20 rods produced a mean 
length of 36.015 inches.
a. Calculate the p-value for this test of hypothesis. Based on this 
p-value, will the quality control inspector decide to stop the 
machine and adjust it if he chooses the maximum probability 
of a Type I error to be .02? What if the maximum probability 
of a Type I error is .10?
b. Test the hypothesis of part a using the critical-value approach 
and α = .02. Does the machine need to be adjusted? What if 
α = .10?
9.30 At Farmer’s Dairy, a machine is set to fill 32-ounce milk car-
tons. However, this machine does not put exactly 32 ounces of milk 
into each carton; the amount varies slightly from carton to carton 
but has an approximate normal distribution. It is known that when the 
machine is working properly, the mean net weight of these cartons is 
32 ounces. The standard deviation of the milk in all such cartons is 
always equal to .15 ounce. The quality control inspector at this company 
takes a sample of 25 such cartons every week, calculates the mean net 
weight of these cartons, and tests the null hypothesis, μ = 32 ounces, 
against the alternative hypothesis, μ ≠32 ounces. If the null hypothe-
sis is rejected, the machine is stopped and adjusted. A recent sample of 
25 such cartons produced a mean net weight of 31.93 ounces.
a. Calculate the p-value for this test of hypothesis. Based on this 
p-value, will the quality control inspector decide to stop the 
machine and adjust it if she chooses the maximum probability 
of a Type I error to be .01? What if the maximum probability 
of a Type I error is .05?
b. Test the hypothesis of part a using the critical-value approach 
and α = .01. Does the machine need to be adjusted? What if 
α = .05?
9.31 According to Moebs Services Inc., the average cost of an indi-
vidual checking account to major U.S. banks was $380 in 2013 (www.
moebs.com). A bank consultant wants to determine whether the cur-
rent mean cost of such checking accounts at major U.S. banks is more 
than $380 a year. A recent random sample of 150 such checking 
accounts taken from major U.S. banks produced a mean annual cost to 
them of $390. Assume that the standard deviation of annual costs to 
major banks of all such checking accounts is $60.
a. Find the p-value for this test of hypothesis. Based on this 
p-value, would you reject the null hypothesis if the maximum 
probability of Type I error is to be .05? What if the maximum 
probability of Type I error is to be .01?
b. Test the hypothesis of part a using the critical-value approach 
and α = .05. Would you reject the null hypothesis? What if 
α = .01? What if α = 0?
9.32 According to a survey by the College Board, undergraduate 
students at private nonprofit four-year colleges spent an average of 
$1244 on books and supplies in 2014–2015 (www.collegeboard.org). 
A recent random sample of 200 undergraduate college students 
from a large private nonprofit four-year college showed that they 
spent an average of $1204 on books and supplies during the last 
academic year. Assume that the standard deviation of annual expen-
ditures on books and supplies by all such students at this college is 
$200.
APPLICATIONS
9.25 The manufacturer of a certain brand of auto batteries claims 
that the mean life of these batteries is 45 months. A consumer protec-
tion agency that wants to check this claim took a random sample of 24 
such batteries and found that the mean life for this sample is 43.05 
months. The lives of all such batteries have a normal distribution with 
the population standard deviation of 4.5 months.
a. Find the p-value for the test of hypothesis with the alternative 
hypothesis that the mean life of these batteries is less than 
45 months. Will you reject the null hypothesis at α = .025?
b. Test the hypothesis of part a using the critical-value approach 
and α = .025.
9.26 According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, all workers in 
America who had a bachelor’s degree and were employed earned an 
average of $1224 a week in 2014. A recent sample of 400 American 
workers who have a bachelor’s degree showed that they earn an aver-
age of $1260 per week. Suppose that the population standard devia-
tion of such earnings is $160.
a. Find the p-value for the test of hypothesis with the alternative 
hypothesis that the current mean weekly earning of American 
workers who have a bachelor’s degree is higher than $1224. 
Will you reject the null hypothesis at α = .025?
b. Test the hypothesis of part a using the critical-value approach 
and α = .025.
9.27 According to the National Association of Colleges and 
Employers, the average starting salary of 2014 college graduates with 
a bachelor’s degree was $45,473 (www.naceweb.org). A random 
sample of 1000 recent college graduates from a large city showed that 
their average starting salary was $44,930. Suppose that the population 
standard deviation for the starting salaries of all recent college gradu-
ates from this city is $7820.
a. Find the p-value for the test of hypothesis with the alternative 
hypothesis that the average starting salary of recent college 
graduates from this city is less than $45,473. Will you reject 
the null hypothesis at α = .01? Explain. What if α = .025?
b. Test the hypothesis of part a using the critical-value approach. 
Will you reject the null hypothesis at α = .01? What if α = .025?
9.28 A telephone company claims that the mean duration of all 
long-distance phone calls made by its residential customers is 10 min-
utes. A random sample of 100 long-distance calls made by its residen-
tial customers taken from the records of this company showed that the 
mean duration of calls for this sample is 9.20 minutes. The population 
standard deviation is known to be 3.80 minutes.
a. Find the p-value for the test that the mean duration of all long-
distance calls made by residential customers of this company 
is different from 10 minutes. If α = .02, based on this p-value, 
would you reject the null hypothesis? Explain. What if 
α = .05?
b. Test the hypothesis of part a using the critical-value approach 
and α = .02. Does your conclusion change if α = .05?
9.29 Lazurus Steel Corporation produces iron rods that are sup-
posed to be 36 inches long. The machine that makes these rods does 
not produce each rod exactly 36 inches long. The lengths of the rods 
are approximately normally distributed and vary slightly. It is known 
that when the machine is working properly, the mean length of the 
rods is 36 inches. The standard deviation of the lengths of all rods 
produced on this machine is always equal to .035 inch. The quality 

9.3 Hypothesis Tests About μ: σ Not Known
367
9.3 Hypothesis Tests About μ: σ Not Known
9.33 A company claims that the mean net weight of the contents of its 
All Taste cereal boxes is at least 18 ounces. Suppose you want to test 
whether or not the claim of the company is true. Explain briefly how 
you would conduct this test using a large sample. Assume that σ = 
.25 ounce.
a. Find the p-value for the test of hypothesis with the alternative 
hypothesis that the annual mean expenditure by all such students 
at this college is less than $1244. Based on this p-value, would 
you reject the null hypothesis if the significance level is .025?
b. Test the hypothesis of part a using the critical-value 
approach and α = .025. Would you reject the null hypothesis? 
Explain.
This section explains how to perform a test of hypothesis about the population mean μ when 
the population standard deviation σ is not known. Here, again, there are three possible cases as 
follows.
Case I. If the following three conditions are fulfilled:
1. 
The population standard deviation σ is not known
2. 
The sample size is small (i.e., n < 30)
3. 
The population from which the sample is selected is approximately normally distributed, 
then we use the t distribution to perform a test of hypothesis about μ.
Case II. If the following two conditions are fulfilled:
1. 
The population standard deviation σ is not known
2. 
The sample size is large (i.e., n ≥ 30),
then again we use the t distribution to perform a test of hypothesis about μ.
Case III. If the following three conditions are fulfilled:
1. 
The population standard deviation σ is not known
2. 
The sample size is small (i.e., n < 30)
3. The population from which the sample is selected is not normally distributed (or the shape 
of its distribution is unknown), 
then we use a nonparametric method to perform a test of hypothesis about μ.
 
The following chart summarizes the above three cases.
 
Below we discuss Cases I and II and learn how to use the t distribution to perform a test of 
hypothesis about μ when σ is not known. When the conditions mentioned for Case I or Case II 
are satisfied, the random variable
t = x −μ
s x
  where  s x =
s
√n
Use the t distribution to 
test a hypothesis 
about μ
Use a nonparametric 
method to test a hypothesis 
about μ
Case I
1. n < 30
2.  Population is 
approximately normal
Case II
n ≥ 30
Case III
1. n < 30
2.  Population is not normal
σ Is Not Known
www.ebook3000.com

368
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
has a t distribution. Here, the t is called the test statistic to perform a test of hypothesis about a 
population mean μ.
Test Statistic The value of the test statistic t for the sample mean x is computed as
t = x −μ
s x  where s x =
s
√n
The value of t calculated for x by using this formula is also called the observed value of t.
 
In Section 9.2, we discussed two procedures, the p-value approach and the critical-value 
approach, to test hypotheses about μ when σ is known. In this section also we will use these two 
procedures to test hypotheses about μ when σ is not known. The steps used in these procedures 
are the same as in Section 9.2. The only difference is that we will be using the t distribution in 
place of the normal distribution.
9.3.1 The p-Value Approach
To use the p-value approach to perform a test of hypothesis about μ using the t distribution, we 
will use the same four steps that we used in such a procedure in Section 9.2.1. Although the 
p-value can be obtained very easily by using technology, we can use Table V of Appendix B to 
find a range for the p-value when technology is not available. Note that when using the t distri-
bution and Table V, we cannot find the exact p-value but only a range within which it falls.
 
Examples 9–5 and 9–6 illustrate the p-value procedure to test a hypothesis about μ using the 
t distribution.
EXAMPLE 9–5 
Age at Which Children Start Walking
A psychologist claims that the mean age at which children start walking is 12.5 months. Carol 
wanted to check if this claim is true. She took a random sample of 18 children and found that the 
mean age at which these children started walking was 12.9 months with a standard deviation of 
.80 month. It is known that the ages at which all children start walking are approximately nor-
mally distributed. Find the p-value for the test that the mean age at which all children start walk-
ing is different from 12.5 months. What will your conclusion be if the significance level is 1%?
Solution Let μ be the mean age at which all children start walking, and let x be the corre-
sponding mean for the sample. From the given information,
n = 18, 
x = 12.9 months, and s = .80 month
The claim of the psychologist is that the mean age at which children start walking is 12.5 months. 
To calculate the p-value and to make the decision, we apply the following four steps.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
We are to test if the mean age at which all children start walking is different from 12.5 
months. Hence, the null and alternative hypotheses are
 
H0: μ = 12.5 (The mean walking age is 12.5 months.)
 
H1: μ ≠12.5 (The mean walking age is different from 12.5 months.)
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
In this example, we do not know the population standard deviation σ, the sample size is small 
(n < 30), and the population is approximately normally distributed. Hence, it is Case I mentioned in 
the beginning of this section. Consequently, we will use the t distribution to find the p-value for this test.
Step 3. Calculate the p-value.
 
The ≠ sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates that the test is two-tailed. To find the 
p-value, first we find the degrees of freedom and the t value for x = 12.9 months. Then, the 
Finding a p-value and making a 
decision for a two-tailed test of 
hypothesis about μ: σ not known, 
n < 30, and population normal.

9.3 Hypothesis Tests About μ: σ Not Known
369
p-value is equal to twice the area in the tail of the t distribution curve beyond this t value for 
x = 12.9 months. This p-value is shown in Figure 9.11. We find this p-value as follows:
s x =
s
√n
= .80
√18
= .18856181
          t = x −μ
S x
= 12.9 −12.5
.18856181 = 2.121
and 
                              df = n −1 = 18 −1 = 17
Now we can find the range for the p-value. To do so, we go to Table V of Appendix B (the t dis-
tribution table) and find the row of df = 17. In this row, we find the two values of t that cover 
t = 2.121. From Table V, for df = 17, these two values of t are 2.110 and 2.567. The test statistic 
t = 2.121 falls between these two values. Now look in the top row of this table to find the areas 
in the tail of the t distribution curve that correspond to 2.110 and 2.567. These two areas are .025 
and .01, respectively. In other words, the area in the upper tail of the t distribution curve for 
df = 17 and t = 2.110 is .025, and the area in the upper tail of the t distribution curve for df = 17 
and t = 2.567 is .01. Because it is a two-tailed test, the p-value for t = 2.121 is between 
2(.025) = .05 and 2(.01) = .02, which can be written as
.02 < p-value < .05
Note that by using Table V of Appendix B, we cannot find the exact p-value but only a range for 
it. If we have access to technology, we can find the exact p-value. If we use technology for this 
example, we will obtain a p-value of .049.
From H0
Figure 9.11 The required p-value.
2.121
−2.121
t
0
The sum of these two
areas gives the p-value
Step 4. Make a decision.
 
Thus, we can state that for any α greater than or equal to .05 (the upper limit of the p-value 
range), we will reject the null hypothesis. For any α less than or equal to .02 (the lower limit of 
the p-value range), we will not reject the null hypothesis. However, if α is between .02 and .05, 
we cannot make a decision. Note that if we use technology, then the p-value we will obtain for 
this example is .049, and we can make a decision for any value of α. For our example, α = .01, 
which is less than the lower limit of the p-value range of .02. As a result, we fail to reject H0 and 
conclude that the mean age at which all children start walking is not significantly different from 
12.5 months. As a result, we can state that the difference between the hypothesized population 
mean and the sample mean is so small that it may have occurred because of sampling error. 
◼ 
EXAMPLE 9–6 
Life of Batteries
Grand Auto Corporation produces auto batteries. The company claims that its top-of-the-line 
Never Die batteries are good, on average, for at least 65 months. A consumer protection agency 
tested 45 such batteries to check this claim. It found that the mean life of these 45 batteries is 
63.4 months, and the standard deviation is 3 months. Find the p-value for the test that the mean 
life of all such batteries is less than 65 months. What will your conclusion be if the significance 
level is 2.5%?
Finding a p-value and making a 
decision for a left-tailed test of 
hypothesis about μ: σ not known 
and n ≥ 30.
www.ebook3000.com

370
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
Solution Let μ be the mean life of all such auto batteries, and let x be the corresponding mean 
for the sample. From the given information,
n = 45, 
x = 63.4 months, and s = 3 months
The claim of the company is that the mean life of these batteries is at least 65 months. To calcu-
late the p-value and make the decision, we apply the following four steps.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
We are to test if the mean life of these batteries is at least 65 months. Hence, the null and 
alternative hypotheses are
H0: μ ≥65  (The mean life of batteries is at least 65 months.)
H1: μ < 65  (The mean life of batteries is less than 65 months.)
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
In this example, we do not know the population standard deviation σ, and the sample size is 
large (n ≥ 30). Hence, it is Case II mentioned in the beginning of this section. Consequently, we 
will use the t distribution to find the p-value for this test.
Step 3. Calculate the p-value.
 
The < sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates that the test is left-tailed. To find the 
p-value, first we find the degrees of freedom and the t value for x = 63.4 months. Then, the 
p-value is given by the area in the tail of the t distribution curve beyond this t value for 
x = 63.4 months. This p-value is shown in Figure 9.12. We find this p-value as follows:
s x =
s
√n
=
3
√45
= .44721360
       t = x −μ
s x
= 63.4 −65
.44721360 = −3.578
and                                             df = n −1 = 45 −1 = 44
From H0
t
0
−3.578
p -value
Figure 9.12 The required p-value.
Now we can find the range for the p-value. To do so, we go to Table V of Appendix B (the t dis-
tribution table) and find the row of df = 44. In this row, we find the two values of t that cover 
t = 3.578. Note that we use the positive value of the test statistic t, although our test statistic has 
a negative value. From Table V, for df = 44, the largest value of t is 3.286, for which the area in 
the tail of the t distribution is .001. This means that the area to the left of t = −3.286 is .001. 
Because −3.578 is smaller than −3.286, the area to the left of t = −3.578 is smaller than .001. 
Therefore, the p-value for t = −3.578 is less than .001, which can be written as
p-value < .001
Thus, here the p-value has only the upper limit of .001. In other words, the p-value for this exam-
ple is less than .001. If we use technology for this example, we will obtain a p-value of .00043.
Step 4. Make a decision.
 
Thus, we can state that for any α greater than or equal to .001 (the upper limit of the p-value 
range), we will reject the null hypothesis. For our example α = .025, which is greater than the 
upper limit of the p-value of .001. As a result, we reject H0 and conclude that the mean life of 

9.3 Hypothesis Tests About μ: σ Not Known
371
such batteries is less than 65 months. Therefore, we can state that the difference between the 
hypothesized population mean of 65 months and the sample mean of 63.4 is too large to be attrib-
uted to sampling error alone. 
◼ 
9.3.2 The Critical-Value Approach
In this procedure, as mentioned in Section 9.2.2, we have a predetermined value of the signifi-
cance level α. The value of α gives the total area of the rejection region(s). First we find the 
critical value(s) of t from the t distribution table in Appendix B for the given degrees of freedom 
and the significance level. Then we find the value of the test statistic t for the observed value of 
the sample statistic x. Finally we compare these two values and make a decision. Remember, if 
the test is one-tailed, there is only one critical value of t, and it is obtained by using the value of 
α, which gives the area in the left or right tail of the t distribution curve, depending on whether 
the test is left-tailed or right-tailed, respectively. However, if the test is two-tailed, there are two 
critical values of t, and they are obtained by using α∕2 area in each tail of the t distribution curve. 
The value of the test statistic t is obtained as mentioned earlier in this section.
 
Examples 9–7 and 9–8 describe the procedure to test a hypothesis about μ using the critical-
value approach and the t distribution.
EXAMPLE 9–7 
Age at Which Children Start Walking
Refer to Example 9–5. A psychologist claims that the mean age at which children start walking 
is 12.5 months. Carol wanted to check if this claim is true. She took a random sample of 18 chil-
dren and found that the mean age at which these children started walking was 12.9 months with 
a standard deviation of .80 month. Using a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the mean 
age at which all children start walking is different from 12.5 months? Assume that the ages at 
which all children start walking have an approximate normal distribution.
Solution Let μ be the mean age at which all children start walking, and let x be the correspond-
ing mean for the sample. Then, from the given information,
n = 18, x = 12.9 months, s = .80 month, and α = .01
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
We are to test if the mean age at which all children start walking is different from 12.5 months. 
The null and alternative hypotheses are
 H0: μ = 12.5  (The mean walking age is 12.5 months.)
 H1: μ ≠12.5  (The mean walking age is different from 12.5 months.)
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
In this example, the population standard deviation σ is not known, the sample size is small 
(n < 30), and the population is approximately normally distributed. Hence, it is Case I men-
tioned in the beginning of Section 9.3. Consequently, we will use the t distribution to perform 
the test in this example.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The significance level is .01. The ≠ sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates that the test 
is two-tailed and the rejection region lies in both tails. The area of the rejection region in each tail 
of the t distribution curve is
 Area in each tail = α∕2 = .01∕2 = .005
 df = n −1 = 18 −1 = 17
From the t distribution table, the critical values of t for 17 degrees of freedom and .005 area in 
each tail of the t distribution curve are −2.898 and 2.898. These values are shown in Figure 9.13.
Conducting a two-tailed test 
of hypothesis about μ using 
the critical-value approach: 
σ unknown, n < 30, and 
population normal.
Cohen Ostrow/Digital Vision/
Getty Images
www.ebook3000.com

372
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
2.898
0
t
−2.898
 Two critical values of t
/2 = .005
Do not reject H0
Reject H0
Reject H0
/2 = .005
α
α
Figure 9.13 The critical values of t.
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
We calculate the value of the test statistic t for x = 12.9 as follows:
 s x =
s
√n
= .80
√18
= .18856181
 t = x −μ
s x
= 12.9 −12.5
.18856181 = 2.121
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
The value of the test statistic t = 2.121 falls between the two critical points, −2.898 and 
2.898, which is the nonrejection region. Consequently, we fail to reject H0. As a result, we can 
state that the difference between the hypothesized population mean and the sample mean is so 
small that it may have occurred because of sampling error. The mean age at which children start 
walking is not significantly different from 12.5 months. 
◼ 
From H0
EXAMPLE 9–8 
Waiting Time for Service at a Bank
The management at Massachusetts Savings Bank is always concerned about the quality of service 
provided to its customers. With the old computer system, a teller at this bank could serve, on 
average, 22 customers per hour. The management noticed that with this service rate, the waiting 
time for customers was too long. Recently the management of the bank installed a new computer 
system, expecting that it would increase the service rate and consequently make the customers 
happier by reducing the waiting time. To check if the new computer system is more efficient than 
the old system, the management of the bank took a random sample of 70 hours and found that 
during these hours the mean number of customers served by tellers was 27 per hour with a stand-
ard deviation of 2.5 customers. Testing at a 1% significance level, would you conclude that the 
new computer system is more efficient than the old computer system?
Solution Let μ be the mean number of customers served per hour by a teller using the new 
system, and let x be the corresponding mean for the sample. Then, from the given information,
n = 70 hours, x = 27 customers, s = 2.5 customers, and α = .01
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
We are to test whether or not the new computer system is more efficient than the old system. 
The new computer system will be more efficient than the old system if the mean number of cus-
tomers served per hour by using the new computer system is significantly more than 22; other-
wise, it will not be more efficient. The null and alternative hypotheses are
 H0: μ = 22  (The new computer system is not more efficient.)
 H1: μ > 22  (The new computer system is more efficient.)
Conducting a right-tailed 
test of hypothesis about μ using 
the critical-value approach: 
σ unknown and n ≥ 30.
PhotoDisc, Inc./Getty Images

9.3 Hypothesis Tests About μ: σ Not Known
373
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
In this example, the population standard deviation σ is not known and the sample size is 
large (n ≥ 30). Hence, it is Case II mentioned in the beginning of Section 9.3. Consequently, we 
will use the t distribution to perform the test for this example.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The significance level is .01. The > sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates that the test 
is right-tailed and the rejection region lies in the right tail of the t distribution curve.
 Area in the right tail = α = .01
 df = n −1 = 70 −1 = 69
From the t distribution table, the critical value of t for 69 degrees of freedom and .01 area in the 
right tail is 2.382. This value is shown in Figure 9.14.
2.382
Critical value of t
 = .01
0
t
Do not reject H0
Reject H0
α
Figure 9.14 The critical value of t.
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
The value of the test statistic t for x = 27 is calculated as follows:
 s x =
s
√n
= 2.5
√70
= .29880715
 t = x −μ
s x
=
27 −22
.29880715 = 16.733
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
The value of the test statistic t = 16.733 is greater than the critical value of t = 2.382 and falls 
in the rejection region. Consequently, we reject H0. As a result, we conclude that the value of the 
sample mean is very large compared to the hypothesized value of the population mean, and the 
difference between the two may not be attributed to chance alone. The mean number of custom-
ers served per hour using the new computer system is more than 22. The new computer system is 
more efficient than the old computer system. 
◼
Note: What if the Sample Size Is Large and the Number 
of df Is Not in the t Distribution Table?
In this section when σ is not known, we used the t distribution to perform tests of hypothesis 
about μ in Cases I and II. Note that in Case II, the sample size is large. If we have access to tech-
nology, it does not matter how large the sample size is, we can always use the t distribution. 
However, if we are using the t distribution table (Table V of Appendix B), this may pose a prob-
lem. Usually such a table goes only up to a certain number of degrees of freedom. For example, 
Table V in Appendix B goes only up to 75 degrees of freedom. Thus, if the sample size is larger 
than 76 (with df more than 75), we cannot use Table V to find the critical value(s) of t to make a 
From H0
www.ebook3000.com

374
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
decision in this section. In such a situation when n is large and is not included in the t distribution 
table, there are two options:
1. 
Use the t value from the last row (the row of ∞) in Table V of Appendix B.
2. 
Use the normal distribution as an approximation to the t distribution.
 
To use the normal distribution as an approximation to the t distribution to make a test of 
hypothesis about μ, the procedure is exactly like the one in Section 9.2, except that now we will 
replace σ by s, and σ x by s x.
 
Note that the t values obtained from the last row of the t distribution table are the same as 
will be obtained from the normal distribution table for the same areas in the upper tail or lower 
tail of the distribution. Again, note that here we can use the normal distribution as a convenience 
and as an approximation, but if we can, we should use the t distribution by using technology.
EXERCISES
9.40 Perform the following tests of hypothesis.
a. H0: μ = 285, 
H1: μ < 285, 
n = 55,
 
x = 267.80, 
s = 42.90, 
α = .05
b. H0: μ = 10.70, 
H1: μ ≠ 10.70, 
n = 47,
 
x = 12.025, 
s = 4.90, 
α = .01
c. H0: μ = 147,500, 
H1: μ > 147,500, 
n = 41,
 
x = 149,812, 
s = 22,972,  
α = .10
APPLICATIONS
9.41 The XO Group Inc., released the results of its annual Real 
Weddings Study on March 27, 2014 (www.theknot.com). According 
to this study, the average cost of a wedding in America was $29,858 
in 2013. A recent sample of 100 American couples who got married 
this year produced a mean wedding cost of $32,084 with a standard 
deviation of $9275. Using a 2.5% significance level and the critical- 
value approach, can you conclude that the current mean cost of a wed-
ding in America is higher than $29,858? Find the range for the p-value 
for this test. What will your conclusion be using this p-value range 
and α = .05?
9.42 The president of a university claims that the mean time spent par-
tying by all students at this university is not more than 7 hours per week. 
A random sample of 40 students taken from this university showed that 
they spent an average of 9.50 hours partying the previous week with a 
standard deviation of 2.3 hours. Test at a 2.5% significance level whether 
the president’s claim is true. Explain your conclusion in words.
9.43 A soft-drink manufacturer claims that its 12-ounce cans do not 
contain, on average, more than 30 calories. A random sample of 64 
cans of this soft drink, which were checked for calories, contained a 
mean of 32 calories with a standard deviation of 3 calories. Does the 
sample information support the alternative hypothesis that the manu-
facturer’s claim is false? Use a significance level of 5%. Find the 
range for the p-value for this test. What will your conclusion be using 
this p-value and α = .05?
9.44 According to ValuePenguin, the average annual cost of auto-
mobile insurance was $1388 in the state of Nevada in 2014 (www.
valuepenguin.com). An insurance broker is interested to find if the 
current mean annual rate of automobile insurance in Nevada is more 
than $1388. She took a random sample of 100 insured automobiles 
from the state of Nevada and found the mean annual automobile 
insurance rate of $1413 with a standard deviation of $122.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
9.34 Briefly explain the conditions that must hold true to use the t 
distribution to make a test of hypothesis about the population mean.
9.35 For each of the following examples of tests of hypothesis about 
μ, show the rejection and nonrejection regions on the t distribution 
curve.
a. A two-tailed test with   α = .02 and n = 20
b. A left-tailed test with   α = .01 and n = 16
c. A right-tailed test with α = .05 and n = 18
9.36 A random sample of 14 observations taken from a population 
that is normally distributed produced a sample mean of 212.37 and a 
standard deviation of 16.35. Find the critical and observed values of t 
and the range for the p-value for each of the following tests of hypoth-
eses, using α = .10.
a. H0: μ = 205 versus H1: μ ≠ 205
b. H0: μ = 205 versus H1: μ > 205
9.37 A random sample of 8 observations taken from a population 
that is normally distributed produced a sample mean of 44.98 and a 
standard deviation of 6.77. Find the critical and observed values of t 
and the range for the p-value for each of the following tests of hypoth-
eses, using α = .05.
a. H0: μ = 50 versus H1: μ ≠ 50
b. H0: μ = 50 versus H1: μ < 50
9.38 Consider the null hypothesis H0: μ = 100. Suppose that a ran-
dom sample of 35 observations is taken from this population to per-
form this test. Using a significance level of .01, show the rejection and 
nonrejection regions and find the critical value(s) of t when the alter-
native hypothesis is as follows.
a. H1: μ ≠ 100  b. H1: μ > 100  c. H1: μ < 100
9.39 Consider H0: μ = 80 versus H1: μ ≠ 80 for a population that is 
normally distributed.
a. A random sample of 25 observations taken from this popula-
tion produced a sample mean of 77 and a standard deviation 
of 8. Using α = .01, would you reject the null hypothesis?
b. Another random sample of 25 observations taken from the 
same population produced a sample mean of 86 and a stand-
ard deviation of 6. Using α = .01, would you reject the null 
hypothesis?
Comment on the results of parts a and b.

9.4 Hypothesis Tests About a Population Proportion: Large Samples
375
a.  Using a 1% significance level and the critical-value approach, 
can you conclude that the current mean annual automobile 
insurance rate in Nevada is higher than $1388?
b. Find the range for the p-value for this test. What will your 
conclusion be using this p-value range and α = .01?
9.45 The manager of a restaurant in a large city claims that waiters 
working in all restaurants in his city earn an average of $150 or more 
in tips per week. A random sample of 25 waiters selected from restau-
rants of this city yielded a mean of $139 in tips per week with a stand-
ard deviation of $28. Assume that the weekly tips for all waiters in this 
city have a normal distribution.
a. Using a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the man-
ager’s claim is true? Use both approaches.
b. What is the Type I error in this exercise? Explain. What is the 
probability of making such an error?
9.46 According to an estimate, 2 years ago the average age of all 
CEOs of medium-sized companies in the United States was 58 years. 
Jennifer wants to check if this is still true. She took a random sample 
of 70 such CEOs and found their mean age to be 55 years with a 
standard deviation of 6 years.
a. Suppose that the probability of making a Type I error is 
selected to be zero. Can you conclude that the current mean 
age of all CEOs of medium-sized companies in the United 
States is different from 58 years?
b. Using a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the cur-
rent mean age of all CEOs of medium-sized companies in the 
United States is different from 58 years? Use both approaches.
9.47 A past study claimed that adults in America spent an average of 
18 hours a week on leisure activities. A researcher wanted to test this 
claim. She took a sample of 12 adults and asked them about the time 
they spend per week on leisure activities. Their responses (in hours) 
are as follows.
13.6 14.0 24.5 24.6 22.9 37.7 14.6 14.5 21.5 21.0 17.8 21.4
Assume that the times spent on leisure activities by all American 
adults are normally distributed. Using a 10% significance level, can 
you conclude that the average amount of time spent by American 
adults on leisure activities has changed? (Hint: First calculate the 
sample mean and the sample standard deviation for these data using 
the formulas learned in Sections 3.1.1 and 3.2.2 of Chapter 3. Then 
make the test of hypothesis about μ.)
9.48 The past records of a supermarket show that its customers 
spend an average of $95 per visit at this store. Recently the manage-
ment of the store initiated a promotional campaign according to which 
each customer receives points based on the total money spent at the 
store, and these points can be used to buy products at the store. The 
management expects that as a result of this campaign, the customers 
should be encouraged to spend more money at the store. To check 
whether this is true, the manager of the store took a sample of 14 
customers who visited the store. The following data give the money 
(in dollars) spent by these customers at this supermarket during their 
visits.
109.15 136.01 107.02 116.15 101.53 109.29 110.79
 94.83 100.91  97.94 104.30  83.54  67.59 120.44
Assume that the money spent by all customers at this supermarket has 
a normal distribution. Using a 5% significance level, can you con-
clude that the mean amount of money spent by all customers at this 
supermarket after the campaign was started is more than $95? (Hint: 
First calculate the sample mean and the sample standard deviation for 
these data using the formulas learned in Sections 3.1.1 and 3.2.2 of 
Chapter 3. Then make the test of hypothesis about μ.)
9.49 According to the analysis of Federal Reserve statistics and 
other government data, American households with credit card debts 
owed an average of $15,706 on their credit cards in August 2015 
(www.nerdwallet.com). A recent random sample of 500 American 
households with credit card debts produced a mean credit card debt of 
$16,377 with a standard deviation of $3800. Do these data provide 
significant evidence at a 1% significance level to conclude that the 
current mean credit card debt of American households with credit 
card debts is higher than $15,706? Use both the p-value approach and 
the critical-value approach.
 *9.50 The manager of a service station claims that the mean amount 
spent on gas by its customers is $15.90 per visit. You want to test if the 
mean amount spent on gas at this station is different from $15.90 per 
visit. Briefly explain how you would conduct this test when σ is not 
known.
 *9.51 A tool manufacturing company claims that its top-of-the-line 
machine that is used to manufacture bolts produces an average of 88 
or more bolts per hour. A company that is interested in buying this 
machine wants to check this claim. Suppose you are asked to con-
duct this test. Briefly explain how you would do so when σ is not 
known.
Often we want to conduct a test of hypothesis about a population proportion. For example, in a 
2014 Gallup poll, 61% of adults said that upper-income people were paying too little in federal 
taxes. An agency may want to check if this percentage has changed since 2014. As another exam-
ple, a mail-order company claims that 90% of all orders it receives are shipped within 72 hours. 
The company’s management may want to determine from time to time whether or not this claim 
is true.
 
This section presents the procedure to perform tests of hypotheses about the population 
proportion, p, for large samples. The procedures to make such tests are similar in many respects 
to the ones for the population mean, μ. Again, the test can be two-tailed or one-tailed. We know 
from Chapter 7 that when the sample size is large, the sample proportion, pˆ, is approximately 
normally distributed with its mean equal to p and standard deviation equal to √pq∕n. Hence, 
9.4 Hypothesis Tests About a Population Proportion: Large Samples
www.ebook3000.com

376
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
we use the normal distribution to perform a test of hypothesis about the population proportion, 
p, for a large sample. As was mentioned in Chapters 7 and 8, in the case of a proportion, the 
sample size is considered to be large when np and nq are both greater than 5.
Test Statistic The value of the test statistic z for the sample proportion, pˆ, is computed as
z = pˆ −p
σpˆ   where σpˆ = A
pq
n
The value of p that is used in this formula is the one from the null hypothesis. The value of q is 
equal to 1 − p.
 
The value of z calculated for pˆ using the above formula is also called the observed 
value of z.
 
In Section 9.2, we discussed two procedures, the p-value approach and the critical-value 
approach, to test hypotheses about μ. Here too we will use these two procedures to test hypoth-
eses about p. The steps used in these procedures are the same as in Section 9.2. The only differ-
ence is that we will be making tests of hypotheses about p rather than about μ.
9.4.1 The p-Value Approach
To use the p-value approach to perform a test of hypothesis about p, we will use the same four 
steps that we used in such a procedure in Section 9.2. Although the p-value for a test of 
hypothesis about p can be obtained very easily by using technology, we can use Table IV of 
Appendix B to find this p-value when technology is not available.
 
Examples 9–9 and 9–10 illustrate the p-value procedure to test a hypothesis about p for a 
large sample.
EXAMPLE 9–9 
Emotional Attachment to Alma Mater
According to a Gallup poll conducted February 4 to March 7, 2014, 20% of traditional college 
graduates (those who earned their degree before age 25) were emotionally attached to their alma 
mater (www.gallup.com). Suppose this result is true for the 2014 population of traditional col-
lege graduates. In a recent random sample of 2000 traditional college graduates, 22% said that they 
are emotionally attached to their alma mater. Find the p-value to test the hypothesis that the cur-
rent percentage of traditional college graduates who are emotionally attached to their alma mater 
is different from 20%. What is your conclusion if the significance level is 5%?
Solution Let p be the current proportion of all traditional college graduates who are emotion-
ally attached to their alma mater, and pˆ be the corresponding sample proportion. Then, from the 
given information,
n = 2000,  pˆ = .22,  and  α = .05
In 2014, 20% of traditional college graduates were emotionally attached to their alma mater. 
Hence,
p = .20  and  q = 1 −p = 1 −.20 = .80
To calculate the p-value and to make a decision, we apply the following four steps.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
The current percentage of traditional college graduates who are emotionally attached to their 
alma mater will not be different from 20% if p = .20, and the current percentage will be different 
from 20% if p ≠.20. The null and alternative hypotheses are as follows:
H0: p = .20 (The current percentage is not different from 20%.)
H1: p ≠.20 (The current percentage is different from 20%.)
Finding a p-value and making a 
decision for a two-tailed test of 
hypothesis about p: large sample.

9.4 Hypothesis Tests About a Population Proportion: Large Samples
377
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
To check whether the sample is large, we calculate the values of np and nq.
np = 2000(.20) = 400  and  nq = 2000(.80) = 1600
Since np and nq are both greater than 5, we can conclude that the sample size is large. Conse-
quently, we will use the normal distribution to find the p-value for this test.
Step 3. Calculate the p-value.
 
The ≠ sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates that the test is two-tailed. The p-value is 
equal to twice the area in the tail of the normal distribution curve to the right of z for pˆ = .22. 
This p-value is shown in Figure 9.15. To find this p-value, first we find the test statistic z for 
pˆ = .22 as follows:
 σpˆ = B
pq
n = B
(.20)(.80)
2000
= .00894427
 z = pˆ −p
σpˆ
= .22 −.20
.00894427 = 2.24
Now we find the area to the right of z = 2.24 from the normal distribution table. This area is 
1 − .9875 = .0125. Consequently, the p-value is
p-value = 2(.0125) = .0250
From H0
.22
p
p  = .20
z
0
−2.24
2.24
.0125
The sum of these two areas
gives the required p-value
.0125
Figure 9.15 The required p-value.
Step 4. Make a decision.
 
Thus, we can state that for any α greater than or equal to .0250 we will reject the null hypoth-
esis, and for any α less than .0250 we will not reject the null hypothesis. In our example, α = .05, 
which is greater than the p-value of .0250. As a result, we reject H0 and conclude that the current 
percentage of traditional college graduates who are emotionally attached to their alma mater is 
different from .20. Consequently, we can state that the difference between the hypothesized pop-
ulation proportion of .20 and the sample proportion of .22 is too large to be attributed to sampling 
error alone when α = .05. 
◼ 
EXAMPLE 9–10 
Percentage of Defective Chips
When working properly, a machine that is used to make chips for calculators does not produce 
more than 4% defective chips. Whenever the machine produces more than 4% defective chips, it 
needs an adjustment. To check if the machine is working properly, the quality control department 
at the company often takes samples of chips and inspects them to determine if they are good or 
defective. One such random sample of 200 chips taken recently from the production line con-
tained 12 defective chips. Find the p-value to test the hypothesis whether or not the machine 
needs an adjustment. What would your conclusion be if the significance level is 2.5%?
Finding a p-value and making a 
decision for a right-tailed test of 
hypothesis about p: large sample.
www.ebook3000.com

378
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
Solution Let p be the proportion of defective chips in all chips produced by this machine, and 
let pˆ be the corresponding sample proportion. Then, from the given information,
n = 200, pˆ = 12∕200 = .06, and α = .025
When the machine is working properly, it does not produce more than 4% defective chips. Hence, 
assuming that the machine is working properly, we obtain
p = .04 and q = 1 −p = 1 −.04 = .96
To calculate the p-value and to make a decision, we apply the following four steps.
Step 1.  State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
The machine will not need an adjustment if the percentage of defective chips is 4% or less, 
and it will need an adjustment if this percentage is greater than 4%. Hence, the null and alterna-
tive hypotheses are as follows:
 H0: p ≤ .04  (The machine does not need an adjustment.)
 H1: p > .04  (The machine needs an adjustment.)
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
To check if the sample is large, we calculate the values of np and nq:
np = 200(.04) = 8 and nq = 200(.96) = 192
Since np and nq are both greater than 5, we can conclude that the sample size is large. Conse-
quently, we will use the normal distribution to find the p-value for this test.
Step 3. Calculate the p-value.
 
The > sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates that the test is right-tailed. The p-value is 
given by the area in the upper tail of the normal distribution curve to the right of z for pˆ = .06. 
This p-value is shown in Figure 9.16. To find this p-value, first we find the test statistic z for 
pˆ = .06 as follows:
 σpˆ = B
pq
n = B
(.04)(.96)
200
= .01385641
 z = pˆ −p
σpˆ
= .06 −.04
.01385641 = 1.44
From H0
.06
p  = .04
z
1.44
0
p -value = .0749
p
Figure 9.16 The required p-value.
Now we find the area to the right of z = 1.44 from the normal distribution table. This area is 
1 −.9251 = .0749. Consequently, the p-value is
p-value = .0749
Step 4. Make a decision.
 
Thus, we can state that for any α greater than or equal to .0749 we will reject the null 
hypothesis, and for any α less than .0749 we will not reject the null hypothesis. For our example, 

9.4 Hypothesis Tests About a Population Proportion: Large Samples
379
α = .025, which is less than the p-value of .0749. As a result, we fail to reject H0 and conclude 
that the machine does not need an adjustment. 
◼ 
9.4.2 The Critical-Value Approach
In this procedure, as mentioned in Section 9.2.2, we have a predetermined value of the signifi-
cance level α. The value of α gives the total area of the rejection region(s). First we find the 
critical value(s) of z from the normal distribution table for the given significance level. Then we 
find the value of the test statistic z for the observed value of the sample statistic pˆ. Finally we 
compare these two values and make a decision. Remember, if the test is one-tailed, there is only 
one critical value of z, and it is obtained by using the value of α, which gives the area in the left 
or right tail of the normal distribution curve, depending on whether the test is left-tailed or right-
tailed, respectively. However, if the test is two-tailed, there are two critical values of z, and they 
are obtained by using α∕2 area in each tail of the normal distribution curve. The value of the test 
statistic z is obtained as mentioned earlier in this section.
 
Examples 9–11 and 9–12 describe the procedure to test a hypothesis about p using the 
critical-value approach and the normal distribution.
EXAMPLE 9–11 
Emotional Attachment to Alma Mater
Refer to Example 9–9. According to a Gallup poll conducted February 4 to March 7, 2014, 20% 
of traditional college graduates (those who earned their degree before age 25) were emotionally 
attached to their alma mater (www.gallup.com). Suppose this result is true for the 2014 popula-
tion of traditional college graduates. In a recent random sample of 2000 traditional college grad-
uates, 22% said that they are emotionally attached to their alma mater. Using a 5% significance 
level, can you conclude that the current percentage of traditional college graduates who are 
emotionally attached to their alma mater is different from 20%?
Solution Let p be the current proportion of all traditional college graduates who are emotion-
ally attached to their alma mater, and pˆ be the corresponding sample proportion. Then, from the 
given information,
n = 2000, pˆ = .22,  and  α = .05
In 2014, 20% of traditional college graduates were emotionally attached to their alma mater. 
Hence,
p = .20  and  q = 1 −p = 1 −.20 = .80
To use the critical-value approach to perform a test of hypothesis, we apply the following five 
steps.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
The current percentage of traditional college graduates who are emotionally attached to their 
alma mater will not be different from 20% if p = .20, and the current percentage will be different 
from 20% if p ≠.20. The null and alternative hypotheses are as follows:
 H0: p = .20 (The current percentage is not different from 20%.)
 H1: p ≠.20 (The current percentage is different from 20%.)
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
To check if the sample is large, we calculate the values of np and nq.
np = 2000(.20) = 400  and  nq = 2000(.80) = 1600
Since np and nq are both greater than 5, we can conclude that the sample size is large. Conse-
quently, we will use the normal distribution to make the test.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The ≠sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates that the test is two-tailed. The signifi-
cance level is .05. Therefore, the total area of the two rejection regions is .05, and the rejection 
Making a two-tailed test of 
hypothesis about p using 
the critical-value approach: 
large sample.
www.ebook3000.com

380
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
region in each tail of the sampling distribution of pˆ is α/2 = .05/2 = .025. The critical values 
of z, obtained from the standard normal distribution table, are −1.96 and 1.96, as shown in 
Figure 9.17.
p = .20
z
0
−1.96
1.96
Two Critical values of z
/2 = .025
/2 = .025
p
Do not reject H0
Reject H0
Reject H0
α
α
Figure 9.17 The critical values of z.
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
The value of the test statistic z for pˆ = .22 is calculated as follows.
 σpˆ = B
pq
n = B
(.20)(.80)
2000
= .00894427
 z = pˆ −p
σpˆ
= .22 −.20
.00894427 = 2.24
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
The value of the test statistic z = 2.24 for pˆ falls in the rejection region. As a result, we reject 
H0 and conclude that the current percentage of traditional college graduates who are emotionally 
attached to their alma mater is different from .20. Consequently, we can state that the difference 
between the hypothesized population proportion of .20 and the sample proportion of .22 is too 
large to be attributed to sampling error alone when α = .05. 
◼ 
From H0
EXAMPLE 9–12 
Mailing the Received Orders
Direct Mailing Company sells computers and computer parts by mail. The company claims that 
at least 90% of all orders are mailed within 72 hours after they are received. The quality control 
department at the company often takes samples to check if this claim is valid. A recently taken 
sample of 150 orders showed that 129 of them were mailed within 72 hours. Do you think the 
company’s claim is true? Use a 2.5% significance level.
Solution Let p be the proportion of all orders that are mailed by the company within 72 hours, 
and let pˆ be the corresponding sample proportion. Then, from the given information,
n = 150, pˆ = 129∕150 = .86,  and  α = .025
The company claims that at least 90% of all orders are mailed within 72 hours. Assuming that this 
claim is true, the values of p and q are
p = .90  and  q = 1 −p = 1 −.90 = .10
Conducting a left-tailed test of 
hypothesis about p using the 
critical-value approach: 
large sample.

9.4 Hypothesis Tests About a Population Proportion: Large Samples
381
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
The null and alternative hypotheses are
 H0: p ≥.90  (The company’s claim is true.)
 H1: p < .90  (The company’s claim is false.)
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
We first check whether np and nq are both greater than 5:
np = 150(.90) = 135 > 5 and nq = 150(.10) = 15 > 5
Consequently, the sample size is large. Therefore, we use the normal distribution to make the 
hypothesis test about p.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The significance level is .025. The < sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates that the test 
is left-tailed, and the rejection region lies in the left tail of the sampling distribution of pˆ with its 
area equal to .025. As shown in Figure 9.18, the critical value of z, obtained from the normal 
distribution table for .0250 area in the left tail, is −1.96.
Do not reject H0
Critical value of z
p = .90
Reject H0
0
−1.96
z
 = .025
p
α
Figure 9.18 Critical value of z.
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
The value of the test statistic z for pˆ = .86 is calculated as follows:
 σpˆ = B
pq
n = B
(.90)(.10)
150
= .02449490
 z = pˆ −p
σpˆ
= .86 −.90
.02449490 = −1.63
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
The value of the test statistic z = −1.63 is greater than the critical value of z = −1.96, and 
it falls in the nonrejection region. Therefore, we fail to reject H0. We can state that the differ-
ence between the sample proportion and the hypothesized value of the population proportion 
is small, and this difference may have occurred owing to chance alone. Therefore, the propor-
tion of all orders that are mailed within 72 hours is at least 90%, and the company’s claim 
seems to be true. 
◼
From H0
www.ebook3000.com

ARE UPPER-
INCOME PEOPLE 
PAYING THEIR FAIR 
SHARE IN FEDERAL 
TAXES?
CASE STUDY 9–2
In a Gallup poll of Americans aged 18 and over conducted April 3–6, 2014, among other questions, adults 
were asked: are the upper-income people “paying their fair share in federal taxes, paying too much or paying 
too little?” The responses of the adults polled are shown in the above graph. Of these adults, 61% said that 
upper-income people were paying too little in federal taxes, 24% said that they were paying their fair share, 
13% said that they were paying too much, and 2% had no opinion.
 
Suppose that we want to check whether the current percentage of American adults who will say that 
upper-income people are paying too little in federal taxes is different from 61%. Suppose we take a sample 
of 1600 American adults and ask them the same question, and 65% of them say that upper-income people 
are paying too little in federal taxes. Let us choose a significance level of 1%. The test is two-tailed. The null 
and alternative hypotheses are:
H0: p = .61
H1: p ≠.61
Here, n = 1600, pˆ = .65, α = .01, and α∕2 = .005. The sample is large. (The reader should check that np and 
nq are both greater than 5.) Using the normal distribution for the test, the critical values of z for .0050 and 
.9950 areas to the left are −2.58 and 2.58, respectively. We find the observed value of z as follows:
 σpˆ = B
pq
n = B
(.61)(.39)
1600
= .01219375
 z = pˆ −p
σpˆ
= .65 −.61
.01219375 = 3.28
 
The value of the test statistic z = 3.28 for pˆ  is larger than the upper critical value of z = 2.58, and it falls 
in the rejection region. Consequently, we reject H0 and conclude that the current percentage of American 
adults who hold the opinion that upper-income people are paying too little in federal taxes is significantly 
different from 61%.
 
We can use the p-value approach too. From the normal distribution table, the area under the normal 
curve to the right of z = 3.28 is .0005. Therefore, the p-value is 2(.0005) = .0010. Since α = .01 is larger than 
.0010, we reject the null hypothesis.
Source: http://www.gallup.com/poll/ 
168521/taxes-rise-half-say-middle-
income-pay.aspx.
Data source: www.gallup.com
382
Profit or Loss from Business
Short Term Capital Gains
1040
2014
 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
ARE UPPER-INCOME PEOPLE PAYING THEIR FAIR SHARE IN FEDERAL TAXES?
No opinion
24%
2%
Too much
13%
Too little
61%
Fair share

9.4 Hypothesis Tests About a Population Proportion: Large Samples
383
EXERCISES
9.60 Make the following hypothesis tests about p.
a. H0: p = .45, H1: p ≠ .45, n = 100, 
pˆ = .49, α = .10
b. H0: p = .72, H1: p < .72, n = 700, 
pˆ = .64, α = .05
c. H0: p = .30, H1: p > .30, n = 200, 
pˆ = .33, α = .01
APPLICATIONS
9.61 According to a study conducted in 2015, 18% of shoppers said 
that they prefer to buy generic instead of name-brand products. Sup-
pose that in a recent sample of 1500 shoppers, 315 stated that they 
prefer to buy generic instead of name-brand products. At a 5% sig-
nificance level, can you conclude that the proportion of all shoppers 
who currently prefer to buy generic instead of name-brand products is 
higher than .18? Use both the p-value and the critical-value approaches.
9.62 According to the U.S. Census Bureau, in 2014, 62% of Americans 
age 18 and older were married. A recent sample of 2000 Americans age 
18 and older showed that 58% of them are married. Can you reject the 
null hypothesis at a 1% significance level in favor of the alternative 
that the percentage of current population of Americans age 18 and 
older who are married is lower than 62%? Use both the p-value and 
the critical-value approaches.
9.63 According to a 2014 CIRP Your First College Year Survey, 
88% of the first-year college students said that their college experi-
ence exposed them to diverse opinions, cultures, and values (www.
heri.ucla.edu). Suppose in a recent poll of 1800 first-year college stu-
dents, 91% said that their college experience exposed them to diverse 
opinions, cultures, and values. Perform a hypothesis test to determine 
if it is reasonable to conclude that the current percentage of all first-
year college students who will say that their college experience 
exposed them to diverse opinions, cultures, and values is higher than 
88%. Use a 2% significance level, and use both the p-value and the 
critical-value approaches.
9.64 According to an article in Forbes magazine of April 3, 2014, 
57% of students said that they did not attend the college of their first 
choice due to financial concerns (www.forbes.com). In a recent poll 
of 1600 students, 864 said that they did not attend the college of their 
first choice due to financial concerns. Using a 1% significance level, 
perform a test of hypothesis to determine whether the current percent-
age of students who did not attend the college of their first choice due 
to financial concerns is lower than 57%. Use both the p-value and the 
critical-value approaches.
9.65 In a Gallup poll conducted July 7–10, 2014, 45% of Americans 
said that they actively try to include organic foods into their diets 
(www.gallup.com). In a recent sample of 2100 Americans, 1071 said 
that they actively try to include organic foods into their diets. Is there 
significant evidence at a 1% significance level to conclude that the 
current percentage of all Americans who will say that they actively try 
to include organic foods into their diets is different from 45%? Use 
both the p-value and the critical-value approaches.
9.66 A mail-order company claims that at least 60% of all orders are 
mailed within 48 hours. From time to time the quality control depart-
ment at the company checks if this promise is fulfilled. Recently the 
quality control department at this company took a sample of 400 
orders and found that 208 of them were mailed within 48 hours of the 
placement of the orders.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
9.52 Explain when a sample is large enough to use the normal dis-
tribution to make a test of hypothesis about the population proportion.
9.53 In each of the following cases, do you think the sample size is 
large enough to use the normal distribution to make a test of hypoth-
esis about the population proportion? Explain why or why not.
a. n = 40 
and 
p = .11
b.  n = 100 
and 
p = .73
c. n = 80 
and 
p = .05
d. n = 50 
and 
p = .14
9.54 For each of the following examples of tests of hypothesis 
about the population proportion, show the rejection and nonrejec-
tion regions on the graph of the sampling distribution of the sample 
proportion.
a. A two-tailed test with α  = .10
b. A left-tailed test with α   = .01
c. A right-tailed test with α = .05
9.55 A random sample of 500 observations produced a sample pro-
portion equal to .38. Find the critical and observed values of z for each 
of the following tests of hypotheses using α = .05.
a. H0: p = .30 versus H1: p > .30
b. H0: p = .30 versus H1: p ≠ .30
9.56 Consider the null hypothesis H0: p = .65. Suppose a random 
sample of 1000 observations is taken to perform this test about the 
population proportion. Using α = .05, show the rejection and nonre-
jection regions and find the critical value(s) of z for a
a. left-tailed test
b. two-tailed test
c. right-tailed test
9.57 Consider the null hypothesis H0: p = .25. Suppose a random 
sample of 400 observations is taken to perform this test about the 
population proportion. Using α = .01, show the rejection and nonre-
jection regions and find the critical value(s) of z for a
a. left-tailed test
b. two-tailed test
c. right-tailed test
9.58 Consider H0: p = .70 versus H1: p ≠ .70.
a. A random sample of 600 observations produced a sample pro-
portion equal to .68. Using α = .01, would you reject the null 
hypothesis?
b. Another random sample of 600 observations taken from the 
same population produced a sample proportion equal to .76. 
Using α = .01, would you reject the null hypothesis?
Comment on the results of parts a and b.
9.59 Consider H0: p = .45 versus H1: p < .45.
a. A random sample of 400 observations produced a sample 
proportion equal to .42. Using α = .025, would you reject the 
null hypothesis?
b. Another random sample of 400 observations taken from the 
same population produced a sample proportion of .39. Using 
α = .025, would you reject the null hypothesis?
Comment on the results of parts a and b.
www.ebook3000.com

384
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
a. Testing at a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the 
company’s claim is true? Use the critical-value approach
b. What will your decision be in part a if the probability of 
making a Type I error is zero? Explain.
c. Make the test of part a using the p-value approach and α = .01.
9.67 Shulman Steel Corporation makes bearings that are supplied to 
other companies. One of the machines makes bearings that are sup-
posed to have a diameter of 4 inches. The bearings that have a diam-
eter of either more or less than 4 inches are considered defective and 
are discarded. When working properly, the machine does not produce 
more than 7% of bearings that are defective. The quality control 
inspector selects a sample of 200 bearings each week and inspects 
them for the size of their diameters. Using the sample proportion, the 
quality control inspector tests the null hypothesis p ≤ .07 against the 
alternative hypothesis p > .07, where p is the proportion of bearings 
that are defective. He always uses a 2% significance level. If the null 
hypothesis is rejected, the machine is stopped to make any necessary 
adjustments. One sample of 200 bearings taken recently contained 22 
defective bearings.
a. Using a 2% significance level, will you conclude that the 
machine should be stopped to make necessary adjustments?
b. Perform the test of part a using a 1% significance level. Is 
your decision different from the one in part a?
Comment on the results of parts a and b.
 *9.68 Two years ago, 75% of the customers of a bank said that they 
were satisfied with the services provided by the bank. The manager of 
the bank wants to know if this percentage of satisfied customers has 
changed since then. She assigns this responsibility to you. Briefly 
explain how you would conduct such a test.
 *9.69 A study claims that 65% of students at all colleges and univer-
sities hold off-campus (part-time or full-time) jobs. You want to check 
if the percentage of students at your school who hold off-campus jobs 
is different from 65%. Briefly explain how you would conduct such a 
test. Collect data from 40 students at your school on whether or not 
they hold off-campus jobs. Then, calculate the proportion of students 
in this sample who hold off-campus jobs. Using this information, test 
the hypothesis. Select your own significance level.
USES AND MISUSES...
FOLLOW THE RECIPE
Hypothesis testing is one of the most powerful and dangerous tools 
of statistics. It allows us to make statements about a population and 
attach a degree of uncertainty to these statements. Pick up a news-
paper and flip through it; rare will be the day when the paper does not 
contain a story featuring a statistical result, often reported with a 
significance level. Given that the subjects of these reports—public 
health, the environment, and so on—are important to our lives, it is 
critical that we perform the statistical calculations and interpretations 
properly. The first step, one that you should look for when reading 
statistical results, is proper formulation/specification.
 
Formulation or specification, simply put, is the list of steps you 
perform when constructing a hypothesis test. In this chapter, these 
steps are: stating the null and alternative hypotheses; selecting the 
appropriate distribution; and determining the rejection and nonrejec-
tion regions. Once these steps are performed, all you need to do is to 
calculate the p-value or the test statistic to complete the hypothesis 
test. It is important to beware of traps in the specification.
 
Though it might seem obvious, stating the hypothesis properly 
can be difficult. For hypotheses around a population mean, the null 
and alternative hypotheses are mathematical statements that do not 
overlap and also provide no holes. Suppose that a confectioner states 
that the average mass of his chocolate bars is 100 grams. The null 
hypothesis is that the mass of the bars is 100 grams, and the alterna-
tive hypothesis is that the mass of the bars is not 100 grams. When 
you take a sample of chocolate bars and measure their masses, all 
possibilities for the sample mean will fall within one of your decision 
regions. The problem is a little more difficult for hypotheses based on 
proportions. Make sure that you only have two categories. For exam-
ple, if you are trying to determine the percentage of the population 
that has blonde hair, your groups are “blonde” and “not blonde.” You 
need to decide how to categorize bald people before you conduct this 
experiment: Do not include bald people in the survey.
 
Finally, beware of numerical precision. When your sample is 
large and you assume that it has a normal distribution, the rejection 
region for a two-tailed test using the normal distribution with a signifi-
cance level of 5% will be values of the sample mean that are farther 
than 1.96 standard deviations from the assumed mean. When you 
perform your calculations, the sample mean may fall on the border of 
your decision region. Remember that there is measurement error and 
sampling error that you cannot account for. In this case, it is probably 
best to adjust your significance level so that the sample mean falls 
squarely in a decision region.
THE POWER OF NEGATIVE THINKING
In the beginning of this chapter, you learned about Type I and Type II 
errors. If this is your first statistics class, you might think that this is 
your first exposure to the concepts of Type I and Type II errors, but 
that is not the case. As a matter of fact, if you can recall having a 
medical test, you must have had an interaction with a variety of con-
cepts related to hypothesis testing, including Type I and Type II errors.
 
In a typical medical test, the assumption (our null hypothesis) is 
that you do not have the condition for which you are being tested. If 
the assumption is true, the doctor knows what should happen in the 
test. If the test results are different from the normal range, the doctor 
has data that would allow the assumption to be rejected. Whenever 
the null hypothesis is rejected (that is, the test results demonstrate 
that the person has the condition for which he or she was tested), the 
medical result is called a positive test result. If the doctor fails to reject 
the null hypothesis (if the test results do not demonstrate that you 
have the condition), the medical result is called a negative test result.

Supplementary Exercises
385
 
As with other types of hypothesis tests, medical tests are not 
perfect. Sometimes people are (falsely) diagnosed as having a condi-
tion or illness when they actually do not have it. In medical terminol-
ogy, this Type I error is referred to as a false positive. Similarly, the 
result of a test may (wrongly) indicate that a person does not have a 
condition or illness when actually he or she has it. This Type II error is 
called a false negative in medical terminology.
 
Companies that develop medical tests perform intensive 
research and clinical tests to reduce the risk of making both these 
types of errors. Specifically, data are collected on the sensitivity and 
the specificity of medical tests. In the context of an illness, the sensi-
tivity of a test is the proportion of all people with the illness who are 
identified by the test as actually having it. For example, suppose 100 
students on a college campus have been identified by throat culture 
as having strep throat. All these 100 students are tested for strep 
throat using another type of test. Suppose 97 of the 100 tests come 
back positive with the second test. Then the sensitivity of the (second) 
test is .97 (or 97%), and the probability of a false negative (Type II 
error) is one minus the sensitivity, which is .03 here.
 
The specificity of a test refers to how well a test identifies that a 
healthy person does not have a given disease. Using the strep throat 
reference again, suppose that 400 students have been identified by 
throat culture as not having strep throat. All these 400 students are 
given a new strep test, and 394 of them are shown to have a negative 
result (that is, they are identified as not having strep throat). Then the 
specificity of the test is 394/400 = .985 (or 98.5%), and the probability 
of a false positive (Type I error) is one minus the specificity, which is 
.015 here.
 
Of course, low probabilities for both types of errors are very 
important in medical testing. A false positive can result in an individual 
obtaining unnecessary, often expensive, and sometime debilitating 
treatment, whereas a false negative can allow a disease to progress 
to an advanced stage when early detection could have helped to save 
a person’s life.
One-tailed test A test in which there is only one rejection region, 
either in the left tail or in the right tail of the distribution curve.
p-value The smallest significance level at which a null hypothesis 
can be rejected.
Right-tailed test A test in which the rejection region lies in the 
right tail of the distribution curve.
Significance level The value of α that gives the probability of com-
mitting a Type I error.
Test statistic The value of z or t calculated for a sample statistic 
such as the sample mean or the sample proportion.
Two-tailed test A test in which there are two rejection regions, one 
in each tail of the distribution curve.
Type I error An error that occurs when a true null hypothesis is 
rejected.
Type II error An error that occurs when a false null hypothesis is 
not rejected.
α The significance level of a test of hypothesis that denotes the 
probability of rejecting a null hypothesis when it actually is true. (The 
probability of committing a Type I error.)
Alternative hypothesis A claim about a population parameter that 
will be true if the null hypothesis is false.
β The probability of not rejecting a null hypothesis when it actually 
is false. (The probability of committing a Type II error.)
Critical value or critical point One or two values that divide the 
whole region under the sampling distribution of a sample statistic into 
rejection and nonrejection regions.
Left-tailed test A test in which the rejection region lies in the left 
tail of the distribution curve.
Null hypothesis A claim about a population parameter that is 
assumed to be true until proven otherwise.
Observed value of z or t The value of z or t calculated for a sample 
statistic such as the sample mean or the sample proportion.
Glossary
9.71 Consider the following null and alternative hypotheses:
H0: p = .82 versus H1: p ≠.82
A random sample of 600 observations taken from this population 
produced a sample proportion of .86.
a. If this test is made at a 2% significance level, would you reject 
the null hypothesis? Use the critical-value approach.
b. What is the probability of making a Type I error in part a?
c. Calculate the p-value for the test. Based on this p-value, 
would you reject the null hypothesis if α = .025? What if 
α = .01?
9.70 Consider the following null and alternative hypotheses:
H0: μ = 120 versus H1: μ > 120
A random sample of 81 observations taken from this population pro-
duced a sample mean of 123.5. The population standard deviation is 
known to be 15.
a. If this test is made at a 2.5% significance level, would you 
reject the null hypothesis? Use the critical-value approach.
b. What is the probability of making a Type I error in part a?
c. Calculate the p-value for the test. Based on this p-value, would 
you reject the null hypothesis if α = .01? What if α = .05?
Supplementary Exercises
www.ebook3000.com

386
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
9.72 Consider the following null and alternative hypotheses:
H0: p = .44 versus H1: p < .44
A random sample of 450 observations taken from this population 
produced a sample proportion of .39.
a. If this test is made at a 2% significance level, would you reject 
the null hypothesis? Use the critical-value approach.
b. What is the probability of making a Type I error in part a?
c. Calculate the p-value for the test. Based on this p-value, would 
you reject the null hypothesis if α = .01? What if α = .025?
9.73 The mean consumption of water per household in a city was 
1245 cubic feet per month. Due to a water shortage because of a 
drought, the city council campaigned for water use conservation by 
households. A few months after the campaign was started, the mean 
consumption of water for a sample of 100 households was found to be 
1175 cubic feet per month. The population standard deviation is given 
to be 250 cubic feet.
a. Find the p-value for the hypothesis test that the mean con-
sumption of water per household has decreased due to the 
campaign by the city council. Would you reject the null 
hypothesis at α = .025?
b. Make the test of part a using the critical-value approach and 
α = .025.
9.74 According to a Bureau of Labor Statistics release of March 25, 
2015, financial analysts earned an average of $110,510 in 2014. Sup-
pose that the 2014 earnings of all financial analysts had a mean of 
$110,510. A recent sample of 400 financial analysts showed that they 
earn an average of $114,630 a year. Assume that the standard devia-
tion of the annual earnings of all financial analysts is $30,570.
a. Using the critical-value approach, can you conclude that the 
current average annual earnings of financial analysts is higher 
than $110,510? Use α = .01.
b. What is the Type I error in part a? Explain. What is the prob-
ability of making this error in part a?
c. Will your conclusion of part a change if the probability of 
making a Type I error is zero?
d. Calculate the p-value for the test of part a. What is your con-
clusion if α = .01?
9.75 A real estate agent claims that the mean living area of all single-
family homes in his county is at most 2400 square feet. A random 
sample of 50 such homes selected from this county produced the 
mean living area of 2540 square feet and a standard deviation of 472 
square feet.
a. Using α = .05, can you conclude that the real estate agent’s 
claim is true?
b. What will your conclusion be if α = .01?
Comment on the results of parts a and b.
9.76 Customers often complain about long waiting times at restaurants 
before the food is served. A restaurant claims that it serves food to its 
customers, on average, within 15 minutes after the order is placed. A 
local newspaper journalist wanted to check if the restaurant’s claim is 
true. A sample of 36 customers showed that the mean time taken to 
serve food to them was 15.75 minutes with a standard deviation of 2.4 
minutes. Using the sample mean, the journalist says that the restaurant’s 
claim is false. Do you think the journalist’s conclusion is fair to the 
restaurant? Use a 1% significance level to answer this question.
9.77 The administrative office of a hospital claims that the mean 
waiting time for patients to get treatment in its emergency ward is 
25 minutes. A random sample of 16 patients who received treat-
ment in the emergency ward of this hospital produced a mean wait-
ing time of 27.5 minutes with a standard deviation of 4.8 minutes. 
Using a 1% significance level, test whether the mean waiting time 
at the emergency ward is different from 25 minutes. Assume that 
the waiting times for all patients at this emergency ward have a 
normal distribution.
9.78 An earlier study claimed that U.S. adults spent an average of 114 
minutes per day with their family. A recently taken sample of 25 
adults from a city showed that they spend an average of 109 minutes 
per day with their family. The sample standard deviation is 11 minutes. 
Assume that the times spent by adults with their families have an 
approximate normal distribution.
a. Using a 1% significance level, test whether the mean time 
spent currently by all adults with their families in this city is 
different from 114 minutes a day.
b. Suppose the probability of making a Type I error is zero. Can 
you make a decision for the test of part a without going 
through the five steps of hypothesis testing? If yes, what is 
your decision? Explain.
9.79 A company claims that its 8-ounce low-fat yogurt cups contain, 
on average, at most 150 calories per cup. A consumer agency wanted 
to check whether or not this claim is true. A random sample of 10 such 
cups produced the following data on calories.
147 159 153 146 144 161 163 153 143 158
Test using a 2.5% significance level whether the company’s claim is 
true. Assume that the numbers of calories for such cups of yogurt 
produced by this company have an approximate normal distribution.
9.80 According to a Bureau of Labor Statistics release of February 
20, 2015, 79% of American children under age 18 lived with at least 
one other sibling in 2014. Suppose that in a recent sample of 2000 
American children under age 18, 1620 were living with at least one 
other sibling.
a. Using the critical-value approach and α = .05, test if the cur-
rent percentage of all American children under age 18 who 
live with at least one other sibling is different from 79%.
b. How do you explain the Type I error in part a? What is the 
probability of making this error in part a?
c. Calculate the p-value for the test of part a. What is your con-
clusion if α = .05?
9.81 PolicyInteractive of Eugene, Oregon conducted a study of 
American adults in April 2014 for the Center for a New American 
Dream. Seventy-five percent of the adults included in this study said 
that having basic needs met is very or extremely important in their 
vision of the American dream (www.newdream.org). A recent sample 
of 1500 American adults were asked the same question and 72% of 
them said that having basic needs met is very or extremely important 
in their vision of the American dream.
a. Using the critical-value approach and α = .01, test if the 
current percentage of American adults who hold the above-
mentioned opinion is less than 75%.
b. How do you explain the Type I error in part a? What is the 
probability of making this error in part a?
c. Calculate the p-value for the test of part a. What is your con-
clusion if α = .01?
9.82 More and more people are abandoning national brand products 
and buying store brand products to save money. The president of a 
company that produces national brand coffee claims that 40% of the 

Advanced Exercises
387
people prefer to buy national brand coffee. A random sample of 700 
people who buy coffee showed that 259 of them buy national brand 
coffee. Using α = .01, can you conclude that the percentage of people 
who buy national brand coffee is different from 40%? Use both 
approaches to make the test.
9.83 According to an estimate, 75% of cell phone owners in a large 
city had smart phones in 2014. In a recent sample of 1000 cell 
phone owners selected from this city, 790 had smart phones. At a 
2% significance level, can you conclude that the current proportion 
of cell phone owners in this city who have smart phones is different 
from .75?
9.84 Dartmouth Distribution Warehouse makes deliveries of a large 
number of products to its customers. To keep its customers happy and 
satisfied, the company’s policy is to deliver on time at least 90% of all 
the orders it receives from its customers. The quality control inspector 
at the company quite often takes samples of orders delivered and checks 
to see whether this policy is maintained. A recent sample of 90 orders 
taken by this inspector showed that 75 of them were delivered on time.
a. Using a 2% significance level, can you conclude that the com-
pany’s policy is maintained?
b. What will your decision be in part a if the probability of mak-
ing a Type I error is zero? Explain.
9.88 In Las Vegas, Nevada, and Atlantic City, New Jersey, tests are 
performed often on the various gaming devices used in casinos. For 
example, dice are often tested to determine if they are balanced. Sup-
pose you are assigned the task of testing a die, using a two-tailed test 
to make sure that the probability of a 2-spot is 1/6. Using a 5% sig-
nificance level, determine how many 2-spots you would have to obtain 
to reject the null hypothesis when your sample size is
a. 120  b. 1200  c. 12,000
Calculate the value of pˆ for each of these three cases. What can you 
say about the relationship between (1) the difference between pˆ and 
1/6 that is necessary to reject the null hypothesis and (2) the sample 
size as it gets larger?
9.89 A statistician performs the test H0: μ = 15 versus H1: μ ≠15 
and finds the p-value to be .4546.
a. The statistician performing the test does not tell you the value 
of the sample mean and the value of the test statistic. Despite 
this, you have enough information to determine the pair of 
p-values associated with the following alternative hypotheses.
i. H1: μ < 15  ii. H1: μ > 15
 
Note that you will need more information to determine which 
p-value goes with which alternative. Determine the pair of 
p-values. Here the value of the sample mean is the same in 
both cases.
b. Suppose the statistician tells you that the value of the test statistic 
is negative. Match the p-values with the alternative hypotheses.
 
 
Note that the result for one of the two alternatives implies 
that the sample mean is not on the same side of μ = 15 as the 
rejection region. Although we have not discussed this scenario 
in the book, it is important to recognize that there are many 
real-world scenarios in which this type of situation does occur. 
For example, suppose the EPA is to test whether or not a com-
pany is exceeding a specific pollution level. If the average 
discharge level obtained from the sample falls below the 
threshold (mentioned in the null hypothesis), then there would 
be no need to perform the hypothesis test.
9.90 You read an article that states “50 hypothesis tests of H0: μ = 35 
versus H1: μ ≠35 were performed using α = .05 on 50 different 
samples taken from the same population with a mean of 35. Of these, 
47 tests failed to reject the null hypothesis.” Explain why this type of 
result is not surprising.
9.85 Acme Bicycle Company makes derailleurs for mountain bikes. 
Usually no more than 4% of these parts are defective, but occasionally 
the machines that make them get out of adjustment and the rate of 
defectives exceeds 4%. To guard against this, the chief quality control 
inspector takes a random sample of 130 derailleurs each week and 
checks each one for defects. If too many of these parts are defective, 
the machines are shut down and adjusted. To decide how many parts 
must be defective to shut down the machines, the company’s statisti-
cian has set up the hypothesis test
H0: p ≤.04 versus H1: p > .04
where p is the proportion of defectives among all derailleurs being 
made currently. Rejection of H0 would call for shutting down the 
machines. For the inspector’s convenience, the statistician would like 
the rejection region to have the form, “Reject H0 if the number of 
defective parts is C or more.” Find the value of C that will make the 
significance level (approximately) .05.
9.86 Alpha Airline claims that only 15% of its flights arrive more 
than 10 minutes late. Let p be the proportion of all of Alpha’s flights 
that arrive more than 10 minutes late. Consider the hypothesis test
H0: p ≤.15 versus H1: p > .15
Suppose we take a random sample of 50 flights by Alpha Airline and 
agree to reject H0 if 9 or more of them arrive late. Find the signifi-
cance level for this test.
9.87 Thirty percent of all people who are inoculated with the current 
vaccine that is used to prevent a disease contract the disease within a 
year. The developer of a new vaccine that is intended to prevent this 
disease wishes to test for significant evidence that the new vaccine is 
more effective.
a. Determine the appropriate null and alternative hypotheses.
b. The developer decides to study 100 randomly selected peo-
ple by inoculating them with the new vaccine. If 84 or more 
of them do not contract the disease within a year, the devel-
oper will conclude that the new vaccine is superior to the old 
one. What significance level is the developer using for the 
test?
c. Suppose 20 people inoculated with the new vaccine are 
studied and the new vaccine is concluded to be better than the 
old one if fewer than 3 people contract the disease within a 
year. What is the significance level of the test?
Advanced Exercises
www.ebook3000.com

388
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
14. The sign in the alternative hypothesis in a left-tailed test is 
always
a. <  b. >  c. ≠
15. The sign in the alternative hypothesis in a right-tailed test is 
always
a. <  b. >  c. ≠
16. According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, U.S. workers who 
had employer-provided health insurance paid an average premium 
of $1170 for single (one person) health insurance coverage during 
2013 (www.kff.org). Suppose that a recent random sample of 
100 workers with employer-provided health insurance selected from 
a large city paid an average premium of $1198 for single health 
insurance coverage. Assume that such premiums paid by all such 
workers in this city have a standard deviation of $125.
a. Using the critical-value approach and a 1% significance level, 
can you conclude that the current average such premium paid 
by all such workers in this city is different from $1170?
b. Using the critical-value approach and a 2.5% significance 
level, can you conclude that the current average such premium 
paid by all such workers in this city is higher than $1170?
c. What is the Type I error in parts a and b? What is the proba-
bility of making this error in each of parts a and b?
d. Calculate the p-value for the test of part a. What is your con-
clusion if α = .01?
e. Calculate the p-value for the test of part b. What is your con-
clusion if α = .025?
17. A minor league baseball executive has become concerned about 
the slow pace of games played in her league, fearing that it will lower 
attendance. She meets with the league’s managers and umpires and 
discusses guidelines for speeding up the games. Before the meeting, 
the mean duration of nine-inning games was 3 hours, 5 minutes (i.e., 
185 minutes). A random sample of 36 nine-inning games after the 
meeting showed a mean of 179 minutes with a standard deviation of 
12 minutes.
a. Testing at a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the 
mean duration of nine-inning games has decreased after the 
meeting?
b. What is the Type I error in part a? What is the probability of 
making this error?
c. What will your decision be in part a if the probability of mak-
ing a Type I error is zero? Explain.
d. Find the range for the p-value for the test of part a. What is 
your decision based on this p-value?
18. An editor of a New York publishing company claims that the 
mean time taken to write a textbook is at least 31 months. A sam-
ple of 16 textbook authors found that the mean time taken by them 
to write a textbook was 25 months with a standard deviation of 
7.2 months.
a. Using a 2.5% significance level, would you conclude that the edi-
tor’s claim is true? Assume that the time taken to write a textbook 
is approximately normally distributed for all textbook authors.
b. What is the Type I error in part a? What is the probability of 
making this error?
c. What will your decision be in part a if the probability of mak-
ing a Type I error is .001?
 1. A test of hypothesis is always about
a. a population parameter
b. a sample statistic
c. a test statistic
 2. A Type I error is committed when
a. a null hypothesis is not rejected when it is actually false
b. a null hypothesis is rejected when it is actually true
c. an alternative hypothesis is rejected when it is actually true
 3. A Type II error is committed when
a. a null hypothesis is not rejected when it is actually false
b. a null hypothesis is rejected when it is actually true
c. an alternative hypothesis is rejected when it is actually true
 4. A critical value is the value
a. calculated from sample data
b. determined from a table (e.g., the normal distribution table or 
other such tables)
c. neither a nor b
 5. The computed value of a test statistic is the value
a. calculated for a sample statistic
b. determined from a table (e.g., the normal distribution table or 
other such tables)
c. neither a nor b
 6. The observed value of a test statistic is the value
a. calculated for a sample statistic
b. determined from a table (e.g., the normal distribution table or 
other such tables)
c. neither a nor b
 7. The significance level, denoted by α, is
a. the probability of committing a Type I error
b. the probability of committing a Type II error
c. neither a nor b
 8. The value of β gives the
a. probability of committing a Type I error
b. probability of committing a Type II error
c. power of the test
 9. The value of 1 − β gives the
a. probability of committing a Type I error
b. probability of committing a Type II error
c. power of the test
10. A two-tailed test is a test with
a. two rejection regions
b. two nonrejection regions
c. two test statistics
11. A one-tailed test
a. has one rejection region
b. has one nonrejection region
c. both a and b
12. The smallest level of significance at which a null hypothesis is 
rejected is called
a. α  b. p-value  c. β
13. The sign in the alternative hypothesis in a two-tailed test is always
a. <  b. >  c. ≠
Self-Review Test

Technology Instructions
389
19. A financial advisor claims that less than 50% of adults in the 
United States have a will. A random sample of 1000 adults showed 
that 450 of them have a will.
a.  At a 5% significance level, can you conclude that the percent-
age of people who have a will is less than 50%?
b. What is the Type I error in part a? What is the probability of 
making this error?
c. What would your decision be in part a if the probability of 
making a Type I error were zero? Explain.
d. Find the p-value for the test of hypothesis mentioned in part a. 
Using this p-value, will you reject the null hypothesis if 
α = .05? What if α = .01?
Note: The Mini-Projects are located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Mini-Projects
Note: The Decide for Yourself feature is located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Decide for Yourself
TI-84 Color/TI-84
CHAPTER 9
TECHNOLOGY 
INSTRUCTIONS
The TI-84 Color Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for the TI-84 Plus C 
color graphing calculator running the 4.0 operating system. Some screens, menus, and func-
tions will be slightly different in older operating systems. The TI-84 and TI-84 Plus can perform 
all of the same functions but will not have the “Color” option referenced in some of the menus.
Testing a Hypothesis about μ, σ Known, for Example 9–2 of the Text
1. Select STAT > TESTS > Z-Test.
2. Use the following settings in the Z-Test menu (see Screen 9.1):
• At the Inpt prompt, select Stats.
    Note: If you have the data in a list, select Data at the Inpt prompt.
• At the μ0 prompt, type 10.
• At the σ prompt type 2.4.
• At the x prompt, type 9.2.
• At the n prompt, type 36.
• At the μ prompt, select < μ0.
3. Highlight Calculate and press ENTER.
4. The output includes the test statistic and the p-value. (See Screen 9.2.)
Compare the test statistic to the critical-value of z or the p-value to the value of α and make 
a decision.
Note: Complete TI-84, Minitab, and Excel manuals are available for download at the textbook’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Screen 9.1
Screen 9.2
www.ebook3000.com

390
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
Testing a Hypothesis About μ, σ Unknown, for Example 9–5 
of the Text
1. Select STAT > TESTS > T-Test.
2. Use the following settings in the T-Test menu (see Screen 9.3):
• At the Inpt prompt, select Stats.
    Note: If you have the data in a list, select Data at the Inpt prompt.
• At the μ0 prompt, type 12.5.
• At the x prompt, type 12.9.
• At the Sx prompt, type 0.80.
• At the n prompt, type 18.
• At the μ prompt, select ≠μ0.
3. Highlight Calculate and press ENTER.
4. The output includes the test statistic and the p-value. (See Screen 9.4.)
Compare the test statistic to the critical value of t or p-value to the value of α and make a 
decision.
Testing a Hypothesis About p for Example 9–9 of the Text
1. Select STAT > TESTS > 1-PropZTest.
2. Use the following settings in the 1-PropZTest menu (see Screen 9.5):
• At the p0 prompt, type 0.20.
• At the x prompt, type 440.
     Note: The value of x is the number of successes in the sample and must be a whole number or the 
calculator will return an error message. To find x, multiply n by pˆ and round the result to the nearest 
whole number.
• At the n prompt, type 2000.
• At the prop prompt, select ≠p0.
3. Highlight Calculate and press ENTER.
4. The output includes the test statistic and the p-value. (See Screen 9.6.)
Compare the test statistic to the critical value of z or the p-value to the value of α and make 
a decision.
Screen 9.3
Screen 9.4
Screen 9.5
Screen 9.6
The Minitab Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Minitab version 17. Some 
screens, menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Minitab.
Testing a Hypothesis About μ, σ Known, for Example 9–2 
of the Text
1. Select Stat > Basic Statistics > 1-Sample Z.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen (see Screen 9.7):
Minitab

Technology Instructions
391
• From the drop-down menu, select Summarized Data.
     Note: If you have the data in a column, select One or more samples, each in a column, type the 
column name(s) in the box, and move to step 3 below.
• In the Sample size box, type 36.
• In the Sample mean box, type 9.2.
• In the Known standard deviation box, type 2.4.
• Next to Perform hypothesis test, check the check box.
• In the Hypothesized mean box, type 10.
3. Select Options. When the new dialog box appears on screen, select Mean < 
hypothesized mean from the Alternative hypothesis box.
4. Click OK in both dialog boxes.
5. The output, including the test statistic and p-value, will be displayed in the Session 
window. (See Screen 9.8.)
Compare the test statistic to the critical value of z or the p-value to the value of α and 
make a decision.
Testing a Hypothesis About μ, σ Unknown, for Example 9–5 
of the Text
1. Select Stat > Basic Statistics > 1-Sample t.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen (see Screen 9.9):
• From the drop-down menu, select Summarized Data.
     Note: If you have the data in a column, select One or more samples, each in a column, type the 
column name(s) in the box, and move to step 3 below.
• In the Sample size box, type 18.
• In the Sample mean box, type 12.9.
• In the Standard deviation box, type 0.80.
• Next to Perform hypothesis test, check the check box.
• In the Hypothesized mean box, type 12.5.
3. Select Options. When the new dialog box appears on screen, select Mean ≠ 
hypothesized mean from the Alternative hypothesis box.
4. Click OK in both dialog boxes.
5. The output, including the test statistic and p-value, will be displayed in the Session 
window. (See Screen 9.10.)
Compare the test statistic to the critical value of t or the p-value to the value of α and make 
a decision.
Testing a Hypothesis About p for Example 9–9 of the Text
1. Select Stat > Basic Statistics > 1 Proportion.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen (see Screen 9.11):
• From the drop-down menu, select Summarized Data.
Screen 9.7
Screen 9.8
Screen 9.9
Screen 9.11
Screen 9.10
www.ebook3000.com

392
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
     Note: If you have the data in a column, select One or more samples, each in a column, type 
the column name(s) in the box, and move to step 3 below.
• In the Number of events box, type 440.
     Note: The number of events is the number of successes in the sample, and this must be a 
whole 
number or Minitab will return an error message. To find the number of events, multiply n by pˆ 
and round the result to the nearest whole number.
• In the Number of trials box, type 2000.
• Next to Perform hypothesis test, check the check box.
• In the Hypothesized mean box, type 0.20.
3. Select Options. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Select Proportion ≠hypothesized proportion from the Alternative hypothesis box,
• In the Method box, select Normal approximation from the drop-down menu.
4. Click OK in both dialog boxes.
5.  The output, including the test statistic and p-value, will be displayed in the Session 
window. (See Screen 9.12.)
Compare the test statistic to the critical value of z or the p-value to the value of α and 
make a decision.
Screen 9.12
The Excel Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Excel 2013. Some screens, 
menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Excel. To enable some of 
the advanced Excel functions, you must enable the Data Analysis Add-In for Excel. For Excel 
2007 and older versions of Excel, replace the function Z.TEST with the function ZTEST, and 
replace NORM.S.DIST with the function NORMSDIST.
Testing a Hypothesis About μ, σ Known
1. To perform this test, Excel must have the raw data, not summary statistics, so enter these 10 
data values into cells A1 through A10 (see Screen 9.13):
81, 79, 62, 98, 74, 82, 85, 72, 90, 88
2. Click on cell B1.
3. Suppose we wish to test H0: μ = 75 and it is known that σ = 12. Type one of the following 
commands into cell B1 based on your alternative hypothesis (see Screen 9.13):
• For H1: μ > 75, type =Z.TEST(A1:A10,75,12).
• For H1: μ < 75, type =1 − Z.TEST(A1:A10,75,12).
• For H1: μ ≠75, type =2*MIN(Z.TEST(A1:A10,75,12),1-Z.TEST(A1:A10,75,12)).
4. The output is the p-value for the test.
Compare the p-value to the value of α and make a decision.
Excel
Screen 9.13

Technology Instructions
393
Testing a Hypothesis About μ, σ Unknown
1. To perform this test, Excel must have the raw data, not summary statistics, so enter 
these 10 data values into cells A1 through A10 (see Screen 9.14):
81, 79, 62, 98, 74, 82, 85, 72, 90, 88
2. Suppose we wish to test H0: μ = 75. There is no Excel function for a one-sample 
t-test for μ, but it is possible to trick Excel into performing these calculations for us.
3. Enter 0 into cells B1 through B10. (See Screen 9.14.)
4. Click DATA and then click Data Analysis Tools in the Analysis group.
5. Select t-Test: Two Sample Assuming Unequal Variances from the dialog box that appears 
on screen.
6. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen (see Screen 9.14):
• Type A1:A10 in the Variable 1 Range box.
• Type B1:B10 in the Variable 2 Range box.
• Type 75 in the Hypothesized Mean Difference box.
• Select New Worksheet Ply from the Output Options.
7. Click OK.
8. When the output appears, resize column A so that it is easier to read. (See Screen 9.15.)
9. The correct formula for the p-value depends on your alternative hypothesis and the t statistic.
• For H1: μ > 75,
• If the t statistic is positive, use the p-value from P(T<=t) one-tail.
• If the t statistic is negative, the p-value is found by subtracting P(T<=t) one-tail from 1.
• For H1: μ < 75,
• If the t statistic is positive, the p-value is found by subtracting P(T<=t) one-tail from 1.
• If the t statistic is negative, use the p-value from P(T<=t) one-tail.
• For H1: μ ≠ 75 use the p-value from P(T<=t) two-tail.
Testing a Hypothesis about p for Example 9–9 of the Text
1. There is no Excel function that can be used to create a confidence interval for a 
population proportion, so we must enter a few calculations in sequence. To make 
our work easier to understand, type the following text into the corresponding 
spreadsheet cells (see Screen 9.16):
• Type “null hyp” in cell A1.
• Type “p-hat” in cell A2.
• Type “n” in cell A3.
• Type “SD of p-hat” in cell A4.
• Type “z stat” in cell A5.
• Type “p-value” in cell A6.
2. Click on cell B1 and type 0.20.
Screen 9.14
Screen 9.15
Screen 9.16
www.ebook3000.com

394
Chapter 9 Hypothesis Tests About the Mean and Proportion
3. Click on cell B2 and type 0.22.
4. Click on cell B3 and type 2000.
5. Click on cell B4 and type =SQRT(B1*(1-B1)/B3).
6. Click on cell B5 and type =(B2-B1)/B4.
7. Click on cell B6. The correct formula for the p-value depends on your alternative hypothesis.
• For H1: p > 0.20, type =1−NORM.S.DIST(B5,1).
• For H1: p < 0.20, type =NORM.S.DIST(B5,1).
• For H1: p ≠0.20, type =2*MIN(NORM.S.DIST(B5,1),1-NORM.S.DIST(B5,1)) 
(see Screen 9.16).
TA9.3 General Logs Banana Bombs cereal is sold in 10.40-ounce 
packages. Because the cereal is sold by weight, the number of pieces 
of Banana Bombs varies from box to box. The following values rep-
resent the number of pieces in 19 boxes of Banana Bombs.
686 695 690 681 683 705 724 701 689 698
715 703 711 676 686 695 697 707 693
Perform a hypothesis test to determine whether the average number of 
pieces in all 10.40-ounce boxes of Banana Bombs is different from 
700. Assume that the distribution of the number of pieces in a 10.40-
ounce box is approximately normal. Use α = .05.
TA9.4 According to a basketball coach, the mean height of all male 
college basketball players is 74 inches. A random sample of 25 such 
players produced the following data on their heights.
68
76
74
83
77
76
69
67
71
74
79
85
69
78
75
78
68
72
83
79
82
76
69
70
81
Test at a 2% significance level whether the mean height of all male 
college basketball players is different from 74 inches. Assume that the 
heights of all male college basketball players are (approximately) 
normally distributed.
TA9.5 A past study claimed that adults in America spent an average 
of 18 hours a week on leisure activities. A researcher took a sample of 
10 adults from a town and asked them about the time they spend per 
week on leisure activities. Their responses (in hours) follow.
14 25 22 38 16 26 19 23 41 33
Assume that the times spent on leisure activities by all adults are nor-
mally distributed and the population standard deviation is 3 hours. 
Using a 5% significance level, can you conclude that the claim of the 
earlier study is true?
TA9.6 Refer to Data Set IV on the Manchester Road Race that 
accompanies this text (see Appendix A). Take a random sample of 100 
TA9.1 The Wechsler adult Intelligence Scale-III (WAIS-III) is a 
widely used intelligence test. On this test, a score of 90-109 is consid-
ered typical. An administrator at a college believes that the incoming 
freshmen class is of higher intelligence than typical. She selects a 
random sample of 36 students from the incoming class and records 
their intelligence test scores, which are produced below.
 95
123
128
114
118
102
122
 98
125
120
121
132
113
117
134
100
121
130
121
99
113
111
113
115
116
103
114
107
131
128
115
129
126
118
106
115
Test if this sample data support this administrator’s belief that the 
mean intelligence test score for all freshman is greater than 109. Use
α = .05.
TA9.2 Some colleges are known for their excellent cafeteria food, 
so much so that the term “Freshman 15” has been coined to refer to 
the amount of weight that students gain during their freshman year 
at college. The following data represent the amount of weight gained 
by 40 randomly selected students from a college during their fresh-
man year. Note that a negative value implies that a student lost 
weight.
21.1
17.7
25.1
9.8
25.9
5.3
0.3
23.4
22.4
7.6
25.5
15.9
24.2
27.5
−3.0
8.7
13.6
11.2
13.5
7.8
17.8
5.9
−2.4
2.9
0.7
−1.0
25.7
18.0
28.7
3.2
2.2
26.7
24.5
10.5
25.5
−3.2
−0.5
8.0
5.7
−4.6
Although this college is happy about the reputation of its food ser-
vice, it is concerned about the health issues of substantial weight 
gains. As a result, it distributed nutrition pamphlets to students in an 
attempt to reduce the amount of weight gain. Perform a hypothesis 
test at a 10% significance level to determine whether the average 
weight gain by all freshmen at this college during the first year is less 
than 15 pounds.
TECHNOLOGY ASSIGNMENTS

Technology Assignments
395
from column 3 that lists net times (in minutes) to complete this race. 
It is known that σ = 14.010 minutes for this variable on net times.
a. Using the sample information and a 5% significance level, test 
the hypothesis that the mean time for all participants to com-
plete this race was less than 52 minutes.
b. Use technology to compute the mean time for all participants, 
which will be 50.873 minutes. This population mean is less 
than 52 minutes. Did your test of part a give you the correct 
decision?
TA9.7 Refer to Data Set IV on the Manchester Road Race that 
accompanies this text (see Appendix A). Let p be the proportion of all 
participants that are female. Select a random sample of 100 from col-
umn 6 that lists gender of the participants. Using this sample informa-
tion and 1% significance level, test the hypothesis H0: p = .44 versus 
H1: p ≠.44. In this population of participants, 46.81% were females. 
Did your hypothesis test give you the correct decision?
TA9.8 A manufacturer of contact lenses must ensure that each con-
tact lens is properly manufactured with no flaws, since flaws lead to 
poor vision or even eye damage. In a recent quality control check, 48 
of 5000 lenses were found to have flaws. Using this sample informa-
tion and 1% significance level, test the hypothesis H0: p = .01 versus 
H1: p > .01.
TA9.9 A mail-order company claims that at least 60% of all orders it 
receives are mailed within 48 hours. From time to time the quality 
control department at the company checks if this promise is kept. 
Recently, the quality control department at this company took a 
sample of 400 orders and found that 224 of them were mailed within 
48 hours of the placement of the orders. Test at a 1% significance level 
whether or not the company’s claim is true.
www.ebook3000.com

396
CHAPTER10
Chapters 8 and 9 discussed the estimation and hypothesis-testing procedures for μ and p involving 
a single population. This chapter extends the discussion of estimation and hypothesis-testing proce-
dures to the difference between two population means and the difference between two population 
proportions. For example, we may want to make a confidence interval for the difference between the 
mean prices of houses in California and in New York, or we may want to test the hypothesis that the 
mean price of houses in California is different from that in New York. As another example, we may 
want to make a confidence interval for the difference between the proportions of all male and female 
adults who abstain from drinking, or we may want to test the hypothesis that the proportion of all 
adult men who abstain from drinking is different from the proportion of all adult women who abstain 
from drinking. Constructing confidence intervals and testing hypotheses about population parame-
ters are referred to as making inferences.
Which toothpaste do you use? Are you a loyal user of this toothpaste? Will you ever switch to another tooth-
paste? Many of us never switch from one brand to another brand of a product. So, how do we find which of 
the two toothpastes has more loyal users? In other words, how do we test that one toothpaste has a higher 
percentage of its users who will not switch to the other toothpaste? (See Example 10–14.)
© Westend61 GmbH/Alamy Stock Photo
10.1  Inferences About the 
Difference Between Two 
Population Means for 
Independent Samples: 
σ1 and σ2 Known
10.2  Inferences About the 
Difference Between Two 
Population Means for 
Independent Samples: 
σ1 and σ2 Unknown but 
Equal
10.3  Inferences About the 
Difference Between Two 
Population Means for 
Independent Samples: 
σ1 and σ2 Unknown and 
Unequal
10.4  Inferences About the 
Mean of Paired Samples 
(Dependent Samples)
10.5  Inferences About the 
Difference Between Two 
Population Proportions 
for Large and 
Independent Samples
Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: 
Two Populations

10.1 Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population Means for Independent Samples: σ1 and σ2 Known
397
10.1 Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population Means 
for Independent Samples: σ1 and σ2 Known
Let μ1 be the mean of the first population and μ2 be the mean of the second population. Suppose 
we want to make a confidence interval and test a hypothesis about the difference between these 
two population means, that is, μ1 − μ2. Let x1 be the mean of a sample taken from the first popu-
lation and x2 be the mean of a sample taken from the second population. Then, x1 −x2 is the 
sample statistic that is used to make an interval estimate and to test a hypothesis about μ1 − μ2. 
This section discusses how to make confidence intervals and test hypotheses about μ1 − μ2 when 
certain conditions (to be explained later in this section) are satisfied. First we explain the con-
cepts of independent and dependent samples.
10.1.1 Independent Versus Dependent Samples
Two samples are independent if they are drawn from two different populations and the elements 
of one sample have no relationship to the elements of the second sample. If the elements of the 
two samples are somehow related, then the samples are said to be dependent. Thus, in two inde-
pendent samples, the selection of one sample has no effect on the selection of the second sample.
Independent Versus Dependent Samples Two samples drawn from two populations are inde-
pendent if the selection of one sample from one population does not affect the selection of the 
second sample from the second population. Otherwise, the samples are dependent.
Examples 10–1 and 10–2 illustrate independent and dependent samples, respectively.
EXAMPLE 10–1 
Salaries of Male and Female Executives
Suppose we want to estimate the difference between the mean salaries of all male and all female 
executives. To do so, we draw two samples, one from the population of male executives and 
another from the population of female executives. These two samples are independent because 
they are drawn from two different populations, and the samples have no effect on each other. 
◼ 
EXAMPLE 10–2 
Weights Before and After a Weight Loss Program
Suppose we want to estimate the difference between the mean weights of all participants before 
and after a weight loss program. To accomplish this, suppose we take a sample of 40 participants 
and measure their weights before and after the completion of this program. Note that these two 
samples include the same 40 participants. This is an example of two dependent samples. 
◼ 
 
This section and Sections 10.2, 10.3, and 10.5 discuss how to make confidence intervals and 
test hypotheses about the difference between two population parameters when samples are inde-
pendent. Section 10.4 discusses how to make confidence intervals and test hypotheses about the 
difference between two population means when samples are dependent.
10.1.2 Mean, Standard Deviation, and Sampling Distribution of x1 − x2
Suppose we select two (independent) samples from two different populations that are referred to 
as population 1 and population 2. Let
μ1 = the mean of population 1
μ2 = the mean of population 2
σ1 = the standard deviation of population 1
σ2 = the standard deviation of population 2
n1 = the size of the sample drawn from population 1
n2 = the size of the sample drawn from population 2
x1 = the mean of the sample drawn from population 1
x2 = the mean of the sample drawn from population 2
Illustrating two independent 
samples.
Illustrating two dependent 
samples.
www.ebook3000.com

398
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
Then, as we discussed in Chapters 8 and 9, if
1. 
The standard deviation σ1 of population 1 is known
2. 
At least one of the following two conditions is fulfilled:
 
 i. The sample is large (i.e., n1 ≥30)
 
ii.  If the sample size is small, then the population from which the sample is drawn is approx-
imately normally distributed 
then the sampling distribution of x1 is approximately normal with its mean equal to μ1 and the 
standard deviation equal to σ1 ∕√n1, assuming that n1∕N1 ≤.05.
 
Similarly, if
1. 
The standard deviation σ2 of population 2 is known
2. 
At least one of the following two conditions is fulfilled:
 
 i. The sample is large (i.e., n2 ≥30)
 
ii.  If the sample size is small, then the population from which the sample is drawn is approx-
imately normally distributed 
then the sampling distribution of x2 is approximately normal with its mean equal to μ2 and the 
standard deviation equal to σ2∕√n2, assuming that n2∕N2 ≤.05.
 
Using these results, we can make the following statements about the mean, the standard 
deviation, and the shape of the sampling distribution of x1 −x2.
 
If the following conditions are satisfied:
1. 
The two samples are independent
2. 
The standard deviations σ1 and σ2 of the two populations are known
3. 
At least one of the following two conditions is fulfilled:
 
 i. Both samples are large (i.e., n1 ≥30 and n2 ≥30)
 
ii.  If either one or both sample sizes are small, then both populations from which the 
samples are drawn are approximately normally distributed 
then the sampling distribution of x1 −x2 is approximately normally distributed with its mean and 
standard deviation,1 respectively,
μ x1 − x2 = μ1 −μ2
and
      σ x1−x2 = B
σ2
1
n1
+ σ2
2
n2
In these cases, we can use the normal distribution to make a confidence interval and test a hypoth-
esis about μ1 −μ2. Figure 10.1 shows the sampling distribution of x1 −x2 when the above condi-
tions are fulfilled.
1The formula for the standard deviation of x1 −x2 can also be written as
σ x1−x2 = √σ x1
2 + σ x2
2
where σ x1 = σ1∕√n1 and σ x2 = σ2∕√n2.
Figure 10.1 The sampling distribution of x1 −x2.
       x1 − x2 =
–
–
1
n1
+
2
–
–
  μ1 − μ2
x1 − x2
2
n2
2
Approximately
normal
σ
σ
σ

10.1 Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population Means for Independent Samples: σ1 and σ2 Known
399
 
Note that to apply the procedures learned in this chapter, the samples selected must be simple 
random samples.
10.1.3 Interval Estimation of μ1 − μ2
By constructing a confidence interval for μ1 − μ2, we find the difference between the means of 
two populations. For example, we may want to find the difference between the mean heights of 
male and female adults. The difference between the two sample means, x1 −x2, is the point 
estimator of the difference between the two population means, μ1 − μ2. When the conditions 
mentioned earlier in this section hold true, we use the normal distribution to make a confidence 
interval for the difference between the two population means. The following formula gives the 
interval estimation for μ1 − μ2.
Sampling Distribution, Mean, and Standard Deviation of x1 − x2 When the conditions listed on 
the previous page are satisfied, the sampling distribution of x1 −x2 is (approximately) normal 
with its mean and standard deviation as, respectively,
μ x1− x2 = μ1 −μ2 
  and   σ x1−x2 = B
σ2
1
n1
+ σ2
2
n2
Confidence Interval for μ1 − μ2 When using the normal distribution, the (1 − α)100% confi-
dence interval for μ1 − μ2 is
 (x1 −x2) ± z σ x1−x2
The value of z is obtained from the normal distribution table for the given confidence level. The 
value of σx1−x2 is calculated as explained earlier. Here, x1 −x2 is the point estimator of μ1 − μ2.
 
Note that in the real world, σ1 and σ2 are never known. Consequently we will never use the 
procedures of this section, but we are discussing these procedures in this book for the information 
of the readers.
 
Example 10–3 illustrates the procedure to construct a confidence interval for μ1 − μ2 using 
the normal distribution.
EXAMPLE 10–3 
Annual Premiums for Employer-Sponsored 
Health Insurance
According to the Kaiser Family Foundation surveys in 2014 and 2012, the average annual premi-
ums for employer-sponsored health insurance for family coverage was $16,834 in 2014 and 
$15,745 in 2012 (www.kff.org). Suppose that these averages are based on random samples of 250 
and 200 employees who had such employer-sponsored health insurance plans for 2014 and 2012, 
respectively. Further assume that the population standard deviations for 2014 and 2012 were 
$2160 and $1990, respectively. Let μ1 and μ2 be the population means for such annual premiums 
for the years 2014 and 2012, respectively.
(a) What is the point estimate of μ1 − μ2?
(b) Construct a 97% confidence interval for μ1 − μ2.
Solution Let us refer to the employees who had employer-sponsored health insurance for 
family coverage in 2014 as population 1 and those for 2012 as population 2. Then the respective 
samples are samples 1 and 2. Let x1 and x2 be the means of the two samples, respectively. From 
the given information,
For 2014:  n1 = 250,  x1 = $16,834,  σ1 = $2160
For 2012:  n2 = 200,  x2 = $15,745,  σ2 = $1990
Constructing a confidence interval 
for μ1 − μ2: σ1 and σ2 known, and 
samples are large.
www.ebook3000.com

400
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
(a) The point estimate of μ1 − μ2 is given by the value of x1 −x2. Thus,
Point estimate of μ1 −μ2 = $16,834 −$15,745 = $1089
(b)  The confidence level is 1 −α = .97. From the normal distribution table, the values of z 
for .0150 and .9850 areas to the left are −2.17 and 2.17, respectively. Hence, we will use 
z = 2.17 in the confidence interval formula. First we calculate the standard deviation of 
x1 −x2, σ x1−x2, as follows:
σ x1−x2 = B
σ2
1
n1
+ σ 2
2
n2
= B
(2160)2
250
+ (1990)2
200
= $196.1196064
 
Next, substituting all the values in the confidence interval formula, we obtain a 97% 
confidence interval for μ1 − μ2 as
 (x1 −x2) ± z σ x1−x2 = ($16,834 −$15,745) ± 2.17(196.1196064)
 = 1089 ± 425.58 = $663.42 to $1514.58
 
Thus, with 97% confidence we can state that the difference between the average 
annual premiums for employer-sponsored health insurance for family coverage in 2014 
and 2012 is between $663.42 and $1514.58. The value zσx1−x2 = $425.58 is called the 
margin of error for this estimate. 
◼ 
 
Note that in Example 10–3 both sample sizes were large and the population standard devia-
tions were known. If the standard deviations of the two populations are known, at least one of the 
sample sizes is small, and both populations are approximately normally distributed, we use the 
normal distribution to make a confidence interval for μ1 −μ2. The procedure in this case is 
exactly the same as in Example 10–3.
10.1.4 Hypothesis Testing About μ1 − μ2
It is often necessary to compare the means of two populations. For example, we may want to 
know if the mean price of houses in Chicago is different from that in Los Angeles. Similarly, we 
may be interested in knowing if American children spend, on average, fewer hours in school than 
Japanese children do. In both these cases, we will perform a test of hypothesis about μ1 − μ2. The 
alternative hypothesis in a test of hypothesis may be that the means of the two populations are 
different, or that the mean of the first population is greater than the mean of the second popula-
tion, or that the mean of the first population is less than the mean of the second population. These 
three situations are described next.
1. Testing an alternative hypothesis that the means of two populations are different is equiva-
lent to μ1 ≠ μ2, which is the same as μ1 − μ2 ≠ 0.
2. 
Testing an alternative hypothesis that the mean of the first population is greater than the 
mean of the second population is equivalent to μ1 > μ2, which is the same as μ1 − μ2 > 0.
3. Testing an alternative hypothesis that the mean of the first population is less than the mean 
of the second population is equivalent to μ1 < μ2, which is the same as μ1 − μ2 < 0.
 
The procedure that is followed to perform a test of hypothesis about the difference 
between two population means is similar to the one that is used to test hypotheses about single- 
population parameters in Chapter 9. The procedure involves the same five steps for the critical- 
value approach that were used in Chapter 9 to test hypotheses about μ and p. Here, again, if 
the following conditions are satisfied, we will use the normal distribution to make a test of 
hypothesis about μ1 − μ2.
1. 
The two samples are independent.
2. 
The standard deviations σ1 and σ2 of the two populations are known.
3. 
At least one of the following two conditions is fulfilled:

10.1 Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population Means for Independent Samples: σ1 and σ2 Known
401
Example 10–4 shows how to make a test of hypothesis about μ1 − μ2.
EXAMPLE 10–4 
Annual Premiums for Employer-Sponsored 
Health Insurance
Refer to Example 10–3 about the average annual premiums for employer-sponsored health insur-
ance for family coverage in 2014 and 2012. Test at a 1% significance level whether the popula-
tion means for the two years are different.
Solution From the information given in Example 10–3,
For 2014:  n1 = 250,  x1 = $16,834,  σ1 = $2160
For 2012:  n2 = 200,  x2 = $15,745,  σ2 = $1990
Let μ1 and μ2 be the population means for such annual premiums for the years 2014 and 2012, 
respectively. Let x1 and x2 be the corresponding sample means.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
We are to test whether the two population means are different. The two possibilities are:
 
 i.  The mean annual premiums for the years 2014 and 2012 are not different. In other words, 
μ1 = μ2, which can be written as μ1 − μ2 = 0.
 
ii.  The mean annual premiums for the years 2014 and 2012 are different. That is, μ1 ≠μ2, 
which can be written as μ1 −μ2 ≠0.
Considering these two possibilities, the null and alternative hypotheses are, respectively,
H0: μ1 − μ2 = 0  (The two population means are not different.)
H0: μ1 − μ2 ≠ 0  (The two population means are different.)
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
Here, the population standard deviations, σ1 and σ2, are known, and both samples are large 
(n1 ≥ 30 and n2 ≥ 30). Therefore, the sampling distribution of x1 −x2 is approximately normal, 
and we use the normal distribution to perform the hypothesis test.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The significance level is given to be .01. The ≠ sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates 
that the test is two-tailed. The area in each tail of the normal distribution curve is α∕2 = .01∕2 = 
.005. The critical values of z for .0050 and .9950 areas to the left are (approximately) −2.58 and 
2.58 from Table IV of Appendix B. These values are shown in Figure 10.2.
Making a two-tailed test of 
hypothesis about μ1 − μ2: 
σ1 and σ2 are known, and 
samples are large.
Test Statistic z for x1 − x2 When using the normal distribution, the value of the test statistic 
z for x1 −x2 is computed as
z = (x1 −x2) −(μ1 −μ2)
σ x1− x2
The value of μ1 − μ2 is substituted from H0. The value of σ x1−x2 is calculated as earlier in this 
section.
 
 i. Both samples are large (i.e., n1 ≥ 30 and n2 ≥ 30)
 
ii.  If either one or both sample sizes are small, then both populations from which the samples 
are drawn are approximately normally distributed
www.ebook3000.com

402
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
The value of the test statistic z for x1 −x2 is computed as follows:
 σx1−x2 = B
σ2
1
n1
+ σ 2
2
n2
= B
(2160)2
250
+ (1990)2
200
= $196.1196064
 z = (x1 −x2) −(μ1 −μ2)
σ x1−x2
= ($16,834 −$15,745) −0
196.1196064
= 5.55
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
Because the value of the test statistic z = 5.55 falls in the rejection region, we reject the 
null hypothesis H0. Therefore, we conclude that the average annual premiums for employer-
sponsored health insurance for family coverage were different for 2014 and 2012.
Using the p-Value to Make a Decision for Example 10–4
We can use the p-value approach to make the above decision. To do so, we keep Steps 1 and 2. 
Then in Step 3 we calculate the value of the test statistic z (as done in Step 4) and find the p-value 
for this z from the normal distribution table. In Step 4, the z value for x1 −x2 was calculated to 
be 5.55. In this example, the test is two-tailed. The p-value is equal to twice the area under the 
sampling distribution of x1 −x2 to the right of z = 5.55. From the normal distribution table 
(Table IV in Appendix B), the area to the right of z = 5.55 is (approximately) zero. Therefore, 
the p-value is zero. As we know from Chapter 9, we will reject the null hypothesis for any α 
(significance level) that is greater than or equal to the p-value. Consequently, in this example, 
we will reject the null hypothesis for (almost) any α > 0. Since α = .01 in this example, which 
is greater than zero, we reject the null hypothesis. 
◼
From H0
Figure 10.2 Rejection and nonrejection regions.
Do not reject H0
Two critical values of z
Reject H0
Reject H0
0
−2.58
2.58
z
 α/2 = .005
 α/2 = .005
  μ1 − μ2 = 0
–
–x1 − x2
EXERCISES
10.3 The following information is obtained from two independent 
samples selected from two normally distributed populations.
n1 = 18   
x1 = 7.82  σ1 = 2.35
n2 = 15   
x2 = 5.99  σ2 = 3.17
a. What is the point estimate of μ1 − μ2?
b. Construct a 99% confidence interval for μ1 − μ2. Find the 
margin of error for this estimate.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
10.1 Briefly explain the meaning of independent and dependent 
samples. Give one example of each.
10.2 Describe the sampling distribution of x1 −x2 for two inde-
pendent samples when σ1 and σ2 are known and either both sample 
sizes are large or both populations are normally distributed. What are 
the mean and standard deviation of this sampling distribution?

10.1 Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population Means for Independent Samples: σ1 and σ2 Known
403
a. Let μ1 and μ2 be the population means of ice cream amounts 
dispensed by all male and all female students at this college, 
respectively. What is the point estimate of μ1 − μ2?
b. Construct a 95% confidence interval for μ1 − μ2.
c. Using a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the 
average amount of ice cream dispensed by all male college 
students is larger than the average amount dispensed by 
all female college students? Use both approaches to make 
this test.
10.9 A car magazine is comparing the total repair costs incurred 
during the first three years on two sports cars, the T-999 and the XPY. 
Random samples of 45 T-999s and 51 XPYs are taken. All 96 cars are 
3 years old and have similar mileages. The mean of repair costs for 
the 45 T-999 cars is $3300 for the first 3 years. For the 51 XPY cars, 
this mean is $3850. Assume that the standard deviations for the two 
populations are $800 and $1000, respectively.
a. Construct a 99% confidence interval for the difference 
between the two population means.
b. Using a 1% significance level, can you conclude that such 
mean repair costs are different for these two types of cars?
c. What would your decision be in part b if the probability of 
making a Type I error were zero? Explain.
10.10 The management at New Century Bank claims that the mean 
waiting time for all customers at its branches is less than that at the 
Public Bank, which is its main competitor. A business consulting firm 
took a sample of 200 customers from the New Century Bank and 
found that they waited an average of 4.5 minutes before being served. 
Another sample of 300 customers taken from the Public Bank showed 
that these customers waited an average of 4.75 minutes before being 
served. Assume that the standard deviations for the two populations 
are 1.2 and 1.5 minutes, respectively.
a. Make a 97% confidence interval for the difference between 
the two population means.
b. Test at a 2.5% significance level whether the claim of the 
management of the New Century Bank is true.
c. Calculate the p-value for the test of part b. Based on this 
p-value, would you reject the null hypothesis if α = .01? What 
if α = .05?
10.11 Maine Mountain Dairy claims that its 8-ounce low-fat 
yogurt cups contain, on average, fewer calories than the 8-ounce 
low-fat yogurt cups produced by a competitor. A consumer agency 
wanted to check this claim. A sample of 27 such yogurt cups pro-
duced by this company showed that they contained an average of 
141 calories per cup. A sample of 25 such yogurt cups produced by 
its competitor showed that they contained an average of 144 calo-
ries per cup. Assume that the two populations are approximately 
normally distributed with population standard deviations of 5.5 and 
6.4 calories, repectively.
a. Make a 98% confidence interval for the difference between 
the mean number of calories in the 8-ounce low-fat yogurt 
cups produced by the two companies.
b. Test at a 1% significance level whether Maine Mountain 
Dairy’s claim is true.
c. Calculate the p-value for the test of part b. Based on this 
p-value, would you reject the null hypothesis if α = .05? What 
if α = .025?
10.4 The following information is obtained from two independent 
samples selected from two populations.
n1 = 650   
x1 = 1.05  σ1 = 5.22
n2 = 675   
x2 = 1.54  σ2 = 6.80
a. What is the point estimate of μ1 − μ2?
b. Construct a 95% confidence interval for μ1 − μ2. Find the 
margin of error for this estimate.
10.5 The following information is obtained from two independent 
samples selected from two normally distributed populations.
n1 = 18  
x1 = 7.82  σ1 = 2.35
n2 = 15  
x2 = 5.99  σ2 = 3.17
Test at a 5% significance level if the two population means are 
different.
10.6 The following information is obtained from two independent 
samples selected from two populations.
n1 = 650  
x1 = 1.05  σ1 = 5.22
n2 = 675  
x2 = 1.54  σ2 = 6.80
Test at a 5% significance level if μ1 is less than μ2.
APPLICATIONS
10.7 In parts of the eastern United States, whitetail deer are a major 
nuisance to farmers and homeowners, frequently damaging crops, 
gardens, and landscaping. A consumer organization arranges a test of 
two of the leading deer repellents A and B on the market. Fifty-six 
unfenced gardens in areas having high concentrations of deer are used 
for the test. Twenty-nine gardens are chosen at random to receive 
repellent A, and the other 27 receive repellent B. For each of the 56 
gardens, the time elapsed between application of the repellent and the 
appearance of the first deer in the garden is recorded. For repellent A, 
the mean time is 101 hours. For repellent B, the mean time is 92 
hours. Assume that the two populations of elapsed times have approx-
imately normal distributions with population standard deviations of 
15 and 10 hours, respectively.
a. Let μ1 and μ2 be the population means of elapsed times for the 
two repellents, respectively. Find the point estimate of μ1 − μ2.
b. Find a 97% confidence interval for μ1 − μ2.
c. Test at a 2% significance level whether the mean elapsed times 
for repellents A and B are different. Use both approaches, the 
critical-value and p-value, to perform this test.
10.8 A local college cafeteria has a self-service soft ice cream 
machine. The cafeteria provides bowls that can hold up to 16 ounces 
of ice cream. The food service manager is interested in comparing 
the average amount of ice cream dispensed by male students to 
the average amount dispensed by female students. A measurement 
device was placed on the ice cream machine to determine the 
amounts dispensed. Random samples of 85 male and 78 female stu-
dents who got ice cream were selected. The sample averages were 
7.23 and 6.49 ounces for the male and female students, respectively. 
Assume that the population standard deviations are 1.22 and 1.17 
ounces, respectively.
www.ebook3000.com

404
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
This section discusses making a confidence interval and testing a hypothesis about the difference 
between the means of two populations, μ1 − μ2, assuming that the standard deviations, σ1 and σ2, 
of these populations are not known but are assumed to be equal. There are some other conditions, 
explained below, that must be fulfilled to use the procedures discussed in this section.
 
If the following conditions are satisfied,
1. 
The two samples are independent
2. The standard deviations σ1 and σ2 of the two populations are unknown, but they can be 
assumed to be equal, that is, σ1 = σ2
3. 
At least one of the following two conditions is fulfilled:
 i. Both samples are large (i.e., n1 ≥30 and n2 ≥30)
ii.  If either one or both sample sizes are small, then both populations from which the samples 
are drawn are approximately normally distributed 
then we use the t distribution to make a confidence interval and test a hypothesis about the differ-
ence between the means of two populations, μ1 −μ2.
 
When the standard deviations of the two populations are equal, we can use σ for both σ1 and 
σ2. Because σ is unknown, we replace it by its point estimator sp, which is called the pooled 
sample standard deviation (hence, the subscript p). The value of sp is computed by using the 
information from the two samples as follows.
10.2 Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population Means 
for Independent Samples: σ1 and σ2 Unknown but Equal
Pooled Standard Deviation for Two Samples The pooled standard deviation for two samples 
is computed as
sp = B
(n1 −1)s2
1 + (n2 −1)s2
2
n1 + n2 −2
where n1 and n2 are the sizes of the two samples and s1
2 and s2
2 are the variances of the two 
samples, respectively. Here sp is an estimator of σ.
Estimator of the Standard Deviation of x1 − x2 The estimator of the standard deviation of 
x1 −x2 is
sx1 − x2 = sp  A
1
n1
+ 1
n2
In this formula, n1 − 1 are the degrees of freedom for sample 1, n2 − 1 are the degrees of freedom 
for sample 2, and n1 + n2 − 2 are the degrees of freedom for the two samples taken together. 
Note that sp is an estimator of the standard deviation, σ, of each of the two populations.
 
When sp is used as an estimator of σ, the standard deviation of x1 −x2, σx1−x2 is estimated by 
sx1−x2. The value of sx1−x2 is calculated by using the following formula.
 
Now we are ready to discuss the procedures that are used to make confidence intervals and 
test hypotheses about μ1 − μ2 for independent samples selected from two populations with 
unknown but equal standard deviations.
10.2.1 Interval Estimation of μ1 − μ2
As was mentioned earlier in this chapter, the difference between the two sample means, x1 −x2, 
is the point estimator of the difference between the two population means, μ1 − μ2. The following 
formula gives the confidence interval for μ1 − μ2 when the t distribution is used and the 
conditions mentioned earlier in this section are fulfilled.

10.2 Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population Means for Independent Samples: σ1 and σ2 Unknown but Equal
405
 
Example 10–5 describes the procedure to make a confidence interval for μ1 −μ2 using the 
t distribution.
Confidence Interval for μ1 − μ2 The (1 − α)100% confidence interval for μ1 − μ2 is
(x1 −x2) ± t sx1−x2
where the value of t is obtained from the t distribution table for the given confidence level and 
n1 + n2 − 2 degrees of freedom, and sx1−x2 is calculated as explained earlier.
EXAMPLE 10–5 
Caffeine in Two Brands of Coffee
A consumer agency wanted to estimate the difference in the mean amounts of caffeine in two 
brands of coffee. The agency took a sample of 15 one-pound jars of Brand I coffee that showed 
the mean amount of caffeine in these jars to be 80 milligrams per jar with a standard deviation of 
5 milligrams. Another sample of 12 one-pound jars of Brand II coffee gave a mean amount of 
caffeine equal to 77 milligrams per jar with a standard deviation of 6 milligrams. Construct a 95% 
confidence interval for the difference between the mean amounts of caffeine in one-pound jars of 
these two brands of coffee. Assume that the two populations are approximately normally distrib-
uted and that the standard deviations of the two populations are equal.
Solution Let μ1 and μ2 be the mean amounts of caffeine per jar in all 1-pound jars of Brand I 
and II coffee, respectively, and let x1 and x2 be the means of the two respective samples. From the 
given information,
Brand I coffee: 
  n1 = 15   x1 = 80 milligrams   s1 = 5 milligrams
Brand II coffee:  n2 = 12   x2 = 77 milligrams   s2 = 6 milligrams
The confidence level is 1 − α = .95.
 
Here, σ1 and σ2 are unknown but assumed to be equal, the samples are independent (taken 
from two different populations), and the sample sizes are small but the two populations are 
approximately normally distributed. Hence, we will use the t distribution to make the confidence 
interval for μ1 − μ2 as all conditions mentioned in the beginning of this section are satisfied.
 
First we calculate the standard deviation of x1 −x2 as follows. Note that since it is assumed 
that σ1 and σ2 are equal, we will use sp to calculate sx1−x2.
 sp = B
(n1 −1)  s2
1 + (n2 −1)s2
2
n1 + n2 −2
= B
(15 −1)(5)2 + (12 −1)(6)2
15 + 12 −2
= 5.46260011
 sx1−x2 = sp A
1
n1
+ 1
n2
= (5.46260011) A
1
15 + 1
12 = 2.11565593
 
Next, to find the t value from the t distribution table, we need to know the area in each tail of 
the t distribution curve and the degrees of freedom.
 Area in each tail = α2 = (1 −.95)2 = .025
 Degrees of freedom = n1 + n2 −2 = 15 + 12 −2 = 25
The t value for df = 25 and .025 area in the right tail of the t distribution curve is 2.060. The 95% 
confidence interval for μ1 − μ2 is
 (x1 −x2) ± tsx1−x2 = (80 −77) ± 2.060(2.11565593)
 = 3 ± 4.36 = −1.36 to 7.36 milligrams
 
Thus, with 95% confidence we can state that based on these two sample results, the differ-
ence in the mean amounts of caffeine in 1-pound jars of these two brands of coffee lies between 
Constructing a confidence 
interval for μ1 − μ2: two 
independent samples, unknown 
but equal σ1 and σ2.
© ansonsaw/iStockphoto
www.ebook3000.com

406
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
−1.36 and 7.36 milligrams. Because the lower limit of the interval is negative, it is possible that 
the mean amount of caffeine is greater in the second brand than in the first brand of coffee.
 
Note that the value of x1 −x2, which is 80 − 77 = 3, gives the point estimate of μ1 − μ2. The 
value of tsx1−x2, which is 4.36, is the margin of error. 
◼ 
10.2.2 Hypothesis Testing About μ1 − μ2
When the conditions mentioned in the beginning of Section 10.2 are satisfied, the t distribution 
is applied to make a hypothesis test about the difference between two population means. The test 
statistic in this case is t, which is calculated as follows.
Test Statistic t for x1 − x2  The value of the test statistic t for x1 −x2 is computed as
t = (x1 −x2) −(μ1 −μ2)
sx1 − x2
The value of μ1 − μ2 in this formula is substituted from the null hypothesis, and sx1−x2 is calcu-
lated as explained earlier in Section 10.2.1.
 
Examples 10–6 and 10–7 illustrate how to use the t distribution to perform a test of hypoth-
esis about the difference between two population means for independent samples that are selected 
from two populations with equal standard deviations.
EXAMPLE 10–6 
Calories in Two Brands of Diet Soda
A sample of 14 cans of Brand I diet soda gave the mean number of calories of 23 per can with a 
standard deviation of 3 calories. Another sample of 16 cans of Brand II diet soda gave the mean 
number of calories of 25 per can with a standard deviation of 4 calories. At a 1% significance level, 
can you conclude that the mean numbers of calories per can are different for these two brands of 
diet soda? Assume that the calories per can of diet soda are approximately normally distributed for 
each of the two brands and that the standard deviations for the two populations are equal.
Solution Let μ1 and μ2 be the mean number of calories for all cans of Brand I and Brand II 
diet soda, respectively, and let x1 and x2 be the means of the respective samples. From the given 
information,
Brand I diet soda:   n1 = 14   x1 = 23   s1 = 3
Brand II diet soda:  n2 = 16   x2 = 25   s2 = 4
The significance level is α = .01.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
We are to test for the difference in the mean number of calories for the two brands. The null 
and alternative hypotheses are, respectively,
H0: μ1 −μ2 = 0 (The mean number of calories are not different)
H1: μ1 −μ2 ≠0 (The mean number of calories are different)
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
Here, the two samples are independent, σ1 and σ2 are unknown but equal, and the sample sizes 
are small but both populations are approximately normally distributed. Hence, all conditions men-
tioned in the beginning of Section 10.2 are fulfilled. Consequently, we will use the t distribution.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The ≠ sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates that the test is two-tailed. The signifi-
cance level is .01. Hence,
 Area in each tail = α∕2 = .01∕2 = .005
 Degrees of freedom = n1 + n2 −2 = 14 + 16 −2 = 28
Making a two-tailed test of 
hypothesis about μ1 − μ2: two 
independent samples, and 
unknown but equal σ1 and σ2.

10.2 Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population Means for Independent Samples: σ1 and σ2 Unknown but Equal
407
The critical values of t for df = 28 and .005 area in each tail of the t distribution curve are −2.763 
and 2.763, as shown in Figure 10.3.
Do not reject H0
0
Two critical values of t
2.763
Reject H0
Reject H0
−2.763
t
 α/2 = .005
 α/2 = .005
Figure 10.3 Rejection and nonrejection regions.
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
The value of the test statistic t for x1 −x2 is computed as follows:
 sp = B
(n1 −1)s2
1 + (n2 −1)s2
2
n1 + n2 −2
= B
(14 −1)(3)2 + (16 −1)(4)2
14 + 16 −2
= 3.57071421
 sx1−x2 = sp A
1
n1
+ 1
n2
= (3.57071421) A
1
14 + 1
16 = 1.30674760
 t = (x1 −x2) −(μ1 −μ2)
sx1− x2
= (23 −25) −0
1.30674760
= −1.531
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
Because the value of the test statistic t = −1.531 for x1 −x2 falls in the nonrejection region, 
we fail to reject the null hypothesis. Consequently we conclude that there is no difference in the 
mean number of calories for the two brands of diet soda. The difference in x1 and x2 observed for 
the two samples may have occurred due to sampling error only.
Using the p-Value to Make a Decision for Example 10–6
We can use the p-value approach to make the above decision. To do so, we keep Steps 1 and 2 
of this example. Then in Step 3, we calculate the value of the test statistic t (as done in Step 4 
above) and then find the p-value for this t from the t distribution table (Table V of Appendix B) 
or by using technology. In Step 4 above, the t-value for x1 −x2 was calculated to be −1.531. In 
this example, the test is two-tailed. Therefore, the p-value is equal to twice the area under the 
t distribution curve to the left of t = −1.531. If we have access to technology, we can use it to 
find the exact p-value, which will be .137. If we use the t distribution table, we can only find a 
range for the p-value. From Table V of Appendix B, for df = 28, the two values that include 
1.531 are 1.313 and 1.701. (Note that we use the positive value of t, although our t is negative.) 
Thus, the test statistic t = −1.531 falls between −1.313 and −1.701. The areas in the t distribu-
tion table that correspond to 1.313 and 1.701 are .10 and .05, respectively. Because it is a two-
tailed test, the p-value for t = −1.531 is between 2(.10) = .20 and 2(.05) = .10, which can be 
written as
.10 < p-value < .20
As we know from Chapter 9, we will reject the null hypothesis for any α (significance level) that 
is greater than or equal to the p-value. Consequently, in this example, we will reject the null 
hypothesis for any α ≥.20 using the above range and not reject it for α < .10. If we use technol-
ogy, we will reject the null hypothesis for α ≥.137. Since α = .01 in this example, which is 
smaller than both .10 and .137, we fail to reject the null hypothesis. 
◼
From H0
www.ebook3000.com

408
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
EXAMPLE 10–7 
Time Spent Watching Television by Children
A sample of 40 children from New York State showed that the mean time they spend watching 
television is 28.50 hours per week with a standard deviation of 4 hours. Another sample of 35 
children from California showed that the mean time spent by them watching television is 23.25 
hours per week with a standard deviation of 5 hours. Using a 2.5% significance level, can you 
conclude that the mean time spent watching television by children in New York State is greater 
than that for children in California? Assume that the standard deviations for the two populations 
are equal.
Solution Let all children from New York State be referred to as population 1 and those from 
California as population 2. Let μ1 and μ2 be the mean time spent watching television by children 
in populations 1 and 2, respectively, and let x1 and x2 be the mean time spent watching television 
by children in the respective samples. From the given information,
New York:  n1 = 40    x1 = 28.50 hours    s1 = 4 hours
California:  n2 = 35    x2 = 23.25 hours    s2 = 5 hours
The significance level is α = .025.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
The two possible decisions are:
1. The mean time spent watching television by children in New York State is not greater than 
that for children in California. This can be written as μ1 = μ2 or μ1 − μ2 = 0.
2. The mean time spent watching television by children in New York State is greater than that 
for children in California. This can be written as μ1 > μ2 or μ1 − μ2 > 0.
 
Hence, the null and alternative hypotheses are, respectively,
 H0: μ1 −μ2 = 0
 H1: μ1 −μ2 > 0
 
Note that the null hypothesis can also be written as μ1 − μ2 ≤ 0.
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
Here, the two samples are independent (taken from two different populations), σ1 and σ2 are 
unknown but assumed to be equal, and both samples are large. Hence, all conditions mentioned in 
the beginning of Section 10.2 are fulfilled. Consequently, we use the t distribution to make the test.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The > sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates that the test is right-tailed. The significance 
level is .025.
 
Area in the right tail of the t distribution = α = .025
 
Degrees of freedom = n1 + n2 −2 = 40 + 35 −2 = 73
From the t distribution table, the critical value of t for df = 73 and .025 area in the right tail of the 
t distribution is 1.993. This value is shown in Figure 10.4.
Making a right-tailed test of 
hypothesis about μ1 − μ2: two 
independent samples, σ1 and σ2 
unknown but equal, and both 
samples are large.
© Dori OConnell/iStockphoto
Do not reject H0
0
Critical value of t
1.993
Reject H0
t
α = .025
Figure 10.4 Rejection and nonrejection regions.

10.2 Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population Means for Independent Samples: σ1 and σ2 Unknown but Equal
409
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
The value of the test statistic t for x1 −x2 is computed as follows:
 sp = B
(n1 −1)s2
1 + (n2 −1)s2
2
n1 + n2 −2
= B
(40 −1)(4)2 + (35 −1)(5)2
40 + 35 −2
= 4.49352655
 sx1−x2 = sp A
1
n1
+ 1
n2
= (4.49352655) A
1
40 + 1
35 = 1.04004930
 t = (x1 −x2) −(μ1 −μ2)
sx1−x2
= (28.50 −23.25) −0
1.04004930
= 5.048
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
Because the value of the test statistic t = 5.048 for x1 −x2 falls in the rejection region (see 
Figure 10.4), we reject the null hypothesis H0. Hence, we conclude that children in New York 
State spend more time, on average, watching TV than children in California.
Using the p-Value to Make a Decision for Example 10–7
To use the p-value approach to make the above decision, we keep Steps 1 and 2 of this example. 
Then in Step 3, we calculate the value of the test statistic t (as done in Step 4 above) and then find 
the p-value for this t from the t distribution table (Table V of Appendix B) or by using technology. 
In Step 4 above, the t-value for x1 −x2 was calculated to be 5.048. In this example, the test is 
right-tailed. Therefore, the p-value is equal to the area under the t distribution curve to the right 
of t = 5.048. If we have access to technology, we can use it to find the exact p-value, which will 
be .000. If we use the t distribution table, for df = 73, the value of the test statistic t = 5.048 is 
larger than 3.206. Therefore, the p-value for t = 5.048 is less than .001, which can be written as
p-value < .001
Since we will reject the null hypothesis for any α (significance level) greater than or equal to the 
p-value, here we reject the null hypothesis because α = .025 is greater than both the p-values, 
.001 obtained above from the table and .000 obtained by using technology. Note that obtaining 
the p-value = .000 from technology does not mean that the p-value is zero. It means that when 
the p-value is rounded to three digits after the decimal, it is .000. 
◼
Note: What If the Sample Sizes Are Large and the Number 
of df Are Not in the t Distribution Table?
In this section, we used the t distribution to make confidence intervals and perform tests of 
hypothesis about μ1 −μ2. When both sample sizes are large, it does not matter how large the 
sample sizes are if we are using technology. However, if we are using the t distribution 
table (Table V of Appendix B), this may pose a problem if samples are too large. Table V in 
Appendix B goes up to only 75 degrees of freedom. Thus, if the degrees of freedom are larger 
than 75, we cannot use Table V to find the critical value(s) of t. As mentioned in Chapters 8 and 
9, in such a situation, there are two options:
1. 
Use the t value from the last row (the row of ∞) in Table V.
2. 
Use the normal distribution as an approximation to the t distribution.
From H0
EXERCISES
10.13 The following information was obtained from two independ-
ent samples selected from two normally distributed populations with 
unknown but equal standard deviations.
 n1 = 21 x1 = 13.97 s1 = 3.78
 n2 = 20 x2 = 15.55 s2 = 3.26
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
10.12 Explain what conditions must hold true to use the t distribu-
tion to make a confidence interval and to test a hypothesis about 
μ1 − μ2 for two independent samples selected from two populations 
with unknown but equal standard deviations.
www.ebook3000.com

410
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
a. What is the point estimate of μ1 − μ2?
b Construct a 95% confidence interval for μ1 − μ2.
10.14 The following information was obtained from two independ-
ent samples selected from two normally distributed populations with 
unknown but equal standard deviations.
n1 = 21  
x1 = 13.97  s1 = 3.78
n2 = 20  
x2 = 15.55  s2 = 3.26
Test at a 5% significance level if the two population means are different.
10.15 The following information was obtained from two independ-
ent samples selected from two populations with unknown but equal 
standard deviations.
n1 = 55  
x1 = 90.40  s1 = 11.60
n2 = 50  
x2 = 86.30  s2 = 10.25
Test at a 1% significance level if the two population means are different.
10.16 The following information was obtained from two independ-
ent samples selected from two populations with unknown but equal 
standard deviations.
n1 = 55  
x1 = 90.40  s1 = 11.60
n2 = 50  
x1 = 86.30  s2 = 10.25
Test at a 5% significance level if μ1 is greater than μ2.
10.17 The following information was obtained from two independ-
ent samples selected from two normally distributed populations with 
unknown but equal standard deviations.
Sample 1: 47.7 46.9 51.9 34.1 65.8 61.5 50.2 40.8
53.1 46.1 47.9 45.7 49.0
Sample 2: 50.0 47.4 32.7 48.8 54.0 46.3 42.5 40.8
39.0 68.2 48.5 41.8
a. Let μ1 be the mean of population 1 and μ2 be the mean of 
population 2. What is the point estimate of μ1 − μ2?
b. Construct a 98% confidence interval for μ1 − μ2.
c. Test at a 1% significance level if μ1 is greater than μ2.
10.18 The following information was obtained from two independ-
ent samples selected from two normally distributed populations with 
unknown but equal standard deviations.
Sample 1: 2.18 2.23 1.96 2.24 2.72 1.87 2.68
2.15 2.49 2.05
Sample 2: 1.82 1.26 2.00 1.89 1.73 2.03 1.43
2.05 1.54 2.50 1.99 2.13
a. Let μ1 be the mean of population 1 and μ2 be the mean of 
population 2. What is the point estimate of μ1 − μ2?
b. Construct a 99% confidence interval for μ1 − μ2.
c. Test at a 2.5% significance level if μ1 is lower than μ2.
APPLICATIONS
10.19 The standard recommendation for automobile oil changes is 
once every 5000 miles. A local mechanic is interested in determining 
whether people who drive more expensive cars are more likely to fol-
low the recommendation. Independent random samples of 45 customers 
who drive luxury cars and 40 customers who drive compact lower-
price cars were selected. The average distance driven between oil 
changes was 5187 miles for the luxury car owners and 5214 miles for 
the compact lower-price cars. The sample standard deviations were 
424 and 507 miles for the luxury and compact groups, respectively. 
Assume that the two population distributions of the distances between 
oil changes have the same standard deviation.
a. Construct a 95% confidence interval for the difference in the 
mean distances between oil changes for all luxury cars and all 
compact lower-price cars.
b. Using a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the mean 
distance between oil changes is less for all luxury cars than 
that for all compact lower-price cars?
10.20 A high school counselor wanted to know if tenth-graders at 
her high school tend to have the same free time as the twelfth-graders. 
She took random samples of 25 tenth-graders and 23 twelfth-graders. 
Each student was asked to record the amount of free time he or she 
had in a typical week. The mean for the tenth-graders was found to be 
29 hours of free time per week with a standard deviation of 7.0 hours. 
For the twelfth-graders, the mean was 22 hours of free time per week 
with a standard deviation of 6.2 hours. Assume that the two popula-
tions are approximately normally distributed with unknown but equal 
standard deviations.
a. Make a 90% confidence interval for the difference between 
the corresponding population means.
b. Test at a 5% significance level whether the two population 
means are different.
10.21 A consumer organization tested two paper shredders, the 
Piranha and the Crocodile, designed for home use. Each of 10 ran-
domly selected volunteers shredded 100 sheets of paper with the 
Piranha, and then another sample of 10 randomly selected volunteers 
each shredded 100 sheets with the Crocodile. The Piranha took an 
average of 203 seconds to shred 100 sheets with a standard deviation 
of 6 seconds. The Crocodile took an average of 187 seconds to shred 
100 sheets with a standard deviation of 5 seconds. Assume that the 
shredding times for both machines are approximately normally dis-
tributed with equal but unknown standard deviations.
a. Construct a 99% confidence interval for the difference 
between the two population means.
b. Using a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the mean 
time taken by the Piranha to shred 100 sheets is higher than 
that for the Crocodile?
c. What would your decision be in part b if the probability of 
making a Type I error were zero? Explain.
10.22 Quadro Corporation has two supermarket stores in a city. The 
company’s quality control department wanted to check if the custom-
ers are equally satisfied with the service provided at these two stores. 
A sample of 380 customers selected from Supermarket I produced a 
mean satisfaction index of 7.6 (on a scale of 1 to 10, 1 being the low-
est and 10 being the highest) with a standard deviation of .75. Another 
sample of 370 customers selected from Supermarket II produced a 
mean satisfaction index of 8.1 with a standard deviation of .59. 
Assume that the customer satisfaction index for each supermarket has 
unknown but same population standard deviation.
a. Construct a 98% confidence interval for the difference 
between the mean satisfaction indexes for all customers for 
the two supermarkets.
b. Test at a 1% significance level whether the mean satisfac-
tion indexes for all customers for the two supermarkets are 
different.
10.23 Using data from the U.S. Census Bureau and other sources, 
www.nerdwallet.com estimated that considering only the households 
with credit card debts, the average credit card debt for U.S. house-
holds was $15,523 in 2014 and $15,242 in 2013. Suppose that these 
estimates were based on random samples of 600 households with 
credit card debts in 2014 and 700 households with credit card debts 

10.3 Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population Means for Independent Samples: σ1 and σ2 Unknown and Unequal
411
10.3 Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population Means 
for Independent Samples: σ1 and σ2 Unknown and Unequal
b. Construct a 98% confidence interval for μ1 − μ2.
c. Using a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the aver-
age credit card debt for such households was higher in 2014 
than in 2013? Use both the p-value and the critical-value 
approaches to make this test.
in 2013. Suppose that the sample standard deviations for these two 
samples were $3870 and $3764, respectively. Assume that the 
standard deviations for the two populations are unknown but equal.
a. Let μ1 and μ2 be the average credit card debts for all such 
households for the years 2014 and 2013, respectively. What is 
the point estimate of μ1 − μ2?
Section 10.2 explained how to make inferences about the difference between two population 
means using the t distribution when the standard deviations of the two populations are unknown 
but equal and certain other assumptions hold true. Now, what if all other assumptions of Sec-
tion 10.2 hold true, but the population standard deviations are not only unknown but also 
unequal? In this case, the procedures used to make confidence intervals and to test hypotheses 
about μ1 − μ2 remain similar to the ones we learned in Sections 10.2.1 and 10.2.2, except for 
two differences. When the population standard deviations are unknown and not equal, the 
degrees of freedom are no longer given by n1 + n2 − 2, and the standard deviation of x1 −x2 is 
not calculated using the pooled standard deviation sp.
 
Because the standard deviations of the two populations are not known, we use sx1−x2 as a 
point estimator of σ x1−x2. The following formula is used to calculate the standard deviation sx1−x2 
of x1 −x2.
Degrees of Freedom If
1. The two samples are independent
2.  The standard deviations σ1 and σ2 of the two populations are unknown and unequal, that is, 
σ1 ≠σ2
3. At least one of the following two conditions is fulfilled:
 i. Both samples are large (i.e., n1 ≥30 and n2 ≥30)
ii.  If either one or both sample sizes are small, then both populations from which the samples 
are drawn are approximately normally distributed
then the t distribution is used to make inferences about μ1 − μ2, and the degrees of freedom for 
the t distribution are given by
df =
(
s2
1
n1
+ s2
2
n2)
2
(
s1
2
n1)
2
n1 −1 +
(
s2
2
n2)
2
n2 −1
The number given by this formula is always rounded down for df.
Estimate of the Standard Deviation of x1 − x2 The value of sx1−x2 is calculated as
sx1−x2 = B
s2
1
n1
+ s2
2
n2
www.ebook3000.com

412
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
10.3.1 Interval Estimation of μ1 − μ2
Again, the difference between the two sample means, x1 −x2, is the point estimator of the differ-
ence between the two population means, μ1 − μ2. The following formula gives the confidence 
interval for μ1 − μ2 when the t distribution is used and the conditions mentioned earlier in this 
section are satisfied.
 
Example 10–8 describes how to construct a confidence interval for μ1 − μ2 when the standard 
deviations of the two populations are unknown and unequal.
EXAMPLE 10–8 
Caffeine in Two Brands of Coffee
According to Example 10–5 of Section 10.2.1, a sample of 15 one-pound jars of coffee of Brand 
I showed that the mean amount of caffeine in these jars is 80 milligrams per jar with a standard 
deviation of 5 milligrams. Another sample of 12 one-pound coffee jars of Brand II gave a mean 
amount of caffeine equal to 77 milligrams per jar with a standard deviation of 6 milligrams. Con-
struct a 95% confidence interval for the difference between the mean amounts of caffeine in 
one-pound coffee jars of these two brands. Assume that the two populations are approximately 
normally distributed and that the standard deviations of the two populations are not equal.
Solution Let μ1 and μ2 be the mean amounts of caffeine per jar in all 1-pound jars of Brands I 
and II, respectively, and let x1 and x2 be the means of the two respective samples.
From the given information,
 
Brand I coffee:   n1 = 15   x1 = 80 milligrams   s1 = 5 milligrams
 
Brand II coffee:  n2 = 12   x2 = 77 milligrams   s2 = 6 milligrams
The confidence level is 1 − α = .95.
 
First, we calculate the standard deviation of x1 −x2 as follows:
sx1−x2 = B
s2
1
n1
+ s2
2
n2
= B
(5)2
15
+ (6)2
12
= 2.16024690
 
Next, to find the t value from the t distribution table, we need to know the area in each tail of 
the t distribution curve and the degrees of freedom.
              Area in each tail = α∕2 = (1 −.95)∕2 = .025
 df =
(
s2
1
n1
+ s2
2
n2)
2
(
s2
1
n1)
2
n1 −1 +
(
s2
2
n2)
2
n2 −1
=
(
(5)2
15 + (6)2
12 )
2
(
(5)2
15 )
2
15 −1 +
(
(6)2
12 )
2
12 −1
= 21.42 ≈21
Note that the degrees of freedom are always rounded down as in this calculation. From the t dis-
tribution table, the t value for df = 21 and .025 area in the right tail of the t distribution curve is 
2.080. The 95% confidence interval for μ1 − μ2 is
 (x1 −x2) ± tsx1−x2 = (80 −77) ± 2.080(2.16024690)
 = 3 ± 4.49 = −1.49 to 7.49
Constructing a confidence interval 
for μ1 − μ2: two independent 
samples, σ1 and σ2 unknown 
and unequal.
Confidence Interval for μ1 − μ2 The (1 − α)100% confidence interval for μ1 − μ2 is
(x1 −x2) ± t s x1−x2
where the value of t is obtained from the t distribution table for a given confidence level and the 
degrees of freedom that are given by the formula mentioned earlier, and sx1−x2 is also calculated 
as explained earlier.

10.3 Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population Means for Independent Samples: σ1 and σ2 Unknown and Unequal
413
 
Thus, with 95% confidence we can state that based on these two sample results, the differ-
ence in the mean amounts of caffeine in 1-pound jars of these two brands of coffee is between 
−1.49 and 7.49 milligrams. 
◼ 
 
Comparing this confidence interval with the one obtained in Example 10–5, we observe that 
the two confidence intervals are very close. From this we can conclude that even if the standard 
deviations of the two populations are not equal and we use the procedure of Section 10.2.1 to 
make a confidence interval for μ1 − μ2, the margin of error will be small as long as the difference 
between the two population standard deviations is not too large.
10.3.2 Hypothesis Testing About μ1 − μ2
When the standard deviations of the two populations are unknown and unequal along with the 
other conditions of Section 10.2 holding true, we use the t distribution to make a test of hypoth-
esis about μ1 − μ2. This procedure differs from the one in Section 10.2.2 only in the calculation 
of degrees of freedom for the t distribution and the standard deviation of x1 −x2. The df and the 
standard deviation of x1 −x2 in this case are given by the formulas used in Section 10.3.1.
Test Statistic t for x1 − x2 The value of the test statistic t for x1 −x2 is computed as
t = (x1 −x2) −(μ1 −μ2)
sx1−x2
The value of μ1 − μ2 in this formula is substituted from the null hypothesis, and sx1−x2 is calcu-
lated as explained earlier.
 
Example 10–9 illustrates the procedure used to conduct a test of hypothesis about μ1 − μ2 
when the standard deviations of the two populations are unknown and unequal.
EXAMPLE 10–9 
Calories in Two Brands of Diet Soda
According to Example 10–6 of Section 10.2.2, a sample of 14 cans of Brand I diet soda gave the 
mean number of calories per can of 23 with a standard deviation of 3 calories. Another sample of 
16 cans of Brand II diet soda gave the mean number of calories of 25 per can with a standard 
deviation of 4 calories. Test at a 1% significance level whether the mean numbers of calories per 
can of diet soda are different for these two brands. Assume that the calories per can of diet 
soda are approximately normally distributed for each of these two brands and that the standard 
deviations for the two populations are not equal.
Solution Let μ1 and μ2 be the mean number of calories for all cans of Brand I and Brand II 
diet soda, respectively, and let x1 and x2 be the means of the respective samples. From the given 
information,
 
Brand I diet soda: 
 n1 = 14   x1 = 23   s1 = 3
 
Brand II diet soda: n2 = 16   x2 = 25   s2 = 4
The significance level is α = .01.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
We are to test for the difference in the mean number of calories for the two brands. The null 
and alternative hypotheses are, respectively,
H0: μ1 −μ2 = 0 (The mean number of calories are not different.)
H1: μ1 −μ2 ≠0 (The mean number of calories are different.)
Making a two-tailed test of 
hypothesis about μ1 − μ2: two 
independent samples, and 
unknown and unequal σ1 and σ2.
www.ebook3000.com

414
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
Here, the two samples are independent, σ1 and σ2 are unknown and unequal, the sample sizes 
are small, but both populations are approximately normally distributed. Hence, all conditions 
mentioned in the beginning of Section 10.3 are fulfilled. Consequently, we use the t distribution 
to make the test.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The ≠sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates that the test is two-tailed. The significance 
level is .01. Hence,
Area in each tail = α2 = .012 = .005
The degrees of freedom are calculated as follows:
df =
(
s2
1
n1
+ s2
2
n2)
2
(
s2
1
n1)
2
n1 −1 +
(
s2
2
n2)
2
n2 −1
=
(
(3)2
14 + (4)2
16 )
2
(
(3)2
14 )
2
14 −1 +
(
(4)2
16 )
2
16 −1
= 27.41 ≈27
From the t distribution table, the critical values of t for df = 27 and .005 area in each tail of the 
t distribution curve are −2.771 and 2.771. These values are shown in Figure 10.5.
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
The value of the test statistic t for x1 −x2 is computed as follows:
 sx1−x2 = B
s2
1
n1
+ s2
2
n2
= B
(3)2
14 + (4)2
16 = 1.28173989
 
                     t = (x1 −x2) −(μ1 −μ2)
sx1−x2
= (23 −25) −0
1.28173989
= −1.560
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
Because the value of the test statistic t = −1.560 for x1 −x2 falls in the nonrejection region, 
we fail to reject the null hypothesis. Hence, there is no difference in the mean numbers of calories 
per can for the two brands of diet soda. The difference in x1 and x2 observed for the two samples 
may have occurred due to sampling error only.
Using the p-Value to Make a Decision for Example 10–9
We can use the p-value approach to make the above decision. To do so, we keep Steps 1 and 2 
of this example. Then in Step 3 we calculate the value of the test statistic t (as done in Step 4 
above) and then find the p-value for this t from the t distribution table (Table V of Appendix B) 
or by using technology. In Step 4 above, the t-value for x1 −x2 was calculated to be −1.560. In 
this example, the test is two-tailed. Therefore, the p-value is equal to twice the area under the 
Do not reject H0
0
Two critical values of t
2.771
Reject H0
Reject H0
−2.771
t
 α/2 = .005
 α/2 = .005
Figure 10.5 Rejection and nonrejection regions.
From H0

10.3 Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population Means for Independent Samples: σ1 and σ2 Unknown and Unequal
415
t distribution curve to the left of t = −1.560. If we have access to technology, we can use it to 
find the exact p-value, which will be .130. If we use the t distribution table, we can only find a 
range for the p-value. From Table V of Appendix B, for df = 27, the two values that include 
1.560 are 1.314 and 1.703. (Note that we use the positive value of t, although our t is negative.) 
Thus, the test statistic t = −1.560 falls between −1.314 and −1.703. The areas in the t distribu-
tion table that correspond to 1.314 and 1.703 are .10 and .05, respectively. Because it is a two-
tailed test, the p-value for t = −1.560 is between 2(.10) = .20 and 2(.05) = .10, which can be 
written as
.10 < p-value < .20
Since we will reject the null hypothesis for any α (significance level) that is greater than the 
p-value, we will reject the null hypothesis in this example for any α ≥ .20 using the above range 
and not reject for α < .10. If we use technology, we will reject the null hypothesis for α ≥.130. 
Since α = .01 in this example, which is smaller than both .10 and .130, we fail to reject the null 
hypothesis. 
◼
The degrees of freedom for the procedures to make a confidence interval and to test a hypothesis 
about μ1 − μ2 learned in Sections 10.3.1 and 10.3.2 are always rounded down.
 Remember
EXERCISES
10.29 The following information was obtained from two independ-
ent samples selected from two populations with unequal and unknown 
population standard deviations.
n1 = 48  
x1 = .863  s1 = .176
n2 = 46  
x2 = .796  s2 = .068
Test at a 2.5% significance level if μ1 is greater than μ2.
APPLICATIONS
10.30 A town that recently started a single-stream recycling pro-
gram provided 60-gallon recycling bins to 25 randomly selected 
households and 75-gallon recycling bins to 22 randomly selected 
households. The total volume of recycling over a 10-week period was 
measured for each of the households. The average total volumes were 
382 and 415 gallons for the households with the 60- and 75-gallon 
bins, respectively. The sample standard deviations were 52.5 and 
43.8 gallons, respectively. Assume that the 10-week total volumes of 
recycling are approximately normally distributed for both groups with 
unknown and unequal population standard deviations.
a. Construct a 98% confidence interval for the difference in the 
mean volumes of 10-week recyclying for all households with 
the 60- and 75-gallon bins.
b. Using a 2% significance level, can you conclude that the 
average 10-week recycling volume of all households having 
60-gallon containers is different from the average 10-week 
recycling volume of all households that have 75-gallon containers?
c. Suppose that the sample standard deviations were 59.3 and 
33.8 gallons, respectively. Redo parts a and b. Discuss any 
changes in the results.
10.31 An insurance company wants to know if the average speed at 
which men drive cars is higher than that of women drivers. The com-
pany took a random sample of 27 cars driven by men on a highway 
and found the mean speed to be 72 miles per hour with a standard 
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
10.24 Assuming that the two populations are normally distributed 
with unequal and unknown population standard deviations, construct 
a 95% confidence interval for μ1 − μ2 for the following.
n1 = 14 x1 = 109.43 s1 = 2.26
n2 = 15 x2 = 113.88 s2 = 5.84
10.25 Assuming that the two populations have unequal and unknown 
population standard deviations, construct a 99% confidence interval 
for μ1 − μ2 for the following.
n1 = 48 x1 = .863 s1 = .176
n2 = 46 x2 = .796 s2 = .068
10.26 The following information was obtained from two independ-
ent samples selected from two normally distributed populations with 
unequal and unknown population standard deviations.
n1 = 14  
x1 = 109.43  s1 = 2.26
n2 = 15  
x2 = 113.88  s2 = 5.84
Test at a 5% significance level if the two population means are different.
10.27 The following information was obtained from two independ-
ent samples selected from two populations with unequal and unknown 
population standard deviations.
n1 = 48  
x1 = .863  s1 = .176
n2 = 46  
x2 = .796  s2 = .068
Test at a 1% significance level if the two population means are different.
10.28 The following information was obtained from two independ-
ent samples selected from two normally distributed populations with 
unequal and unknown population standard deviations.
n1 = 14  
x1 = .109.43  s1 = 2.26
n2 = 15  
x2 = .113.88  s2 = 5.84
Test at a 1% significance level if μ1 is less than μ2.
www.ebook3000.com

416
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
10.4 Inferences About the Mean of Paired Samples (Dependent Samples)
10.33 Quadro Corporation has two supermarket stores in a city. 
The company’s quality control department wanted to check if the 
customers are equally satisfied with the service provided at these 
two stores. A sample of 380 customers selected from Supermarket I 
produced a mean satisfaction index of 7.6 (on a scale of 1 to 10, 1 
being the lowest and 10 being the highest) with a standard deviation 
of .75. Another sample of 370 customers selected from Supermarket 
II produced a mean satisfaction index of 8.1 with a standard devia-
tion of .59. Assume that the customer satisfaction indexes for the 
two supermarkets have unknown and unequal population standard 
deviations.
a. Construct a 98% confidence interval for the difference 
between the mean satisfaction indexes for all customers for 
the two supermarkets.
b. Test at a 1% significance level whether the mean satisfac-
tion indexes for all customers for the two supermarkets are 
different.
c. Suppose that the sample standard deviations were .88 and .39, 
respectively. Redo parts a and b. Discuss any changes in the 
results.
10.34 Using data from the U.S. Census Bureau and other sources, 
www.nerdwallet.com estimated that considering only the households 
with credit card debts, the average credit card debt for U.S. house-
holds was $15,523 in 2014 and $15,242 in 2013. Suppose that these 
estimates were based on random samples of 600 households with 
credit card debts in 2014 and 700 households with credit card debts 
in 2013. Suppose that the sample standard deviations for these two 
samples were $3870 and $3764, respectively. Assume that the standard 
deviations for the two populations are unknown and unequal.
a. Let μ1 and μ2 be the average credit card debts for all such 
households for the years 2014 and 2013, respectively. What is 
the point estimate of μ1 − μ2?
b. Construct a 98% confidence interval for μ1 − μ2.
c. Using a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the aver-
age credit card debt for such households was higher in 2014 
than in 2013? Use both the p-value and the critical-value 
approaches to make this test.
deviation of 2.2 miles per hour. Another sample of 18 cars driven by 
women on the same highway gave a mean speed of 68 miles per hour 
with a standard deviation of 2.5 miles per hour. Assume that the 
speeds at which all men and all women drive cars on this highway are 
both approximately normally distributed with unknown and unequal 
population standard deviations.
a. Construct a 98% confidence interval for the difference 
between the mean speeds of cars driven by all men and all 
women on this highway.
b. Test at a 1% significance level whether the mean speed of cars 
driven by all men drivers on this highway is higher than that 
of cars driven by all women drivers.
c. Suppose that the sample standard deviations were 1.9 and 
3.4 miles per hour, respectively. Redo parts a and b. Discuss 
any changes in the results.
10.32 A company claims that its medicine, Brand A, provides faster 
pain relief than another company’s medicine, Brand B. A researcher 
tested both brands of medicine on two groups of randomly selected 
patients. The results of the test are given in the following table. The 
mean and standard deviation of relief times are in minutes.
 
 
 
Mean of  
Standard Deviation
Brand 
Sample Size 
Relief Times 
of Relief Times
 
A 
25 
44 
11
 
B 
22 
49 
 9
Assume that the two populations are approximately normally distrib-
uted with unknown and unequal standard deviations.
a. Construct a 99% confidence interval for the difference 
between the mean relief times for the two brands of medicine.
b. Test at a 1% significance level whether the mean relief time 
for Brand A is less than that for Brand B.
c. Suppose that the sample standard deviations were 13.3 and 
7.2 minutes, respectively. Redo parts a and b. Discuss any 
changes in the results.
Sections 10.1, 10.2, and 10.3 were concerned with estimation and hypothesis testing about 
the difference between two population means when the two samples were drawn indepen-
dently from two different populations. This section describes estimation and hypothesis 
testing procedures for the mean of paired samples, which are also called two dependent 
samples.
 
In a case of two dependent samples, two data values—one for each sample—are collected 
from the same source (or element) and, hence, these are also called paired or matched 
samples. For example, we may want to make inferences about the mean weight loss for members 
of a health club after they have gone through an exercise program for a certain period of time. 
To do so, suppose we select a sample of 15 members of this health club and record their 
weights before and after the program. In this example, both sets of data are collected from 
the same 15 persons, once before and once after the program. Thus, although there are two 
samples, they contain the same 15 persons. This is an example of paired (or dependent or 
matched) samples. The procedures to make confidence intervals and test hypotheses in the case 
of paired samples are different from the ones for independent samples discussed in earlier 
sections of this chapter.

10.4 Inferences About the Mean of Paired Samples (Dependent Samples)
417
 
As another example of paired samples, suppose an agronomist wants to measure the effect 
of a new brand of fertilizer on the yield of potatoes. To do so, he selects 10 pieces of land and 
divides each piece into two portions. Then he randomly assigns one of the two portions from each 
piece of land to grow potatoes without using fertilizer (or using some other brand of fertilizer). 
The second portion from each piece of land is used to grow potatoes with the new brand of ferti-
lizer. Thus, he will have 10 pairs of data values. Then, using the procedure to be discussed in this 
section, he will make inferences about the difference in the mean yields of potatoes with and 
without the new fertilizer.
 
The question arises, why does the agronomist not choose 10 pieces of land on which to grow 
potatoes without using the new brand of fertilizer and another 10 pieces of land to grow potatoes by 
using the new brand of fertilizer? If he does so, the effect of the fertilizer might be confused with the 
effects due to soil differences at different locations. Thus, he will not be able to isolate the effect of 
the new brand of fertilizer on the yield of potatoes. Consequently, the results will not be reliable. By 
choosing 10 pieces of land and then dividing each of them into two portions, the researcher decreases 
the possibility that the difference in the productivities of different pieces of land affects the results.
 
In paired samples, the difference between the two data values for each element of the two 
samples is denoted by d. This value of d is called the paired difference. We then treat all the 
values of d as one sample and make inferences applying procedures similar to the ones used for 
one-sample cases in Chapters 8 and 9. Note that because each source (or element) gives a pair of 
values (one for each of the two data sets), each sample contains the same number of values. That 
is, both samples are of the same size. Therefore, we denote the (common) sample size by n, 
which gives the number of paired difference values denoted by d. The degrees of freedom for the 
paired samples are n − 1. Let
μd = the mean of the paired differences for the population
σd =  the standard deviation of the paired differences for the population, which is 
usually not known
d = the mean of the paired differences for the sample
sd = the standard deviation of the paired differences for the sample
n = the number of paired difference values
Mean and Standard Deviation of the Paired Differences for Two Samples The values of the 
mean and standard deviation, d and sd, respectively, of paired differences for two samples are 
calculated as2
 d =
∑d
n
 sd = R
∑d 2 −(∑d)2
n
n −1
2The basic formula used to calculate sd is
sd = B
∑(d −d )2
n −1
However, we will not use this formula to make calculations in this chapter.
Paired or Matched Samples Two samples are said to be paired or matched samples when for 
each data value collected from one sample there is a corresponding data value collected from the 
second sample, and both these data values are collected from the same source.
www.ebook3000.com

418
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
 
Thus, if the standard deviation σd of the population of paired differences is known and 
either the sample size is large (i.e., n ≥30) or the population of paired differences is approxi-
mately normally distributed (with n < 30), then the normal distribution can be used to make a 
confidence interval and to test a hypothesis about μd. However, usually σd is not known. Then, 
if the standard deviation σd of the population of paired differences is unknown and either the 
sample size is large (i.e., n ≥30) or the population of paired differences is approximately 
normally distributed (with n < 30), then the t distribution is used to make a confidence interval 
and to test a hypothesis about μd.
 
Sections 10.4.1 and 10.4.2 describe the procedures that are used to make a confidence inter-
val and to test a hypothesis about μd under the above conditions. The inferences are made using 
the t distribution.
10.4.1 Interval Estimation of μd
The mean d of paired differences for paired samples is the point estimator of μd. The following 
formula is used to construct a confidence interval for μd when the t distribution is used.
 
Example 10–10 illustrates the procedure to construct a confidence interval for μd.
Sampling Distribution, Mean, and Standard Deviation of d  If σd is known and either the sample 
size is large (n ≥30) or the population is normally distributed, then the sampling distribution 
of d is approximately normal with its mean and standard deviation given as, respectively,
μd = μd and σ d = σd
√n
 
In paired samples, instead of using x1 −x2 as the sample statistic to make inferences about 
μ1 − μ2, we use the sample statistic d to make inferences about μd. Actually the value of d is 
always equal to x1 −x2, and the value of μd is always equal to μ1 − μ2.
Making Inferences About μd If
1.  The standard deviation σd of the population of paired differences is unknown
2. At least one of the following two conditions is fulfilled:
 i. The sample size is large (i.e., n ≥30)
ii.  If the sample size is small, and the population of paired differences is approxi-
mately normally distributed
then the t distribution is used to make inferences about μd. The standard deviation σ d of d is 
estimated by s d, which is calculated as
s d = sd
√n
Confidence Interval for μd The (1 − α)100% confidence interval for μd is
d ± t s d
where the value of t is obtained from the t distribution table for the given confidence level and 
n − 1 degrees of freedom, and s d is calculated as explained earlier.

10.4 Inferences About the Mean of Paired Samples (Dependent Samples)
419
EXAMPLE 10–10 
Special Diet and Systolic Blood Pressure
A researcher wanted to find the effect of a special diet on systolic blood pressure. She selected a 
sample of seven adults and put them on this dietary plan for 3 months. The following table gives 
the systolic blood pressures (in mm Hg) of these seven adults before and after the completion of 
this plan.
Subject
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Before
210
180
195
220
231
199
224
After
193
186
186
223
220
183
233
Let μd be the mean reduction in the systolic blood pressures due to this special dietary plan for 
the population of all adults. Construct a 95% confidence interval for μd. Assume that the popula-
tion of paired differences is approximately normally distributed.
Solution Because the information obtained is from paired samples, we will make the confi-
dence interval for the paired difference mean μd of the population using the paired difference 
mean d of the sample. Let d be the difference in the systolic blood pressure of an adult before and 
after this special dietary plan. Then, d is obtained by subtracting the systolic blood pressure after 
the plan from the systolic blood pressure before the plan. The third column of Table 10.1 lists the 
values of d for the seven adults. The fourth column of the table records the values of d2, which 
are obtained by squaring each of the d values.
Constructing a confidence 
interval for μd: paired samples, σd 
unknown, n < 30, and population 
normal.
The values of d and sd are calculated as follows:
 d =
∑d
n = 35
7 = 5.00
 sd = R
∑d 2 −(∑d)2
n
n −1
= R
873 −(35)2
7
7 −1
= 10.78579312
Hence, the standard deviation of d is
s d = sd
√n
= 10.78579312
√7
= 4.07664661
Here, σd is not known, the sample size is small, but the population is approximately normally 
distributed. Hence, we will use the t distribution to make the confidence interval. For the 95% 
confidence interval, the area in each tail of the t distribution curve is
Area in each tail = α∕2 = (1 −.95)∕2 = .025
Table 10.1
 
Difference
Before 
After 
d 
d2
 210 
193 
17 
289
 180 
186 
−6 
36
 195 
186 
9 
81
 220 
223 
−3 
9
 231 
220 
11 
121
 199 
183 
16 
256
 224 
233 
−9 
81
 
 
 
Σd = 35 
Σd2 = 873
www.ebook3000.com

420
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
The degrees of freedom are
df = n −1 = 7 −1 = 6
From the t distribution table, the t value for df = 6 and .025 area in the right tail of the t distribu-
tion curve is 2.447. Therefore, the 95% confidence interval for μd is
d ± t s d = 5.00 ± 2.447(4.07664661) = 5.00 ± 9.98 = −4.98 to 14.98
 
Thus, we can state with 95% confidence that the mean difference between systolic blood 
pressures before and after the given dietary plan for all adult participants is between −4.98 and 
14.98 mm Hg. 
◼ 
10.4.2 Hypothesis Testing About μd
A hypothesis about μd is tested by using the sample statistic d. This section illustrates the case of 
the t distribution only. Earlier in this section we learned what conditions should hold true to use 
the t distribution to test a hypothesis about μd. The following formula is used to calculate the 
value of the test statistic t when testing a hypothesis about μd.
Test Statistic t for d  The value of the test statistic t for d is computed as follows:
t = d −μd
s d
The critical value of t is found from the t distribution table for the given significance level and 
n − 1 degrees of freedom.
 
Examples 10–11 and 10–12 illustrate the hypothesis-testing procedure for μd.
EXAMPLE 10–11 
How to Be a Successful Salesperson
A company wanted to know if attending a course on “how to be a successful salesperson” can 
increase the average sales of its employees. The company sent six of its salespersons to attend 
this course. The following table gives the 1-week sales of these salespersons before and after they 
attended this course.
Subject
1
2
3
4
5
6
Before
12
18
25
 9
14
16
After
18
24
24
14
19
20
Using a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the mean weekly sales for all salespersons 
increase as a result of attending this course? Assume that the population of paired differences has 
an approximate normal distribution.
Solution Because the data are for paired samples, we test a hypothesis about the paired differ-
ences mean μd of the population using the paired differences mean d of the sample.
Let
d = (Weekly sales before the course) −(Weekly sales after the course)
In Table 10.2, we calculate d for each of the six salespersons by subtracting the sales after the 
course from the sales before the course. The fourth column of the table lists the values of d2.
Conducting a left-tailed test of 
hypothesis about μd for paired 
samples: σd not known, small 
sample but normally distributed 
population.

10.4 Inferences About the Mean of Paired Samples (Dependent Samples)
421
 
The values of d and sd are calculated as follows:
 d =
∑d
n = −25
6
= −4.17
 sd = R
∑d 2 −(∑d)2
n
n −1
= R
139 −(−25)2
6
6 −1
= 2.63944439
The standard deviation of d is
s d = sd
√n
= 2.63944439
√6
= 1.07754866
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
We are to test if the mean weekly sales for all salespersons increase as a result of taking 
the course. Let μ1 be the mean weekly sales for all salespersons before the course and μ2 the 
mean weekly sales for all salespersons after the course. Then μd = μ1 − μ2. The mean weekly 
sales for all salespersons will increase due to attending the course if μ1 is less than μ2, which 
can be written as μ1 − μ2 < 0 or μd < 0. Consequently, the null and alternative hypotheses are, 
respectively,
 H0: μd = 0 (μ1 −μ2 = 0 or the mean weekly sales do not increase)
 H1: μd < 0 (μ1 −μ2 < 0 or the mean weekly sales do increase)
Note that we can also write the null hypothesis as μd ≥ 0.
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
Here σd is unknown, the sample size is small (n < 30), but the population of paired differ-
ences is approximately normally distributed. Therefore, we use the t distribution to conduct the test.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The < sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates that the test is left-tailed. The significance 
level is .01. Hence,
 Area in left tail = α = .01
 Degrees of freedom = n −1 = 6 −1 = 5
The critical value of t for df = 5 and .01 area in the left tail of the t distribution curve is −3.365. 
This value is shown in Figure 10.6.
Table 10.2
 
Difference
Before 
After 
d 
d2
 12 
18 
−6 
36
 18 
24 
−6 
36
 25 
24 
  1 
  1
  9 
14 
−5 
25
 14 
19 
−5 
25
 16 
20 
−4 
16
 
 
 
Σd = −25 
Σd2 = 139
www.ebook3000.com

422
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
The value of the test statistic t for d is computed as follows:
t = d −μd
s d
= −4.17 −0
1.07754866 = −3.870
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
Because the value of the test statistic t = −3.870 for d falls in the rejection region, we reject 
the null hypothesis. Consequently, we conclude that the mean weekly sales for all salespersons 
increase as a result of this course.
Using the p-Value to Make a Decision for Example 10–11
We can use the p-value approach to make the above decision. To do so, we keep Steps 1 and 2 of 
this example. Then in Step 3, we calculate the value of the test statistic t for d (as done in Step 4 
above) and then find the p-value for this t from the t distribution table (Table V of Appendix B) 
or by using technology. If we have access to technology, we can use it to find the exact p-value, 
which will be .006. By using Table V, we can find a range for p-value. From Table V, for df = 5, 
the test statistic t = −3.870 falls between −3.365 and −4.032. The areas in the t distribution table 
that correspond to −3.365 and −4.032 are .01 and .005, respectively. Because it is a left-tailed 
test, the p-value is between .01 and .005, which can be written as
.005 < p-value < .01
Since we will reject the null hypothesis for any α (significance level) that is greater than or equal 
to the p-value, we will reject the null hypothesis in this example for any α ≥ .006 using the tech-
nology and α ≥.01 using the above range. Since α = .01 in this example, which is larger than 
.006 obtained from technology, we reject the null hypothesis. Also, because α is equal to .01, 
using the p-value range we reject the null hypothesis. 
◼
From H0
t
−3.365
0
Reject H0
Do not reject H0
Critical value of t
α = .01
Figure 10.6 Rejection and nonrejection regions.
EXAMPLE 10–12 
Special Diet and Systolic Blood Pressure
Refer to Example 10–10. The table that gives the blood pressures (in mm Hg) of seven adults 
before and after the completion of a special dietary plan is reproduced here.
Subject
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Before
210
180
195
220
231
199
224
After
193
186
186
223
220
183
233
Let μd be the mean of the differences between the systolic blood pressures before and after com-
pleting this special dietary plan for the population of all adults. Using a 5% significance level, can 
you conclude that the mean of the paired differences μd is different from zero? Assume that the 
population of paired differences is approximately normally distributed.
Making a two-tailed 
test of hypothesis about μd for 
paired samples: σd not known, 
small sample but normally 
distributed population.

10.4 Inferences About the Mean of Paired Samples (Dependent Samples)
423
Solution Table 10.3 gives d and d2 for each of the seven adults (blood pressure values in 
mm Hg).
Table 10.3
 
Difference
Before 
After 
d 
d2
 210 
193 
17 
289
 180 
186 
−6 
36
 195 
186 
9 
81
 220 
223 
−3 
9
 231 
220 
11 
121
 199 
183 
16 
256
 224 
233 
−9 
81
 
 
 
Σd = 35 
Σd2 = 873
 
The values of d and sd are calculated as follows:
 d =
∑d
n = 35
7 = 5.00
 sd = R
∑d 2 −(∑d)2
n
n −1
= R
873 −(35)2
7
7 −1
= 10.78579312
Hence, the standard deviation of d is
s d = sd
√n
= 10.78579312
√7
= 4.07664661
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 H0: μd = 0 (The mean of the paired differences is not different from zero.)
 H1: μd ≠0 (The mean of the paired differences is different from zero.)
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
Here σd is unknown, the sample size is small, but the population of paired differences is 
approximately normal. Hence, we use the t distribution to make the test.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The ≠ sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates that the test is two-tailed. The significance 
level is .05.
 Area in each tail of the curve = α2 = .052 = .025
 Degrees of freedom = n −1 = 7 −1 = 6
Do not reject H0
Two critical values of t
Reject H0
0
−2.447
2.447
t
Reject H0
 α/2 = .025
 α/2 = .025
Figure 10.7 Rejection and 
nonrejection regions.
www.ebook3000.com

424
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
The two critical values of t for df = 6 and .025 area in each tail of the t distribution curve are 
−2.447 and 2.447. These values are shown in Figure 10.7.
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
The value of the test statistic t for d is computed as follows:
t = d −μd
s d
=
5.00 −0
4.07664661 = 1.226
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
Because the value of the test statistic t = 1.226 for d falls in the nonrejection region, we fail 
to reject the null hypothesis. Hence, we conclude that the mean of the population of paired dif-
ferences is not different from zero. In other words, we can state that the mean of the differences 
between the systolic blood pressures before and after completing this special dietary plan for the 
population of all adults is not different from zero.
Using the p-Value to Make a Decision for Example 10–12
We can use the p-value approach to make the above decision. To do so, we keep Steps 1 and 2 of 
this example. Then in Step 3, we calculate the value of the test statistic t for d (as done in Step 4 
above) and then find the p-value for this t from the t distribution table (Table V of Appendix B) 
or by using technology. If we have access to technology, we can use it to find the exact p-value, 
which will be .266. By using Table V, we can find a range for the p-value. From Table V, for 
df = 6, the test statistic t = 1.226 is less than 1.440. The area in the t distribution table that 
corresponds to 1.440 is .10. Because it is a two-tailed test, the p-value is greater than 2(.10) = .20, 
which can be written as
p-value > .20
Since α = .05 in this example, which is smaller than .20 and also smaller than .266 (obtained from 
technology), we fail to reject the null hypothesis. 
◼ 
From H0
EXERCISES
being the highest score) of these employees before and after they 
attended the course.
Before
8
5
4
9
6
9
5
After
10
8
5
11
6
7
9
a. Construct a 95% confidence interval for the mean μd of the pop-
ulation of paired differences, where a paired difference is equal 
to the score of an employee before attending the course minus 
the score of the same employee after attending the course.
b. Test at a 1% significance level whether attending this course 
increases the mean score of employees.
Assume that the population of paired differences has an approximate 
normal distribution.
10.39 A finger-tapping experiment was conducted by a doctoral 
neuropsychology student. The purpose of this experiment was to 
determine bilateral nervous system integrity, which provides data 
about the neuromuscular system and motor control. The experiment 
requires the subjects to place the palm of the hand on a table and then 
to tap the index finger on the surface of the table. Ten subjects who 
had suffered a mild concussion were given a finger tapping test using 
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
10.35 Explain when would you use the paired-samples procedure to 
make confidence intervals and test hypotheses.
10.36 Find the following confidence intervals for μd, assuming that 
the populations of paired differences are normally distributed.
a. n = 11 
d = 25.4, sd = 13.5, confidence level = 99%
b. n = 23, d = 13.2, sd = 4.8, confidence level = 95%
c. n = 18, d = 34.6, sd = 11.7, confidence level = 90%
10.37 Perform the following tests of hypotheses, assuming that the 
populations of paired differences are normally distributed.
a. H0: μd = 0, H1: μd ≠ 0, n = 9, d = 6.7, 
sd = 2.5,  α = .10
b. H0: μd = 0, H1: μd > 0, n = 22, d = 14.8, sd = 6.4,  α = .05
c. H0: μd = 0, H1: μd < 0, n = 17, d = −9.3, sd = 4.8,  α = .01
APPLICATIONS
10.38 A company sent seven of its employees to attend a course in 
building self-confidence. These employees were evaluated for their 
self-confidence before and after attending this course. The following 
table gives the scores (on a scale of 1 to 15, 1 being the lowest and 15 

10.5 Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population Proportions for Large and Independent Samples
425
the right index finger and then the left index finger. The total number 
of taps in 30 seconds by each subject are listed in the following table. 
All subject in the data set are right-handed. Assume that the popula-
tion of paired differences is approximately normally distributed.
Subject
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Right
125
131
95
105
137
129
91
112
138
94
Left
127
138
97
107
130
128
85
114
135
85
a. Make a 95% confidence interval for the mean of the popula-
tion of paired differences, where a paired difference is equal 
to the number of taps for the right index finger minus the num-
ber of taps for the left index finger.
b. Using a 5% significance level, can you conclude that the average 
number of taps is different for the right and left index fingers?
10.40 The manufacturer of a gasoline additive claims that the use of 
this additive increases gasoline mileage. A random sample of six cars 
was selected, and these cars were driven for 1 week without the gaso-
line additive and then for 1 week with the gasoline additive. The fol-
lowing table gives the miles per gallon for these cars without and with 
the gasoline additive.
Without
24.6
28.3
18.9
23.7
15.4
29.5
With
26.3
31.7
18.2
25.3
18.3
30.9
a. Construct a 99% confidence interval for the mean μd of the 
population of paired differences, where a paired difference is 
equal to the miles per gallon without the gasoline additive 
minus the miles per gallon with the gasoline additive.
b. Using a 2.5% significance level, can you conclude that the use 
of the gasoline additive increases the gasoline mileage?
Assume that the population of paired differences is approximately 
normally distributed.
10.41 A factory that emits airborne pollutants is testing two differ-
ent brands of filters for its smokestacks. The factory has two smoke-
stacks. One brand of filter (Filter I) is placed on one smokestack, 
and the other brand (Filter II) is placed on the second smokestack. 
Random samples of air released from the smokestacks are taken at 
different times throughout the day. Pollutant concentrations are meas-
ured from both stacks at the same time. The following data represent 
the pollutant concentrations (in parts per million) for samples taken 
at 20 different times after passing through the filters. Assume that 
the differences in concentration levels at all times are approximately 
normally distributed.
Time
Filter I
Filter II
Time
Filter I
Filter II
 1
24
26
11
11
 9
 2
31
30
12
 8
10
 3
35
33
13
14
17
 4
32
28
14
17
16
 5
25
23
15
19
16
 6
25
28
16
19
18
 7
29
24
17
25
27
 8
30
33
18
20
22
 9
26
22
19
23
27
10
18
18
20
32
31
a. Make a 95% confidence interval for the mean of the popula-
tion of paired differences, where a paired difference is equal 
to the pollutant concentration passing through Filter I minus 
the pollutant concentration passing through Filter II.
b. Using a 5% significance level, can you conclude that the 
average paired difference for concentration levels is different 
from zero?
10.5 Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population 
Proportions for Large and Independent Samples
Quite often we need to construct a confidence interval and test a hypothesis about the difference 
between two population proportions. For instance, we may want to estimate the difference 
between the proportions of defective items produced on two different machines. If p1 and p2 are 
the proportions of defective items produced on the first and second machine, respectively, then 
we are to make a confidence interval for p1 −p2. Alternatively, we may want to test the hypoth-
esis that the proportion of defective items produced on Machine I is different from the propor-
tion of defective items produced on Machine II. In this case, we are to test the null hypothesis 
p1 − p2 = 0 against the alternative hypothesis p1 −p2 ≠0.
 
This section discusses how to make a confidence interval and test a hypothesis about p1 − p2 
for two large and independent samples. The sample statistic that is used to make inferences about 
p1 − p2 is pˆ1 −pˆ2, where pˆ1 and pˆ2 are the proportions for two large and independent samples. 
As discussed in Chapter 7, we determine a sample proportion by dividing the number of elements 
in the sample that possess a given attribute by the sample size. Thus,
pˆ1 = x1n1 and pˆ2 = x2n2
where x1 and x2 are the number of elements that possess a given characteristic in the two samples 
and n1 and n2 are the sizes of the two samples, respectively.
www.ebook3000.com

426
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
10.5.1 Mean, Standard Deviation, and Sampling Distribution 
of pˆ 1 −pˆ 2
As discussed in Chapter 7, for a large sample, the sample proportion pˆ is approximately normally 
distributed with mean p and standard deviation √pq∕n. Hence, for two large and independent 
samples of sizes n1 and n2, respectively, their sample proportions pˆ1 and pˆ2 are approximately 
normally distributed with means p1 and p2 and standard deviations √p1q1n1 and √p2 q2n2, 
respectively. Using these results, we can make the following statements about the shape of the 
sampling distribution of pˆ1 −pˆ2 and its mean and standard deviation.
Mean, Standard Deviation, and Sampling Distribution of pˆ1 − pˆ2 For two large and independent 
samples, the sampling distribution of pˆ1 −pˆ2 is approximately normal, with its mean and 
standard deviation given as
 μpˆ1−pˆ2 = p1 −p2
and                                                      σpˆ1−pˆ2 = A
p1q1
n1
+ p2q2
n2
respectively, where q1 = 1 − p1 and q2 = 1 − p2.
 
Thus, to construct a confidence interval and to test a hypothesis about p1 − p2 for large and 
independent samples, we use the normal distribution. As was indicated in Chapter 7, in the case 
of proportion, the sample is large if np and nq are both greater than 5. In the case of two samples, 
both sample sizes are large if n1p1, n1q1, n2p2, and n2q2 are all greater than 5.
10.5.2 Interval Estimation of p1 − p2
The difference between two sample proportions pˆ1 −pˆ2 is the point estimator for the difference 
between two population proportions p1 − p2. Because we do not know p1 and p2 when we are 
making a confidence interval for p1 − p2, we cannot calculate the value of σpˆ1−pˆ2. Therefore, we 
use spˆ1−pˆ2 as the point estimator of σpˆ1−pˆ2 in the interval estimation. We construct the confidence 
interval for p1 − p2 using the following formula.
Confidence Interval for p1 − p2 The (1 − α)100% confidence interval for p1 − p2 is
(pˆ1 −pˆ2) ± z spˆ1−pˆ2
where the value of z is read from the normal distribution table for the given confidence level, and 
spˆ1−pˆ2 is calculated as
spˆ1−pˆ2 = A
pˆ1qˆ1
n1
+ pˆ2qˆ2
n2
 
Example 10–13 describes the procedure that is used to make a confidence interval for the 
difference between two population proportions for large samples.
EXAMPLE 10–13 
Users of Two Toothpastes
A researcher wanted to estimate the difference between the percentages of users of two tooth-
pastes who will never switch to another toothpaste. In a sample of 500 users of Toothpaste A 
taken by this researcher, 100 said that they will never switch to another toothpaste. In another 
sample of 400 users of Toothpaste B taken by the same researcher, 68 said that they will never 
switch to another toothpaste.
Constructing a confidence 
interval for p1 − p2: large and 
independent samples.

10.5 Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population Proportions for Large and Independent Samples
427
(a) Let p1 and p2 be the proportions of all users of Toothpastes A and B, respectively, who 
will never switch to another toothpaste. What is the point estimate of p1 − p2?
(b) Construct a 97% confidence interval for the difference between the proportions of all 
users of the two toothpastes who will never switch.
Solution Let p1 and p2 be the proportions of all users of Toothpastes A and B, respectively, who 
will never switch to another toothpaste, and let pˆ1 and pˆ2 be the respective sample proportions. 
Let x1 and x2 be the number of users of Toothpastes A and B, respectively, in the two samples 
who said that they will never switch to another toothpaste. From the given information,
 Toothpaste A: n1 = 500 and x1 = 100
 Toothpaste B: n2 = 400 and x2 = 68
The two sample proportions are calculated as follows:
 pˆ1 = x1n1 = 100500 = .20
 pˆ2 = x2n2 = 68400 = .17
Then,
 qˆ1 = 1 −.20 = .80 and qˆ2 = 1 −.17 = .83
(a) The point estimate of p1 − p2 is as follows:
Point estimate of p1 −p2 = pˆ1 −pˆ2 = .20 −.17 = .03
(b) The values of n1pˆ1, n1qˆ1, n2 pˆ 2, and n2qˆ2 are
n1pˆ1 = 500(.20) = 100  n1qˆ1 = 500(.80) = 400
n2pˆ2 = 400(.17) = 68   n2qˆ2 = 400(.83) = 332
Because each of these values is greater than 5, both sample sizes are large. Conse-
quently we use the normal distribution to make a confidence interval for p1 − p2. The 
standard deviation of pˆ1 −pˆ2 is
spˆ1−pˆ2 = B
pˆ1qˆ1
n1
+ pˆ2qˆ2
n2
= B
(.20)(.80)
500
+ (.17)(.83)
400
= .02593742
The z value for a 97% confidence level, obtained from the normal distribution table, is 
2.17. The 97% confidence interval for p1 − p2 is
 (pˆ1 −pˆ2) ± z spˆ1−pˆ2 = (.20 −.17) ± 2.17(.02593742)
 = .03 ± .056 = −.026 to .086
Thus, with 97% confidence we can state that the difference between the two population 
proportions is between −.026 and .086 or −2.6% and 8.6%.
 Note that here pˆ1 −pˆ2 = .03 gives the point estimate of p1 − p2 and z spˆ1−pˆ2 = .056 is 
the margin of error of the estimate. 
◼ 
10.5.3 Hypothesis Testing About p1 − p2
In this section we learn how to test a hypothesis about p1 − p2 for two large and independent 
samples. The procedure involves the same five steps we have used previously. Once again, we 
calculate the standard deviation of pˆ1 −pˆ2 as
σpˆ1−pˆ2 = A
p1q1
n1
+ p2q2
n2
When a test of hypothesis about p1 − p2 is performed, usually the null hypothesis is p1 = p2 
and the values of p1 and p2 are not known. Assuming that the null hypothesis is true and p1 = p2, 
© Andrey Armyagov/iStockphoto
www.ebook3000.com

428
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
a common value of p1 and p2, denoted by p, is calculated by using one of the following two 
formulas:
p = x1 + x2
n1 + n2 or n1pˆ1 + n2pˆ2
n1 + n2
Which of these formulas is used depends on whether the values of x1 and x2 or the values of pˆ1 
and pˆ2 are known. Note that x1 and x2 are the number of elements in each of the two samples that 
possess a certain characteristic. This value of p is called the pooled sample proportion. Using 
the value of the pooled sample proportion, we compute an estimate of the standard deviation of 
pˆ1 −pˆ2 as follows:
spˆ1−pˆ2 = Bp q (
1
n1
+ 1
n2)
where q = 1 −p.
Test Statistic z for pˆ1 − pˆ2 The value of the test statistic z for pˆ1 −pˆ2 is calculated as
z = (pˆ1 −pˆ2) −(p1 −p2)
spˆ1−pˆ2
The value of p1 − p2 is substituted from H0, which usually is zero.
 
Examples 10–14 and 10–15 illustrate the procedure to test hypotheses about the difference 
between two population proportions for large samples.
EXAMPLE 10–14 
Users of Two Toothpastes
Reconsider Example 10–13 about the percentages of users of two toothpastes who will never 
switch to another toothpaste. At a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the proportion of 
users of Toothpaste A who will never switch to another toothpaste is higher than the proportion 
of users of Toothpaste B who will never switch to another toothpaste?
Solution Let p1 and p2 be the proportions of all users of Toothpastes A and B, respectively, who 
will never switch to another toothpaste, and let pˆ1 and pˆ2 be the corresponding sample propor-
tions. Let x1 and x2 be the number of users of Toothpastes A and B, respectively, in the two 
samples who said that they will never switch to another toothpaste. From the given information,
 Toothpaste A: n1 = 500 and x1 = 100
 Toothpaste B: n2 = 400 and x2 = 68
The significance level is α = .01. The two sample proportions are calculated as follows:
 pˆ1 = x1n1 = 100500 = .20
 pˆ2 = x2n2 = 68400 = .17
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
We are to test if the proportion of users of Toothpaste A who will never switch to another 
toothpaste is higher than the proportion of users of Toothpaste B who will never switch to another 
toothpaste. In other words, we are to test whether p1 is greater than p2. This can be written as 
p1 − p2 > 0. Thus, the two hypotheses are
 H0: p1 = p2  
or  p1 −p2 = 0  ( p1 is the same as p2)
 H1: p1 > p2  
or  p1 −p2 > 0  ( p1 is greater than p2)
Making a right-tailed test of 
hypothesis about p1 − p2: 
large and independent samples.

10.5 Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population Proportions for Large and Independent Samples
429
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
As shown in Example 10–13, n1pˆ1, n1qˆ1, n2pˆ2, and n2qˆ2 are all greater than 5. Consequently 
both samples are large, and we use the normal distribution to make the test.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The > sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates that the test is right-tailed. From the 
normal distribution table, for a .01 significance level, the critical value of z is 2.33 for .9900 area 
to the left. This is shown in Figure 10.8.
Figure 10.8 Rejection and nonrejection regions.
p1  −  p2
z
0
2.33
^
^
p1 − p2 = 0
Do not reject H0
Reject H0
Critical value of z
α = .01
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
The pooled sample proportion is
 p = x1 + x2
n1 + n2
= 100 + 68
500 + 400 = .187  and   q = 1 −p = 1 −.187 = .813
The estimate of the standard deviation of pˆ1 −pˆ2 is
spˆ1−pˆ2 = Bp q(
1
n1
+ 1
n2) = B(.187) (.813)(
1
500 +
1
400) = .02615606
The value of the test statistic z for pˆ1 −pˆ2 is
 z = (pˆ1 −pˆ2) −( p1 −p2)
spˆ1−pˆ2
= (.20 −.17) −0
.02615606
= 1.15
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
Because the value of the test statistic z = 1.15 for pˆ1 −pˆ2 falls in the nonrejection region (see 
Figure 10.8), we fail to reject the null hypothesis. Therefore, we conclude that the proportion of 
users of Toothpaste A who will never switch to another toothpaste is not greater than the propor-
tion of users of Toothpaste B who will never switch to another toothpaste.
Using the p-Value to Make a Decision for Example 10–14
We can use the p-value approach to make the above decision. To do so, we keep Steps 1 and 2 
above. Then in Step 3, we calculate the value of the test statistic z (as done in Step 4 above) and 
find the p-value for this z from the normal distribution table. In Step 4 above, the z-value for 
pˆ1 −pˆ2 was calculated to be 1.15. In this example, the test is right-tailed. The p-value is given by 
the area under the normal distribution curve to the right of z = 1.15. From the normal distribution 
table (Table IV of Appendix B), this area is 1 −.8749 = .1251. Hence, the p-value is .1251. We 
reject the null hypothesis for any α (significance level) greater than or equal to the p-value; in this 
example, we will reject the null hypothesis for any α ≥ .1251 or 12.51%. Because α = .01 here, 
which is less than .1251, we fail to reject the null hypothesis. 
◼
From H0
www.ebook3000.com

430
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
EXAMPLE 10–15 
Can We Live Without a Vehicle?
The International Organization of Motor Vehicle Manufacturers (OICA), a group that defends the 
interests of the vehicle manufacturers, released the findings of a study it conducted during 2015 
that included responses to a question that asked people if they can live without a car (USA 
TODAY, September 17, 2015). Suppose recently a sample of 1000 adults from California and 
another sample of 1200 adults from New York State were selected and these adults were asked if 
they can live without a vehicle. Sixty-four percent of these adults from California and 61% from 
New York State said that they cannot live without a vehicle. Test if the proportion of adults from 
California is different from the proportion of adults from New York State who will say that they 
cannot live without a vehicle. Use a 1% significance level.
Solution Let p1 and p2 be the proportion of all adults in California and New York State, respec-
tively, who will say that they cannot live without a vehicle. Let pˆ1 and pˆ2 be the corresponding 
sample proportions. From the given information,
      For California:       n1 = 1000  and  
pˆ1 = .64
For New York State:  n2 = 1200  and  
pˆ2 = .61
The significance level is α = .01.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
The null and alternative hypotheses are, respectively,
 H0: p1 −p2 = 0  (The two population proportions are not different.)
 H1: p1 −p2 ≠0  (The two population proportions are different.)
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
Because the samples are large and independent, we apply the normal distribution to make the 
test. (The reader should check that n1pˆ1, n1qˆ1, n2pˆ2, and n2qˆ2 are all greater than 5.)
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The ≠ sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates that the test is two-tailed. For a 1% signifi-
cance level, the critical values of z are −2.58 and 2.58. Note that to find these two critical values, we 
look for .0050 and .9950 areas in Table IV of Appendix B. These values are shown in Figure 10.9.
Conducting a two-tailed test of 
hypothesis about p1 − p2: 
large and independent samples.
Figure 10.9 Rejection and nonrejection regions.
Do not reject H0
Reject H0
Reject H0
−2.58
2.58
Two critical values of z
z
p1  −  p2 = 0
0
p1  −  p2
^
^
α/2 = .005
 α/2 = .005
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
The pooled sample proportion is
p = n1pˆ1 + n2pˆ2
n1 + n2
= 1000(.64) + 1200(.61)
1000 + 1200
= .624
and                              q = 1 −p = 1 −.624 = .376

10.5 Inferences About the Difference Between Two Population Proportions for Large and Independent Samples
431
The estimate of the standard deviation of pˆ1 −pˆ2 is
spˆ1−pˆ2 = Bp  q (
1
n1
+ 1
n2) = B(.624)(.376)(
1
1000 +
1
1200) = .02073991
The value of the test statistic z for pˆ1 −pˆ2 is
z = (pˆ1 −pˆ2) −(p1 −p2)
spˆ1−pˆ2
= (.64 −.61) −0
.02073991
= 1.45
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
Because the value of the test statistic z = 1.45 falls in the nonrejection region, we fail to reject 
the null hypothesis H0. Therefore, we conclude that the proportions of all adults in California and 
New York State who will say that they cannot live without a vehicle are not different.
Using the p-Value to Make a Decision for Example 10–15
We can use the p-value approach to make the above decision. To do so, we keep Steps 1 and 2. 
Then in Step 3, we calculate the value of the test statistic z (as done in Step 4) and find the p-value 
for this z from the normal distribution table. In Step 4, the z-value for pˆ1 −pˆ2 was calculated to 
be 1.45. In this example, the test is two-tailed. The p-value is given by twice the area under the 
normal distribution curve to the right of z = 1.45. From the normal distribution table (Table IV of 
Appendix B), the area to the right of z = 1.45 is .0735. Hence, the p-value is 2(.0735) = .1470. 
As we know, we will reject the null hypothesis for any α (significance level) greater than or equal 
to the p-value. Since α = .01 in this example, which is smaller than .1470, we fail to reject the 
null hypothesis. 
◼
EXERCISES
10.48 A sample of 500 observations taken from the first population 
gave x1 = 305. Another sample of 600 observations taken from the 
second population gave x2 = 348.
a. Find the point estimate of p1 − p2.
b. Make a 97% confidence interval for p1 − p2.
c. Show the rejection and nonrejection regions on the sampling 
distribution of pˆ1 −pˆ2 for H0: p1 = p2 versus H1: p1 > p2. Use 
a significance level of 2.5%.
d. Find the value of the test statistic z for the test of part c.
e. Will you reject the null hypothesis mentioned in part c at a 
significance level of 2.5%?
10.49 A sample of 1000 observations taken from the first population 
gave x1 = 290. Another sample of 1200 observations taken from the 
second population gave x2 = 396.
a.  Find the point estimate of p1 − p2.
b. Make a 98% confidence interval for p1 − p2.
c. Show the rejection and nonrejection regions on the sampling 
distribution of pˆ1 −pˆ2 for H0: p1 = p2 versus H1: p1 < p2. Use 
a significance level of 1%.
d.  Find the value of the test statistic z for the test of part c.
e. Will you reject the null hypothesis mentioned in part c at a 
significance level of 1%?
APPLICATIONS
10.50 In a survey of American drivers, 79% of women drivers and 
85% of men drivers said that they exceeded the speed limit at least 
once in the past week. Suppose that these percentages are based on 
random samples of 600 women and 700 men drivers.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
10.42 What is the shape of the sampling distribution of pˆ1 −pˆ2 for 
two large samples? What are the mean and standard deviation of this 
sampling distribution?
10.43 When are the samples considered large enough for the sam-
pling distribution of the difference between two sample proportions to 
be (approximately) normal?
10.44 Construct a 99% confidence interval for p1 − p2 for the 
following.
n1 = 300, pˆ1 = .55, n2 = 200, pˆ2 = .62
10.45 Construct a 95% confidence interval for p1 − p2 for the 
following.
n1 = 100, pˆ1 = .81, n2 = 150, pˆ2 = .77
10.46 Consider the following information obtained from two inde-
pendent samples:
n1 = 300, 
pˆ1 = .55, n2 = 200, 
pˆ2 = .62
Test at a 1% significance level if p1 is less than p2.
10.47 Consider the following information obtained from two inde-
pendent samples:
n1 = 100, 
pˆ1 = .81, n2 = 150, 
pˆ2 = .77
Test at a 2% significance level if p1 is greater than p2.
www.ebook3000.com

432
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
a. Let p1 and p2 be the proportion of all women and men 
American drivers, respectively, who will say that they 
exceeded the speed limit at least once in the past week. 
Construct a 98% confidence interval for p1 −p2.
b. Using a 1% significance level, can you conclude that p1 is 
lower than p2? Use both the critical-value and the p-value 
approaches.
10.51 A state that requires periodic emission tests of cars operates 
two emission test stations, A and B, in one of its towns. Car owners 
have complained of lack of uniformity of procedures at the two 
stations, resulting in different failure rates. A sample of 400 cars at 
Station A showed that 53 of those failed the test; a sample of 470 cars 
at Station B found that 51 of those failed the test.
a. What is the point estimate of the difference between the two 
population proportions?
b. Construct a 95% confidence interval for the difference 
between the two population proportions.
c. Testing at a 5% significance level, can you conclude that 
the two population proportions are different? Use both the 
critical-value and the p-value approaches.
10.52 The management of a supermarket chain wanted to investi-
gate if the percentages of men and women who prefer to buy national 
brand products over the store brand products are different. A sample 
of 600 men shoppers at the company’s supermarkets showed that 246 
of them prefer to buy national brand products over the store brand 
products. Another sample of 700 women shoppers at the company’s 
supermarkets showed that 266 of them prefer to buy national brand 
products over the store brand products.
a. What is the point estimate of the difference between the two 
population proportions?
b. Construct a 98% confidence interval for the difference 
between the proportions of all men and all women shoppers at 
these supermarkets who prefer to buy national brand products 
over the store brand products.
c. Testing at a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the 
proportions of all men and all women shoppers at these super-
markets who prefer to buy national brand products over the 
store brand products are different?
10.53 The lottery commissioner’s office in a state wanted to find if 
the percentages of men and women who play the lottery often are 
different. A sample of 500 men taken by the commissioner’s office 
showed that 160 of them play the lottery often. Another sample of 
300 women showed that 66 of them play the lottery often.
a. What is the point estimate of the difference between the two 
population proportions?
b. Construct a 99% confidence interval for the difference 
between the proportions of all men and all women who play 
the lottery often.
c.  Testing at a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the 
proportions of all men and all women who play the lottery 
often are different?
10.54 A mail-order company has two warehouses, one on the West 
Coast and the second on the East Coast. The company’s policy is to 
mail all orders placed with it within 72 hours. The company’s quality 
control department checks quite often whether or not this policy is 
maintained at the two warehouses. A recently taken sample of 400 
orders placed with the warehouse on the West Coast showed that 364 
of them were mailed within 72 hours. Another sample of 300 orders 
placed with the warehouse on the East Coast showed that 279 of them 
were mailed within 72 hours.
a. Construct a 97% confidence interval for the difference 
between the proportions of all orders placed at the two ware-
houses that are mailed within 72 hours.
b. Using a 2.5% significance level, can you conclude that the 
proportion of all orders placed at the warehouse on the West 
Coast that are mailed within 72 hours is lower than the corre-
sponding proportion for the warehouse on the East Coast?
10.55 A company that has many department stores in the southern 
states wanted to find at two such stores the percentage of sales for 
which at least one of the items was returned. A sample of 800 sales 
randomly selected from Store A showed that for 280 of them at least 
one item was returned. Another sample of 900 sales randomly selected 
from Store B showed that for 279 of them at least one item was 
returned.
a. Construct a 98% confidence interval for the difference 
between the proportions of all sales at the two stores for which 
at least one item is returned.
b. Using a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the pro-
portions of all sales for which at least one item is returned is 
higher for Store A than for Store B?
USES AND MISUSES...
STATISTICS AND HEALTH-RELATED STUDIES
While watching the news or browsing through a newspaper, we are 
likely to see or read the results of some new medical study. Often, the 
study result is really eye-catching, such as the following headline from 
USA TODAY: “Chocolate Lowers Heart Stroke Risk” (http://yourlife.
usatoday.com/health/healthcare/studies/story/2011-08-29/
Chocolate-lowers-heart-stroke-risk/50174422/1). Certainly a head-
line such as this one can grab your attention, especially if you are a 
chocolate lover. However, it is important to find out about the type 
of study that was conducted and determine whether it indicated an 
association (i.e., it showed a potential link between chocolate 
consumption and stroke risk) or a causal relationship (i.e., it showed 
that consuming chocolate actually does lower the risk of a stroke).
 
Two primary types of medical studies are (1) case–control stud-
ies and (b) cohort studies. A case–control study is an observational 
study that essentially works backward. In the case of the aforemen-
tioned story, people in the study were classified into two different 
groups—those who had a stroke, and those who did not have a 
stroke. The people were interviewed and asked about their chocolate 
consumption habits. The study revealed that the proportion of people 
who consumed chocolate was higher in the nonstroke group than in 
the stroke group. As noted in the USA TODAY article, this result 

Supplementary Exercises
433
regarding the relationship was consistent across a number of inde-
pendent case–control studies, which were combined into a single 
study using a process called meta-analysis. So, with this information, 
this set of case–control studies leads to a new question: Does con-
suming chocolate actually reduce the risk of having a stroke, or is 
there something else that is the cause of these results?
 
When a case–control study identifies a potential causal link, the 
next step is to perform a cohort study (i.e., a clinical trial). In a cohort 
study, individuals are selected to participate in the study, and then 
these individuals are randomly assigned to different groups, with each 
group receiving a specific treatment. In this case, members in one 
group would eat chocolate regularly, whereas the members in the 
other group would not. The participants would be observed over a 
long period of time, and the proportion of people who have a stroke in 
each group would be compared. If the result of this study is consist-
ent with the result of the case–control study, more research would 
be conducted to determine the biological or chemical link between 
chocolate and stroke prevention.
 
One question you might ask at this point is: Why would we per-
form a case–control study instead of commencing with a cohort study 
from the start? The reason is that cohort studies, especially those 
involving health-related issues, are expensive and involve a great deal 
of time. In the chocolate-and-stroke example, the researchers will 
have to wait to determine whether the individuals in the study have a 
stroke or not. If you do not know whether there is an association 
between chocolate consumption and stroke risk, you would probably 
not want to spend the time and money to perform this study. Case–
control studies, on the other hand, are relatively inexpensive and easy 
to perform because databases are maintained on health events, and, 
hence, the results of the study can be obtained by accessing data-
bases and performing interviews. The results of a cheaper case–
control study would allow us to determine whether it is worth spend-
ing the money to perform a cohort study that provides data to help 
make a more substantial decision.
from each element, one for each sample. Also called dependent 
samples.
μd The mean of the paired differences for the population.
sd The standard deviation of the paired differences for a sample.
σd The standard deviation of the paired differences for the popu-
lation.
d The difference between two matched values in two samples 
collected from the same source. It is called the paired difference.
d The mean of the paired differences for a sample.
Independent samples Two samples drawn from two populations 
such that the selection of one does not affect the selection of the other.
Paired or matched samples Two samples drawn in such a way 
that they include the same elements and two data values are obtained 
Glossary
b. Test at a 2.5% significance level whether the mean weekly 
earnings of female workers who are not union members is less 
than that of female workers who are union members.
10.58 According to a Bureau of Labor Statistics report released on 
March 25, 2015, statisticians earn an average of $84,010 a year and 
accountants and auditors earn an average of $73,670 a year (www.bls.
gov). Suppose that these estimates are based on random samples of 
2000 statisticians and 1800 accountants and auditors. Further, assume 
that the sample standard deviations of the annual earnings of these 
two groups are $15,200 and $14,500, respectively, and the population 
standard deviations are unknown but equal for the two groups.
a. Construct a 98% confidence interval for the difference in the 
mean annual earnings of the two groups, statisticians and 
accountants and auditors.
b. Using a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the aver-
age annual earnings of statisticians is higher than that of 
accountants and auditors?
10.59 The manager of a factory has devised a detailed plan for evacu-
ating the building as quickly as possible in the event of a fire or other 
emergency. An industrial psychologist believes that workers actually 
leave the factory faster at closing time without following any system. 
The company holds fire drills periodically in which a bell sounds and 
10.56 A consulting agency was asked by a large insurance company to 
investigate if business majors were better salespersons than those with 
other majors. A sample of 20 salespersons with a business degree showed 
that they sold an average of 11 insurance policies per week. Another 
sample of 25 salespersons with a degree other than business showed that 
they sold an average of 9 insurance policies per week. Assume that the 
two populations are approximately normally distributed with population 
standard deviations of 1.80 and 1.35 policies per week, respectively.
a. Construct a 99% confidence interval for the difference 
between the two population means.
b. Using a 1% significance level, can you conclude that persons 
with a business degree are better salespersons than those who 
have a degree in another area?
10.57 According to an estimate, the average earnings of female work-
ers who are not union members are $1120 per week and those of female 
workers who are union members are $1244 per week. Suppose that 
these average earnings are calculated based on random samples of 1500 
female workers who are not union members and 2000 female workers 
who are union members. Further assume that the standard deviations 
for the two corresponding populations are $70 and $90, respectively.
a. Construct a 95% confidence interval for the difference between 
the two population means.
Supplementary Exercises
www.ebook3000.com

434
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
workers leave the building according to the system. The evacuation 
time for each drill is recorded. For comparison, the psychologist also 
records the evacuation time when the bell sounds for closing time 
each day. A random sample of 36 fire drills showed a mean evacuation 
time of 5.1 minutes with a standard deviation of 1.1 minutes. A random 
sample of 37 days at closing time showed a mean evacuation time of 
4.2 minutes with a standard deviation of 1.0 minute.
a. Construct a 99% confidence interval for the difference between 
the two population means.
b. Test at a 5% significance level whether the mean evacuation 
time is smaller at closing time than during fire drills.
Assume that the evacuation times at closing time and during fire drills 
have equal but unknown population standard deviations.
10.60 An economist was interested in studying the impact of the 
recession of a few years ago on dining out, including drive-through 
meals at fast-food restaurants. A random sample of 48 families of four 
with discretionary incomes between $300 and $400 per week indi-
cated that they reduced their spending on dining out by an average of 
$31.47 per week, with a sample standard deviation of $10.95. Another 
random sample of 42 families of five with discretionary incomes 
between $300 and $400 per week reduced their spending on dining 
out by an average of $35.28 per week, with a sample standard devia-
tion of $12.37. (Note that the two groups of families are differentiated 
by the number of family members.) Assume that the distributions of 
reductions in weekly dining-out spendings for the two groups have 
unknown and unequal population standard deviations.
a. Construct a 90% confidence interval for the difference in the 
mean weekly reduction in dining out spending levels for the 
two populations.
b. Using a 5% significance level, can you conclude that the aver-
age weekly spending reduction for all families of four with 
discretionary incomes between $300 and $400 per week is 
less than the average weekly spending reduction for all fami-
lies of five with discretionary incomes between $300 and 
$400 per week?
10.61 According to a Bureau of Labor Statistics report released on 
March 25, 2015, statisticians earn an average of $84,010 a year and 
accountants and auditors earn an average of $73,670 a year (www.bls.
gov). Suppose that these estimates are based on random samples of 
2000 statisticians and 1800 accountants and auditors. Further assume 
that the sample standard deviations of the annual earnings of these 
two groups are $15,200 and $14,500, respectively, and the population 
standard deviations are unknown and unequal for the two groups.
a. Construct a 98% confidence interval for the difference in the 
mean annual earnings of the two groups, statisticians and 
accountants and auditors.
b. Using a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the aver-
age annual earnings of statisticians is higher than that of 
accountants and auditors?
10.62 The manager of a factory has devised a detailed plan for evacu-
ating the building as quickly as possible in the event of a fire or other 
emergency. An industrial psychologist believes that workers actually 
leave the factory faster at closing time without following any system. 
The company holds fire drills periodically in which a bell sounds and 
workers leave the building according to the system. The evacuation 
time for each drill is recorded. For comparison, the psychologist also 
records the evacuation time when the bell sounds for closing time 
each day. A random sample of 36 fire drills showed a mean evacuation 
time of 5.1 minutes with a standard deviation of 1.1 minutes. A 
random sample of 37 days at closing time showed a mean evacuation 
time of 4.2 minutes with a standard deviation of 1.0 minute.
a. Construct a 99% confidence interval for the difference 
between the two population means.
b. Test at a 5% significance level whether the mean evacuation 
time is smaller at closing time than during fire drills.
Assume that the evacuation times at closing time and during fire drills 
have unknown and unequal population standard deviations.
10.63 Two local post offices are interested in knowing the average 
number of Christmas cards that are mailed out from the towns that they 
serve. A random sample of 80 households from Town A showed that 
they mailed an average of 28.55 Christmas cards with a standard devia-
tion of 10.30. The corresponding values of the mean and standard devi-
ation produced by a random sample of 58 households from Town B 
were 33.67 and 8.97 Christmas cards. Assume that the distributions of 
the number of Christmas cards mailed by all households from both 
these towns have unknown and unequal population standard deviations.
a. Construct a 95% confidence interval for the difference in the 
average number of Christmas cards mailed by all households 
in these two towns.
b. Using a 10% significance level, can you conclude that the aver-
age number of Christmas cards mailed out by all households in 
Town A is different from the corresponding average for Town B?
10.64 The owner of a mosquito-infested fishing camp in Alaska 
wants to test the effectiveness of two rival brands of mosquito repel-
lents, X and Y. During the first month of the season, eight people are 
chosen at random from those guests who agree to take part in the 
experiment. For each of these guests, Brand X is randomly applied to 
one arm and Brand Y is applied to the other arm. These guests fish for 
4 hours, then the owner counts the number of bites on each arm. The 
table below shows the number of bites on the arm with Brand X and 
those on the arm with Brand Y for each guest.
Guest
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Brand X
12
23
18
36
8
27
22
32
Brand Y
9
20
21
27
6
18
15
25
a. Construct a 95% confidence interval for the mean μd of the 
population of paired differences, where a paired difference is 
defined as the number of bites on the arm with Brand X minus 
the number of bites on the arm with Brand Y.
b. Test at a 5% significance level whether the mean number of 
bites on the arm with Brand X and the mean number of bites 
on the arm with Brand Y are different for all such guests.
Assume that the population of paired differences has an approximate 
normal distribution.
10.65 A random sample of nine students was selected to test the 
effectiveness of a special course designed to improve memory. The 
following table gives the scores in a memory test given to these stu-
dents before and after this course.
Before
43
57
48
65
81
49
38
69
58
After
49
56
55
77
89
57
36
64
69
a. Construct a 95% confidence interval for the mean μd of the 
population of paired differences, where a paired difference is 
defined as the difference between the memory test scores of a 
student before and after attending this course.

Advanced Exercises
435
b. Test at a 1% significance level whether this course makes any sta-
tistically significant improvement in the memory of all students.
Assume that the population of paired differences has an approximate 
normal distribution.
10.66 In a random sample of 800 men aged 25 to 35 years, 24% said 
they live with one or both parents. In another sample of 850 women of 
the same age group, 18% said that they live with one or both parents.
a. Construct a 95% confidence interval for the difference between 
the proportions of all men and all women aged 25 to 35 years 
who live with one or both parents.
b. Test at a 2% significance level whether the two population 
proportions are different.
c. Repeat the test of part b using the p-value approach.
10.67 The Pew Research Center conducted a poll in January 2014 of 
online adults who use social networking sites. According to this poll, 
89% of the 18–29 year olds and 82% of the 30–49 year olds who are 
online use social networking sites (www.pewinternet.org). Suppose 
that this survey included 562 online adults in the 18–29 age group and 
624 in the 30–49 age group.
a. Let p1 and p2 be the proportion of all online adults in the 
age groups 18–29 and 30–49, respectively, who use social 
networking sites. Construct a 95% confidence interval for 
p1 −p2.
b. Using a 1% significance level, can you conclude that p1 is 
different from p2? Use both the critical-value and the p-value 
approaches.
a. Find the p-value for this test.
b. Does your answer to part a indicate that the result is statisti-
cally significant? Use α = .025.
c. Find a 95% confidence interval for μ1 − μ2.
d. Does your answer to part c imply that this result is of great 
practical significance?
10.71 Gamma Corporation is considering the installation of governors 
on cars driven by its sales staff. These devices would limit the car speeds 
to a preset level, which is expected to improve fuel economy. The com-
pany is planning to test several cars for fuel consumption without gover-
nors for 1 week. Then governors would be installed in the same cars, and 
fuel consumption will be monitored for another week. Gamma Corpora-
tion wants to estimate the mean difference in fuel consumption with a 
margin of error of estimate of 2 mpg with a 90% confidence level. 
Assume that the differences in fuel consumption are normally distrib-
uted and that previous studies suggest that an estimate of sd = 3 mpg is 
reasonable. How many cars should be tested? (Note that the critical 
value of t will depend on n, so it will be necessary to use trial and error.)
10.72 Refer to the previous exercise. Suppose Gamma Corporation 
decides to test governors on seven cars. However, the management is 
afraid that the speed limit imposed by the governors will reduce the 
number of contacts the salespersons can make each day. Thus, both 
the fuel consumption and the number of contacts made are recorded 
for each car/salesperson for each week of the testing period, both 
before and after the installation of governors.
 
Number of  
Fuel
 
Contacts 
Consumption (mpg)
Salesperson 
Before 
After 
Before 
After
 
A 
50 
49 
25 
26
 
B 
63 
60 
21 
24
 
C 
42 
47 
27 
26
 
D 
55 
51 
23 
25
 
E 
44 
50 
19 
24
 
F 
65 
60 
18 
22
 
G 
66 
58 
20 
23
Suppose that as a statistical analyst with the company, you are 
directed to prepare a brief report that includes statistical analysis and 
10.68 Manufacturers of two competing automobile models, Gofer and 
Diplomat, each claim to have the lowest mean fuel consumption. Let μ1 
be the mean fuel consumption in miles per gallon (mpg) for the Gofer and 
μ2 the mean fuel consumption in mpg for the Diplomat. The two manu-
facturers have agreed to a test in which several cars of each model will be 
driven on a 100-mile test run. The fuel consumption, in mpg, will be cal-
culated for each test run. The average mpg for all 100-mile test runs for 
each model gives the corresponding mean. Assume that for each model 
the gas mileages for the test runs are normally distributed with σ = 2 mpg. 
Note that each car is driven for one and only one 100-mile test run.
a. How many cars (i.e., sample size) for each model are required 
to estimate μ1 − μ2 with a 90% confidence level and with a 
margin of error of estimate of 1.5 mpg? Use the same number 
of cars (i.e., sample size) for each model.
b. If μ1 is actually 33 mpg and μ2 is actually 30 mpg, what is the 
probability that five cars for each model would yield x1 ≥x2?
10.69 Maria and Ellen both specialize in throwing the javelin. Maria 
throws the javelin a mean distance of 200 feet with a standard devia-
tion of 10 feet, whereas Ellen throws the javelin a mean distance of 
210 feet with a standard deviation of 12 feet. Assume that the dis-
tances each of these athletes throws the javelin are normally distrib-
uted with these population means and standard deviations. If Maria 
and Ellen each throw the javelin once, what is the probability that 
Maria’s throw is longer than Ellen’s?
10.70 A new type of sleeping pill is tested against an older, standard 
pill. Two thousand insomniacs are randomly divided into two equal 
groups. The first group is given the old pill, and the second group 
receives the new pill. The time required to fall asleep after the pill is 
administered is recorded for each person. The results of the experi-
ment are given in the following table, where x and s represent the 
mean and standard deviation, respectively, for the times required to 
fall asleep for people in each group after the pill is taken.
 
Group 1 (Old Pill) 
Group 2 (New Pill)
n 
1000 
1000
x 
15.4 minutes 
15.0 minutes
s 
3.5 minutes 
3.0 minutes
Consider the test of hypothesis H0: μ1 − μ2 = 0 versus H1: μ1 − μ2 > 0, 
where μ1 and μ2 are the mean times required for all potential users to 
fall asleep using the old pill and the new pill, respectively.
Advanced Exercises
www.ebook3000.com

436
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
interpretation of the data. Management will use your report to help 
decide whether or not to install governors on all salespersons’ cars. 
Use 90% confidence intervals and .05 significance levels for any 
hypothesis tests to make suggestions. Assume that the differences in 
fuel consumption and the differences in the number of contacts are 
both normally distributed.
10.73 We wish to estimate the difference between the mean scores on a 
standardized test of students taught by Instructors A and B. The scores of 
all students taught by Instructor A have a normal distribution with a 
standard deviation of 15, and the scores of all students taught by Instruc-
tor B have a normal distribution with a standard deviation of 10. To 
estimate the difference between the two means, you decide that the same 
number of students from each instructor’s class should be observed.
a. Assuming that the sample size is the same for each instructor’s 
class, how large a sample should be taken from each class to 
estimate the difference between the mean scores of the two 
populations to within 5 points with 90% confidence?
b. Suppose that samples of the size computed in part a will be 
selected in order to test for the difference between the two 
population mean scores using a .05 level of significance. How 
large does the difference between the two sample means have 
to be for you to conclude that the two population means are 
different?
c. Explain why a paired-samples design would be inappropriate 
for comparing the scores of Instructor A versus Instructor B.
10.74 Sixty-five percent of all male voters and 40% of all female vot-
ers favor a particular candidate. A sample of 100 male voters and 
another sample of 100 female voters will be polled. What is the prob-
ability that at least 10 more male voters than female voters will favor 
this candidate?
5. 
Repeat Problem 4 assuming that the times spent per week play-
ing with their children by all alcoholic and all nonalcoholic fathers 
both are normally distributed with unequal and unknown standard 
deviations.
6. 
Lake City has two shops, Zeke’s and Elmer’s, that handle the 
majority of the town’s auto body repairs. Seven cars that were dam-
aged in collisions were taken to both shops for written estimates of the 
repair costs. These estimates (in dollars) are shown in the following 
table.
Zeke’s
1058
544
1349
1296
676
998
1698
Elmer’s
 995
540
1175
1350
605
970
1520
a. Construct a 99% confidence interval for the mean μd of the 
population of paired differences, where a paired differ-
ence is equal to Zeke’s estimate minus Elmer’s estimate.
b. Test at a 5% significance level whether the mean μd of the 
population of paired differences is different from zero.
Assume that the population of paired differences is (approximately) 
normally distributed.
7. 
A sample of 500 male registered voters showed that 57% of 
them voted in the last presidential election. Another sample of 400 
female registered voters showed that 55% of them voted in the same 
election.
a. Construct a 97% confidence interval for the difference 
between the proportions of all male and all female registered 
voters who voted in the last presidential election.
b. Test at a 1% significance level whether the proportion of all 
male voters who voted in the last presidential election is dif-
ferent from that of all female voters.
1. 
To test the hypothesis that the mean blood pressure of university 
professors is lower than that of company executives, which of the 
following would you use?
a. A left-tailed test b. A two-tailed test c. A right-tailed test
2. 
Briefly explain the meaning of independent and dependent 
samples. Give one example of each of these cases.
3. 
A company psychologist wanted to test if company executives 
have job-related stress scores higher than those of university profes-
sors. He took a sample of 40 executives and 50 professors and tested 
them for job-related stress. The sample of 40 executives gave a mean 
stress score of 7.6. The sample of 50 professors produced a mean 
stress score of 5.4. Assume that the standard deviations of the two 
populations are .8 and 1.3, respectively.
a. Construct a 99% confidence interval for the difference between 
the mean stress scores of all executives and all professors.
b. Test at a 2.5% significance level whether the mean stress 
score of all executives is higher than that of all professors.
4. 
A sample of 20 alcoholic fathers showed that they spend an aver-
age of 2.3 hours per week playing with their children with a standard 
deviation of .54 hour. A sample of 25 nonalcoholic fathers gave a 
mean of 4.6 hours per week with a standard deviation of .8 hour.
a. Construct a 95% confidence interval for the difference 
between the mean times spent per week playing with their 
children by all alcoholic and all nonalcoholic fathers.
b. Test at a 1% significance level whether the mean time spent 
per week playing with their children by all alcoholic fathers is 
less than that of nonalcoholic fathers.
Assume that the times spent per week playing with their children by 
all alcoholic and all nonalcoholic fathers both are normally distributed 
with equal but unknown standard deviations.
Self-Review Test
Note: The Mini-Projects are located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Mini-Projects
Note: The Decide for Yourself feature is located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Decide for Yourself

Technology Instructions
437
TI-84 Color/TI-84
CHAPTER 10
TECHNOLOGY 
INSTRUCTIONS
The TI-84 Color Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for the TI-84 Plus C color 
graphing calculator running the 4.0 operating system. Some screens, menus, and functions will 
be slightly different in older operating systems. The TI-84 and TI-84 Plus can perform all of the 
same functions, but will not have the “Color” option referenced in some of the menus.
Estimating μ1 − μ2, σ1 and σ2 Known, for Example 10–3(b) of the Text
See the graphing calculator manual on the textbook Web site for specific directions on creating 
confidence intervals for μ1 − μ2 when σ1 and σ2 are known. The correct menu can be found by 
selecting STAT > TESTS > 2-SampZInt.
Testing a Hypothesis about μ1 − μ2, σ1 and σ2 Known, for
Example 10–4 of the Text
See the graphing calculator manual on the textbook Web site for specific directions on testing a 
hypothesis for μ1 − μ2 when σ1 and σ2 are known. The correct menu can be found by selecting 
STAT > TESTS > 2-SampZTest.
Estimating μ1 − μ2, σ1 and σ2 Unknown But Equal, for
Example 10–5 of the Text
1. Select STAT > TESTS > 2-SampTInt.
2. Use the following settings in the 2-SampTInt menu:
• Select Stats at the Inpt prompt.
 
Note: If you have the data in a list, select Data at the Inpt prompt.
• Type 80 at the x1 prompt.
• Type 5 at the Sx1 prompt.
• Type 15 at the n1 prompt.
• Type 77 at the x2 prompt.
• Type 6 at the Sx2 prompt.
• Type 12 at the n2 prompt.
• Type 0.95 at the C-Level prompt.
• Select Yes at the Pooled prompt.
3. Scroll down, highlight Calculate, and press ENTER.
4. The output includes the confidence interval. (See Screen 10.1.)
Testing a Hypothesis about μ1 − μ2, σ1 and σ2 Unknown 
But Equal, for Example 10–6 of the Text
1. Select STAT > TESTS > 2-SampTTest.
2. Use the following settings in the 2-SampTTest menu:
• Select Stats at the Inpt prompt.
Note: Complete TI-84, Minitab, and Excel manuals are available for download at the textbook’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Screen 10.1
www.ebook3000.com

438
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
 
Note: If you have the data in a list, select Data at the Inpt prompt.
• Type 23 at the x1 prompt.
• Type 3 at the Sx1 prompt.
• Type 14 at the n1 prompt.
• Type 25 at the x2 prompt.
• Type 4 at the Sx2 prompt.
• Type 16 at the n2 prompt.
• Select ≠μ2 at the μ1 prompt.
• Select Yes at the Pooled prompt.
3. Scroll down, highlight Calculate, and press ENTER.
4. The output includes the test statistic and the p-value. (See Screen 10.2.)
Compare the value of the test statistic to the critical-value of t or the p-value to α and make a 
decision.
Estimating μ1 − μ2, σ1 and σ2 Unknown and Unequal, for
Example 10–8 of the Text
Follow the instructions given previously in the TI-84 section entitled “Estimating μ1 − μ2, σ1 and σ2 
Unknown but Equal, for Example 10–5 of the Text,” but select No at the Pooled prompt in step 2.
Testing a Hypothesis about μ1 − μ2, σ1 and σ2 Unknown 
and Unequal, for Example 10–9 of the Text
Follow the instructions given previously in the TI-84 section entitled “Testing a Hypothesis 
about μ1 − μ2, σ1 and σ2 Unknown but Equal, for Example 10–6 of the Text,” but select No at 
the Pooled prompt in step 2.
Estimating μd, σd Unknown
Create a list of differences for the paired data and then follow the directions for creating a 
confidence interval for a single mean when the population standard deviation is unknown. 
Specific directions can be found in the Chapter 8 Technology Instructions.
Testing a Hypothesis about μd, σd Unknown
Create a list of differences for the paired data and then follow the directions for testing a 
hypothesis about a single mean when the population standard deviation is unknown. Specific 
directions can be found in the Chapter 9 Technology Instructions.
Estimating p1 − p2 for Example 10–13 of the Text
1. Select STAT > TESTS > 2-PropZInt.
2. Use the following settings in the 2-PropZInt menu:
• Type 100 at the x1 prompt.
• Type 500 at the n1 prompt.
• Type 68 at the x2 prompt.
• Type 400 at the n2 prompt.
• Type 0.97 at the C-Level prompt.
3. Highlight Calculate and press ENTER.
4. The output includes the confidence interval. (See Screen 10.3.)
Screen 10.2
Screen 10.3

Technology Instructions
439
Testing a Hypothesis about p1 − p2 for Example 10–14 of the Text
1. Select STAT > TESTS > 2-PropZTest.
2. Use the following settings in the 2-PropZTest menu:
• Type 100 at the x1 prompt.
• Type 500 at the n1 prompt.
• Type 68 at the x2 prompt.
• Type 400 at the n2 prompt.
• Select >p2 at the p1 prompt.
3. Highlight Calculate and press ENTER.
4. The output includes the test statistic and the p-value. (See Screen 10.4.)
Compare the value of the test statistic to the critical-value of z or the p-value to α and make a 
decision.
Screen 10.4
The Minitab Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Minitab version 17. 
Some screens, menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Minitab.
Estimating μ1 − μ2, σ1 and σ2 Unknown But Equal, for
Example 10–5 of the Text
1. Select Stat > Basic Statistics > 2-Sample t.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Select Summarized Data from the dropdown menu.
 
 Note: If you have the data in two different columns, select Each sample is in its own column, 
type the column names in the Sample 1 and Sample 2 boxes, and move to step 3 below.
• Type 15 in the Sample size box for Sample 1.
• Type 80 in the Sample mean box for Sample 1.
• Type 5 in the Standard deviation box for Sample 1.
• Type 12 in the Sample size box for Sample 2.
• Type 77 in the Sample mean box for Sample 2.
• Type 6 in the Standard deviation box for Sample 2.
3. Select Options and use the following settings when the dialog box appears on 
screen:
• Type 95 in the Confidence level box.
• Check the Assume equal variances checkbox.
4. Click OK in both dialog boxes.
5. The confidence interval will be displayed in the Session window. 
(See Screen 10.5.)
Minitab
Screen 10.5
www.ebook3000.com

440
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
Testing a Hypothesis about μ1 − μ2, σ1 and σ2 Unknown 
But Equal, for Example 10–6 of the Text
1. Select Stat > Basic Statistics > 2-Sample t.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Select Summarized Data from the dropdown menu.
 
 Note: If you have the data in two different columns, select Each sample is in its own column, 
type the column names in the Sample 1 and Sample 2 boxes, and move to step 3 below.
• Type 14 in the Sample size box for Sample 1.
• Type 23 in the Sample mean box for Sample 1.
• Type 3 in the Standard deviation box for Sample 2.
• Type 16 in the Sample size box for Sample 2.
• Type 25 in the Sample mean box for Sample 2.
• Type 4 in the Standard deviation box for Sample 2.
3.  Select Options and use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Type 0 in the Hypothesized difference box.
• Select Difference ≠ hypothesized difference in the Alternative hypothesis box.
• Check the Assume equal variances box.
4. Click OK in both dialog boxes.
5.  The output, including the test statistic and p-value, will be displayed in the Session window. 
(See Screen 10.6.)
Compare the value of the test statistic to the critical-value of t or the p-value to α and make a 
decision.
Estimating μ1 − μ2, σ1 and σ2 Unknown and Unequal, for
Example 10–8 of the Text
Follow the instructions given previously in the Minitab section entitled “Estimating μ1 − μ2, σ1 
and σ2 Unknown but Equal, for Example 10–5 of the Text” but do not check the Assume equal 
variances box in step 3.
Testing a Hypothesis about μ1 − μ2, σ1 and σ2 Unknown
and Unequal, for Example 10–9 of the Text
Follow the instructions given previously in the Minitab section entitled “Testing a Hypothesis 
about μ1 − μ2, σ1 and σ2 Unknown but Equal, for Example 10–6 of the Text” but do not check 
the Assume equal variances box in step 3.
Estimating μd, σd Unknown, for Example 10–10 of the Text
1. Enter the data from Example 10–10 into C1 (“Before”) and C2 (“After”).
2. Select Stat > Basic Statistics > Paired t.
3. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Select Each sample is in a column from the dropdown menu.
• Type C1 in the Sample 1 box.
• Type C2 in the Sample 2 box.
Screen 10.6

Technology Instructions
441
4. Select Options and use the following settings when the dialog box appears on screen.
• Type 95 in the Confidence level box
5. Click OK in both dialog boxes.
6. The confidence interval will be displayed in the Session window.
Testing a Hypothesis about μd, σd Unknown, for 
Example 10–11 of the Text
1. Enter the data from Example 10–11 into C1 (“Before”) and C2 (“After”).
2. Select Stat > Basic Statistics > Paired t.
3. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Select Each sample is in a column from the dropdown menu.
• Type C1 in the Sample 1 box.
• Type C2 in the Sample 2 box.
4. Select Options and use the following settings when the dialog box appears on screen.
• Type 0 in the Hypothesized difference box.
• Select Difference < hypothesized difference in the Alternative hypothesis box.
5. Click OK in both dialog boxes.
6. The output, including the test statistic and p-value, will be displayed in the 
Session window. (See Screen 10.7.)
Compare the value of the test statistic to the critical-value of t or the p-value to α and make a 
decision.
Estimating p1 − p2 for Example 10–13 of the Text
1. Select Stat > Basic Statistics > 2 Proportions.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Select Summarized Data from the dropdown menu.
 
 Note: If you have the data in two different columns, select Each sample is in its own column, type 
the column names in the Sample 1 and Sample 2 boxes, and move to step 3 below.
• Type 100 in the Number of events box for Sample 1.
• Type 500 in the Number of trials box for Sample 1.
• Type 68 in the Number of events box for Sample 2.
• Type 400 in the Number of trials box for Sample 2.
3. Select Options and use the following settings when the dialog box appears on screen.
• Type 97 in the Confidence level box.
4. Click OK in both dialog boxes.
5. The confidence interval will be displayed in the Session window. (See Screen 10.8.)
Testing a Hypothesis about p1 − p2 for Example 10–14 of the Text
1. Select Stat > Basic Statistics > 2 Proportions.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Select Summarized Data from the dropdown menu.
Screen 10.7
Screen 10.8
www.ebook3000.com

442
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
 Note: If you have the data in two different columns, select Each sample is in its own 
column, type the column names in the Sample 1 and Sample 2 boxes, and move to 
step 3 below.
• Type 100 in the Number of events box for Sample 1.
• Type 500 in the Number of trials box for Sample 1.
• Type 68 in the Number of events box for Sample 2.
• Type 400 in the Number of trials box for Sample 2.
3.  Select Options and use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on 
screen:
• Type 0 in the Hypothesized difference box.
• Select Difference > hypothesized difference from the Alternative hypothesis box.
• Select Use the pooled estimate of the proportion from the Test method box.
4. Click OK in both dialog boxes.
5.  The output, including the test statistic and p-value, will be displayed in the 
Session window. (See Screen 10.9.)
Compare the value of the test statistic to the critical-value of z or the p-value to α and 
make a decision.
Screen 10.9
Excel
The Excel Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Excel 2013.  Some screens, 
menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Excel. To enable some of the 
advanced Excel functions, you must enable the Data Analysis Add-In for Excel.
Testing a Hypothesis about μ1 − μ2, σ1 and σ2 Known
See the Excel manual on the textbook Web site for specific directions on creating confidence 
intervals for μ1 − μ2, when σ1 and σ2 are known. The correct menu can be found by clicking on 
DATA and then clicking on Data Analysis Tools from the Analysis group.
Estimating μ1 − μ2, σ1 and σ2 Unknown But Equal, for
Example 10–5 of the Text
1. In a new worksheet, enter the following text into the indicated cells (see Screen 10.10):
• Type Sample 1 in cell A1, Sample 2 in cell A4, Sample means in cells B1 and B4, Sample 
standard deviations in cells B2 and B5, and Sample sizes in cells B3 and B6.
• Type xbar1 − xbar2 in cell A8, df in cell A9, t* in cell A10, Pooled s in cell A11, and std 
dev in cell A12.
• Type Lower bound in cell A14 and Upper bound in cell A15.
2. Enter the values of the summary statistics in the indicated cells (see Screen 10.10):
• Type 80 in cell C1.
• Type 5 in cell C2.
• Type 15 in cell C3.
• Type 77 in cell C4.
• Type 6 in cell C5.
• Type 12 in cell C6.

Technology Instructions
443
3. Enter the following formulas in the indicated cells (see Screen 10.10):
• Type =C1-C4 in cell B8.
• Type =C3+C6-2 in cell B9.
• Type =T.INV(0.975,B9) in cell B10.
 
Note: The value 0.975 is found by (1 – α/2).
• Type =SQRT(((C3-1)*C2^2+(C6-1)*C5^2)/B9) in cell B11.
• Type =B11*SQRT(1/C3+1/C6) in cell B12.
• Type =B8-B10*B12 in cell B14.
• Type =B8+B10*B12 in cell B15.
4. The lower and upper bounds of the confidence interval will be in cells B14 and B15, 
respectively. (See Screen 10.10.)
Testing a Hypothesis about μ1 − μ2, σ1 and σ2 Unknown But Equal
1. To perform this test, Excel must have the raw data, not summary statistics. Suppose we wish 
to test H0: μ1 = μ2 versus H1: μ1 > μ2 at the α = 0.05 significance level and that the popula-
tion standard deviations are unknown but equal (see Screen 10.11):
• Enter the first set of ten data values into cells A1 through A10: 81, 79, 62, 98, 74, 82, 85, 
72, 90, 88.
• Enter the second set of ten data values into cells B1 through B10: 61, 78, 85, 77, 90, 95, 
64, 74, 80, 85.
2. Click DATA and then click Data Analysis Tools from the Analysis group.
3. Select t-Test: Two-Sample Assuming Equal Variances from the dialog box that appears 
on screen and then click OK.
4. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen (see Screen 10.11):
• Type A1:A10 in the Variable 1 Range box.
• Type B1:B10 in the Variable 2 Range box.
• Type 0 in the Hypothesized Mean Difference box.
• Type 0.05 in the Alpha box.
• Select New Worksheet Ply from the Output options.
5. Click OK.
6. When the output appears, resize column A so that it is easier to read.
7. The correct formula for the p-value depends on your alternative hypothesis and the t statistic.
• For  H1: μ1 > μ2,
• If the t statistic is positive, use the p-value from P(T<=t) one-tail.
• If the t statistic is negative, the p-value is found by subtracting P(T<=t) one-tail 
from 1.
• For H1: μ1 < μ2,
• If the t statistic is positive, the p-value is found by subtracting P(T<=t) one-tail 
from 1.
• If the t statistic is negative, use the p-value from P(T<=t) one-tail.
• For H1: μ1 ≠ μ2 use the p-value from P(T<=t) two-tail.
Screen 10.10
Screen 10.11
www.ebook3000.com

444
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
Estimating μ1 − μ2, σ1 and σ2 Unknown and Unequal, for
Example 10–8 of the Text
1. In a new worksheet, enter the following text into the indicated cells (see Screen 10.12):
• Type Sample 1 in cell A1, Sample 2 in cell A4, Sample means in cells B1 and B4, Sample 
standard deviations in cells B2 and B5, and Sample size in cells B4 and B6.
• Type xbar1 − xbar2 in cell A8, df in cell A9, t* in cell A10, and std dev in cell A11.
• Type Lower bound in cell A13 and Upper bound in cell A14.
2. Enter the values of the summary statistics in the indicated cells (see Screen 10.12):
• Type 80 in cell C1.
• Type 5 in cell C2.
• Type 15 in cell C3.
• Type 77 in cell C4.
• Type 6 in cell C5.
• Type 12 in cell C6.
3. Enter the following formulas in the indicated cells (see Screen 10.12):
• Type =C1-C4 in cell B8.
• Type =(C2^2/C3+C5^2/C6)^2/((C2^2/C3)^2/(C3-1)+(C5^2/C6)^2/(C6-1)) in cell B9.
• Type =T.INV(0.975,B9) in cell B10.
 
Note: The value 0.975 is found by (1 − α/2).
• Type =SQRT(C2^2/C3+C5^2/C6) in cell B11.
• Type =B8-B10*B11 in cell B13.
• Type =B8+B10*B11 in cell B14.
4.  The lower and upper bounds of the confidence interval will be in cells B13 and B14, 
respectively. (See Screen 10.12.)
Testing a Hypothesis about μ1 − μ2, σ1 and σ2 Unknown and Equal
1. To perform this test, Excel must have the raw data, not summary statistics. Suppose we wish 
to test H0: μ1 = μ2 versus H1: μ1 > μ2 at the α = 0.05 significance level and that the popula-
tion standard deviations are unknown but equal (see Screen 10.13):
• Enter these ten data values into cells A1 through A10: 81, 79, 62, 98, 74, 82, 85, 72, 90, 88.
• Enter these ten data values into cells B1 through B10: 61, 78, 85, 77, 90, 95, 64, 74, 80, 85.
2. Click DATA and then click Data Analysis Tools from the Analysis group.
3.  Select t-Test: Two-Sample Assuming Unequal Variances from the dialog 
box that appears on screen and then click OK.
4.  Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen 
(see Screen 10.13):
• Type A1:A10 in the Variable 1 Range box.
• Type B1:B10 in the Variable 2 Range box.
• Type 0 in the Hypothesized Mean Difference box.
Screen 10.12
Screen 10.13

Technology Instructions
445
• Type 0.05 in the Alpha box.
• Select New Worksheet Ply from the Output options.
5. Click OK.
6. When the output appears, resize column A so that it is easier to read.
7. The correct formula for the p-value depends on your alternative hypothesis and the t statistic.
• For  H1: μ1 > μ2,
• If the t statistic is positive, use the p-value from P(T<=t) one-tail.
• If the t statistic is negative, the p-value is found by subtracting P(T<=t) one-tail from 1.
• For  H1: μ1 < μ2,
• If the t statistic is positive, the p-value is found by subtracting P(T<=t) one-tail from 1.
• If the t statistic is negative, use the p-value from P(T<=t) one-tail.
• For H1: μ1 ≠ μ2 use the p-value from P(T<=t) two-tail.
Estimating μd, σd Unknown
See the Excel manual on the textbook Web site for specific directions on creating confidence 
intervals for μd when σd is unknown.
Testing a Hypothesis about μd, σd Unknown
See the Excel manual on the textbook Web site for specific directions on testing a hypothesis 
about μd when σd is unknown.
Estimating p1 − p2 for Example 10–13 of the Text
1. In a new worksheet, enter the following text into the indicated cells (see Screen 10.14):
• Type Sample 1 in cell A1, Sample 2 in cell A3, Number successes in cells B1 and B3, and 
Number trials in cells B2 and B4.
• Type phat1 in cell A6, phat2 in cell A7, phat1 − phat2 in cell A8, z* in cell A9, and  Std 
dev in cell A10.
• Type Lower bound in cell A12 and Upper bound in cell A13.
2. Enter the values of the summary statistics in the indicated cells (see Screen 10.14):
• Type 100 in cell C1.
• Type 500 in cell C2.
• Type 68 in cell C3.
• Type 400 in cell C4.
3. Enter the following formulas in the indicated cells (see Screen 10.14):
• Type =C1/C2 in cell B6.
• Type =C3/C4 in cell B7.
• Type =B6-B7 in cell B8.
• Type =NORM.INV(0.985,0,1) in cell B9.
 
Note: The value 0.985 is found by (1 − α/2).
• Type =SQRT(B6*(1-B6)/C2+B7*(1-B7)/C4) in cell B10.
Screen 10.14
www.ebook3000.com

446
Chapter 10 Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: Two Populations
• Type =B8-B9*B10 in cell B12.
• Type =B8+B9*B10 in cell B13.
4. The lower and upper bounds of the confidence interval will be in cells B12 and B13, 
respectively. (See Screen 10.14.)
Testing a Hypothesis about p1 − p2 for Example 10–14 of the Text
1. In a new worksheet, enter the following text into the indicated cells (see Screen 10.15):
• Type Sample 1 in cell A1, Sample 2 in cell A3, Number successes in cells B1 and B3, 
and Number trials in cells B2 and B4.
• Type phat1 in cell A6, phat2 in cell A7, phat1 − phat2 in cell A8, Pooled samp prop 
in cell A9, and Std dev in cell A10.
• Type Test stat in cell A12 and p-value in cell A13.
2.  Enter the values of the summary statistics in the indicated cells (see Screen 10.15):
• Type 100 in cell C1.
• Type 500 in cell C2.
• Type 68 in cell C3.
• Type 400 in cell C4.
3. Enter the following formulas in the indicated cells (see Screen 10.15):
• Type =C1/C2 in cell B6.
• Type =C3/C4 in cell B7.
• Type =B6-B7 in cell B8.
• Type =(C1+C3)/(C2+C4) in cell B9.
 
Note: The value 0.985 is found by (1 − α/2).
• Type =SQRT(B9*(1-B9)/C2+B9*(1-B9)/C4) in cell B10.
• Type =B8/B10 in cell B12.
• The formula for cell B13 depends on H1:
• For H1: μ1 > μ2, type =1-NORM.S.DIST(B12,1) in cell B13.
• For H1: μ1 < μ2, type =NORM.S.DIST(B12,1) in cell B13.
• For H1: μ1 ≠ μ2, type =2*(1-NORM.S.DIST(ABS(B12),1)) in cell B13.
4.  The test statistic will be in cell B12 and the p-value will be in cell B13. 
(See Screen 10.15.)
Screen 10.15
average credit card debts for all such households for the years 2014 
and 2013, respectively.
a. Construct a 98% confidence interval for μ1 − μ2.
b. Using a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the aver-
age credit card debt for such households was higher in 2014 
than in 2013? Use both the p-value and the critical-value 
approaches to make this test.
TA10.1 Using data from the U.S. Census Bureau and other sources, 
www.nerdwallet.com estimated that considering only the households 
with credit card debts, the average credit card debt for U.S. house-
holds was $15,523 in 2014 and $15,242 in 2013. Suppose that these 
estimates were based on random samples of 600 households with 
credit card debts in 2014 and 700 households with credit card debts 
in 2013. Suppose that the sample standard deviations for these two 
samples were $3870 and $3764, respectively. Assume that the standard 
deviations for the two populations are equal. Let μ1 and μ2 be the 
TECHNOLOGY ASSIGNMENTS

Technology Assignments
447
workers and asked them to use these two types of machines to assem-
ble products. The following table gives the time taken (in minutes) to 
assemble one unit of the product on each type of machine for each of 
these eight workers.
Machine I
23
26
19
24
27
22
20
18
Machine II
21
24
23
25
24
28
24
23
a. Construct a 98% confidence interval for the mean μd of the 
population of paired differences, where a paired difference is 
equal to the time taken to assemble a unit of the product on 
Machine I minus the time taken to assemble a unit of the prod-
uct on Machine II by the same worker.
b. Test at a 5% significance level whether the mean of the popu-
lation of paired differences is different from zero.
Assume that the population of paired differences is (approximately) 
normally distributed.
TA10.7 A company has two restaurants in two different areas of New 
York City. The company wants to estimate the percentages of patrons 
who think that the food and service at each of these restaurants are 
excellent. A sample of 200 patrons taken from the restaurant in Area 
A showed that 118 of them think that the food and service are excel-
lent at this restaurant. Another sample of 250 patrons selected from 
the restaurant in Area B showed that 160 of them think that the food 
and service are excellent at this restaurant.
a. Construct a 97% confidence interval for the difference 
between the two population proportions.
b. Testing at a 2.5% significance level, can you conclude that the 
proportion of patrons at the restaurant in Area A who think 
that the food and service are excellent is lower than the cor-
responding proportion at the restaurant in Area B?
TA10.8 The management of a supermarket chain wanted to investi-
gate whether the percentages of all men and all women who prefer to 
buy national brand products over the store brand products are differ-
ent. A sample of 600 men shoppers at the company’s supermarkets 
showed that 246 of them prefer to buy national brand products over 
the store brand products. Another sample of 700 women shoppers at 
the company’s supermarkets showed that 266 of them prefer to buy 
national brand products over the store brand products.
a. Construct a 99% confidence interval for the difference 
between the proportions of all men and all women shoppers at 
these supermarkets who prefer to buy national brand products 
over the store brand products.
b. Testing at a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the 
proportions of all men and all women shoppers at these super-
markets who prefer to buy national brand products over the 
store brand products are different?
TA10.2 A company recently opened two supermarkets in two different 
areas. The management wants to know if the mean sales per day for 
these two supermarkets are different. A sample of 10 days for Supermar-
ket A produced the following data on daily sales (in thousand dollars).
47.56
57.66
51.23
58.29
43.71
49.33
52.35
50.13
47.45
53.86
A sample of 12 days for Supermarket B produced the following data 
on daily sales (in thousand dollars).
56.34
63.55
61.64
63.75
54.78
58.19
55.40
59.44
62.33
67.82
56.65
67.90
Assume that the daily sales of the two supermarkets are both normally 
distributed with equal but unknown standard deviations.
a. Construct a 99% confidence interval for the difference 
between the mean daily sales for these two supermarkets.
b. Test at a 1% significance level whether the mean daily sales 
for these two supermarkets are different.
TA10.3 Refer to Technology Assignment TA10.1. Now do that 
assignment without assuming that the population standard deviations 
are equal.
TA10.4 Refer to Technology Assignment TA10.2. Now do that 
assignment assuming the daily sales of the two supermarkets are both 
normally distributed with unequal and unknown standard deviations.
TA10.5 A finger-tapping experiment was conducted by a doctoral 
neuropsychology student. The purpose of this experiment was to 
determine bilateral nervous system integrity, which provides data 
about the neuromuscular system and motor control. The experiment 
requires the subjects to place the palm of the hand on a table and then 
to tap the index finger on the surface of the table. Ten subjects who 
had suffered a mild concussion were given a finger tapping test using 
the right index finger and then the left index finger. The total number 
of taps in thirty seconds by each subject are listed in the following 
table. All subject in the data set are right-handed. Assume that the pop-
ulation of paired differences is approximately normally distributed.
Subject
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Right
125
131
95
105
137
129
91
112
138 94
Left
127
138
97
107
130
128
85
114
135 85
a. Make a 95% confidence interval for the mean of the popula-
tion of paired differences, where a paired difference is equal 
to the number of taps for the right index finger minus the num-
ber of taps for the left index finger.
b. Using a 5% significance level, can you conclude that the average 
number of taps is different for the right and left index fingers?
TA10.6 A company is considering installing new machines to assem-
ble its products. The company is considering two types of machines, 
but it will buy only one type. The company selected eight assembly 
www.ebook3000.com

448
CHAPTER11
The tests of hypothesis about the mean, the difference between two means, the proportion, and the 
difference between two proportions were discussed in Chapters 9 and 10. The tests about propor-
tions dealt with countable or categorical data. In the case of a proportion and the difference between 
two proportions in Chapters 9 and 10, the tests concerned experiments with only two categories. 
Recall from Chapter 5 that such experiments are called binomial experiments. This chapter describes 
three types of tests:
1. 
Tests of hypothesis for experiments with more than two categories, called goodness-of-fit tests
2. 
Tests of hypothesis about contingency tables, called independence and homogeneity tests
3. 
Tests of hypothesis about the variance and standard deviation of a single population
All of these tests are performed by using the chi-square distribution, which is sometimes written 
as χ2 distribution and is read as “chi-square distribution.” The symbol χ is the Greek letter chi, pro-
nounced “ki-.” The values of a chi-square distribution are denoted by the symbol χ2 (read as “chi-
square”), just as the values of the standard normal distribution and the t distribution are denoted by 
z and t, respectively. Section 11.1 describes the chi-square distribution.
Are you a fan of people who work on Wall Street? Do you think that people who work on Wall Street are 
as honest and moral as the general public? In a Harris poll conducted in 2012, 28% of the U.S. adults 
polled agreed with the statement, “In general, people on Wall Street are as honest and moral as other 
people.” Sixty-eight percent of the adults polled disagreed with this statement. (See Case Study 11–1.)
© EIGHTFISH/The Image Bank/Getty Images, Inc.
11.1  The Chi-Square 
Distribution
11.2 A Goodness-of-Fit Test
Case Study 11–1 Are People 
On Wall Street Honest 
And Moral?
11.3  A Test of Independence 
or Homogeneity
11.4  Inferences About the 
Population Variance
Chi-Square Tests

11.1 The Chi-Square Distribution
449
11.1 The Chi-Square Distribution
Like the t distribution, the chi-square distribution has only one parameter, called the degrees of 
freedom (df). The shape of a specific chi-square distribution depends on the number of degrees 
of freedom.1 (The degrees of freedom for a chi-square distribution are calculated by using differ-
ent formulas for different tests. This will be explained when we discuss those tests.) The random 
variable χ2 assumes nonnegative values only. Hence, a chi-square distribution curve starts at the 
origin (zero point) and lies entirely to the right of the vertical axis. Figure 11.1 shows three chi-
square distribution curves. They are for 2, 7, and 12 degrees of freedom, respectively.
 
As we can see from Figure 11.1, the shape of a chi-square distribution curve is skewed for 
very small degrees of freedom, and it changes drastically as the degrees of freedom increase. 
Eventually, for large degrees of freedom, the chi-square distribution curve looks like a normal 
distribution curve. The peak (or mode) of a chi-square distribution curve with 1 or 2 degrees of 
freedom occurs at zero and for a curve with 3 or more degrees of freedom at df − 2. For instance, 
the peak of the chi-square distribution curve with df = 2 in Figure 11.1 occurs at zero. The peak 
for the curve with df = 7 occurs at 7 − 2 = 5. Finally, the peak for the curve with df = 12 occurs 
at 12 − 2 = 10. Like all other continuous distribution curves, the total area under a chi-square 
distribution curve is 1.0.
 
If we know the degrees of freedom and the area in the right tail of a chi-square distribution 
curve, we can find the value of χ2 from Table VI of Appendix B. Examples 11–1 and 11–2 show 
how to read that table.
EXAMPLE 11–1
Find the value of χ2 for 7 degrees of freedom and an area of .10 in the right tail of the chi-square 
distribution curve.
Solution To find the required value of χ2, we locate 7 in the column for df and .100 in the top 
row in Table VI of Appendix B. The required χ2 value is given by the entry at the intersection of 
Reading the chi-square 
distribution table: area in the 
right tail known.
1The mean of a chi-square distribution is equal to its df, and the standard deviation is equal to √2 df.
Figure 11.1 Three chi-square distribution curves.
df = 2
df = 7
df = 12
0
1 2
3
4
5
6 7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
2
The Chi-Square Distribution The chi-square distribution has only one parameter, called the 
degrees of freedom. The shape of a chi-square distribution curve is skewed to the right for small 
df and becomes symmetric for large df. The entire chi-square distribution curve lies to the right 
of the vertical axis. The chi-square distribution assumes nonnegative values only, and these are 
denoted by the symbol χ2 (read as “chi-square”).
www.ebook3000.com

450
Chapter 11 Chi-Square Tests
the row for 7 and the column for .100. This value is 12.017. The relevant portion of Table VI is 
presented as Table 11.1 here.
 
As shown in Figure 11.2, for df = 7 and an area of .10 in the right tail of the chi-square dis-
tribution curve, the χ2 value is 12.017.
EXAMPLE 11–2
Find the value of χ2 for 12 degrees of freedom and an area of .05 in the left tail of the chi-square 
distribution curve.
Solution We can read Table VI of Appendix B only when an area in the right tail of the 
chi-square distribution curve is known. When the given area is in the left tail, as in this example, 
the first step is to find the area in the right tail of the chi-square distribution curve as follows.
Area in the right tail = 1 −Area in the left tail
Therefore, for our example,
Area in the right tail = 1 −.05 = .95
Next, we locate 12 in the column for df and .950 in the top row in Table VI of Appendix B. The 
required value of χ2, given by the entry at the intersection of the row for 12 and the column for 
.950, is 5.226. The relevant portion of Table VI is presented as Table 11.2 here.
Reading the chi-square 
distribution table: area in the 
left tail known.
Table 11.1 χ2 for df = 7 and .10 Area in the Right Tail
 
Area in the Right Tail Under the Chi-Square Distribution Curve
 df 
.995 
. . . 
.100 
. . . 
.005
 1 
0.000 
. . . 
2.706 
. . . 
7.879
 2 
0.010 
. . . 
4.605 
. . . 
10.597
 . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
 . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
 . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
 7 
0.989 
. . . 
12.017 
. . . 
20.278
 . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
 . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
 . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
 100 
67.328 
. . . 
118.498 
. . . 
140.169
Required value of χ2
.10
2
12.017
0
df = 7
Figure 11.2 The χ2 value.
◼

11.2 A Goodness-of-Fit Test
451
As shown in Figure 11.3, for df = 12 and .05 area in the left tail, the χ2 value is 5.226.
Required value of χ2
Table 11.2 χ2 for df = 12 and .95 Area in the Right Tail
 
Area in the Right Tail Under the Chi-Square Distribution Curve
 df 
.995 
. . . 
.950 
. . . 
.005
 1 
0.000 
. . . 
0.004 
. . . 
7.879
 2 
0.010 
. . . 
0.103 
. . . 
10.597
 . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
 . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
 . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
 12 
3.074 
. . . 
5.226 
. . . 
28.300
 . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
 . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
 . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
 100 
67.328 
. . . 
77.929 
. . . 
140.169
EXERCISES
11.4 Determine the value of χ2 for 23 degrees of freedom and an 
area of .990 in the left tail of the chi-square distribution curve.
11.5 Find the value of χ2 for 4 degrees of freedom and
a. .005 area in the right tail of the chi-square distribution 
curve
b. .05 area in the left tail of the chi-square distribution curve
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
11.1 Describe the chi-square distribution. What is the parameter 
(parameters) of such a distribution?
11.2 Find the value of χ2 for 12 degrees of freedom and an area of 
.025 in the right tail of the chi-square distribution curve.
11.3 Determine the value of χ2 for 14 degrees of freedom and an 
area of .10 in the left tail of the chi-square distribution curve.
Shaded area = .95
df = 12
5.226
0
.05
2
Figure 11.3 The χ2 value.
◼
This section explains how to make tests of hypothesis about experiments with more than two 
possible outcomes (or categories). Such experiments, called multinomial experiments, pos-
sess four characteristics. Note that a binomial experiment is a special case of a multinomial 
experiment.
11.2 A Goodness-of-Fit Test
www.ebook3000.com

452
Chapter 11 Chi-Square Tests
 
An experiment of many rolls of a die is an example of a multinomial experiment. It consists 
of many identical rolls (trials); each roll (trial) results in one of the six possible outcomes; each 
roll is independent of the other rolls; and the probabilities of the six outcomes remain constant for 
each roll.
 
As a second example of a multinomial experiment, suppose we select a random sample of 
people and ask them whether or not the quality of American cars is better than that of Japanese 
cars. The response of a person can be yes, no, or does not know. Each person included in the 
sample can be considered as one trial (repetition) of the experiment. There will be as many trials 
for this experiment as the number of persons selected. Each person can belong to any of the three 
categories—yes, no, or does not know. The response of each selected person is independent of the 
responses of other persons. Given that the population is large, the probabilities of a person 
belonging to the three categories remain the same for each trial. Consequently, this is an example 
of a multinomial experiment.
 
The frequencies obtained from the actual performance of an experiment are called the 
observed frequencies. In a goodness-of-fit test, we test the null hypothesis that the observed 
frequencies for an experiment follow a certain pattern or theoretical distribution. The test is 
called a goodness-of-fit test because the hypothesis tested is how good the observed frequencies 
fit a given pattern.
 
For our first example involving the experiment of many rolls of a die, we may test the null 
hypothesis that the given die is fair. The die will be fair if the observed frequency for each out-
come is close to one-sixth of the total number of rolls.
 
For our second example involving opinions of people on the quality of American cars, 
suppose such a survey was conducted in 2015, and in that survey 41% of the people said yes, 
48% said no, and 11% said do not know. We want to test if these percentages still hold true. 
Suppose we take a random sample of 1000 adults and observe that 536 of them think that the 
quality of American cars is better than that of Japanese cars, 362 say it is worse, and 102 have 
no opinion. The frequencies 536, 362, and 102 are the observed frequencies. These frequencies 
are obtained by actually performing the survey. Now, assuming that the 2015 percentages are 
still true (which will be our null hypothesis), in a sample of 1000 adults we will expect 410 to 
say yes, 480 to say no, and 110 to say do not know. These frequencies are obtained by multiply-
ing the sample size (1000) by the 2015 proportions. These frequencies are called the expected 
frequencies. Then, we will make a decision to reject or not to reject the null hypothesis based 
on how large the difference between the observed frequencies and the expected frequencies is. 
To perform this test, we will use the chi-square distribution. Note that in this case we are test-
ing the null hypothesis that all three percentages (or proportions) are unchanged. However, if 
we want to make a test for only one of the three proportions, we use the procedure learned in 
Section 9.4 of Chapter 9. For example, if we are testing the hypothesis that the current percent-
age of people who think the quality of American cars is better than that of the Japanese cars is 
different from 41%, then we will test the null hypothesis H0: p = .41 against the alternative 
hypothesis H1: p ≠.41. This test will be conducted using the procedure discussed in Section 9.4 
of Chapter 9.
 
As mentioned earlier, the frequencies obtained from the performance of an experiment are 
called the observed frequencies. They are denoted by O. To make a goodness-of-fit test, we cal-
culate the expected frequencies for all categories of the experiment. The expected frequency for 
a category, denoted by E, is given by the product of n and p, where n is the total number of trials 
and p is the probability for that category.
A Multinomial Experiment An experiment with the following characteristics is called a multi-
nomial experiment:
1. The experiment consists of n identical trials (repetitions).
2. Each trial results in one of k possible outcomes (or categories), where k > 2.
3. The trials are independent.
4. The probabilities of the various outcomes remain constant for each trial.

11.2 A Goodness-of-Fit Test
453
 
The procedure to make a goodness-of-fit test involves the same five steps that we used in the 
preceding chapters. The chi-square goodness-of-fit test is always a right-tailed test.
 
Whether or not the null hypothesis is rejected depends on how much the observed and 
expected frequencies differ from each other. To find how large the difference between the 
observed frequencies and the expected frequencies is, we do not look at just Σ(O − E), because 
some of the O − E values will be positive and others will be negative. The net result of the sum 
of these differences will always be zero. Therefore, we square each of the O − E values to obtain 
(O − E)2, and then we weight them according to the reciprocals of their expected frequencies. 
The sum of the resulting numbers gives the computed value of the test statistic χ2.
 
To make a goodness-of-fit test, the sample size should be large enough so that the 
expected frequency for each category is at least 5. If there is a category with an expected fre-
quency of less than 5, either increase the sample size or combine two or more categories to make 
each expected frequency at least 5.
 
Examples 11–3 and 11–4 describe the procedure for performing goodness-of-fit tests using 
the chi-square distribution.
EXAMPLE 11–3 
Number of People Using an ATM Each Day
A bank has an ATM installed inside the bank, and it is available to its customers only from 7 am 
to 6 pm Monday through Friday. The manager of the bank wanted to investigate if the number 
of people who use this ATM is the same for each of the 5 days (Monday through Friday) of the 
week. She randomly selected one week and counted the number of people who used this ATM 
Conducting a goodness-of-fit 
test: equal proportions for all 
categories.
Observed and Expected Frequencies The frequencies obtained from the performance of an 
experiment are called the observed frequencies and are denoted by O. The expected frequen-
cies, denoted by E, are the frequencies that we expect to obtain if the null hypothesis is true. The 
expected frequency for a category is obtained as
E = np
where n is the sample size and p is the probability that an element belongs to that category if the 
null hypothesis is true.
Degrees of Freedom for a Goodness-of-Fit Test In a goodness-of-fit test, the degrees of 
freedom are
df = k −1
where k denotes the number of possible outcomes (or categories) for the experiment.
Test Statistic for a Goodness-of-Fit Test The test statistic for a goodness-of-fit test is χ2, and 
its value is calculated as
χ2 = ∑(O −E)2
E
where 
O = observed frequency for a category
 
E = expected frequency for a category = np
Remember that a chi-square goodness-of-fit test is always a right-tailed test.
www.ebook3000.com

454
Chapter 11 Chi-Square Tests
on each of the 5 days during that week. The information she obtained is given in the following 
table, where the number of users represents the number of people who used this ATM on these 
days.
Day
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Number of users
253
197
204
279
267
At a 1% level of significance, can we reject the null hypothesis that the number of people who 
use this ATM each of the 5 days of the week is the same? Assume that this week is typical of all 
weeks in regard to the use of this ATM.
Solution To conduct this test of hypothesis, we proceed as follows.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
Because there are 5 categories (days) as listed in the table, the number of ATM users will be 
the same for each of these 5 days if 20% of all users use the ATM each day. The null and alterna-
tive hypotheses are as follows.
H0: The number of people using the ATM is the same for all 5 days of the week.
H1: The number of people using the ATM is not the same for all 5 days of the week.
If the number of people using this ATM is the same for all 5 days of the week, then .20 of the 
users will use this ATM on any of the 5 days of the week. Let p1, p2, p3, p4, and p5 be the propor-
tion of people who use this ATM on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, respec-
tively. Then, the null and alternative hypotheses can also be written as
H0: p1 = p2 = p3 = p4 = p5 = .20
H1: At least two of the five proportions are not equal to .20
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
Because there are 5 categories (i.e., 5 days on which the ATM is used), this is a multinomial 
experiment. Consequently, we use the chi-square distribution to make this test.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The significance level is given to be .01, and the goodness-of-fit test is always right-tailed. 
Therefore, the area in the right tail of the chi-square distribution curve is .01, that is,
Area in the right tail = α = .01
The degrees of freedom are calculated as follows:
 k = number of categories = 5
 df = k −1 = 5 −1 = 4
From the chi-square distribution table (Table VI of Appendix B), for df = 4 and .01 area in the 
right tail of the chi-square distribution curve, the critical value of χ2 is 13.277, as shown in 
Figure 11.4.
Photodisc/Getty Images, Inc.
Do not reject H0
Reject H0
13.277
Critical value of 2
2
    = .01
α
Figure 11.4 Rejection and nonrejection regions.
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.

11.2 A Goodness-of-Fit Test
455
 
All the required calculations to find the value of the test statistic χ2 are shown in Table 11.3. 
The calculations made in Table 11.3 are explained as follows.
1. 
The first two columns of Table 11.3 list the 5 categories (days) and the observed frequencies for 
the 1200 persons who used the ATM during each of the 5 days of the selected week. The third 
column contains the probabilities for the 5 categories assuming that the null hypothesis is true.
2. 
The fourth column contains the expected frequencies. These frequencies are obtained by 
multiplying the total users (n = 1200) by the probabilities listed in the third column. If the 
null hypothesis is true (i.e., the ATM users are equally distributed over all 5 days), then we 
will expect 240 out of 1200 persons to use the ATM each day. Consequently, each category 
in the fourth column has the same expected frequency.
3. The fifth column lists the differences between the observed and expected frequencies, that is, 
O − E. These values are squared and recorded in the sixth column.
4. 
Finally, we divide the squared differences (that appear in the sixth column) by the corre-
sponding expected frequencies (listed in the fourth column) and write the resulting numbers 
in the seventh column.
5. 
The sum of the seventh column gives the value of the test statistic χ2. Thus,
χ2 = ∑ (O −E)2
E
= 23.184
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
The value of the test statistic χ2 = 23.184 is larger than the critical value of χ2 = 13.277, and 
falls in the rejection region. Hence, we reject the null hypothesis and state that the number of per-
sons who use this ATM is not the same for each of the 5 days of the week. In other words, we 
conclude that a higher number of users of this ATM use this machine on one or more of these days.
 
If you make this chi-square test using any of the statistical software packages, you will 
obtain a p-value of .000311 for the test. In this case you can compare the p-value obtained in the 
computer output with the level of significance and make a decision. As you know from Chapter 9, 
you will reject the null hypothesis if α (significance level) is greater than or equal to the p-value 
and not reject it otherwise. 
◼ 
EXAMPLE 11–4 
Are Federal Taxes Paid by 
Upper-Income People Fair?
In a Gallup poll conducted April 3–6, 2014, Americans aged 18 and older were asked if upper-
income people were “paying their fair share in federal taxes, paying too much or paying too lit-
tle.” Of the respondents, 61% said too little, 24% said fair share, 13% said too much, and 2% had 
no opinion (www.gallup.com). Assume that these percentages hold true for the 2014 population 
of Americans aged 18 and older. Recently, 1000 randomly selected Americans aged 18 and older 
were asked the same question. The following table lists the number of Americans in this sample 
who belonged to each response.
Response
Too Little
Fair Share
Too Much
No Opinion
Frequency
581
256
138
25
Conducting a goodness-of-fit 
test: testing if results of a survey 
fit a given distribution.
Table 11.3 Calculating the Value of the Test Statistic
 
 
Observed  
 
Expected
Category 
Frequency  
 
Frequency
 (Day) 
O 
p 
E = np 
(O − E) 
(O − E)2 
(O −E)2
E
Monday 
253 
.20 
1200(.20) = 240 
13 
169 
.704
Tuesday 
197 
.20 
1200(.20) = 240 
−43 
1849 
7.704
Wednesday 
204 
.20 
1200(.20) = 240 
−36 
1296 
5.400
Thursday 
279 
.20 
1200(.20) = 240 
39 
1521 
6.338
Friday 
267 
.20 
1200(.20) = 240 
27 
729 
3.038
 
 
n = 1200 
Sum = 23.184
www.ebook3000.com

456
Chapter 11 Chi-Square Tests
Test at a 2.5% level of significance whether the current distribution of opinions is different from 
that for 2014.
Solution We perform the following five steps for this test of hypothesis.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
The null and alternative hypotheses are
H0: The current percentage distribution of opinions is the same as for 2014.
H1: The current percentage distribution of opinions is different from that for 2014.
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
Because this experiment has four categories as listed in the table, it is a multinomial experi-
ment. Consequently we use the chi-square distribution to make this test.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The significance level is given to be .025, and because the goodness-of-fit test is always 
right-tailed, the area in the right tail of the chi-square distribution curve is .025, that is,
Area in the right tail = α = .025
 
The degrees of freedom are calculated as follows:
 k = number of categories = 4
 df = k −1 = 4 −1 = 3
 
From the chi-square distribution table (Table VI of Appendix B), for df = 3 and .025 area in 
the right tail of the chi-square distribution curve, the critical value of χ2 is 9.348, as shown in 
Figure 11.5.
Do not reject H0
Reject H0
9.348
Critical value of 2
   = .025
and df = 3
2
α
Figure 11.5 Rejection and nonrejection 
regions.
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
All the required calculations to find the value of the test statistic χ2 are shown in Table 11.4. Note 
that the four percentages for 2014 have been converted into probabilities and recorded in the third 
column of Table 11.4. The value of the test statistic χ2 is given by the sum of the last column. Thus,
χ2 = ∑(O −E)2
E
= 4.188
Table 11.4 Calculating the Value of the Test Statistic
 
 
Observed 
 
Expected
 Category 
Frequency  
 
Frequency
 (Response) 
O 
p 
E = np 
(O − E) 
(O − E)2 
(O −E)2
E
Too little 
581 
.61 
1000(.61) = 610 
−29 
841 
1.379
Fair share 
256 
.24 
1000(.24) = 240 
16 
256 
1.067
Too much 
138 
.13 
1000(.13) = 130 
8 
64 
.492
No opinion 
25 
.02 
1000(.02) = 20 
5 
25 
1.250
 
 
n = 1000 
Sum = 4.188

ARE PEOPLE ON 
WALL STREET 
HONEST AND 
MORAL?
CASE STUDY 11–1
In a Harris poll conducted by Harris Interactive between April 10 and April 17, 2012, U.S. adults aged 18 years 
and older were asked whether they agreed with the statement, “In general, people on Wall Street are as honest 
and moral as other people.” (http://www.harrisinteractive.com/NewsRoom/HarrisPolls/tabid/447/ctl/ReadCus-
tom%20Default/mid/1508/ArticleId/1018/Default.aspx.) The accompanying chart shows the percentage distri-
bution of the responses of these adults. Twenty-eight percent of the adults polled said that they agree with this 
statement, 68% disagreed, and 4% were not sure or refused to answer. Assume that these percentages were 
true for the population of U.S. adults in 2012. Suppose that we want to test the hypothesis whether these per-
centages with respect to the foregoing statement are still true. Then the two hypotheses are as follows:
 
H0: The current percentage distribution of opinions is the same as in 2012
 
H1: The current percentage distribution of opinions is not the same as in 2012
To test this hypothesis, suppose that we currently take a sample of 2000 U.S. adults and ask them whether 
they agree with the foregoing statement. Suppose that 488 of them say that they agree with the statement, 
1444 say that they disagree, and 68 are not sure or refuse to give an answer. Using the given information, we 
calculate the value of the test statistic as shown in the following table.
Suppose that we use a 1% significance level to perform this test. Then for df = 3 − 1 = 2 and .01 area in the 
right tail, the critical value of χ2 is 9.210 from Table VI of Appendix B. Since the observed value of χ2 is 16.245 
and it is larger than the critical value of χ2 = 9.210, we reject the null hypothesis. Thus, we conclude that the 
current percentage distribution of opinions of U.S. adults in response to the given statement is significantly 
different from the distribution of those in 2012.
 
We can also use the p-value approach to make this decision. In Table VI of Appendix B, for df = 2, the larg-
est value of χ2 is 10.597, and the area to the right of χ2 = 10.597 is .005. Thus, the p-value for χ2 = 16.245 will be 
less than .005. (By using technology, we obtain the p-value of .0003.) Since α = .01 in this example is greater than 
.005 (or .0003), we reject the null hypothesis and conclude that the current percentage distribution of opinions of 
U.S. adults in response to the given statement is significantly different from the distribution of those in 2012.
SALES
ARE PEOPLE ON WALL STREET HONEST AND MORAL?
Data source: Harris Interactive telephone poll of U.S. adults conducted April 10–17, 2012.
BROADWAY
WALL
ST
1-9
Not sure/refused
Agree
28%
Disagree
68%
4%
 
 
Observed 
 
Expected 
 
 
Frequency 
 
Frequency 
Category 
O 
p 
E = np 
(O − E) 
(O − E)2 
(O −E)2
E
Agree  
488 
.28 
2000(.28) =  560 
−72 
5184 
9.257
Disagree 
1444 
.68 
2000(.68) = 1360 
84 
7056 
5.188
Not sure/refuse 
68 
.04 
2000(.04) =   80 
−12 
144 
1.800
 
 
n = 2000 
Sum = 16.245
457
www.ebook3000.com

458
Chapter 11 Chi-Square Tests
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
The observed value of the test statistic χ2 = 4.188 is smaller than the critical value of 
χ2 = 9.348, and falls in the nonrejection region. Hence, we fail to reject the null hypothesis, and 
state that the current percentage distribution of opinions seems to be the same as for 2014.
 
If you make this chi-square test using any of the statistical software packages, you will 
obtain a p-value of .242 for the test. In this case you can compare the p-value obtained in the 
computer output with the level of significance and make a decision. As you know from Chapter 9, 
you will reject the null hypothesis if α (significance level) is greater than or equal to the p-value 
and not reject it otherwise. 
◼ 
EXERCISES
Payment method
C
CK
D
N
Number of customers
240
104
111
45
Test at a 1% significance level whether the distribution of payment 
methods in the checkout line changed after the discount went into 
effect.
11.14 Home Mail Corporation sells products by mail. The compa-
ny’s management wants to find out if the number of orders received at 
the company’s office on each of the 5 days of the week is the same. 
The company took a sample of 400 orders received during a 4-week 
period. The following table lists the frequency distribution for these 
orders by the day of the week.
Day of the week
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Number of orders 
received
92
71
65
83
89
Test at a 5% significance level whether the null hypothesis that the 
orders are evenly distributed over all days of the week is true.
11.15 Of all students enrolled at a large undergraduate university, 
19% are seniors, 23% are juniors, 27% are sophomores, and 31% are 
freshmen. A sample of 200 students taken from this university by the 
student senate to conduct a survey includes 50 seniors, 46 juniors, 
55 sophomores, and 49 freshmen. Using a 2.5% significance level, 
test the null hypothesis that this sample is a random sample. (Hint: 
This sample will be a random sample if it includes approximately 
19% seniors, 23% juniors, 27% sophomores, and 31% freshmen.)
11.16 Chance Corporation produces beauty products. Two years 
ago the quality control department at the company conducted a survey 
of users of one of the company’s products. The survey revealed that 
53% of the users said the product was excellent, 31% said it was 
satisfactory, 7% said it was unsatisfactory, and 9% had no opinion. 
Assume that these percentages were true for the population of all 
users of this product at that time. After this survey was conducted, the 
company redesigned this product. A recent survey of 800 users of 
the redesigned product conducted by the quality control department at 
the company showed that 495 of the users think the product is excel-
lent, 255 think it is satisfactory, 35 think it is unsatisfactory, and 15 
have no opinion. Is the percentage distribution of the opinions of users 
of the redesigned product different from the percentage distribution of 
users of this product before it was redesigned? Use α = .025.
11.17 Henderson Corporation makes metal sheets, among other 
products. When the process that is used to make metal sheets works 
properly, 92% of the sheets contain no defects, 5% have one defect 
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
11.6 Describe the four characteristics of a multinomial experiment.
11.7 What is a goodness-of-fit test and when is it applied? Explain.
11.8 Explain the difference between the observed and expected fre-
quencies for a goodness-of-fit test.
11.9 How is the expected frequency of a category calculated for a 
goodness-of-fit test? What are the degrees of freedom for such a test?
11.10 To make a goodness-of-fit test, what should be the minimum 
expected frequency for each category? What are the alternatives if this 
condition is not satisfied?
11.11 The following table lists the frequency distribution for 60 
rolls of a die.
Outcome
1-spot
2-spot
3-spot
4-spot
5-spot
6-spot
Frequency
7
12
8
15
11
7
Test at a 5% significance level whether the null hypothesis that the 
given die is fair is true.
APPLICATIONS
11.12 A drug company is interested in investigating whether the 
color of their packaging has any impact on sales. To test this, they 
used five different colors (blue, green, orange, red, and yellow) for 
their packages of an over-the-counter pain reliever, instead of the tra-
ditional white package. The following table shows the number of 
packages of each color sold during the first month.
Package color
Blue
Green
Orange
Red
Yellow
Number of 
packages sold
310
292
280
216
296
Using a 1% significance level, test the null hypothesis that the number 
of packages sold of each of these five colors is the same.
11.13 Over the last 3 years, Art’s Supermarket has observed the fol-
lowing distribution of payment methods in the checkout lines: cash 
(C) 41%, check (CK) 24%, credit or debit card (D) 26%, and other 
(N) 9%. In an effort to minimize costly credit and debit card fees, 
Art’s has just begun offering a 1% discount for cash payment in the 
checkout line. The following table lists the frequency distribution of 
payment methods for a random sample of 500 customers after the 
discount went into effect.

11.3 A Test of Independence or Homogeneity
459
11.3 A Test of Independence or Homogeneity
This section is concerned with tests of independence and homogeneity, which are performed 
using contingency tables. Except for a few modifications, the procedure used to make such tests 
is almost the same as the one applied in Section 11.2 for a goodness-of-fit test.
11.3.1 A Contingency Table
Often we may have information on more than one variable for each element. Such information 
can be summarized and presented using a two-way classification table, which is also called a 
contingency table or cross-tabulation. Suppose a university has a total of 20,758 students enrolled. 
By classifying these students based on gender and whether these students are full-time or part-
time, we can prepare Table 11.5, which provides an example of a contingency table. Table 11.5 
has two rows (one for males and the second for females) and two columns (one for full-time and 
the second for part-time students). Hence, it is also called a 2 × 2 (read as “two by two”) contin-
gency table.
 
A contingency table can be of any size. For example, it can be 2 × 3, 3 × 2, 3 × 3, or 4 × 2. 
Note that in these notations, the first digit refers to the number of rows in the table, and the second 
digit refers to the number of columns. For example, a 3 × 2 table will contain three rows and two 
columns. In general, an R × C table contains R rows and C columns.
 
Each of the four boxes that contain numbers in Table 11.5 is called a cell. The number of 
cells in a contingency table is obtained by multiplying the number of rows by the number of 
columns. Thus, Table 11.5 contains 2 × 2 = 4 cells. The subjects that belong to a cell of a contin-
gency table possess two characteristics. For example, 2615 students listed in the second cell of 
the first row in Table 11.5 are male and enrolled part-time. The numbers written inside the cells 
are called the joint frequencies. For example, 2615 students belong to the joint category of male 
and part-time. Hence, it is referred to as the joint frequency of this category.
11.3.2 A Test of Independence
In a test of independence for a contingency table, we test the null hypothesis that the two attri-
butes (characteristics) of the elements of a given population are not related (that is, they are inde-
pendent) against the alternative hypothesis that the two characteristics are related (that is, they are 
dependent). For example, we may want to test if the affiliation of people with the Democratic and 
Republican parties is independent of their income levels. We perform such a test by using the 
chi-square distribution. As another example, we may want to test if there is an association 
between being a man or a woman and having a preference for watching sports or soap operas on 
television.
Number of defects
None
One
Two or More
Number of metal sheets
262
24
14
Does the evidence from this sample suggest that the process needs an 
adjustment? Use α = .01.
each, and 3% have two or more defects each. The quality control inspec-
tors at the company take samples of metal sheets quite often and check 
them for defects. If the distribution of defects for a sample is signifi-
cantly different from the above-mentioned percentage distribution, the 
process is stopped and adjusted. A recent sample of 300 sheets produced 
the frequency distribution of defects listed in the following table.
Students who are 
male and enrolled 
part-time
Table 11.5 Total Enrollment at a University
 
Full-Time 
Part-Time
Male 
6768 
2615
Female 
7658 
3717
www.ebook3000.com

460
Chapter 11 Chi-Square Tests
 
The value of the test statistic χ2 in a test of independence is obtained using the same formula 
as in the goodness-of-fit test described in Section 11.2.
 
The null hypothesis in a test of independence is always that the two attributes are not related. 
The alternative hypothesis is that the two attributes are related.
 
The frequencies obtained from the performance of an experiment for a contingency table are 
called the observed frequencies. The procedure to calculate the expected frequencies for a 
contingency table for a test of independence is different from the one for a goodness-of-fit test. 
Example 11–5 describes this procedure.
EXAMPLE 11–5 
Lack of Discipline in Schools
Lack of discipline has become a major problem in schools in the United States. A random 
sample of 300 adults was selected, and these adults were asked if they favor giving more 
freedom to schoolteachers to punish students for lack of discipline. The two-way classification 
of the responses of these adults is presented in the following table.
In Favor 
(F)
Against 
(A)
No Opinion 
(N)
Men (M)
93
70
12
Women (W)
87
32
6
Calculate the expected frequencies for this table, assuming that the two attributes, gender and 
opinions on the issue, are independent.
Solution The preceding table is reproduced as Table 11.6 here. Note that Table 11.6 includes 
the row and column totals.
Calculating expected frequencies 
for a test of independence.
Degrees of Freedom for a Test of Independence A test of independence involves a test of the 
null hypothesis that two attributes of a population are not related. The degrees of freedom for 
a test of independence are
df = (R −1)(C −1)
where R and C are the number of rows and the number of columns, respectively, in the given 
contingency table.
Test Statistic for a Test of Independence The value of the test statistic χ2 for a test of inde-
pendence is calculated as
χ2 = ∑ (O −E)2
E
where O and E are the observed and expected frequencies, respectively, for a cell.
Table 11.6 Observed Frequencies
In Favor 
(F)
Against 
(A)
No Opinion 
(N)
Row 
Totals
Men (M)
93
70
12
175
Women (W)
87
32
6
125
Column Totals
180
102
18
300

11.3 A Test of Independence or Homogeneity
461
 
The numbers 93, 70, 12, 87, 32, and 6 listed inside the six cells of Table 11.6 are called the 
observed frequencies of the respective cells.
 
As mentioned earlier, the null hypothesis in a test of independence is that the two attributes 
(or classifications) are independent. In a test of independence, first we assume that the null 
hypothesis is true and that the two attributes are independent. Assuming that the null hypothesis 
is true and that gender and opinions are not related in this example, we calculate the expected 
frequency for the cell corresponding to Men and In Favor as shown below. From Table 11.6,
 P(a person is a Man) = P(M) = 175∕300
 P(a person is In Favor) = P(F) = 180∕300
Because we are assuming that M and F are independent (by assuming that the null hypothesis is 
true), from the formula learned in Chapter 4, the joint probability of these two events is
P(M and F) = P(M) × P(F) = (175∕300) × (180∕300)
Then, assuming that M and F are independent, the number of persons expected to be Men and 
In Favor in a sample of 300 is
 E for Men and In Favor = 300 × P(M and F)
 = 300 × 175
300 × 180
300 = 175 × 180
300
 = (Row total)(Column total)
Sample size
 
Thus, the rule for obtaining the expected frequency for a cell is to divide the product of the 
corresponding row and column totals by the sample size.
Using this rule, we calculate the expected frequencies of the six cells of Table 11.6 as follows:
 E for Men and In Favor cell = (175)(180)∕300 = 105.00
 E for Men and Against cell = (175)(102)∕300 = 59.50
 E for Men and No Opinion cell = (175)(18)∕300 = 10.50
 E for Women and In Favor cell = (125)(180)∕300 = 75.00
 E for Women and Against cell = (125)(102)∕300 = 42.50
 E for Women and No Opinion cell = (125)(18)∕300 = 7.50
 
The expected frequencies are usually written in parentheses below the observed frequencies 
within the corresponding cells, as shown in Table 11.7.
Expected Frequencies for a Test of Independence The expected frequency E for a cell is cal-
culated as
E = (Row total)(Column total)
Sample size
Table 11.7 Observed and Expected Frequencies
In Favor 
(F)
Against 
(A)
No Opinion 
(N)
Row 
Totals
Men (M)
93
(105.00)
70
(59.50)
12
(10.50)
175
Women (W)
87
(75.00)
32
(42.50)
6
(7.50)
125
Column Totals
180
102
18
300
◼
www.ebook3000.com

462
Chapter 11 Chi-Square Tests
 
Like a goodness-of-fit test, a test of independence is always right-tailed. To apply a chi-
square test of independence, the sample size should be large enough so that the expected 
frequency for each cell is at least 5. If the expected frequency for a cell is not at least 5, we 
either increase the sample size or combine some categories. Examples 11–6 and 11–7 describe 
the procedure to make tests of independence using the chi-square distribution.
EXAMPLE 11–6 
Lack of Discipline in Schools
Reconsider the two-way classification table given in Example 11–5. In that example, a random 
sample of 300 adults was selected, and they were asked if they favor giving more freedom to 
schoolteachers to punish students for lack of discipline. Based on the results of the survey, a two-
way classification table was prepared and presented in Example 11–5. Does the sample provide 
sufficient evidence to conclude that the two attributes, gender and opinions of adults, are depend-
ent? Use a 1% significance level.
Solution The test involves the following five steps.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
As mentioned earlier, the null hypothesis must be that the two attributes are independent. 
Consequently, the alternative hypothesis is that these attributes are dependent.
 
H0: Gender and opinions of adults are independent.
 
H1: Gender and opinions of adults are dependent.
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
We use the chi-square distribution to make a test of independence for a contingency table.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The significance level is 1%. Because a test of independence is always right-tailed, the area 
of the rejection region is .01 and falls in the right tail of the chi-square distribution curve. The 
contingency table contains two rows (Men and Women) and three columns (In Favor, Against, 
and No Opinion). Note that we do not count the row and column of totals. The degrees of free-
dom are
df = (R −1)(C −1) = (2 −1)(3 −1) = 2
From Table VI of Appendix B, for df = 2 and α = .01, the critical value of χ2 is 9.210. This value 
is shown in Figure 11.6.
Making a test of 
independence: 2 × 3 table.
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
Table 11.7, with the observed and expected frequencies constructed in Example 11–5, is 
reproduced as Table 11.8.
Figure 11.6 Rejection and nonrejection regions.
2
Do not reject H0
Reject H0
   = .01
9.210
Critical value of 2
α

11.3 A Test of Independence or Homogeneity
463
 
To compute the value of the test statistic χ2, we take the difference between each pair of 
observed and expected frequencies listed in Table 11.8, square those differences, and then divide 
each of the squared differences by the respective expected frequency. The sum of the resulting 
numbers gives the value of the test statistic χ2. All these calculations are made as follows:
 χ2 = ∑ (O −E)2
E
 = (93 −105.00)2
105.00
+ (70 −59.50)2
59.50
+ (12 −10.50)2
10.50
+ (87 −75.00)2
75.00
+ (32 −42.50)2
42.50
+ (6 −7.50)2
7.50
 = 1.371 + 1.853 + .214 + 1.920 + 2.594 + .300 = 8.252
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
The value of the test statistic χ2 = 8.252 is less than the critical value of χ2 = 9.210, and it 
falls in the nonrejection region. Hence, we fail to reject the null hypothesis and state that there is 
not enough evidence from the sample to conclude that the two characteristics, gender and opin-
ions of adults, are dependent for this issue. 
◼ 
EXAMPLE 11–7 
Relationship Between Gender and Owning 
Smart Phone
A researcher wanted to study the relationship between gender and owning smart phones among 
adults who have cell phones. She took a sample of 2000 adults and obtained the information 
given in the following table.
Own Smart Phones
Do Not Own Smart Phones
Men
640
450
Women
440
470
At a 5% level of significance, can you conclude that gender and owning a smart phone are related 
for all adults?
Solution We perform the following five steps to make this test of hypothesis.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
The null and alternative hypotheses are, respectively,
H0: Gender and owning a smart phone are not related.
H1: Gender and owning a smart phone are related.
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
Because we are performing a test of independence, we use the chi-square distribution to 
make the test.
Making a test of independence: 
2 × 2 table.
Table 11.8 Observed and Expected Frequencies
In Favor 
(F)
Against 
(A)
No Opinion 
(N)
Row 
Totals
Men (M)
93
(105.00)
70
(59.50)
12
(10.50)
175
Women (W)
87
(75.00)
32
(42.50)
6
(7.50)
125
Column Totals
180
102
18
300
© THEGIFT777/iStockphoto
www.ebook3000.com

464
Chapter 11 Chi-Square Tests
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
With a significance level of 5%, the area of the rejection region is .05 and falls under the right 
tail of the chi-square distribution curve. The contingency table contains two rows (men and women) 
and two columns (own smart phones and do not own smart phones). The degrees of freedom are
df = (R −1)(C −1) = (2 −1)(2 −1) = 1
From Table VI of Appendix B, the critical value of χ2 for df = 1 and α = .05 is 3.841. This value 
is shown in Figure 11.7.
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
The expected frequencies for the various cells are calculated as follows and are listed within 
parentheses in Table 11.9.
E for men and own smart phones cell = (1090)(1080)∕2000 = 588.60
E for men and do not own smart phones cell = (1090)(920)∕2000 = 501.40
E for women and own smart phones cell = (910)(1080)∕2000 = 491.40
E for women and do not own smart phones cell = (910)(920)∕2000 = 418.60
The value of the test statistic χ2 is calculated as follows:
 χ2 = ∑ (O −E)2
E
 = (640 −588.60)2
588.60
+ (450 −501.40)2
501.40
+ (440 −491.40)2
491.40
+ (470 −418.60)2
418.60
 = 4.489 + 5.269 + 5.376 + 6.311 = 21.445
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
The value of the test statistic χ2 = 21.445 is larger than the critical value of χ2 = 3.841 and 
falls in the rejection region. Hence, we reject the null hypothesis and state that there is strong 
evidence from the sample to conclude that the two characteristics, gender and owning smart 
phones, are related for all adults. 
◼ 
Do not reject H0
Reject H0
 = .05
3.841
Critical value of 2
2
α
Figure 11.7 Rejection and nonrejection regions.
Table 11.9 Observed and Expected Frequencies
Own Smart Phones 
(Y)
Do Not Own Smart Phones 
(N)
Row 
Totals
Men (M)
640
(588.60)
450
(501.40)
1090
Women (W)
440
(491.40)
470
(418.60)
910
Column Totals
1080
920
2000

11.3 A Test of Independence or Homogeneity
465
11.3.3 A Test of Homogeneity
In a test of homogeneity, we test if two (or more) populations are homogeneous (similar) with 
regard to the distribution of a certain characteristic. For example, we might be interested in test-
ing the null hypothesis that the proportions of households that belong to different income groups 
are the same in California and Wisconsin, or we may want to test whether or not the preferences 
of people in Florida, Arizona, and Vermont are similar with regard to Coke, Pepsi, and 7-Up.
 
Let us consider the example of testing the null hypothesis that the proportions of households 
in California and Wisconsin who belong to various income groups are the same. (Note that in a 
test of homogeneity, the null hypothesis is always that the proportions of elements with certain 
characteristics are the same in two or more populations. The alternative hypothesis is that these 
proportions are not the same.) Suppose we define three income strata: high-income group (with 
an income of more than $200,000), medium-income group (with an income of $70,000 to 
$200,000), and low-income group (with an income of less than $70,000). Furthermore, assume 
that we take one sample of 250 households from California and another sample of 150 house-
holds from Wisconsin, collect the information on the incomes of these households, and prepare 
the contingency table as in Table 11.10.
 
Note that in this example the column totals are fixed. That is, we decided in advance to take 
samples of 250 households from California and 150 from Wisconsin. However, the row totals (of 
104, 120, and 176) are determined randomly by the outcomes of the two samples. If we compare 
this example to the one about lack of discipline in schools in the previous section, we will notice 
that neither the column nor the row totals were fixed in that example. Instead, the researcher took 
just one sample of 300 adults, collected the information on gender and opinions, and prepared the 
contingency table. Thus, in that example, the row and column totals were all determined randomly. 
Thus, when both the row and column totals are determined randomly, we perform a test of inde-
pendence. However, when either the column totals or the row totals are fixed, we perform a test of 
homogeneity. In the case of income groups in California and Wisconsin, we will perform a test of 
homogeneity to test for the similarity of income groups in the two states.
 
The procedure to conduct a test of homogeneity is similar to the procedure used to make a 
test of independence discussed earlier. Like a test of independence, a test of homogeneity is 
right-tailed. Example 11–8 illustrates the procedure to make a homogeneity test.
EXAMPLE 11–8 
Distribution of Households 
in Regard to Income Levels
Consider the data on income distributions for households in California and Wisconsin given in 
Table 11.10. Using a 2.5% significance level, test whether the distribution of households with 
regard to income levels is different (not homogeneous) for the two states.
Solution We perform the following five steps to make this test of hypothesis.
Performing a test of homogeneity.
A Test of Homogeneity A test of homogeneity involves testing the null hypothesis that the pro-
portions of elements with certain characteristics in two or more different populations are the 
same against the alternative hypothesis that these proportions are not the same.
Table 11.10 Observed Frequencies
California
Wisconsin
High income
70
34
Medium income
80
40
Low income
100
76
Column Totals
250
150
Row 
Totals
104
120
176
400
www.ebook3000.com

466
Chapter 11 Chi-Square Tests
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
The two hypotheses are, respectively,2
 
H0:  The proportions of households that belong to different income groups are the 
same in both states.
 
H1:  The proportions of households that belong to different income groups are not 
the same in both states.
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
We use the chi-square distribution to make a homogeneity test.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The significance level is 2.5%. Because the homogeneity test is right-tailed, the area of the 
rejection region is .025 and lies in the right tail of the chi-square distribution curve. The contin-
gency table for income groups in California and Wisconsin contains three rows and two columns. 
Hence, the degrees of freedom are
df = (R −1)(C −1) = (3 −1)(2 −1) = 2
From Table VI of Appendix B, the value of χ2 for df = 2 and .025 area in the right tail of the chi-
square distribution curve is 7.378. This value is shown in Figure 11.8.
2Let pHC, pMC, and pLC be the proportions of households in California who belong to high-, middle-, and low-income 
groups, respectively. Let pHW, pMW, and pLW be the corresponding proportions for Wisconsin. Then we can also write the 
null hypothesis as
H0: pHC = pHW, pMC = pMW, and pLC = pLW
and the alternative hypothesis as
H1: At least two of the equalities mentioned in H0 are not true.
7.378
Critical value of 2
Do not reject H0
Reject H0
 = .025
α
2
Figure 11.8 Rejection and nonrejection 
regions.
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
To compute the value of the test statistic χ2, we first need to calculate the expected frequen-
cies. Table 11.11 lists the observed and the expected frequencies. The numbers in parentheses in 
this table are the expected frequencies, which are calculated using the formula
E = (Row total)(Column total)
Total of both samples
Table 11.11 Observed and Expected Frequencies
California
Wisconsin
High income
70
(65)
34
(39)
Medium income
80
(75)
40
(45)
Low income
100
(110)
76
(66)
Column Totals
250
150
Row 
Totals
104
120
176
400

11.3 A Test of Independence or Homogeneity
467
Thus, for instance,
E for High income and California cell = (104)(250)
400
= 65
The remaining expected frequencies are calculated in the same way. Note that the expected fre-
quencies in a test of homogeneity are calculated in the same way as in a test of independence. The 
value of the test statistic χ2 is computed as follows:
 χ2 = ∑ (O −E)2
E
 = (70 −65)2
65
+ (34 −39)2
39
+ (80 −75)2
75
+ (40 −45)2
45
 
+ (100 −110)2
110
+ (76 −66)2
66
 = .385 + .641 + .333 + .556 + .909 + 1.515 = 4.339
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
The value of the test statistic χ2 = 4.339 is less than the critical value of χ2 = 7.378 and falls 
in the nonrejection region. Hence, we fail to reject the null hypothesis and state that there is no 
evidence that the distributions of households with regard to income are different in California and 
Wisconsin. 
◼ 
EXERCISES
 
Sample Selected From
 
Population 1 Population 2 Population 3 Population 4
Row 1 
24 
81 
60 
121
Row 2 
46 
64 
91 
72
Row 3 
20 
37 
105 
93
a. Write the null and alternative hypotheses for a test of homoge-
neity for this table.
b. Calculate the expected frequencies for all cells assuming that 
the null hypothesis is true.
c. For α = .025, find the critical value of χ2. Show the rejection 
and nonrejection regions on the chi-square distribution curve.
d. Find the value of the test statistic χ2.
e. Using α = .025, would you reject the null hypothesis?
APPLICATIONS
11.23 During the economic recession a few years ago, many fami-
lies faced hard times financially. Some studies observed that more 
people stopped buying name brand products and started buying less 
expensive store brand products instead. Data produced by a recent 
sample of 700 adults on whether they usually buy store brand or name 
brand products are recorded in the following table.
 
More Often Buy
 
Name Brand 
Store Brand
Men 
150 
165
Women 
160 
225
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
11.18 Describe in your own words a test of independence and a test 
of homogeneity. Give one example of each.
11.19 Explain how the expected frequencies for cells of a contin-
gency table are calculated in a test of independence or homogeneity. 
How do you find the degrees of freedom for such tests?
11.20 To make a test of independence or homogeneity, what should 
be the minimum expected frequency for each cell? What are the alter-
natives if this condition is not satisfied?
11.21 Consider the following contingency table, which is based on 
a sample survey.
 
Column 1 
Column 2 
Column 3
Row 1 
137 
64 
105
Row 2 
98 
71 
65
Row 3 
115 
81 
115
a. Write the null and alternative hypotheses for a test of inde-
pendence for this table.
b. Calculate the expected frequencies for all cells, assuming that 
the null hypothesis is true.
c. For α = .01, find the critical value of χ2. Show the rejection 
and nonrejection regions on the chi-square distribution curve.
d. Find the value of the test statistic χ2.
e. Using α = .01, would you reject the null hypothesis?
11.22 Consider the following contingency table, which records the 
results obtained for four samples of fixed sizes selected from four 
populations.
www.ebook3000.com

468
Chapter 11 Chi-Square Tests
 
Arson 
Accident 
Lightning 
Unknown
Region A 
6 
9 
6 
10
Region B 
7 
14 
15 
9
Test at a 5% significance level whether causes of fire and regions of 
fires are related.
11.28 Four hundred people were selected from each of the four geo-
graphic regions (Midwest, Northeast, South, West) of the United 
States, and they were asked which form of camping they prefer. The 
choices were pop-up camper/trailer, family style (tenting with sani-
tary facilities), rustic (tenting, no sanitary facilities), or none. The 
results of the survey are shown in the following table.
 
Midwest 
Northeast 
South 
West
Camper/trailer 
132 
129 
129 
135
Family style 
180 
175 
168 
146
Rustic 
46 
50 
59 
68
None 
42 
46 
44 
51
Based on the evidence from these samples, can you conclude that the 
distributions of favorite forms of camping are different for at least two 
of the regions? Use α = .01.
11.29 The following table gives the distributions of grades for three 
professors for a few randomly selected classes that each of them 
taught during the last 2 years.
 
Professor
 
 
Miller 
Smith 
Moore
 
A 
18 
36 
20
Grade
 
B 
25 
44 
15
 
C 
85 
73 
82
 
D and F 
17 
12 
8
Using a 2.5% significance level, test the null hypothesis that the grade 
distributions are homogeneous for these three professors.
11.30 Two random samples, one of 95 blue-collar workers and a 
second of 50 white-collar workers, were taken from a large company. 
These workers were asked about their views on a certain company 
issue. The following table gives the results of the survey.
 
Opinion
 
Favor 
Oppose 
Uncertain
Blue-collar workers 
44 
39 
12
White-collar workers 
21 
26 
3
Using a 2.5% significance level, test the null hypothesis that the 
distributions of opinions are homogeneous for the two groups of 
workers.
Using a 1% significance level, can you reject the null hypothesis that 
the two attributes, gender and buying name or store brand products, 
are independent?
11.24 Many students graduate from college deeply in debt from 
student loans, credit card debts, and so on. A sociologist took a ran-
dom sample of 401 single persons, classified them by gender, and 
asked, “Would you consider marrying someone who was $25,000 or 
more in debt?” The results of this survey are shown in the following 
table.
 
Yes 
No 
Uncertain
Women 
125 
59 
21
Men 
101 
79 
16
Test at a 1% significance level whether gender and response are 
related.
11.25 A random sample of 1000 Americans was taken, and these 
adults were asked if experience in politics was necessary for a candi-
date to be president of America. The following table presents the 
results of the survey.
 
Necessary 
Not Necessary 
No Opinion
Men 
260 
220 
70
Women 
230 
180 
40
Test at a 1% significance level whether gender and opinions are 
related.
11.26 The game show Deal or No Deal involves a series of opportu-
nities for the contestant to either accept an amount of money from the 
show’s banker or to decline it and open a specific number of brief-
cases in the hope of exposing and, thereby eliminating, low amounts 
of money from the game, which would lead the banker to increase the 
amount of the next offer. Suppose that 700 people aged 21 years and 
older were selected at random. Each of them watched an episode of 
the show until exactly four briefcases were left unopened. The money 
amounts in these four briefcases were $750, $5000, $50,000, and 
$400,000, respectively. The banker’s offer to the contestant was 
$81,600 if the contestant would stop the game and accept the offer. If 
the contestant were to decline the offer, he or she would choose one 
briefcase out of these four to open, and then there would be a new 
offer. All 700 persons were asked whether they would accept the offer 
(Deal) for $81,600 or turn it down (No Deal), as well as their ages. 
The responses of these 700 persons are listed in the following table.
 
Age Group (years)
 
21–29 
30–39 
40–49 
50–59 
60 and Over
Deal 
78 
82 
89 
92 
63
No Deal 
56 
70 
60 
63 
47
Test at a 5% significance level whether the decision to accept or not to 
accept the offer (Deal or No Deal) and age group are dependent.
11.27 A forestry official is comparing the causes of forest fires in 
two regions, A and B. The following table shows the causes of fire for 
76 recent fires in these two regions.

11.4 Inferences About the Population Variance
469
11.4 Inferences About the Population Variance
Earlier chapters explained how to make inferences (confidence intervals and hypothesis tests) 
about the population mean and population proportion. However, we may often need to control the 
variance (or standard deviation). Consequently, there may be a need to estimate and to test a 
hypothesis about the population variance σ2. Section 11.4.1 describes how to make a confidence 
interval for the population variance (or standard deviation). Section 11.4.2 explains how to test a 
hypothesis about the population variance.
 
As an example, suppose a machine is set up to fill packages of cookies so that the net weight 
of cookies per package is 32 ounces. Note that the machine will not put exactly 32 ounces of 
cookies into each package. Some of the packages will contain less and some will contain more 
than 32 ounces. However, if the variance (and, hence, the standard deviation) is too large, some 
of the packages will contain quite a bit less than 32 ounces of cookies, and some others will con-
tain quite a bit more than 32 ounces. The manufacturer will not want a large variation in the 
amounts of cookies put into different packages. To keep this variation within some specified 
acceptable limit, the machine will be adjusted from time to time. Before the manager decides to 
adjust the machine at any time, he or she must estimate the variance or test a hypothesis or do 
both to find out if the variance exceeds the maximum acceptable value.
 
Like every sample statistic, the sample variance is a random variable, and it possesses a 
sampling distribution. If all the possible samples of a given size are taken from a population and 
their variances are calculated, the probability distribution of these variances is called the 
sampling distribution of the sample variance.
 
Thus, the chi-square distribution is used to construct a confidence interval and test a hypoth-
esis about the population variance σ2.
11.4.1 Estimation of the Population Variance
The value of the sample variance s2 gives a point estimate of the population variance σ2. The 
(1 − α)100% confidence interval for σ2 is given by the following formula.
Sampling Distribution of (n − 1) s2/σ2 If the population from which the sample is selected is 
(approximately) normally distributed, then
(n −1) s2
σ 2
has a chi-square distribution with n − 1 degrees of freedom. Note that it is not s2 but the above 
expression that has a chi-square distribution.
Confidence Interval for the Population Variance σ2 Assuming that the population from which 
the sample is selected is (approximately) normally distributed, we obtain the (1 − α)100% 
confidence interval for the population variance σ2 as
(n −1) s2
χ2
α∕2  to (n −1) s2
χ2
1−α∕2
where χ2
α∕2 and χ2
1 − α∕2 are obtained from the chi-square distribution table for α∕2 and 1 − α∕2 
areas in the right tail of the chi-square distribution curve, respectively, and for n − 1 degrees of 
freedom.
The confidence interval for the population standard deviation can be obtained by simply 
taking the positive square roots of the two limits of the confidence interval for the population 
variance.
www.ebook3000.com

470
Chapter 11 Chi-Square Tests
 
The procedure for making a confidence interval for σ2 involves the following three steps.
1. 
Take a sample of size n and compute s2 using the formula learned in Chapter 3. However, if 
n and s2 are given, then perform only steps 2 and 3.
2. 
Calculate α∕2 and 1 − α∕2. Find two values of χ2 from the chi-square distribution table 
(Table VI of Appendix B): one for α∕2 area in the right tail of the chi-square distribution 
curve and df = n − 1, and the second for 1 − α∕2 area in the right tail and df = n − 1.
3. 
Substitute all the values in the formula for the confidence interval for σ2 and simplify.
 
Example 11–9 illustrates the estimation of the population variance and population standard 
deviation.
EXAMPLE 11–9 
Weights of Packages of Cookies
One type of cookie manufactured by Haddad Food Company is Cocoa Cookies. The machine that 
fills packages of these cookies is set up in such a way that the average net weight of these pack-
ages is 32 ounces with a variance of .015 square ounce. From time to time the quality control 
inspector at the company selects a sample of a few such packages, calculates the variance of the 
net weights of these packages, and constructs a 95% confidence interval for the population vari-
ance. If either one of the two limits of this confidence interval is not in the interval .008 to .030, 
the machine is stopped and adjusted. A recently taken random sample of 25 packages from the 
production line gave a sample variance of .029 square ounce. Based on this sample information, 
do you think the machine needs an adjustment? Assume that the net weights of cookies in all 
packages are normally distributed.
Solution The following three steps are performed to estimate the population variance and to 
make a decision.
Step 1. From the given information, n = 25 and s2 = .029
Step 2. The confidence level is 1 − α = .95. Hence, α = 1 − .95 = .05. Therefore,
 α∕2 = .05∕2 = .025
 1 −α∕2 = 1 −.025 = .975
 df = n −1 = 25 −1 = 24
From Table VI of Appendix B,
χ2 for 24 df and .025 area in the right tail = 39.364
χ2 for 24 df and .975 area in the right tail = 12.401
These values are shown in Figure 11.9.
Constructing confidence 
intervals for σ2 and σ.
df = 24
12.401
Value of     1 −
/2
df = 24
39.364
1 −
= .975
2
2
2
α
2
= .025
2
α
Value of    /2
2
α
α
Figure 11.9 The values of χ2.

11.4 Inferences About the Population Variance
471
Step 3. The 95% confidence interval for σ2 is
 (n −1) s2
χ2
α2  to (n −1) s2
χ2
1−α∕2
 (25 −1)(.029)
39.364
 to (25 −1)(.029)
12.401
 .0177 to .0561
Thus, with 95% confidence, we can state that the variance for all packages of Cocoa Cookies lies 
between .0177 and .0561 square ounce. Note that the lower limit (.0177) of this confidence inter-
val is between .008 and .030, but the upper limit (.0561) is larger than .030 and falls outside the 
interval .008 to .030. Because the upper limit is larger than .030, we can state that the machine 
needs to be stopped and adjusted.
 
We can obtain the confidence interval for the population standard deviation σ by taking the 
positive square roots of the two limits of the above confidence interval for the population vari-
ance. Thus, a 95% confidence interval for the population standard deviation is
√.0177 to √.0561 or .133 to .237
Hence, the standard deviation of all packages of Cocoa Cookies is between .133 and .237 ounce 
at a 95% confidence level. 
◼ 
11.4.2 Hypothesis Tests About the Population Variance
A test of hypothesis about the population variance can be one-tailed or two-tailed. To make a test 
of hypothesis about σ2, we perform the same five steps we used earlier in hypothesis-testing 
examples. The procedure to test a hypothesis about σ2 discussed in this section is applied only 
when the population from which a sample is selected is (approximately) normally distributed.
 
Examples 11–10 and 11–11 illustrate the procedure for making tests of hypothesis about σ2.
EXAMPLE 11–10 
Weights of Packages of Cookies
One type of cookie manufactured by Haddad Food Company is Cocoa Cookies. The machine that 
fills packages of these cookies is set up in such a way that the average net weight of these pack-
ages is 32 ounces with a variance of .015 square ounce. From time to time the quality control 
inspector at the company selects a sample of a few such packages, calculates the variance of the 
net weights of these packages, and makes a test of hypothesis about the population variance. She 
always uses α = .01. The acceptable value of the population variance is .015 square ounce or less. 
If the conclusion from the test of hypothesis is that the population variance is not within the 
acceptable limit, the machine is stopped and adjusted. A recently taken random sample of 25 
packages from the production line gave a sample variance of .029 square ounce. Based on this 
sample information, do you think the machine needs an adjustment? Assume that the net weights 
of cookies in all packages are normally distributed.
Solution From the given information,
n = 25, α = .01, and s2 = .029
The population variance should not exceed .015 square ounce.
Performing a right-tailed test 
of hypothesis about σ2.
Test Statistic for a Test of Hypothesis About σ2 The value of the test statistic χ2 is calculated as
χ2 = (n −1) s2
σ2
where s2 is the sample variance, σ2 is the hypothesized value of the population variance, and 
n − 1 represents the degrees of freedom. The population from which the sample is selected is 
assumed to be (approximately) normally distributed.
www.ebook3000.com

472
Chapter 11 Chi-Square Tests
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
We are to test whether or not the population variance is within the acceptable limit. The 
population variance is within the acceptable limit if it is less than or equal to .015; otherwise, it 
is not. Thus, the two hypotheses are
 H0: σ2 ≤.015  (The population variance is within the acceptable limit.)
 H1: σ2 > .015  (The population variance exceeds the acceptable limit.)
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
Since the population is normally distributed, we will use the chi-square distribution to test a 
hypothesis about σ2.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The significance level is 1% and, because of the > sign in H1, the test is right-tailed. The 
rejection region lies in the right tail of the chi-square distribution curve with its area equal to .01. 
The degrees of freedom for a chi-square test about σ2 are n − 1; that is,
df = n −1 = 25 −1 = 24
From Table VI of Appendix B, the critical value of χ2 for 24 degrees of freedom and .01 area in 
the right tail is 42.980. This value is shown in Figure 11.10.
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
The value of the test statistic χ2 for the sample variance is calculated as follows:
χ2 = (n −1) s2
σ2
= (25 −1)(.029)
.015
= 46.400
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
The value of the test statistic χ2 = 46.400 is greater than the critical value of χ2 = 42.980 and 
falls in the rejection region. Consequently, we reject H0 and conclude that the population variance 
is not within the acceptable limit. The machine should be stopped and adjusted. 
◼ 
EXAMPLE 11–11 
Variance of GPAs of Students at a University
It is known that the variance of GPAs (with a maximum GPA of 4) of all students at a large 
university was .24 in 2014. A professor wants to determine whether the variance of the current 
GPAs of students at this university is different from .24. She took a random sample of 20 
students and found that the variance of their GPAs is .27. Using a 5% significance level, can 
you conclude that the current variance of the GPAs of students at this university is different 
from .24? Assume that the GPAs of all current students at this university are (approximately) 
normally distributed.
From H0
Conducting a two-tailed test of 
hypothesis about σ2.
 = .01
42.980
Critical value of 2
Do not reject H0
Reject H0
α
2
Figure 11.10 Rejection and nonrejection regions.

11.4 Inferences About the Population Variance
473
Solution From the given information,
n = 20, α = .05, and s2 = .27
The population variance was .24 in 2014.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
The null and alternative hypotheses are, respectively,
H0: σ2 = .24 (The population variance is not different from .24.)
H1: σ2 ≠.24 (The population variance is different from .24.)
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
Since the population of GPAs is normally distributed, we will use the chi-square distribution 
to test a hypothesis about σ2.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The significance level is 5%. The ≠ sign in H1 indicates that the test is two-tailed. The rejec-
tion region lies in both tails of the chi-square distribution curve with its total area equal to .05. 
Consequently, the area in each tail of the distribution curve is .025. The values of α∕2 and 
1 − α∕2 are, respectively,
α
2 = .05
2 = .025 and 1 −α
2 = 1 −.025 = .975
The degrees of freedom are
df = n −1 = 20 −1 = 19
From Table VI of Appendix B, the critical values of χ2 for 19 degrees of freedom and for α∕2 and 
1 − α∕2 areas in the right tail are
 χ2 for 19 df and .025 area in the right tail = 32.852
 χ2 for 19 df and .975 area in the right tail = 8.907
These two values are shown in Figure 11.11.
Corbis Digital Stock/©Corbis
Figure 11.11 Rejection and nonrejection regions.
Do not reject H0
Two critical values of 2
32.852
8.907
Reject H0
Reject H0
/2 = .025
/2 = .025
α
α
2
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
The value of the test statistic χ2 for the sample variance is calculated as follows:
χ2 = (n −1)s2
σ2
= (20 −1)(.27)
.24
= 21.375
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
The value of the test statistic χ2 = 21.375 is between the two critical values of χ2, 8.907 and 
32.852 and falls in the nonrejection region. Consequently, we fail to reject H0 and conclude that 
the population variance of the current GPAs of students at this university does not appear to be 
different from .24. 
◼ 
From H0
www.ebook3000.com

474
Chapter 11 Chi-Square Tests
 
Note that we can make a test of hypothesis about the population standard deviation σ using 
the same procedure as that for the population variance σ2. To make a test of hypothesis about σ, 
the only change will be mentioning the values of σ in H0 and H1. The rest of the procedure 
remains the same as in the case of σ2.
EXERCISES
APPLICATIONS
11.35 Sandpaper is rated by the coarseness of the grit on the paper. 
Sandpaper that is more coarse will remove material faster. Jobs that 
involve the final sanding of bare wood prior to painting or sanding in 
between coats of paint require sandpaper that is much finer. A manu-
facturer of sandpaper rated 220, which is used for the final preparation 
of bare wood, wants to make sure that the variance of the diameter of 
the particles in their 220 sandpaper does not exceed 2.0 micrometers. 
Fifty-one randomly selected particles are measured. The variance of 
the particle diameters is 2.13 micrometers. Assume that the distribu-
tion of particle diameter is approximately normal.
a. Construct the 95% confidence intervals for the population 
variance and standard deviation.
b. Test at a 2.5% significance level whether the variance of the 
particle diameters of all particles in 220-rated sandpaper is 
greater than 2.0 micrometers.
11.36 An auto manufacturing company wants to estimate the vari-
ance of miles per gallon for its auto model AST727. A random sample 
of 22 cars of this model showed that the variance of miles per gallon 
for these cars is .62. Assume that the miles per gallon for all such cars 
are (approximately) normally distributed.
a. Construct the 95% confidence intervals for the population 
variance and standard deviation.
b. Test at a 1% significance level whether the sample result indi-
cates that the population variance is different from .30.
11.37 The manufacturer of a certain brand of lightbulbs claims that 
the variance of the lives of these bulbs is 4200 square hours. A consumer 
agency took a random sample of 25 such bulbs and tested them. The vari-
ance of the lives of these bulbs was found to be 5200 square hours. Assume 
that the lives of all such bulbs are (approximately) normally distributed.
a. Make the 99% confidence intervals for the variance and stand-
ard deviation of the lives of all such bulbs.
b. Test at a 5% significance level whether the variance of such 
bulbs is different from 4200 square hours.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
11.31 A sample of certain observations selected from a normally 
distributed population produced a sample variance of 46. Construct a 
95% confidence interval for σ2 for each of the following cases and 
comment on what happens to the confidence interval of σ2 when the 
sample size increases.
a. n = 12  b. n = 16  c. n = 25
11.32 A sample of 25 observations selected from a normally distrib-
uted population produced a sample variance of 35. Construct a confi-
dence interval for σ2 for each of the following confidence levels and 
comment on what happens to the confidence interval of σ2 when the 
confidence level decreases.
a. 1 − α = .99
b. 1 − α = .95
c. 1 − α = .90
11.33 A sample of 21 observations selected from a normally distrib-
uted population produced a sample variance of 1.97.
a. Write the null and alternative hypotheses to test whether the 
population variance is greater than 1.75.
b. Using α = .025, find the critical value of χ2. Show the rejection 
and nonrejection regions on a chi-square distribution curve.
c. Find the value of the test statistic χ2.
d. Using a 2.5% significance level, will you reject the null 
hypothesis stated in part a?
11.34 A sample of 30 observations selected from a normally distrib-
uted population produced a sample variance of 5.8.
a. Write the null and alternative hypotheses to test whether the 
population variance is different from 6.0.
b. Using α = .05, find the critical value of χ2. Show the rejection 
and nonrejection regions on a chi-square distribution curve.
c. Find the value of the test statistic χ2.
d. Using a 5% significance level, will you reject the null hypoth-
esis stated in part a?
USES AND MISUSES...
1. DO NOT FEED THE ANIMALS
You are a wildlife enthusiast studying African wildlife: gnus, zebras, 
and gazelles. You know that a herd of each species will visit one of 
three watering places in a region every day, but you do not know the 
distribution of choices that the animals make or whether these 
choices are dependent. You have observed that the animals some-
times drink together and sometimes do not. A statistician offers to 
help and says that he will perform a test for independence of watering 
place choices based on your observations of the animals’ behavior 
over the past several months. The statistician performs some calcula-
tions and says that he has answered your question because his chi-
square test of the independence of watering place choices, at a 5% 
significance level, told him to reject the null hypothesis. He has also 
performed a goodness-of-fit test on the hypothesis that the animals 
are equally likely to choose any watering place, and he has rejected 
that hypothesis as well.

Glossary
475
outcomes per trial, (3) the trials are independent, and (4) the prob-
abilities of the various outcomes remain constant for each trial.
Observed frequencies The frequencies actually obtained from the 
performance of an experiment.
Test of homogeneity A test of the null hypothesis that the propor-
tions of elements that belong to different groups in two (or more) 
populations are similar.
Test of independence A test of the null hypothesis that two attrib-
utes of a population are not related.
Chi-square distribution A distribution, with degrees of freedom as 
the only parameter, that is skewed to the right for small df and looks 
like a normal curve for large df.
Expected frequencies The frequencies for different categories of a 
multinomial experiment or for different cells of a contingency table 
that are expected to occur when a given null hypothesis is true.
Goodness-of-fit test A test of the null hypothesis that the observed 
frequencies for an experiment follow a certain pattern or theoretical 
distribution.
Multinomial experiment An experiment with n trials for which 
(1) the trials are identical, (2) there are more than two possible 
Glossary
 
The statistician barely helped you. In the first case, you know a 
single piece of information: the choice of a watering place for the 
three groups of animals is dependent. Another way of stating the 
result is that your data indicate that the choice of watering places for 
at least one of the animals is not independent of the others. Perhaps 
the zebras get up early, and the gnus and gazelles follow, making the 
gnus and gazelles dependent on the choice of the zebras. Or perhaps 
the animals choose the watering place of the day independent of the 
other animals, but always avoid the watering place at which the lions 
are drinking. Regarding the goodness-of-fit test, all you know is that 
the hypothesis that the animals equally favor the three watering 
places was wrong. But you do not know what the expected distribu-
tion should be. In short, the rejection of the null hypothesis raises 
more questions than it answers.
2.  IS THERE A GENDER BIAS 
IN ADMISSIONS?
Categorical data analysis methods, such as a chi-square test for 
independence, are used quite often in analyzing employment and 
admissions data in discrimination cases. One of the more famous 
discrimination cases involved graduate admissions at the University 
of California, Berkeley, in 1973. The claim was that UC Berkeley was 
discriminating against women in their admissions decisions, as would 
seem to be the case based on the data in the following table.
 
Applicants 
Percentage Admitted
Male 
8442 
44%
Female 
4321 
35%
The p-value for the corresponding chi-square test of independence is 
approximately 1.1 × 10−22, so it would seem clear that there is statisti-
cal dependence between gender and graduate admission. However, 
although it is true that admission rates differed by gender, the fact that 
the University was found not guilty of discrimination against women 
might shock you.
 
In order to find out why the University was found not guilty, 
we need to introduce another variable into the study: program of 
study. When the various programs were considered separately, 
the following admission rates for the six largest programs were 
observed.
 
Men 
Women
 Department Applicants Admitted (%) Applicants Admitted (%)
 
A 
825 
62 
108 
82
 
B 
560 
63 
25 
68
 
C 
325 
37 
593 
34
 
D 
417 
33 
375 
35
 
E 
191 
28 
393 
24
 
F 
272 
6 
341 
7
As one can see, four of the six programs had nominally higher admis-
sion rates for women than for men. So, why is the overall acceptance 
rate higher for men than for women? Looking at Departments A and 
B, which had the highest acceptance rates, we notice that 1385 men 
(16.4% of all men) applied to those programs, while 133 women 
(3.1% of all women) applied to these programs. On the other hand, 
almost twice as many women as men applied to the programs with 
the lowest acceptance rates. Hence, the overall acceptance rate for 
each gender was affected by the programs to which they applied and 
the number who applied to those programs. Since a much higher per-
centage of men applied to programs with higher (overall) acceptance 
rates, the overall acceptance rate for men ended up being higher than 
the overall acceptance rate for women.
 
This result is an example of what is known as Simpson’s Paradox, 
which occurs when the inclusion of an additional variable (characteristic) 
reverses the conclusion made without that variable.
Source: P. J. Bickel, E. A. Hammel, and J. W. O’Connell (1975): Sex 
Bias in Graduate Admissions: Data From Berkeley. Science 187(4175): 
398–404.
www.ebook3000.com

476
Chapter 11 Chi-Square Tests
offenders to jail time. A sample of 180 recent shoplifting cases pro-
duced the following two-way table.
 
Jail 
Other Sentence
Judge Stark 
27 
65
Judge Rivera 
31 
57
Test at a 5% significance level whether the type of sentence for shop-
lifting depends on which judge tries the case.
11.43 According to a Gallup poll whose results were reported on 
October 22, 2013, American’s views on legalizing marijuana are 
changing. In that survey, American adults were asked whether mari-
juana should be legalized in America. Suppose in a recent survey, 600 
Americans were randomly selected from each of the four age groups 
listed in the table below. The frequencies of the responses for various 
age groups are listed in this table assuming that every person included 
in the survey responded yes or no.
 
Yes 
No
18 to 29 
402 
198
30 to 49 
372 
228
50 to 64 
336 
264
65+ 
270 
330
Test at a 1% significance level whether the proportion of Americans 
who support legalizing marijuana is the same for each of the age groups.
11.44 The recession and bad economic conditions of a few years ago 
forced many people to hold more than one job to make ends meet. 
A sample of 500 persons who held more than one job produced the 
following two-way table.
 
Single 
Married 
Other
Male 
72 
209 
39
Female 
33 
102 
45
Test at a 1% significance level whether gender and marital status are 
related for all people who hold more than one job.
11.45 A random sample of 100 persons was selected from each of 
four regions in the United States. These people were asked whether 
or not they support a certain farm subsidy program. The results of the 
survey are summarized in the following table.
 
Favor 
Oppose 
Uncertain
Northeast 
56 
33 
11
Midwest 
73 
23 
4
South 
67 
28 
5
West 
59 
35 
6
Using a 1% significance level, test the null hypothesis that the percent-
ages of people with different opinions are similar for all four regions.
11.38 In a Pew Research Center poll conducted December 3–8, 2013, 
American adults age 18 and older were asked if Christmas is more a 
religious or a cultural holiday for them. Of the respondents, 51% said 
Christmas is a religious holiday for them, 32% said it is a cultural 
holiday, and 17% gave other answers (www.pewforum.org). Assume 
that these results are true for the 2013 population of adults. Recently, 
a random sample of 1200 American adults age 18 and older was taken, 
and these adults were asked the same question. Their responses are 
presented in the following table.
Response 
Religious Holiday 
Cultural Holiday 
Other
Frequency 
660 
408 
132
Test at a 2.5% significance level whether the distribution of recent 
opinions is significantly different from that of the 2013 opinions.
11.39 In a Harris Poll conducted October 15–20, 2014, American 
adults were asked “to think ahead 2 to 5 years and assess if they feel 
solar energy will contribute to meeting our energy needs.” Of the 
respondents, 31% said solar energy will make a major contribution to 
meeting our energy needs within the next 2 to 5 years, 53% felt it will 
make a minor contribution, and 16% expected that it will make hardly 
any contribution at all (www.harrisinteractive.com). Assume that 
these results are true for the 2014 population of adults. Recently a 
random sample of 2000 American adults was selected and these adults 
were asked the same question. The results of the poll are presented in 
the following table.
 
Major  
Minor 
Hardly Any
Response 
Contribution 
Contribution 
Contribution
Frequency 
820 
920 
260
Test at a 2.5% significance level whether the current distribution of 
opinions to the said question is significantly different from that for the 
2014 opinions.
11.40 In a recent poll, American adults were asked, if they have a 
choice, would they prefer to live in a city, suburb, or countryside. The 
following table shows the frequencies for the three choices.
Response 
City 
Suburb 
Countryside
Frequency 
640 
790 
570
Test at a 1% significance level if these three places are equally pre-
ferred by American adults.
11.41 A randomly selected sample of 100 persons who suffer from 
allergies were asked during what season they suffer the most. The 
results of the survey are recorded in the following table.
Season 
Fall 
Winter 
Spring 
Summer
Persons allergic 
18 
13 
31 
38
Using a 1% significance level, test the null hypothesis that the propor-
tions of all allergic persons are equally distributed over the four seasons.
11.42 All shoplifting cases in the town of Seven Falls are randomly 
assigned to either Judge Stark or Judge Rivera. A citizens group wants 
to know whether either of the two judges is more likely to sentence the 
Supplementary Exercises

Advanced Exercises
477
millimeter or less. The quality control officer takes a sample of such 
ball bearings quite often and checks, using confidence intervals and 
tests of hypotheses, whether or not the variance of these bearings is 
within .025 square millimeter. If it is not, the machine is stopped and 
adjusted. A recently taken random sample of 23 ball bearings gave a 
variance of the diameters equal to .034 square millimeter.
a. Using a 5% significance level, can you conclude that the 
machine needs an adjustment? Assume that the diameters of 
all ball bearings have a normal distribution.
b. Construct a 95% confidence interval for the population variance.
11.52 A random sample of 25 students taken from a university gave 
the variance of their GPAs equal to .19.
a. Construct the 99% confidence intervals for the population vari-
ance and standard deviation. Assume that the GPAs of all stu-
dents at this university are (approximately) normally distributed.
b. The variance of GPAs of all students at this university was .13 
two years ago. Test at a 1% significance level whether the var-
iance of current GPAs at this university is different from .13.
11.53 The following are the prices (in dollars) of the same brand of 
camcorder found at eight stores in Los Angeles.
568  628  602  642  550  688  615  604
a. Using the formula from Chapter 3, find the sample variance, 
s2, for these data.
b. Make the 95% confidence intervals for the population variance 
and standard deviation. Assume that the prices of this cam-
corder at all stores in Los Angeles follow a normal distribution.
c. Test at a 5% significance level whether the population variance 
is different from 750 square dollars.
11.46 Construct the 98% confidence intervals for the population 
variance and standard deviation for the following data, assuming that 
the respective populations are (approximately) normally distributed.
a. n = 21, s2 = 9.2 
b. n = 17, s2 = 1.7
11.47 Construct the 95% confidence intervals for the population 
variance and standard deviation for the following data, assuming that 
the respective populations are (approximately) normally distributed.
a. n = 10, s2 = 7.2 
b. n = 18, s2 = 14.8
11.48 A sample of 21 units selected from a normally distributed 
population produced a variance of 9.2. Test at a 5% significance level 
if the population variance is different from 6.5.
11.49 A sample of 10 units selected from a normally distributed 
population produced a variance of 7.2. Test at a 1% significance level 
if the population variance is greater than 4.2.
11.50 In 2014, the variance of the ages of all workers at a large com-
pany that has more than 30,000 workers was 133. A recent random 
sample of 25 workers selected from this company showed that the 
variance of their ages is 112.
a. Using a 2.5% significance level, can you conclude that the 
current variance of the ages of workers at this company is 
lower than 133? Assume that the ages of all current workers at 
this company are (approximately) normally distributed.
b. Construct a 98% confidence intervals for the variance and the 
standard deviation of the ages of all current workers at this 
company.
11.51 A company manufactures ball bearings that are supplied to 
other companies. The machine that is used to manufacture these ball 
bearings produces them with a variance of diameters of .025 square 
of red and green marbles are the same for each of the five boxes. You 
sample 50 times, with replacement, from each of the five boxes and 
observe 20, 14, 23, 30, and 18 red marbles, respectively. Can you 
conclude that the five boxes have the same proportion of red and 
green marbles? Use a .05 level of significance.
11.57 You have collected data on a variable, and you want to deter-
mine if a normal distribution is a reasonable model for these data. The 
following table shows how many of the values fall within certain 
ranges of z values for these data.
Category 
Count
z score below −2 
48
z score from −2 to less than −1.5 
67
z score from −1.5 to less than −1 
146
z score from −1 to less than −0.5 
248
z score from −0.5 to less than 0 
187
z score from 0 to less than 0.5 
125
z score from 0.5 to less than 1 
88
z score from 1 to less than 1.5 
47
z score from 1.5 to less than 2 
25
z score of 2 or above 
19
Total 
1000
Perform a hypothesis test to determine if a normal distribution is an 
appropriate model for these data. Use a significance level of 5%.
11.54 A chemical manufacturing company wants to locate a hazardous 
waste disposal site near a city of 50,000 residents and has offered 
substantial financial inducements to the city. Two hundred adults (110 
women and 90 men) who are residents of this city are chosen at random. 
Sixty percent of these adults oppose the site, 32% are in favor, and 8% 
are undecided. Of those who oppose the site, 65% are women; of those 
in favor, 62.5% are men. Using a 5% level of significance, can you 
conclude that opinions on the disposal site are dependent on gender?
11.55 A student who needs to pass an elementary statistics course 
wonders whether it will make a difference if she takes the course with 
instructor A rather than instructor B. Observing the final grades given 
by each instructor in a recent elementary statistics course, she finds 
that Instructor A gave 48 passing grades in a class of 52 students and 
Instructor B gave 44 passing grades in a class of 54 students. Assume 
that these classes and grades make simple random samples of all 
classes and grades of these instructors.
a. Compute the value of the standard normal test statistic z of 
Section 10.5.3 for the data and use it to find the p-value when 
testing for the difference between the proportions of passing 
grades given by these instructors.
b. Construct a 2 × 2 contingency table for these data. Compute 
the value of the χ2 test statistic for the test of independence 
and use it to find the p-value.
c. How do the test statistics in parts a and b compare? How do the 
p-values for the tests in parts a and b compare? Do you think 
this is a coincidence, or do you think this will always happen?
11.56 Each of five boxes contains a large (but unknown) number of 
red and green marbles. You have been asked to find if the proportions 
Advanced Exercises
www.ebook3000.com

478
Chapter 11 Chi-Square Tests
Test at the 1% significance level whether the current distribution of 
opinions is different from the 2014 distribution.
11. The following table gives the two-way classification of 1000 
persons who have been married at least once. They are classified by 
educational level and marital status.
 
Educational Level
 
Less Than  
High School 
Some 
College
 
High School 
Degree 
College 
Degree
Divorced 
173 
158 
95 
53
Never divorced 
162 
126 
110 
123
Test at a 1% significance level whether educational level and ever 
being divorced are dependent.
12. A researcher wanted to investigate if people who belong to dif-
ferent income groups are homogeneous with regard to playing lot-
teries. She took a sample of 600 people from the low-income group, 
another sample of 500 people from the middle-income group, and a 
third sample of 400 people from the high-income group. All these 
people were asked whether they play the lottery often, sometimes, or 
never. The results of the survey are summarized in the following table.
 
Income Group
 
Low 
Middle 
High
Play often 
174 
163 
90
Play sometimes 
286 
217 
120
Never play 
140 
120 
190
Using a 5% significance level, can you reject the null hypothesis that 
the percentages of people who play the lottery often, sometimes, and 
never are the same for each income group?
13. The owner of an ice cream parlor is concerned about consistency 
in the amount of ice cream his servers put in each cone. He would like 
the variance of all such cones to be no more than .25 square ounce. 
He decides to weigh each double-dip cone just before it is given to 
the customer. For a sample of 20 double-dip cones, the weights were 
found to have a variance of .48 square ounce. Assume that the weights 
of all such cones are (approximately) normally distributed.
a. Construct the 99% confidence intervals for the population 
variance and the population standard deviation.
b. Test at a 1% significance level whether the variance of the 
weights of all such cones exceeds .25 square ounce.
 1. The random variable χ2 assumes only
a. positive  b. nonnegative  c. nonpositive values
 2. The parameter(s) of the chi-square distribution is (are)
a. degrees of freedom  b. df and n  c. χ2
 3. Which of the following is not a characteristic of a multinomial 
experiment?
a. It consists of n identical trials.
b. There are k possible outcomes for each trial and k > 2.
c. The trials are random.
d. The trials are independent.
e. The probabilities of outcomes remain constant for each trial.
 4. The observed frequencies for a goodness-of-fit test are
a. the frequencies obtained from the performance of an experi-
ment
b. the frequencies given by the product of n and p
c. the frequencies obtained by adding the results of a and b
 5. The expected frequencies for a goodness-of-fit test are
a. the frequencies obtained from the performance of an experi-
ment
b. the frequencies given by the product of n and p
c. the frequencies obtained by adding the results of a and b
 6. The degrees of freedom for a goodness-of-fit test are
a. n − 1  b. k − 1 
c. n + k − 1
 7. The chi-square goodness-of-fit test is always
a. two-tailed  b. left-tailed  c. right-tailed
 8. To apply a goodness-of-fit test, the expected frequency of each 
category must be at least
a. 10  b. 5  c. 8
 9. The degrees of freedom for a test of independence are
a. (R − 1)(C − 1)  b. n − 2  c. (n − 1)(k − 1)
10. In a Gallup poll conducted August 7–10, 2014, American adults 
aged 18 and older were asked, “If you were taking a new job and 
had your choice of a boss, would you prefer to work for a man or a 
woman?” Of the respondents, 33% said that they would prefer a male 
boss, 20% said a female boss, 46% said it would not make a difference 
to them, and 1% had no opinion (www.gallup.com). Suppose these 
results are true for the 2014 population. Recently, 1500 randomly se-
lected American adults were asked the same question. The following 
table contains the frequency distribution that resulted from this survey.
Response 
Male Boss Female Boss No Difference No Opinion
Frequency 
480 
360 
630 
30
Self-Review Test
Note: The Mini-Projects are located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Mini-Projects
Note: The Decide for Yourself feature is located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Decide for Yourself

Technology Instructions
479
TI-84 Color/TI-84
CHAPTER 11
TECHNOLOGY 
INSTRUCTIONS
The TI-84 Color Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for the TI-84 Plus C 
color graphing calculator running the 4.0 operating system. Some screens, menus, and 
functions will be slightly different in older operating systems. The TI-84 and TI-84 Plus can 
perform all of the same functions but will not have the “Color” option referenced in some of 
the menus.
Performing a Chi-Square Goodness of Fit Test 
for Example 11–3 of the Text
1. Enter the observed counts from Example 11–3 into list 1 and the corresponding expected 
counts in list 2.
2. Select STAT > TESTS > χ2 GOF-Test.
3. Use the following settings in the χ2 GOF-Test menu (see Screen 11.1):
• Type L1 at the Observed prompt.
• Type L2 at the Expected prompt.
• Type 4 at the df prompt.
• Select any desired color at the Color prompt.
4. Highlight Calculate, and press ENTER.
5. The output includes the test statistic and the p-value. The values of (O-E)2/E are stored in a 
list named CNTRB. (See Screen 11.2.)
Now compare the χ2-value with the critical value of χ2 or the p-value from Screen 11.2 with 
α and make a decision.
Performing a Chi-Square Independence/Homogeneity 
Test for Example 11–6 of the Text
1. Select 2nd > X−1 > EDIT > [A]. Press ENTER.
2. Use the following settings in the matrix editor (see Screen 11.3):
• At the Matrix[A] prompt, type 2 for the number of rows and 3 for the number of columns. 
Use the arrow keys to navigate between these numbers.
• Enter the observed counts from Example 11–6 into the matrix. Use ENTER and the arrow 
keys to move between cells.
3. Select STAT > TESTS > χ2-Test.
4. Use the following settings in the χ2-Test menu (see Screen 11.4):
• Enter [A] at the Observed prompt.
 
Note: To enter the name for the matrix [A], select 2nd > X−1 > NAMES > [A].
• Enter [B] at the Expected prompt.
Note: Complete TI-84, Minitab, and Excel manuals are available for download at the textbook’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Screen 11.1
Screen 11.2
Screen 11.3
Screen 11.4
www.ebook3000.com

480
Chapter 11 Chi-Square Tests
 
Note: To enter the name for the matrix [B], select 2nd > X−1 > NAMES > [B].
• Select any desired color at the Color prompt.
5. Highlight Calculate, and press ENTER.
6. The output includes the test statistic and the p-value. (See Screen 11.5.)
Now compare the χ2-value with the critical value of χ2 or the p-value from Screen 11.5 with 
α and make decision.
Screen 11.5
Minitab
The Minitab Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Minitab version 17. Some 
screens, menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Minitab.
Performing a Chi-Square Goodness of Fit Test 
for Example 11–3 of the Text
1. Enter the observed counts from Example 11–3 into C1.
2. Select Stat > Tables > Chi-Square Goodness-of-Fit Test (One Variable).
3.  Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen 
(see Screen 11.6):
• Select Observed counts and type C1 in the box.
• Select Equal proportions at the Test submenu.
 
 Note: If the alternative hypothesis does not specify equal proportions, go to the 
worksheet and type the proportions in C2. Return to the dialog box, select Specific 
proportions at the Test submenu, and type C2 in the box.
4. Click OK.
5.  The output, including the test statistic and p-value, will be displayed in the 
Session window. (See Screen 11.7.)
 
 Note: By default, Minitab will also generate two different bar graphs: one of the 
observed and expected counts and another of the (O-E)2/E values, which are called the 
contributions to the Chi-Square statistic. These graphs are not shown here.
Now compare the χ2-value with the critical value of χ2 or the p-value from 
Screen 11.7 with α and make a decision.
Performing a Chi-Square Independence/Homogeneity 
Test for Example 11–6 of the Text
1.  Enter the contingency table from Example 11–6 into the first two rows of C1 
through C3. (See Screen 11.8.)
2. Select Stat > Tables > Chi-Square Test for Association.
3.  Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen 
(see Screen 11.8):
• Select Summarized data in a two-way table from the drop-down menu.
 
 Note: For raw data in C1 and C2, select Raw data (categorical variables) from the drop-
down menu, type C2 in the Rows box, and C1 in the Columns box. Then go to step 4.
• Type C1-C3 in the Columns containing the table box.
Screen 11.6
Screen 11.7
Screen 11.8

Technology Instructions
481
4. Click OK.
5. The output, including the test statistic and p-value, will be displayed in the Session 
window. (See Screen 11.9.)
Now compare the χ2-value with the critical value of χ2 or the p-value from Screen 11.9 
with α and make a decision.
Testing a Hypothesis About σ2 for Example 11–10 of the Text
1. Select Stat > Basic Statistics > 1 Variance.
2. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Select Sample variance from the drop-down menu.
 
 Note: If you have the data in a column, select One or more samples, each in a column, type the 
column name in the next box, and move to step 3 below.
• Type 25 in the Sample size box.
• Type .029 in the Sample variance box.
• Check the Perform hypothesis test checkbox.
• Select Hypothesized variance from the drop-down menu.
• Type .015 in the Value box.
3. Select Options and use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Type 95 in the Confidence level box.
• Select Variance > hypothesized variance from the Alternative hypothesis drop-down menu.
4. Click OK in both dialog boxes.
5. The output, including the test statistic and p-value, will be displayed in the Session window. 
The output also includes a confidence interval, but it is a one-sided confidence interval, 
which is beyond the scope of this text.
Screen 11.9
Excel
The Excel Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Excel 2013. Some screens, 
menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Excel. To enable some of the 
advanced Excel functions, you must enable the Data Analysis Add-In for Excel.
Performing a Chi-Square Goodness of Fit Test 
for Example 11–3 of the Text
1. In a new worksheet, enter the following text into the indicated cells (see Screen 11.10):
• Type Observed in cell A1, Expected in cell B1, and Contribution in cell C1.
• Type Chi-square in cell E1 and p-value in cell E2.
2. Enter the observed counts in cells A2-A6 and the expected counts in cells B2-B6. 
(See Screen 11.10.)
3. Enter the formula =(A2-B2)^2/B2 in cell C2. Copy the formula from cell C2 to cells C3-C6. 
(See Screen 11.10.)
4. Enter the formula =SUM(C2:C6) in cell F1. The output is the value of the test statistic. 
(See Screen 11.10.)
Screen 11.10
www.ebook3000.com

482
Chapter 11 Chi-Square Tests
5. Enter the formula =CHISQ.DIST.RT(F1,4) in cell F2. The output is the p-value. 
(See Screen 11.10.)
 
Note: In this formula, 4 is the degrees of freedom. Adjust this value as needed for other tests.
Now compare the χ2-value with the critical value of χ2 or the p-value from Screen 11.10 with 
α and make a decision.
Performing a Chi-Square Independence/Homogeneity 
Test for Example 11–6 of the Text
1.  In a new worksheet, enter Observed in cell A1, Expected in cell E1, and p-value in cell I1. 
(See Screen 11.11.)
2.  Enter the observed counts in cells A2-C3 and the expected counts in cells E2-G3. 
(See Screen 11.11.)
3. Enter the formula =CHISQ.TEST(A2:C3,E2:G3) in cell J1. The output is the p-value. 
(See Screen 11.11.)
Now compare the p-value from Screen 11.11 with α and make a decision.
Screen 11.11
Test at a 1% significance level whether gender and marital status are 
dependent for all persons aged 18 years and older.
TA11.3 Two samples, one of 3000 students from urban high schools 
and another of 2000 students from rural high schools, were taken. 
These students were asked if they have ever smoked. The following 
table lists the summary of the results.
 
Urban 
Rural
Have never smoked 
1448 
1228
Have smoked 
1552 
772
Using a 5% significance level, test the null hypothesis that the propor-
tions of urban and rural students who have smoked and who have 
never smoked are homogeneous.
TA11.4 Refer to Data Set IV on the Manchester Road Race that 
accompanies this text (see Appendix A). Select a random sample of 
500 participants. Perform a hypothesis test with the null hypothesis 
that the gender of a participant (listed in column 6) is independent of 
whether the person is from Connecticut or not from Connecticut 
(listed in column 9).
TA11.1 In the Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index poll conducted 
January 1 to June 23, 2014, American adults were asked about their 
exercise habits. One of the questions asked was, “In the last seven 
days, on how many days did you exercise for 30 or more minutes?” Of 
the respondents, 14% said every day, 23% said four to six days, 34% 
said one to three days, and 29% said none (www.gallup.com). Assume 
that the Gallup-Healthways results were true for all American adults 
in 2014. Suppose a recent random sample of 2000 American adults 
produced the frequencies given in the following table.
Exercise Category 
Every day 
4 to 6 days 
1 to 3 days 
None
Number of People 
320 
370 
720 
590
Test at a 5% significance level whether the current distribution of 
exercise frequency differs from that of 2014.
TA11.2 A sample of 4000 persons aged 18 years and older produced 
the following two-way classification table:
 
Men 
Women
Single 
531 
357
Married 
1375 
1179
Widowed 
55 
195
Divorced 
139 
169
TECHNOLOGY ASSIGNMENTS

483
483
CHAPTER12
Chapter 10 described the procedures that are used to test hypotheses about the difference between 
two population means using the normal and t distributions. Also described in that chapter were the 
hypothesis-testing procedures for the difference between two population proportions using the normal 
distribution. Then, Chapter 11 explained the procedures that are used to test hypotheses about the 
equality of more than two population proportions using the chi-square distribution.
This chapter explains how to test the null hypothesis that the means of more than two populations 
are equal. For example, suppose that teachers at a school have devised three different methods to 
teach arithmetic. They want to find out if these three methods produce different mean scores. Let μ1, 
μ2, and μ3 be the mean scores of all students who will be taught by Methods I, II, and III, respectively. 
To test whether or not the three teaching methods produce the same mean, we test the null hypothesis
H0: μ1 = μ2 = μ3 (All three population means are equal.)
against the alternative hypothesis
H1: Not alll three population means are equal.
We use the analysis of variance procedure to perform such a test of hypothesis.
JGI/Jamie Grill/Getty Images, Inc.
Trying something new can be risky, and there can be uncertainty about the results. Suppose a school 
district plans to test three different methods for teaching arithmetic. After teachers implement these dif-
ferent methods for a semester, administrators want to know if the mean scores of students taught with 
these three different methods are all the same. What data will they require and how will they test for this 
equality of more than two means? (See Examples 12–2 and 12–3.)
12.1 The F Distribution
12.2 One-Way Analysis of 
Variance
Analysis of Variance
www.ebook3000.com

484
Chapter 12 Analysis of Variance
Note that the analysis of variance procedure can be used to compare two population means. 
However, the procedures learned in Chapter 10 are more efficient for performing tests of hypothesis 
about the difference between two population means; the analysis of variance procedure, to be dis-
cussed in this chapter, is used to compare three or more population means.
An analysis of variance test is performed using the F distribution. First, the F distribution is 
described in Section 12.1 of this chapter. Then, Section 12.2 discusses the application of the one-way 
analysis of variance procedure to perform tests of hypothesis.
Like the chi-square distribution, the shape of a particular F distribution1 curve depends on the 
number of degrees of freedom. However, the F distribution has two numbers of degrees of freedom: 
degrees of freedom for the numerator and degrees of freedom for the denominator. These 
two numbers representing two types of degrees of freedom are the parameters of the F distribution. 
Each combination of degrees of freedom for the numerator and for the denominator gives a 
different F distribution curve. The values of an F distribution are denoted by F, which assumes 
only nonnegative values. Like the normal, t, and chi-square distributions, the F distribution is a 
continuous distribution. The shape of an F distribution curve is skewed to the right, but the 
skewness decreases as both numbers of degrees of freedom increase.
12.1 The F Distribution
1The F distribution is named after Sir Ronald Fisher.
The F Distribution 
1. The F distribution is continuous and skewed to the right.
2. The F distribution has two numbers of degrees of freedom: df for the numerator and df for 
the denominator.
3. The units (the values of the F-variable) of an F distribution, denoted by F, are nonnegative.
 
For an F distribution, degrees of freedom for the numerator and degrees of freedom for the 
denominator are usually written as follows:
df = (8, 14)
First number denotes the 
df for the numerator
Second number denotes the 
df for the denominator
 
Figure 12.1 shows three F distribution curves for three sets of degrees of freedom for the 
numerator and for the denominator. In the figure, the first number gives the degrees of freedom 
associated with the numerator, and the second number gives the degrees of freedom associated 
with the denominator. We can observe from this figure that as both degrees of freedom increase, 
the peak of the curve moves to the right; that is, the skewness decreases.
Figure 12.1 Three F distribution 
curves.
F
df = (1, 3)
df = (7, 6)
df = (12, 40)

12.1 The F Distribution
485
 
Table VII in Appendix B lists the values of F for the F distribution. To read Table VII, we 
need to know three quantities: the degrees of freedom for the numerator, the degrees of freedom 
for the denominator, and an area in the right tail of an F distribution curve. Note that the F distri-
bution table (Table VII) is read only for an area in the right tail of the F distribution curve. Also 
note that Table VII has four parts. These four parts give the F values for areas of .01, .025, .05, 
and .10, respectively, in the right tail of the F distribution curve. We can make the F distribution 
table for other values in the right tail. Example 12–1 illustrates how to read Table VII.
EXAMPLE 12–1 
Find the F value for 8 degrees of freedom for the numerator, 14 degrees of freedom for the 
denominator, and .05 area in the right tail of the F distribution curve.
Solution To find the required value of F, we use the portion of Table VII of Appendix B that 
corresponds to .05 area in the right tail of the F distribution curve. The relevant portion of that 
table is shown here as Table 12.1. To find the required F value, we locate 8 in the row for degrees 
of freedom for the numerator (at the top of Table VII) and 14 in the column for degrees of free-
dom for the denominator (the first column on the left side in Table VII). The entry where the 
column for 8 and the row for 14 intersect gives the required F value. This value of F is 2.70, as 
shown in Table 12.1 and Figure 12.2. The F value obtained from this table for a test of hypothesis 
is called the critical value of F.
Reading the F 
distribution table.
Degrees of Freedom for 
the Denominator
The F value for 8 df for the numerator, 
14 df for the denominator, and .05 area in 
the right tail
Table 12.1 Obtaining the F Value From Table VII
 
Degrees of Freedom for the Numerator
 
 
1 
2 
. . . 
8 
. . . 
100
 1 
161.5 
199.5 
. . . 
238.9 
. . . 
253.0
 2 
18.51 
19.00 
. . . 
19.37 
. . . 
19.49
 . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
 . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
 14 
4.60 
3.74 
. . . 
2.70 
. . . 
2.19
 . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
 . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . .
 100 
3.94 
3.09 
. . . 
2.03 
. . . 
1.39
.05
The required F value
df = (8, 14)
2.70
0
F
Figure 12.2 The value of F from 
Table VII for 8 df for the numerator, 
14 df for the denominator, and .05 
area in the right tail.
◼
12.3 Find the critical value of F for the following.
a. df = (2, 6) and area in the right tail = .025
b. df = (6, 6) and area in the right tail = .025
c. df = (15, 6) and area in the right tail = .025
12.4 Determine the critical value of F for the following.
a. df = (6, 12) and area in the right tail = .01
EXERCISES
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
12.1 Describe the main characteristics of an F distribution.
12.2 Find the critical value of F for the following.
a. df = (3, 3) and area in the right tail = .05
b. df = (3, 10) and area in the right tail = .05
c. df = (3, 30) and area in the right tail = .05
www.ebook3000.com

486
Chapter 12 Analysis of Variance
b. df = (6, 40) and area in the right tail = .01
c. df = (6, 100) and area in the right tail = .01
12.5 Find the critical value of F for an F distribution with df = 
(3, 12) and
a. area in the right tail = .05 
b. area in the right tail = .10
12.6 Find the critical value of F for an F distribution with .025 area 
in the right tail and
a. df = (4, 11)  
b. df = (15, 3)
As mentioned in the beginning of this chapter, the analysis of variance procedure is used to test the 
null hypothesis that the means of three or more populations are the same against the alternative 
hypothesis that not all population means are the same. The analysis of variance procedure can 
be used to compare two population means. However, the procedures learned in Chapter 10 are 
more efficient for performing tests of hypotheses about the difference between two population 
means; the analysis of variance procedure is used to compare three or more population means.
 
Reconsider the example of teachers at a school who have devised three different methods to 
teach arithmetic. They want to find out if these three methods produce different mean scores. Let 
μ1, μ2, and μ3 be the mean scores of all students who are taught by Methods I, II, and III, respec-
tively. To test if the three teaching methods produce different means, we test the null hypothesis
H0: μ1 = μ2 = μ3 (All three population means are equal.)
against the alternative hypothesis
H1: Not all three population means are equal.
 
One method to test such a hypothesis is to test the three hypotheses H0: μ1 = μ2, H0: μ1 = μ3, 
and H0: μ2 = μ3 separately using the procedure discussed in Chapter 10. Besides being time con-
suming, such a procedure has other disadvantages. First, if we reject even one of these three 
hypotheses, then we must reject the null hypothesis H0: μ1 = μ2 = μ3. Second, combining the 
Type I error probabilities for the three tests (one for each test) will give a very large Type I error 
probability for the test H0: μ1 = μ2 = μ3. Hence, we should prefer a procedure that can test the 
equality of three means in one test. The ANOVA, short for analysis of variance, provides such a 
procedure. It is used to compare three or more population means in a single test. Note that if the 
null hypothesis is rejected, it does not necessarily imply that all three of the means are different 
or unequal. It could imply that one mean is different from the other two means, or that all three 
means are different, or that two means are significantly different from each other, but neither is 
significantly different from the third mean.
12.2 One-Way Analysis of Variance
ANOVA ANOVA is a procedure that is used to test the null hypothesis that the means of three or 
more populations are all equal.
 
This section discusses the one-way ANOVA procedure to make tests by comparing the 
means of several populations. By using a one-way ANOVA test, we analyze only one factor or 
variable. For instance, in the example of testing for the equality of mean arithmetic scores of 
students taught by each of the three different methods, we are considering only one factor, which 
is the effect of different teaching methods on the scores of students. Sometimes we may analyze 
the effects of two factors. For example, if different teachers teach arithmetic using these three 
methods, we can analyze the effects of teachers and teaching methods on the scores of students. 
This is done by using a two-way ANOVA. The procedure under discussion in this chapter is 
called the analysis of variance because the test is based on the analysis of variation in the data 
obtained from different samples. The application of one-way ANOVA requires that the following 
assumptions hold true.

12.2 One-Way Analysis of Variance
487
 
For instance, in the example about three methods of teaching arithmetic, we first assume 
that the scores of all students taught by each method are approximately normally distributed. 
Second, the means of the distributions of scores for the three teaching methods may or may not 
be the same, but all three distributions have the same variance, σ2. Third, when we take samples 
to perform an ANOVA test, these samples are drawn independently and randomly from three 
different populations.
 
The ANOVA test is applied by calculating two estimates of the variance, σ2, of population 
distributions: the variance between samples and the variance within samples. The variance 
between samples is also called the mean square between samples or MSB. The variance within 
samples is also called the mean square within samples or MSW.
 
The variance between samples, MSB, gives an estimate of σ2 based on the variation among 
the means of samples taken from different populations. For the example of three teaching meth-
ods, MSB will be based on the values of the mean scores of three samples of students taught by 
three different methods. If the means of all populations under consideration are equal, the means 
of the respective samples will still be different, but the variation among them is expected to be 
small, and, consequently, the value of MSB is expected to be small. However, if the means of 
populations under consideration are not all equal, the variation among the means of the respective 
samples is expected to be large, and, consequently, the value of MSB is expected to the large.
 
The variance within samples, MSW, gives an estimate of σ2 based on the variation within the 
data of different samples. For the example of three teaching methods, MSW will be based on the 
scores of individual students included in the three samples taken from three populations. The 
concept of MSW is similar to the concept of the pooled standard deviation, sp, for two samples 
discussed in Section 10.2 of Chapter 10.
 
The one-way ANOVA test is always right-tailed with the rejection region in the right 
tail of the F distribution curve. The hypothesis-testing procedure using ANOVA involves the 
same five steps that were used in earlier chapters. The next subsection explains how to calculate 
the value of the test statistic F for an ANOVA test.
12.2.1 Calculating the Value of the Test Statistic
The value of the test statistic F for a test of hypothesis using ANOVA is given by the ratio of two 
variances, the variance between samples (MSB) and the variance within samples (MSW).
Assumptions of One-Way ANOVA The following assumptions must hold true to use one-way 
ANOVA.
1. The populations from which the samples are drawn are approximately normally distributed.
2. The populations from which the samples are drawn have the same variance (or standard 
deviation).
3. The samples drawn from different populations are random and independent.
Test Statistic F for a One-Way Anova Test The value of the test statistic F for an ANOVA test 
is calculated as
F = Variance between samples
Variance within samples  or  MSB
MSW
The calculation of MSB and MSW is explained in Example 12–2.
 
Example 12–2 describes the calculation of MSB, MSW, and the value of the test statistic F. 
Since the basic formulas are laborious to use, they are not presented here. We have used only the 
short-cut formulas to make calculations in this chapter.
www.ebook3000.com

488
Chapter 12 Analysis of Variance
EXAMPLE 12–2 
Three Methods of Teaching Arithmetic
Fifteen fourth-grade students were randomly assigned to three groups to experiment with three 
different methods of teaching arithmetic. At the end of the semester, the same test was given to 
all 15 students. The following table gives the scores of students in the three groups.
Method I
Method II
Method III
48
55
84
73
85
68
51
70
95
65
69
74
87
90
67
Calculate the value of the test statistic F. Assume that all the required assumptions mentioned in 
Section 12.2 hold true.
Solution In ANOVA terminology, the three methods used to teach arithmetic are called treat-
ments. The table contains data on the scores of fourth-graders included in the three samples. 
Each sample of students is taught by a different method. Let
 x = the score of a student
 k = the number of different samples (or treatments)
 ni = the size of sample i
 Ti = the sum of the values in sample i
 n = the number of values in all samples = n1 + n2 + n3 + · · ·
 ∑x = the sum of the values in all samples = T1 + T2 + T3 + · · ·
 ∑x2 = the sum of the squares of the values in all samples
 
To calculate MSB and MSW, we first compute the between-samples sum of squares, 
denoted by SSB, and the within-samples sum of squares, denoted by SSW. The sum of SSB 
and SSW is called the total sum of squares and is denoted by SST; that is,
SST = SSB + SSW
The values of SSB and SSW are calculated using the following formulas.
Calculating the value of the 
test statistic F.
PhotoDisc, Inc./Getty Images
Between- and Within-Samples Sums of Squares The between-samples sum of squares, 
denoted by SSB, is calculated as
SSB = (
T 2
1
n1
+ T 2
2
n2
+ T 2
3
n3
+ · · ·) −(∑x)2
n
The within-samples sum of squares, denoted by SSW, is calculated as
SSW = ∑x2 −(
T 2
1
n1
+ T 2
2
n2
+ T 2
3
n3
+ · · ·)
 
Table 12.2 lists the scores of 15 students who were taught arithmetic by each of the three 
different methods; the values of T1, T2, and T3; and the values of n1, n2, and n3.
 
In Table 12.2, T1 is obtained by adding the five scores of the first sample. Thus, T1 = 48 + 
73 + 51 + 65 + 87 = 324. Similarly, the sums of the values in the second and third samples give 
T2 = 369 and T3 = 388, respectively. Because there are five observations in each sample, 
n1 = n2 = n3 = 5. The values of ∑  x and n are, respectively,
 ∑x = T1 + T2 + T3 = 324 + 369 + 388 = 1081
 n = n1 + n2 + n3 = 5 + 5 + 5 = 15

12.2 One-Way Analysis of Variance
489
To calculate ∑x2, we square all the scores included in all three samples and then add them. Thus,
 ∑x2 = (48)2 + (73)2 + (51)2 + (65)2 + (87)2 + (55)2 + (85)2 + (70)2
        
 + (69)2 + (90)2 + (84)2 + (68)2 + (95)2 + (74)2 + (67)2
 = 80,709
 
Substituting all the values in the formulas for SSB and SSW, we obtain the following values 
of SSB and SSW:
 SSB = (
(324)2
5
+ (369)2
5
+ (388)2
5
) −(1081)2
15
= 432.1333
 SSW = 80,709 −(
(324)2
5
+ (369)2
5
+ (388)2
5
) = 2372.8000
The value of SST is obtained by adding the values of SSB and SSW. Thus,
SST = 432.1333 + 2372.8000 = 2804.9333
 
The variance between samples (MSB) and the variance within samples (MSW) are calcu-
lated using the following formulas.
Table 12.2
 Method I 
Method II 
Method III
 
48 
55 
84
 
73 
85 
68
 
51 
70 
95
 
65 
69 
74
 
87 
90 
67
 T1 = 324 
T2 = 369 
T3 = 388
 n1 = 5 
 n2 = 5 
 n3 = 5
Calculating the Values of MSB and MSW MSB and MSW are calculated as, respectively,
MSB = SSB
k −1 and MSW = SSW
n −k
where k − 1 and n − k are, respectively, the df for the numerator and the df for the denominator 
for the F distribution. Remember, k is the number of different samples.
Consequently, the variance between samples is
MSB = SSB
k −1 = 432.1333
3 −1
= 216.0667
The variance within samples is
MSW = SSW
n −k = 2372.8000
15 −3
= 197.7333
The value of the test statistic F is given by the ratio of MSB and MSW. Therefore,
F = MSB
MSW = 216.0667
197.7333 = 1.09
 
For convenience, all these calculations are often recorded in a table called the ANOVA table. 
Table 12.3 gives the general form of an ANOVA table.
www.ebook3000.com

490
Chapter 12 Analysis of Variance
 
Substituting the values of the various quantities into Table 12.3, we write the ANOVA table 
for our example as Table 12.4.
Table 12.3 ANOVA Table
Source of 
Degrees of 
Sum of 
Mean 
Value of the
Variation 
Freedom 
Squares 
Square 
Test Statistic
Between 
k − 1 
SSB 
MSB
Within 
n − k 
SSW 
MSW 
F = MSB
MSW
Total 
n − 1 
SST
Table 12.4 ANOVA Table for Example 12–2
Source of 
Degrees of 
Sum of 
Mean 
Value of the
Variation 
Freedom 
Squares 
Square 
Test Statistic
Between 
 2 
432.1333 
216.0667
Within 
12 
2372.8000 
197.7333 
F = 216.0667
197.7333 = 1.09
Total 
14 
2804.9333
12.2.2 One-Way ANOVA Test
Now suppose we want to test the null hypothesis that the mean scores are equal for all three 
groups of fourth-graders taught by three different methods of Example 12–2 against the alterna-
tive hypothesis that the mean scores of all three groups are not equal. Note that in a one-way 
ANOVA test, the null hypothesis is that the means for all populations are equal. The alternative 
hypothesis is that not all population means are equal. In other words, the alternative hypothesis 
states that at least one of the population means is different from the others. Example 12–3 dem-
onstrates how we use the one-way ANOVA procedure to make such a test.
EXAMPLE 12–3 
Three Methods of Teaching Arithmetic
Reconsider Example 12–2 about the scores of 15 fourth-grade students who were randomly 
assigned to three groups in order to experiment with three different methods of teaching arithme-
tic. At a 1% significance level, can we reject the null hypothesis that the mean arithmetic score of 
all fourth-grade students taught by each of these three methods is the same? Assume that all the 
assumptions required to apply the one-way ANOVA procedure hold true.
Solution To make a test about the equality of the means of three populations, we follow our 
standard procedure with five steps.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
Let μ1, μ2, and μ3 be the mean arithmetic scores of all fourth-grade students who are taught, 
respectively, by Methods I, II, and III. The null and alternative hypotheses are
H0: μ1 = μ2 = μ3 (The mean scores of the three groups are all equal.)
H1: Not all three means are equal.
Note that the alternative hypothesis states that at least one population mean is different from the 
other two.
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
Because we are comparing the means for three normally distributed populations and all of 
the assumption required to apply ANOVA procedure are satisfied, we use the F distribution to 
make this test.
Performing a one-way ANOVA 
test: all samples the same size.
◼
PhotoDisc, Inc./Getty Images

12.2 One-Way Analysis of Variance
491
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The significance level is .01. Because a one-way ANOVA test is always right-tailed, the area 
in the right tail of the F distribution curve is .01, which is the rejection region in Figure 12.3.
 
Next we need to know the degrees of freedom for the numerator and the denominator. In 
our example, the students were assigned to three different methods. As mentioned earlier, these 
methods are called treatments. The number of treatments is denoted by k. The total number of 
observations in all samples taken together is denoted by n. Then, the number of degrees of 
freedom for the numerator is equal to k − 1 and the number of degrees of freedom for the 
denominator is equal to n − k. In our example, there are 3 treatments (methods of teaching) and 
15 total observations (total number of students) in all 3 samples. Thus,
Degrees of freedom for the numerator = k −1 = 3 −1 = 2
Degrees of freedom for the denominator = n −k = 15 −3 = 12
From Table VII of Appendix B, we find the critical value of F for 2 df for the numerator, 12 df for 
the denominator, and .01 area in the right tail of the F distribution curve. This value of F is 6.93, 
as shown in Figure 12.3.
 
Thus, we will fail to reject H0 if the calculated value of the test statistic F is less than 6.93, 
and we will reject H0 if it is 6.93 or larger.
Figure 12.3 Critical value of F for 
df = (2, 12) and α = .01.
= .01
α
Critical value of F
Do not reject H0
Reject H0
0
F
6.93
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
We computed the value of the test statistic F for these data in Example 12–2. This value is
F = 1.09
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
Because the value of the test statistic F = 1.09 is less than the critical value of F = 6.93, it 
falls in the nonrejection region. Hence, we fail to reject the null hypothesis, and conclude that 
the means of the three populations seem to be equal. In other words, the three different methods 
of teaching arithmetic do not seem to affect the mean scores of students. The difference in the 
three mean scores in the case of our three samples may have occurred only because of sampling 
error. 
◼ 
 
In Example 12–3, the sample sizes were the same for all treatments. Example 12–4 describes 
a case in which the sample sizes are not the same for all treatments.
EXAMPLE 12–4 
Bank Tellers Serving Customers
From time to time, unknown to its employees, the research department at Post Bank observes 
various employees for their work productivity. Recently this department wanted to check whether 
the four tellers at a branch of this bank serve, on average, the same number of customers per hour. 
The research manager observed each of the four tellers for a certain number of hours. The follow-
ing table gives the number of customers served by the four tellers during each of the observed 
hours.
Performing a one-way ANOVA 
test: all samples not the same 
size.
www.ebook3000.com

492
Chapter 12 Analysis of Variance
Teller A
Teller B
Teller C
Teller D
19
14
11
24
21
16
14
19
26
14
21
21
24
13
13
26
18
17
16
20
13
18
© YinYang/iStockphoto
 = .05
Reject H0
Do not reject H0
Critical value of F
3.16
0
F
α
Figure 12.4 Critical value of F for 
df = (3, 18) and α = .05.
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
First we calculate SSB and SSW. Table 12.5 lists the number of customers served by each of 
the four tellers during the selected hours; the values of T1, T2, T3, and T4; and the values of n1, n2, 
n3, and n4.
At a 5% significance level, test the null hypothesis that the mean number of customers served per 
hour by each of these four tellers is the same. Assume that all the assumptions required to apply 
the one-way ANOVA procedure hold true.
Solution To make a test about the equality of means of four populations, we follow our stand-
ard procedure with five steps.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
Let μ1, μ2, μ3, and μ4 be the mean number of customers served per hour by tellers A, B, C, 
and D, respectively. The null and alternative hypotheses are, respectively,
H0: μ1 = μ2 = μ3 = μ4  (The mean number of customers served per hour by 
each of the four tellers is the same.)
H1: Not all four population means are equal.
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
Because we are testing for the equality of four means for four normally distributed popula-
tions and all of the assumptions required to apply ANOVA procedure hold true, we use the F 
distribution to make the test.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The significance level is .05, which means the area in the right tail of the F distribution 
curve is .05. In this example, there are 4 treatments (tellers) and 22 total observations in all four 
samples. Thus,
Degrees of freedom for the numerator = k −1 = 4 −1 = 3
Degrees of freedom for the denominator = n −k = 22 −4 = 18
The critical value of F from Table VII for 3 df for the numerator, 18 df for the denominator, and 
.05 area in the right tail of the F distribution curve is 3.16. This value is shown in Figure 12.4.

12.2 One-Way Analysis of Variance
493
 
The values of ∑x and n are, respectively,
 ∑x = T1 + T2 + T3 + T4 = 108 + 87 + 93 + 110 = 398
 n = n1 + n2 + n3 + n4 = 5 + 6 + 6 + 5 = 22
The value of ∑x2 is calculated as follows:
 ∑x2 = (19)2 + (21)2 + (26)2 + (24)2 + (18)2 + (14)2 + (16)2 + (14)2
 + (13)2 + (17)2 + (13)2 + (11)2 + (14)2 + (21)2 + (13)2
 + (16)2 + (18)2 + (24)2 + (19)2 + (21)2 + (26)2 + (20)2
 = 7614
 
Substituting all the values in the formulas for SSB and SSW, we obtain the following values 
of SSB and SSW:
 SSB = (
T 2
1
n1
+ T 2
2
n2
+ T 2
3
n3
+ T 2
4
n4 ) −(∑x)2
n
 = (
(108)2
5
+ (87)2
6
+ (93)2
6
+ (110)2
5
) −(398)2
22
= 255.6182
 SSW = ∑x2 −(
T 2
1
n1
+ T 2
2
n2
+ T 2
3
n3
+ T 2
4
n4 )
 = 7614 −(
(108)2
5
+ (87)2
6
+ (93)2
6
+ (110)2
5
) = 158.2000
Hence, the variance between samples MSB and the variance within samples MSW are, respectively,
 MSB = SSB
k −1 = 255.6182
4 −1
= 85.2061
 MSW = SSW
n −k = 158.2000
22 −4
= 8.7889
The value of the test statistic F is given by the ratio of MSB and MSW, which is
F = MSB
MSW = 85.2061
8.7889 = 9.69
Writing the values of the various quantities in the ANOVA table, we obtain Table 12.6 given on 
the next page.
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
Because the value of the test statistic F = 9.69 is greater than the critical value of F = 3.16, 
it falls in the rejection region. Consequently, we reject the null hypothesis, and conclude that the 
mean number of customers served per hour by each of the four tellers is not the same. In other 
Table 12.5
 Teller A 
Teller B 
Teller C 
Teller D
 
19 
14 
11 
24
 
21 
16 
14 
19
 
26 
14 
21 
21
 
24 
13 
13 
26
 
18 
17 
16 
20
 
 
13 
18
 T1 = 108 
T2 = 87 
T3 = 93 
T4 = 110
 n1 = 5 
n2 = 6 
n3 = 6 
n4 = 5
www.ebook3000.com

494
Chapter 12 Analysis of Variance
words, for at least one of the tellers, the mean number of customers served per hour is different 
from that of the other three tellers. 
◼ 
Note: What if the Sample Size is Large and the Number 
of df Are Not in the F Distribution Table?
In this chapter, we used the F distribution to perform tests of hypothesis about the equality of 
population means for three or more populations. If we use technology to perform such tests, it 
does not matter how large the df (degrees of freedom) for the numerator and denominator are. 
However, when we use the F distribution table (Table VII in Appendix B), sometime we may not 
find the exact df for the numerator and/or for the denominator in this table, especially when either 
of these df are large. In such cases, we use the following alternative.
 
If the number of df is not given in the table, use the closest number of df that falls below the 
actual value of df. For example, if an ANOVA problem has 4 df for the numerator and 47 df for 
the denominator, we will use 4 df for the numerator and 40 df for the denominator to obtain the 
critical value of F from the table. As long as the number of df for the denominator is 3 or larger, 
the critical values of F become smaller as the numbers of df increase. Hence, whenever the 
observed value of F falls in the rejection region for a smaller number of df, it will fall in the 
rejection region for the larger number of df also.
Table 12.6 ANOVA Table for Example 12–4
Source of 
Degrees of 
Sum of 
Mean 
Value of the
Variation 
Freedom 
Squares 
Square 
Test Statistic
Between 
 3 
255.6182 
85.2061
Within 
18 
158.2000 
 8.7889 
F = 85.2061
8.7889 = 9.69
Total 
21 
413.8182
EXERCISES
c. Using the one-way ANOVA procedure, test at a 1% signifi-
cance level whether the means of the populations from which 
these samples are drawn are all equal.
d. Are the conclusions reached in parts b and c the same?
12.10 The following ANOVA table, based on information obtained 
for three samples selected from three independent populations that 
are normally distributed with equal variances, has a few missing 
values.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
12.7 Briefly explain when a one-way ANOVA procedure is used to 
make a test of hypothesis.
12.8 Describe the assumptions that must hold true to apply the one-
way analysis of variance procedure to test hypotheses.
12.9 Consider the following data obtained for two samples selected 
at random from two populations that are independent and normally 
distributed with equal variances.
Sample I
Sample II
32
27
26
35
31
33
20
40
27
38
34
31
a. Calculate the means and standard deviations for these samples 
using the formulas from Chapter 3.
b. Using the procedure learned in Section 10.2 of Chapter 10, 
test at a 1% significance level whether the means of the popu-
lations from which these samples are drawn are all equal.
Source of 
Degrees of 
Sum of 
Mean 
Value of the
Variation 
Freedom 
Squares 
Square 
Test Statistic
Between 
2 
 
19.2813
Within 
 
89.3677 
 
F = _____ =
Total 
12
a. Find the missing values and complete the ANOVA table.
b. Using α = .01, what is your conclusion for the test with the 
null hypothesis that the means of the three populations are all 
equal against the alternative hypothesis that the means of the 
three populations are not all equal?

12.2 One-Way Analysis of Variance
495
APPLICATIONS
For the following exercises assume that all the assumptions required 
to apply the one-way ANOVA procedure hold true.
12.11 A clothing store chain is having a sale based on the use of a 
coupon. The company is interested in knowing whether the wording 
of the coupon affects the number of units of the product purchased by 
customers. The company created four coupons for the same product, 
each with different wording. Four groups of 50 customers each were 
selected at random. Group 1 received the first version of the coupon; 
Group 2 received the second version; and so on. The units of the 
product purchased by each customer were recorded. The following 
ANOVA table contains some of the values from the analysis.
Business
Computer Science
Engineering
208
156
126
162
113
275
240
281
363
180
128
146
148
305
298
312
147
392
176
232
292
At a 5% significance level, can you reject the null hypothesis that the 
mean time taken to find their first full-time job for all May 2014 grad-
uates in these fields is the same?
12.14 A consumer agency wanted to find out if the mean time taken 
by each of three brands of medicines to provide relief from a headache 
is the same. The first drug was administered to six randomly selected 
patients, the second to four randomly selected patients, and the third 
to five randomly selected patients. The following table gives the time 
(in minutes) taken by each patient to get relief from a headache after 
taking the medicine.
Drug I
Drug II
Drug III
25
15
44
38
21
39
42
19
54
65
25
58
47
73
52
At a 2.5% significance level, will you reject the null hypothesis that 
the mean time taken to provide relief from a headache is the same for 
each of the three drugs?
12.15 A large company buys thousands of lightbulbs every year. 
The company is currently considering four brands of lightbulbs to 
choose from. Before the company decides which lightbulbs to buy, it 
wants to investigate if the mean lifetimes of the four types of light-
bulbs are the same. The company’s research department randomly 
selected a few bulbs of each type and tested them. The following table 
lists the number of hours (in thousands) that each of the bulbs in each 
brand lasted before being burned out.
Brand I
Brand II
Brand III
Brand IV
23
19
23
26
24
23
27
24
19
18
25
21
26
24
26
29
22
20
23
28
23
22
21
24
25
19
27
28
At a 2.5% significance level, test the null hypothesis that the mean 
lifetime of bulbs for each of these four brands is the same.
Source of 
Degrees of 
Sum of 
Mean 
Value of the
Variation 
Freedom 
Squares 
Square 
Test Statistic
Between
Within 
 
75127.856 
 
F = _____ =
Total 
 
77478.291
Assume that the four populations are normally distributed with equal 
variances.
a. Find the missing values and complete the ANOVA table.
b. What are the appropriate null and alternative hypotheses for 
this analysis? Using α = .05, what is your conclusion about 
the equality of population means for all four coupons?
12.12 A local “pick-your-own” farmer decided to grow blueberries. 
The farmer purchased and planted eight plants of each of the four differ-
ent varieties of highbush blueberries. The yield (in pounds) of each plant 
was measured in the upcoming year to determine whether the average 
yields were different for at least two of the four plant varieties. The 
yields of these plants of the four varieties are given in the following table.
Berkeley
5.13
5.36
5.20
5.15
4.96
5.14
5.54
5.22
Duke
5.31
4.89
5.09
5.57
5.36
4.71
5.13
5.30
Jersey
5.20
4.92
5.44
5.20
5.17
5.24
5.08
5.13
Sierra
5.08
5.30
5.43
4.99
4.89
5.30
5.35
5.26
a. We are to test the null hypothesis that the mean yields for all 
such bushes of the four varieties are the same. Write the null 
and alternative hypotheses.
b. What are the degrees of freedom for the numerator and the 
denominator?
c. Calculate SSB, SSW, and SST.
d. Show the rejection and nonrejection regions on the F distribu-
tion curve for α = .01.
e. Calculate the between-samples and within-samples variances.
f. What is the critical value of F for α = .01?
g. What is the calculated value of the test statistic F?
h. Write the ANOVA table for this exercise.
i. Will you reject the null hypothesis stated in part a at a signifi-
cance level of 1%?
12.13 A university employment office wants to compare the time 
taken by graduates with three different majors to find their first full-
time job after graduation. The following table lists the time (in days) 
taken to find their first full-time job after graduation for a random 
sample of eight business majors, seven computer science majors, and 
six engineering majors who graduated in May 2014.
www.ebook3000.com

496
Chapter 12 Analysis of Variance
USES AND MISUSES...
DO N0T BE LATE
Imagine that working at your company requires that staff travel fre-
quently. You want to determine if the on-time performance of any one 
airline is sufficiently different from that of the remaining airlines to 
warrant a preferred status with your company. The local airport Web 
site publishes the scheduled and actual departure and arrival times 
for the four airlines that service it. You decide to perform an ANOVA 
test on the mean delay times for all airline carriers at the airport. The 
null hypothesis here is that the mean delay times for Airlines A, B, C, 
and D are all the same. The results of the ANOVA test tell you not to 
reject the null hypothesis: All airline carriers have the same mean 
departure and arrival delay times, so that adopting a preferred status 
based on the on-time performance is not warranted.
 
When your boss tells you to redo your analysis, you should not 
be surprised. The choice to study flights only at the local airport was 
a good one because your company should be concerned about the 
performance of an airline at the most convenient airport. A regional 
airport will have a much different on-time performance profile than a 
large hub airport. By mixing both arrival and departure data, however, 
you violated the assumption that the populations are normally distrib-
uted. For arrival data, this assumption could be valid: The influence of 
high-altitude winds, local weather, and the fact that the arrival time is 
an estimate in the first place result in a distribution of arrival times 
around the predicted arrival times. However, departure delays are not 
normally distributed. Because a flight does not leave before its depar-
ture time but can leave after, departure delays are skewed to the right. 
As the statistical methods become more sophisticated, so do the 
assumptions regarding the characteristics of the data. Careful atten-
tion to these assumptions is required.
One-way ANOVA The analysis of variance technique that analyzes 
one variable only.
SSB The sum of squares between samples. Also called the sum of 
squares of the factor or treatment.
SST The total sum of squares given by the sum of SSB and SSW.
SSW The sum of squares within samples. Also called the sum of 
squares of errors.
Analysis of variance (ANOVA) A statistical technique used to test 
whether the means of three or more populations are all equal.
F distribution A continuous distribution that has two parameters: 
df for the numerator and df for the denominator.
Mean square between samples or MSB A measure of the variation 
among the means of samples taken from different populations.
Mean square within samples or MSW A measure of the variation 
within the data of all samples taken from different populations.
Glossary
is the same. He selected 15 chickens and randomly put each of them on 
one of these three brands of diet. The following table lists the weights 
(in pounds) gained by these chickens after a period of 1 month.
Brand A
Brand B
Brand C
 .8
 .6
1.2
1.3
1.3
 .8
1.7
 .6
 .7
 .9
 .4
1.5
 .6
 .7
 .9
a. At a 1% significance level, can you reject the null hypothesis 
that the mean weight gain for all chickens is the same for each 
of these three diets?
b. If you did not reject the null hypothesis in part a, explain the 
Type II error that you may have made in this case. Note that 
you cannot calculate the probability of committing a Type II 
error without additional information.
12.18 An ophthalmologist is interested in determining whether a golfer’s 
type of vision (far-sightedness, near-sightedness, no prescription) impacts 
how well he or she can judge distance. Random samples of golfers from 
For the following exercises, assume that all the assumptions required 
to apply the one-way ANOVA procedure hold true.
12.16 The following table lists the numbers of violent crimes reported 
to police on randomly selected days for this year. The data are taken 
from three large cities of about the same size.
City A
City B
City C
 5
 2
 8
 9
 4
12
12
 1
10
 3
13
 3
 9
 7
 9
 7
 6
14
13
Using a 5% significance level, test the null hypothesis that the mean 
number of violent crimes reported per day is the same for each of 
these three cities.
12.17 A farmer wants to test three brands of weight-gain diets for 
chickens to determine if the mean weight gain for each of these brands 
Supplementary Exercises

Advanced Exercises
497
these three groups (far-sightedness, near-sightedness, no prescription) 
were selected, and these golfers were blindfolded and taken to the same 
location on a golf course. Then each of them was asked to estimate the 
distance from this location to the pin at the end of the hole. The data (in 
yards) given in the following table represent how far off the estimates (let 
us call these errors) of these golfers were from the actual distance. A 
negative value implies that the person underestimated the distance, and a 
positive value implies that a person overestimated the distance.
Far-sighted
−11
−9
−8 −10
−3 −11
−8
1
−4
Near-sighted
−2
−5
−7
−8
−6
−9
2 −10 −10
No prescription
−5
1
0
4
3
−2
0
−8
At a 1% significance level can you reject the null hypothesis that the 
average errors in predicting distance for all golfers of the three different 
vision types are the same.
12.19 A resort area has three seafood restaurants, which employ stu-
dents during the summer season. The local chamber of commerce 
took a random sample of five servers from each restaurant and 
recorded the tips they received on a recent Friday night. The results 
(in dollars) of the survey are shown in the table below. Assume that 
the Friday night for which the data were collected is typical of all 
Friday nights of the summer season.
Barzini’s
Hwang’s
Jack’s
 97
67
 93
114
85
102
105
92
 98
 85
78
 80
120
90
 91
a. Would a student seeking a server’s job at one of these three 
restaurants reject the null hypothesis that the mean tips on a 
Friday night are the same for all three restaurants? Use a 5% 
level of significance.
b. What will your decision be in part a if the probability of mak-
ing a Type I error is zero? Explain.
12.20 A student who has a 9 a.m. class on Monday, Wednesday, and 
Friday mornings wants to know if the mean time taken by students to 
find parking spaces just before 9 a.m. is the same for each of these 
three days of the week. He randomly selects five weeks and records 
the time taken to find a parking space on Monday, Wednesday, and 
Friday of each of these five weeks. These times (in minutes) are given 
in the following table. Assume that this student is representative of all 
students who need to find a parking space just before 9 a.m. on these 
three days.
Monday
Wednesday
Friday
 6
 9
 3
12
12
 2
15
 5
10
14
14
 7
10
13
 5
At a 5% significance level, test the null hypothesis that the mean 
time taken to find a parking space just before 9 a.m. on Monday, 
Wednesday, and Friday is the same for all students.
12.22 The editor of an automotive magazine has asked you to com-
pare the mean gas mileages of city driving for three makes of com-
pact cars. The editor has made available to you one car of each of 
the three makes, three drivers, and a budget sufficient to buy gas 
and pay the drivers for approximately 500 miles of city driving for 
each car.
a. Explain how you would conduct an experiment and gather the 
data for a magazine article comparing the gas mileage.
b. Suppose that you wish to test the null hypothesis that the 
mean gas mileages of city driving are the same for all three 
makes. Outline the procedure for using your data to conduct 
this test. Assume that the assumptions for applying analysis of 
variance are satisfied.
12.23 Suppose you are performing a one-way ANOVA test with only 
the information given in the following table.
Source of 
Variation
Degrees of 
Freedom
Sum of 
Squares
Between
 4
 200
Within
45
3547
12.21 A billiards parlor in a small town is open just 4 days per 
week—Thursday through Sunday. Revenues vary considerably from 
day to day and week to week, so the owner is not sure whether some 
days of the week are more profitable than others. He takes random 
samples of 5 Thursdays, 5 Fridays, 5 Saturdays, and 5 Sundays from 
last year’s records and lists the revenues for these 20 days. His book-
keeper finds the average revenue for each of the four samples, and 
then calculates ∑x2. The results are shown in the following table. The 
value of the  ∑x2 came out to be 2,890,000.
Day
Mean Revenue ($)
Sample Size
Thursday
295
5
Friday
380
5
Saturday
405
5
Sunday
345
5
Assume that the revenues for each day of the week are normally distrib-
uted and that the standard deviations are equal for all four populations. 
At a 1% level of significance, can you reject the null hypothesis that the 
mean revenue is the same for each of the four days of the week?
Advanced Exercises
www.ebook3000.com

498
Chapter 12 Analysis of Variance
a. Suppose the sample sizes for all groups are equal. How many 
groups are there? What are the group sample sizes?
b. The p-value for the test of the equality of the means of all 
populations is calculated to be .6406. Suppose you plan to 
increase the sample sizes for all groups but keep them all 
equal. However, when you do this, the sum of squares within 
samples and the sum of squares between samples (magically) 
remain the same. What are the smallest sample sizes for 
groups that would make this result significant at a 5% signifi-
cance level?
10. A small college town has four pizza parlors that make deliver-
ies. A student doing a research paper for her business management 
class decides to compare how promptly the four parlors deliver. On 
six randomly chosen nights, she orders a large pepperoni pizza from 
each establishment, then records the elapsed time until the pizza is 
delivered to her apartment. Assume that her apartment is approxi-
mately the same distance from the four pizza parlors. The following 
table shows the times (in minutes) for these deliveries. Assume that 
all the assumptions required to apply the one-way ANOVA procedure 
hold true.
Tony’s
Luigi’s
Angelo’s
Kowalski’s
20.0
22.1
22.3
23.9
24.0
27.0
26.0
24.1
18.3
20.2
24.0
25.8
22.0
32.0
30.1
29.0
20.8
26.0
28.0
25.0
19.0
24.8
25.8
24.2
a. Using a 5% significance level, test the null hypothesis that 
the mean delivery time is the same for each of the four pizza 
parlors.
b. Is it a Type I error or a Type II error that may have been com-
mitted in part a? Explain.
 1. The F distribution is
a. continuous  b. discrete  c. neither
 2. The F distribution is always
a. symmetric
b. skewed to the right
c. skewed to the left
 3. The units of the F distribution, denoted by F, are always
a. nonpositive  b. positive  c. nonnegative
 4. The one-way ANOVA test analyzes only one
a. variable  b. population  c. sample
 5. The one-way ANOVA test is always
a. right-tailed  b. left-tailed  c. two-tailed
 6. For a one-way ANOVA with k treatments and n observations in 
all samples taken together, the degrees of freedom for the numerator 
are
a. k − 1  b. n − k  c. n − 1
 7. For a one-way ANOVA with k treatments and n observations in all 
samples taken together, the degrees of freedom for the denominator are
a. k − 1  b. n − k  c. n − 1
 8. The ANOVA test can be applied to compare
a. two or more population means
b. more than four population means only
c. more than three population means only
 9. Briefly describe the assumptions that must hold true to apply the 
one-way ANOVA procedure as mentioned in this chapter.
Self-Review Test
Note: The Mini-Projects are located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Mini-Projects
Note: The Decide for Yourself feature is located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Decide for Yourself

Technology Instructions
499
TI-84 Color/TI-84
CHAPTER 12
TECHNOLOGY 
INSTRUCTIONS
The TI-84 Color Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for the TI-84 Plus C 
color graphing calculator running the 4.0 operating system. Some screens, menus, and func-
tions will be slightly different in older operating systems. The TI-84 and TI-84 Plus can perform 
all of the same functions but will not have the “Color” option referenced in some of the menus.
Performing a One-Way ANOVA Test for Example 12–3 of the Text
1. Enter the data from Example 12–3 into list 1 (Method I), list 2 (Method II), and list 3 
(Method III).
2. Select STAT > TESTS > ANOVA. This will paste the ANOVA function to the home screen.
3. Complete the command ANOVA(L1,L2,L3) by following these steps (see Screen 12.1):
• Select 2nd > STAT > NAMES > L1.
• Press the comma key.
• Select 2nd > STAT > NAMES > L2.
• Press the comma key.
• Select 2nd > STAT > NAMES > L3.
• Press the right parenthesis key.
4. Press ENTER.
5. The output includes the test statistic and the p-value. Scroll down to see the rest of the 
ANOVA table. (See Screen 12.2.)
Now compare the F-value to the critical value of F or the p-value from Screen 12.2 with α and 
make a decision.
Note: Complete TI-84, Minitab, and Excel manuals are available for download at the textbook’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Screen 12.1
Screen 12.2
Screen 12.3
The Minitab Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Minitab version 17. Some 
screens, menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Minitab.
Performing a One-Way ANOVA Test for Example 12–3 of the Text
1. Enter the data from Example 12–3 into C1 (Method I), C2 (Method II), and C3 (Method III).
2. Select Stat > ANOVA > One-Way.
3. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen (see Screen 12.3):
• Select Response data are in a separate column for each factor level from the drop-down 
menu.
• Type C1-C3 in the Responses box.
Minitab
www.ebook3000.com

500
Chapter 12 Analysis of Variance
4. Select Options and use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Check the Assume equal variances checkbox.
• Type 99 in the Confidence level box.
• Select Two-sided from the Type of confidence interval dropdown menu.
5. Click OK in both dialog boxes.
6. The output, including the test statistic and p-value, will be displayed in the Session window. 
(See Screen 12.4.)
Note: By default, Minitab will show a graph called an interval plot, which is not shown here.
Now compare the F-value to the critical value of F or the p-value from Screen 12.4 with α and 
make a decision.
The Excel Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Excel 2013. Some screens, 
menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Excel. To enable some of the 
advanced Excel functions, you must enable the Data Analysis Add-In for Excel.
Performing a One-Way ANOVA Test for Example 12–3 of the Text
1. In a new worksheet, enter the data from Method I in cells A1-A5, Method II in cells B1-B5, 
and the data from Method III in cells C1-C5. (See Screen 12.5.)
2. Click DATA and then click Data Analysis Tools from the Analysis group.
3. Select Anova: Single Factor from the dialog box that appears on screen and then click OK.
4. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen (see Screen 12.5):
• Type A1:C5 in the Input Range box.
• Select Columns in the Grouped by field.
• Type .01 in the Alpha box.
• Select New Worksheet Ply from the Output options.
5. Click OK.
6. The output includes the test statistic and the p-value.
Now compare the F-value to the critical value of F or the p-value from Screen 12.6 with α and 
make a decision.
Excel
Screen 12.6
Screen 12.5
Screen 12.4

Technology Assignments
501
At a 2.5% significance level, test the null hypothesis that the mean 
lifetime of bulbs for each of these four brands is the same.
TA12.3 A local car dealership is interested in determining how suc-
cessful their salespeople are in turning a profit when selling a car. 
Specifically, they are interested in the average percentage of price 
markups earned on various car sales. The following table lists the per-
centages of price markups for a random sample of car sales by three 
salespeople at this dealership. Note that here the markups are calcu-
lated as follows. Suppose an auto dealer pays $19,000 for a car and 
lists the sale price as $25,000, which gives a markup of $6000. If the 
car is sold for $22,000, the markup percentage earned on this sale is 
50% ($3000 is half of $6000).
Ira
23.2
26.9
27.3
34.1
30.7
31.6
43.8
Jim
19.6
41.2
60.3
34.3
52.0
23.3
39.1
44.2
Kelly
52.3
50.0
53.4
37.9
26.4
41.1
25.2
41.2
Test at a 5% significance level whether the average markup percent-
age earned on all car sales is different for at least one of the three 
salespersons.
TA12.1 A consumer agency wanted to determine if the mean time 
taken by each of three brands of medicines to provide relief from a 
headache is the same. The first drug was administered to six randomly 
selected patients, the second to four randomly selected patients, and 
the third to five randomly selected patients. The following table gives 
the time (in minutes) taken by each patient to get relief from a head-
ache after taking the medicine.
Drug I
Drug II
Drug III
25
15
44
38
21
39
42
19
54
65
25
58
47
73
52
At a 2.5% significance level, will you conclude that the mean time 
taken to provide relief from a headache is different for at least one of 
the three drugs?
TA12.2 A large company buys thousands of lightbulbs every year. 
The company is currently considering four brands of lightbulbs to 
choose from. Before the company decides which lightbulbs to buy, it 
wants to investigate if the mean lifetimes of the four types of light-
bulbs are the same. The company’s research department randomly 
selected a few bulbs of each type and tested them. The following table 
lists the number of hours (in thousands) that each of the bulbs in each 
brand lasted before being burned out.
Brand I
Brand II
Brand III
Brand IV
23
19
23
26
24
23
27
24
19
18
25
21
26
24
26
29
22
20
23
28
23
22
21
24
25
19
27
28
TECHNOLOGY ASSIGNMENTS
www.ebook3000.com

502
CHAPTER13
This chapter considers the relationship between two variables in two ways: (1) by using regression 
analysis and (2) by computing the correlation coefficient. By using a regression model, we can
evaluate the magnitude of change in one variable due to a certain change in another variable. For 
example, an economist can estimate the amount of change in food expenditure due to a certain 
change in the income of a household by using a regression model. A sociologist may want to esti-
mate the increase in the crime rate due to a particular increase in the unemployment rate. Besides 
answering these questions, a regression model also helps predict the value of one variable for a given 
value of another variable. For example, by using the regression line, we can predict the (approximate) 
food expenditure of a household with a given income.
The correlation coefficient, on the other hand, simply tells us how strongly two variables are 
related. It does not provide any information about the size of the change in one variable as a result of 
a certain change in the other variable. For example, the correlation coefficient tells us how strongly 
income and food expenditure or crime rate and unemployment rate are related.
Are the heights and weights of persons related? Does a person’s weight depend on his/her height? If yes, 
what is the change in the weight of a person, on average, for every 1 inch increase in height? What is this 
rate of change for National Football League players? (See Case Study 13–1.)
Michael Zagaris/Getty Images Sport/Getty Images, Inc.
13.1 Simple Linear 
Regression
Case Study 13–1 Regression 
of Weights on Heights 
for NFL Players
13.2 Standard Deviation of 
Errors and Coefficient 
of Determination
13.3 Inferences About B
13.4 Linear Correlation
13.5 Regression Analysis: 
A Complete Example
13.6 Using the Regression 
Model
Simple Linear Regression

13.1 Simple Linear Regression
503
13.1 Simple Linear Regression
Only simple linear regression will be discussed in this chapter.1 In the next two subsections the 
meaning of the words simple and linear as used in simple linear regression is explained.
13.1.1 Simple Regression
Let us return to the example of an economist investigating the relationship between food expend-
iture and income. What factors or variables does a household consider when deciding how much 
money it should spend on food every week or every month? Certainly, income of the household 
is one factor. However, many other variables also affect food expenditure. For instance, the assets 
owned by the household, the size of the household, the preferences and tastes of household 
members, and any special dietary needs of household members are some of the variables that 
influence a household’s decision about food expenditure. These variables are called independent 
or explanatory variables because they all vary independently, and they explain the variation in 
food expenditures among different households. In other words, these variables explain why dif-
ferent households spend different amounts of money on food. Food expenditure is called the 
dependent variable because it depends on the independent variables. Studying the effect of two 
or more independent variables on a dependent variable using regression analysis is called multi-
ple regression. However, if we choose only one (usually the most important) independent 
variable and study the effect of that single variable on a dependent variable, it is called a simple 
regression. Thus, a simple regression includes only two variables: one independent and one 
dependent. Note that whether it is a simple or a multiple regression analysis, it always includes 
one and only one dependent variable. It is the number of independent variables that changes in 
simple and multiple regressions.
Simple Regression A regression model is a mathematical equation that describes the relation-
ship between two or more variables. A simple regression model includes only two variables: 
one independent and one dependent. The dependent variable is the one being explained, and the 
independent variable is the one that explains the variation in the dependent variable.
13.1.2 Linear Regression
The relationship between two variables in a regression analysis is expressed by a mathematical 
equation called a regression equation or model. A regression equation, when plotted, may 
assume one of many possible shapes, including a straight line. A regression equation that gives a 
straight-line relationship between two variables is called a linear regression model; otherwise, 
the model is called a nonlinear regression model. In this chapter, only linear regression models 
are studied.
Linear Regression A (simple) regression model that gives a straight-line relationship between 
two variables is called a linear regression model.
 
The two diagrams in Figure 13.1 show a linear and a nonlinear relationship between the 
dependent variable food expenditure and the independent variable income. A linear relationship 
between income and food expenditure, shown in Figure 13.1a, indicates that as income increases, 
the food expenditure always increases at a constant rate. A nonlinear relationship between income 
and food expenditure, as depicted in Figure 13.1b, shows that as income increases, the food 
expenditure increases, although, after a point, the rate of increase in food expenditure is lower for 
every subsequent increase in income.
1The term regression was first used by Sir Francis Galton (1822–1911), who studied the relationship between the 
heights of children and the heights of their parents.
www.ebook3000.com

504
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
 
The equation of a linear relationship between two variables x and y is written as
y = a + bx
Each set of values of a and b gives a different straight line. For instance, when a = 50 and b = 5, 
this equation becomes
y = 50 + 5x
 
To plot a straight line, we need to know two points that lie on that line. We can find two 
points on a line by assigning any two values to x and then calculating the corresponding values 
of y. For the equation y = 50 + 5x:
1. 
When x = 0, then y = 50 + 5(0) = 50.
2. 
When x = 10, then y = 50 + 5(10) = 100.
These two points are plotted in Figure 13.2. By joining these two points, we obtain the line rep-
resenting the equation y = 50 + 5x.
Figure 13.1 Relationship between food expenditure and 
income. (a) Linear relationship. (b) Nonlinear relationship.
Food expenditure
Linear
Income
(a)
Food expenditure
Nonlinear
Income
(b)
y = 50 + 5x
y = 100
x = 10  
50
100
150
x
y
5
10
15
y = 50
x = 0  
Figure 13.2 Plotting a linear equation.
 
Note that in Figure 13.2 the line intersects the y (vertical) axis at 50. Consequently, 50 is 
called the y-intercept. The y-intercept is given by the constant term in the equation. It is the value 
of y when x is zero.
 
In the equation y = 50 + 5x, 5 is called the coefficient of x or the slope of the line. It gives 
the amount of change in y due to a change of one unit in x. For example:
If x = 10, then y = 50 + 5(10) = 100.
If x = 11, then y = 50 + 5(11) = 105.
Hence, as x increases by 1 unit (from 10 to 11), y increases by 5 units (from 100 to 105). This is 
true for any value of x. Such changes in x and y are shown in Figure 13.3.
 
In general, when an equation is written in the form
y = a + bx
a gives the y-intercept and b represents the slope of the line. In other words, a represents the point 
where the line intersects the y-axis, and b gives the amount of change in y due to a change of one 
unit in x. Note that b is also called the coefficient of x.

13.1 Simple Linear Regression
505
13.1.3 Simple Linear Regression Model
In a regression model, the independent variable is usually denoted by x, and the dependent 
variable is usually denoted by y. The x variable, with its coefficient, is written on the right side 
of the = sign, whereas the y variable is written on the left side of the = sign. The y-intercept and 
the slope, which we earlier denoted by a and b, respectively, can be represented by any of the 
many commonly used symbols. Let us denote the y-intercept (which is also called the constant 
term) by A, and the slope (or the coefficient of the x variable) by B. Then, our simple linear 
regression model is written as
50
x
y
1
5
Change in y
Change in x
y-intercept
1
5
Figure 13.3 y-intercept and slope of a line.
 
Constant term or y-intercept 
         Slope
 
y = A + Bx 
(1)
 
Dependent variable 
Independent variable
In model (1), A gives the value of y for x = 0, and B gives the change in y due to a change of one 
unit in x.
 
Model (1) is called a deterministic model. It gives an exact relationship between x and y. 
This model simply states that y is determined exactly by x, and for a given value of x there is one 
and only one (unique) value of y.
 
However, in many cases the relationship between variables is not exact. For instance, if y is 
food expenditure and x is income, then model (1) would state that food expenditure is determined 
by income only and that all households with the same income spend the same amount on food. 
As mentioned earlier, however, food expenditure is determined by many variables, only one of 
which is included in model (1). In reality, different households with the same income spend dif-
ferent amounts of money on food because of the differences in the sizes of the household, the 
assets they own, and their preferences and tastes. Hence, to take these variables into considera-
tion and to make our model complete, we add another term to the right side of model (1). This 
term is called the random error term. It is denoted by ε (Greek letter epsilon). The complete 
regression model is written as
 
y = A + Bx + ε 
(2)
 
Random error term
 
The regression model (2) is called a probabilistic model or a statistical relationship.
Equation of a Regression Model In the regression model y = A + Bx + ε, A is called the 
y-intercept or constant term, B is the slope, and ε is the random error term. The dependent and 
independent variables are y and x, respectively.
www.ebook3000.com

506
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
 
The random error term ε is included in the model to represent the following two phenomena:
1. 
Missing or omitted variables. As mentioned earlier, food expenditure is affected by many 
variables other than income. The random error term ε is included to capture the effect of all 
those missing or omitted variables that have not been included in the model.
2. 
Random variation. Human behavior is unpredictable. For example, a household may have 
many parties during one month and spend more than usual on food during that month. The 
same household may spend less than usual during another month because it spent quite a bit 
of money to buy furniture. The variation in food expenditure for such reasons may be called 
random variation.
 
In model (2), A and B are the population parameters. The regression line obtained for 
model (2) by using the population data is called the population regression line. The values of A 
and B in the population regression line are called the true values of the y-intercept and slope, 
respectively.
 
However, population data are difficult to obtain. As a result, we almost always use sample 
data to estimate model (2). The values of the y-intercept and slope calculated from sample data 
on x and y are called the estimated values of A and B and are denoted by a and b, respectively. 
Using a and b, we write the estimated regression model as
 
yˆ = a + bx 
(3)
where yˆ (read as y hat) is the estimated or predicted value of y for a given value of x. Equa-
tion (3) is called the estimated regression model; it gives the regression of y on x.
Estimates of A and B In the model yˆ = a + bx, a and b, which are calculated using sample 
data, are called the estimates of A and B, respectively.
13.1.4 Scatter Diagram
Suppose we take a sample of seven households from a small city and collect information on 
their incomes and food expenditures for the last month. The information obtained (in hundreds 
of dollars) is given in Table 13.1.
Table 13.1  Incomes and Food Expenditures 
of Seven Households
 Income 
Food Expenditure
 
55 
14
 
83 
24
 
38 
13
 
61 
16
 
33 
 9
 
49 
15
 
67 
17
 
In Table 13.1, we have a pair of observations for each of the seven households. Each pair 
consists of one observation on income and a second on food expenditure. For example, the first 
household’s income for the last month was $5500 and its food expenditure was $1400. By plot-
ting all seven pairs of values, we obtain a scatter diagram or scatterplot. Figure 13.4 gives the 
scatter diagram for the data of Table 13.1. Each dot in this diagram represents one household. 
A scatter diagram is helpful in detecting a relationship between two variables. For example, by 
looking at the scatter diagram of Figure 13.4, we can observe that there exists a strong linear 
relationship between food expenditure and income. If a straight line is drawn through the points, 
the points will be scattered closely around the line.

13.1 Simple Linear Regression
507
 
As shown in Figure 13.5, a large number of straight lines can be drawn through the scatter 
diagram of Figure 13.4. Each of these lines will give different values for a and b of model (3).
 
In regression analysis, we try to find a line that best fits the points in the scatter diagram. 
Such a line provides a best possible description of the relationship between the dependent 
and independent variables. The least squares method, discussed in the next section, gives 
such a line. The line obtained by using the least squares method is called the least squares 
regression line.
Figure 13.4 Scatter diagram.
Food expenditure
First
household
Seventh 
household
Income
24
18
12
6
20
40
60
80
100
Scatter Diagram A plot of paired observations is called a scatter diagram.
Figure 13.5 Scatter diagram and straight lines.
Food expenditure
Income
24
18
12
6
20
40
60
80
100
13.1.5 Least Squares Regression Line
The value of y obtained for a member from the survey is called the observed or actual value 
of y. As mentioned earlier in this section, the value of y, denoted by yˆ, obtained for a given x by 
using the regression line is called the predicted value of y. The random error ε denotes the 
difference between the actual value of y and the predicted value of y for population data. For 
example, for a given household, ε is the difference between what this household actually spent 
on food during the last month and what is predicted using the population regression line. The 
ε is also called the residual because it measures the surplus (positive or negative) of actual food 
expenditure over what is predicted by using the regression model. If we estimate model (2) by 
using sample data, the difference between the actual y and the predicted y based on this estima-
tion cannot be denoted by ε. The random error for the sample regression model is denoted 
by e. Thus, e is an estimator of ε. If we estimate model (2) using sample data, then the value of e 
is given by
e = Actual food expenditure −Predicted food expenditure = y −yˆ
 
In Figure 13.6, e is the vertical distance between the actual position of a household and the 
point on the regression line. Note that in such a diagram, we always measure the dependent variable 
on the vertical axis and the independent variable on the horizontal axis.
 
The value of an error is positive if the point that gives the actual food expenditure is above 
the regression line and negative if it is below the regression line. The sum of these errors is always 
www.ebook3000.com

508
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
zero. In other words, the sum of the actual food expenditures for seven households included in the 
sample will be the same as the sum of the food expenditures predicted by the regression model. 
Thus,
∑e = ∑(y −yˆ) = 0
Hence, to find the line that best fits the scatter of points, we cannot minimize the sum of errors. 
Instead, we minimize the error sum of squares, denoted by SSE, which is obtained by adding 
the squares of errors. Thus,
SSE = ∑e2 = ∑(y −yˆ)2
The least squares method gives the values of a and b for model (3) such that the sum of squared 
errors (SSE) is minimum.
Food expenditure
Income
24
18
12
6
20
40
60
80
100
Regression line
Each of these vertical
distances represents e.
Figure 13.6 Regression line and random errors.
Error Sum of Squares (SSE) The error sum of squares, denoted by SSE, is
SSE = ∑e2 = ∑(y −yˆ)2
The values of a and b that give the minimum SSE are called the least squares estimates of A 
and B, and the regression line obtained with these estimates is called the least squares regression 
line.
The Least Squares Line For the least squares regression line yˆ = a + bx,
b =
SSxy
SSxx and a = y −bx
where               SSxy = ∑xy −(∑x)(∑y)
n
 and SSxx = ∑x2 −(∑x)2
n
and SS stands for “sum of squares.” The least squares regression line yˆ = a + bx is also called 
the regression of y on x.
 
The least squares values of a and b are computed using the formulas given above.2 These 
formulas are for estimating a sample regression line. Suppose we have access to a population data 
set. We can find the population regression line by using the same formulas with a little adaptation. 
If we have access to population data, we replace a by A, b by B, and n by N in these formulas, and 
2The values of SSxy and SSxx can also be obtained by using the following basic formulas:
SSxy = ∑(x −x)(y −y) and SSxx = ∑(x −x)2
However, these formulas take longer to make calculations.

13.1 Simple Linear Regression
509
use the values of ∑x, ∑y, ∑xy, and ∑x2 calculated for population data to make the required 
computations. The population regression line is written as
μy ∣x = A + Bx
where μy ∣x is read as “the mean value of y for a given x.” When plotted on a graph, the points on 
this population regression line give the average values of y for the corresponding values of x. 
These average values of y are denoted by μy ∣ x.
 
Example 13–1 illustrates how to estimate a regression line for sample data.
EXAMPLE 13–1 
Incomes and Food Expenditures of Households
Find the least squares regression line for the data on incomes and food expenditures of the seven 
households given in Table 13.1. Use income as an independent variable and food expenditure as 
a dependent variable.
Solution We are to find the values of a and b for the regression model yˆ = a + bx. Table 13.2 
shows the calculations required for the computation of a and b. We denote the independent 
variable (income) by x and the dependent variable (food expenditure) by y, both in hundreds of 
dollars.
Estimating the least squares 
regression line.
Table 13.2
 Income  
Food Expenditure
 
x 
y 
xy 
x2
 
55 
14 
770 
3025
 
83 
24 
1992 
6889
 
38 
13 
494 
1444
 
61 
16 
976 
3721
 
33 
 9 
297 
1089
 
49 
15 
735 
2401
 
67 
17 
1139 
4489
 ∑x = 386 
∑y = 108 
∑xy = 6403 
∑x2 = 23,058
 
The following steps are performed to compute a and b.
Step 1. Compute ∑x, ∑y, x, and y.
 ∑x = 386,  ∑y = 108
 x = ∑x∕n = 386∕7 = 55.1429
y = ∑y∕n = 108∕7 = 15.4286
Step 2. Compute ∑xy and ∑x2.
 
To calculate ∑xy, we multiply the corresponding values of x and y. Then, we sum all these 
products. The products of x and y are recorded in the third column of Table 13.2. To compute ∑x2, 
we square each of the x values and then add them. The squared values of x are listed in the fourth 
column of Table 13.2. From these calculations,
∑xy = 6403 and ∑x2 = 23,058
Step 3. Compute SSxy and SSxx.
 SSxy = ∑xy −(∑x)(∑y)
n
= 6403 −(386)(108)
7
= 447.5714
 SSxx = ∑x2 −(∑x)2
n
= 23,058 −(386)2
7
= 1772.8571
© Troels Graugaard/iStockphoto
www.ebook3000.com

510
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
Step 4. Compute a and b:
 b =
SSxy
SSxx
= 447.5714
1772.8571 = .2525
 a = y −bx = 15.4286 −(.2525)(55.1429) = 1.5050
 
Thus, our estimated regression model yˆ = a + bx is
yˆ = 1.5050 + .2525x
This regression line is called the least squares regression line. It gives the regression of food 
expenditure on income.
 
Note that we have rounded all calculations to four decimal places. We can round the values 
of a and b in the regression equation to two decimal places, but we do not do this here because 
we will use this regression equation for prediction and estimation purposes later. 
◼ 
 
Using this estimated regression model, we can find the predicted value of y for any specific 
value of x. For instance, suppose we randomly select a household whose monthly income is 
$6100, so that x = 61 (recall that x denotes income in hundreds of dollars). The predicted value 
of food expenditure for this household is
yˆ = 1.5050 + (.2525)(61) = $16.9075 hundred = $1690.75
In other words, based on our regression line, we predict that a household with a monthly income 
of $6100 is expected to spend $1690.75 per month on food. This value of yˆ can also be inter-
preted as a point estimator of the mean value of y for x = 61. Thus, we can state that, on average, 
all households with a monthly income of $6100 spend about $1690.75 per month on food.
 
In our data on seven households, there is one household whose income is $6100. The actual 
food expenditure for that household is $1600 (see Table 13.1). The difference between the actual 
and predicted values gives the error of prediction. Thus, the error of prediction for this household, 
which is shown in Figure 13.7, is
e = y −yˆ = 16 −16.9075 = −$.9075 hundred = −$90.75
Figure 13.7 Error of prediction.
Food expenditure
Income
24
18
12
6
20
40
60
80
100
Predicted = $1690.75
Actual = $1600
y = 1.5050 + .2525 x
^
Error
Therefore, the error of prediction is −$90.75. The negative error indicates that the predicted value 
of y is greater than the actual value of y. Thus, if we use the regression model, this household’s 
food expenditure is overestimated by $90.75.
13.1.6 Interpretation of a and b
How do we interpret a = 1.5050 and b = .2525 obtained in Example 13–1 for the regression of 
food expenditure on income? A brief explanation of the y-intercept and the slope of a regression 
line was given in Section 13.1.2. Below we explain the meaning of a and b in more detail.

13.1 Simple Linear Regression
511
Interpretation of a
Consider a household with zero income. Using the estimated regression line obtained in Exam-
ple 13–1, we get the predicted value of y for x = 0 as
yˆ = 1.5050 + .2525(0) = $1.5050 hundred = $150.50
Thus, we can state that a household with no income is expected to spend $150.50 per month on 
food. Alternatively, we can also state that the point estimate of the average monthly food expend-
iture for all households with zero income is $150.50. Note that here we have used yˆ as a point 
estimate of μy ∣ x. Thus, a = 150.50 gives the predicted or mean value of y for x = 0 based on the 
regression model estimated for the sample data.
 
However, we should be very careful when making this interpretation of a. In our sample of 
seven households, the incomes vary from a minimum of $3300 to a maximum of $8300. (Note 
that in Table 13.1, the minimum value of x is 33 and the maximum value is 83.) Hence, our 
regression line is valid only for the values of x between 33 and 83. If we predict y for a value of 
x outside this range, the prediction usually will not hold true. Thus, since x = 0 is outside the 
range of household incomes that we have in the sample data, the prediction that a household 
with zero income spends $150.50 per month on food does not carry much credibility. The same 
is true if we try to predict y for an income greater than $8300, which is the maximum value of 
x in Table 13.1.
Interpretation of b
The value of b in a regression model gives the change in the predicted value of y (dependent 
variable) due to a change of one unit in x (independent variable). For example, by using the 
regression equation obtained in Example 13–1, we see:
 When x = 50,  yˆ = 1.5050 + .2525(50) = 14.1300
 When x = 51,  yˆ = 1.5050 + .2525(51) = 14.3825
Hence, when x increased by one unit, from 50 to 51, yˆ increased by 14.3825 − 14.1300 = .2525, 
which is the value of b. Because our unit of measurement is hundreds of dollars, we can state that, 
on average, a $100 increase in income will result in a $25.25 increase in food expenditure. We 
can also state that, on average, a $1 increase in income of a household will increase the food 
expenditure by $.2525. Note the phrase “on average” in these statements. The regression line is 
seen as a measure of the mean value of y for a given value of x. If one household’s income is 
increased by $100, that household’s food expenditure may or may not increase by $25.25. How-
ever, if the incomes of all households are increased by $100 each, the average increase in their 
food expenditures will be very close to $25.25.
 
Note that when b is positive, an increase in x will lead to an increase in y, and a decrease 
in x will lead to a decrease in y. In other words, when b is positive, the movements in x and 
y are in the same direction. Such a relationship between x and y is called a positive linear 
relationship. The regression line in this case slopes upward from left to right. On the other 
hand, if the value of b is negative, an increase in x will lead to a decrease in y, and a decrease 
in x will cause an increase in y. The changes in x and y in this case are in opposite directions. 
Such a relationship between x and y is called a negative linear relationship. The regression 
line in this case slopes downward from left to right. The two diagrams in Figure 13.8 show 
these two cases.
For a regression model, b is computed as b = SSxy∕SSxx. The value of SSxx is always positive, and 
that of SSxy can be positive or negative. Hence, the sign of b depends on the sign of SSxy. If SSxy 
is positive (as in our example on the incomes and food expenditures of seven households), then 
b will be positive, and if SSxy is negative, then b will be negative.
 
Case Study 13–1 illustrates the difference between the population regression line and a 
sample regression line.
 Remember
b > 0
(a) Positive linear
 relationship
x
y
b < 0
(b) Negative linear
relationship
x
y
Figure 13.8 Positive and 
negative linear relationships 
between x and y.
www.ebook3000.com

REGRESSION 
OF WEIGHTS ON 
HEIGHTS FOR NFL 
PLAYERS
CASE STUDY 13–1
Data Set VIII that accompanies this text lists many characteristics of National Football League (NFL) players 
who were on the rosters of all NFL teams during the 2014 season. These data comprise the population of NFL 
players for that season. We postulate the following simple linear regression model for these data:
y = A + Bx + ε
where y is the weight (in pounds) and x is the height (in inches) of an NFL player.
 
Using the population data that contain 1965 players, we obtain the following regression line:
μγ∣x = −640.9 + 11.94x
This equation gives the population regression line because it is obtained by using the population data. 
(Note that in the population regression line we write μy|x instead of yˆ.) Thus, the true values of A and B are, 
respectively,
A = −640.9 and B = 11.94
 
The value of B indicates that for every 1-inch increase in the height of an NFL player, weight increases 
on average by 11.94 pounds. However, A = −640.9 does not make any sense. It states that the weight of a 
player with zero height is −640.9 pounds. (Recall from Section 13.1.6 that we must be very careful if and 
when we apply the regression equation to predict y for values of x outside the range of data used to find the 
regression line.) Figure 13.9 gives the scatter diagram and the regression line for the heights and weights of 
all NFL players.
512
Figure 13.9 Scatter diagram and regression line for the data on heights and 
weights of all NFL players.
Height
Weight
100
65.0
67.5
70.0
72.5
75.0
77.5
80.0
82.5
150
200
250
300
350
400
 
Next, we selected a random sample of 50 players and estimated the regression model for this sample. 
The estimated regression line for this sample is
yˆ = −610 + 11.50x
 
The values of a and b are
a = −610 and b = 11.50
These values of a and b give the estimates of A and B based on sample data. The scatter diagram and the 
regression line for the sample observations on heights and weights are given in Figure 13.10. Note that this 
figure does not show exactly 50 dots because some points/dots may be exactly the same or very close to 
each other.

13.1.7 Assumptions of the Regression Model
Like any other theory, the linear regression analysis is also based on certain assumptions. Consider 
the population regression model
 
y = A + Bx + ε 
(4)
Four assumptions are made about this model. These assumptions are explained next with refer-
ence to the example on incomes and food expenditures of households. Note that these assump-
tions are made about the population regression model and not about the sample regression model.
Assumption 1: The random error term ε has a mean equal to zero for each x. In other words, 
among all households with the same income, some spend more than the predicted food expendi-
ture (and, hence, have positive errors) and others spend less than the predicted food expenditure 
(and, consequently, have negative errors). This assumption simply states that the sum of the 
positive errors is equal to the sum of the negative errors, so that the mean of errors for all house-
holds with the same income is zero. Thus, when the mean value of ε is zero, the mean value of y 
for a given x is equal to A + Bx, and it is written as
μy ∣ x = A + Bx
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, μy ∣ x is read as “the mean value of y for a given value of x.” 
When we find the values of A and B for model (4) using the population data, the points on the 
regression line give the average values of y, denoted by μy ∣ x, for the corresponding values of x.
Assumption 2: The errors associated with different observations are independent. According 
to this assumption, the errors for any two households in our example are independent. In other 
words, all households decide independently how much to spend on food.
Assumption 3: For any given x, the distribution of errors is normal. The corollary of this 
assumption is that the food expenditures for all households with the same income are normally 
distributed.
 
As we can observe from Figures 13.9 and 13.10, the scatter diagrams for population and sample data 
both show a (positive) linear relationship between the heights and weights of NFL players, although not a very 
strong positive relationship.
513
Source: www.sportscity.com/NFL-
salaries and www.nfl.com/teams.
Height
Weight
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
150
200
250
300
350
Figure 13.10 Scatter diagram and regression line for the data on heights and 
weights of 50 NFL players.
www.ebook3000.com

514
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
Assumption 4: The distribution of population errors for each x has the same (constant) 
standard deviation, which is denoted by σε. This assumption indicates that the spread of points 
around the regression line is similar for all x values.
 
Figure 13.11 illustrates the meanings of the first, third, and fourth assumptions for house-
holds with incomes of $4000 and $7500 per month. The same assumptions hold true for any other 
income level. In the population of all households, there will be many households with a monthly 
income of $4000. Using the population regression line, if we calculate the errors for all these 
households and prepare the distribution of these errors, it will look like the distribution given in 
Figure 13.11a. Its standard deviation will be σε. Similarly, Figure 13.11b gives the distribution of 
errors for all those households in the population whose monthly income is $7500. Its standard 
deviation is also σε. Both of these distributions are identical. Note that the mean of both of these 
distributions is E(ε) = 0.
Figure 13.11 (a) Errors for households with an income of $4000 per month. (b) Errors for households 
with an income of $7500 per month.
Errors for households
with income = $4000
Normal distribution with (constant)
standard deviation
(a)
E(  ) = 0
σε
ε
Normal distribution with (constant)
standard deviation
(b)
Errors for households
with income = $7500
σε
E(  ) = 0
ε
 
Figure 13.12 shows how the distributions given in Figure 13.11 look when they are plotted 
on the same diagram with the population regression line. The points on the vertical line through 
x = 40 give the food expenditures for various households in the population, each of which has the 
same monthly income of $4000. The same is true about the vertical line through x = 75 or any 
other vertical line for some other value of x.
Food expenditure
Income
24
18
12
6
20
60
80
100
40
x = 75
Population
regression
line
Figure 13.12 Distribution of errors around the population 
regression line.
13.1.8 Cautions in Using Regression
When carefully applied, regression is a very helpful technique for making predictions and esti-
mations about one variable for a certain value of another variable. However, we need to be cau-
tious when using the regression analysis, for it can give us misleading results and predictions. 
The following are the two most important points to remember when using regression.

13.1 Simple Linear Regression
515
(a) A Note on the Use of Simple Linear Regression
We should apply linear regression with caution. When we use simple linear regression, we 
assume that the relationship between two variables is described by a straight line. In the real 
world, the relationship between variables may not be linear. Hence, before we use a simple linear 
regression, it is better to construct a scatter diagram and look at the plot of the data points. We 
should estimate a linear regression model only if the scatter diagram indicates such a relation-
ship. The scatter diagrams of Figure 13.13 give two examples for which the relationship between 
x and y is not linear. Consequently, using linear regression in such cases would be wrong.
Figure 13.13 Nonlinear relationship between x and y.
(a)
x
y
(b)
x
y
(b) Extrapolation
The regression line estimated for the sample data is reliable only for the range of x values observed 
in the sample. For example, the values of x in our example on incomes and food expenditures 
vary from a minimum of 33 to a maximum of 83. Hence, our estimated regression line is appli-
cable only for values of x between 33 and 83; that is, we should use this regression line to esti-
mate the mean food expenditure or to predict the food expenditure of a single household only 
for income levels between $3300 and $8300. If we estimate or predict y for a value of x either less 
than 33 or greater than 83, it is called extrapolation. This does not mean that we should never use 
the regression line for extrapolation. Instead, we should interpret such predictions cautiously and 
not attach much importance to them.
 
Similarly, if the data used for the regression estimation are time-series data, the predicted 
values of y for periods outside the time interval used for the estimation of the regression line 
should be interpreted very cautiously. When using the estimated regression line for extrapolation, 
we are assuming that the same linear relationship between the two variables holds true for values 
of x outside the given range. It is possible that the relationship between the two variables may not 
be linear outside that range. Nonetheless, even if it is linear, adding a few more observations at 
either end will probably give a new estimation of the regression line.
EXERCISES
13.5 Explain the difference between a simple and a multiple regres-
sion model.
13.6 Briefly explain the difference between a deterministic and a 
probabilistic regression model.
13.7 Why is the random error term included in a regression model?
13.8 Explain the least squares method and least squares regression 
line. Why are they called by these names?
13.9 Explain the meaning and concept of SSE. You may use a graph 
for illustration purposes.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
13.1 Explain the meaning of the words simple and linear as used in 
simple linear regression.
13.2 Explain the meaning of independent and dependent variables 
for a regression model.
13.3 Explain the difference between exact and nonexact relation-
ships between two variables. Give one example of each.
13.4 Explain the difference between linear and nonlinear relation-
ships between two variables.
www.ebook3000.com

516
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
13.10 Explain the difference between y and yˆ.
13.11 Two variables x and y have a positive linear relationship. 
Explain what happens to the value of y when x increases. Give one 
example of a positive relationship between two variables.
13.12 Two variables x and y have a negative linear relationship. 
Explain what happens to the value of y when x increases. Give one 
example of a negative relationship between two variables.
13.13 Explain the following.
a. Population regression line
b. Sample regression line
c. True values of A and B
d. Estimated values of A and B that are denoted by a and b, 
respectively
13.14 Briefly explain the assumptions of the population regression 
model.
13.15 Plot the following straight lines. Give the values of the 
y-intercept and slope for each of these lines and interpret them. Indi-
cate whether each of the lines gives a positive or a negative relation-
ship between x and y.
a. y = 100 + 5x 
b. y = 400 − 4x
13.16 A population data set produced the following information.
N = 460, ∑x = 3920, ∑y = 2650, ∑xy = 26,570,
          ∑x 2 = 48,530
Find the population regression line.
13.17 The following information is obtained from a sample data set.
n = 12, ∑x = 66, ∑y = 588, ∑xy = 2244, ∑x 2 = 396
Find the estimated regression line.
APPLICATIONS
13.18 Bob’s Pest Removal Service specializes in removing wild 
creatures (skunks, bats, reptiles, etc.) from private homes. He charges 
$70 to go to a house plus $20 per hour for his services. Let y be the 
total amount (in dollars) paid by a household using Bob’s services 
and x the number of hours Bob spends capturing and removing the 
animal(s). The equation for the relationship between x and y is
 
y = 70 + 20x
a. Bob spent 3 hours removing a coyote from under Alice’s 
house. How much will he be paid?
b. Suppose nine persons called Bob for assistance during a 
week. Strangely enough, each of these jobs required exactly 
3 hours. Will each of these clients pay Bob the same amount, 
or do you expect each one to pay a different amount? Explain.
c. Is the relationship between x and y exact or nonexact?
13.19 A researcher took a sample of 10 years and found the follow-
ing relationship between x and y, where x is the number of major 
natural calamities (such as tornadoes, hurricanes, earthquakes, floods, 
etc.) that occurred during a year and y represents the average annual total 
profits (in millions of dollars) of a sample of insurance companies in 
the United States.
yˆ = 342.6 −2.10x
a. A randomly selected year had 24 major calamities. What are 
the expected average profits of U.S. insurance companies for 
that year?
b. Suppose the number of major calamities was the same for 
each of 3 years. Do you expect the average profits for all U.S. 
insurance companies to be the same for each of these 3 years? 
Explain.
c. Is the relationship between x and y exact or nonexact?
13.20 An auto manufacturing company wanted to investigate how 
the price of one of its car models depreciates with age. The research 
department at the company took a sample of eight cars of this model 
and collected the following information on the ages (in years) and 
prices (in hundreds of dollars) of these cars.
Age
8
3
6
9
2
5
6
3
Price
45
210
100
33
267
134
109
235
a. Construct a scatter diagram for these data. Does the scatter 
diagram exhibit a linear relationship between ages and prices 
of cars?
b. Find the regression line with price as a dependent variable and 
age as an independent variable.
c. Give a brief interpretation of the values of a and b calculated 
in part b.
d. Plot the regression line on the scatter diagram of part a and 
show the errors by drawing vertical lines between scatter 
points and the regression line.
e. Predict the price of a 7-year-old car of this model.
f. Estimate the price of an 18-year-old car of this model. Comment 
on this finding.
13.21 The following table gives information on the amount of sugar 
(in grams) and the calorie count in one serving of a sample of 13 dif-
ferent varieties of cereal.
Sugar (grams)
4
15
12
11
8
6
7
Calories
120
200
140
110
120
80
190
Sugar (grams)
2
7
14
20
3
13
Calories
100
120
190
190
110
120
a. Construct a scatter diagram for these data. Does the scatter 
diagram exhibit a linear relationship between the amount of 
sugar and the number of calories per serving?
b. Find the regression equation of the number of calories on the 
amount of sugar.
c. Give a brief interpretation of the values of a and b calculated 
in part b.
d. Plot the regression line on the scatter diagram of part a and 
show the errors by drawing vertical lines between scatter 
points and the predictive regression line.
e. Calculate the calorie count for a cereal with 16 grams of sugar 
per serving.
f. Estimate the calorie count for a cereal with 52 grams of sugar 
per serving. Comment on this finding.
13.22 While browsing through the magazine rack at a bookstore, a 
statistician decides to examine the relationship between the price of 
a magazine and the percentage of the magazine space that contains 
advertisements. The data collected for eight magazines are given in 
the following table.

13.2 Standard Deviation of Errors and Coefficient of Determination
517
Percentage containing ads
37
43
58
49
Price ($)
5.50
6.95
4.95
5.75
Percentage containing ads
70
28
65
32
Price ($)
3.95
8.25
5.50
6.75
a. Construct a scatter diagram for these data. Does the scatter dia-
gram exhibit a linear relationship between the percentage of a 
magazine’s space containing ads and the price of the magazine?
b. Find the estimated regression equation of price on the per-
centage of space containing ads.
c. Give a brief interpretation of the values of a and b calculated 
in part b.
d. Plot the estimated regression line on the scatter diagram of 
part a, and show the errors by drawing vertical lines between 
scatter points and the predictive regression line.
e. Predict the price of a magazine with 50% of its space contain-
ing ads.
f. Estimate the price of a magazine with 99% of its space con-
taining ads. Comment on this finding.
13.23 The following table gives the 2015 total payroll (in millions 
of dollars) and the percentage of games won during the 2015 season 
by each of the National League baseball teams.
 
Total Payroll 
Percentage of
Team 
(millions of dollars) 
Games Won
Arizona Diamondbacks 
92 
49
Atlanta Braves 
98 
41
Chicago Cubs 
119 
60
Cincinnati Reds 
117 
40
Colorado Rockies 
102 
42
Los Angeles Dodgers 
273 
57
Miami Marlins 
68 
44
Milwaukee Brewers 
105 
42
New York Mets 
101 
56
Philadelphia Phillies 
136 
39
Pittsburgh Pirates 
88 
61
San Diego Padres 
101 
46
San Francisco Giants 
173 
52
St. Louis Cardinals 
121 
62
Washington Nationals 
165 
51
Source: http://baseball.about.com with Associated Press, and www.espn.go.com
a. Find the least squares regression line with total payroll as the 
independent variable and percentage of games won as the 
dependent variable.
b. Is the equation of the regression line obtained in part a the 
population regression line? Why or why not? Do the values of 
the y-intercept and the slope of the regression line give A and 
B or a and b?
c. Give a brief interpretation of the values of the y-intercept and 
the slope obtained in part a.
d. Predict the percentage of games won by a team with a total 
payroll of $150 million.
13.24 The following table gives the 2015 total payroll (in millions 
of dollars) and the percentage of games won during the 2015 season 
by each of the American League baseball teams.
 
Total Payroll 
Percentage of
Team 
(millions of dollars) 
Games Won
Baltimore Orioles 
110 
50
Boston Red Sox 
187 
48
Chicago White Sox 
115 
47
Cleveland Indians 
86 
50
Detroit Tigers 
174 
46
Houston Astros 
71 
53
Kansas City Royals 
114 
59
Los Angeles Angels 
151 
53
Minnesota Twins 
109 
51
New York Yankees 
219 
54
Oakland Athletics 
86 
42
Seattle Mariners 
120 
47
Tampa Bay Rays 
76 
49
Texas Rangers 
142 
54
Toronto Blue Jays 
123 
57
Source: http://baseball.about.com with Associated Press, and www.espn.
go.com
a. Find the least squares regression line with total payroll as the 
independent variable and percentage of games won as the 
dependent variable.
b. Is the equation of the regression line obtained in part a the 
population regression line? Why or why not? Do the values of 
the y-intercept and the slope of the regression line give A and 
B or a and b?
c. Give a brief interpretation of the values of the y-intercept and 
the slope obtained in part a.
d. Predict the percentage of games won by a team with a total 
payroll of $150 million.
13.2 Standard Deviation of Errors and Coefficient of Determination
In this section we discuss two concepts related to regression analysis. First we discuss the con-
cept of the standard deviation of random errors and its calculation. Then we learn about the 
concept of the coefficient of determination and its calculation.
www.ebook3000.com

518
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
13.2.1 Standard Deviation of Errors
When we consider incomes and food expenditures, all households with the same income are 
expected to spend different amounts on food. Consequently, the random error ε will assume dif-
ferent values for these households. The standard deviation σε measures the spread of these errors 
around the population regression line. The standard deviation of errors tells us how widely the 
errors and, hence, the values of y are spread for a given x. In Figure 13.12, which is reproduced 
as Figure 13.14, the points on the vertical line through x = 40 give the monthly food expendi-
tures for all households with a monthly income of $4000. The distance of each dot from the 
point on the regression line gives the value of the corresponding error. The standard deviation of 
errors σε measures the spread of such points around the population regression line. The same is 
true for x = 75 or any other value of x.
Figure 13.14 Spread of errors 
for x = 40 and x = 75.
Food expenditure
Income
24
18
12
6
20
60
80
100
40
x = 75
Population
regression
line
 
Note that σε denotes the standard deviation of errors for the population. However, usually σε 
is unknown. In such cases, it is estimated by se, which is the standard deviation of errors for the 
sample data. The following is the basic formula to calculate se:
se = A
SSE
n −2   where  SSE = ∑(y −yˆ)2
In this formula, n − 2 represents the degrees of freedom for the regression model. The reason 
df = n − 2 is that we lose one degree of freedom to calculate x and one for y.
Degrees of Freedom for a Simple Linear Regression Model The degrees of freedom for a 
simple linear regression model are
d f = n −2
 
For computational purposes, it is more convenient to use the following formula to calculate 
the standard deviation of errors se.
Standard Deviation of Errors The standard deviation of errors is calculated as3
se = B
SSyy −b SSxy
n −2
where 
           SSyy = ∑y2 −(∑y)2
n
The calculation of SSxy was discussed earlier in this chapter.4
3If we have access to population data, the value of σε is calculated using the formula
σε = B
SSyy −B SSxy
N
4The basic formula to calculate SSyy is ∑(y −y)2.

13.2 Standard Deviation of Errors and Coefficient of Determination
519
Like the value of SSxx, the value of SSyy is always positive.
 
Example 13–2 illustrates the calculation of the standard deviation of errors for the data of 
Table 13.1.
EXAMPLE 13–2 
Incomes and Food Expenditures of Households
Compute the standard deviation of errors se for the data on monthly incomes and food expendi-
tures of the seven households given in Table 13.1.
Solution To compute se, we need to know the values of SSyy, SSxy, and b. In Example 13–1, 
we computed SSxy and b. These values are
SSxy = 447.5714 and b = .2525
To compute SSyy, we calculate ∑y2 as shown in Table 13.3.
Calculating the standard 
deviation of errors.
Table 13.3
 Income 
Food Expenditure
 
x 
y 
y2
 
55 
14 
196
 
83 
24 
576
 
38 
13 
169
 
61 
16 
256
 
33 
 9 
 81
 
49 
15 
225
 
67 
17 
289
 ∑x = 386 
∑y = 108 
∑y
2 = 1792
The value of SSyy is
SSyy = ∑y2 −(∑y)2
n
= 1792 −(108)2
7
= 125.7143
Hence, the standard deviation of errors is
 
se = B
SSyy −b SSxy
n −2
= B
125.7143 −.2525(447.5714)
7 −2
= 1.5939 
◼ 
13.2.2 Coefficient of Determination
We may ask the question: How good is the regression model? In other words: How well does the 
independent variable explain the dependent variable in the regression model? The coefficient of 
determination is one concept that answers this question.
 
For a moment, assume that we possess information only on the food expenditures of 
households and not on their incomes. Hence, in this case, we cannot use the regression line to 
predict the food expenditure for any household. As we did in earlier chapters, in the absence of 
a regression model, we use y to estimate or predict every household’s food expenditure. Con-
sequently, the error of prediction for each household is now given by y −y, which is the dif-
ference between the actual food expenditure of a household and the mean food expenditure. If 
we calculate such errors for all households in the sample and then square and add them, the 
resulting sum is called the total sum of squares and is denoted by SST. Actually SST is the 
same as SSyy and is defined as
SST = SSyy = ∑(y −y)2
www.ebook3000.com

520
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
However, for computational purposes, SST is calculated using the following formula.
Total Sum of Squares (SST) The total sum of squares, denoted by SST, is calculated as
SST = ∑y2 −(∑y)2
n
Note that this is the same formula that we used to calculate SSyy.
The value of SSyy, which is 125.7143, was calculated in Example 13–2. Consequently, the value 
of SST is
SST = 125.7143
From Example 13–1, y = 15.4286. Figure 13.15 shows the error for each of the seven households 
in our sample using the scatter diagram of Figure 13.4 and using y.
Figure 13.15 Total errors.
Food expenditure
Income
24
18
12
6
20
40
60
80
100
y = 15.4286
 
Now suppose we use the simple linear regression model to predict the food expenditure of 
each of the seven households in our sample. In this case, we predict each household’s food 
expenditure by using the regression line we estimated earlier in Example 13–1, which is
yˆ = 1.5050 + .2525x
The predicted food expenditures, denoted by yˆ, for the seven households are listed in Table 13.4. 
Also given are the errors and error squares.
Table 13.4
 x 
y 
yˆ = 1.5050 + .2525x 
e = y −yˆ 
e2 = (y −yˆ)2
55 
14 
15.3925 
−1.3925 
1.9391
83 
24 
22.4625 
1.5375 
2.3639
38 
13 
11.1000 
1.9000 
3.6100
61 
16 
16.9075 
−.9075 
.8236
33 
 9 
9.8375 
−.8375 
.7014
49 
15 
13.8775 
1.1225 
1.2600
67 
17 
18.4225 
−1.4225 
2.0235
 
 
 
 
∑e2 = ∑(y −yˆ)2 = 12.7215
 
We calculate the values of yˆ (given in the third column of Table 13.4) by substituting the 
values of x in the estimated regression model. For example, the value of x for the first household 
is 55. Substituting this value of x in the regression equation, we obtain
yˆ = 1.5050 + .2525(55) = 15.3925

13.2 Standard Deviation of Errors and Coefficient of Determination
521
Similarly we find the other values of yˆ. The error sum of squares SSE is given by the sum of the 
fifth column in Table 13.4. Thus,
SSE = ∑(y −yˆ)2 = 12.7215
The errors of prediction for the regression model for the seven households are shown in 
Figure 13.16.
Food expenditure
Income
24
18
12
6
20
40
60
80
100
^y = 1.5050 + .2525 x
Figure 13.16 Errors of prediction when regression model 
is used.
 
Thus, from the foregoing calculations,
SST = 125.7143 and SSE = 12.7215
These values indicate that the sum of squared errors decreased from 125.7143 to 12.7215 when 
we used yˆ in place of y to predict food expenditures. This reduction in squared errors is called the 
regression sum of squares and is denoted by SSR. Thus,
SSR = SST −SSE = 125.7143 −12.7215 = 112.9928
The value of SSR can also be computed by using the formula
SSR = ∑(yˆ −y)2
Regression Sum of Squares (SSR) The regression sum of squares, denoted by SSR, is
SSR = SST −SSE
 
Thus, SSR is the portion of SST that is explained by the use of the regression model, and 
SSE is the portion of SST that is not explained by the use of the regression model. The sum of 
SSR and SSE is always equal to SST. Thus,
SST = SSR + SSE
 
The ratio of SSR to SST gives the coefficient of determination. The coefficient of determi-
nation calculated for population data is denoted by ρ2 (ρ is the Greek letter rho), and the one 
calculated for sample data is denoted by r2. The coefficient of determination gives the proportion 
of SST that is explained by the use of the regression model. The value of the coefficient of deter-
mination always lies in the range zero to one. The coefficient of determination can be calculated 
by using the formula
r2 = SSR
SST or SST −SSE
SST
However, for computational purposes, the formula given on the next page is more efficient to use 
to calculate the coefficient of determination.
www.ebook3000.com

522
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
 
Example 13–3 illustrates the calculation of the coefficient of determination for a sample 
data set.
5If we have access to population data, the value of 𝜌2 is calculated using the formula
ρ2 =
B SSxy
SSyy
The values of SSxy and SSyy used here are calculated for the population data set.
Coefficient of Determination The coefficient of determination, denoted by r2, represents the 
proportion of SST that is explained by the use of the regression model. The computational formula 
for r2 is5
r2 =
b SSxy
SSyy
and 
         0 ≤r2 ≤1
EXAMPLE 13–3 
Incomes and Food Expenditures of Households
For the data of Table 13.1 on monthly incomes and food expenditures of seven households, 
calculate the coefficient of determination.
Solution From earlier calculations made in Examples 13–1 and 13–2,
b = .2525, SSxy = 447.5714, and SSyy = 125.7143
Hence,
r 2 =
b SSxy
SSyy
= (.2525)(447.5714)
125.7143
= .8990 = .90
 
Thus, we can state that SST is reduced by approximately 90% (from 125.7143 to 12.7215) 
when we use yˆ, instead of y, to predict the food expenditures of households. Note that r2 is 
usually rounded to two decimal places. 
◼
Calculating the coefficient 
of determination.
 
The total sum of squares SST is a measure of the total variation in food expenditures, the 
regression sum of squares SSR is the portion of total variation explained by the regression model 
(or by income), and the error sum of squares SSE is the portion of total variation not explained 
by the regression model. Hence, for Example 13–3 we can state that 90% of the total variation in 
food expenditures of households occurs because of the variation in their incomes, and the remain-
ing 10% is due to randomness and other variables.
 
Usually, the higher the value of r2, the better is the regression model. This is so because if r2 
is larger, a greater portion of the total errors is explained by the included independent variable, 
and a smaller portion of errors is attributed to other variables and randomness.
EXERCISES
13.28 A population data set produced the following information.
 N = 250, ∑x = 9880, ∑y = 1456, ∑xy = 85,080,
 ∑x2 = 485,870, and ∑y2 = 135,675
Find the values of σε and 𝜌2.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
13.25 What are the degrees of freedom for a simple linear regres-
sion model?
13.26 Explain the meaning of coefficient of determination.
13.27 Explain the meaning of SST and SSR. You may use graphs for 
illustration purposes.

13.2 Standard Deviation of Errors and Coefficient of Determination
523
13.29 A population data set produced the following information.
 N = 460, ∑x = 3920, ∑y = 2650, ∑xy = 26,570,
 ∑x2 = 48,530, and ∑y2 = 39,347
Find the values of σε and 𝜌2.
13.30 The following information is obtained from a sample data set.
 n = 12, ∑x = 66, ∑y = 588, ∑xy = 2244,
 ∑x2 = 396, and ∑y2 = 58,734
Find the values of se and r2.
APPLICATIONS
13.31 The following table gives information on the calorie count 
and grams of fat for 8 of the many types of bagels produced and sold 
by Panera Bread.
Bagel 
Calories 
Fat (grams)
Asiago Cheese 
330 
6.0
Blueberry 
340 
1.5
Cinnamon Crunch 
420 
6.0
Cinnamon Swirl & Raisin 
320 
2.0
Everything 
300 
2.5
French Toast 
350 
4.0
Plain 
290 
1.5
Sesame 
310 
3.0
With calories as the dependent variable and fat content as the inde-
pendent variable, find the following:
a. SSxx, SSyy, and SSxy
b. Standard deviation of errors
c. SST, SSE, and SSR
d. Coefficient of determination
13.32 An auto manufacturing company wanted to investigate how 
the price of one of its car models depreciates with age. The research 
department at the company took a sample of eight cars of this model 
and collected the following information on the ages (in years) and 
prices (in hundreds of dollars) of these cars.
Age
8
3
6
9
2
5
6
3
Price
45
210
100
33
267
134
109
235
a. Calculate the standard deviation of errors.
b. Compute the coefficient of determination and give a brief 
interpretation of it.
13.33 The following table gives information on the amount of sugar 
(in grams) and the calorie count in one serving of a sample of 13 dif-
ferent varieties of cereal. Here calories is the dependent variable.
Sugar (grams)
4
15
12
11
8
6
7
Calories
120
200
140
110
120
80
190
Sugar (grams)
2
7
14
20
3
13
Calories
100
120
190
190
110
120
a. Determine the standard deviation of errors.
b. Find the coefficient of determination and give a brief interpre-
tation of it.
13.34 While browsing through the magazine rack at a bookstore, a 
statistician decides to examine the relationship between the price of a 
magazine and the percentage of the magazine space that contains 
advertisements. The data collected for eight magazines are given in 
the following table. Here price is the dependent variable.
Percentage containing ads
37
43
58
49
Price ($)
5.50
6.95
4.95
5.75
Percentage containing ads
70
28
65
32
Price ($)
3.95
8.25
5.50
6.75
a. Find the standard deviation of errors.
b. Compute the coefficient of determination. What percentage of 
the variation in price is explained by the least squares regres-
sion of price on the percentage of magazine space containing 
ads? What percentage of this variation is not explained?
13.35 The following table gives the 2015 total payroll (in millions 
of dollars) and the percentage of games won during the 2015 season 
by each of the National League baseball teams.
 
Total Payroll 
Percentage of
Team 
(millions of dollars) 
Games Won
Arizona Diamondbacks 
92 
49
Atlanta Braves 
98 
41
Chicago Cubs 
119 
60
Cincinnati Reds 
117 
40
Colorado Rockies 
102 
42
Los Angeles Dodgers 
273 
57
Miami Marlins 
68 
44
Milwaukee Brewers 
105 
42
New York Mets 
101 
56
Philadelphia Phillies 
136 
39
Pittsburgh Pirates 
88 
61
San Diego Padres 
101 
46
San Francisco Giants 
173 
52
St. Louis Cardinals 
121 
62
Washington Nationals 
165 
51
Source: http://baseball.about.com with Associated Press, and www.espn.
go.com
a. Find the standard deviation of errors, σε with percentage of 
games won as the dependent variable. (Note that this data set 
belongs to a population.)
b. Compute the coefficient of determination, 𝜌2.
www.ebook3000.com

524
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
 
However, usually the standard deviation of population errors σε is not known. Hence, the 
sample standard deviation of errors se is used to estimate σε. In such a case, when σε is unknown, 
the standard deviation of b is estimated by sb, which is calculated as
sb =
se
√SSxx
If σε is known, the normal distribution can be used to make inferences about B. However, if σε is 
not known, the normal distribution is replaced by the t distribution to make inferences about B.
13.3.2 Estimation of B
The value of b obtained from the sample regression line is a point estimate of the slope B of the 
population regression line. As mentioned in Section 13.3.1, if σε is not known, the t distribution 
is used to make a confidence interval for B.
13.3 Inferences About B
This section is concerned with estimation and tests of hypotheses about the population regres-
sion slope B. We can also make a confidence interval and test hypothesis about the y-intercept A 
of the population regression line. However, making inferences about A is beyond the scope of 
this text.
13.3.1 Sampling Distribution of b
One of the main purposes for determining a regression line is to find the true value of the slope B 
of the population regression line. However, in almost all cases, the regression line is estimated 
using sample data. Then, based on the sample regression line, inferences are made about the 
population regression line. The slope b of a sample regression line is a point estimator of the 
slope B of the population regression line. The different sample regression lines estimated for dif-
ferent samples taken from the same population will give different values of b. If only one sample 
is taken and the regression line for that sample is estimated, the value of b will depend on which 
elements are included in the sample. Thus, b is a random variable, and it possesses a probability 
distribution that is more commonly called its sampling distribution. The shape of the sampling 
distribution of b, its mean, and standard deviation are given next.
The Sampling Distribution of b and its Mean and Standard Deviation Because of the assump-
tion of normally distributed random errors, the sampling distribution of b is normal. The mean 
and standard deviation of b, denoted by μb and σb, respectively, are
μb = B and σb =
σε
√SSxx
Confidence Interval for B The (1 − α)100% confidence interval for B is given by
b ± tsb
where 
sb =
se
√SSxx
and the value of t is obtained from the t distribution table, Table V of Appendix B, for α∕2 area 
in the right tail of the t distribution and n − 2 degrees of freedom.
 
Example 13–4 describes the procedure for making a confidence interval for B.

13.3 Inferences About B
525
EXAMPLE 13–4 
Incomes and Food Expenditures of Households
Construct a 95% confidence interval for B for the data on incomes and food expenditures of seven 
households given in Table 13.1.
Solution From the given information and earlier calculations in Examples 13–1 and 13–2,
n = 7, b = .2525, SSxx = 1772.8571, and se = 1.5939
The confidence level is 95%. We have
 sb =
se
√SSxx
=
1.5939
√1772.8571
= .0379
 d f = n −2 = 7 −2 = 5
 α∕2 = (1 − .95)∕2 = .025
From the t distribution table, Table V of Appendix B, the value of t for 5 df and .025 area in the 
right tail of the t distribution curve is 2.571. The 95% confidence interval for B is
b ± tsb = .2525 ± 2.571(.0379) = .2525 ± .0974 = .155 to .350
Thus, we are 95% confident that the slope B of the population regression line is between .155 
and .350. 
◼ 
13.3.3 Hypothesis Testing About B
Testing a hypothesis about B when the null hypothesis is B = 0 (that is, the slope of the regression 
line is zero) is equivalent to testing that x does not determine y and that the regression line is of 
no use in predicting y for a given x. However, we should remember that we are testing for a linear 
relationship between x and y. It is possible that x may determine y nonlinearly. Hence, a nonlinear 
relationship may exist between x and y.
 
To test the hypothesis that x does not determine y linearly, we will test the null hypothesis 
that the slope of the regression line is zero; that is, B = 0. The alternative hypothesis can be: 
(1) x determines y, that is, B ≠0; (2) x determines y positively, that is, B > 0; or (3) x determines 
y negatively, that is, B < 0.
 
The procedure used to make a hypothesis test about B is similar to the one used in earlier 
chapters. It involves the same five steps. Of course, we can use the p-value approach too.
Constructing a confidence 
interval for B.
Test Statistic for b The value of the test statistic t for b is calculated as
t = b −B
sb
The value of B is substituted from the null hypothesis.
 
Example 13–5 illustrates the procedure for testing a hypothesis about B.
EXAMPLE 13–5 
Incomes and Food Expenditures of Households 
Test at the 1% significance level whether the slope of the regression line for the example on 
incomes and food expenditures of seven households is positive.
Solution From the given information and earlier calculations in Examples 13–1 and 13–4,
n = 7, b = .2525, and sb = .0379
Conducting a test of 
hypothesis about B.
www.ebook3000.com

526
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
We are to test whether or not the slope B of the population regression line is positive. Hence, 
the two hypotheses are
 H0:B = 0 (The  slope is zero)
 H1:B > 0 (The slope is positive)
Note that we can also write the null hypothesis as H0: B ≤ 0, which states that the slope is either 
zero or negative.
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
Here, σε is not known. All assumptions for the population regression model are assumed to 
hold true. Hence, we will use the t distribution to make the test about B.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The significance level is .01. The > sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates that the test 
is right-tailed. Therefore,
Area in the right tail of the t distribution = α = .01
d f = n −2 = 7 −2 = 5
From the t distribution table, Table V of Appendix B, the critical value of t for 5 df and .01 area 
in the right tail of the t distribution is 3.365, as shown in Figure 13.17.
Do not reject H0
Critical value of t
Reject H0
0
3.365
t
α = .01
Figure 13.17 Rejection and nonrejection regions.
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
The value of the test statistic t for b is calculated as follows:
t = b −B
sb
= .2525 −0
.0379
= 6.662
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
The value of the test statistic t = 6.662 is greater than the critical value of t = 3.365, and it 
falls in the rejection region. Hence, we reject the null hypothesis and conclude that x (income) 
determines y (food expenditure) positively. That is, food expenditure increases with an increase 
in income and it decreases with a decrease in income.
Using the p-Value to Make a Decision
We can find the range for the p-value (as we did in Chapters 9 and 10) from the t distribution 
table, Table V of Appendix B, and make a decision by comparing that p-value with the signifi-
cance level. For this example, df = 5, and the observed value of t is 6.662. From Table V (the 
t distribution table) in the row of df = 5, the largest value of t is 5.893 for which the area in the 
right tail of the t distribution is .001. Since our observed value of t = 6.662 is larger than 5.893, 
the p-value for t = 6.662 is less than .001, that is,
p-value < .001
From H0

13.3 Inferences About B
527
 
Note that if we use technology to find this p-value, we will obtain a p-value of .000. Thus, 
we can state that for any α equal to or higher than .001 (the upper limit of the p-value range), we 
will reject the null hypothesis. For our example, α = .01, which is larger than the p-value of .001. 
As a result, we reject the null hypothesis. 
◼ 
 
Note that the null hypothesis does not always have to be B = 0. We may test the null 
hypothesis that B is equal to a certain value.
A Note on Regression and Causality
The regression line does not prove causality between two variables; that is, it does not predict that 
a change in y is caused by a change in x. The information about causality is based on theory or 
common sense. A regression line describes only whether or not a significant quantitative relation-
ship between x and y exists. Significant relationship means that we reject the null hypothesis 
H0: B = 0 at a given significance level. The estimated regression line gives the change in y due to 
a change of one unit in x. Note that it does not indicate that the reason y has changed is that x has 
changed. In our example on incomes and food expenditures, it is economic theory and common 
sense, not the regression line, that tell us that food expenditure depends on income. The regres-
sion analysis simply helps determine whether or not this dependence is significant.
EXERCISES
c. Can you conclude that B is different from zero? Use α = .01.
d. Using a significance level of .025, test whether B is less than 
−1.25.
APPLICATIONS
13.40 An auto manufacturing company wanted to investigate how 
the price of one of its car models depreciates with age. The research 
department at the company took a sample of eight cars of this model 
and collected the following information on the ages (in years) and 
prices (in hundreds of dollars) of these cars.
Age
8
3
6
9
2
5
6
3
Price
45
210
100
33
267
134
109
235
a. Construct a 95% confidence interval for B.
b. Test at the 5% significance level whether B is negative.
13.41 The following table gives information on the amount of sugar 
(in grams) and the calorie count in one serving of a sample of 13 dif-
ferent varieties of cereal. Here calories is the dependent variable.
Sugar (grams)
4
15
12
11
8
6
7
Calories
120
200
140
110
120
80
190
Sugar (grams)
2
7
14
20
3
13
Calories
100
120
190
190
110
120
a. Make a 95% confidence interval for B.
b. It is well known that each additional gram of carbohydrate 
adds 4 calories. Sugar is one type of carbohydrate. Using 
regression equation for the data in the table, test at the 1% 
significance level whether B is different from 4.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
13.36 Describe the mean, standard deviation, and shape of the sam-
pling distribution of the slope b of the simple linear regression model.
13.37 The following information is obtained for a sample of 16 
observations taken from a population.
SSxx = 340.700, se = 1.951, and yˆ = 12.45 + 6.32x
a. Make a 99% confidence interval for B.
b. Using a significance level of .025, can you conclude that B is 
positive?
c. Using a significance level of .01, can you conclude that B is 
different from zero?
d. Using a significance level of .02, test whether B is different 
from 4.50. (Hint: The null hypothesis here will be H0: B = 
4.50, and the alternative hypothesis will be H1: B ≠ 4.50. 
Notice that the value of B = 4.50 will be used to calculate the 
value of the test statistic t.)
13.38 The following information is obtained for a sample of 25 obser-
vations taken from a population.
SSxx = 274.600, se = .932, and yˆ = 280.56 −3.77x
a. Make a 95% confidence interval for B.
b. Using a significance level of .01, test whether B is negative.
c. Testing at the 5% significance level, can you conclude that B 
is different from zero?
d. Test if B is different from −5.20. Use α = .01.
13.39 The following information is obtained for a sample of 80 
observations taken from a population.
SSxx = 380.592, se = .961, and yˆ = 160.24 −2.70x
a. Make a 97% confidence interval for B.
b. Test at the 1% significance level whether B is negative.
www.ebook3000.com

528
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
13.42 The following table contains information on the amount of time 
spent each day (on average) on social networks and the Internet for social 
or entertainment purposes and the grade point average for a random 
sample of 12 college students. Here GPA is the dependent variable.
Time (hours per day)
4.4
6.2
4.2
1.6
4.7
5.4
GPA
3.22
2.21
3.13
3.69
2.7
2.2
Time (hours per day)
1.3
2.1
6.1
3.3
4.4
3.5
GPA
3.69
3.25
2.66
2.89
2.71
3.36
a. Construct a 98% confidence interval for B.
b. Test at the 1% significance level whether B is negative.
13.43 While browsing through the magazine rack at a bookstore, a 
statistician decides to examine if the price of a magazine depends on 
the percentage of the magazine space that contains advertisements. 
The data collected for eight magazines are given in the following 
table.
Percentage containing ads
37
43
58
49
Price ($)
5.50
6.95
4.95
5.75
Percentage containing ads
70
28
65
32
Price ($)
3.95
8.25
5.50
6.75
a. Construct a 98% confidence interval for B.
b. Testing at the 5% significance level, can you conclude that B 
is different from zero?
13.44 The following table gives information on the calorie count 
and grams of fat for 8 of the many types of bagels produced and sold 
by Panera Bread.
Bagel 
Calories 
Fat (grams)
Asiago Cheese 
330 
6.0
Blueberry 
340 
1.5
Cinnamon Crunch 
420 
6.0
Cinnamon Swirl & Raisin 
320 
2.0
Everything 
300 
2.5
French Toast 
350 
4.0
Plain 
290 
1.5
Sesame 
310 
3.0
a. Find the least squares regression line with calories as the 
dependent variable and fat content as the independent variable.
b. Make a 95% confidence interval for B.
c. Test at the 5% significance level whether B is different from 14.
13.4 Linear Correlation
This section describes the meaning and calculation of the linear correlation coefficient and the 
procedure to conduct a test of hypothesis about it.
13.4.1 Linear Correlation Coefficient
Another measure of the relationship between two variables is the correlation coefficient. This 
section describes the simple linear correlation, for short linear correlation, which measures the 
strength of the linear association between two variables. In other words, the linear correlation 
coefficient measures how closely the points in a scatter diagram are spread around the regression 
line. The correlation coefficient calculated for the population data is denoted by ρ (Greek letter 
rho) and the one calculated for sample data is denoted by r. (Note that the square of the correla-
tion coefficient is equal to the coefficient of determination.)
Value of the Correlation Coefficient The value of the correlation coefficient always lies in the 
range −1 to 1; that is,
−1 ≤ρ ≤1 and −1 ≤r ≤1
 
Although we can explain the linear correlation using the population correlation coefficient 𝜌, 
we will do so using the sample correlation coefficient r.
 
If r = 1, it is said to be a perfect positive linear correlation. In such a case, all points 
in the scatter diagram lie on a straight line that slopes upward from left to right, as shown in 
Figure 13.18a. If r = −1, the correlation is said to be a perfect negative linear correlation. 
In this case, all points in the scatter diagram fall on a straight line that slopes downward from 
left to right, as shown in Figure 13.18b. If the points are scattered all over the diagram, as 
shown in Figure 13.18c, then there is no linear correlation between the two variables, and 
consequently r is close to 0. Note that here r is not equal to zero but is very close to zero.
r = 1
(a)
x
y
r = −1
(b)
y
x
y
r ≈ 0
(c)
x
y
Figure 13.18 Linear correla-
tion between two variables. 
(a) Perfect positive linear corre-
lation, r = 1. (b) Perfect negative 
linear correlation, r = −1. (c) No 
linear correlation, r ≈ 0.

13.4 Linear Correlation
529
 
We do not usually encounter an example with perfect positive or perfect negative correlation 
(unless the relationship between variables is exact). What we observe in real-world problems is 
either a positive linear correlation with 0 < r < 1 (that is, the correlation coefficient is greater than 
zero but less than 1) or a negative linear correlation with −1 < r < 0 (that is, the correlation coef-
ficient is greater than −1 but less than zero).
 
If the correlation between two variables is positive and close to 1, we say that the variables 
have a strong positive linear correlation. If the correlation between two variables is positive but 
close to zero, then the variables have a weak positive linear correlation. In contrast, if the cor-
relation between two variables is negative and close to −1, then the variables are said to have a 
strong negative linear correlation. If the correlation between two variables is negative but close 
to zero, there exists a weak negative linear correlation between the variables. Graphically, a 
strong correlation indicates that the points in the scatter diagram are very close to the regression 
line, and a weak correlation indicates that the points in the scatter diagram are widely spread 
around the regression line. These four cases are shown in Figure 13.19a–d.
x
y
(a) Strong positive linear correlation
(r is close to 1)
x
y
(b) Weak positive linear correlation
(r is positive but close to zero)
x
y
(c) Strong negative linear correlation
(r is close to −1)
x
y
(d) Weak negative linear correlation
(r is negative and close to zero)
Figure 13.19 Linear correlation between two variables.
 
The linear correlation coefficient is calculated by using the following formula. (This correla-
tion coefficient is also called the Pearson product moment correlation coefficient.)
Linear Correlation Coefficient The simple linear correlation coefficient, denoted by r, measures 
the strength of the linear relationship between two variables for a sample and is calculated as6
r =
SSxy
√SSxx SSyy
6If we have access to population data, the value of 𝜌 is calculated using the formula
ρ =
SSxy
√SSxx SSyy
Here the values of SSxy, SSxx, and SSyy are calculated using the population data.
 
Because both SSxx and SSyy are always positive, the sign of the correlation coefficient r 
depends on the sign of SSxy. If SSxy is positive, then r will be positive, and if SSxy is negative, then 
r will be negative. Another important observation to remember is that r and b, calculated for the 
www.ebook3000.com

530
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
same sample, will always have the same sign. That is, both r and b are either positive or negative. 
This is so because both r and b provide information about the relationship between x and y. Like-
wise, the corresponding population parameters 𝜌 and B will always have the same sign.
 
Example 13–6 illustrates the calculation of the linear correlation coefficient r.
EXAMPLE 13–6 
Incomes and Food Expenditures of Households
Calculate the correlation coefficient for the example on incomes and food expenditures of seven 
households.
Solution From earlier calculations made in Examples 13–1 and 13–2,
SSxy = 447.5714, SSxx = 1772.8571, and SSyy = 125.7143
Substituting these values in the formula for r, we obtain
r =
SSxy
√SSxx SSyy
=
447.5714
√(1772.8571)(125.7143)
= .9481 = .95
Thus, the linear correlation coefficient is .95. The correlation coefficient is usually rounded to 
two decimal places. 
◼ 
 
The linear correlation coefficient simply tells us how strongly the two variables are (linearly) 
related. The correlation coefficient of .95 for incomes and food expenditures of seven households 
indicates that income and food expenditure are very strongly and positively correlated. This cor-
relation coefficient does not, however, provide us with any more information.
 
The square of the correlation coefficient gives the coefficient of determination, which was 
explained in Section 13.2.2. Thus, (.95)2 is .90, which is the value of r2 calculated in Example 13–3.
 
Sometimes the calculated value of r may indicate that the two variables are very strongly 
linearly correlated, but in reality they may not be. For example, if we calculate the correlation 
coefficient between the price of a haircut and the size of families in the United States using data 
for the last 30 years, we will find a strong negative linear correlation. Over time, the price of a 
haircut has increased and the size of families has decreased. This finding does not mean that 
family size and the price of a haircut are related. As a result, before we calculate the correlation 
coefficient, we must seek help from a theory or from common sense to postulate whether or not 
the two variables have a causal relationship.
 
Another point to note is that in a simple regression model, one of the two variables is catego-
rized as an independent (also known as an explanatory or predictor) variable and the other is 
classified as a dependent (also known as a response) variable. However, no such distinction is 
made between the two variables when the correlation coefficient is calculated.
13.4.2 Hypothesis Testing About the Linear Correlation Coefficient
This section describes how to perform a test of hypothesis about the population correlation 
coefficient 𝜌 using the sample correlation coefficient r. We use the t distribution to make this 
test. However, to use the t distribution, both variables should be normally distributed.
 
Usually (although not always), the null hypothesis is that the linear correlation coefficient 
between the two variables is zero, that is, 𝜌 = 0. The alternative hypothesis can be one of the follow-
ing: (1) the linear correlation coefficient between the two variables is less than zero, that is, 𝜌 < 0; 
(2) the linear correlation coefficient between the two variables is greater than zero, that is, 𝜌 > 0; or 
(3) the linear correlation coefficient between the two variables is not equal to zero, that is, 𝜌 ≠ 0.
Calculating the linear 
correlation coefficient.
Test Statistic for r If both variables are normally distributed and the null hypothesis is 
H0: 𝜌 = 0, then the value of the test statistic t is calculated as
t = r A
n −2
1 −r2
Here n − 2 gives the degrees of freedom.

13.4 Linear Correlation
531
 
Example 13–7 describes the procedure to perform a test of hypothesis about the linear cor-
relation coefficient.
EXAMPLE 13–7 
Incomes and Food Expenditures of Households
Using a 1% level of significance and the data from Example 13–1, test whether the linear correla-
tion coefficient between incomes and food expenditures is positive. Assume that the populations 
of both variables are normally distributed.
Solution From Examples 13–1 and 13–6,
n = 7 and r = .9481
Below we use the five steps to perform this test of hypothesis.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
 
We are to test whether the linear correlation coefficient between incomes and food expendi-
tures is positive. Hence, the null and alternative hypotheses are, respectively,
 H0: ρ = 0 (The linear correlation coefficient is zero.)
 H1: ρ > 0 (The linear correlation coefficient is positive.)
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
 
The population distributions for both variables are normally distributed. Hence, we use the t 
distribution to perform this test about the linear correlation coefficient.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
 
The significance level is 1%. From the alternative hypothesis we know that the test is right-
tailed. Hence,
Area in the right tail of the t distribution = .01
df = n −2 = 7 −2 = 5
From the t distribution table, Table V of Appendix B, the critical value of t is 3.365. The rejection 
and nonrejection regions for this test are shown in Figure 13.20.
Performing a test of hypothesis 
about the correlation coefficient.
Do not reject H0
Critical value of t
Reject H0
0
3.365
t
α = .01
Figure 13.20 Rejection and nonrejection regions.
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
 
The value of the test statistic t for r is calculated as follows:
t = r A
n −2
1 −r 2 = .9481 A
7 −2
1 −(.9481)2 = 6.667
Step 5. Make a decision.
 
The value of the test statistic t = 6.667 is greater than the critical value of t = 3.365, and it 
falls in the rejection region. Hence, we reject the null hypothesis and conclude that there is a 
positive linear relationship between incomes and food expenditures.
www.ebook3000.com

532
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
Using the p-Value to Make a Decision
We can find the range for the p-value from the t distribution table (Table V of Appendix B) and 
make a decision by comparing that p-value with the significance level. For this example, df = 5, 
and the observed value of t is 6.667. From Table V (the t distribution table) of Appendix B in the 
row of df = 5 the largest value of t is 5.893 for which the area in the right tail of the t distribution 
is .001. Since our observed value of t = 6.667 is larger than 5.893, the p-value for t = 6.667 is 
less than .001, that is,
p-value < .001
 
Thus, we can state that for any α equal to or greater than .001 (the upper limit of the p-value 
range), we will reject the null hypothesis. For our example, α = .01, which is greater than the 
p-value of .001. As a result, we reject the null hypothesis. 
◼
EXERCISES
13.53 Will you expect a positive, zero, or negative linear correlation 
between the two variables for each of the following examples?
a. SAT scores and GPAs of students
b. Stress level and blood pressure of individuals
c. Amount of fertilizer used and yield of corn per acre
d. Ages and prices of houses
e. Heights of husbands and incomes of their wives
13.54 A population data set produced the following information.
 
 N = 250, ∑x = 9880, ∑y = 1456, ∑xy = 85,080,
 
 ∑x2 = 485,870, and ∑y2 = 135,675
Find the linear correlation coefficient ρ.
13.55 A population data set produced the following information.
 
 N = 460, ∑x = 3920, ∑y = 2650, ∑xy = 26,570,
 
 ∑x2 = 48,530, and ∑y2 = 39,347
Find the linear correlation coefficient ρ.
13.56 A sample data set produced the following information.
 n = 10, ∑x = 100, ∑y = 220, ∑xy = 3680,
 
 ∑x2 = 1140, and ∑y2 = 25,272
a. Calculate the linear correlation coefficient r.
b. Using a 2% significance level, can you conclude that ρ is dif-
ferent from zero?
APPLICATIONS
13.57 An auto manufacturing company wanted to investigate how 
the price of one of its car models depreciates with age. The research 
department at the company took a sample of eight cars of this model 
and collected the following information on the ages (in years) and 
prices (in hundreds of dollars) of these cars.
Age
8
3
6
9
2
5
6
3
Price
45
210
100
33
267
134
109
235
a. Do you expect the ages and prices of cars to be positively or 
negatively related? Explain.
b. Calculate the linear correlation coefficient.
c. Test at a 2.5% significance level whether ρ is negative.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
13.45 What does a linear correlation coefficient tell about the rela-
tionship between two variables? Within what range can a correlation 
coefficient assume a value?
13.46 What is the difference between ρ and r? Explain.
13.47 Explain each of the following concepts. You may use graphs 
to illustrate each concept.
a. Perfect positive linear correlation
b. Perfect negative linear correlation
c. Strong positive linear correlation
d. Strong negative linear correlation
e. Weak positive linear correlation
f. Weak negative linear correlation
g. No linear correlation
13.48 Can the values of B and ρ calculated for the same population 
data have different signs? Explain.
13.49 For a sample data set, the linear correlation coefficient r has a 
positive value. Which of the following is true about the slope b of the 
regression line estimated for the same sample data?
a. The value of b will be positive.
b. The value of b will be negative.
c. The value of b can be positive or negative.
13.50 For a sample data set, the slope b of the regression line has a 
negative value. Which of the following is true about the linear correla-
tion coefficient r calculated for the same sample data?
a. The value of r will be positive.
b. The value of r will be negative.
c. The value of r can be positive or negative.
13.51 For a sample data set on two variables, the value of the linear 
correlation coefficient is (close to) zero. Does this mean that these 
variables are not related? Explain.
13.52 Will you expect a positive, zero, or negative linear correlation 
between the two variables for each of the following examples?
a. Grade of a student and hours spent studying
b. Incomes and entertainment expenditures of households
c. Ages of women and makeup expenses per month
d. Price of a computer and consumption of Coca-Cola
e. Price and consumption of wine

13.5 Regression Analysis: A Complete Example
533
Compute the linear correlation coefficient, ρ. Does it make sense to 
make a confidence interval and to test a hypothesis about ρ here? 
Explain.
13.61 The following table gives the 2015 total payroll (in millions 
of dollars) and the percentage of games won during the 2015 season 
by each of the American League baseball teams. 
13.58 The following data give the ages (in years) of husbands and 
wives for six couples.
Husband’s age
43
57
28
19
35
39
Wife’s age
37
51
32
20
33
38
a. Do you expect the ages of husbands and wives to be positively 
or negatively related?
b. Plot a scatter diagram. By looking at the scatter diagram, do 
you expect the correlation coefficient between these two vari-
ables to be close to zero, 1, or −1?
c. Find the correlation coefficient. Is the value of r consistent 
with what you expected in parts a and b?
d. Using a 5% significance level, test whether the correlation 
coefficient is different from zero.
13.59 The following table gives information on the amount of sugar 
(in grams) and the calorie count in one serving of a sample of 13 dif-
ferent varieties of cereal.
Sugar 
(grams)
4
15
12
11
8
6
7
2
7
14
20
3 13
Calories 120 200 140 110 120 80 190 100 120 190 190 110 120
a. Find the correlation coefficient.
b. Test at a 1% significance level whether the linear correlation 
coefficient between the two variables listed in the table is 
positive.
13.60 The following table gives the 2015 total payroll (in millions 
of dollars) and the percentage of games won during the 2015 season 
by each of the National League baseball teams. 
 
Total Payroll  
Percentage of
Team 
(millions of dollars) 
Games Won
Arizona Diamondbacks 
92 
49
Atlanta Braves 
98 
41
Chicago Cubs 
119 
60
Cincinnati Reds 
117 
40
Colorado Rockies 
102 
42
Los Angeles Dodgers 
273 
57
Miami Marlins 
68 
44
Milwaukee Brewers 
105 
42
New York Mets 
101 
56
 
Total Payroll  
Percentage of
Team 
(millions of dollars) 
Games Won
Baltimore Orioles 
110 
50
Boston Red Sox 
187 
48
Chicago White Sox 
115 
47
Cleveland Indians 
86 
50
Detroit Tigers 
174 
46
Houston Astros 
71 
53
Kansas City Royals 
114 
59
Los Angeles Angels 
151 
53
Minnesota Twins 
109 
51
New York Yankees 
219 
54
Oakland Athletics 
86 
42
Seattle Mariners 
120 
47
Tampa Bay Rays 
76 
49
Texas Rangers 
142 
54
Toronto Blue Jays 
123 
57
Source: http://baseball.about.com with Associated Press, and www.espn.
go.com
Philadelphia Phillies 
136 
39
Pittsburgh Pirates 
88 
61
San Diego Padres 
101 
46
San Francisco Giants 
173 
52
St. Louis Cardinals 
121 
62
Washington Nationals 
165 
51
Source: http://baseball.about.com with Associated Press, and www.espn.
go.com
This section works out an example that includes all the topics we have discussed so far in this 
chapter.
EXAMPLE 13–8 
Driving Experience and Monthly Auto Insurance
A random sample of eight drivers selected from a small town insured with a company and having 
similar minimum required auto insurance policies was selected. The table on the next page lists 
their driving experiences (in years) and monthly auto insurance premiums (in dollars):
A complete example of regression 
analysis.
13.5 Regression Analysis: A Complete Example
Compute the linear correlation coefficient, ρ. Does it make sense to 
make a confidence interval and to test a hypothesis about ρ here? 
Explain.
www.ebook3000.com

534
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
Driving Experience 
(years)
Monthly Auto Insurance 
Premium ($)
5
64
2
87
12
50
9
71
15
44
6
56
25
42
16
60
(a) Does the insurance premium depend on the driving experience, or does the driving 
experience depend on the insurance premium? Do you expect a positive or a negative 
relationship between these two variables?
(b) Compute SSxx, SSyy, and SSxy.
(c) Find the least squares regression line by choosing appropriate dependent and independ-
ent variables based on your answer in part a.
(d) Interpret the meaning of the values of a and b calculated in part c.
(e) Plot the scatter diagram and the regression line.
(f) Calculate r and r2, and explain what they mean.
(g) Predict the monthly auto insurance premium for a driver with 10 years of driving experience.
(h) Compute the standard deviation of errors.
(i) Construct a 90% confidence interval for B.
(j) Test at a 5% significance level whether B is negative.
(k) Using α = .05, test whether ρ is different from zero.
Solution
(a) Based on theory and intuition, we expect the insurance premium to depend on driving 
experience. Consequently, the insurance premium is the dependent variable (variable y) 
and driving experience is the independent variable (variable x) in the regression model. 
A new driver is considered a high risk by the insurance companies, and he or she has to 
pay a higher premium for auto insurance. On average, the insurance premium is expected 
to decrease with an increase in the years of driving experience. Therefore, we expect a 
negative relationship between these two variables. In other words, both the population 
correlation coefficient ρ and the population regression slope B are expected to be negative.
(b) Table 13.5 shows the calculation of Σx, Σy, Σxy, Σx2, and Σy2.
PhotoDisc, Inc./Getty Images
Table 13.5
 Experience  
Premium
 
x 
y 
xy 
x2 
y2
 
5 
64 
320 
25 
4096
 
2 
87 
174 
4 
7569
 
12 
50 
600 
144 
2500
 
9 
71 
639 
81 
5041
 
15 
44 
660 
225 
1936
 
6 
56 
336 
36 
3136
 
25 
42 
1050 
625 
1764
 
16 
60 
960 
256 
3600
 Σx = 90 
Σy = 474 
Σxy = 4739 
Σx2 = 1396 
Σy2 = 29,642

13.5 Regression Analysis: A Complete Example
535
 
The values of x and y are
 x = ∑x∕n = 90∕8 = 11.25
 y = ∑y∕n = 474∕8 = 59.25
 
The values of SSxy, SSxx, and SSyy are computed as follows:
 SSxy = ∑xy −(∑x)(∑y)
n
= 4739 −(90)(474)
8
= −593.5000
 SSxx = ∑x2 −(∑x)2
n
= 1396 −(90)2
8
= 383.5000
 SSyy = ∑y2 −(∑y)2
n
= 29,642 −(474)2
8
= 1557.5000
(c) To find the regression line, we calculate a and b as follows:
 b =
SSxy
SSxx
= −593.5000
383.5000 = −1.5476
 a = y −bx = 59.25 −(−1.5476)(11.25) = 76.6605
Thus, our estimated regression line yˆ = a + bx is
yˆ = 76.6605 −1.5476x
(d) The value of a = 76.6605 gives the value of yˆ for x = 0; that is, it gives the monthly auto 
insurance premium for a driver with no driving experience. However, as mentioned 
earlier in this chapter, we should not attach much importance to this statement because 
the sample contains drivers with only 2 or more years of experience. The value of b 
gives the change in yˆ due to a change of one unit in x. Thus, b = −1.5476 indicates that, 
on average, for every extra year of driving experience, the monthly auto insurance pre-
mium decreases by $1.55. Note that when b is negative, y decreases as x increases.
(e) Figure 13.21 shows the scatter diagram and the regression line for the data on eight auto 
drivers. Note that the regression line slopes downward from left to right. This result is 
consistent with the negative relationship we anticipated between driving experience and 
insurance premium.
Insurance premium
90
Experience
5
y = 76.6605 − 1.5476 x
∧
80
70
60
50
40
10
15
20
25
0
Figure 13.21 Scatter diagram and the 
regression line.
(f) The values of r and r2 are computed as follows:
 r =
SSxy
√SSxx SSyy
=
−593.5000
√(383.5000)(1557.5000)
= −.7679 = −.77
 r 2 =
b SSxy
SSyy
= (−1.5476)(−593.5000)
1557.5000
= .5897 = .59
www.ebook3000.com

536
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
The value of r = −.77 indicates that the driving experience and the monthly auto insur-
ance premium are negatively related. The (linear) relationship is strong but not very 
strong. The value of r2 = .59 states that 59% of the total variation in insurance premiums 
is explained by years of driving experience, and 41% is not. The low value of r2 indicates 
that there may be many other important variables that contribute to the determination of 
auto insurance premiums. For example, the premium is expected to depend on the driv-
ing record of a driver and the type and age of the car.
(g) Using the estimated regression line, we find the predicted value of y for x = 10 as:
yˆ = 76.6605 −1.5476x = 76.6605 −1.5476(10) = $61.18
Thus, we expect the monthly auto insurance premium of a driver with 10 years of driv-
ing experience to be $61.18.
(h) The standard deviation of errors is
se = B
SSyy −b SSxy
n −2
= B
1557.5000 −(−1.5476)(−593.5000)
8 −2
= 10.3199
(i) To construct a 90% confidence interval for B, first we calculate the standard deviation 
of b:
sb =
se
√SSxx
=
10.3199
√383.5000
= .5270
For a 90% confidence level, the area in each tail of the t distribution is
α∕2 = (1 − .90)∕2 = .05
The degrees of freedom are
d f = n −2 = 8 −2 = 6
From the t distribution table, the t value for .05 area in the right tail of the t distribution 
and 6 df is 1.943. The 90% confidence interval for B is
 b ± tsb = −1.5476 ± 1.943(.5270)
 = −1.5476 ± 1.0240 = −2.57 to −.52
Thus, we can state with 90% confidence that B lies in the interval −2.57 to −.52. That 
is, on average, the monthly auto insurance premium of a driver decreases by an amount 
between $.52 and $2.57 for every extra year of driving experience.
(j) We perform the following five steps to test the hypothesis about B.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
The null and alternative hypotheses are, respectively,
 H0: B = 0 (B is not negative.)
 H1: B < 0 (B is negative.)
Note that the null hypothesis can also be written as H0: B ≥ 0.
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
Because σε is not known, we use the t distribution to make the hypothesis test.
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
The significance level is .05. The < sign in the alternative hypothesis indicates that 
it is a left-tailed test.
Area in the left tail of the t distribution = α = .05
 d f = n −2 = 8 −2 = 6
From the t distribution table, the critical value of t for .05 area in the left tail of the t 
distribution and 6 df is −1.943, as shown in Figure 13.22.

13.5 Regression Analysis: A Complete Example
537
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
The value of the test statistic t for b is calculated as follows:
t = b −B
sb
= −1.5476 −0
.5270
= −2.937
Step 5. Make a decision.
The value of the test statistic t = −2.937 falls in the rejection region. Hence, we reject 
the null hypothesis and conclude that B is negative. That is, the monthly auto insurance 
premium decreases with an increase in years of driving experience.
Using the p-Value to Make a Decision
We can find the range for the p-value from the t distribution table (Table V of Appendix B) 
and make a decision by comparing that p-value with the significance level. For this 
example, df = 6 and the observed value of t is −2.937. From Table V (the t distribution 
table) in the row of df = 6, 2.937 is between 2.447 and 3.143. The corresponding areas 
in the right tail of the t distribution are .025 and .01, respectively. Our test is left-tailed, 
however, and the observed value of t is negative. Thus, t = −2.937 lies between −2.447 
and −3.143. The corresponding areas in the left tail of the t distribution are .025 and .01. 
Therefore the range of the p-value is
.01 < p-value < .025
Thus, we can state that for any α equal to or greater than .025 (the upper limit of the 
p-value range), we will reject the null hypothesis. For our example, α = .05, which is 
greater than the upper limit of the p-value of .025. As a result, we reject the null 
hypothesis.
Note that if we use technology to find this p-value, we will obtain a p-value of .013. 
Then we can reject the null hypothesis for any α ≥.013.
(k) We perform the following five steps to test the hypothesis about the linear correlation 
coefficient ρ.
Step 1. State the null and alternative hypotheses.
The null and alternative hypotheses are, respectively,
 
H0: ρ = 0 (The linear correlation coefficient is zero.)
 
H1: ρ ≠0 (The linear correlation coefficient is different from zero.)
Step 2. Select the distribution to use.
Assuming that variables x and y are normally distributed, we will use the t distribu-
tion to perform this test about the linear correlation coefficient.
From H0
t
−1.943
0
α = .05
Do not reject H0
Critical value of t
Reject H0
Figure 13.22 Rejection and nonrejection regions.
www.ebook3000.com

538
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
Step 3. Determine the rejection and nonrejection regions.
The significance level is 5%. From the alternative hypothesis we know that the test is 
two-tailed. Hence,
 
Area in each tail of the t distribution = .05∕2 = .025
 
d f = n −2 = 8 −2 = 6
From the t distribution table, Table V of Appendix B, the critical values of t are −2.447 
and 2.447. The rejection and nonrejection regions for this test are shown in Figure 13.23.
Step 4. Calculate the value of the test statistic.
The value of the test statistic t for r is calculated as follows:
t = r A
n −2
1 −r 2 = (−.7679) A
8 −2
1 −(−.7679)2 = −2.936
Step 5. Make a decision.
The value of the test statistic t = −2.936 falls in the rejection region. Hence, we reject 
the null hypothesis and conclude that the linear correlation coefficient between driving 
experience and auto insurance premium is different from zero.
Using the p-Value to Make a Decision
We can find the range for the p-value from the t distribution table and make a decision 
by comparing that p-value with the significance level. For this example, df = 6 and the 
observed value of t is −2.936. From Table V (the t distribution table) in the row of 
df = 6, t = 2.936 is between 2.447 and 3.143. The corresponding areas in the right tail 
of the t distribution curve are .025 and .01, respectively. Since the test is two tailed, the 
range of the p-value is
2(.01) < p-value < 2(.025)  or  .02 < p-value < .05
Thus, we can state that for any α equal to or greater than .05 (the upper limit of the 
p-value range), we will reject the null hypothesis. For our example, α = .05, which is 
equal to the upper limit of the p-value. As a result, we reject the null hypothesis. 
◼ 
2.447
0
t
−2.447
 Two critical values of t
 α/2 = .025
 α/2 = .025
Do not reject H0
Reject H0
Reject H0
Figure 13.23 Rejection and nonrejection regions.
EXERCISES
Pressure (psi)
7.8
8.1
8.3
7.4
8.9
7.2
8.6
7.5
8.1
8.5
Bounce height 
(inches)
54.1 54.3 55.2 53.3 55.4 52.2 55.7 54.6 54.8 55.3
a. With the pressure as an independent variable and bounce 
height as a dependent variable, compute SSxx, SSyy, and SSxy.
b. Find the least squares regression line.
c. Interpret the meaning of the values of a and b calculated in 
part b.
APPLICATIONS
13.62 The recommended air pressure in a basketball is between 7 
and 9 pounds per square inch (psi). When dropped from a height of 
6 feet, a properly inflated basketball should bounce upward between 
52 and 56 inches (http://www.bestsoccerbuys.com/balls-basketball.
html). The basketball coach at a local high school purchased 10 new 
basketballs for the upcoming season, inflated the balls to pressures 
between 7 and 9 psi, and performed the bounce test mentioned above. 
The data obtained are given in the following table.

13.6 Using the Regression Model
539
wanted to find if the restaurants’ sales depend on the mean income of 
households in the related areas. The company collected information 
on these two variables for 10 restaurants randomly selected from dif-
ferent areas. The following table gives information on the weekly 
sales (in thousands of dollars) of these restaurants and the mean 
annual incomes (in thousands of dollars) of the households for those 
areas.
Sales
26
38
23
30
22
40
44
32
28
47
Income
46
63
48
52
32
55
58
49
41
72
a. Taking income as an independent variable and sales as a 
dependent variable, compute SSxx, SSyy, and SSxy.
b. Find the least squares regression line.
c. Briefly explain the meaning of the values of a and b calculated 
in part b.
d Calculate r and r2 and briefly explain what they mean.
e. Compute the standard deviation of errors.
f. Construct a 95% confidence interval for B.
g. Test at a 2.5% significance level whether B is positive.
h. Using a 2.5% significance level, test whether ρ is positive.
13.65 The following table gives information on GPAs and starting 
salaries (rounded to the nearest thousand dollars) of seven recent 
college graduates.
GPA
2.90
3.81
3.20
2.42
3.94
2.05
2.25
Starting salary
48
53
50
37
65
32
37
a. With GPA as an independent variable and starting salary as a 
dependent variable, compute SSxx, SSyy, and SSxy.
b. Find the least squares regression line.
c. Interpret the meaning of the values of a and b calculated in 
part b.
d. Calculate r and r2 and briefly explain what they mean.
e. Compute the standard deviation of errors.
f. Construct a 95% confidence interval for B.
g. Test at a 1% significance level whether B is different from 
zero.
h. Test at a 1% significance level whether ρ is positive.
d. Calculate r and r2 and explain what they mean.
e. Compute the standard deviation of errors.
f. Predict the bounce height of a basketball for x = 8.0.
g. Construct a 98% confidence interval for B.
h. Test at a 5% significance level whether B is different from 
zero.
i. Using α = .05, can you conclude that ρ is different from zero?
13.63 The following table gives information on the incomes (in 
thousands of dollars) and charitable contributions (in hundreds of dol-
lars) for the last year for a random sample of 10 households.
Income
Charitable Contributions
76
15
57
4
140
42
97
33
75
5
107
32
65
10
77
18
102
28
53
4
a. With income as an independent variable and charitable contri-
butions as a dependent variable, compute SSxx, SSyy, and SSxy.
b. Find the regression of charitable contributions on income.
c. Briefly explain the meaning of the values of a and b.
d. Calculate r and r2 and briefly explain what they mean.
e. Compute the standard deviation of errors.
f. Construct a 99% confidence interval for B.
g. Test at a 1% significance level whether B is positive.
h. Using a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the 
linear correlation coefficient is different from zero?
13.64 The CTO Corporation has a large number of chain restaurants 
throughout the United States. The research department at the company 
13.6 Using the Regression Model
Let us return to the example on incomes and food expenditures to discuss two major uses of a 
regression model:
1. Estimating the mean value of y for a given value of x. For instance, we can use our food 
expenditure regression model to estimate the mean food expenditure of all households with 
a specific income (say, $5500 per month).
2. 
Predicting a particular value of y for a given value of x. For instance, we can determine the 
expected food expenditure of a randomly selected household with a particular monthly 
income (say, $5500) using our food expenditure regression model.
13.6.1 Using the Regression Model for Estimating 
the Mean Value of y
Our population regression model is
y = A + Bx + ε
www.ebook3000.com

540
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, the mean value of y for a given x is denoted by μy∣x, read as 
“the mean value of y for a given value of x.” Because of the assumption that the mean value of 
ε is zero, the mean value of y is given by
μy∣x = A + Bx
Our objective is to estimate this mean value. The value of yˆ, obtained from the sample regression 
line by substituting the value of x, gives the point estimate of μy∣x for that x.
 
For our example on incomes and food expenditures, the estimated sample regression line 
(from Example 13–1) is
yˆ = 1.5050 + .2525x
Suppose we want to estimate the mean food expenditure for all households with a monthly 
income of $5500. We will denote this population mean by μy ∣x =55 or μy ∣55. Note that we have 
written x = 55 and not x = 5500 in μy ∣ 55 because the units of measurement for the data used to 
estimate the above regression line in Example 13–1 were hundreds of dollars. Using the regres-
sion line, we find that the point estimate of μy ∣55 is
yˆ = 1.5050 + .2525(55) = $15.3925 hundred
Thus, based on the sample regression line, the point estimate for the mean food expenditure μy∣55 
for all households with a monthly income of $5500 is $1539.25 per month.
 
However, suppose we take a second sample of seven households from the same popula-
tion and estimate the regression line for this sample. The point estimate of μy∣55 obtained from 
the regression line for the second sample is expected to be different. All possible samples of 
the same size taken from the same population will give different regression lines as shown in 
Figure 13.24, and, consequently, a different point estimate of μy∣x. Therefore, a confidence 
interval constructed for μy∣x based on one sample will give a more reliable estimate of μy∣x 
than will a point estimate.
 
To construct a confidence interval for μy∣x, we must know the mean, the standard deviation, 
and the shape of the sampling distribution of its point estimator yˆ.
 
The point estimator yˆ of μy∣x is normally distributed with a mean of A + Bx and a standard 
deviation of
σˆym = σε B
1
n + (x0 −x)2
SSxx
where σˆym is the standard deviation of yˆ when it is used to estimate μy∣x, x0 is the value of x for 
which we are estimating μy∣x, and σε is the population standard deviation of ε.
 
However, usually σε is not known. Rather, it is estimated by the standard deviation of sample 
errors se. In this case, we replace σε by se and σˆym by sˆym in the foregoing expression. To make a 
confidence interval for μy ∣x, we use the t distribution because σε is not known.
Population
regression line
 μyx = A + Bx
Regression lines y = a + bx
estimated from different samples
^
x
y
Figure 13.24 Population and sample regression lines.

13.6 Using the Regression Model
541
 
Example 13–9 illustrates how to make a confidence interval for the mean value of y, μy ∣ x.
EXAMPLE 13–9 
Incomes and Food Expenditures of Households
Refer to Example 13–1 on incomes and food expenditures. Find a 99% confidence interval for 
the mean food expenditure for all households with a monthly income of $5500.
Solution Using the regression line estimated in Example 13–1, we find the point estimate of 
the mean food expenditure for x = 55 as
yˆ = 1.5050 + .2525(55) = $15.3925 hundred
The confidence level is 99%. Hence, the area in each tail of the t distribution is
α∕2 = (1 −.99)∕2 = .005
The degrees of freedom are
d f = n −2 = 7 −2 = 5
From the t distribution table, the t value for .005 area in the right tail of the t distribution and 5 df 
is 4.032. From calculations in Examples 13–1 and 13–2, we know that
se = 1.5939, x = 55.1429, and SSxx = 1772.8571
The standard deviation of yˆ as an estimate of μy ∣x for x = 55 is calculated as follows:
sˆym = se B
1
n + (x0 −x)2
SSxx
= (1.5939) B
1
7 + (55 −55.1429)2
1772.8571
= .6025
Hence, the 99% confidence interval for μy ∣ 55 is
 yˆ ± tsˆym = 15.3925 ± 4.032(.6025)
 = 15.3925 ± 2.4293 = 12.9632 to 17.8218
 
Thus, with 99% confidence we can state that the mean food expenditure for all households 
with a monthly income of $5500 is between $1296.32 and $1782.18. 
◼ 
13.6.2 Using the Regression Model for Predicting 
a Particular Value of y
The second major use of a regression model is to predict a particular value of y for a given value 
of x—say, x0. For example, we may want to predict the food expenditure of a randomly selected 
household with a monthly income of $5500. In this case, we are not interested in the mean food 
expenditure of all households with a monthly income of $5500 but in the food expenditure of one 
particular household with a monthly income of $5500. This predicted value of y is denoted by yp. 
Again, to predict a single value of y for x = x0 from the estimated sample regression line, we use the 
value of yˆ as a point estimate of yp. Using the estimated regression line, we find that yˆ for x = 55 is
yˆ = 1.5050 + .2525(55) = $15.3925 hundred
Constructing a confidence 
interval for the mean value of y 
for a given x.
Confidence Interval for 𝜇y|x The (1 − α)100% confidence interval for 𝞵y|x for x = x0 is
yˆ ± tsˆym
where the value of t is obtained from the t distribution table for α∕2 area in the right tail of the 
t distribution curve and df = n − 2. The value of sˆym is calculated as follows:
sˆym = se B
1
n + (x0 −x)2
SSxx
www.ebook3000.com

542
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
Thus, based on our regression line, the point estimate for the food expenditure of a given house-
hold with a monthly income of $5500 is $1539.25 per month. Note that yˆ = 1539.25 is the point 
estimate for the mean food expenditure for all households with x = 55 as well as for the predicted 
value of food expenditure of one household with x = 55.
 
Different regression lines estimated by using different samples of seven households each 
taken from the same population will give different values of the point estimator for the predicted 
value of y for x = 55. Hence, a confidence interval constructed for yp based on one sample will 
give a more reliable estimate of yp than will a point estimate. The confidence interval constructed 
for yp is more commonly called a prediction interval.
 
The procedure for constructing a prediction interval for yp is similar to that for constructing 
a confidence interval for μy∣x except that the standard deviation of yˆ is larger when we predict a 
single value of y than when we estimate μy∣x.
 
The point estimator yˆ of yp is normally distributed with a mean of A + Bx and a standard 
deviation of
σˆyp = σε  B1 + 1
n + (x0 −x)2
SSxx
where σˆyp is the standard deviation of the predicted value of y, x0 is the value of x for which we 
are predicting y, and σε is the population standard deviation of ε.
 
However, usually σε is not known. In this case, we replace σε by se and σˆyp by sˆyp in the forego-
ing expression. To make a prediction interval for yp, we use the t distribution when σε is not known.
 
Example 13–10 illustrates the procedure to make a prediction interval for a particular 
value of y.
EXAMPLE 13–10 
Incomes and Food Expenditures 
of Households
Refer to Example 13–1 on incomes and food expenditures. Find a 99% prediction interval for the 
predicted food expenditure for a randomly selected household with a monthly income of $5500.
Solution Using the regression line estimated in Example 13–1, we find the point estimate of 
the predicted food expenditure for x = 55:
yˆ = 1.5050 + .2525(55) = $15.3925 hundred
The area in each tail of the t distribution for a 99% confidence level is
α∕2 = (1 −.99)∕2 = .005
The degrees of freedom are
d f = n −2 = 7 −2 = 5
From the t distribution table, the t value for .005 area in the right tail of the t distribution curve 
and 5 df is 4.032. From calculations in Examples 13–1 and 13–2,
se = 1.5939, x = 55.1429, and SSxx = 1772.8571
Making a prediction interval for a 
particular value of y for a given x.
Prediction Interval for yp The (1 − α)100% prediction interval for the predicted value of y, 
denoted by yp, for x = x0 is
yˆ ± tsyˆp
where the value of t is obtained from the t distribution table for α∕2 area in the right tail of the 
t distribution curve and df = n − 2. The value of sˆyp is calculated as follows:
syˆp = se B1 + 1
n + (x0 −x)2
SSxx

13.6 Using the Regression Model
543
The standard deviation of yˆ as an estimator of yp for x = 55 is calculated as follows:
 sˆyp = se  B1 + 1
n + (x0 −x)2
SSxx
 = (1.5939)  B1 + 1
7 + (55 −55.1429)2
1772.8571
= 1.7040
Hence, the 99% prediction interval for yp for x = 55 is
 yˆ ± tsˆyp = 15.3925 ± 4.032(1.7040)
 = 15.3925 ± 6.8705 = 8.5220 to 22.2630
 
Thus, with 99% confidence we can state that the predicted food expenditure of a household 
with a monthly income of $5500 is between $852.20 and $2226.30. 
◼ 
 
As we can observe in Example 13–10, this interval is much wider than the one for the mean 
value of y for x = 55 calculated in Example 13–9, which was $1296.32 to $1782.18. This is 
always true. The prediction interval for predicting a single value of y is always larger than the 
confidence interval for estimating the mean value of y for a certain value of x.
EXERCISES
following table gives the temperature and the number of pairs of gloves 
(in hundreds) produced on each of the 8 randomly selected days.
Temperature (°F)
72
71
78
75
81
77
68
76
Pairs of gloves
37
37
32
36
33
35
39
34
Construct a 99% confidence interval for μy ∣ x for x = 77 and a 99% 
prediction interval for yp for x = 77. Here pairs of gloves is the 
dependent variable.
13.71 The recommended air pressure in a basketball is between 7 
and 9 pounds per square inch (psi). When dropped from a height of 
6 feet, a properly inflated basketball should bounce upward between 
52 and 56 inches (http://www.bestsoccerbuys.com/balls-basketball.
html). The basketball coach at a local high school purchased 10 new 
basketballs for the upcoming season, inflated the balls to pressures 
between 7 and 9 psi, and performed the bounce test mentioned above. 
The data obtained are given in the following table.
Pressure (psi)
7.8
8.1
8.3
7.4
8.9
7.2
8.6
7.5
8.1
8.5
Bounce height 
(inches)
54.1 54.3 55.2 53.3 55.4 52.2 55.7 54.6 54.8 55.3
Construct a 99% confidence interval for the mean bounce height of all 
basketballs that are inflated to 8.5 psi. Construct a 99% prediction 
interval for the bounce height of a randomly selected basketball that is 
inflated to 8.5 psi. Here bounce height is the dependent variable.
13.72 The following table gives information on GPAs and starting 
salaries (rounded to the nearest thousand dollars) of seven recent col-
lege graduates.
GPA
2.90
3.81
3.20
2.42
3.94
2.05
2.25
Starting salary
48
53
50
37
65
32
37
Construct a 98% confidence interval for the mean starting salary of 
recent college graduates with a GPA of 3.15. Construct a 98% predic-
tion interval for the starting salary of a randomly selected recent col-
lege graduate with a GPA of 3.15.
CONCEPTS AND PROCEDURES
13.66 Briefly explain the difference between estimating the mean 
value of y and predicting a particular value of y using a regression model.
13.67 Construct a 99% confidence interval for the mean value of y and 
a 99% prediction interval for the predicted value of y for the following.
a. yˆ = 3.25 + .80x for x = 15 given se = .954, x = 18.52, SSxx = 
144.65, and n = 10
b. yˆ = −27 + 7.67x for x = 12 given se = 2.46, x = 13.43, SSxx = 
369.77, and n = 10
13.68 Construct a 95% confidence interval for the mean value of y and 
a 95% prediction interval for the predicted value of y for the following.
a. yˆ = 13.40 + 2.58x for x = 8 given se = 1.29, x = 11.30, SSxx = 
210.45, and n = 12
b. yˆ = −8.6 + 3.72x for x = 24 given se = 1.89, x = 19.70, SSxx = 
315.40, and n = 10
APPLICATIONS
13.69 The following data give the experience (in years) and monthly 
salaries (in hundreds of dollars) of nine randomly selected secretaries.
Experience
14
3
5
6
4
9
18
5
16
Monthly 
salary
62
29
37
43
35
60
67
32
60
Construct a 90% confidence interval for the mean monthly salary of all 
secretaries with 10 years of experience. Construct a 90% prediction 
interval for the monthly salary of a randomly selected secretary with 
10 years of experience.
13.70 The owner of a small factory that produces work gloves is con-
cerned about the high cost of air conditioning in the summer, but he is 
afraid that keeping the temperature in the factory too high will lower 
productivity. During the summer, he experiments with temperature 
settings from 68°F to 81°F and measures each day’s productivity. The 
www.ebook3000.com

544
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
USES AND MISUSES...
1. PROCESSING ERRORS
Stuck on the far right side of the linear regression model is the Greek 
letter epsilon, ε. Despite its diminutive size, proper respect for the 
error term is critical to good linear regression modeling and analysis.
 
One interpretation of the error term is that it is a process. Imagine 
you are a chemist and you have to weigh a number of chemicals for 
an experiment. The balance that you use in your laboratory is very 
accurate—so accurate, in fact, that the shuffling of your feet, your 
exhaling near it, or the rumbling of trucks on the road outside can 
cause the reading to fluctuate. Because the value of the measurement 
that you take will be affected by a number of factors out of your con-
trol, you must make several measurements for each chemical, note 
each measurement, and then take the means and standard deviations 
of your samples. The distribution of measurements around a mean is 
the result of a random error process dependent on a number of fac-
tors out of your control; each time you use the balance, the measure-
ment you take is the sum of the actual mass of the chemical and a 
“random” error. In this example, the measurements will most likely be 
normally distributed around the mean.
 
Linear regression analysis makes the same assumption about 
the two variables you are comparing: The value of the dependent 
variable is a linear function of the independent variable, plus a little bit 
of error that you cannot control. Unfortunately, when working with 
economic or survey data, you rarely can duplicate an experiment to 
identify the error model. As a statistician, however, you can use the 
errors to help you refine your model of the relationship among the 
variables and to guide your collection of new data. For example, if 
the errors are skewed to the right for moderate values of the inde-
pendent variable and skewed to the left for small and large values of 
the independent variable, you can modify your model to account for 
this difference. Or you can think about other relationships among the 
variables that might explain this particular distribution of errors. A 
detailed analysis of the error in your model can be just as instructive 
as analysis of the slope and y-intercept of the identified model.
2. OUTLIERS AND CORRELATION
In Chapter 3 we learned that outliers can affect the values of some 
of the summary measures such as the mean, standard deviation, and 
range. Note that although outliers do affect many other summary 
measures, these three are affected substantially. Here we will see that 
just looking at a number that represents the correlation coefficient 
does not provide the entire story. A very famous data set for demon-
strating this concept was created by F. J. Anscombe (Anscombe, F. J., 
Graphs in Statistical Analysis, American Statistician, 27, pp. 17–21). 
He created four pairs of data sets on x and y variables, each of which 
has a correlation of .816. To the novice, it may seem that the scatter-
plots for these four data sets should look virtually the same, but that 
may not be true. Look at the four scatterplots shown in Figure 13.25.
 
No two of these scatterplots are even remotely close to being 
the same or even similar. The data used in the upper left plot are lin-
early associated, as are the data in the lower left plot. However the 
plot of y3 versus x3 contains an outlier. Without this outlier, the cor-
relation between x3 and y3 would be 1. On the other hand, there is 
Scatterplots of Anscombe’s data
5.0
4
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
6
8
10
5.0
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
5.0
4
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
6
8
10
10
15
5.0
20
7.5
10.0
12.5
y1 and x1
y3 by x3
y2 and x2
y4 and x4
Figure 13.25 Four scatterplots with the same correlation coefficient.

Supplementary Exercises
545
much more variability in the relationship between x1 and y1. As far as 
x4 and y4 are concerned, the strong correlation is defined by the 
single point in the upper right corner of the scatterplot. Without this 
point, there would be no variability among the x4 values, and the cor-
relation would be undefined. Lastly, the scatterplot of y2 versus x2 
reveals that there is an extremely well-defined relationship between 
these variables, but it is not linear. Being satisfied that the correlation 
coefficient is close to 1.0 between variables x2 and y2 implies that 
there is a strong linear association between the variables when actu-
ally we are fitting a line to a set of data that should be represented by 
another type of mathematical function.
 
As we have mentioned before, the process of making a graph 
may seem trivial, but the importance of graphs in our analysis can 
never be overstated.
Population parameters for a simple regression model The values 
of A and B for the regression model y = A + Bx + ε that are obtained 
by using population data.
Positive relationship between two variables The value of the 
slope in the regression line and the correlation coefficient between 
two variables are both positive.
Prediction interval The confidence interval for a particular value 
of y for a given value of x.
Probabilistic or statistical model A model in which the independ-
ent variable does not determine the dependent variable exactly.
Random error term (ε) The difference between the actual and pre-
dicted values of y.
Scatter diagram or scatterplot A plot of the paired observations 
of x and y.
Simple linear regression A regression model with one depend-
ent and one independent variable that assumes a straight-line rela-
tionship.
Slope The coefficient of x in a regression model that gives the 
change in y for a change of one unit in x.
SSE (error sum of squares) The sum of the squared differences 
between the actual and predicted values of y. It is the portion of the 
SST that is not explained by the regression model.
SSR (regression sum of squares) The portion of the SST that is 
explained by the regression model.
SST (total sum of squares) The sum of the squared differences 
between actual y values and y.
Standard deviation of errors A measure of spread for the random 
errors.
y-intercept The point at which the regression line intersects the 
vertical axis on which the dependent variable is marked. It is the value 
of y when x is zero.
Coefficient of determination A measure that gives the proportion 
(or percentage) of the total variation in a dependent variable that is 
explained by a given independent variable.
Degrees of freedom for a simple linear regression model Sample 
size minus 2; that is, n − 2.
Dependent variable The variable to be predicted or explained.
Deterministic model A model in which the independent variable 
determines the dependent variable exactly. Such a model gives an 
exact relationship between two variables.
Estimated or predicted value of y The value of the dependent vari-
able, denoted by yˆ, that is calculated for a given value of x using the 
estimated regression model.
Independent or explanatory variable The variable included in a 
model to explain the variation in the dependent variable.
Least squares estimates of A and B The values of a and b that are 
calculated by using the sample data.
Least squares method The method used to fit a regression line 
through a scatter diagram such that the error sum of squares is minimum.
Least squares regression line A regression line obtained by using 
the least squares method.
Linear correlation coefficient A measure of the strength of the 
linear relationship between two variables.
Linear regression model A regression model that gives a straight-
line relationship between two variables.
Multiple regression model A regression model that contains two 
or more independent variables.
Negative relationship between two variables The value of the 
slope in the regression line and the correlation coefficient between 
two variables are both negative.
Nonlinear (simple) regression model A regression model that 
does not give a straight-line relationship between two variables.
Glossary
a. Taking age as an independent variable and number of break-
downs as a dependent variable, what is your hypothesis about 
the sign of B in the regression line? (In other words, do you 
expect B to be positive or negative?)
b. Find the least squares regression line. Is the sign of b the same 
as you hypothesized for B in part a?
c. Give a brief interpretation of the values of a and b calculated 
in part b.
13.73 The following data give information on the ages (in years) and 
the number of breakdowns during the last month for a sample of seven 
machines at a large company.
Age (years)
12
7
2
8
13
9
4
Number of 
breakdowns
10
5
1
4
12
7
2
Supplementary Exercises
www.ebook3000.com

546
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
d. Compute r and r2 and explain what they mean.
e. Compute the standard deviation of errors.
f. Construct a 99% confidence interval for B.
g. Test at a 2.5% significance level whether B is positive.
h. At a 2.5% significance level, can you conclude that ρ is posi-
tive? Is your conclusion the same as in part g?
13.74 The health department of a large city has developed an air 
pollution index that measures the level of several air pollutants that 
cause respiratory distress in humans. The following table gives the 
pollution index (on a scale of 1 to 10, with 10 being the worst) for 7 
randomly selected summer days and the number of patients with 
acute respiratory problems admitted to the emergency rooms of the 
city’s hospitals.
Air pollution 
index
4.5
6.7
8.2
5.0
4.6
6.1
3.0
Emergency 
admissions
53
82
102
60
39
42
27
a. Taking the air pollution index as an independent variable and 
the number of emergency admissions as a dependent variable, 
do you expect B to be positive or negative in the regression 
model y = A + Bx + ε?
b. Find the least squares regression line. Is the sign of b the same 
as you hypothesized for B in part a?
c. Compute r and r2, and explain what they mean.
d. Compute the standard deviation of errors.
e. Construct a 90% confidence interval for B.
f. Test at a 5% significance level whether B is positive.
g. Test at a 5% significance level whether ρ is positive. Is your 
conclusion the same as in part f?
13.75 The management of a supermarket wants to find if there is a 
relationship between the number of times a specific product is pro-
moted on the intercom system in the store and the number of units of 
that product sold. To experiment, the management selected a product 
and promoted it on the intercom system for 7 days. The following 
table gives the number of times this product was promoted each day 
and the number of units sold.
 Number of Promotions  
Number of Units Sold
          per Day 
per Day (hundreds)
 
15 
11
 
22 
22
 
42 
30
 
30 
26
 
18 
17
 
12 
15
 
38 
23
a. With the number of promotions as an independent variable 
and the number of units sold as a dependent variable, what do 
you expect the sign of B in the regression line y = A + Bx + ε 
will be?
b. Find the least squares regression line yˆ = a + bx. Is the sign 
of b the same as you hypothesized for B in part a?
c. Give a brief interpretation of the values of a and b calculated 
in part b.
d. Compute r and r2 and explain what they mean.
e. Predict the number of units of this product sold on a day with 
35 promotions.
f. Compute the standard deviation of errors.
g. Construct a 98% confidence interval for B.
h. Testing at a 1% significance level, can you conclude that B is 
positive?
i. Using α = .02, can you conclude that the correlation coeffi-
cient is different from zero?
13.76 The following table gives the average weekly retail price of a 
gallon of regular gasoline in the eastern United States over a 9-week 
period from December 1, 2014, through January 26, 2015. Consider 
these 9 weeks as a random sample.
Date 
12/1/14 12/8/14 12/15/14 12/22/14 12/29/14 1/5/15
Price ($) 
2.861 
2.776 
2.667 
2.535 
2.445 
2.378
Date 
1/12/15 1/19/15 
1/26/15
Price ($) 
2.293 
2.204 
2.174
a. Assign a value of 0 to 12/1/14, 1 to 12/8/14, 2 to 12/15/14, and 
so on. Call this new variable Time. Make a new table with the 
variables Time and Price.
b. With time as an independent variable and price as the depend-
ent variable, compute SSxx, SSyy, and SSxy.
c. Construct a scatter diagram for these data. Does the scatter 
diagram exhibit a negative linear relationship between time 
and price?
d. Find the least squares regression line yˆ = a + bx.
e. Give a brief interpretation of the values of a and b calculated 
in part d.
f. Compute the correlation coefficient r.
g. Predict the average price of a gallon of regular gasoline in 
the eastern United States for Time = 26. Comment on this 
prediction.
13.77 The following data give information on the ages (in years) and 
the number of breakdowns during the last month for a sample of seven 
machines at a large company.
Age (years)
12
7
2
8
13
9
4
Number of 
breakdowns
10
5
1
4
12
7
2
Construct a 99% confidence interval for the mean number of break-
downs per month for all machines with an age of 8 years. Find a 99% 
prediction interval for the number of breakdowns per month for a 
randomly selected machine with an age of 8 years.
13.78 The management of a supermarket wants to find if there is a 
relationship between the number of times a specific product is pro-
moted on the intercom system in the store and the number of units of 
that product sold. To experiment, the management selected a product 
and promoted it on the intercom system for 7 days. The following 
table gives the number of times this product was promoted each day 
and the number of units sold.

Self-Review Test
547
 Number of Promotions  
Number of Units Sold per
 
per Day 
Day (hundreds)
 
15 
11
 
22 
22
 
42 
30
 
30 
26
 
18 
17
 
12 
15
 
38 
23
Make a 90% confidence interval for the mean number of units of that 
product sold on days with 35 promotions. Construct a 90% prediction 
interval for the number of units of that product sold on a randomly 
selected day with 35 promotions.
13.79 The following table provides information on the living area (in 
square feet) and price (in thousands of dollars) of 10 randomly 
selected houses listed for sale in a city.
Living 
Area
3008 2032 2272 1840 2579 2583 1650 3932 2978 2176
Price
375
320
355
289
360
384
272
470
395
360
Construct a 98% confidence interval for the mean price of all houses 
with living areas of 2400 square feet. Construct a 98% prediction 
interval for the price of a randomly selected house with a living area 
of 2400 square feet.
this study? What does the correlation coefficient tell us about the rela-
tionship between the two variables in this example? Write a short note 
to your friend answering these questions.
13.82 Consider the formulas for calculating a prediction interval for 
a new (specific) value of y. For each of the changes mentioned in parts 
a through c below, state the effect on the width of the confidence inter-
val (increase, decrease, or no change) and why it happens. Note that 
besides the change mentioned in each part, everything else such as the 
values of a, b, x, se, and SSxx remains unchanged.
a. The confidence level is increased.
b. The sample size is increased.
c. The value of x0 is moved farther away from the value of x.
d. What will the value of the margin of error be if x0 equals x?
13.83 Consider the following data
x
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
y
−125
−64
−27
−8
−1
0
1
8
27
64
125
a. Calculate the correlation between x and y, and perform a 
hypothesis test to determine if the correlation is significantly 
greater than zero. Use a significance level of 5%.
b. Are you willing to conclude that there is a strong linear asso-
ciation between the two variables? Use at least one graph to 
support your answer, and to explain why or why not.
13.80 Consider the data given in the following table.
x
10
20
30
40
50
60
y
12
15
19
21
25
30
a. Find the least squares regression line and the linear correla-
tion coefficient r.
b. Suppose that each value of y given in the table is increased by 
5 and the x values remain unchanged. Would you expect r to 
increase, decrease, or remain the same? How do you expect 
the least squares regression line to change?
c. Increase each value of y given in the table by 5 and find the 
new least squares regression line and the correlation coeffi-
cient r. Do these results agree with your expectation in part b?
13.81 An economist is studying the relationship between the incomes 
of fathers and their sons or daughters. Let x be the annual income of a 
30-year-old person and let y be the annual income of that person’s 
father at age 30 years, adjusted for inflation. A random sample of 300 
thirty-year-olds and their fathers yields a linear correlation coefficient 
of .60 between x and y. A friend of yours, who has read about this 
research, asks you several questions, such as: Does the positive value 
of the correlation coefficient suggest that the 30-year-olds tend to earn 
more than their fathers? Does the correlation coefficient reveal any-
thing at all about the difference between the incomes of 30-year-olds 
and their fathers? If not, what other information would we need from 
Advanced Exercises
 3. A deterministic regression model is a model that
a. contains the random error term
b. does not contain the random error term
c. gives a nonlinear relationship
 4. A probabilistic regression model is a model that
a. contains the random error term
b. does not contain the random error term
c. shows an exact relationship
 1. A simple regression is a regression model that contains
a. only one independent variable
b. only one dependent variable
c. more than one independent variable
d. both a and b
 2. The relationship between independent and dependent variables 
represented by the (simple) linear regression is that of
a. a straight line  b. a curve  c. both a and b
Self-Review Test
www.ebook3000.com

548
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
league baseball team’s night games on 7 randomly selected evenings 
in May.
Temperature
61
70
50
65
48
75
53
Attendance
10
16
12
15
 8
20
18
a. Do you think temperature depends on attendance or attend-
ance depends on temperature?
b. With temperature as an independent variable and attendance 
as a dependent variable, what is your hypothesis about the 
sign of B in the regression model?
c. Construct a scatter diagram for these data. Does the scatter 
diagram exhibit a linear relationship between the two 
variables?
d. Find the least squares regression line. Is the sign of b the 
same as the one you hypothesized for B in part b?
e. Give a brief interpretation of the values of the y-intercept and 
slope calculated in part d.
f. Compute r and r2, and explain what they mean.
g. Predict the attendance at a night game in May for a tempera-
ture of 60°F.
h. Compute the standard deviation of errors.
i. Construct a 99% confidence interval for B.
j. Testing at a 1% significance level, can you conclude that B is 
positive?
k. Construct a 95% confidence interval for the mean attendance 
at a night game in May when the temperature is 60°F.
l. Make a 95% prediction interval for the attendance at a night 
game in May when the temperature is 60°F.
m. Using a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the 
linear correlation coefficient is positive?
 5. The least squares regression line minimizes the sum of
a. errors  b. squared errors  c. predictions
 6. The degrees of freedom for a simple regression model are
a. n − 1  b. n − 2  c. n − 5
 7. Is the following statement true or false?
The coefficient of determination gives the proportion of 
total squared errors (SST) that is explained by the use of the 
regression model.
 8. Is the following statement true or false?
The linear correlation coefficient measures the strength of 
the linear association between two variables.
 9. The value of the coefficient of determination is always in the 
range
a. 0 to 1  b. −1 to 1  c. −1 to 0
10. The value of the correlation coefficient is always in the range
a. 0 to 1  b. −1 to 1  c. −1 to 0
11. Explain why the random error term ε is added to the regression 
model.
12. Explain the difference between A and a and between B and b for 
a regression model.
13. Briefly explain the assumptions of a regression model.
14. Briefly explain the difference between the population regression 
line and a sample regression line.
15. The following table gives the temperatures (in degrees Fahren-
heit) at 6 pm and the attendance (rounded to hundreds) at a minor 
Note: The Mini-Projects are located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Mini-Projects
Note: The Decide for Yourself feature is located on the text’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
Decide for Yourself
TI-84 Color/TI-84
CHAPTER 13
TECHNOLOGY 
INSTRUCTIONS
Note: Complete TI-84, Minitab, and Excel manuals are available for download at the textbook’s Web site, www.wiley.com/college/mann.
The TI-84 Color Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for the TI-84 Plus C 
color graphing calculator running the 4.0 operating system. Some screens, menus, and func-
tions will be slightly different in older operating systems. The TI-84 and TI-84 Plus can perform 
all of the same functions but will not have the “Color” option referenced in some of the menus.
Finding the Regression Equation, r2, and r 
for Example 13–1 of the Text
1. Enter the data from Example 13–1 into L1 (Income) and L2 (Food Expenditure).
2. Select STAT > CALC > LinReg(a+bx).

Technology Instructions
549
3. Use the following settings in the LinReg(a+bx) menu (see Screen 13.1):
• Enter L1 at the Xlist prompt.
• Enter L2 at the Ylist prompt.
• Leave the FreqList prompt blank.
Note: If you have another list with the frequency for each ordered pair, enter the name of that list at 
this prompt.
• Enter Y1 at the Store RegEQ prompt.
Note: To get Y1, select VARS > Y-VARS > Function > Y1.
4. Highlight Calculate and press ENTER.
5. The output includes the least squares regression equation, the coefficient of determination, 
and the correlation coefficient. In addition, the regression equation will be stored as function Y1. 
(See Screen 13.2.)
Note: If you did not see the values of r and r2, select 2nd > 0 > DiagnosticOn and press ENTER once 
the function DiagnosticOn is pasted onto the home screen. You should see Done once the calculator 
has executed this command. This needs to be done only once.
Constructing a Confidence Interval for Slope for Example 13–4 
of the Text
1. Enter the data from Table 13.1 into L1 (Income) and L2 (Food Expenditure).
2. Select STAT > TESTS > LinRegTInt.
3. Use the following settings in the LinRegTInt menu (see Screen 13.3):
• Enter L1 at the Xlist prompt.
• Enter L2 at the Ylist prompt.
• Type 1 at the Freq prompt.
Note: If you have another list with the frequency for each ordered pair, enter the name of that list at 
this prompt.
• Type 0.95 at the C-Level prompt.
• Enter Y1 at the RegEQ prompt.
Note: To get Y1, select VARS > Y-VARS > Function > Y1.
4. Highlight Calculate and press ENTER.
5. The output includes the confidence interval, the value of b, the degrees of freedom, the regres-
sion equation coefficients, the standard deviation of errors, the coefficient of determination, and 
the correlation coefficient. In addition, the regression equation will be stored as function Y1. 
(See Screen 13.4.)
Testing a Hypothesis About Slope or Correlation for Example 13–5 
of the Text
1. Enter the data from Table 13.1 into L1 (Income) and L2 (Food Expenditure).
2. Select STAT > TESTS > LinRegTTest.
3. Use the following settings in the LinRegTTest menu (see Screen 13.5):
• Enter L1 at the Xlist prompt.
• Enter L2 at the Ylist prompt.
Screen 13.1
Screen 13.2
Screen 13.3
Screen 13.4
Screen 13.5
www.ebook3000.com

550
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
• Type 1 at the Freq prompt.
Note: If you have another list with the frequency for each ordered pair, enter the name of that list at 
this prompt.
• Select >0 at the β & ρ prompt.
• Enter Y1 at the RegEQ prompt.
Note: To get Y1, select VARS > Y-VARS > Function > Y1.
4. Highlight Calculate and press ENTER.
5. The output includes the test statistic, the p-value, the degrees of freedom, the regression 
equation coefficients, the standard deviation of errors, the coefficient of determination, and 
the correlation coefficient (you must scroll down to see r and r2). In addition, the regression 
equation will be stored as function Y1. (See Screen 13.6.)
Now compare the t-value to the critical value of t or the p-value from Screen 13.6 with α and 
make a decision.
Screen 13.6
The Minitab Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Minitab version 17. Some 
screens, menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions of Minitab.
Finding the Regression Equation and r2 for 
Example 13–1 of the Text
1.  Enter the data from Example 13–1 into C1 (Income) and C2 (Food Expenditure).
2. Select Stat > Regression > Regression > Fit Regression Model.
3. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Type C2 in the Responses box.
• Type C1 in the Continuous predictors box.
•  Click on the Options button and enter 95 in the Confidence level for all 
intervals box. Click OK.
•  Click on the Results button and select Expanded tables from the Display of 
results drop-down menu. Click OK.
4. Click OK.
5.  The output will be displayed in the Session window. The output includes the 
value of r2and the regression equation. (See Screen 13.7.)
Finding r for Example 13–6 of the Text
1. Enter the data from Table 13.1 into C1 (Income) and C2 (Food Expenditure).
2. Select Stat > Basic Statistics > Correlation. (See Screen 13.8.)
3. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen:
• Type C1 C2 in the Variables box. Be sure to separate C1 and C2 with a space.
• Uncheck the Display p-values check box.
4. Click OK.
5. The output will be displayed in the Session window.
Minitab
Screen 13.7
Screen 13.8

Technology Instructions
551
Constructing a Confidence Interval for Slope 
for Example 13–4 of the Text
Follow the directions shown above for finding the regression equation. The output includes the 
confidence interval in the Coefficients table in the Income row. (See Screen 13.7.)
Testing a Hypothesis About Slope or Correlation 
for Example 13–5 of the Text
Follow the directions shown above for finding the regression equation. The output also includes 
the test statistic t and p-value in the Coefficients table in the Income row. The p-value is for a 
two-sided test, so if a one-sided test is required, be sure to adjust the p-value accordingly. (See 
Screen 13.7.)
Now compare the t-value to the critical value of t or the p-value from Screen 13.7 with α and 
make a decision.
Constructing a Prediction Interval for Slope 
for Example 13–10 of the Text
1. Enter the data from Table 13.1 into C1 (Income) and C2 (Food Expenditure).
2. To create a prediction interval, you must first find the regression equation (fit a regression 
model) as described above. If you do not fit the regression model, you will not get the 
correct output.
3. Select Stat > Regression > Regression > Predict.
4. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen (see Screen 13.9):
• Select Food Expenditure (or C2) from the Response drop-down menu.
• Select Enter individual values from second drop-down menu.
• Type 55 in the list below Income (or C1).
• Click on the Options button and enter 99 in the Confidence level box. 
Click OK.
5. Click OK.
6. The output, including the prediction interval, will be displayed in the Session 
window.
Screen 13.9
The Excel Technology Instructions feature of this text is written for Excel 2013. 
Some screens, menus, and functions will be slightly different in older versions 
of Excel. To enable some of the advanced Excel functions, you must enable the 
Data Analysis Add-In for Excel.
Finding the Regression Equation, r2, and r 
for Example 13–1 of the Text
1. In a new worksheet, enter the data from Example 13–1 into cells A1-A7 
(Income) and cells B1-B7 (Food Expenditure). (See Screen 13.10.)
2. Click DATA and then click Data Analysis Tools from the Analysis group.
3. Select Regression from the dialog box that appears on screen and then click OK.
Excel
Screen 13.10
www.ebook3000.com

552
Chapter 13 Simple Linear Regression
4. Use the following settings in the dialog box that appears on screen (see Screen 13.10):
• Type B1:B7 in the Input Y Range box.
• Type A1:A7 in the Input X Range box.
• Check the Confidence Level check box and type 95 in the Confidence Level box.
• Select New Worksheet Ply from the Output options.
5. Click OK.
6.  When the output appears, resize the columns so that they are easier to read. The 
output includes the coefficients of the least squares regression equation, the coef-
ficient of determination (R square), and the correlation coefficient (Multiple R). 
(See Screen 13.11.)
Constructing a Confidence Interval for Slope 
for Example 13–4 of the Text
Follow the directions shown above for finding the regression equation. The output also includes 
the lower and upper bounds of the confidence interval in the last table of the output in the X 
Variable 1 row. (See Screen 13.11.)
Testing a Hypothesis About Slope or Correlation 
for Example 13–5 of the Text
Follow the directions shown above for finding the regression equation. The output also includes 
the test statistic t and p-value in the last table of the output in the X Variable 1 row. The p-value 
is for a two-sided test, so if a one-sided test is required, be sure to adjust the p-value accordingly. 
(See Screen 13.11.)
Now compare the t-value to the critical value of t or the p-value from Screen 13.11 with α and 
make a decision.
Screen 13.11
a. Construct a scatter diagram for these data.
b. Find the correlation coefficient between the two variables.
c. Find the regression line with actual precipitation as a depend-
ent variable and predicted precipitation as an independent 
variable.
d. Make a 95% confidence interval for B.
e. Test at a 1% significance level whether B is positive.
f. Using a 1% significance level, can you conclude that the 
linear correlation coefficient is positive?
TA13.2 Refer to Data Set III on NFL players that accompanies this 
text (see Appendix A). Select a random sample of 30 players from that 
population. Do the following for the data on heights and weights of 
these 30 players.
a. Construct a scatter diagram for these data. Does this scatter 
diagram show a linear relationship between variables?
b. Find the correlation between these two variables.
c. Find the regression line with weight as a dependent variable 
and height as an independent variable.
TA13.1 In a rainy coastal town in the Pacific Northwest, the local TV 
weatherman is often criticized for making inaccurate forecasts for 
daily precipitation. On each of 30 randomly selected days last winter, 
his precipitation forecast (x) for the next day was recorded along with 
the actual precipitation (y) for that day. These data are shown in the 
following table (in inches of rain).
x
y
x
y
x
y
1.0
.6
0
0
.4
.2
0
.1
0
.1
.2
.5
.2
0
.1
.2
.1
.1
0
0
.2
.2
0
.2
.5
.3
.1
0
.1
0
1.0
1.4
2.0
2.1
.2
.1
.5
.3
.4
.2
1.4
1.2
.1
.1
.2
.1
.5
1.0
0
.1
0
0
0
.5
2.0
.3
.3
.2
0
0
TECHNOLOGY ASSIGNMENTS

Technology Assignments
553
d. Construct a 99% confidence interval for B.
e. Test at a 2.5% significance level whether B is positive.
TA13.4 Refer to Data Set IV on the Manchester Road Race that 
accompanies this text (see Appendix A). Take a random sample of 45 
participants. Do the following for the variables on ages and times (in 
minutes) for this sample.
a. Construct a scatter diagram for these data, using age as the 
independent variable. Discuss whether it is appropriate to fit a 
linear regression model to these data.
b. Find the correlation coefficient for these two variables.
c. Find the equation of the regression line with age as the inde-
pendent variable and time as the dependent variable.
d. Make a 98% confidence interval for B. Explain what this 
interval means with regard to a person’s time for each addi-
tional year of age.
e. Test at a 1% significance level whether B is positive.
f. Test at a 1% significance level whether B is greater than .10.
d. Make a 98% confidence interval for B.
e. Test at a 2.5% significance level whether B is positive.
f. Make a 95% confidence interval for the mean weight of all 
NFL players who are 75 inches tall. Construct a 95% predic-
tion interval for the weight of a randomly selected NFL player 
with a height of 75 inches.
TA13.3 The following data give information on the ages (in years) 
and the number of breakdowns during the last month for a sample of 
seven machines at a large company.
Age (in years)
12
7
2
8
13
9
4
Number of breakdowns
10
5
1
4
12
7
2
a. Construct a scatter diagram for these data.
b. Find the least squares regression line with age as an independ-
ent variable and the number of breakdowns as a dependent 
variable.
c. Compute the correlation coefficient.
www.ebook3000.com


A1
A1
This textbook is accompanied by 13 large data sets that can be used for statistical analysis using 
technology. These data sets are
Data Set I 
City Data
Data Set II 
Data on States
Data Set III 
NFL Data
Data Set IV 
Manchester Road Race Data
Data Set V 
Data on Movies
Data Set VI 
Standard & Poor’s 500 Index Data 
Data Set VII 
McDonald’s Data
Data Set VIII 
Data on NFL Kickers
Data Set IX 
Subway Menu Items Data
Data Set X 
Major League Baseball Data
Data Set XI 
Data on Airline Flights
Data Set XII 
Data on Coffee Maker Ratings
Data Set XIII 
Simulated Data 
Explanation of Data Sets
These data sets are available in Minitab, Excel, and a few other formats on the Web site for this text, 
www.wiley.com/college/mann. Once you are on this Web site, click on the companion sites next to 
the cover of the book. Choose one of the two sites. Search for Data Sets on the drop-down menus 
and then click on Data Sets. These data sets can be downloaded from this Web site. If you need 
more information on these data sets, you may either contact the John Wiley area representative or 
send an email to the author (see Preface). The Web site contains the following files:
 1. CITYDATA (This file contains Data Set I)
 2.  STATEDATA (This file contains Data Set II)
 3. NFL (This file contains Data Set III)
 4. ROADRACE (This file contains Data Set IV)
 5. MOVIEDATA (This file contains Data Set V)
 6. S&PDATA (This file contains Data Set VI)
 7. MCDONALDSDATA (This file contains Data Set VII)
 8. NFLKICKERS (This file contains Data Set VIII)
 9. SUBWAYMENU (This file contains Data Set IX)
10. BASEBALL (This file contains Data Set X)
11. AIRLINEFLIGHTS (This file contains Data Set XI)
12. COFFEEMAKERRATINGS (This file contains Data Set XII)
13. SIMULATED (This file contains Data Set XIII)
The following are the explanations of these data sets.
 APPENDIXA
www.ebook3000.com

A2
Appendix A Explanation of Data Sets
Data Set I: City Data1
This data set contains prices (in dollars) of selected products and services for selected urban areas 
across the United States. This data set is reproduced from the C2ER Cost of Living Index (COLI) 
survey and shows the average prices for the first quarter of 2015. It is reproduced with the permis-
sion of the Center for Regional Economic Competitiveness. This data set has 21 columns that 
contain the following variables:
C1 
Name of the urban area
C2 
Name of the state
C3 
Price of T-bone steak per pound
C4 
Price of 1 pound of ground beef (minimum 80% lean)
C5 
Price per pound of a whole fryer chicken
C6 
Price of one half-gallon carton of whole milk
C7 
Price of one dozen large eggs, grade A/AA
C8 
Price of a loaf of white bread
C9 
Price of fresh orange juice, 64 ounces, Tropicana or Florida Natural brand
C10 Price of an 11.5-ounce can or brick of coffee
C11 Price of 2-liter Coca-Cola, excluding any deposit
C12  Monthly rent of an unfurnished two-bedroom apartment (excluding all utilities except 
water), 1.5 or 2 baths, 950 square feet
C13  Price of 1 gallon of regular unleaded gas, natural brand, including all taxes; cash price 
at self-service pump, if available
C14  Cost of a visit to the doctor’s office for a routine examination for a problem with low 
to moderate severity
C15 Cost of a teeth-cleaning visit to the dentist’s office (established patients only)
C16  Price of an 11- to 12-inch thin-crust regular cheese pizza (no extra cheese) at Pizza 
Hut and/or Pizza Inn
C17 Price of a man’s barbershop haircut, no styling
C18  Price of a woman’s haircut with shampoo and blow-dry at beauty salons that make 
appointments and allow customer to select stylist
C19  Price of a movie ticket; first run (new release), indoor 6 to 10 pm, Saturday evening 
rates, no discounts
C20 Price of Heineken’s beer; six-pack of 12-ounce containers, excluding any deposit
C21  Price of wine, Livingston Cellars or Gallo brand Chablis or Chenin Blanc, 1.5-liter 
bottle
Data Set II: Data on States
This data set contains information on different variables for all 50 states of the United States. 
These data have been obtained from various Web sites such as the Web sites of the census bureau, 
insurance institute for highway safety, Bureau of Labor Statistics, and National Center for Educa-
tion Statistics. This data set has 14 columns that contain the following variables:
C1 
Name of the state
C2 
Total population, 2013
C3 
Area of the state in square miles
C4 
Median household income (in dollars), 2013
1 We are thankful to Jennie Allison (assistant project manager) and Erol Yildirim (vice president of product development) 
at the Center for Regional Economic Competitiveness for providing this data set to us. 

Data Set IV: Manchester Road Race Data
A3
C5 
Total miles traveled by vehicles in millions of miles, 2013
C6 
Traffic fatalities, 2013
C7 
 Average salary (in dollars) of teachers teaching in the K–12 public school system, 
2012–2013
C8 
Total revenue of the state in thousands of dollars, 2013
C9 
Total state expenditures on education in thousands of dollars, 2013
C10 Total state expenditure on public welfare in thousands of dollars, 2013
C11 Total state expenditure on hospitals in thousands of dollars, 2013
C12 Total state expenditure on health in thousands of dollars, 2013
C13 Total state expenditure on highways in thousands of dollars, 2013
C14 Total state expenditure on police protection in thousands of dollars, 2013
Data Set III: NFL Data
This data set contains information on the NFL (National Football League) players who played for 
NFL teams during the 2014 season. These data were obtained from the Web site www.pro-football-
reference.com. Data that were missing on this Web site were supplemented from other Internet 
sources. If a player played for more than one team during the 2014 season, the last team for 
whom he played is recorded, but the total number of games for all teams is recorded. This data 
set has 10 columns that contain the following variables:
C1 
Name of the player
C2 
Team for whom the player played
C3 
Age of the player in years as of December 31, 2014
C4 
Number of games played during the 2014 season
C5 
Weight in pounds
C6 
Height in inches
C7 
College/university that the player attended
C8 
Birth date
C9 
Number of years played in the NFL prior to the 2014 season
C10 Whether the player was nominated to the Pro Bowl during the 2014 season (Yes/No)
Data Set IV: Manchester Road Race Data
This data set contains information on 11,682 runners who participated in and completed the 78th 
annual Manchester Road Race held on November 27, 2014 (Thanksgiving Day) in Manchester, 
Connecticut. Twelve of the 11,682 runners have missing information on one or more variables. 
This road race is held every year on Thanksgiving Day. The length of the race is 4.748 miles. This 
data set was obtained from the Web site www.coolrunning.com. This data set has nine columns that 
contain the following variables:
C1 
Overall place in which the runner finished
C2 
Division in which the runner competed, classified by gender and age
C3 
Net time (in minutes) to complete the race
C4 
Average pace of the runner in minutes per mile
C5 
Age of the runner in years
C6 
Gender (M/F)
C7 
City of residence
C8 
State of residence
C9 
Whether the runner is a Connecticut resident (Yes/No)
www.ebook3000.com

A4
Appendix A Explanation of Data Sets
Data Set V: Data on Movies
This data set contains information on the top 200 films of 2014 in terms of total gross domestic 
box office earnings until the movie’s closing date in first-run theaters. For the eight movies that 
did not have a first-run theater close date at the time of this writing, the total gross domestic box 
office earnings was recorded as of October 13, 2015. Earnings do not include additional sources 
of revenue, such as home entertainment sales and rentals, television rights, and product place-
ment fees. This data set was obtained from the Web site www.boxofficemojo.com. This data set 
has eight columns that contain the following variables:
C1 
Movie title
C2 
Studio that produced the movie
C3 
 Gross earnings in dollars from box office sales in the United States and Canada from 
the release date until the closing date of the movie
C4 
 Number of theater locations at which the movie was shown during the length of its 
release
C5 
 Gross earnings in dollars from box office sales in the United States and Canada during 
the opening weekend of the movie
C6 
 Number of theater locations at which the movie was shown during the opening week-
end of the movie
C7 
Genre of the movie as reported by IMDB, the Internet Movie Data Base
C8 
Length of the film in minutes
Data Set VI: Standard & Poor’s 500 Index Data
This data set contains information on the 500 stocks in the Standard & Poor’s 500 index at 
the close of the financial markets on Friday, June 26, 2015. This data set was obtained from the 
Web site www.barchart.com. This data set has eight columns that contain the following variables:
C1 
Stock symbol
C2 
Company name
C3 
Closing stock price for the day in dollars
C4 
 Difference between the closing stock price for the current day and the previous day in 
dollars
C5 
 Difference between the closing stock price for the current day and the previous day as 
a percentage of the previous day closing price
C6 
Highest trade price for the day in dollars
C7 
Lowest trade price for the day in dollars
C8 
Total number of contracts traded for the day
Data Set VII: McDonald’s Data
This data set contains information on 228 menu items available at McDonald’s restaurants and is 
obtained from the Web site www.nutrition-charts.com. This data set has 14 columns that contain 
the following variables:
C1 
Menu item name
C2 
Calories
C3 
Protein in grams
C4 
Total fat in grams
C5 
Total carbohydrates in grams

Data Set IX: Subway Menu Items Data
A5
C6 
Sodium in milligrams
C7 
Calories from fat
C8 
Saturated fat in grams
C9 
Trans fat in grams
C10 Cholesterol in milligrams
C11 Fiber in grams
C12 Sugars in grams
C13 Weight Watchers points
C14  Menu category (Beverages/Breakfast/Burgers and Sandwiches/Chicken and Fish/
Desserts and Shakes/Salads/Snacks and Sides)
Data Set VIII: Data on NFL Kickers
This data set contains information on the performance of 31 placekickers who had at least one 
attempt per game during the 2014 NFL (National Football League) regular season. This data set 
was obtained from the Web site espn.go.com/nfl/statistics/. It has nine columns that contain the 
following variables:
C1 
Name of the player 
C2 
Name of the team
C3 
Field goals made during the season
C4 
Field goals attempted during the season
C5 
Field goal completion percentage during the season
C6 
Longest field goal made during the season in yards
C7 
Extra points made during the season
C8 
Extra points attempted during the season
C9 
Extra point completion percentage during the season
Data Set IX: Subway Menu Items Data 
This data set contains information on the nutritional characteristics of Subway food items. 
Breads, condiments,  sides, and beverages are not included. This data set, obtained from the Web 
site www.subway.com, has 19 columns that contain the following variables:
C1 
Menu item name
C2 
Item type (Sandwich/Salad/Soup/Dessert)
C3 
Whether the item is a breakfast item (Yes/No)
C4 
Serving size in grams
C5 
Total calories
C6 
Calories from fat
C7 
Total fat in grams
C8 
Saturated fat in grams
C9 
Trans fat in grams
C10 Cholesterol in milligrams
C11 Sodium in milligrams
C12 Carbohydrates in grams
C13 Dietary fiber in grams
www.ebook3000.com

A6
Appendix A Explanation of Data Sets
C14 Sugars in grams
C15 Protein in grams
C16 Vitamin A percent daily value
C17 Vitamin C percent daily value
C18 Calcium percent daily value
C19 Iron percent daily value
Data Set X: Major League Baseball Data 
This data set contains information on the offensive performance of all 443 Major League Base-
ball players who had at least 100 visits to the plate during the 2014 regular season. This data set, 
obtained from the Web site mlb.mlb.com, has 20 columns that contain the following variables:
C1 
Name of the player 
C2 
Name of the team 
C3 
The fielding position played by the player
C4 
The number of games in which a player appeared
C5 
 The number of official at bats by a batter, with official at bat defined as the number of 
visits to the plate minus sacrifices, walks, and hits by pitches
C6 
The number of times a base runner safely reached home plate
C7 
 The number of times a batter hit the ball and reached base safely without the aid of an 
error or fielder’s choice
C8 
 The number of times a batter hit the ball and reached second base without the aid of 
an error or fielder’s choice
C9 
 The number of times a batter hit the ball and reached third base without the aid of an 
error or fielder’s choice
C10  The number of times a batter hit the ball and reached home plate, scoring a run either by 
hitting the ball out of play in fair territory or without the aid of an error or fielder’s choice
C11  The number of runs scored safely due to a batter hitting a ball or drawing a base on 
balls
C12 The number of walks by a batter
C13 The number of strikeouts by a batter
C14 The number of times a player stole a base
C15 The number of times a player was thrown out attempting to steal a base
C16 The average number of hits by a batter defined by hits divided by at bats
C17  The on-base percentage, defined as the number of times each batter reached base by 
hit, walk, or hit by a pitch, divided by plate appearances including at bats, walks, hit 
by a pitch, and sacrifice flies
C18 The slugging percentage, defined as total bases divided by at bats
C19 The number of times a batter was hit by a pitch
C20 The number of times a runner tagged up and scored after a batter’s fly out
Data Set XI: Data on Airline Flights
This data set contains information on airline flights departing Newark (New Jersey) Liberty 
International Airport during May 2015. No arriving flights are included in these data, and 
flights with missing data were removed, leaving 8946 flights in the data. This data set, 

Data Set XIII: Simulated Data
A7
obtained from the Web site www.transtats.bts.gov, has 13 columns that contain the following 
variables:
C1 
Day of the week 
C2 
Date of the flight
C3 
Airline carrier of the flight
C4 
Destination airport IATA code
C5 
Destination airport city
C6 
Local departure time
C7 
Departure delay in minutes (a negative number indicates early departure)
C8 
Whether the departure delay was 15 minutes or more (Yes/No)
C9 
Local arrival time
C10 Arrival delay in minutes (a negative number indicates early arrival)
C11 Whether the arrival delay was 15 minutes or more (Yes/No)
C12  Total airtime in minutes from the time the wheels left the ground to the time they 
touched ground again
C13 Distance between airports in miles
Data Set XII: Data on Coffee Maker Ratings
This data set contains information on the Consumer Reports ratings of 54 drip coffee makers with 
carafe and an 8- to 14-cup capacity. The ratings were current as of Monday, July 13, 2015. This 
data set, obtained from the Web site www.consumerreports.org, has seven columns that contain 
the following variables:
C1 
Coffeemaker model name
C2 
Manufacturer’s suggested retail price in dollars
C3 
 Overall score as computed by Consumer Reports on a 100-point scale, with 100 points 
representing the best possible score
C4 
Whether this model was recommended by Consumer Reports (Yes/No)
C5 
 Brew performance as rated by Consumer Reports (Excellent/Very Good/Good/Fair/
Poor)
C6 
Convenience as rated by Consumer Reports (Excellent/Very Good/Good/Fair/Poor)
C7 
 Carafe handling as rated by Consumer Reports (Excellent/Very Good/Good/Fair/
Poor)
Data Set XIII: Simulated Data
This data set contains four columns of simulated data from four different probability distribu-
tions. There are 1000 observations in each of the four columns, and these columns contain the 
following information:
C1  
Simulated data from probability distribution 1
C2  
Simulated data from probability distribution 2
C3  
Simulated data from probability distribution 3
C4  
Simulated data from probability distribution 4
www.ebook3000.com


B1
B1
 Table I 
Table of Binomial Probabilities
Table II 
Values of e−𝜆
Table III 
Table of Poisson Probabilities
Table IV 
Standard Normal Distribution Table
Table V 
The t Distribution Table
Table VI 
Chi-Square Distribution Table
Table VII 
The F Distribution Table
Note: The following tables are on the Web site of the text along with Chapters 14 and 15.
Table VIII 
Critical Values of X for the Sign Test
Table IX 
Critical Values of T for the Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test
Table X 
Critical Values of T for the Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test
Table XI 
Critical Values for the Spearman Rho Rank Correlation Coefficient Test
Table XII 
Critical Values for a Two-Tailed Runs Test with α = 0.5
Statistical Tables
 APPENDIXB
www.ebook3000.com

B2
Appendix B Statistical Tables
 Table I Table of Binomial Probabilities
 
p
 n 
x 
.05 
.10 
.20 
.30 
.40 
.50 
.60 
.70 
.80 
.90 
.95
 1 
0 
.9500 
.9000 
.8000 
.7000 
.6000 
.5000 
.4000 
.3000 
.2000 
.1000 
.0500
 
1 
.0500 
.1000 
.2000 
.3000 
.4000 
.5000 
.6000 
.7000 
.8000 
.9000 
.9500
 2 
0 
.9025 
.8100 
.6400 
.4900 
.3600 
.2500 
.1600 
.0900 
.0400 
.0100 
.0025
 
1 
.0950 
.1800 
.3200 
.4200 
.4800 
.5000 
.4800 
.4200 
.3200 
.1800 
.0950
 
2 
.0025 
.0100 
.0400 
.0900 
.1600 
.2500 
.3600 
.4900 
.6400 
.8100 
.9025
 3 
0 
.8574 
.7290 
.5120 
.3430 
.2160 
.1250 
.0640 
.0270 
.0080 
.0010 
.0001
 
1 
.1354 
.2430 
.3840 
.4410 
.4320 
.3750 
.2880 
.1890 
.0960 
.0270 
.0071
 
2 
.0071 
.0270 
.0960 
.1890 
.2880 
.3750 
.4320 
.4410 
.3840 
.2430 
.1354
 
3 
.0001 
.0010 
.0080 
.0270 
.0640 
.1250 
.2160 
.3430 
.5120 
.7290 
.8574
 4 
0 
.8145 
.6561 
.4096 
.2401 
.1296 
.0625 
.0256 
.0081 
.0016 
.0001 
.0000
 
1 
.1715 
.2916 
.4096 
.4116 
.3456 
.2500 
.1536 
.0756 
.0256 
.0036 
.0005
 
2 
.0135 
.0486 
.1536 
.2646 
.3456 
.3750 
.3456 
.2646 
.1536 
.0486 
.0135
 
3 
.0005 
.0036 
.0256 
.0756 
.1536 
.2500 
.3456 
.4116 
.4096 
.2916 
.1715
 
4 
.0000 
.0001 
.0016 
.0081 
.0256 
.0625 
.1296 
.2401 
.4096 
.6561 
.8145
 5 
0 
.7738 
.5905 
.3277 
.1681 
.0778 
.0312 
.0102 
.0024 
.0003 
.0000 
.0000
 
1 
.2036 
.3280 
.4096 
.3602 
.2592 
.1562 
.0768 
.0284 
.0064 
.0005 
.0000
 
2 
.0214 
.0729 
.2048 
.3087 
.3456 
.3125 
.2304 
.1323 
.0512 
.0081 
.0011
 
3 
.0011 
.0081 
.0512 
.1323 
.2304 
.3125 
.3456 
.3087 
.2048 
.0729 
.0214
 
4 
.0000 
.0004 
.0064 
.0283 
.0768 
.1562 
.2592 
.3601 
.4096 
.3281 
.2036
 
5 
.0000 
.0000 
.0003 
.0024 
.0102 
.0312 
.0778 
.1681 
.3277 
.5905 
.7738
 6 
0 
.7351 
.5314 
.2621 
.1176 
.0467 
.0156 
.0041 
.0007 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000
 
1 
.2321 
.3543 
.3932 
.3025 
.1866 
.0937 
.0369 
.0102 
.0015 
.0001 
.0000
 
2 
.0305 
.0984 
.2458 
.3241 
.3110 
.2344 
.1382 
.0595 
.0154 
.0012 
.0001
 
3 
.0021 
.0146 
.0819 
.1852 
.2765 
.3125 
.2765 
.1852 
.0819 
.0146 
.0021
 
4 
.0001 
.0012 
.0154 
.0595 
.1382 
.2344 
.3110 
.3241 
.2458 
.0984 
.0305
 
5 
.0000 
.0001 
.0015 
.0102 
.0369 
.0937 
.1866 
.3025 
.3932 
.3543 
.2321
 
6 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0007 
.0041 
.0156 
.0467 
.1176 
.2621 
.5314 
.7351
 7 
0 
.6983 
.4783 
.2097 
.0824 
.0280 
.0078 
.0016 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
1 
.2573 
.3720 
.3670 
.2471 
.1306 
.0547 
.0172 
.0036 
.0004 
.0000 
.0000
 
2 
.0406 
.1240 
.2753 
.3177 
.2613 
.1641 
.0774 
.0250 
.0043 
.0002 
.0000
 
3 
.0036 
.0230 
.1147 
.2269 
.2903 
.2734 
.1935 
.0972 
.0287 
.0026 
.0002
 
4 
.0002 
.0026 
.0287 
.0972 
.1935 
.2734 
.2903 
.2269 
.1147 
.0230 
.0036
 
5 
.0000 
.0002 
.0043 
.0250 
.0774 
.1641 
.2613 
.3177 
.2753 
.1240 
.0406
 
6 
.0000 
.0000 
.0004 
.0036 
.0172 
.0547 
.1306 
.2471 
.3670 
.3720 
.2573
 
7 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0016 
.0078 
.0280 
.0824 
.2097 
.4783 
.6983
 8 
0 
.6634 
.4305 
.1678 
.0576 
.0168 
.0039 
.0007 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
1 
.2793 
.3826 
.3355 
.1977 
.0896 
.0312 
.0079 
.0012 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000

 Table I Table of Binomial Probabilities
B3
 Table I Table of Binomial Probabilities (continued)
 
p
 n 
x 
.05 
.10 
.20 
.30 
.40 
.50 
.60 
.70 
.80 
.90 
.95
 
2 
.0515 
.1488 
.2936 
.2965 
.2090 
.1094 
.0413 
.0100 
.0011 
.0000 
.0000
 
3 
.0054 
.0331 
.1468 
.2541 
.2787 
.2187 
.1239 
.0467 
.0092 
.0004 
.0000
 
4 
.0004 
.0046 
.0459 
.1361 
.2322 
.2734 
.2322 
.1361 
.0459 
.0046 
.0004
 
5 
.0000 
.0004 
.0092 
.0467 
.1239 
.2187 
.2787 
.2541 
.1468 
.0331 
.0054
 
6 
.0000 
.0000 
.0011 
.0100 
.0413 
.1094 
.2090 
.2965 
.2936 
.1488 
.0515
 
7 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0012 
.0079 
.0312 
.0896 
.1977 
.3355 
.3826 
.2793
 
8 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0007 
.0039 
.0168 
.0576 
.1678 
.4305 
.6634
 9 
0 
.6302 
.3874 
.1342 
.0404 
.0101 
.0020 
.0003 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
1 
.2985 
.3874 
.3020 
.1556 
.0605 
.0176 
.0035 
.0004 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
2 
.0629 
.1722 
.3020 
.2668 
.1612 
.0703 
.0212 
.0039 
.0003 
.0000 
.0000
 
3 
.0077 
.0446 
.1762 
.2668 
.2508 
.1641 
.0743 
.0210 
.0028 
.0001 
.0000
 
4 
.0006 
.0074 
.0661 
.1715 
.2508 
.2461 
.1672 
.0735 
.0165 
.0008 
.0000
 
5 
.0000 
.0008 
.0165 
.0735 
.1672 
.2461 
.2508 
.1715 
.0661 
.0074 
.0006
 
6 
.0000 
.0001 
.0028 
.0210 
.0743 
.1641 
.2508 
.2668 
.1762 
.0446 
.0077
 
7 
.0000 
.0000 
.0003 
.0039 
.0212 
.0703 
.1612 
.2668 
.3020 
.1722 
.0629
 
8 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0004 
.0035 
.0176 
.0605 
.1556 
.3020 
.3874 
.2985
 
9 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0003 
.0020 
.0101 
.0404 
.1342 
.3874 
.6302
10 
0 
.5987 
.3487 
.1074 
.0282 
.0060 
.0010 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
1 
.3151 
.3874 
.2684 
.1211 
.0403 
.0098 
.0016 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
2 
.0746 
.1937 
.3020 
.2335 
.1209 
.0439 
.0106 
.0014 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000
 
3 
.0105 
.0574 
.2013 
.2668 
.2150 
.1172 
.0425 
.0090 
.0008 
.0000 
.0000
 
4 
.0010 
.0112 
.0881 
.2001 
.2508 
.2051 
.1115 
.0368 
.0055 
.0001 
.0000
 
5 
.0001 
.0015 
.0264 
.1029 
.2007 
.2461 
.2007 
.1029 
.0264 
.0015 
.0001
 
6 
.0000 
.0001 
.0055 
.0368 
.1115 
.2051 
.2508 
.2001 
.0881 
.0112 
.0010
 
7 
.0000 
.0000 
.0008 
.0090 
.0425 
.1172 
.2150 
.2668 
.2013 
.0574 
.0105
 
8 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0014 
.0106 
.0439 
.1209 
.2335 
.3020 
.1937 
.0746
 
9 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0016 
.0098 
.0403 
.1211 
.2684 
.3874 
.3151
 
10 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0010 
.0060 
.0282 
.1074 
.3487 
.5987
11 
0 
.5688 
.3138 
.0859 
.0198 
.0036 
.0005 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
1 
.3293 
.3835 
.2362 
.0932 
.0266 
.0054 
.0007 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
2 
.0867 
.2131 
.2953 
.1998 
.0887 
.0269 
.0052 
.0005 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
3 
.0137 
.0710 
.2215 
.2568 
.1774 
.0806 
.0234 
.0037 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000
 
4 
.0014 
.0158 
.1107 
.2201 
.2365 
.1611 
.0701 
.0173 
.0017 
.0000 
.0000
 
5 
.0001 
.0025 
.0388 
.1321 
.2207 
.2256 
.1471 
.0566 
.0097 
.0003 
.0000
 
6 
.0000 
.0003 
.0097 
.0566 
.1471 
.2256 
.2207 
.1321 
.0388 
.0025 
.0001
 
7 
.0000 
.0000 
.0017 
.0173 
.0701 
.1611 
.2365 
.2201 
.1107 
.0158 
.0014
 
8 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0037 
.0234 
.0806 
.1774 
.2568 
.2215 
.0710 
.0137
 
9 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0005 
.0052 
.0269 
.0887 
.1998 
.2953 
.2131 
.0867
www.ebook3000.com

B4
Appendix B Statistical Tables
 Table I Table of Binomial Probabilities (continued)
 
p
 n 
x 
.05 
.10 
.20 
.30 
.40 
.50 
.60 
.70 
.80 
.90 
.95
 
10 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0007 
.0054 
.0266 
.0932 
.2362 
.3835 
.3293
 
11 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0005 
.0036 
.0198 
.0859 
.3138 
.5688
12 
 0 
.5404 
.2824 
.0687 
.0138 
.0022 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 1 
.3413 
.3766 
.2062 
.0712 
.0174 
.0029 
.0003 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 2 
.0988 
.2301 
.2835 
.1678 
.0639 
.0161 
.0025 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 3 
.0173 
.0852 
.2362 
.2397 
.1419 
.0537 
.0125 
.0015 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000
 
 4 
.0021 
.0213 
.1329 
.2311 
.2128 
.1208 
.0420 
.0078 
.0005 
.0000 
.0000
 
 5 
.0002 
.0038 
.0532 
.1585 
.2270 
.1934 
.1009 
.0291 
.0033 
.0000 
.0000
 
 6 
.0000 
.0005 
.0155 
.0792 
.1766 
.2256 
.1766 
.0792 
.0155 
.0005 
.0000
 
 7 
.0000 
.0000 
.0033 
.0291 
.1009 
.1934 
.2270 
.1585 
.0532 
.0038 
.0002
 
 8 
.0000 
.0000 
.0005 
.0078 
.0420 
.1208 
.2128 
.2311 
.1329 
.0213 
.0021
 
 9 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0015 
.0125 
.0537 
.1419 
.2397 
.2362 
.0852 
.0173
 
10 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0025 
.0161 
.0639 
.1678 
.2835 
.2301 
.0988
 
11 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0003 
.0029 
.0174 
.0712 
.2062 
.3766 
.3413
 
12 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0022 
.0138 
.0687 
.2824 
.5404
13 
 0 
.5133 
.2542 
.0550 
.0097 
.0013 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 1 
.3512 
.3672 
.1787 
.0540 
.0113 
.0016 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 2 
.1109 
.2448 
.2680 
.1388 
.0453 
.0095 
.0012 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 3 
.0214 
.0997 
.2457 
.2181 
.1107 
.0349 
.0065 
.0006 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 4 
.0028 
.0277 
.1535 
.2337 
.1845 
.0873 
.0243 
.0034 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000
 
 5 
.0003 
.0055 
.0691 
.1803 
.2214 
.1571 
.0656 
.0142 
.0011 
.0000 
.0000
 
 6 
.0000 
.0008 
.0230 
.1030 
.1968 
.2095 
.1312 
.0442 
.0058 
.0001 
.0000
 
 7 
.0000 
.0001 
.0058 
.0442 
.1312 
.2095 
.1968 
.1030 
.0230 
.0008 
.0000
 
 8 
.0000 
.0000 
.0011 
.0142 
.0656 
.1571 
.2214 
.1803 
.0691 
.0055 
.0003
 
 9 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0034 
.0243 
.0873 
.1845 
.2337 
.1535 
.0277 
.0028
 
10 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0006 
.0065 
.0349 
.1107 
.2181 
.2457 
.0997 
.0214
 
11 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0012 
.0095 
.0453 
.1388 
.2680 
.2448 
.1109
 
12 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0016 
.0113 
.0540 
.1787 
.3672 
.3512
 
13 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0013 
.0097 
.0550 
.2542 
.5133
14 
 0 
.4877 
.2288 
.0440 
.0068 
.0008 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 1 
.3593 
.3559 
.1539 
.0407 
.0073 
.0009 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 2 
.1229 
.2570 
.2501 
.1134 
.0317 
.0056 
.0005 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 3 
.0259 
.1142 
.2501 
.1943 
.0845 
.0222 
.0033 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 4 
.0037 
.0349 
.1720 
.2290 
.1549 
.0611 
.0136 
.0014 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 5 
.0004 
.0078 
.0860 
.1963 
.2066 
.1222 
.0408 
.0066 
.0003 
.0000 
.0000
 
 6 
.0000 
.0013 
.0322 
.1262 
.2066 
.1833 
.0918 
.0232 
.0020 
.0000 
.0000
 
 7 
.0000 
.0002 
.0092 
.0618 
.1574 
.2095 
.1574 
.0618 
.0092 
.0002 
.0000
 
 8 
.0000 
.0000 
.0020 
.0232 
.0918 
.1833 
.2066 
.1262 
.0322 
.0013 
.0000
 
 9 
.0000 
.0000 
.0003 
.0066 
.0408 
.1222 
.2066 
.1963 
.0860 
.0078 
.0004
 
10 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0014 
.0136 
.0611 
.1549 
.2290 
.1720 
.0349 
.0037

 Table I Table of Binomial Probabilities
B5
Table I Table of Binomial Probabilities (continued)
 
p
 n 
x 
.05 
.10 
.20 
.30 
.40 
.50 
.60 
.70 
.80 
.90 
.95
 
11 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0033 
.0222 
.0845 
.1943 
.2501 
.1142 
.0259
 
12 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0005 
.0056 
.0317 
.1134 
.2501 
.2570 
.1229
 
13 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0009 
.0073 
.0407 
.1539 
.3559 
.3593
 
14 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0008 
.0068 
.0440 
.2288 
.4877
15 
 0 
.4633 
.2059 
.0352 
.0047 
.0005 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 1 
.3658 
.3432 
.1319 
.0305 
.0047 
.0005 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 2 
.1348 
.2669 
.2309 
.0916 
.0219 
.0032 
.0003 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 3 
.0307 
.1285 
.2501 
.1700 
.0634 
.0139 
.0016 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 4 
.0049 
.0428 
.1876 
.2186 
.1268 
.0417 
.0074 
.0006 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 5 
.0006 
.0105 
.1032 
.2061 
.1859 
.0916 
.0245 
.0030 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000
 
 6 
.0000 
.0019 
.0430 
.1472 
.2066 
.1527 
.0612 
.0116 
.0007 
.0000 
.0000
 
 7 
.0000 
.0003 
.0138 
.0811 
.1771 
.1964 
.1181 
.0348 
.0035 
.0000 
.0000
 
 8 
.0000 
.0000 
.0035 
.0348 
.1181 
.1964 
.1771 
.0811 
.0138 
.0003 
.0000
 
 9 
.0000 
.0000 
.0007 
.0116 
.0612 
.1527 
.2066 
.1472 
.0430 
.0019 
.0000
 
10 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0030 
.0245 
.0916 
.1859 
.2061 
.1032 
.0105 
.0006
 
11 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0006 
.0074 
.0417 
.1268 
.2186 
.1876 
.0428 
.0049
 
12 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0016 
.0139 
.0634 
.1700 
.2501 
.1285 
.0307
 
13 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0003 
.0032 
.0219 
.0916 
.2309 
.2669 
.1348
 
14 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0005 
.0047 
.0305 
.1319 
.3432 
.3658
 
15 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0005 
.0047 
.0352 
.2059 
.4633
16 
0 
.4401 
.1853 
.0281 
.0033 
.0003 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
1 
.3706 
.3294 
.1126 
.0228 
.0030 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
2 
.1463 
.2745 
.2111 
.0732 
.0150 
.0018 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
3 
.0359 
.1423 
.2463 
.1465 
.0468 
.0085 
.0008 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
4 
.0061 
.0514 
.2001 
.2040 
.1014 
.0278 
.0040 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
5 
.0008 
.0137 
.1201 
.2099 
.1623 
.0667 
.0142 
.0013 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
6 
.0001 
.0028 
.0550 
.1649 
.1983 
.1222 
.0392 
.0056 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000
 
7 
.0000 
.0004 
.0197 
.1010 
.1889 
.1746 
.0840 
.0185 
.0012 
.0000 
.0000
 
8 
.0000 
.0001 
.0055 
.0487 
.1417 
.1964 
.1417 
.0487 
.0055 
.0001 
.0000
 
9 
.0000 
.0000 
.0012 
.0185 
.0840 
.1746 
.1889 
.1010 
.0197 
.0004 
.0000
 
10 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0056 
.0392 
.1222 
.1983 
.1649 
.0550 
.0028 
.0001
 
11 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0013 
.0142 
.0666 
.1623 
.2099 
.1201 
.0137 
.0008
 
12 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0040 
.0278 
.1014 
.2040 
.2001 
.0514 
.0061
 
13 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0008 
.0085 
.0468 
.1465 
.2463 
.1423 
.0359
 
14 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0018 
.0150 
.0732 
.2111 
.2745 
.1463
 
15 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0030 
.0228 
.1126 
.3294 
.3706
 
16 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0003 
.0033 
.0281 
.1853 
.4401
17 
0 
.4181 
.1668 
.0225 
.0023 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
1 
.3741 
.3150 
.0957 
.0169 
.0019 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
2 
.1575 
.2800 
.1914 
.0581 
.0102 
.0010 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
www.ebook3000.com

B6
Appendix B Statistical Tables
Table I Table of Binomial Probabilities (continued)
 
p
 n 
x 
.05 
.10 
.20 
.30 
.40 
.50 
.60 
.70 
.80 
.90 
.95
 
 3 
.0415 
.1556 
.2393 
.1245 
.0341 
.0052 
.0004 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 4 
.0076 
.0605 
.2093 
.1868 
.0796 
.0182 
.0021 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 5 
.0010 
.0175 
.1361 
.2081 
.1379 
.0472 
.0081 
.0006 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 6 
.0001 
.0039 
.0680 
.1784 
.1839 
.0944 
.0242 
.0026 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000
 
 7 
.0000 
.0007 
.0267 
.1201 
.1927 
.1484 
.0571 
.0095 
.0004 
.0000 
.0000
 
 8 
.0000 
.0001 
.0084 
.0644 
.1606 
.1855 
.1070 
.0276 
.0021 
.0000 
.0000
 
 9 
.0000 
.0000 
.0021 
.0276 
.1070 
.1855 
.1606 
.0644 
.0084 
.0001 
.0000
 
10 
.0000 
.0000 
.0004 
.0095 
.0571 
.1484 
.1927 
.1201 
.0267 
.0007 
.0000
 
11 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0026 
.0242 
.0944 
.1839 
.1784 
.0680 
.0039 
.0001
 
12 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0006 
.0081 
.0472 
.1379 
.2081 
.1361 
.0175 
.0010
 
13 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0021 
.0182 
.0796 
.1868 
.2093 
.0605 
.0076
 
14 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0004 
.0052 
.0341 
.1245 
.2393 
.1556 
.0415
 
15 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0010 
.0102 
.0581 
.1914 
.2800 
.1575
 
16 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0019 
.0169 
.0957 
.3150 
.3741
 
17 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0023 
.0225 
.1668 
.4181
18 
 0 
.3972 
.1501 
.0180 
.0016 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 1 
.3763 
.3002 
.0811 
.0126 
.0012 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 2 
.1683 
.2835 
.1723 
.0458 
.0069 
.0006 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 3 
.0473 
.1680 
.2297 
.1046 
.0246 
.0031 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 4 
.0093 
.0700 
.2153 
.1681 
.0614 
.0117 
.0011 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 5 
.0014 
.0218 
.1507 
.2017 
.1146 
.0327 
.0045 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 6 
.0002 
.0052 
.0816 
.1873 
.1655 
.0708 
.0145 
.0012 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 7 
.0000 
.0010 
.0350 
.1376 
.1892 
.1214 
.0374 
.0046 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000
 
 8 
.0000 
.0002 
.0120 
.0811 
.1734 
.1669 
.0771 
.0149 
.0008 
.0000 
.0000
 
 9 
.0000 
.0000 
.0033 
.0386 
.1284 
.1855 
.1284 
.0386 
.0033 
.0000 
.0000
 
10 
.0000 
.0000 
.0008 
.0149 
.0771 
.1669 
.1734 
.0811 
.0120 
.0002 
.0000
 
11 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0046 
.0374 
.1214 
.1892 
.1376 
.0350 
.0010 
.0000
 
12 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0012 
.0145 
.0708 
.1655 
.1873 
.0816 
.0052 
.0002
 
13 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0045 
.0327 
.1146 
.2017 
.1507 
.0218 
.0014
 
14 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0011 
.0117 
.0614 
.1681 
.2153 
.0700 
.0093
 
15 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0031 
.0246 
.1046 
.2297 
.1680 
.0473
 
16 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0006 
.0069 
.0458 
.1723 
.2835 
.1683
 
17 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0012 
.0126 
.0811 
.3002 
.3763
 
18 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0016 
.0180 
.1501 
.3972
19 
 0 
.3774 
.1351 
.0144 
.0011 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 1 
.3774 
.2852 
.0685 
.0093 
.0008 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 2 
.1787 
.2852 
.1540 
.0358 
.0046 
.0003 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 3 
.0533 
.1796 
.2182 
.0869 
.0175 
.0018 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 4 
.0112 
.0798 
.2182 
.1491 
.0467 
.0074 
.0005 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000

 Table I Table of Binomial Probabilities
B7
Table I Table of Binomial Probabilities (continued)
 
p
 n 
x 
.05 
.10 
.20 
.30 
.40 
.50 
.60 
.70 
.80 
.90 
.95
 
 5 
.0018 
.0266 
.1636 
.1916 
.0933 
.0222 
.0024 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 6 
.0002 
.0069 
.0955 
.1916 
.1451 
.0518 
.0085 
.0005 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 7 
.0000 
.0014 
.0443 
.1525 
.1797 
.0961 
.0237 
.0022 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 8 
.0000 
.0002 
.0166 
.0981 
.1797 
.1442 
.0532 
.0077 
.0003 
.0000 
.0000
 
 9 
.0000 
.0000 
.0051 
.0514 
.1464 
.1762 
.0976 
.0220 
.0013 
.0000 
.0000
 
10 
.0000 
.0000 
.0013 
.0220 
.0976 
.1762 
.1464 
.0514 
.0051 
.0000 
.0000
 
11 
.0000 
.0000 
.0003 
.0077 
.0532 
.1442 
.1797 
.0981 
.0166 
.0002 
.0000
 
12 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0022 
.0237 
.0961 
.1797 
.1525 
.0443 
.0014 
.0000
 
13 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0005 
.0085 
.0518 
.1451 
.1916 
.0955 
.0069 
.0002
 
14 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0024 
.0222 
.0933 
.1916 
.1636 
.0266 
.0018
 
15 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0005 
.0074 
.0467 
.1491 
.2182 
.0798 
.0112
 
16 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0018 
.0175 
.0869 
.2182 
.1796 
.0533
 
17 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0003 
.0046 
.0358 
.1540 
.2852 
.1787
 
18 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0008 
.0093 
.0685 
.2852 
.3774
 
19 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0011 
.0144 
.1351 
.3774
20 
 0 
.3585 
.1216 
.0115 
.0008 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 1 
.3774 
.2702 
.0576 
.0068 
.0005 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 2 
.1887 
.2852 
.1369 
.0278 
.0031 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 3 
.0596 
.1901 
.2054 
.0716 
.0123 
.0011 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 4 
.0133 
.0898 
.2182 
.1304 
.0350 
.0046 
.0003 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 5 
.0022 
.0319 
.1746 
.1789 
.0746 
.0148 
.0013 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 6 
.0003 
.0089 
.1091 
.1916 
.1244 
.0370 
.0049 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 7 
.0000 
.0020 
.0545 
.1643 
.1659 
.0739 
.0146 
.0010 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 8 
.0000 
.0004 
.0222 
.1144 
.1797 
.1201 
.0355 
.0039 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000
 
 9 
.0000 
.0001 
.0074 
.0654 
.1597 
.1602 
.0710 
.0120 
.0005 
.0000 
.0000
 
10 
.0000 
.0000 
.0020 
.0308 
.1171 
.1762 
.1171 
.0308 
.0020 
.0000 
.0000
 
11 
.0000 
.0000 
.0005 
.0120 
.0710 
.1602 
.1597 
.0654 
.0074 
.0001 
.0000
 
12 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0039 
.0355 
.1201 
.1797 
.1144 
.0222 
.0004 
.0000
 
13 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0010 
.0146 
.0739 
.1659 
.1643 
.0545 
.0020 
.0000
 
14 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0049 
.0370 
.1244 
.1916 
.1091 
.0089 
.0003
 
15 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0013 
.0148 
.0746 
.1789 
.1746 
.0319 
.0022
 
16 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0003 
.0046 
.0350 
.1304 
.2182 
.0898 
.0133
 
17 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0011 
.0123 
.0716 
.2054 
.1901 
.0596
 
18 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0031 
.0278 
.1369 
.2852 
.1887
 
19 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0005 
.0068 
.0576 
.2702 
.3774
 
20 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0008 
.0115 
.1216 
.3585
21 
 0 
.3406 
.1094 
.0092 
.0006 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 1 
.3764 
.2553 
.0484 
.0050 
.0003 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 2 
.1981 
.2837 
.1211 
.0215 
.0020 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
www.ebook3000.com

B8
Appendix B Statistical Tables
Table I Table of Binomial Probabilities (continued)
 
p
 n 
x 
.05 
.10 
.20 
.30 
.40 
.50 
.60 
.70 
.80 
.90 
.95
 
 3 
.0660 
.1996 
.1917 
.0585 
.0086 
.0006 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 4 
.0156 
.0998 
.2156 
.1128 
.0259 
.0029 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 5 
.0028 
.0377 
.1833 
.1643 
.0588 
.0097 
.0007 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 6 
.0004 
.0112 
.1222 
.1878 
.1045 
.0259 
.0027 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 7 
.0000 
.0027 
.0655 
.1725 
.1493 
.0554 
.0087 
.0005 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 8 
.0000 
.0005 
.0286 
.1294 
.1742 
.0970 
.0229 
.0019 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 9 
.0000 
.0001 
.0103 
.0801 
.1677 
.1402 
.0497 
.0063 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000
 
10 
.0000 
.0000 
.0031 
.0412 
.1342 
.1682 
.0895 
.0176 
.0008 
.0000 
.0000
 
11 
.0000 
.0000 
.0008 
.0176 
.0895 
.1682 
.1342 
.0412 
.0031 
.0000 
.0000
 
12 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0063 
.0497 
.1402 
.1677 
.0801 
.0103 
.0001 
.0000
 
13 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0019 
.0229 
.0970 
.1742 
.1294 
.0286 
.0005 
.0000
 
14 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0005 
.0087 
.0554 
.1493 
.1725 
.0655 
.0027 
.0000
 
15 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0027 
.0259 
.1045 
.1878 
.1222 
.0112 
.0004
 
16 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0007 
.0097 
.0588 
.1643 
.1833 
.0377 
.0028
 
17 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0029 
.0259 
.1128 
.2156 
.0998 
.0156
 
18 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0006 
.0086 
.0585 
.1917 
.1996 
.0660
 
19 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0020 
.0215 
.1211 
.2837 
.1981
 
20 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0003 
.0050 
.0484 
.2553 
.3764
 
21 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0006 
.0092 
.1094 
.3406
22 
 0 
.3235 
.0985 
.0074 
.0004 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 1 
.3746 
.2407 
.0406 
.0037 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 2 
.2070 
.2808 
.1065 
.0166 
.0014 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 3 
.0726 
.2080 
.1775 
.0474 
.0060 
.0004 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 4 
.0182 
.1098 
.2108 
.0965 
.0190 
.0017 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 5 
.0034 
.0439 
.1898 
.1489 
.0456 
.0063 
.0004 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 6 
.0005 
.0138 
.1344 
.1808 
.0862 
.0178 
.0015 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 7 
.0001 
.0035 
.0768 
.1771 
.1314 
.0407 
.0051 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 8 
.0000 
.0007 
.0360 
.1423 
.1642 
.0762 
.0144 
.0009 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 9 
.0000 
.0001 
.0140 
.0949 
.1703 
.1186 
.0336 
.0032 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000
 
10 
.0000 
.0000 
.0046 
.0529 
.1476 
.1542 
.0656 
.0097 
.0003 
.0000 
.0000
 
11 
.0000 
.0000 
.0012 
.0247 
.1073 
.1682 
.1073 
.0247 
.0012 
.0000 
.0000
 
12 
.0000 
.0000 
.0003 
.0097 
.0656 
.1542 
.1476 
.0529 
.0046 
.0000 
.0000
 
13 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0032 
.0336 
.1186 
.1703 
.0949 
.0140 
.0001 
.0000
 
14 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0009 
.0144 
.0762 
.1642 
.1423 
.0360 
.0007 
.0000
 
15 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0051 
.0407 
.1314 
.1771 
.0768 
.0035 
.0001
 
16 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0015 
.0178 
.0862 
.1808 
.1344 
.0138 
.0005
 
17 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0004 
.0063 
.0456 
.1489 
.1898 
.0439 
.0034
 
18 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0017 
.0190 
.0965 
.2108 
.1098 
.0182
 
19 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0004 
.0060 
.0474 
.1775 
.2080 
.0726

 Table I Table of Binomial Probabilities
B9
Table I Table of Binomial Probabilities (continued)
 
p
 n 
x 
.05 
.10 
.20 
.30 
.40 
.50 
.60 
.70 
.80 
.90 
.95
 
20 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0014 
.0166 
.1065 
.2808 
.2070
 
21 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0037 
.0406 
.2407 
.3746
 
22 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0004 
.0074 
.0985 
.3235
23 
 0 
.3074 
.0886 
.0059 
.0003 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 1 
.3721 
.2265 
.0339 
.0027 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 2 
.2154 
.2768 
.0933 
.0127 
.0009 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 3 
.0794 
.2153 
.1633 
.0382 
.0041 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 4 
.0209 
.1196 
.2042 
.0818 
.0138 
.0011 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 5 
.0042 
.0505 
.1940 
.1332 
.0350 
.0040 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 6 
.0007 
.0168 
.1455 
.1712 
.0700 
.0120 
.0008 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 7 
.0001 
.0045 
.0883 
.1782 
.1133 
.0292 
.0029 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 8 
.0000 
.0010 
.0442 
.1527 
.1511 
.0584 
.0088 
.0004 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 9 
.0000 
.0002 
.0184 
.1091 
.1679 
.0974 
.0221 
.0016 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
10 
.0000 
.0000 
.0064 
.0655 
.1567 
.1364 
.0464 
.0052 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000
 
11 
.0000 
.0000 
.0019 
.0332 
.1234 
.1612 
.0823 
.0142 
.0005 
.0000 
.0000
 
12 
.0000 
.0000 
.0005 
.0142 
.0823 
.1612 
.1234 
.0332 
.0019 
.0000 
.0000
 
13 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0052 
.0464 
.1364 
.1567 
.0655 
.0064 
.0000 
.0000
 
14 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0016 
.0221 
.0974 
.1679 
.1091 
.0184 
.0002 
.0000
 
15 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0004 
.0088 
.0584 
.1511 
.1527 
.0442 
.0010 
.0000
 
16 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0029 
.0292 
.1133 
.1782 
.0883 
.0045 
.0001
 
17 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0008 
.0120 
.0700 
.1712 
.1455 
.0168 
.0007
 
18 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0040 
.0350 
.1332 
.1940 
.0505 
.0042
 
19 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0011 
.0138 
.0818 
.2042 
.1196 
.0209
 
20 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0041 
.0382 
.1633 
.2153 
.0794
 
21 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0009 
.0127 
.0933 
.2768 
.2154
 
22 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0027 
.0339 
.2265 
.3721
 
23 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0003 
.0059 
.0886 
.3074
24 
 0 
.2920 
.0798 
.0047 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 1 
.3688 
.2127 
.0283 
.0020 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 2 
.2232 
.2718 
.0815 
.0097 
.0006 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 3 
.0862 
.2215 
.1493 
.0305 
.0028 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 4 
.0238 
.1292 
.1960 
.0687 
.0099 
.0006 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 5 
.0050 
.0574 
.1960 
.1177 
.0265 
.0025 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 6 
.0008 
.0202 
.1552 
.1598 
.0560 
.0080 
.0004 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 7 
.0001 
.0058 
.0998 
.1761 
.0960 
.0206 
.0017 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 8 
.0000 
.0014 
.0530 
.1604 
.1360 
.0438 
.0053 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 9 
.0000 
.0003 
.0236 
.1222 
.1612 
.0779 
.0141 
.0008 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
10 
.0000 
.0000 
.0088 
.0785 
.1612 
.1169 
.0318 
.0026 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
11 
.0000 
.0000 
.0028 
.0428 
.1367 
.1488 
.0608 
.0079 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000
www.ebook3000.com

B10
Appendix B Statistical Tables
Table I Table of Binomial Probabilities (continued)
 
p
 n 
x 
.05 
.10 
.20 
.30 
.40 
.50 
.60 
.70 
.80 
.90 
.95
 
12 
.0000 
.0000 
.0008 
.0199 
.0988 
.1612 
.0988 
.0199 
.0008 
.0000 
.0000
 
13 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0079 
.0608 
.1488 
.1367 
.0428 
.0028 
.0000 
.0000
 
14 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0026 
.0318 
.1169 
.1612 
.0785 
.0088 
.0000 
.0000
 
15 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0008 
.0141 
.0779 
.1612 
.1222 
.0236 
.0003 
.0000
 
16 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0053 
.0438 
.1360 
.1604 
.0530 
.0014 
.0000
 
17 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0017 
.0206 
.0960 
.1761 
.0998 
.0058 
.0001
 
18 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0004 
.0080 
.0560 
.1598 
.1552 
.0202 
.0008
 
19 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0025 
.0265 
.1177 
.1960 
.0574 
.0050
 
20 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0006 
.0099 
.0687 
.1960 
.1292 
.0238
 
21 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0028 
.0305 
.1493 
.2215 
.0862
 
22 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0006 
.0097 
.0815 
.2718 
.2232
 
23 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0020 
.0283 
.2127 
.3688
 
24 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0047 
.0798 
.2920
25 
 0 
.2774 
.0718 
.0038 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 1 
.3650 
.1994 
.0236 
.0014 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 2 
.2305 
.2659 
.0708 
.0074 
.0004 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 3 
.0930 
.2265 
.1358 
.0243 
.0019 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 4 
.0269 
.1384 
.1867 
.0572 
.0071 
.0004 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 5 
.0060 
.0646 
.1960 
.1030 
.0199 
.0016 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 6 
.0010 
.0239 
.1633 
.1472 
.0442 
.0053 
.0002 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 7 
.0001 
.0072 
.1108 
.1712 
.0800 
.0143 
.0009 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 8 
.0000 
.0018 
.0623 
.1651 
.1200 
.0322 
.0031 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
 9 
.0000 
.0004 
.0294 
.1336 
.1511 
.0609 
.0088 
.0004 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
10 
.0000 
.0001 
.0118 
.0916 
.1612 
.0974 
.0212 
.0013 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 
11 
.0000 
.0000 
.0040 
.0536 
.1465 
.1328 
.0434 
.0042 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000
 
12 
.0000 
.0000 
.0012 
.0268 
.1140 
.1550 
.0760 
.0115 
.0003 
.0000 
.0000
 
13 
.0000 
.0000 
.0003 
.0115 
.0760 
.1550 
.1140 
.0268 
.0012 
.0000 
.0000
 
14 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0042 
.0434 
.1328 
.1465 
.0536 
.0040 
.0000 
.0000
 
15 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0013 
.0212 
.0974 
.1612 
.0916 
.0118 
.0001 
.0000
 
16 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0004 
.0088 
.0609 
.1511 
.1336 
.0294 
.0004 
.0000
 
17 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0031 
.0322 
.1200 
.1651 
.0623 
.0018 
.0000
 
18 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0009 
.0143 
.0800 
.1712 
.1108 
.0072 
.0001
 
19 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0002 
.0053 
.0442 
.1472 
.1633 
.0239 
.0010
 
20 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0016 
.0199 
.1030 
.1960 
.0646 
.0060
 
21 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0004 
.0071 
.0572 
.1867 
.1384 
.0269
 
22 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0019 
.0243 
.1358 
.2265 
.0930
 
23 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0004 
.0074 
.0708 
.2659 
.2305
 
24 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0014 
.0236 
.1994 
.3650
 
25 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0038 
.0718 
.2774 

 Table II Values of e−λ
B11
 Table II Values of e−λ
λ 
e−λ 
λ 
e−λ
0.0 
1.00000000 
3.9 
.02024191
0.1 
.90483742 
4.0 
.01831564
0.2 
.81873075 
4.1 
.01657268
0.3 
.74081822 
4.2 
.01499558
0.4 
.67032005 
4.3 
.01356856
0.5 
.60653066 
4.4 
.01227734
0.6 
.54881164 
4.5 
.01110900
0.7 
.49658530 
4.6 
.01005184
0.8 
.44932896 
4.7 
.00909528
0.9 
.40656966 
4.8 
.00822975
1.0 
.36787944 
4.9 
.00744658
1.1 
.33287108 
5.0 
.00673795
1.2 
.30119421 
5.1 
.00609675
1.3 
.27253179 
5.2 
.00551656
1.4 
.24659696 
5.3 
.00499159
1.5 
.22313016 
5.4 
.00451658
1.6 
.20189652 
5.5 
.00408677
1.7 
.18268352 
5.6 
.00369786
1.8 
.16529889 
5.7 
.00334597
1.9 
.14956862 
5.8 
.00302755
2.0 
.13533528 
5.9 
.00273944
2.1 
.12245643 
6.0 
.00247875
2.2 
.11080316 
6.1 
.00224287
2.3 
.10025884 
6.2 
.00202943
2.4 
.09071795 
6.3 
.00183630
2.5 
.08208500 
6.4 
.00166156
2.6 
.07427358 
6.5 
.00150344
2.7 
.06720551 
6.6 
.00136037
2.8 
.06081006 
6.7 
.00123091
2.9 
.05502322 
6.8 
.00111378
3.0 
.04978707 
6.9 
.00100779
3.1 
.04504920 
7.0 
.00091188
3.2 
.04076220 
7.1 
.00082510
3.3 
.03688317 
7.2 
.00074659
3.4 
.03337327 
7.3 
.00067554
3.5 
.03019738 
7.4 
.00061125
3.6 
.02732372 
7.5 
.00055308
3.7 
.02472353 
7.6 
.00050045
3.8 
.02237077 
7.7 
.00045283
www.ebook3000.com

B12
Appendix B Statistical Tables
 Table II Values of e−λ (continued)
λ 
e−λ 
λ 
e−λ
7.8 
.00040973 
9.5 
.00007485
7.9 
.00037074 
9.6 
.00006773
8.0 
.00033546 
9.7 
.00006128
8.1 
.00030354 
9.8 
.00005545
8.2 
.00027465 
9.9 
.00005017
8.3 
.00024852 
10.0 
.00004540
8.4 
.00022487 
11.0 
.00001670
8.5 
.00020347 
12.0 
.00000614
8.6 
.00018411 
13.0 
.00000226
8.7 
.00016659 
14.0 
.00000083
8.8 
.00015073 
15.0 
.00000031
8.9 
.00013639 
16.0 
.00000011
9.0 
.00012341 
17.0 
.00000004
9.1 
.00011167 
18.0 
.000000015
9.2 
.00010104 
19.0 
.000000006
9.3 
.00009142 
20.0 
.000000002
9.4 
.00008272 

 Table III Table of Poisson Probabilities
B13
 Table III Table of Poisson Probabilities
λ
x 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
1.0
 0 
.9048 
.8187 
.7408 
.6703 
.6065 
.5488 
.4966 
.4493 
.4066 
.3679
 1 
.0905 
.1637 
.2222 
.2681 
.3033 
.3293 
.3476 
.3595 
.3659 
.3679
 2 
.0045 
.0164 
.0333 
.0536 
.0758 
.0988 
.1217 
.1438 
.1647 
.1839
 3 
.0002 
.0011 
.0033 
.0072 
.0126 
.0198 
.0284 
.0383 
.0494 
.0613
 4 
.0000 
.0001 
.0003 
.0007 
.0016 
.0030 
.0050 
.0077 
.0111 
.0153
 5 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0002 
.0004 
.0007 
.0012 
.0020 
.0031
 6 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0002 
.0003 
.0005
 7 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001
λ
x 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
1.5 
1.6 
1.7 
1.8 
1.9 
2.0
 0 
.3329 
.3012 
.2725 
.2466 
.2231 
.2019 
.1827 
.1653 
.1496 
.1353
 1 
.3662 
.3614 
.3543 
.3452 
.3347 
.3230 
.3106 
.2975 
.2842 
.2707
 2 
.2014 
.2169 
.2303 
.2417 
.2510 
.2584 
.2640 
.2678 
.2700 
.2707
 3 
.0738 
.0867 
.0998 
.1128 
.1255 
.1378 
.1496 
.1607 
.1710 
.1804
 4 
.0203 
.0260 
.0324 
.0395 
.0471 
.0551 
.0636 
.0723 
.0812 
.0902
 5 
.0045 
.0062 
.0084 
.0111 
.0141 
.0176 
.0216 
.0260 
.0309 
.0361
 6 
.0008 
.0012 
.0018 
.0026 
.0035 
.0047 
.0061 
.0078 
.0098 
.0120
 7 
.0001 
.0002 
.0003 
.0005 
.0008 
.0011 
.0015 
.0020 
.0027 
.0034
 8 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0002 
.0003 
.0005 
.0006 
.0009
 9 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0002
λ
x 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
2.6 
2.7 
2.8 
2.9 
3.0
 0 
.1225 
.1108 
.1003 
.0907 
.0821 
.0743 
.0672 
.0608 
.0550 
.0498
 1 
.2572 
.2438 
.2306 
.2177 
.2052 
.1931 
.1815 
.1703 
.1596 
.1494
 2 
.2700 
.2681 
.2652 
.2613 
.2565 
.2510 
.2450 
.2384 
.2314 
.2240
 3 
.1890 
.1966 
.2033 
.2090 
.2138 
.2176 
.2205 
.2225 
.2237 
.2240
 4 
.0992 
.1082 
.1169 
.1254 
.1336 
.1414 
.1488 
.1557 
.1622 
.1680
 5 
.0417 
.0476 
.0538 
.0602 
.0668 
.0735 
.0804 
.0872 
.0940 
.1008
 6 
.0146 
.0174 
.0206 
.0241 
.0278 
.0319 
.0362 
.0407 
.0455 
.0504
 7 
.0044 
.0055 
.0068 
.0083 
.0099 
.0118 
.0139 
.0163 
.0188 
.0216
 8 
.0011 
.0015 
.0019 
.0025 
.0031 
.0038 
.0047 
.0057 
.0068 
.0081
 9 
.0003 
.0004 
.0005 
.0007 
.0009 
.0011 
.0014 
.0018 
.0022 
.0027
10 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0002 
.0002 
.0003 
.0004 
.0005 
.0006 
.0008
11 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0002 
.0002
12 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001
www.ebook3000.com

B14
Appendix B Statistical Tables
Table III Table of Poisson Probabilities (continued)
λ
x 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
3.6 
3.7 
3.8 
3.9 
4.0
 0 
.0450 
.0408 
.0369 
.0334 
.0302 
.0273 
.0247 
.0224 
.0202 
.0183
 1 
.1397 
.1304 
.1217 
.1135 
.1057 
.0984 
.0915 
.0850 
.0789 
.0733
 2 
.2165 
.2087 
.2008 
.1929 
.1850 
.1771 
.1692 
.1615 
.1539 
.1465
 3 
.2237 
.2226 
.2209 
.2186 
.2158 
.2125 
.2087 
.2046 
.2001 
.1954
 4 
.1733 
.1781 
.1823 
.1858 
.1888 
.1912 
.1931 
.1944 
.1951 
.1954
 5 
.1075 
.1140 
.1203 
.1264 
.1322 
.1377 
.1429 
.1477 
.1522 
.1563
 6 
.0555 
.0608 
.0662 
.0716 
.0771 
.0826 
.0881 
.0936 
.0989 
.1042
 7 
.0246 
.0278 
.0312 
.0348 
.0385 
.0425 
.0466 
.0508 
.0551 
.0595
 8 
.0095 
.0111 
.0129 
.0148 
.0169 
.0191 
.0215 
.0241 
.0269 
.0298
 9 
.0033 
.0040 
.0047 
.0056 
.0066 
.0076 
.0089 
.0102 
.0116 
.0132
10 
.0010 
.0013 
.0016 
.0019 
.0023 
.0028 
.0033 
.0039 
.0045 
.0053
11 
.0003 
.0004 
.0005 
.0006 
.0007 
.0009 
.0011 
.0013 
.0016 
.0019
12 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0002 
.0002 
.0003 
.0003 
.0004 
.0005 
.0006
13 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0002 
.0002
14 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001
λ
x 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
4.4 
4.5 
4.6 
4.7 
4.8 
4.9 
5.0
 0 
.0166 
.0150 
.0136 
.0123 
.0111 
.0101 
.0091 
.0082 
.0074 
.0067
 1 
.0679 
.0630 
.0583 
.0540 
.0500 
.0462 
.0427 
.0395 
.0365 
.0337
 2 
.1393 
.1323 
.1254 
.1188 
.1125 
.1063 
.1005 
.0948 
.0894 
.0842
 3 
.1904 
.1852 
.1798 
.1743 
.1687 
.1631 
.1574 
.1517 
.1460 
.1404
 4 
.1951 
.1944 
.1933 
.1917 
.1898 
.1875 
.1849 
.1820 
.1789 
.1755
 5 
.1600 
.1633 
.1662 
.1687 
.1708 
.1725 
.1738 
.1747 
.1753 
.1755
 6 
.1093 
.1143 
.1191 
.1237 
.1281 
.1323 
.1362 
.1398 
.1432 
.1462
 7 
.0640 
.0686 
.0732 
.0778 
.0824 
.0869 
.0914 
.0959 
.1002 
.1044
 8 
.0328 
.0360 
.0393 
.0428 
.0463 
.0500 
.0537 
.0575 
.0614 
.0653
 9 
.0150 
.0168 
.0188 
.0209 
.0232 
.0255 
.0281 
.0307 
.0334 
.0363
10 
.0061 
.0071 
.0081 
.0092 
.0104 
.0118 
.0132 
.0147 
.0164 
.0181
11 
.0023 
.0027 
.0032 
.0037 
.0043 
.0049 
.0056 
.0064 
.0073 
.0082
12 
.0008 
.0009 
.0011 
.0014 
.0016 
.0019 
.0022 
.0026 
.0030 
.0034
13 
.0002 
.0003 
.0004 
.0005 
.0006 
.0007 
.0008 
.0009 
.0011 
.0013
14 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0002 
.0002 
.0003 
.0003 
.0004 
.0005
15 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0002
λ
x 
5.1 
5.2 
5.3 
5.4 
5.5 
5.6 
5.7 
5.8 
5.9 
6.0
 0 
.0061 
.0055 
.0050 
.0045 
.0041 
.0037 
.0033 
.0030 
.0027 
.0025
 1 
.0311 
.0287 
.0265 
.0244 
.0225 
.0207 
.0191 
.0176 
.0162 
.0149

 Table III Table of Poisson Probabilities
B15
Table III Table of Poisson Probabilities (continued)
λ
x 
5.1 
5.2 
5.3 
5.4 
5.5 
5.6 
5.7 
5.8 
5.9 
6.0
 2 
.0793 
.0746 
.0701 
.0659 
.0618 
.0580 
.0544 
.0509 
.0477 
.0446
 3 
.1348 
.1293 
.1239 
.1185 
.1133 
.1082 
.1033 
.0985 
.0938 
.0892
 4 
.1719 
.1681 
.1641 
.1600 
.1558 
.1515 
.1472 
.1428 
.1383 
.1339
 5 
.1753 
.1748 
.1740 
.1728 
.1714 
.1697 
.1678 
.1656 
.1632 
.1606
 6 
.1490 
.1515 
.1537 
.1555 
.1571 
.1584 
.1594 
.1601 
.1605 
.1606
 7 
.1086 
.1125 
.1163 
.1200 
.1234 
.1267 
.1298 
.1326 
.1353 
.1377
 8 
.0692 
.0731 
.0771 
.0810 
.0849 
.0887 
.0925 
.0962 
.0998 
.1033
 9 
.0392 
.0423 
.0454 
.0486 
.0519 
.0552 
.0586 
.0620 
.0654 
.0688
10 
.0200 
.0220 
.0241 
.0262 
.0285 
.0309 
.0334 
.0359 
.0386 
.0413
11 
.0093 
.0104 
.0116 
.0129 
.0143 
.0157 
.0173 
.0190 
.0207 
.0225
12 
.0039 
.0045 
.0051 
.0058 
.0065 
.0073 
.0082 
.0092 
.0102 
.0113
13 
.0015 
.0018 
.0021 
.0024 
.0028 
.0032 
.0036 
.0041 
.0046 
.0052
14 
.0006 
.0007 
.0008 
.0009 
.0011 
.0013 
.0015 
.0017 
.0019 
.0022
15 
.0002 
.0002 
.0003 
.0003 
.0004 
.0005 
.0006 
.0007 
.0008 
.0009
16 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0002 
.0002 
.0002 
.0003 
.0003
17 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001
λ
x 
6.1 
6.2 
6.3 
6.4 
6.5 
6.6 
6.7 
6.8 
6.9 
7.0
 0 
.0022 
.0020 
.0018 
.0017 
.0015 
.0014 
.0012 
.0011 
.0010 
.0009
 1 
.0137 
.0126 
.0116 
.0106 
.0098 
.0090 
.0082 
.0076 
.0070 
.0064
 2 
.0417 
.0390 
.0364 
.0340 
.0318 
.0296 
.0276 
.0258 
.0240 
.0223
 3 
.0848 
.0806 
.0765 
.0726 
.0688 
.0652 
.0617 
.0584 
.0552 
.0521
 4 
.1294 
.1249 
.1205 
.1162 
.1118 
.1076 
.1034 
.0992 
.0952 
.0912
 5 
.1579 
.1549 
.1519 
.1487 
.1454 
.1420 
.1385 
.1349 
.1314 
.1277
 6 
.1605 
.1601 
.1595 
.1586 
.1575 
.1562 
.1546 
.1529 
.1511 
.1490
 7 
.1399 
.1418 
.1435 
.1450 
.1462 
.1472 
.1480 
.1486 
.1489 
.1490
 8 
.1066 
.1099 
.1130 
.1160 
.1188 
.1215 
.1240 
.1263 
.1284 
.1304
 9 
.0723 
.0757 
.0791 
.0825 
.0858 
.0891 
.0923 
.0954 
.0985 
.1014
10 
.0441 
.0469 
.0498 
.0528 
.0558 
.0588 
.0618 
.0649 
.0679 
.0710
11 
.0244 
.0265 
.0285 
.0307 
.0330 
.0353 
.0377 
.0401 
.0426 
.0452
12 
.0124 
.0137 
.0150 
.0164 
.0179 
.0194 
.0210 
.0227 
.0245 
.0263
13 
.0058 
.0065 
.0073 
.0081 
.0089 
.0099 
.0108 
.0119 
.0130 
.0142
14 
.0025 
.0029 
.0033 
.0037 
.0041 
.0046 
.0052 
.0058 
.0064 
.0071
15 
.0010 
.0012 
.0014 
.0016 
.0018 
.0020 
.0023 
.0026 
.0029 
.0033
16 
.0004 
.0005 
.0005 
.0006 
.0007 
.0008 
.0010 
.0011 
.0013 
.0014
17 
.0001 
.0002 
.0002 
.0002 
.0003 
.0003 
.0004 
.0004 
.0005 
.0006
18 
.0000 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0002 
.0002 
.0002
19 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001
www.ebook3000.com

B16
Appendix B Statistical Tables
Table III Table of Poisson Probabilities (continued)
λ
x 
7.1 
7.2 
7.3 
7.4 
7.5 
7.6 
7.7 
7.8 
7.9 
8.0
 0 
.0008 
.0007 
.0007 
.0006 
.0006 
.0005 
.0005 
.0004 
.0004 
.0003
 1 
.0059 
.0054 
.0049 
.0045 
.0041 
.0038 
.0035 
.0032 
.0029 
.0027
 2 
.0208 
.0194 
.0180 
.0167 
.0156 
.0145 
.0134 
.0125 
.0116 
.0107
 3 
.0492 
.0464 
.0438 
.0413 
.0389 
.0366 
.0345 
.0324 
.0305 
.0286
 4 
.0874 
.0836 
.0799 
.0764 
.0729 
.0696 
.0663 
.0632 
.0602 
.0573
 5 
.1241 
.1204 
.1167 
.1130 
.1094 
.1057 
.1021 
.0986 
.0951 
.0916
 6 
.1468 
.1445 
.1420 
.1394 
.1367 
.1339 
.1311 
.1282 
.1252 
.1221
 7 
.1489 
.1486 
.1481 
.1474 
.1465 
.1454 
.1442 
.1428 
.1413 
.1396
 8 
.1321 
.1337 
.1351 
.1363 
.1373 
.1381 
.1388 
.1392 
.1395 
.1396
 9 
.1042 
.1070 
.1096 
.1121 
.1144 
.1167 
.1187 
.1207 
.1224 
.1241
10 
.0740 
.0770 
.0800 
.0829 
.0858 
.0887 
.0914 
.0941 
.0967 
.0993
11 
.0478 
.0504 
.0531 
.0558 
.0585 
.0613 
.0640 
.0667 
.0695 
.0722
12 
.0283 
.0303 
.0323 
.0344 
.0366 
.0388 
.0411 
.0434 
.0457 
.0481
13 
.0154 
.0168 
.0181 
.0196 
.0211 
.0227 
.0243 
.0260 
.0278 
.0296
14 
.0078 
.0086 
.0095 
.0104 
.0113 
.0123 
.0134 
.0145 
.0157 
.0169
15 
.0037 
.0041 
.0046 
.0051 
.0057 
.0062 
.0069 
.0075 
.0083 
.0090
16 
.0016 
.0019 
.0021 
.0024 
.0026 
.0030 
.0033 
.0037 
.0041 
.0045
17 
.0007 
.0008 
.0009 
.0010 
.0012 
.0013 
.0015 
.0017 
.0019 
.0021
18 
.0003 
.0003 
.0004 
.0004 
.0005 
.0006 
.0006 
.0007 
.0008 
.0009
19 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0002 
.0002 
.0002 
.0003 
.0003 
.0003 
.0004
20 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0002
21 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0001
λ
x 
8.1 
8.2 
8.3 
8.4 
8.5 
8.6 
8.7 
8.8 
8.9 
9.0
 0 
.0003 
.0003 
.0002 
.0002 
.0002 
.0002 
.0002 
.0002 
.0001 
.0001
 1 
.0025 
.0023 
.0021 
.0019 
.0017 
.0016 
.0014 
.0013 
.0012 
.0011
 2 
.0100 
.0092 
.0086 
.0079 
.0074 
.0068 
.0063 
.0058 
.0054 
.0050
 3 
.0269 
.0252 
.0237 
.0222 
.0208 
.0195 
.0183 
.0171 
.0160 
.0150
 4 
.0544 
.0517 
.0491 
.0466 
.0443 
.0420 
.0398 
.0377 
.0357 
.0337
 5 
.0882 
.0849 
.0816 
.0784 
.0752 
.0722 
.0692 
.0663 
.0635 
.0607
 6 
.1191 
.1160 
.1128 
.1097 
.1066 
.1034 
.1003 
.0972 
.0941 
.0911
 7 
.1378 
.1358 
.1338 
.1317 
.1294 
.1271 
.1247 
.1222 
.1197 
.1171
 8 
.1395 
.1392 
.1388 
.1382 
.1375 
.1366 
.1356 
.1344 
.1332 
.1318
 9 
.1255 
.1269 
.1280 
.1290 
.1299 
.1306 
.1311 
.1315 
.1317 
.1318
10 
.1017 
.1040 
.1063 
.1084 
.1104 
.1123 
.1140 
.1157 
.1172 
.1186
11 
.0749 
.0775 
.0802 
.0828 
.0853 
.0878 
.0902 
.0925 
.0948 
.0970
12 
.0505 
.0530 
.0555 
.0579 
.0604 
.0629 
.0654 
.0679 
.0703 
.0728

 Table III Table of Poisson Probabilities
B17
Table III Table of Poisson Probabilities (continued)
λ
x 
8.1 
8.2 
8.3 
8.4 
8.5 
8.6 
8.7 
8.8 
8.9 
9.0
13 
.0315 
.0334 
.0354 
.0374 
.0395 
.0416 
.0438 
.0459 
.0481 
.0504
14 
.0182 
.0196 
.0210 
.0225 
.0240 
.0256 
.0272 
.0289 
.0306 
.0324
15 
.0098 
.0107 
.0116 
.0126 
.0136 
.0147 
.0158 
.0169 
.0182 
.0194
16 
.0050 
.0055 
.0060 
.0066 
.0072 
.0079 
.0086 
.0093 
.0101 
.0109
17 
.0024 
.0026 
.0029 
.0033 
.0036 
.0040 
.0044 
.0048 
.0053 
.0058
18 
.0011 
.0012 
.0014 
.0015 
.0017 
.0019 
.0021 
.0024 
.0026 
.0029
19 
.0005 
.0005 
.0006 
.0007 
.0008 
.0009 
.0010 
.0011 
.0012 
.0014
20 
.0002 
.0002 
.0002 
.0003 
.0003 
.0004 
.0004 
.0005 
.0005 
.0006
21 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0002 
.0002 
.0002 
.0002 
.0003
22 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001
λ
x 
9.1 
9.2 
9.3 
9.4 
9.5 
9.6 
9.7 
9.8 
9.9 
10
 0 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0000
 1 
.0010 
.0009 
.0009 
.0008 
.0007 
.0007 
.0006 
.0005 
.0005 
.0005
 2 
.0046 
.0043 
.0040 
.0037 
.0034 
.0031 
.0029 
.0027 
.0025 
.0023
 3 
.0140 
.0131 
.0123 
.0115 
.0107 
.0100 
.0093 
.0087 
.0081 
.0076
 4 
.0319 
.0302 
.0285 
.0269 
.0254 
.0240 
.0226 
.0213 
.0201 
.0189
 5 
.0581 
.0555 
.0530 
.0506 
.0483 
.0460 
.0439 
.0418 
.0398 
.0378
 6 
.0881 
.0851 
.0822 
.0793 
.0764 
.0736 
.0709 
.0682 
.0656 
.0631
 7 
.1145 
.1118 
.1091 
.1064 
.1037 
.1010 
.0982 
.0955 
.0928 
.0901
 8 
.1302 
.1286 
.1269 
.1251 
.1232 
.1212 
.1191 
.1170 
.1148 
.1126
 9 
.1317 
.1315 
.1311 
.1306 
.1300 
.1293 
.1284 
.1274 
.1263 
.1251
10 
.1198 
.1209 
.1219 
.1228 
.1235 
.1241 
.1245 
.1249 
.1250 
.1251
11 
.0991 
.1012 
.1031 
.1049 
.1067 
.1083 
.1098 
.1112 
.1125 
.1137
12 
.0752 
.0776 
.0799 
.0822 
.0844 
.0866 
.0888 
.0908 
.0928 
.0948
13 
.0526 
.0549 
.0572 
.0594 
.0617 
.0640 
.0662 
.0685 
.0707 
.0729
14 
.0342 
.0361 
.0380 
.0399 
.0419 
.0439 
.0459 
.0479 
.0500 
.0521
15 
.0208 
.0221 
.0235 
.0250 
.0265 
.0281 
.0297 
.0313 
.0330 
.0347
16 
.0118 
.0127 
.0137 
.0147 
.0157 
.0168 
.0180 
.0192 
.0204 
.0217
17 
.0063 
.0069 
.0075 
.0081 
.0088 
.0095 
.0103 
.0111 
.0119 
.0128
18 
.0032 
.0035 
.0039 
.0042 
.0046 
.0051 
.0055 
.0060 
.0065 
.0071
19 
.0015 
.0017 
.0019 
.0021 
.0023 
.0026 
.0028 
.0031 
.0034 
.0037
20 
.0007 
.0008 
.0009 
.0010 
.0011 
.0012 
.0014 
.0015 
.0017 
.0019
21 
.0003 
.0003 
.0004 
.0004 
.0005 
.0006 
.0006 
.0007 
.0008 
.0009
22 
.0001 
.0001 
.0002 
.0002 
.0002 
.0002 
.0003 
.0003 
.0004 
.0004
23 
.0000 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001 
.0002 
.0002
24 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0001 
.0001
www.ebook3000.com

B18
Appendix B Statistical Tables
Table III Table of Poisson Probabilities (continued)
λ
x 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20
 0 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 1 
.0002 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 2 
.0010 
.0004 
.0002 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 3 
.0037 
.0018 
.0008 
.0004 
.0002 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000
 4 
.0102 
.0053 
.0027 
.0013 
.0006 
.0003 
.0001 
.0001 
.0000 
.0000
 5 
.0224 
.0127 
.0070 
.0037 
.0019 
.0010 
.0005 
.0002 
.0001 
.0001
 6 
.0411 
.0255 
.0152 
.0087 
.0048 
.0026 
.0014 
.0007 
.0004 
.0002
 7 
.0646 
.0437 
.0281 
.0174 
.0104 
.0060 
.0034 
.0019 
.0010 
.0005
 8 
.0888 
.0655 
.0457 
.0304 
.0194 
.0120 
.0072 
.0042 
.0024 
.0013
 9 
.1085 
.0874 
.0661 
.0473 
.0324 
.0213 
.0135 
.0083 
.0050 
.0029
10 
.1194 
.1048 
.0859 
.0663 
.0486 
.0341 
.0230 
.0150 
.0095 
.0058
11 
.1194 
.1144 
.1015 
.0844 
.0663 
.0496 
.0355 
.0245 
.0164 
.0106
12 
.1094 
.1144 
.1099 
.0984 
.0829 
.0661 
.0504 
.0368 
.0259 
.0176
13 
.0926 
.1056 
.1099 
.1060 
.0956 
.0814 
.0658 
.0509 
.0378 
.0271
14 
.0728 
.0905 
.1021 
.1060 
.1024 
.0930 
.0800 
.0655 
.0514 
.0387
15 
.0534 
.0724 
.0885 
.0989 
.1024 
.0992 
.0906 
.0786 
.0650 
.0516
16 
.0367 
.0543 
.0719 
.0866 
.0960 
.0992 
.0963 
.0884 
.0772 
.0646
17 
.0237 
.0383 
.0550 
.0713 
.0847 
.0934 
.0963 
.0936 
.0863 
.0760
18 
.0145 
.0255 
.0397 
.0554 
.0706 
.0830 
.0909 
.0936 
.0911 
.0844
19 
.0084 
.0161 
.0272 
.0409 
.0557 
.0699 
.0814 
.0887 
.0911 
.0888
20 
.0046 
.0097 
.0177 
.0286 
.0418 
.0559 
.0692 
.0798 
.0866 
.0888
21 
.0024 
.0055 
.0109 
.0191 
.0299 
.0426 
.0560 
.0684 
.0783 
.0846
22 
.0012 
.0030 
.0065 
.0121 
.0204 
.0310 
.0433 
.0560 
.0676 
.0769
23 
.0006 
.0016 
.0037 
.0074 
.0133 
.0216 
.0320 
.0438 
.0559 
.0669
24 
.0003 
.0008 
.0020 
.0043 
.0083 
.0144 
.0226 
.0328 
.0442 
.0557
25 
.0001 
.0004 
.0010 
.0024 
.0050 
.0092 
.0154 
.0237 
.0336 
.0446
26 
.0000 
.0002 
.0005 
.0013 
.0029 
.0057 
.0101 
.0164 
.0246 
.0343
27 
.0000 
.0001 
.0002 
.0007 
.0016 
.0034 
.0063 
.0109 
.0173 
.0254
28 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0003 
.0009 
.0019 
.0038 
.0070 
.0117 
.0181
29 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0002 
.0004 
.0011 
.0023 
.0044 
.0077 
.0125
30 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0002 
.0006 
.0013 
.0026 
.0049 
.0083
31 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0003 
.0007 
.0015 
.0030 
.0054
32 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0001 
.0004 
.0009 
.0018 
.0034
33 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0002 
.0005 
.0010 
.0020
34 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0002 
.0006 
.0012
35 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0003 
.0007
36 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0002 
.0004
37 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001 
.0002
38 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001
39 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0000 
.0001

 Table IV Standard Normal Distribution Table
B19
 Table IV Standard Normal Distribution Table
The entries in the table on this page give 
the cumulative area under the standard 
normal curve to the left of z with the 
values of z equal to 0 or negative.
   z 
.00 
.01 
.02 
.03 
.04 
.05 
.06 
.07 
.08 
.09
−3.4 
.0003 
.0003 
.0003 
.0003 
.0003 
.0003 
.0003 
.0003 
.0003 
.0002
−3.3 
.0005 
.0005 
.0005 
.0004 
.0004 
.0004 
.0004 
.0004 
.0004 
.0003
−3.2 
.0007 
.0007 
.0006 
.0006 
.0006 
.0006 
.0006 
.0005 
.0005 
.0005
−3.1 
.0010 
.0009 
.0009 
.0009 
.0008 
.0008 
.0008 
.0008 
.0007 
.0007
−3.0 
.0013 
.0013 
.0013 
.0012 
.0012 
.0011 
.0011 
.0011 
.0010 
.0010
−2.9 
.0019 
.0018 
.0018 
.0017 
.0016 
.0016 
.0015 
.0015 
.0014 
.0014
−2.8 
.0026 
.0025 
.0024 
.0023 
.0023 
.0022 
.0021 
.0021 
.0020 
.0019
−2.7 
.0035 
.0034 
.0033 
.0032 
.0031 
.0030 
.0029 
.0028 
.0027 
.0026
−2.6 
.0047 
.0045 
.0044 
.0043 
.0041 
.0040 
.0039 
.0038 
.0037 
.0036
−2.5 
.0062 
.0060 
.0059 
.0057 
.0055 
.0054 
.0052 
.0051 
.0049 
.0048
−2.4 
.0082 
.0080 
.0078 
.0075 
.0073 
.0071 
.0069 
.0068 
.0066 
.0064
−2.3 
.0107 
.0104 
.0102 
.0099 
.0096 
.0094 
.0091 
.0089 
.0087 
.0084
−2.2 
.0139 
.0136 
.0132 
.0129 
.0125 
.0122 
.0119 
.0116 
.0113 
.0110
−2.1 
.0179 
.0174 
.0170 
.0166 
.0162 
.0158 
.0154 
.0150 
.0146 
.0143
−2.0 
.0228 
.0222 
.0217 
.0212 
.0207 
.0202 
.0197 
.0192 
.0188 
.0183
−1.9 
.0287 
.0281 
.0274 
.0268 
.0262 
.0256 
.0250 
.0244 
.0239 
.0233
−1.8 
.0359 
.0351 
.0344 
.0336 
.0329 
.0322 
.0314 
.0307 
.0301 
.0294
−1.7 
.0446 
.0436 
.0427 
.0418 
.0409 
.0401 
.0392 
.0384 
.0375 
.0367
−1.6 
.0548 
.0537 
.0526 
.0516 
.0505 
.0495 
.0485 
.0475 
.0465 
.0455
−1.5 
.0668 
.0655 
.0643 
.0630 
.0618 
.0606 
.0594 
.0582 
.0571 
.0559
−1.4 
.0808 
.0793 
.0778 
.0764 
.0749 
.0735 
.0721 
.0708 
.0694 
.0681
−1.3 
.0968 
.0951 
.0934 
.0918 
.0901 
.0885 
.0869 
.0853 
.0838 
.0823
−1.2 
.1151 
.1131 
.1112 
.1093 
.1075 
.1056 
.1038 
.1020 
.1003 
.0985
−1.1 
.1357 
.1335 
.1314 
.1292 
.1271 
.1251 
.1230 
.1210 
.1190 
.1170
−1.0 
.1587 
.1562 
.1539 
.1515 
.1492 
.1469 
.1446 
.1423 
.1401 
.1379
−0.9 
.1841 
.1814 
.1788 
.1762 
.1736 
.1711 
.1685 
.1660 
.1635 
.1611
−0.8 
.2119 
.2090 
.2061 
.2033 
.2005 
.1977 
.1949 
.1922 
.1894 
.1867
−0.7 
.2420 
.2389 
.2358 
.2327 
.2296 
.2266 
.2236 
.2206 
.2177 
.2148
−0.6 
.2743 
.2709 
.2676 
.2643 
.2611 
.2578 
.2546 
.2514 
.2483 
.2451
−0.5 
.3085 
.3050 
.3015 
.2981 
.2946 
.2912 
.2877 
.2843 
.2810 
.2776
−0.4 
.3446 
.3409 
.3372 
.3336 
.3300 
.3264 
.3228 
.3192 
.3156 
.3121
−0.3 
.3821 
.3783 
.3745 
.3707 
.3669 
.3632 
.3594 
.3557 
.3520 
.3483
−0.2 
.4207 
.4168 
.4129 
.4090 
.4052 
.4013 
.3974 
.3936 
.3897 
.3859
−0.1 
.4602 
.4562 
.4522 
.4483 
.4443 
.4404 
.4364 
.4325 
.4286 
.4247
−0.0 
.5000 
.4960 
.4920 
.4880 
.4840 
.4801 
.4761 
.4721 
.4681 
.4641
z
z
0
www.ebook3000.com

B20
Appendix B Statistical Tables
0.0 
.5000 
.5040 
.5080 
.5120 
.5160 
.5199 
.5239 
.5279 
.5319 
.5359
0.1 
.5398 
.5438 
.5478 
.5517 
.5557 
.5596 
.5636 
.5675 
.5714 
.5753
0.2 
.5793 
.5832 
.5871 
.5910 
.5948 
.5987 
.6026 
.6064 
.6103 
.6141
0.3 
.6179 
.6217 
.6255 
.6293 
.6331 
.6368 
.6406 
.6443 
.6480 
.6517
0.4 
.6554 
.6591 
.6628 
.6664 
.6700 
.6736 
.6772 
.6808 
.6844 
.6879
0.5 
.6915 
.6950 
.6985 
.7019 
.7054 
.7088 
.7123 
.7157 
.7190 
.7224
0.6 
.7257 
.7291 
.7324 
.7357 
.7389 
.7422 
.7454 
.7486 
.7517 
.7549
0.7 
.7580 
.7611 
.7642 
.7673 
.7704 
.7734 
.7764 
.7794 
.7823 
.7852
0.8 
.7881 
.7910 
.7939 
.7967 
.7995 
.8023 
.8051 
.8078 
.8106 
.8133
0.9 
.8159 
.8186 
.8212 
.8238 
.8264 
.8289 
.8315 
.8340 
.8365 
.8389
1.0 
.8413 
.8438 
.8461 
.8485 
.8508 
.8531 
.8554 
.8577 
.8599 
.8621
1.1 
.8643 
.8665 
.8686 
.8708 
.8729 
.8749 
.8770 
.8790 
.8810 
.8830
1.2 
.8849 
.8869 
.8888 
.8907 
.8925 
.8944 
.8962 
.8980 
.8997 
.9015
1.3 
.9032 
.9049 
.9066 
.9082 
.9099 
.9115 
.9131 
.9147 
.9162 
.9177
1.4 
.9192 
.9207 
.9222 
.9236 
.9251 
.9265 
.9279 
.9292 
.9306 
.9319
1.5 
.9332 
.9345 
.9357 
.9370 
.9382 
.9394 
.9406 
.9418 
.9429 
.9441
1.6 
.9452 
.9463 
.9474 
.9484 
.9495 
.9505 
.9515 
.9525 
.9535 
.9545
1.7 
.9554 
.9564 
.9573 
.9582 
.9591 
.9599 
.9608 
.9616 
.9625 
.9633
1.8 
.9641 
.9649 
.9656 
.9664 
.9671 
.9678 
.9686 
.9693 
.9699 
.9706
1.9 
.9713 
.9719 
.9726 
.9732 
.9738 
.9744 
.9750 
.9756 
.9761 
.9767
2.0 
.9772 
.9778 
.9783 
.9788 
.9793 
.9798 
.9803 
.9808 
.9812 
.9817
2.1 
.9821 
.9826 
.9830 
.9834 
.9838 
.9842 
.9846 
.9850 
.9854 
.9857
2.2 
.9861 
.9864 
.9868 
.9871 
.9875 
.9878 
.9881 
.9884 
.9887 
.9890
2.3 
.9893 
.9896 
.9898 
.9901 
.9904 
.9906 
.9909 
.9911 
.9913 
.9916
2.4 
.9918 
.9920 
.9922 
.9925 
.9927 
.9929 
.9931 
.9932 
.9934 
.9936
2.5 
.9938 
.9940 
.9941 
.9943 
.9945 
.9946 
.9948 
.9949 
.9951 
.9952
2.6 
.9953 
.9955 
.9956 
.9957 
.9959 
.9960 
.9961 
.9962 
.9963 
.9964
2.7 
.9965 
.9966 
.9967 
.9968 
.9969 
.9970 
.9971 
.9972 
.9973 
.9974
2.8 
.9974 
.9975 
.9976 
.9977 
.9977 
.9978 
.9979 
.9979 
.9980 
.9981
2.9 
.9981 
.9982 
.9982 
.9983 
.9984 
.9984 
.9985 
.9985 
.9986 
.9986
3.0 
.9987 
.9987 
.9987 
.9988 
.9988 
.9989 
.9989 
.9989 
.9990 
.9990
3.1 
.9990 
.9991 
.9991 
.9991 
.9992 
.9992 
.9992 
.9992 
.9993 
.9993
3.2 
.9993 
.9993 
.9994 
.9994 
.9994 
.9994 
.9994 
.9995 
.9995 
.9995
3.3 
.9995 
.9995 
.9995 
.9996 
.9996 
.9996 
.9996 
.9996 
.9996 
.9997
3.4 
.9997 
.9997 
.9997 
.9997 
.9997 
.9997 
.9997 
.9997 
.9997 
.9998
 Table IV Standard Normal Distribution Table (continued)
The entries in the table on this page give 
the cumulative area under the standard 
normal curve to the left of z with the 
values of z equal to 0 or positive.
 z 
.00 
.01 
.02 
.03 
.04 
.05 
.06 
.07 
.08 
.09
z
z
0

 Table V  The t Distribution Table
B21
 Table V  The t Distribution Table
The entries in this table give the critical values 
of t for the specified number of degrees 
of freedom and areas in the right tail.
 
Area in the Right Tail Under the t Distribution Curve
df 
.10 
.05 
.025 
.01 
.005 
.001
 1 
3.078 
6.314 
12.706 
31.821 
63.657 
318.309
 2 
1.886 
2.920 
4.303 
6.965 
9.925 
22.327
 3 
1.638 
2.353 
3.182 
4.541 
5.841 
10.215
 4 
1.533 
2.132 
2.776 
3.747 
4.604 
7.173
 5 
1.476 
2.015 
2.571 
3.365 
4.032 
5.893
 6 
1.440 
1.943 
2.447 
3.143 
3.707 
5.208
 7 
1.415 
1.895 
2.365 
2.998 
3.499 
4.785
 8 
1.397 
1.860 
2.306 
2.896 
3.355 
4.501
 9 
1.383 
1.833 
2.262 
2.821 
3.250 
4.297
10 
1.372 
1.812 
2.228 
2.764 
3.169 
4.144
11 
1.363 
1.796 
2.201 
2.718 
3.106 
4.025
12 
1.356 
1.782 
2.179 
2.681 
3.055 
3.930
13 
1.350 
1.771 
2.160 
2.650 
3.012 
3.852
14 
1.345 
1.761 
2.145 
2.624 
2.977 
3.787
15 
1.341 
1.753 
2.131 
2.602 
2.947 
3.733
16 
1.337 
1.746 
2.120 
2.583 
2.921 
3.686
17 
1.333 
1.740 
2.110 
2.567 
2.898 
3.646
18 
1.330 
1.734 
2.101 
2.552 
2.878 
3.610
19 
1.328 
1.729 
2.093 
2.539 
2.861 
3.579
20 
1.325 
1.725 
2.086 
2.528 
2.845 
3.552
21 
1.323 
1.721 
2.080 
2.518 
2.831 
3.527
22 
1.321 
1.717 
2.074 
2.508 
2.819 
3.505
23 
1.319 
1.714 
2.069 
2.500 
2.807 
3.485
24 
1.318 
1.711 
2.064 
2.492 
2.797 
3.467
25 
1.316 
1.708 
2.060 
2.485 
2.787 
3.450
26 
1.315 
1.706 
2.056 
2.479 
2.779 
3.435
27 
1.314 
1.703 
2.052 
2.473 
2.771 
3.421
28 
1.313 
1.701 
2.048 
2.467 
2.763 
3.408
29 
1.311 
1.699 
2.045 
2.462 
2.756 
3.396
30 
1.310 
1.697 
2.042 
2.457 
2.750 
3.385
31 
1.309 
1.696 
2.040 
2.453 
2.744 
3.375
32 
1.309 
1.694 
2.037 
2.449 
2.738 
3.365
33 
1.308 
1.692 
2.035 
2.445 
2.733 
3.356
34 
1.307 
1.691 
2.032 
2.441 
2.728 
3.348
35 
1.306 
1.690 
2.030 
2.438 
2.724 
3.340
t
0
www.ebook3000.com

B22
Appendix B Statistical Tables
 Table V  The t Distribution Table (continued)
 
Area in the Right Tail Under the t Distribution Curve
df 
.10 
.05 
.025 
.01 
.005 
.001
36 
1.306 
1.688 
2.028 
2.434 
2.719 
3.333
37 
1.305 
1.687 
2.026 
2.431 
2.715 
3.326
38 
1.304 
1.686 
2.024 
2.429 
2.712 
3.319
39 
1.304 
1.685 
2.023 
2.426 
2.708 
3.313
40 
1.303 
1.684 
2.021 
2.423 
2.704 
3.307
41 
1.303 
1.683 
2.020 
2.421 
2.701 
3.301
42 
1.302 
1.682 
2.018 
2.418 
2.698 
3.296
43 
1.302 
1.681 
2.017 
2.416 
2.695 
3.291
44 
1.301 
1.680 
2.015 
2.414 
2.692 
3.286
45 
1.301 
1.679 
2.014 
2.412 
2.690 
3.281
46 
1.300 
1.679 
2.013 
2.410 
2.687 
3.277
47 
1.300 
1.678 
2.012 
2.408 
2.685 
3.273
48 
1.299 
1.677 
2.011 
2.407 
2.682 
3.269
49 
1.299 
1.677 
2.010 
2.405 
2.680 
3.265
50 
1.299 
1.676 
2.009 
2.403 
2.678 
3.261
51 
1.298 
1.675 
2.008 
2.402 
2.676 
3.258
52 
1.298 
1.675 
2.007 
2.400 
2.674 
3.255
53 
1.298 
1.674 
2.006 
2.399 
2.672 
3.251
54 
1.297 
1.674 
2.005 
2.397 
2.670 
3.248
55 
1.297 
1.673 
2.004 
2.396 
2.668 
3.245
56 
1.297 
1.673 
2.003 
2.395 
2.667 
3.242
57 
1.297 
1.672 
2.002 
2.394 
2.665 
3.239
58 
1.296 
1.672 
2.002 
2.392 
2.663 
3.237
59 
1.296 
1.671 
2.001 
2.391 
2.662 
3.234
60 
1.296 
1.671 
2.000 
2.390 
2.660 
3.232
61 
1.296 
1.670 
2.000 
2.389 
2.659 
3.229
62 
1.295 
1.670 
1.999 
2.388 
2.657 
3.227
63 
1.295 
1.669 
1.998 
2.387 
2.656 
3.225
64 
1.295 
1.669 
1.998 
2.386 
2.655 
3.223
65 
1.295 
1.669 
1.997 
2.385 
2.654 
3.220
66 
1.295 
1.668 
1.997 
2.384 
2.652 
3.218
67 
1.294 
1.668 
1.996 
2.383 
2.651 
3.216
68 
1.294 
1.668 
1.995 
2.382 
2.650 
3.214
69 
1.294 
1.667 
1.995 
2.382 
2.649 
3.213
70 
1.294 
1.667 
1.994 
2.381 
2.648 
3.211
71 
1.294 
1.667 
1.994 
2.380 
2.647 
3.209
72 
1.293 
1.666 
1.993 
2.379 
2.646 
3.207
73 
1.293 
1.666 
1.993 
2.379 
2.645 
3.206
74 
1.293 
1.666 
1.993 
2.378 
2.644 
3.204
75 
1.293 
1.665 
1.992 
2.377 
2.643 
3.202
∞ 
1.282 
1.645 
1.960 
2.326 
2.576 
3.090

Table VI Chi-Square Distribution Table
B23
Table VI Chi-Square Distribution Table
The entries in this table give the critical values of χ2 for the specified
number of degrees of freedom and areas in the right tail.
Area in the Right Tail Under the Chi-Square Distribution Curve
 df 
.995 
.990 
.975 
.950 
.900 
.100 
.050 
.025 
.010 
.005
1 
0.000 
0.000 
0.001 
0.004 
0.016 
2.706 
3.841 
5.024 
6.635 
7.879
2 
0.010 
0.020 
0.051 
0.103 
0.211 
4.605 
5.991 
7.378 
9.210 
10.597
3 
0.072 
0.115 
0.216 
0.352 
0.584 
6.251 
7.815 
9.348 
11.345 
12.838
4 
0.207 
0.297 
0.484 
0.711 
1.064 
7.779 
9.488 
11.143 
13.277 
14.860
5 
0.412 
0.554 
0.831 
1.145 
1.610 
9.236 
11.070 
12.833 
15.086 
16.750
6 
0.676 
0.872 
1.237 
1.635 
2.204 
10.645 
12.592 
14.449 
16.812 
18.548
7 
0.989 
1.239 
1.690 
2.167 
2.833 
12.017 
14.067 
16.013 
18.475 
20.278
8 
1.344 
1.646 
2.180 
2.733 
3.490 
13.362 
15.507 
17.535 
20.090 
21.955
9 
1.735 
2.088 
2.700 
3.325 
4.168 
14.684 
16.919 
19.023 
21.666 
23.589
10 
2.156 
2.558 
3.247 
3.940 
4.865 
15.987 
18.307 
20.483 
23.209 
25.188
11 
2.603 
3.053 
3.816 
4.575 
5.578 
17.275 
19.675 
21.920 
24.725 
26.757
12 
3.074 
3.571 
4.404 
5.226 
6.304 
18.549 
21.026 
23.337 
26.217 
28.300
13 
3.565 
4.107 
5.009 
5.892 
7.042 
19.812 
22.362 
24.736 
27.688 
29.819
14 
4.075 
4.660 
5.629 
6.571 
7.790 
21.064 
23.685 
26.119 
29.141 
31.319
15 
4.601 
5.229 
6.262 
7.261 
8.547 
22.307 
24.996 
27.488 
30.578 
32.801
16 
5.142 
5.812 
6.908 
7.962 
9.312 
23.542 
26.296 
28.845 
32.000 
34.267
17 
5.697 
6.408 
7.564 
8.672 
10.085 
24.769 
27.587 
30.191 
33.409 
35.718
18 
6.265 
7.015 
8.231 
9.390 
10.865 
25.989 
28.869 
31.526 
34.805 
37.156
19 
6.844 
7.633 
8.907 
10.117 
11.651 
27.204 
30.144 
32.852 
36.191 
38.582
20 
7.434 
8.260 
9.591 
10.851 
12.443 
28.412 
31.410 
34.170 
37.566 
39.997
21 
8.034 
8.897 
10.283 
11.591 
13.240 
29.615 
32.671 
35.479 
38.932 
41.401
22 
8.643 
9.542 
10.982 
12.338 
14.041 
30.813 
33.924 
36.781 
40.289 
42.796
23 
9.260 
10.196 
11.689 
13.091 
14.848 
32.007 
35.172 
38.076 
41.638 
44.181
24 
9.886 
10.856 
12.401 
13.848 
15.659 
33.196 
36.415 
39.364 
42.980 
45.559
25 
10.520 
11.524 
13.120 
14.611 
16.473 
34.382 
37.652 
40.646 
44.314 
46.928
26 
11.160 
12.198 
13.844 
15.379 
17.292 
35.563 
38.885 
41.923 
45.642 
48.290
27 
11.808 
12.879 
14.573 
16.151 
18.114 
36.741 
40.113 
43.195 
46.963 
49.645
28 
12.461 
13.565 
15.308 
16.928 
18.939 
37.916 
41.337 
44.461 
48.278 
50.993
29 
13.121 
14.256 
16.047 
17.708 
19.768 
39.087 
42.557 
45.722 
49.588 
52.336
30 
13.787 
14.953 
16.791 
18.493 
20.599 
40.256 
43.773 
46.979 
50.892 
53.672
40 
20.707 
22.164 
24.433 
26.509 
29.051 
51.805 
55.758 
59.342 
63.691 
66.766
50 
27.991 
29.707 
32.357 
34.764 
37.689 
63.167 
67.505 
71.420 
76.154 
79.490
60 
35.534 
37.485 
40.482 
43.188 
46.459 
74.397 
79.082 
83.298 
88.379 
91.952
70 
43.275 
45.442 
48.758 
51.739 
55.329 
85.527 
90.531 
95.023 
100.425 
104.215
80 
51.172 
53.540 
57.153 
60.391 
64.278 
96.578 
101.879 
106.629 
112.329 
116.321
90 
59.196 
61.754 
65.647 
69.126 
73.291 
107.565 
113.145 
118.136 
124.116 
128.299
100 
67.328 
70.065 
74.222 
77.929 
82.358 
118.498 
124.342 
129.561 
135.807 
140.169
  2
0
χ
www.ebook3000.com

Degrees of Freedom for the Denominator
Table VII The F Distribution Table
The entries in the table on this page give the critical values of F 
for .01 area in the right tail under the F distribution curve and 
specified degrees of freedom for the numerator and denominator.
 
Degrees of Freedom for the Numerator
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
15 
20 
25 
30 
40 
50 
100
1 
4052 
5000 
5403 
5625 
5764 
5859 
5928 
5981 
6022 
6056 
6083 
6106 
6157 
6209 
6240 
6261 
6287 
6303 
6334
2 
98.50 
99.00 
99.17 
99.25 
99.30 
99.33 
99.36 
99.37 
99.39 
99.40 
99.41 
99.42 
99.43 
99.45 
99.46 
99.47 
99.47 
99.48 
99.49
3 
34.12 
30.82 
29.46 
28.71 
28.24 
27.91 
27.67 
27.49 
27.35 
27.23 
27.13 
27.05 
26.87 
26.69 
26.58 
26.50 
26.41 
26.35 
26.24
4 
21.20 
18.00 
16.69 
15.98 
15.52 
15.21 
14.98 
14.80 
14.66 
14.55 
14.45 
14.37 
14.20 
14.02 
13.91 
13.84 
13.75 
13.69 
13.58
5 
16.26 
13.27 
12.06 
11.39 
10.97 
10.67 
10.46 
10.29 
10.16 
10.05 
9.96 
9.89 
9.72 
9.55 
9.45 
9.38 
9.29 
9.24 
9.13
6 
13.75 
10.92 
9.78 
9.15 
8.75 
8.47 
8.26 
8.10 
7.98 
7.87 
7.79 
7.72 
7.56 
7.40 
7.30 
7.23 
7.14 
7.09 
6.99
7 
12.25 
9.55 
8.45 
7.85 
7.46 
7.19 
6.99 
6.84 
6.72 
6.62 
6.54 
6.47 
6.31 
6.16 
6.06 
5.99 
5.91 
5.86 
5.75
8 
11.26 
8.65 
7.59 
7.01 
6.63 
6.37 
6.18 
6.03 
5.91 
5.81 
5.73 
5.67 
5.52 
5.36 
5.26 
5.20 
5.12 
5.07 
4.96
9 
10.56 
8.02 
6.99 
6.42 
6.06 
5.80 
5.61 
5.47 
5.35 
5.26 
5.18 
5.11 
4.96 
4.81 
4.71 
4.65 
4.57 
4.52 
4.41
10 
10.04 
7.56 
6.55 
5.99 
5.64 
5.39 
5.20 
5.06 
4.94 
4.85 
4.77 
4.71 
4.56 
4.41 
4.31 
4.25 
4.17 
4.12 
4.01
11 
9.65 
7.21 
6.22 
5.67 
5.32 
5.07 
4.89 
4.74 
4.63 
4.54 
4.46 
4.40 
4.25 
4.10 
4.01 
3.94 
3.86 
3.81 
3.71
12 
9.33 
6.93 
5.95 
5.41 
5.06 
4.82 
4.64 
4.50 
4.39 
4.30 
4.22 
4.16 
4.01 
3.86 
3.76 
3.70 
3.62 
3.57 
3.47
13 
9.07 
6.70 
5.74 
5.21 
4.86 
4.62 
4.44 
4.30 
4.19 
4.10 
4.02 
3.96 
3.82 
3.66 
3.57 
3.51 
3.43 
3.38 
3.27
14 
8.86 
6.51 
5.56 
5.04 
4.69 
4.46 
4.28 
4.14 
4.03 
3.94 
3.86 
3.80 
3.66 
3.51 
3.41 
3.35 
3.27 
3.22 
3.11
15 
8.68 
6.36 
5.42 
4.89 
4.56 
4.32 
4.14 
4.00 
3.89 
3.80 
3.73 
3.67 
3.52 
3.37 
3.28 
3.21 
3.13 
3.08 
2.98
16 
8.53 
6.23 
5.29 
4.77 
4.44 
4.20 
4.03 
3.89 
3.78 
3.69 
3.62 
3.55 
3.41 
3.26 
3.16 
3.10 
3.02 
2.97 
2.86
17 
8.40 
6.11 
5.18 
4.67 
4.34 
4.10 
3.93 
3.79 
3.68 
3.59 
3.52 
3.46 
3.31 
3.16 
3.07 
3.00 
2.92 
2.87 
2.76
18 
8.29 
6.01 
5.09 
4.58 
4.25 
4.01 
3.84 
3.71 
3.60 
3.51 
3.43 
3.37 
3.23 
3.08 
2.98 
2.92 
2.84 
2.78 
2.68
19 
8.18 
5.93 
5.01 
4.50 
4.17 
3.94 
3.77 
3.63 
3.52 
3.43 
3.36 
3.30 
3.15 
3.00 
2.91 
2.84 
2.76 
2.71 
2.60
20 
8.10 
5.85 
4.94 
4.43 
4.10 
3.87 
3.70 
3.56 
3.46 
3.37 
3.29 
3.23 
3.09 
2.94 
2.84 
2.78 
2.69 
2.64 
2.54
21 
8.02 
5.78 
4.87 
4.37 
4.04 
3.81 
3.64 
3.51 
3.40 
3.31 
3.24 
3.17 
3.03 
2.88 
2.79 
2.72 
2.64 
2.58 
2.48
22 
7.95 
5.72 
4.82 
4.31 
3.99 
3.76 
3.59 
3.45 
3.35 
3.26 
3.18 
3.12 
2.98 
2.83 
2.73 
2.67 
2.58 
2.53 
2.42
23 
7.88 
5.66 
4.76 
4.26 
3.94 
3.71 
3.54 
3.41 
3.30 
3.21 
3.14 
3.07 
2.93 
2.78 
2.69 
2.62 
2.54 
2.48 
2.37
24 
7.82 
5.61 
4.72 
4.22 
3.90 
3.67 
3.50 
3.36 
3.26 
3.17 
3.09 
3.03 
2.89 
2.74 
2.64 
2.58 
2.49 
2.44 
2.33
25 
7.77 
5.57 
4.68 
4.18 
3.85 
3.63 
3.46 
3.32 
3.22 
3.13 
3.06 
2.99 
2.85 
2.70 
2.60 
2.54 
2.45 
2.40 
2.29
30 
7.56 
5.39 
4.51 
4.02 
3.70 
3.47 
3.30 
3.17 
3.07 
2.98 
2.91 
2.84 
2.70 
2.55 
2.45 
2.39 
2.30 
2.25 
2.13
40 
7.31 
5.18 
4.31 
3.83 
3.51 
3.29 
3.12 
2.99 
2.89 
2.80 
2.73 
2.66 
2.52 
2.37 
2.27 
2.20 
2.11 
2.06 
1.94
50 
7.17 
5.06 
4.20 
3.72 
3.41 
3.19 
3.02 
2.89 
2.78 
2.70 
2.63 
2.56 
2.42 
2.27 
2.17 
2.10 
2.01 
1.95 
1.82
100 
6.90 
4.82 
3.98 
3.51 
3.21 
2.99 
2.82 
2.69 
2.59 
2.50 
2.43 
2.37 
2.22 
2.07 
1.97 
1.89 
1.80 
1.74 
1.60
F
0
.01
B24

Degrees of Freedom for the Denominator
Table VII The F Distribution Table (continued)
The entries in the table on this page give the critical values of F   
for .025 area in the right tail under the F distribution curve and 
specified degrees of freedom for the numerator and denominator.
 
Degrees of Freedom for the Numerator
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
15 
20 
25 
30 
40 
50 
100
 1 
647.8 
799.5 
864.2 
899.6 
921.8 
937.1 
948.2 
956.7 
963.3 
968.6 
973.0 
976.7 
984.9 
993.1 
998.1 
1001 
1006 
1008 
1013
 2 
38.51 
39.00 
39.17 
39.25 
39.30 
39.33 
39.36 
39.37 
39.39 
39.40 
39.41 
39.41 
39.43 
39.45 
39.46 39.46 
39.47 
39.48 
39.49
 3 
17.44 
16.04 
15.44 
15.10 
14.88 
14.73 
14.62 
14.54 
14.47 
14.42 
14.37 
14.34 
14.25 
14.17 
14.12 14.08 
14.04 
14.01 
13.96
 4 
12.22 
10.65 
9.98 
9.61 
6.36 
9.20 
9.07 
8.98 
8.90 
8.84 
8.79 
8.75 
8.66 
8.56 
8.50 
8.46 
8.41 
8.38 
8.32
 5 
10.01 
8.43 
7.76 
7.39 
7.15 
6.98 
6.85 
6.76 
6.68 
6.62 
6.57 
6.52 
6.43 
6.33 
6.27 
6.23 
6.18 
6.14 
6.08
 6 
8.81 
7.26 
6.60 
6.23 
5.99 
5.82 
5.70 
5.60 
5.52 
5.46 
5.41 
5.37 
5.27 
5.17 
5.11 
5.07 
5.01 
4.98 
4.92
 7 
8.07 
6.54 
5.89 
5.52 
5.29 
5.12 
4.99 
4.90 
4.82 
4.76 
4.71 
4.67 
4.57 
4.47 
4.40 
4.36 
4.31 
4.28 
4.21
 8 
7.57 
6.06 
5.42 
5.05 
4.82 
4.65 
4.53 
4.43 
4.36 
4.30 
4.24 
4.20 
4.10 
4.00 
3.94 
3.89 
3.84 
3.81 
3.74
 9 
7.21 
5.72 
5.08 
4.72 
4.48 
4.32 
4.20 
4.10 
4.03 
3.96 
3.91 
3.87 
3.77 
3.67 
3.60 
3.56 
3.51 
3.47 
3.40
 10 
6.94 
5.46 
4.83 
4.47 
4.24 
4.07 
3.95 
3.85 
3.78 
3.72 
3.66 
3.62 
3.52 
3.42 
3.35 
3.31 
3.26 
3.22 
3.15
 11 
6.72 
5.26 
4.63 
4.28 
4.04 
3.88 
3.76 
3.66 
3.59 
3.53 
3.47 
3.43 
3.33 
3.23 
3.16 
3.12 
3.06 
3.03 
2.96
 12 
6.55 
5.10 
4.47 
4.12 
3.89 
3.73 
3.61 
3.51 
3.44 
3.37 
3.32 
3.28 
3.18 
3.07 
3.01 
2.96 
2.91 
2.87 
2.80
 13 
6.41 
4.97 
4.35 
4.00 
3.77 
3.60 
3.48 
3.39 
3.31 
3.25 
3.20 
3.15 
3.05 
2.95 
2.88 
2.84 
2.78 
2.74 
2.67
 14 
6.30 
4.86 
4.24 
3.89 
3.66 
3.50 
3.38 
3.29 
3.21 
3.15 
3.09 
3.05 
2.95 
2.84 
2.78 
2.73 
2.67 
2.64 
2.56
 15 
6.20 
4.77 
4.15 
3.80 
3.58 
3.41 
3.29 
3.20 
3.12 
3.06 
3.01 
2.96 
2.86 
2.76 
2.69 
2.64 
2.59 
2.55 
2.47
 16 
6.12 
4.69 
4.08 
3.73 
3.50 
3.34 
3.22 
3.12 
3.05 
2.99 
2.93 
2.89 
2.79 
2.68 
2.61 
2.57 
2.51 
2.47 
2.40
 17 
6.04 
4.62 
4.01 
3.66 
3.44 
3.28 
3.16 
3.06 
2.98 
2.92 
2.87 
2.82 
2.72 
2.62 
2.55 
2.50 
2.44 
2.41 
2.33
 18 
5.98 
4.56 
3.95 
3.61 
3.38 
3.22 
3.10 
3.01 
2.93 
2.87 
2.81 
2.77 
2.67 
2.56 
2.49 
2.44 
2.38 
2.35 
2.27
 19 
5.92 
4.51 
3.90 
3.56 
3.33 
3.17 
3.05 
2.96 
2.88 
2.82 
2.76 
2.72 
2.62 
2.51 
2.44 
2.39 
2.33 
2.30 
2.22
 20 
5.87 
4.46 
3.86 
3.51 
3.29 
3.13 
3.01 
2.91 
2.84 
2.77 
2.72 
2.68 
2.57 
2.46 
2.40 
2.35 
2.29 
2.25 
2.17
 21 
5.83 
4.42 
3.82 
3.48 
3.25 
3.09 
2.97 
2.87 
2.80 
2.73 
2.68 
2.64 
2.53 
2.42 
2.36 
2.31 
2.25 
2.21 
2.13
 22 
5.79 
4.38 
3.78 
3.44 
3.22 
3.05 
2.93 
2.84 
2.76 
2.70 
2.65 
2.60 
2.50 
2.39 
2.32 
2.27 
2.21 
2.17 
2.09
 23 
5.75 
4.35 
3.75 
3.41 
3.18 
3.02 
2.90 
2.81 
2.73 
2.67 
2.62 
2.57 
2.47 
2.36 
2.29 
2.24 
2.18 
2.14 
2.06
 24 
5.72 
4.32 
3.72 
3.38 
3.15 
2.99 
2.87 
2.78 
2.70 
2.64 
2.59 
2.54 
2.44 
2.33 
2.26 
2.21 
2.15 
2.11 
2.02
 25 
5.69 
4.29 
3.69 
3.35 
3.13 
2.97 
2.85 
2.75 
2.68 
2.61 
2.56 
2.51 
2.41 
2.30 
2.23 
2.18 
2.12 
2.08 
2.00
 30 
5.57 
4.18 
3.59 
3.25 
3.03 
2.87 
2.75 
2.65 
2.57 
2.51 
2.46 
2.41 
2.31 
2.20 
2.12 
2.07 
2.01 
1.97 
1.88
 40 
5.42 
4.05 
3.46 
3.13 
2.90 
2.74 
2.62 
2.53 
2.45 
2.39 
2.33 
2.29 
2.18 
2.07 
1.99 
1.94 
1.88 
1.83 
1.74
 50 
5.34 
3.97 
3.39 
3.05 
2.83 
2.67 
2.55 
2.46 
2.38 
2.32 
2.26 
2.22 
2.11 
1.99 
1.92 
1.87 
1.80 
1.75 
1.66
100 
5.18 
3.83 
3.25 
2.92 
2.70 
2.54 
2.42 
2.32 
2.24 
2.18 
2.12 
2.08 
1.97 
1.85 
1.77 
1.71 
1.64 
1.59 
1.48
F
0
.025
B25
www.ebook3000.com

Degrees of Freedom for the Denominator
Table VII The F Distribution Table (continued)
The entries in the table on this page give the critical values of F 
for .05 area in the right tail under the F distribution curve and 
specified degrees of freedom for the numerator and denominator.
 
Degrees of Freedom for the Numerator
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
15 
20 
25 
30 
40 
50 
100
1 
161.5 
199.5 
215.7 
224.6 
230.2 
234.0 
236.8 
238.9 
240.5 
241.9 
243.0 
243.9 
246.0 
248.0 
249.3 
250.1 
251.1 
251.8 253.0
2 
18.51 
19.00 
19.16 
19.25 
19.30 
19.33 
19.35 
19.37 
19.38 
19.40 
19.40 
19.41 
19.43 
19.45 
19.46 
19.46 
19.47 
19.48 19.49
3 
10.13 
9.55 
9.28 
9.12 
9.01 
8.94 
8.89 
8.85 
8.81 
8.79 
8.76 
8.74 
8.70 
8.66 
8.63 
8.62 
8.59 
8.58 
8.55
4 
7.71 
6.94 
6.59 
6.39 
6.26 
6.16 
6.09 
6.04 
6.00 
5.96 
5.94 
5.91 
5.86 
5.80 
5.77 
5.75 
5.72 
5.70 
5.66
5 
6.61 
5.79 
5.41 
5.19 
5.05 
4.95 
4.88 
4.82 
4.77 
4.74 
4.70 
4.68 
4.62 
4.56 
4.52 
4.50 
4.46 
4.44 
4.41
6 
5.99 
5.14 
4.76 
4.53 
4.39 
4.28 
4.21 
4.15 
4.10 
4.06 
4.03 
4.00 
3.94 
3.87 
3.83 
3.81 
3.77 
3.75 
3.71
7 
5.59 
4.74 
4.35 
4.12 
3.97 
3.87 
3.79 
3.73 
3.68 
3.64 
3.60 
3.57 
3.51 
3.44 
3.40 
3.38 
3.34 
3.32 
3.27
8 
5.32 
4.46 
4.07 
3.84 
3.69 
3.58 
3.50 
3.44 
3.39 
3.35 
3.31 
3.28 
3.22 
3.15 
3.11 
3.08 
3.04 
3.02 
2.97
9 
5.12 
4.26 
3.86 
3.63 
3.48 
3.37 
3.29 
3.23 
3.18 
3.14 
3.10 
3.07 
3.01 
2.94 
2.89 
2.86 
2.83 
2.80 
2.76
10 
4.96 
4.10 
3.71 
3.48 
3.33 
3.22 
3.14 
3.07 
3.02 
2.98 
2.94 
2.91 
2.85 
2.77 
2.73 
2.70 
2.66 
2.64 
2.59
11 
4.84 
3.98 
3.59 
3.36 
3.20 
3.09 
3.01 
2.95 
2.90 
2.85 
2.82 
2.79 
2.72 
2.65 
2.60 
2.57 
2.53 
2.51 
2.46
12 
4.75 
3.89 
3.49 
3.26 
3.11 
3.00 
2.91 
2.85 
2.80 
2.75 
2.72 
2.69 
2.62 
2.54 
2.50 
2.47 
2.43 
2.40 
2.35
13 
4.67 
3.81 
3.41 
3.18 
3.03 
2.92 
2.83 
2.77 
2.71 
2.67 
2.63 
2.60 
2.53 
2.46 
2.41 
2.38 
2.34 
2.31 
2.26
14 
4.60 
3.74 
3.34 
3.11 
2.96 
2.85 
2.76 
2.70 
2.65 
2.60 
2.57 
2.53 
2.46 
2.39 
2.34 
2.31 
2.27 
2.24 
2.19
15 
4.54 
3.68 
3.29 
3.06 
2.90 
2.79 
2.71 
2.64 
2.59 
2.54 
2.51 
2.48 
2.40 
2.33 
2.28 
2.25 
2.20 
2.18 
2.12
16 
4.49 
3.63 
3.24 
3.01 
2.85 
2.74 
2.66 
2.59 
2.54 
2.49 
2.46 
2.42 
2.35 
2.28 
2.23 
2.19 
2.15 
2.12 
2.07
17 
4.45 
3.59 
3.20 
2.96 
2.81 
2.70 
2.61 
2.55 
2.49 
2.45 
2.41 
2.38 
2.31 
2.23 
2.18 
2.15 
2.10 
2.08 
2.02
18 
4.41 
3.55 
3.16 
2.93 
2.77 
2.66 
2.58 
2.51 
2.46 
2.41 
2.37 
2.34 
2.27 
2.19 
2.14 
2.11 
2.06 
2.04 
1.98
19 
4.38 
3.52 
3.13 
2.90 
2.74 
2.63 
2.54 
2.48 
2.42 
2.38 
2.34 
2.31 
2.23 
2.16 
2.11 
2.07 
2.03 
2.00 
1.94
20 
4.35 
3.49 
3.10 
2.87 
2.71 
2.60 
2.51 
2.45 
2.39 
2.35 
2.31 
2.28 
2.20 
2.12 
2.07 
2.04 
1.99 
1.97 
1.91
21 
4.32 
3.47 
3.07 
2.84 
2.68 
2.57 
2.49 
2.42 
2.37 
2.32 
2.28 
2.25 
2.18 
2.10 
2.05 
2.01 
1.96 
1.94 
1.88
22 
4.30 
3.44 
3.05 
2.82 
2.66 
2.55 
2.46 
2.40 
2.34 
2.30 
2.26 
2.23 
2.15 
2.07 
2.02 
1.97 
1.94 
1.91 
1.85
23 
4.28 
3.42 
3.03 
2.80 
2.64 
2.53 
2.44 
2.37 
2.32 
2.27 
2.24 
2.20 
2.13 
2.05 
2.00 
1.96 
1.91 
1.88 
1.82
24 
4.26 
3.40 
3.01 
2.78 
2.62 
2.51 
2.42 
2.36 
2.30 
2.25 
2.22 
2.18 
2.16 
2.03 
1.97 
1.94 
1.89 
1.86 
1.80
25 
4.24 
3.39 
2.99 
2.76 
2.60 
2.49 
2.40 
2.34 
2.28 
2.24 
2.20 
2.16 
2.09 
2.01 
1.96 
1.92 
1.87 
1.84 
1.78
30 
4.17 
3.32 
2.92 
2.69 
2.53 
2.42 
2.33 
2.27 
2.21 
2.16 
2.13 
2.09 
2.01 
1.93 
1.88 
1.84 
1.79 
1.76 
1.70
40 
4.08 
3.23 
2.84 
2.61 
2.45 
2.34 
2.25 
2.18 
2.12 
2.08 
2.04 
2.00 
1.92 
1.84 
1.78 
1.74 
1.69 
1.66 
1.59
50 
4.03 
3.18 
2.79 
2.56 
2.40 
2.29 
2.20 
2.13 
2.07 
2.03 
1.99 
1.95 
1.87 
1.78 
1.73 
1.69 
1.63 
1.60 
1.52
100 
3.94 
3.09 
2.70 
2.46 
2.31 
2.19 
2.10 
2.03 
1.97 
1.93 
1.89 
1.85 
1.77 
1.68 
1.62 
1.57 
1.52 
1.48 
1.39
F
0
.05
B26

Table VII The F Distribution Table (continued)
The entries in the table on this page give the critical values of F  
for .10 area in the right tail under the F distribution curve and  
specified degrees of freedom for the numerator and denominator.
 
Degrees of Freedom for the Numerator
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
15 
20 
25 
30 
40 
50 
100
1 
39.86 
49.50 
53.59 
55.83 
57.24 
58.20 
58.91 
59.44 
59.86 
60.19 
60.47 
60.71 
61.22 
61.74 
62.05 
62.26 
62.53 
62.69 63.01
2 
8.53 
9.00 
9.16 
9.24 
9.29 
9.33 
9.35 
9.37 
9.38 
9.39 
9.40 
9.41 
9.42 
9.44 
9.45 
9.46 
9.47 
9.47 
9.48
3 
5.54 
5.46 
5.39 
5.34 
5.31 
5.28 
5.27 
5.25 
5.24 
5.23 
5.22 
5.22 
5.20 
5.18 
5.17 
5.17 
5.16 
5.15 
5.14
4 
4.54 
4.32 
4.19 
4.11 
4.05 
4.01 
3.98 
3.95 
3.94 
3.92 
3.91 
3.90 
3.87 
3.84 
3.83 
3.82 
3.80 
3.80 
3.78
5 
4.06 
3.78 
3.62 
3.52 
3.45 
3.40 
3.37 
3.34 
3.32 
3.30 
3.28 
3.27 
3.24 
3.21 
3.19 
3.17 
3.16 
3.15 
3.13
6 
3.78 
3.46 
3.29 
3.18 
3.11 
3.05 
3.01 
2.98 
2.96 
2.94 
2.92 
2.90 
2.87 
2.84 
2.81 
2.80 
2.78 
2.77 
2.75
7 
3.59 
3.26 
3.07 
2.96 
2.88 
2.83 
2.78 
2.75 
2.72 
2.70 
2.68 
2.67 
2.63 
2.59 
2.57 
2.56 
2.54 
2.52 
2.50
8 
3.46 
3.11 
2.92 
2.81 
2.73 
2.67 
2.62 
2.59 
2.56 
2.54 
2.52 
2.50 
2.46 
2.42 
2.40 
2.38 
2.36 
2.35 
2.32
9 
3.36 
3.01 
2.81 
2.69 
2.61 
2.55 
2.51 
2.47 
2.44 
2.42 
2.40 
2.38 
2.34 
2.30 
2.27 
2.25 
2.23 
2.22 
2.19
10 
3.29 
2.92 
2.73 
2.61 
2.52 
2.46 
2.41 
2.38 
2.35 
2.32 
2.30 
2.28 
2.24 
2.20 
2.17 
2.16 
2.13 
2.12 
2.09
11 
3.23 
2.86 
2.66 
2.54 
2.45 
2.39 
2.34 
2.30 
2.27 
2.25 
2.23 
2.21 
2.17 
2.12 
2.10 
2.08 
2.05 
2.04 
2.01
12 
3.18 
2.81 
2.61 
2.48 
2.39 
2.33 
2.28 
2.24 
2.21 
2.19 
2.17 
2.15 
2.10 
2.06 
2.03 
2.01 
1.99 
1.97 
1.94
13 
3.14 
2.76 
2.56 
2.43 
2.35 
2.28 
2.23 
2.20 
2.16 
2.14 
2.12 
2.10 
2.05 
2.01 
1.98 
1.96 
1.93 
1.92 
1.88
14 
3.10 
2.73 
2.52 
2.39 
2.31 
2.24 
2.19 
2.15 
2.12 
2.10 
2.07 
2.05 
2.01 
1.96 
1.93 
1.91 
1.89 
1.87 
1.83
15 
3.07 
2.70 
2.49 
2.36 
2.27 
2.21 
2.16 
2.12 
2.09 
2.06 
2.04 
2.02 
1.97 
1.92 
1.89 
1.87 
1.85 
1.83 
1.79
16 
3.05 
2.67 
2.46 
2.33 
2.24 
2.18 
2.13 
2.09 
2.06 
2.03 
2.01 
1.99 
1.94 
1.89 
1.86 
1.84 
1.81 
1.79 
1.76
17 
3.03 
2.64 
2.44 
2.31 
2.22 
2.15 
2.10 
2.06 
2.03 
2.00 
1.98 
1.96 
1.91 
1.86 
1.83 
1.81 
1.78 
1.76 
1.73
18 
3.01 
2.62 
2.42 
2.29 
2.20 
2.13 
2.08 
2.04 
2.00 
1.98 
1.95 
1.93 
1.89 
1.84 
1.80 
1.78 
1.75 
1.74 
1.70
19 
2.99 
2.61 
2.40 
2.27 
2.18 
2.11 
2.06 
2.02 
1.98 
1.96 
1.93 
1.91 
1.86 
1.81 
1.78 
1.76 
1.73 
1.71 
1.67
20 
2.97 
2.59 
2.38 
2.25 
2.16 
2.09 
2.04 
2.00 
1.96 
1.94 
1.91 
1.89 
1.84 
1.79 
1.76 
1.74 
1.71 
1.69 
1.65
21 
2.96 
2.57 
2.36 
2.23 
2.14 
2.08 
2.02 
1.98 
1.95 
1.92 
1.90 
1.87 
1.83 
1.78 
1.74 
1.72 
1.69 
1.67 
1.63
22 
2.95 
2.56 
2.35 
2.22 
2.13 
2.06 
2.01 
1.97 
1.93 
1.90 
1.88 
1.86 
1.81 
1.76 
1.73 
1.70 
1.67 
1.65 
1.61
23 
2.94 
2.55 
2.34 
2.21 
2.11 
2.05 
1.99 
1.95 
1.92 
1.89 
1.87 
1.84 
1.80 
1.74 
1.71 
1.69 
1.66 
1.64 
1.59
24 
2.93 
2.54 
2.33 
2.19 
2.10 
2.04 
1.98 
1.94 
1.91 
1.88 
1.85 
1.83 
1.78 
1.73 
1.70 
1.67 
1.64 
1.62 
1.58
25 
2.92 
2.53 
2.32 
2.18 
2.09 
2.02 
1.97 
1.93 
1.89 
1.87 
1.84 
1.82 
1.77 
1.72 
1.68 
1.66 
1.63 
1.61 
1.56
30 
2.88 
2.49 
2.28 
2.14 
2.05 
1.98 
1.93 
1.88 
1.85 
1.82 
1.79 
1.77 
1.72 
1.67 
1.63 
1.61 
1.57 
1.55 
1.51
40 
2.84 
2.44 
2.23 
2.09 
2.00 
1.93 
1.87 
1.83 
1.79 
1.76 
1.74 
1.71 
1.66 
1.61 
1.57 
1.54 
1.51 
1.48 
1.43
50 
2.81 
2.41 
2.20 
2.06 
1.97 
1.90 
1.84 
1.80 
1.76 
1.73 
1.70 
1.68 
1.63 
1.57 
1.53 
1.50 
1.46 
1.44 
1.39
100 
2.76 
2.36 
2.14 
2.00 
1.91 
1.83 
1.78 
1.73 
1.69 
1.66 
1.64 
1.61 
1.56 
1.49 
1.45 
1.42 
1.38 
1.35 
1.29
Degrees of Freedom for the Denominator
F
0
.10
B27
www.ebook3000.com

 Note: The following tables are on the Web site of the text along with Chapters 14 and 15.
Table VIII 
Critical Values of X for the Sign Test
Table IX 
Critical Values of T for the Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test
Table X 
Critical Values of T for the Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test
Table XI 
Critical Values for the Spearman Rho Rank Correlation Coefficient Test
Table XII 
Critical Values for a Two-Tailed Runs Test with α = .05
 Statistical Tables on the Web Site
 APPENDIXB
B28

AN1
AN1
Chapter 1
1.3 
a. inferential statistics 
  b. descriptive statistics
1.5 
• Member: Each disease included in the table
 
• Variable: The number of deaths
 
• Measurement: The number of deaths from each disease
 
•  Data set: Collection of the number of deaths from each disease 
listed in the table
1.9 
a. Continuous  b. Continuous  
c. not applicable d. not applicable
1.19 a. Population  
b. Sample 
c. Population 
d. Population 
e. Sample
1.21 a. random sample 
b. simple random sample
c. no systematic error
1.23 quota sample and nonrandom sample
1.25 voluntary response error and nonresponse error
1.27 Since the sample includes only people from one borough of 
New York City, it is not likely to be representative of the entire 
city. So, the researcher is not justified in applying the result to 
New York City.
1.29 When an experimenter controls the (random) assignments of 
elements to different treatment groups, the study is an experi-
ment. For an observational study, the assignment of elements 
to different treatments is voluntary, and the experimenter sim-
ply observes the results of the study. 
1.31 a. designed experiment 
b. not double blind
1.33 observational study
1.35 The conclusion is unjustified. The families volunteered; they 
were not randomly selected from the population of all families 
on welfare, thus they may not be representative of the entire 
population.
1.37 a. ∑m = 77 
b. ∑f 2 = 516 
c. ∑mf = 662  d. ∑m2f = 11,734
1.39 a. 2847 miles 
b. 8,105,409 
c. 1,158,777
1.41 Cross-section data
1.43 a.  sampling without replacement
 
b. sampling with replacement
1.45 a. ∑y = 65    b. ∑x2 = 1230    c. ∑xy = 954
 
d. ∑x2y = 19,328  e. ∑y2 = 841
(Note: Due to differences in rounding, the answers obtained by readers may differ slightly from the ones 
given here.)
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered 
Exercises and Self-Review Tests
1.47 a.  This is an observational study since each participant 
decided how much meat to consume. Thus, the treatment is 
not controlled by the experimenters.
 
b.  Because this is an observational study, no cause-and-
effect relationship between meat consumption and cho-
lesterol level may be inferred. The effect of meat con-
sumption on cholesterol level may be confounded with 
other variables such as other dietary habits, amount of 
exercise, and other features of the participants’ lifestyles.
1.49 a.  Since the patients were randomly selected from the popu-
lation of all people suffering from compulsive behavior 
and were randomly assigned to treatment and control 
groups, the two groups should be comparable and repre-
sentative of the entire population. The patients did not 
know whether or not they were getting the treatment, so 
any improvement in their condition should be due to the 
medicine and not merely to the power of suggestion. Thus, 
the conclusion is justified.
 
b. designed experiment
 
c.  not double-blind since the doctors knew who received the 
medicine
1.51 a.   We would expect $61,200 to be a biased estimate of the 
current mean annual income for all 5432 alumni because 
only 1240 of the 5432 alumni answered the income ques-
tion. These 1240 are unlikely to be representative of the 
entire group of 5432.
 
b.  The following types of bias are likely to be present:
 
 
 Nonresponse error: Alumni with low incomes may be 
ashamed to respond. Thus, the 1240 who actually 
returned their questionnaires and answered the income 
question would tend to have higher than average incomes. 
 
 
 Response error: Some of those who answered the income 
question may give a value that is higher than their actual 
income in order to appear more successful. 
 
c.  We would expect the estimate of $61,200 to be above the 
current mean annual income of all 5432 alumni, for the 
given reasons in part b.
Self-Review Test
 1. b
 2. c
www.ebook3000.com

AN2
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises and Self-Review Tests
 3. a. Sample without replacement 
b. Sample with replacement
 4. a. Qualitative 
b. Quantitative; continuous
c. Quantitative; discrete    d. Qualitative
 9. • Member: Each student included in the table
 
 • Variable: Midterm test score 
 
 • Measurement: The midterm test score of a student
 
 •  Data Set: Collection of the midterm test scores of the students 
listed in the table
 10. a. 33 types  
 
b. 1089      c. 231
 11. a. ∑x = 54    b. ∑y = 113.6   c. ∑x = 472   
d. ∑xy = 742.7 
e. ∑x2y = 5686.7 
f. (∑y)2 = 2172.46
12.  a.  convenience and nonrandom sample 
b. not likely representative of entire population
 
 c. convenience sample
13.  a. no
 
 b. voluntary response error, selection error, and response error
14.  a. designed experiment   b. yes   c. no
15.  observational study
16.  randomized experiment
Chapter 2
2.3 
a. & b.
Category
Frequency
Relative 
Frequency
Percentage
Y
23
23/40 = 0.575
57.5
N
13
13/40 = 0.325
32.5
D
 4
 4/40 = 0.100
10.0
 
c. 57.5% 
d. 42.5%
2.5 
a. & b.
Category
Frequency
Relative 
Frequency
Percentage
PI
9
9/36 = 0.25
25
S
8
  8/36 = 0.222
22.2
V
13
13/36 = 0.361
36.1
PO
3
  3/36 = 0.083
8.3
B
1
  1/36 = 0.028
2.8
C
2
  2/36 = 0.056
5.6
 
c. 50%
2.7 
a.  Let N = No financial stress, S = Some financial stress, 
H = High financial stress, and O = Overwhelming financial 
stress. 
2.9 
The relative frequency for a class is obtained by dividing the 
frequency of that class by the sum of frequencies of all classes. 
The percentage for a class is obtained by multiplying the rela-
tive frequency of that class by 100.
2.11 a. 369 customers were served.
 
b. Each class has a width of 4.
 
d. 57.2% 
 
e.  The number of customers who purchased 10 gallons or less 
cannot be determined exactly because 10 is not a boundary 
value.
2.13 a. & b.
Commuting  
 
Relative
      Times 
Frequency 
Frequency 
Percentage
 0 to  9 
 2 
 2/50 = 0.04 
 4
10 to 19 
14 
14/50 = 0.28 
28
20 to 29  
14 
14/50 = 0.28  
28
30 to 39  
13 
13/50 = 0.26 
26
40 to 49 
 7 
 7/50 = 0.14 
14
 
d. 40%
2.15 a. & b.
Age
Frequency
Relative Frequency
Percentage
20 to 29
8
8/30 = 0.267
26.7
30 to 39 
9
9/30 = 0.300
30.0
40 to 49 
6
6/30 = 0.200
20.0
50 to 59 
6
6/30 = 0.200
20.0
60 to 69 
1
1/30 = 0.033
3.30
 
d. 56.7%
 
e.  The male and female age distributions are very similar, 
with only slight differences in the exact heights of the bars. 
2.17 a. & b.
Weight
Frequency
Relative 
Frequency
Percentage
 91 to 125
5
5/30 = 0.167
16.7
126 to 160 
7
7/30 = 0.233
23.3
161 to 195
3
3/30 = 0.100
10.0
196 to 230 
6
6/30 = 0.200
20.0
231 to 265
9
9/30 = 0.300
30.0
 
d. 40%
 
e.  The weight distributions were similar, but 10% more of the 
females had a weight below 161 pounds than did the males.  
The percentage above 195 pounds was the same in both 
distributions, but of these more females fell in the 231 to 
265 pounds range than did males. 
2.19 a. & b.
Blood 
Glucose Level
Frequency
Relative 
Frequency
Percentage
 75 to  89 
6
6/30 = 0.200
20.0
 90 to 104
4
4/30 = 0.133
13.3
105 to 119
7
7/30 = 0.233
23.3
120 to 134 
7
7/30 = 0.233
23.3
135 to 149 
6
6/30 = 0.200
20.0
 
d. 43.3%

Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises and Self-Review Tests
AN3
2.41 a. & b.
 Number  
 
Relative
 of Orders 
Frequency 
Frequency 
Percentage
 23–29 
4 
4/30 = 0.133 
13.3
 30–36 
9 
9/30 = 0.300 
30.0
 37–43 
6 
6/30 = 0.200 
20.0
 44–50 
8 
8/30 = 0.267 
26.7
 51–57 
3 
3/30 = 0.100 
10.0
 
c. 56.7%
2.43 a. & b.
Commute Length 
(in minutes)
Frequency
Relative 
Frequency
Percentage
22 to less than 28
 5
 5/30 = 0.167
16.7
28 to less than 34
14
14/30 = 0.467
46.7
34 to less than 40 
 8
 8/30 = 0.267
26.7
40 to less than 46
 2
 2/30 = 0.067
 6.7
46 to less than 52
 1
 1/30 = 0.033
 3.3
2.44 a. & b.
Number of Text Cumulative 
Cumulative 
Cumulative
     Messages 
Frequency 
Relative Frequency Percentage
 
32−37 
10 
10/40 = 0.250 
25.0
 
32−43 
19 
19/40 = 0.475 
47.5
 
32−49 
32 
32/40 = 0.800 
80.0
 
32−55 
38 
38/40 = 0.950 
95.0
 
 2−61 
40 
40/40 = 1.000 
100.0
2.45
3
2 3 3 4 5 6 7 7 7 7 8 9
4
0 1 1 2 2 2 3 4 4 5 5 5 7 7 7 7 7 8 8 9
5
0 0 1 2 3 4 9
6
1
2.49 a. 8 
b. 5
2.51 b.  i.
9
9
10
2 8 8
11
0 4 5 5 6 9
12
3 3 3 5 8 8
13
2 3 8
14
6 7 7 8
15
5 9
16
1 2 4 8
17
4 4 5 9 9 9
18
0 2 3 9
19
3 3 5
20
2 4
2.21 a. & b.
Turnovers
Frequency
Relative 
Frequency
Percentage
1
4
4/25 = 0.160
16.0
2
5
5/25 = 0.200
20.0
3
3
3/25 = 0.120
12.0
4
3
3/25 = 0.120
12.0
5
7
7/25 = 0.280
28.0
6
2
2/25 = 0.080
  8.0
7
0
0/25 = 0.000
  0.0
8
1
1/25 = 0.040
  4.0
 
c.  10 games had four or five turnovers. The relative frequency 
is 0.400.
2.25 218, 245, 256, 329, 367, 383, 397, 404, 427, 433, 471, 523, 537, 
551, 563, 581, 592, 622, 636, 647, 655, 678, 689, 810, 841.
2.27
a.
0
7 9
1
1 2 4 5 5 6 7 7 8 8 8 8 9 9
2
1 2 2 3 3 4 4 5 6 6 6 8 9 9
3
0 0 1 1 2 2 3 4 6 7 7 9 9
4
0 2 2 4 6 6 8
b.
0
0
7 9
1
1 2 4
1
5 5 6 7 7 8 8 8 8 9 9
2
1 2 2 3 3 4 4
2
5 6 6 6 8 9 9
3
0 0 1 1 2 2 3 4
3
6 7 7 9 9
4
0 2 2 4
4
6 6 8
2.29
0
5 7
1
0 1 5 7 9
2
1 2 3 6 6 9
3
2 3 9
4
3 8
5
0
6
5
2.31 In order to prepare a dotplot, first we draw a horizontal line with 
numbers that cover the given data set. Then we place a dot above 
the value on the number line that represents each measurement in 
the data set.
2.39 a. & b.
TV Sets 
Owned
Frequency
Relative 
Frequency
Percentage
0
1
1/40 = 0.025
 2.5
1
14
14/40 = 0.350
35.0
2
14
14/40 = 0.350
35.0
3
8
8/40 = 0.200
20.0
4
3
3/40 = 0.075
 7.5
 
d. 62.5%
www.ebook3000.com

AN4
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises and Self-Review Tests
Chapter 3
3.5 
The mode can assume more than one value for a data set.
3.9 
mean = 3, median = 3.5, no mode
3.11 mean = 264.08, median = 262, no mode
3.13 a.  mean = 429.80 thousands of dollars, median = 103.5 thou-
sands of dollars
 
b. no mode
 
c. 124 thousand dollars
 
d.  Median and trimmed mean are good measures to use where 
there is an outlier.
3.15 a. x = 244 thousand dollars.
 
 
Median = 235 thousand dollars.
 
b.  240.875 thousand dollars.
3.17 mean = 29.85 patients, median = 29.5 patients, modes = 24, 
26, 37, and 38
3.19 The opinion that they will not allow their children to play foot-
ball
3.21 $39.94
3.23 $1055
3.25 48 years
3.27 4.8%
3.29 no
3.33 a. Yes, x = 120
 
b.  The coefficient of variation is 35.5%. 
 
 
Range = $114, s2 = 1712,  s = $41.38
3.35 a. Range = 42 thousand dollars  
 
s2 = 154.34 
 
s = 12.42 thousand dollars
 
b. 22.3%
 
c.  sample statistics
3.37 a. range = 52 mmHg, s2 = 248.261,    s = 15.76  mmHg
 
b. 11.89%
3.39 a.  range = 26 minutes, 
s2 = 75.64,    s = 8.70 minutes   (parameters)
 
b. 35.64%
 
c. data widely spread from mean
3.41 a. range = 3,216 thousand dollars s2 = 993,825.51
 
s = 996.91 thousand dollars
 
b. 231.95%
3.43 For yearly salaries: 10.94%
For years of experience: 13.33%
3.45 For Data Set I: s = 14.64, For Data Set II: s = 14.64, 
The standard deviations of the two data sets are equal.
3.47 μ = 8.85, σ2 = 12.5775, s = √12.5775 = 3.55
3.49 μ = 11.24 hours, σ2 = 36.3824, σ = 6.03 hours
3.51 x = $150, s2 = 5730.6122, s = $75.70
 
The values in the column labeled mf give the approximate 
total amounts of electric bills for the families belonging to 
corresponding classes. The value ∑mf = $7500 is the approx-
imate total amount of the electric bills for all 50 families 
included in the sample.
3.53 x = 13.02875 hours, s2 = 78.2648, s = 8.85 hours
 
 
ii.  The display shows a bimodal distribution, due to the 
presence of both females and males in the sample. The 
males tend to be heavier, so their weights are concen-
trated in the larger values, while the females’ weights 
are found primarily in the smaller values.
 
c. 
Females
Males
9
9
8 8 2
10
9 6 5 5 4 0
11
8 8 5 3 3 3
12
3
13
2 8
6 7 8
14
7
5
15
9
4
16
1 2 8
17
4 4 5 9 9 9
18
0 2 3 9
19
3 3 5
20
2 4
Self-Review Test
2. a. 5 b. 7 c. 17 d. 6.5 e. 13.5 f. 90 g. .30
4. a. & b.
Net Worth vs.  
 
Relative
    $200,000 
Frequency 
Frequency 
Percentage
 
M 
12 
12/36 = 0.333 
33.3
 
L 
18 
18/36 = 0.500 
50.0
 
N 
 6 
 6/36 = 0.167 
16.7
 
c. 18/36 = 50%
5. a. & b.
 
Monthly  
 
 Expense on Gas 
 
Relative
 (in dollars) 
Frequency 
Frequency 
Percentage
 
 50 to 149  
 9 
 9/48 = 0.188 
18.8
 
150 to 249  
13 
13/48 = 0.271 
27.1
 
250 to 349  
11 
11/48 = 0.229 
22.9
 
350 to 449  
 9 
 9/48 = 0.188 
18.8
 
450 to 549  
 6 
 6/48 = 0.125 
12.5
 
d. (9 + 6)/48 = 31.25%
6. b. 40 dollars
 
d. (6 + 8 + 7)/30 = 70%
7.
0
4 6 7 8
1
0 2 2 3 4 4 5 6 6 6 7 8 9
2
0 1 2 2 5 9
3
2
8. 30 33 37 42 44 46 47 49 51 53 53 56 60 
67 67 71 79

Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises and Self-Review Tests
AN5
 
c.  Twelve values in the given data set are less than 40. 
Hence, the percentile rank of 
40 = (12/40) × 100 = 30%. Therefore, the number of text 
message was 40 or higher on 70% of the days.
3.73 a.  The quartiles are Q1 = 44.5, Q2 = 57.5, and Q3 = 64. 
IQR = 19.5
 The value 57 lies between Q1 and Q2 which means at least 
25% of the data are smaller and at least 50% of the data 
are larger than 57.
 
b. 
 6; the 30th percentile is the value of the 6th term in the 
ranked data, which is 45. So, P30 = 45.
 
c. 
 Twelve values in the given data are smaller than 61. 
Hence, the percentile rank of 
61 = (12/20) × 100 = 60%.
3.75 Median = 45, Q1 = 33, and Q3 = 60,
IQR = 40.5, Lower inner fence = – 7.5, 
Upper inner fence = 100.5
The smallest and largest values within the two inner fences 
are 22 and 98, respectively. The data set has no outliers. The 
box–and–whisker plot is shown below.
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
3.77 Median = 136, Q1 = 71, and Q3 = 258
 
IQR = 187, 1.5 × IQR = 280.5,
 
Lower inner fence = –209.5
 
Upper inner fence = 538.5
 
The largest value exceeds the upper fence and so, is an 
outlier. 
 
The data are skewed to the left (that is, toward smaller 
values).
3.79 Median = 57.5, Q1 = 44.4, and Q3 = 64
 
IQR = 19.5, 1.5 × IQR = 29.25,
 
Lower inner fence = 15.25, Upper inner fence = 93.25
 
The smallest and the largest values within the two inner 
fences are 35 and 77, respectively. The data set contains no 
outliers. The data are skewed to the left.
3.81 a. x = $54.95 thousand, Median = $46.5 thousand
 
 The modes are 27, 40, 43, and 86 since they each occur 
twice and all other values once.
 
b. $53.94 thousand 
 
c.  range = $67 thousand, s2 = 504.71,    s = $22.47  thousand, 
CoV = 40.89%
3.83 $1,006.80
3.85 x = 5.08 inches, s2 = 6.8506, s = 2.62 inches (sample 
statistics)
3.87 a.  i.  at least 84% of patients had waiting times between 15 
and 45 minutes. 
 
 
ii.  at least 89% of patients had waiting times between 12 
and 48 minutes.
 
b. The required interval is 18 to 42 minutes.
3.55 The empirical rule is applied to a bell–shaped distribution. 
According to this rule, approximately
 
•  68% of the observations lie within one standard deviation of 
the mean.
 
•  95% of the observations lie within two standard deviations of 
the mean.
 
•  99.7% of the observations lie within three standard devia-
tions of the mean
3.57 k = 2: at least 75% fall in (148, 312)
 
k = 2.5: at least 84% fall in (127.5, 332.5)
 
k = 3: at least 89% fall in (107, 353)
3.59 about 68% fall in (66, 98); about 95% fall in (50, 114); about 
99.7% fall in (34, 130)
3.61 a.  i.  at least 84% of all workers have commuting times 
between 14 and 54 minutes.
 
 
ii.  at least 75% of all workers have commuting times 
between 18 and 50 minutes.
 
b. interval is 10 to 58.
3.63 a.  about 99.7% of all workers have commuting times between 
10 and 58 minutes
 
b.  about 68% of all workers have commuting times between 
26 and 42 minutes
 
c.  about 95% of all workers have commuting times between 
18 and 50 minutes
3.65 To find the three quartiles:
 
1.  Rank the given data set in increasing order.
 
2.  Find the median using the procedure in Section 3.1.2. The 
median is the second quartile, Q2.
 
3.  The first quartile, Q1, is the value of the middle term 
among the (ranked) observations that are less than Q2.
 
4.  The third quartile, Q3, is the value of the middle 
term among the (ranked) observations that are greater 
that Q2.
3.67 Given a data set of n values, to find the kth percentile (Pk):
 
1. Rank the given data in increasing order.
 
2.  Calculate kn/100. Then, Pk is the term that is approxi-
mately (kn/100) in the ranking. If kn/100 falls between two 
consecutive integers a and b, it may be necessary to aver-
age the ath and bth values in the ranking to obtain Pk.
3.69 a.  The quartiles are Q1 = 69, Q2 = 73, and Q3 = 76.5. IQR = 7.5
 
b.  4.55; the 35th percentile can be approximated by the 5th 
term in the ranked data. So, P35 = 71.
 
c.  Four values in the given data set are smaller than 70. 
Hence, the percentile rank of 
 
70 = (4/13) × 100 = 30.77%.
3.71 a. The three quartiles are Q1 = 37.5, Q2 = 44, and Q3 = 48
 
IQR = 10.5
 
 
 The value 49 lies between Q2 and Q3, which means at least 
50% of the data are smaller and at least 25% of the data are 
larger than 49.
 
b. 36.4 
 
 
 The 91st percentile can be approximated by the 37th term 
in the ranked data. Therefore, P91 = 53. This means that 
91% of the values in the data set are less than 53.
www.ebook3000.com

AN6
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises and Self-Review Tests
 
c. Q1 = 10 thousand miles and Q3 = 26 thousand miles
 
d. IQR = 16 thousand miles
 
 
 Since the interquartile range is based on the middle 50% 
of the observations it is not affected by outliers. The 
standard deviation, however, is strongly affected by outliers. 
Thus, the interquartile range is preferable in applications in 
which a measure of variation is required that is unaffected 
by extreme values.
Self-Review Test
 1. b 
 2. a and d  
 3. c
 4. c 
 5. b 
 6. b
 7. a 
 8. a 
 9. b
 10. a 
11. b 
12. c
 13. a 
14. a
 15. a. x  = 21 times, Median = 13.5 times
 
The modes are 5, 8, and 14. 
b. 15.6875 times 
c. Range = 90 times
 
s2 = 534.63, s = 23.12 times
d. Coefficient of variation = 110.11%
e. sample statistics
 16. $1,657.914
 17. mean of all scores = 75.43 points
 
 If we drop the outlier (22), then 
 
 mean = 84.33 points. 
 18. Range of all scores = 73 points. If we drop the outlier (22), then 
range = 22 points. 
 19. The value of the standard deviation is zero when all the values in 
a data set are the same. 
 20. a.  The frequency column gives the number of weeks for 
which the number of computers sold was in the corre-
sponding class.
 
 b.  For the given data: n = 25, ∑mf = 486.50, and ∑m2f 
=10,524.25 
x = 19.46 computers 
s2 = 44.0400
s = 6.64 computers
 21. a.  i.   about 75% of the members spent between 59.4 and 
124.2 minutes at the health club.
 
  
ii.  about 84% of the members spent between 51.3 and 132.3 
minutes at the health club.
 
 b. 43.2 minutes to 140.4 minutes.
 22. a.  i. about 68% of the cars are 5.1 to 9.5 years old.
 
  
ii. about 99.7% of the cars are 0.7 to 13.9 years.
 
 b. 2.9 to 11.7 years.
 23. a. Median = 57, Q1 = 52, and Q3 = 66, IQR = 14, 
 
  
 The value 54 lies between Q1 and the Median, so it is in the 
second 25% group from the bottom of the ranked data set. 
This means that 25% of the data is less than 54 and that at 
least 50% of the data is larger than 54. 
 
 b.  10.8; the 60th percentile can be approximated by the 11th 
term in the ranked data. So, P60 = 61. This means that 60% 
of the values in the data set are less than 61.
3.89 
a.  The three quartiles are Q1 = 60, Q2 = 76, and Q3 = 97. 
IQR = 37
 
 
 The value 74 falls between Q1 and Q2, which indicates 
that it is at least as large as 25% of the data and no 
larger than 50% of the data.
 
b.  7; the 70th percentile occurs at the seventh term in the 
ranked data, which is 84. Therefore, 
P70 = 84. This means that about 70% of the values in the 
data set are smaller than or equal to 84.
 
c.  Seven values in the given data are smaller than 97. 
Hence, the percentile rank of 97 = (7/10) × 100 = 70%. 
This means approximately 70% of the values in the data 
set are less than 97.
3.91 
Median = 83, Q1 = 73, and Q3 = 93,
 
IQR = 20, 1.5 × IQR = 30,
 
Lower inner fence = 43, Upper inner fence = 123
 
The smallest and largest values within the two inner fences 
are 62 and 112, respectively. The value 135 is an outlier.
 
The data are skewed to the right.
3.93 
a.  Jeffery would have to suggest $60,000 be awarded to the 
plaintiff.
 
b.  To prevent a juror like Jeffery from having an undue influ-
ence on the amount of damage to be awarded to the plain-
tiff, the jury could revise its procedure by throwing out any 
amounts that are outliers and then recalculate the mean, or 
by using the median, or by using a trimmed mean.
3.95 
a. $301,400
 
b.  18,700, Mean number of trips per month per shopper = 
9.35 trips
 
c.  Mean amount spent per person per month by shoppers 
aged 12−17 = $150.70
3.97 
a.  at least 50% of the scores are within 1.41 standard devia-
tions of the mean
 
b.  at least 80% of the scores are within 2.24 standard devia-
tions of the mean, but this means that at most 10% of the 
scores are greater than 2.24 standard deviations above the 
mean
3.99 
a. Mean = $600.35, Median = $90, and Mode = $0 
 
b. The mean is the largest.
 
c.  Q1 = $0, Q3 = $272.50, IQR = $272.50, 1.5 × IQR = 
$408.75
 
 
Lower inner fence is –408.75
 
 
Upper inner Fence is 681.25
 
 
 The largest and smallest values within the two inner 
fences are 0 and 501, respectively. There are three outli-
ers at 1127, 3709 and 14,589.
 
 
Below is the box–and–whisker plot for the given data.
 
 
The data are strongly skewed to the right.
3.101 
a. 240 pieces of luggage
 
b. 63
3.103 
a.  x = 20.80 thousand miles, Median = 15 thousand miles, 
and Mode = 15 thousand miles
 
b.  Range = 59 thousand miles, s2 = 249.03, s = 15.78 thou-
sand miles

Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises and Self-Review Tests
AN7
 
b.  Events A and B are not mutually exclusive
Events A and C are mutually exclusive
Events B and C are not mutually exclusive
 
c. 
A = {a, c, f, g, h, i, k}; P(A) = 7/11 = 0.636
 
 
B = {b, d, e, g, h, i, k}; P(B) = 7/11 = 0.636
 
 
C = {a, b, d, e, f, h, i, j}; P(C) = 8/11 = 0.727
4.35 a.   i. 0.2957 
 ii. 0.5714
 
 
iii. 0.3575 
iv.  0.4734
 
b.  The events “is a man” and “likes vanilla ice cream” are not 
mutually exclusive. The events “likes vanilla ice cream” 
and “likes chocolate ice cream” are mutually exclusive.
 
c.  P(is a woman) = 400/700 and P(likes chocolate ice cream) = 
207/700, and, P(“is a woman” and “likes chocolate ice 
cream”) = 109/700. Since 109/700 does not equal the prod-
uct (400/700)(207/700), these two events are dependent.
4.37 dependent
4.39 a. mutually exclusive, dependent 
b. 0.75
4.41 The complementary events are A = received job offer and 
B = did not receive job offer. P(A) = .3 and P(B) = .7
4.43 The intersection of two events is the collection of all the out-
comes that are common to both events.  
4.45 If A and B are dependent, then P(A and B) = P(A)P(B|A).  If A 
and B are independent events, then P(A and B) = P(A)P(B).
4.47 a. 0.3132 
b.  0.1166
4.49 a.  0.1429 
b.  0.0000
4.51 0.750
4.53 a. 0.1767 
b. 0.0967
4.55 a. i. 0.1129 
ii. 0.2114
 
b. 0
4.57 .3571
4.59 0.16
4.61 a. 0.064 
b. 0.216
4.63 0.5278
4.65 0.400
4.69 0.75
4.71 a. 0.74 
b. 0.82
4.73 a. 0.750 
b. 0.750 
c. 1.0
4.75 .40  4.77 0.77  4.79 .629  4.81 .4816
4.83 1296
4.85 
8C2 = 28  
5C0 = 1  
5C5 = 1 6C4 = 15  
11C7 = 330  
9P6 = 60,480  
12P8 = 19,958,400
4.87 960
4.89 
25C2 = 300; 25P2 = 600
4.91 
20C6 = 38,760; 20P6 = 27,907,200
4.93 
15C5 = 3003
4.95 a.   i. 0.4360 
 ii. 0.4800
 
iii. 0.3462 
 iv. 0.6809
 
 v. 0.3400 
 vi. 0.6600
 
b.  P(F) = 130/250 = 0.5200 and P(F|A) = 45/141 = 0.3191.  
Since these two probabilities are not equal, the events 
 
 c.  Twelve values in the given data set are less than 64. Hence, 
the percentile rank of 64 = (12/18) × 100 = 66.7% or about 
67%. 
 24. The data is skewed to the right. 
 25. n1 = 15, n2 = 20, x1 = $1035, x2 = $1090, x = $1066.43
 26. 3.17
 27. a. For Data Set I: x = 19.75
 
  
For Data Set II: x = 16.75
 
 b. For Data Set I: ∑x = 79, ∑x2 = 1945, and n = 4; s = 11.32
 
 c. For Data Set II: ∑x = 67, ∑x2 = 1507, and n = 4; s = 11.32
Chapter 4
4.3 
The experiment of selecting two items from the box without 
replacement has the following six possible outcomes: AB, AC, 
BA, BC, CA, CB. The sample space is written as S = {AB, AC, 
BA, BC, CA, CB}.
 
The experiment of selecting two students has four outcomes: 
YY, YN, NY, and NN.
4.5 
Let I = person owns an iPad and N = person does not own an 
iPad. The experiment has four outcomes: II, IN, NI, and NN.
4.7 
The experiment of selecting three persons has eight outcomes: 
FFF, FFA, FAF, FAA, AFF, AFA, AAF, and AAA.  The sample 
space is written as S = {FFF, FFA, FAF, FAA, AFF, AFA, AAF, 
AAA}.
4.9 
a. {IN, NI}; a compound event
 
b. {II, IN, NI}; a compound event
 
c. {NN, NI, IN}; a compound event
 
d. {IN}; a simple event
4.11. 1.  The probability of an event always lies in the range zero to 
1, that is: 
0 ≤P(Ei) ≤1 and 0 ≤P(A) ≤1
 
2.  The sum of the probabilities of all simple events for an 
experiment is always 1, that is:
∑P(Ei) = P(E1) + P(E2) + P(E3) + ... = 1
4.15 The values 2.4, −0.63, 9/4, and −2/9 cannot be probabilities of 
events because the probability of an event can never be less 
than zero or greater than one.
4.17 subjective probability
4.19 a. 0.45 
b. 0.55
4.21 0.66
4.23 4/6  classical approach
4.25 P(company selected offers free health fitness center on the 
company premises) = 130/400 = 0.325
 
Number of companies that do not offer free health fitness 
center on the company premises = 400 − 130 = 270
 
P(company selected does not offer free health fitness center on 
the company premises) = 270/400 = 0.675
 
Yes, the sum of the probabilities is 1.0 because of the second 
property of probability.
4.27 a. 0.10 
b. 0.54
4.33 a.  P(A) = 4/11 and P(A|B) = 1/4. A and B are dependent. 
P(A) = 4/11 and P(A|C) = 0. A and C are dependent.
www.ebook3000.com

AN8
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises and Self-Review Tests
5.9 
a. 
x
P(x)
1
8/80 = 0.10
2
20/80 = 0.25
3
24/80 = 0.30
4
16/80 = 0.20
5
12/80 = 0.15
 
b.  The probabilities listed in the table of part a are approxi-
mate because they are obtained from a sample of 80 days.
 
c. 
i. 0.30 
ii. 0.65
 
 
iii. 0.75 
iv. 0.65
5.11 P(x = 0) = P(II) = 0.7396, 
P(x =1) = P(NI) + P(IN) = 0.1204 + 0.1204 = 0.2408, 
P(x = 2) = P(NN) = 0.0196
x
P(x)
0
0.7396
1
0.2408
2
0.0196
5.13 P(x = 0) = P(UU) = 0.4225, 
P(x =1) = P(HU) + P(UH) = 0.4550, 
P(x = 2) = P(HH) = 0.1225
x
P(x)
0
0.4225
1
0.2275
2
0.1225
5.17 μ = ∑xP(x) = 0.440 error
 
σ = √∑x2P(x) −μ2 = √0.92 −(0.44)2 = 0.852 error
5.19 μ = ∑xP(x) = 1.2997 patients
 
σ = √∑x2P(x) −μ2 = √2.9849 −(1.2997)2
 
  = 1.1383 patients
5.21 There is an average of 2.561 defective tires per limo, with a 
standard deviation of 1.322 tires.
5.23 The contractor is expected to make an average of $3.9 million 
profit with a standard deviation of $3.015 million.
5.25 μ = ∑xP(x) = 0.500 person
 
σ = √∑x2P(x) −μ2 = √0.591 −(0.500)2 = 0.584 person
5.27 The parameters of the binomial distribution are n and p, which 
stand for the total number of trials and the probability of suc-
cess, respectively.
5.29 a.  This is an example of a binomial experiment because it 
satisfies all four conditions of a binomial experiment.
 
b.  This is not a binomial experiment because the draws are 
not independent since the selections are made without 
replacement and, hence, the probabilities of drawing a red 
and a blue ball change with every selection.
 
c.  This is an example of a binomial experiment because it 
satisfies all four conditions of a binomial experiment.
 
 
 “female” and “prefers watching sports” are dependent.  
The events “female” and “prefers watching sports” are 
not mutually exclusive because they can occur together.  
4.97 
a. 
i. 0.750 
 ii. 0.700
 
iii. 0.225 
 iv. 0.775
4.99 
.3996
4.101 
0.0048
4.103 
a. 17,576,000 possible different license places.
 
b. 5200 license plates which fit the description.
4.105 
a. 0.5000
 
b. 0.3333
4.107 
a. .5177
 
b.  Since your chance of winning is less than 50%, the gam-
bler has the advantage and you should not accept his 
proposition.
4.109 
a. 0.8333 
b. 0.1667
4.111 
a. .8851 
b. .0035
Self-Review Test
 1. a 
 
 2. b 
3. c 
4. a
 5. a 
 
 6. b 
7. c 
8. b
 9. b 
 
10. c 
11. b
 12. 120
 13. a. 0.3333 
b. 0.6667
 14. a.  P(out-of-state) = 125/200 = 0.6250 and P(out of state | 
female) = 70/110 = 0.6364.  Since these two probabilities 
are not equal, the two events are dependent.  Events “female” 
and “out of state” are not mutually exclusive because they 
can occur together. 
 
 b.  i. 0.4500 
ii. 0.6364
 15. 0.825  16.  0.3894  17.  0.4225  18.  0.600
 19. a. 0.279 
b. 0.829
 20. a. 
i. 0.3577 
ii. 0.4047
 
iii. 0.2352 
iv. 0.5593
 
 b.  P(W) = 257/506 = 0.5079 and P(W|Y) = 104/181 = 0.5746.  
Since these two probabilities are not equal, the events 
“woman” and “yes” are dependent.  The events “woman” 
and “yes” are not mutually exclusive because they can occur 
together.
Chapter 5
5.3 
discrete
5.5 
1.  The probability assigned to each value of a random variable 
x lies in the range 0 to 1; that is, 0 ≤P(x) ≤1 for each x.
 
2.  The sum of the probabilities assigned to all possible values 
of x is equal to 1; that is, ∑P(x) = 1. 
5.7 
a. 0.15 
b. 0.58 
c. 0.27 
d. 0.74 
e. 0.73 
f. 
0.42 
g. 0.64

Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises and Self-Review Tests
AN9
5.59 a. 0.0446
 
b. 
i. 0.0021
 
 
ii. 0.4542
 
 
iii. 0.0218
5.61 μ = ∑xP(x) = 1.91 root canals
 
σ = √∑x2P(x) −μ2 = √5.29 −(1.91)2 = 1.281 root canals
 
Dr. Sharp performs an average of 1.91 root canals on Monday.
5.63 a. ≈0 .0000 
b. 0.0351 
c. 0.7214
5.65 a. 0.9246 
b. 0.0754
5.67 a. 0.4091 
b. 0.5455 
c. 0.0455
5.69 a. 0.2466
 
b. 
x
P(x)
0
0.2466
1
0.3452
2
0.2417
3
0.1128
4
0.0395
5
0.0111
6
0.0026
7
0.0005
8
0.0001
5.71 The value of ∑xP(x) = −2.22 indicates that your expected 
“gain” is –$2.22, so you should not accept this offer. This game 
is not fair to you since you are expected to lose an average of 
$2.22 per play.
5.73 a. 0.1841
5.79 Player B’s expected winnings are 67¢. Player C’s expected 
winnings are also 67¢. Since Player A has a probability of win-
ning of 3/27, this player should be paid $6 for winning so that 
∑xP(x) = (0)(24/27) + (6)(3/27) = 0.67 or 67¢.
Self-Review Test
 2. The probability distribution table.
 3. a 
 4. b
 6. b  7. a  8. b  9. a  10. c
 12. a
 14. μ = ∑xP(x) = 2.04 homes
 
 σ = √∑x2P(x) −μ2 = √6.26 −(2.04)2 = 1.449 homes
 
 The four real estate agents sell an average of 2.04 homes per 
week.
 15. a. 
i. 0.2128
 
  
ii. 0.8418
 
  
iii. 0.0153
 
 b. μ = np = 12(0.60) = 7.2 adults
 
  
σ = √npq = √12(0.60)(0.40) = 1.697 adults
 16. a. 0.4525 
b. 0.0646 
c. 0.0666
5.31 a. 
x
P(x)
0
0.0003
1
0.0064
2
0.0512
3
0.2048
4
0.4096
5
0.3277
 
b. μ = np = (5)(0.80) = 4.000
 
 
σ = √npq = √(5)(0.80)(0.20) = 0.894
5.33 a. 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 
b.  0.2001
5.35 a. 0.7031 
b. 0.2921 
c. 0.7215
5.37 a. 0.5997 
b. 0.0002
5.39 a. 
x
P(x)
0
0.0000
1
0.0004
2
0.0043
3
0.0287
4
0.1147
5
0.2753
6
0.3670
7
0.2097
 
 
μ = np = (7)(0.80) = 5.6 customers
 
 
σ = √npq = √(7)(0.80)(0.20) = 1.058 customers
 
b. 0.1147
5.43 a. 0.3818 
b. 0.0030 
c. 0.5303
5.45 a. 0.1078 
b. 0.5147 
c. 0.8628
5.49 a. 0.0404 
b. 0.2565
5.51 0.1185
5.53 a. 0.1162
 
b. 
i. 0.6625 
ii. 0.1699
 
 
iii. 0.4941
5.55 a. 0.0259
 
b. 
i. 0.2314 
ii. 0.0015
5.57 a. 0.4493
 
b.
x
P(x)
0
0.4493
1
0.3595
2
0.1438
3
0.0383
4
0.0077
5
0.0012
6
0.0002
 
c. μ = λ = 0.8, σ2 = λ = 0.8, and σ = √λ = √0.8 = 0.894
www.ebook3000.com

AN10
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises and Self-Review Tests
6.53 a. 0.7549 
b. 0.2451
6.55 a. 0.1308 
b. 0.0475 
 
c.  0 approximately
 
 
 Although it is possible for a carton to contain less than 
15.20 ounces, the probability of this is very close to zero.
6.57 Jenn must leave by approximately 7:50 am, 40 minutes before 
she is due to arrive at work.
6.59 a. 0.0454 
b. 0.0838 
c. 0.8861 
d. 0.2477
6.61 approximately 16.23 ounces
6.63 0.0091
6.65 Ashley should leave home at about 8:10 am in order to arrive at 
work by 9 am 95% of the time.
6.67 b.  The gambler has a better chance of coming out ahead 
with the single-number bet.
6.69 P(−0.74 ≤ x ≤ 1.34) = 0.9452 > 0.68
 
P(−1.28 ≤ x ≤ 1.88) = 0.9964 > 0.95
 
P(−1.83 ≤ x  ≤  2.43) = 1 − 0 ≈ 1 > 0.997
Self-Review Test
 1. a   2. a   3. d   4. b
 5. a   6. c   7. b   8. b
 9. a. 0.1878  b. 0.9304  c. 0.0985  d. 0.7704
 10. a. z = −1.28 approximately 
b. z = 0.61
 
 c. z = 1.65 approximately 
d. z = −1.07 approximately
 11. a. 0.5608  b. 0.0015  c. 0.0170  d. 0.1165
 12. a. 48,658 miles 
b. 40,162 miles
 13. a.  i. 0.0318   ii. 0.9453   iii. .9099   
 
 iv. 0.0268   v. 0.4632
 
 b. 0.7054
 
 c. 0.3986
Chapter 7
7.5
x  
P(x)  
xP(x)
 
x2  
x2P(x)
70
0.20
14.00
4900
 980.00
78
0.20
15.60
6084
1216.80
80
0.40
32.00
6400
2560.00
95
0.20
19.00
9025
1805.00
∑xP(x) = 80.60
∑x2P(x) = 6561.80
 
μ = 80.60
σ = 8.09
7.7 
a. Mean of x = μx = μ
 
b.  Standard deviation of x = σx = σ∕√n where σ = popula-
tion standard deviation and n = sample size.
7.11 a. μx = μ = 60 and σx = 2.357
 
b. μx = μ = 60 and σx = 1.054
7.13 a. 100 
b. 256
7.15  μ = $421,000, σ = $90,000, and n = 200 
μx = μ = $421,000 and σx = σ∕√n ≈$6363.96
 17. a. 
i. 0.0521
 
  
ii. 0.2203
 
  
iii. 0.2013
 
 b. 
x
P(x)
x
P(x)
x
P(x)
0
0.0000
9
0.1251
17
0.0128
1
0.0005
10
0.1251
18
0.0071
2
0.0023
11
0.1137
19
0.0037
3
0.0076
12
0.0948
20
0.0019
4
0.0189
13
0.0729
21
0.0009
5
0.0378
14
0.0521
22
0.0004
6
0.0631
15
0.0347
23
0.0002
7
0.0901
16
0.0217
24
0.0001
8
0.1126
Chapter 6
6.11 0.9876
6.13 a. 0.4744  b. 0.4798 
c. 0.1162
d. 0.0610 
e. 0.9400
6.15 a. 0.0764 
b. 0.0495 
c. 0.7422 
d. 0.8133
6.17 a. 0.0096 
b. 0.2466 
c. 0.1570 
d. 0.9625
6.19 a. 1.80 
b. −2.20 
c. −1.20 
d. 2.80
6.21 a. 0.3336 
b. 0.9564
 
c. 0.9686 
d. 0 approximately
6.23 a. 0.0901 
b. 0.9428
6.25 a. 0.0764  
b. 0.1126 
6.27 a. 0.9332  
b. 0.1547
6.29 a. 0.8264 
b. 0.1283
6.31 a. 0.1562  
b. 0.0764 
6.33 a. 0.0188
 
b.  0 approximately
 
 
 Although it is possible that a given car may take more than 
25 minutes for oil and lube service, the probability is 
almost zero.
6.35 0.0232 
6.37 a. z = 1.65 approximately 
b. z = −1.96
 
c. z = −2.33 approximately d. z = 2.58 approximately
6.39 a. 403 
b. 436.75 
c. 694
 
d. 681.25 
e. 409 
f. 
650.5
6.41 a required minimum purchase of $121 would meet the condition
6.43 approximately $208
6.45 The normal distribution may be used as an approximation to a 
binomial distribution when both np >5 and nq > 5.
6.47 a. μ = 72 and σ = 5.36656315
 
b. 0.3192
 
c. 0.4564
6.49 0.3344
6.51 a. 0.0454 
b. 0.0516 
c. 0.8646

Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises and Self-Review Tests
AN11
 
np = (1000)(0.68) = 680 and nq = (1000)(0.32) = 320
 
Since np > 5 and nq > 5, the sampling distribution of pˆ is 
approximately normal.
7.61 .9974
7.63 a. 
0.2592 
b. 0.1515
7.65 0.1515
7.67  μ = 24,966 hours, σ = 2000 hours, and n = 25
 
μx = μ = 24,966 hours and σx = σ∕√n = 400 hours
 
The sampling distribution of x is normal because the popula-
tion is normally distributed.
7.69 a. 0.0582 
b. 0.8325
 
c. 0.9991 
d. 0.0045
7.71 p = 0.88, q = 1 − p = 1 − 0.88 = 0.12, and n = 80
 
μpˆ = p = 0.88, and σpˆ = √pq∕n = 0.03633180
 
np = (80)(0.88) = 70.4 > 5, nq = (80)(0.12) = 9.6 > 5
 
Since np and nq are both greater than 5, the sampling 
distribution of pˆ is approximately normal.
7.73 a. i. 0.9382 
ii. 0.8283
 
b. 0.7994 
c. 0.0618
7.75 a. 0.8461
 
b.  The reporter should take a sample of at least 66 voters.
Self-Review Test
 1. b  2. b  3. a   4. a   5. b   6. b
 7. c  8. a  9. a  10. a  11. a  12. a
14. a. 
μx = μ = $4823 and σx = σ∕√n = $156.53
 
b. 
μx = μ = $4823 and σx = σ∕√n = $70
 
c. 
μx = μ = $4823 and σx = σ∕√n = $24.75
 
 
 In all cases the sampling distribution of x is approximately 
normal because the population has an approximate normal 
distribution, and the approximation improves (in that the 
variance gets smaller) as n gets larger. 
15. a. $4472.14
 
 
 We can draw no conclusion about the shape of the sampling 
distribution of x.
 
b. $2,000
 
 
The sampling distribution of x is approximately normal.
 
c. 
$707.11
 
 
The sampling distribution of x is approximately normal.
16. a. 0.1109  b. 0.7698  c. 0.1515  d. 0.2006
 
e. 
0.2090  f. 0.7852  g. 0.0559  h. 0.7636
17. a. i. 0.1203  ii. 0.1335  iii. 0.7486
 
b. 0.9736   c. 0.0013
18. The sampling distribution of pˆ is approximately normal for a, b, 
and c.
 19. a. i. 0.0869   ii. 0.8924  iii. 0.0207
 
 
iv. 0.1452  v. 0.7517  vi. 0.7517
 
b. 0.9108   c. 0.0414   d. 0.0869
7.17 a. 
∑xP(x) = 80.60 
 
b. σx = √∑x2P(x) −μ2
x = 3.302
 
c.  σ∕√n = 4.67 is not equal to σx = 3.30 in this case 
because n/N = 3/5 = 0.60 > 0.05.
 
d. σx =
σ
√n
 B
N −n
N −1 = 3.302
7.21 a. Slightly skewed to the right
 
b.  Approximately normal because n ≥ 30 and the central limit 
theorem applies
 
c. Close to normal with a slight skew to the right
7.23 μx = μ = 7.7 minutes and σx = σ∕√n = 0.525 minute
 
The sampling distribution of x  is normal because the popula-
tion is normally distributed.
7.25 μx = μ = 3.02 
 
Since n/N = 48/5540 = 0.009 < 0.05,  σx = σ∕√n = 0.042 
 
The sampling distribution of x is approximately normal 
because the population is approximately normally distributed.
7.27 μx = μ = 148 min and σx = σ∕√n = 1 min
 
The sampling distribution of x is approximately normal. 
7.29 .8664
7.31 a. 0.7485 
b. 0.2033
7.33 a. 0.0003 
b. 0.9292
7.35 a. 0.0287 
b. 0.0537 
c. 0.7616
7.37 a. 0.0148 
b. 0.0359 
c. 0.0000
7.39 a. 0.0951 
b. 0.1112 
c. 0.8139
7.41 0.0124
7.43 0.15
7.45 a. μpˆ = p
 
b. σpˆ = √pq∕n
 
c.  The sampling distribution of pˆ is approximately normal if 
np > 5 and nq > 5.
7.47 Sampling error = pˆ – p = 0.04
7.49 The sample proportion pˆ is a consistent estimator of p, since σpˆ 
decreases as the sample size increases.  
7.51 a. n = 400, μpˆ = p = 0.21, and σpˆ = √pq∕n = 0.020
 
b. n = 750, μpˆ = p = 0.21, and σpˆ = √pq∕n = 0.015
7.53 A sample is considered large enough to apply the central limit 
theorem if np > 5 and nq > 5.
7.55 a. 11, the central limit theorem applies
 
b. 58.5, the central limit theorem applies
 
c. The central limit theorem does not apply.
 
d.  The central limit theorem does not apply.
7.57 p = 0.67, q = 1 − p = 1 − 0.67 = 0.33, and n = 400
 
μpˆ = p = 0.67, and σpˆ = √pq∕n = 0.024
 
np = (400)(0.67) = 268 and nq = (400)(0.33) = 132
 
Since np > 5 and nq > 5, the sampling distribution of pˆ is 
approximately normal.
7.59 p = 0.68, q = 1 − p = 1 − 0.68 = 0.32, and n = 1000 
 
μpˆ = p = 0.68, and σpˆ = √pq∕n = 0.0148
www.ebook3000.com

AN12
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises and Self-Review Tests
might differ from the true proportion p, so we make an 
interval estimate to allow for this uncertainty and sampling 
error.
8.67 a. pˆ = 0.333 
b. 0.085 to 0.581
 
 
 The corresponding interval for the population percentage 
is 8.5% to 58.1%.
8.69 1849
8.73 The machine needs an adjustment.
8.75 39.60 to 63.60 minutes
8.77 9.59 to 9.91 hours.
8.79 1.92 to 2.54 hours.
8.81 0.117 to 0.683 The corresponding interval for the population 
percentage is 11.7% to 68.3%.
8.83 221
8.85 359
8.91 1.  While σ is constant, the sample standard deviation, s, is 
not. The sample standard deviation will change with each 
sample.
 
2.  If σ is unknown, the confidence interval is calculated with a 
t value. This value will change as the sample size changes 
because the degrees of freedom will change.
Self-Review Test
 2. b  3. a  4. a  5. c  6. b
 7. a. x = $159,000
 
b. $147,390 to $170,610 E = zσ x = 2.58(4500) = $11,610
 8. $571,283.30 to $649,566.70
 9. a. pˆ = 0.37  b. 0.343 to 0.397
10. 83
11. 273
12. 229
13. The width of the confidence interval can be reduced by:
 
1. Lowering the confidence level
 
2. Increasing the sample size
 
The second alternative is better because lowering the confidence 
level results in a less reliable estimate for μ.
Chapter 9
9.5 
The null hypothesis is initially assumed to be true.
9.7 
a. H0: μ = 20 hours, H1: μ ≠ 20 hours, two-tailed test
 
b. H0: μ = 10 hours, H1: μ > 10 hours, right-tailed test 
 
c. H0: μ = 3 years, H1: μ ≠ 3 years, two-tailed test 
 
d. H0: μ = $1000, H1: μ < $1000, left-tailed test 
 
e. H0: μ = 12 minutes, H1: μ > 12 min, right-tailed test 
9.11 Rejecting H0 is equivalent to stating that the evidence from the 
sample is strong enough to claim that H1 is true.
9.15 a. p-value = 0.0166
 
b. For α = 0.01, do not reject H0 since 0.0166 > 0.01. 
 
c. For α = 0.025, reject H0 since 0.0166 < 0.025. 
9.17 If H0 is rejected, the difference between the observed value of 
x and the hypothesized value of μ is “statistically significant.”
Chapter 8
8.11 a. x = 48.25 
b. 47.20 to 49.30 
c. 1.05
8.13 a. 47.52 to 49.52
 
b. 47.12 to 49.92
 
c. 46.52 to 50.52
 
d.  Yes, the width of the confidence intervals increases as the 
sample size decreases. This occurs because the standard 
deviation of the sample mean increases as the sample size 
decreases.
8.15 a. 167 
b. 65
8.17 a. 299 
b. 126 
c. 61
8.19 3294.96 to 3536.44 gallons
8.21 The machine does not need an adjustment.
8.23 167
8.25 72
8.33 a. df = n – 1 = 21 – 1 = 20 and t = –1.325
 
b. df = n – 1 = 14 – 1 = 13 and t = 2.160
 
c. t = 3.281
 
d. t = –2.715
8.35 a.  2.080 
b. 1.671 
c.  2.807
8.37 a. x = 1.41 
b. −3.40 to 6.22 
c. 4.81
8.39 a. 91.03 to 93.87 
 
b. 90.06 to 93.44 
 
c. 88.07 to 91.19
 
d.  The confidence intervals of parts b and c cover 𝜇 but the 
confidence interval of part a does not.
8.41 $50,539.21 to $59,460.79
8.43 a. 25.36 to 27.44 mpg
8.45 4.88 to 11.12 hours
8.47 a. x = (∑x)∕n = 51.68 
b. 47.82 to 55.54
8.53 a.  The sample size is large enough.
 
b.  The sample size is not large enough.
 
c.  The sample size is large enough.
 
d.  The sample size is not large enough.
8.55 a. 0.297 to 0.343 b. 0.336 to 0.384 c. 0.277 to 0.323
 
d.  The confidence intervals of parts a and b cover p, but the 
confidence interval of part c does not.
8.57 a. 0.615 to 0.845 b. 0.683 to 0.777 c. 0.700 to 0.760
 
d.  Yes, the width of the confidence intervals decreases as the 
sample size increases. This occurs because increasing the 
sample size decreases the standard deviation of the sample 
proportion.
8.59 a. 668 
b. 671
8.61 a. pˆ = 0.67 
b. 0.642 to 0.698  E = zspˆ = 0.028
8.63 a.  pˆ = 0.40, so the point estimate for the population percent-
age is 40%
 
b. 0.069
8.65 a. 0.65 to 0.71
 
b.  The sample proportion of 0.68 is an estimate of p based on 
a random sample. Because of sampling error, this estimate 

Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises and Self-Review Tests
AN13
 
p-value approach
 
Reject H0 since p-value < 0.025. 
The conclusion is the same.
9.43 Reject H0 since p-value < 0.05.
 
Conclude that the manufacturer’s claim is false since the hypoth-
esis test leads to the conclusion that the number of calories in the 
12-ounce cans is greater than 30.
9.45 a.  The manager’s claim is true: the average weekly tip is $150 
or more per week.
 
b.  The Type I error would occur if the mean waiter’s earnings 
from tips was $150 or more but we concluded that it was 
less than $150. The probability of making such an error is 
α = 0.01.
9.47 Do not reject H0 since 1.369 < 1.796.
 
Conclude that the average amount of time American adults 
spent on leisure activities has not changed.
9.49 p-value approach
 
Reject H0 since p-value < 0.001.
 
critical value approach
 
Reject H0 since 3.95 > 3.090.
 
 Conclude that the average credit card debt is greater than $15,706.
9.53 a.  Since np < 5, the sample size is not large enough to use the 
normal distribution.
 
b.  Since np > 5 and nq > 5, the sample size is large enough to 
use the normal distribution.
 
c.  Since np < 5, the sample size is not large enough to use the 
normal distribution.
 
d.  Since np > 5 and nq > 5, the sample size is large enough to 
use the normal distribution.
9.55 a. observed value: 3.9  critical value: 1.65
 
b. observed value: 3.9  critical value: 1.96
9.57 a. rejection region z ≤ −2.33
 
b. rejection region z ≤ −2.58 or rejection region z ≥ 2.58
 
c. rejection region z ≥ 2.33
9.59 a. Do not reject H0 since −1.21 > −1.96. 
 
b.  Reject H0 since −2.41 < −1.96. 
9.61 p-value approach
 
Reject H0 since 0.0013 < 0.05.
 
critical value approach
 
Reject H0 since 1.65 < 3.02.
 
Conclude that the proportion of adults who prefer generic is 
higher than 18%.
9.63 p-value approach
 
Reject H0 since 0 < 0.02.
 
critical value approach
 
Reject H0 since 3.92 > 2.05.
 
Conclude that the current percentage of all college students who 
say their college experience exposed them to diverse opinions, 
cultures, and values is higher than 88%.
9.65 p-value approach
 
Reject H0 since 0 < 0.01.
 
critical value approach
 
Reject H0 since 5.53 > 2.58.
 
Conclude that the current percentage of all Americans who will 
say they actually try to include organic foods in their diet is 
different from 45%.
9.19 a. 0.025 
b. 0.05 
c. 0.01
9.21 a. rejection region z ≤ −2.58 or rejection region z ≥ 2.58
 
b. rejection region z ≥ 2.33
 
c. rejection region z ≤ −2.33
9.23 a. Reject H0 since −2.67 < −1.96.
 
b. Do not reject H0 since −1.00 > −1.96.
9.25 a. Reject H0 since 0.0170 < 0.025.
 
b.  Reject H0 since −2.12 < −1.96. 
 
 
 For both parts a and b, conclude the mean life of these bat-
teries is less than 45 months. 
9.27 a.  For α = 0.01, do not reject H0 since 0.0139 > 0.01.
 
 
For α = 0.025, reject H0 since 0.0139 < 0.025.
 
b.  For α = 0.01, do not reject H0 since −2.20 > −2.33. 
 
 
 For α = .025, reject H0 since −2.20 < −1.96. 
 
 
 For both parts a and b, conclude the salary was less than 
$45,473 at α = 0.01, but not at α = 0.025.
9.29 a.  For α = 0.02, do not reject H0 since .0548 > 0.02. 
 
 
For α = 0.10, reject H0 since 0.0548 < 0.10.
 
b.  For α = 0.02, do not reject H0 since 1.92 < 2.33. 
 
 
For α = 0.10, reject H0 since 1.92 > 1.65.
 
 
 For both parts a and b, the inspector will not stop this 
machine at α = 0.02, but will stop this machine and adjust 
it at α = 0.10.
9.31 a.  For α = 0.05, reject H0 since 0.0207 < 0.05. 
 
 
For α = 0.01, reject H0 since 0.01 < 0.0207
 
b.  For α = 0.05, reject H0 since 2.04 > 1.65. 
 
 
 For α = 0.01, do not reject H0 since 2.04 < 2.33.
 
 
 Conclude that for parts a and b, the mean cost of an indi-
vidual checking account is above $380 if the maximum 
probability of Type 1 error is 0.05. 
 
 
 If α = 0.01, conclude that the mean cost of individual 
checking accounts is not above $380. 
 
 
 If α = 0, there is no rejection region, so do not reject H0. 
Conclude that the mean cost of individual checking 
accounts is not above $380.
9.35 a.  df = n −1 = 20 −1 = 19 
 
 
 rejection region t ≤ −2.539 or rejection region t ≥ 2.539
 
b. df = n −1 = 16 − 1 = 15 
 
 
rejection region t ≤ −2.602
 
c. df = n −1 = 18 −1 = 17 
 
 
rejection region t ≥ 1.740
9.37 a.  p-value approach 
0.05 < p-value < 0.10.
 
 
 critical value approach
For α = 0.05 with df = 7, the critical values of t are 
−2.365 and 2.365.
 
b.  p-value approach
0.025 < p-value < 0.05.
 
 
 critical value approach
For α = 0.05 with df = 7, the critical value of t is −1.895.
9.39 a. Do not reject H0 since −1.875 > −2.797.
 
b.  Reject H0 since 5.000 > 2.797.
9.41 Reject H0 since 2.4 > 1.96.
 
Conclude that the average cost of a wedding in 2013 is greater 
than $29,858. 
www.ebook3000.com

AN14
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises and Self-Review Tests
 7. a 
 8. b 
 9. c
 10. a 
11. c 
12. b
 13. c 
14. a 
15. b
 16. a.  Do not reject H0. Conclude that the average premium is 
$1170.
 
 b.  Reject H0. Conclude that the average premium is greater 
than $1170.
 
 c.  A Type I error would occur if the we reject H0 when it is 
true, that is, to conclude that the average premium is not 
$1170 when it is. A Type I error in part b is to conclude that 
the average premium is more than $1170 when it isn’t. The 
maximum probability of making such an error is α = 0.01 in 
part a and α = 0.025 in part b.
 
 d. For α = 0.01, do not reject H0 since 0.01 < 0.025.
 
 e. For α = 0.025, reject H0 since 0.0125 < 0.25.
 17. a.  Reject H0 since −3.000 < −2.448. Conclude that the mean 
duration of nine-inning games has decreased after the meet-
ing.
 
 b.  A Type I error would be to conclude that the mean durations 
of games have decreased after the meeting when they are 
actually equal to the duration of games before the meeting. 
The maximum probability of making such an error is α = 
0.01.
 
 c.  Do not reject H0.
 
 d. Reject H0.
 18. a.  Reject H0. Conclude that the mean time it takes to write a 
textbook is less than 31 months.
 
 b.  A Type I error would be to conclude that the editor’s claim 
is false when it is actually true. The maximum probability of 
making such an error is α = 0.025.
 
 c. Do not reject H0.
 19. a.  Reject H0  since  −3.16 < −1.65. Conclude that the percent-
age of people who have a will is less than 50%. 
 
 b.  A Type I error would be to conclude that the percentage of 
adults with wills was less than 50% when it is actually 
50%. The maximum probability of making such an error is 
α = 0.05.
 
 c.  Do not reject H0.
 
 d. Reject H0.
Chapter 10
10.3 a. 1.83
 
b. −0.72 to 4.38
 
 
E = zσ x1−x2 = 2.55
10.5 Do not reject H0 since 1.85 < 1.96.
10.7 a. 9 hours
 
b. 1.65 to 16.35 hours
 
c. p-value approach
 
Reject H0 since 0.0078 < 0.02.
 
 
critical value approach
 
 Reject H0 since 2.66 > 2.33. 
 
 
 Conclude that the claim that the mean elapsed times for 
repellent A and B are different is true.
9.67 a.  The machine should be stopped to make necessary adjust-
ments.
 
b.  We conclude that the machine should not be stopped.
9.71 a. Reject H0 since 2.55 > 2.33.
 
b. P(Type I error) = α = 0.02
 
c. For α = 0.025, reject H0 since .0108 < 0.025. 
 
 
For α = 0.01, do not reject H0 since 0.0108 > 0.01. 
9.73 a. Reject H0 since 0.0026 < 0.025.
 
b. Reject H0 since −2.80 < −1.96.
 
 
 Conclude that the mean consumption of water per house-
hold has decreased.
9.75 a.  Reject H0 since 2.097 > 1.677.
 
 
 Conclude that the mean living area of all single-family 
homes in this county exceeds 2400 square feet, and the 
realtor’s claim is false.
 
b.  If α = 0.01, the critical value of t is 2.405. Since the value 
of the test statistic is 2.097, we do not reject H0. Thus, our 
decision differs from that of part a; we conclude that the 
mean living area of all single-family homes in this county 
is at most 2400 square feet, and the realtor’s claim is true.
9.77 Do not reject H0 since 2.083 < 2.947.
 
 Conclude that the mean waiting time at the emergency ward is 
not different than 25 minutes.
9.79 Do not reject H0 since 1.157 < 2.262.
 
Conclude that the average number of calories in the company’s 
eight-ounce low-fat yogurt cups is not more than 150 calories, 
and the company’s claim is true.
9.81 a.  Reject H0 since −2.68 < −2.33. 
 
 
 Conclude that the current percentage of American adults 
who hold the mentioned opinion is less than 75%.
 
b.  A Type I error would occur if the current percentage of 
American adults who hold the mentioned opinion is at 
least 75%, but we concluded this percentage is less than 
75%. The maximum probability of this error is α = 0.01.
 
c.  For α = 0.01, reject H0 since 0.0037 < 0.01. The conclu-
sion is the same as in part a.
9.83 Reject H0 since 2.33 < 2.92. 
 
Conclude that the proportion of cell phone owners in this city 
who have smart phones is different from 0.75.
9.85 Reject H0 and shut down the machine if the number of defec-
tives in a sample of 130 parts is 9 or more. 
9.87 a.  Let p be the proportion of all people receiving the new vac-
cine who contract the disease within a year. Then the 
appropriate hypotheses are H0: p = 0.30 and H1: p < 0.30.
 
b.  z = −2.95 and
 
 
α = P(x < 16.5 ∣  p = 0.30) = P(z < −2.95) = 0.0016
 
c. α = P(x < 3 ∣  p = 0.30) = 0.0354
9.89 a.  One of the p-values is 0.4546/2 = 0.2273. The other 
p-value is the complement, 1 − 0.2273 = 0.7727.
 
b.  Since the value of the test statistic is negative, the p-value 
of 0.2273 is for the left-tailed test, H1: μ < 15. The p-value 
for the right-tailed test, H1: μ > 15, is 0.7727.
Self–Review Test
 1. a 
 2. b 
 3. a
 4. b 
 5. a 
 6. a

Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises and Self-Review Tests
AN15
 
 
 Because the standard error and critical values are both 
larger, the confidence interval is wider. The conclusion 
for the hypothesis test did not change.
10.33 
a. −0.61 to −0.39
 
b.  Reject H0 since −10.16 < −2.58.
 
 
 Conclude that the mean satisfaction indexes for all cus-
tomers for the two supermarkets are different.
 
c. Reject H0 since −10.10 < −2.58.
 
 
 Conclude that the mean satisfaction indexes for all cus-
tomers for the two supermarkets are different. Because 
the standard error only changed slightly and the critical 
value is the same, the confidence interval is very slightly 
wider. The conclusion for the hypothesis test did not 
change.
10.37 
a. Reject H0 since 8.040 > 1.860.
 
b. Reject H0 since 10.847 > 1.721.
 
c. Reject H0 since −7.989 < −2.583.
10.39 
a. −2.51 to 4.71 taps
 
b.  Do not reject H0 since 0.6897 < 1.833.
 
 
 Conclude that the average number of taps is not different 
for right and left index fingers. 
10.41 
a. −1.02 to 1.52 ppm
 
b.  Do not reject H0 since 0.412 < 2.093.
 
 
 Conclude that the average paired difference for concen-
tration levels is not different from zero.
10.43 
Two samples are considered large enough for the sampling 
distribution of the difference between two sample propor-
tions to be approximately normal when n1p1, n1q1, n2p2, and 
n2q2 are all greater than 5. 
10.45 
−0.062 to 0.142
10.47 
Do not reject H0 since 0.76 < 2.05.
10.49 
a. pˆ1 −pˆ2 = −0.04
 
b. −0.086 to 0.006
 
c. H0: p1 − p2 = 0; H1: p1 − p2 < 0
 
d. z = −2.02
 
e. Do not reject H0 since −2.02 > −2.33.
10.51 
a.  pˆ1 −pˆ2 = 0.024
 
b. −0.020 to 0.068
 
c.  p-value approach
 
 
Do not reject H0 since 0.2758 > 0.05.
 
 
critical value approach
 
 
Do not reject H0 since 1.09 < 1.96.
 
 
 Conclude that the proportions of cars that fail the emis-
sions test at the two stations are not different.
10.53 
a. pˆ1 −pˆ2 = 0.10
 
b. 0.018 to 0.182
 
c. Reject H0 since 3.04 > 2.58.
 
 
 Conclude that the proportions of all men and all women 
who play the lottery often are different.
10.55 
a. −0.013 to 0.093
 
b.  Do not reject H0 since 1.75 < 2.33.
 
 
 Conclude that the proportion of all sales for which at 
least one item is returned is not higher for Store A than 
for Store B.
10.9 
a. −$1024.54 to −$75.46
 
b. Reject H0 since −2.99 < −2.58. 
 
 
 Conclude that such mean repair costs are different for 
these two types of cars.
 
c.  If α = 0, there can be no rejection region, and we cannot 
reject H0. Therefore, the decision would be “do not reject 
H0.”
10.11 
a. −6.87 to 0.87 calories
 
b.  Do not reject H0 since −1.81 > −2.33. Maine Mountain 
Dairy’s claim is false.
 
c.  For α = 0.05, reject H0 since 0.0351 < 0.05.
 
 
For α = 0.025, do not reject H0 since 0.0351 > 0.025.
10.13 
a. −1.58 
b. −3.82 to 0.66
10.15 
Do not reject H0 since 1.91 < 2.58.
10.17 
a.  From Sample 1: n1 = 13, x1 = ∑x∕n1 =  640.7∕13 =
49.28
 
 
s1 = 8.06203512
 
 
From Sample 2: n2 = 12, x2 = 46.67
 
 
s2 = 8.87522940
 
 
x1 −x2 = 2.61
 
b. −5.86 to 11.08
 
c. Do not reject H0 since 0.771 < 2.500.
10.19 
a. −225 to 171 miles
 
b. Do not reject H0 since −0.267 > −2.326.
 
 
 Conclude that the mean distance between oil changes is 
not less for all luxury cars than that for all compact lower 
price cars.
10.21 
a. 8.89 to 23.11 seconds
 
b. Reject H0 since 6.478 > 2.552.
 
 
 Conclude that the mean time taken by the Piranha to 
shred 100 sheets is greater than that for the Crocodile.
 
c.  If α = 0, there can be no rejection region, and we cannot 
reject H0. Therefore, the decision would be “do not 
reject H0.”
10.23 
a. x1 −x2 =  $281
 
b. −212.46  to  774.46
 
c. critical value approach
 
 
Do not reject H0 since 1.325 < 2.326.
 
 
p-value approach
 
 
Do not reject H0 since 0.0926 > 0.01.
 
 
 Conclude that the average debt had not changed from 
2013 to 2014.
10.25 
−0.006 to 0.140
10.27 
Do not reject H0 since 2.453 < 2.659.
10.29 
Reject H0 since 2.453 > 2.000.
10.31 
a. 2.23 to 5.77 mph
 
b. Reject H0 since 5.513 > 2.445.
 
 
 Conclude that the mean speed of cars driven by all men 
drivers on this highway is higher than that of cars driven 
by all women drivers.
 
c. 1.80 to 6.20 mph
 
 
Reject H0 since 4.541 > 2.492.
 
 
 Conclude that the mean speed of cars driven by all men 
drivers on this highway is higher than that of cars driven 
by all women drivers.
www.ebook3000.com

AN16
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises and Self-Review Tests
 
b. Do not reject H0 since 2.050 < 2.447.
 
 
 Conclude that the mean estimate for repair costs at Zeke’s is 
not different than the mean estimate at Elmer’s.
7. a. −0.052 to 0.092
 
b.  Do not reject H0 since 0.60 < 2.58.
 
 
 Conclude that the proportion of all male voters who voted in 
the last presidential election is not different from that of all 
female voters.
Chapter 11
11.3 
χ2 = 7.790
11.5 
a. χ2 = 14.860
 
b.  χ2 = 0.711
11.11 
Do not reject H0 since 5.200 < 11.070.
 
Conclude that the die is fair.
11.13 
 Do not reject H0 since 10.886 < 11.345.
 
Conclude that the distribution of payment methods has not 
changed.
11.15 
Do not reject H0 since 6.534 < 9.348.
 
Conclude that the sample is random.
11.17 
Do not reject H0 since 8.888 < 9.210.
 
Conclude that the distribution of defects is the same as when 
the process is working properly and the process does not need 
an adjustment.
11.21 
a.  H0: Row and columns are independent, H1: Rows and 
columns are dependent.
 
c. For α = 0.01, the critical value of χ2 is 13.277. 
 
e.  Do not reject H0 since 10.526 < 13.277. Conclude that 
the rows and columns are independent.
11.23 
 Do not reject H0 since 2.579 < 6.635.
 
Conclude that gender and brand preference are independent.
11.25 
 Do not reject H0 since 4.059 < 9.210.
 
Conclude that gender and opinions are not related.
11.27 
 Do not reject H0 since 2.587 < 7.815.
 
Conclude that region and causes of fire are unrelated.
11.29 
 Reject H0 since 21.586 > 14.449.
 
Conclude that the grade distributions are not homogeneous 
for the three professors.
11.31 
a. 23.0839 to 132.5996
 
b. 25.1019 to 110.1884
 
c. 28.0459 to 89.0251
 
As the sample size increases, the confidence interval for σ2 
decreases in width.
11.33 
a. H0: σ2 = 1.75, H1: σ2 > 1.75
 
b. 34.170
 
c. 22.514 
 
d. Do not reject H0 since 22.514 < 34.170.
11.35 
a. 1.221 to 1.814. 
 
b. Do not reject H0 since 53.250 < 71.420.
 
 
 Conclude that the population variance is not greater than 
2.0 square micrometers. 
11.37 
a. 52.338 to 112.356
 
b.  Do not reject H0 since 12.401 < 29.714 < 39.364.
10.57 
a. −129.30 to −118.70
 
b. Reject H0 since −45.84 < −1.96.
 
 
 Conclude that the mean weekly earnings of female work-
ers who are not union members are less than those of 
female workers who are union members.
10.59 
a. 0.25 to 1.55 minutes
 
b. Reject H0 since 3.66 > 1.667.
 
 
 Conclude that the mean evacuation time is smaller at 
closing time than during fire drills.
10.61 
a.  $9216.94 to $11,463.06
 
b.  Reject H0 since 21.45 > 2.33.
 
 
 Conclude that the average salary of statisticians is higher 
than that of accountants and auditors.
10.63 
a. −8.35 to −1.89 cards
 
b.  Reject H0 since −3.11 < −1.65.
 
 
 Conclude that the average number Christmas cards 
mailed out by all households in Town A is different from 
the corresponding average for Town B.
10.65 
a. −9.54 to −0.24
 
b.  Do not reject H0 since −2.425 > −2.896. 
 
 
 Conclude that the course does not make any statistically 
significant improvement in the memory of all students.
10.67 
a. 0.03 to 0.11
 
b.  p-value approach
 
 
 Reject H0 since 0.0006 < 0.01. 
 
 
critical value approach
 
 
Reject H0 since 3.40 > 2.58.
 
 
 Conclude that the percentage of social media users in the 
18–29 age group is different from the 30−49 age group.
10.69 
0.2611
10.71 
Nine cars should be tested.
10.73 
a. Use a sample size of 36 for each class.
 
b.  The sample means must differ by at least 5.89 points in 
order to conclude that the two population means are 
different.
Self-Review Test
1. a
3. a. 1.62 to 2.78
 
b. Reject H0 since 9.86 > 1.96.
 
 
 Conclude that the mean stress score of all executives is higher 
than that of all professors.
4. a. −2.72 to −1.88 hours
 
b. Reject H0 since −10.997 < −2.416.
 
 
 Conclude that the mean time spent per week playing with 
their children by all alcoholic fathers is less than that of non-
alcoholic fathers.
5. a. −2.70 to −1.90 hours
 
b. Reject H0 since −11.474 < −2.421.
 
 
 Conclude that the mean time spent per week playing with 
their children by all alcoholic fathers is less than that of non-
alcoholic fathers.
6. a. −$53.60 to $186.18

Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises and Self-Review Tests
AN17
 
 b.  Reject H0 since 36.480 > 36.191.
 
  
 Conclude that the population variance exceeds 0.25 square 
ounce.
Chapter 12
12.3 
a. F = 7.26 
b. F = 5.82 
c. F = 5.27
12.5 
a. F = 3.49 
b. F = 2.61
12.9 
a. For Sample I:  n1 = 6, ∑x = 170, 
 
∑x2 = 4946 
 
x1 = 28.333 
 
s1 = 5.08592830
 
For Sample II:  n2 = 6, ∑x = 204,
 
∑x2 = 7048 
 
x2 = 34.000 
 
s2 = 4.73286383
 
b. Do not reject H0 since –1.998 > –3.169.
 
c. Do not reject H0 since 3.99 < 10.04.
 
d.  For both parts b and c, conclude that the population 
means are equal.
12.11 
b. Do not reject H0 since 2.04 < 2.70.
 
 
 Conclude that the means of the four populations are all 
equal.
12.13 
Do not reject H0 since 1.30 < 3.55. 
 
Conclude that the mean time taken to find their first job for all 
2011 graduates in these three fields is the same.
12.15 
 Reject H0 since 5.44 > 3.72.
 
Conclude that the mean life of bulbs for each of these four 
brands is not the same. 
12.17 
a. Do not reject H0 since 1.24 < 6.93.
 
 
 Conclude that the mean weight gained by all chickens is 
the same for each of the three diets.
 
b.  By not rejecting H0, we may have made a Type II error by 
concluding that the mean weight gained by all chickens 
is the same for each of the three diets when in fact it is 
not.
12.19 
a. Reject H0 since 4.89 > 3.89.
 
 
 Conclude that the mean tips for the three restaurants are 
not equal.
 
b.  If α = 0, there can be no rejection region, and we cannot 
reject H0.  Therefore, the decision would be “do not reject 
H0.”
12.21 
 Do not reject H0 since 0.57 < 5.29.
 
Conclude that the mean revenue is the same for all four days 
of the week.
12.23 
a.  There are 5 groups. The within degrees of freedom are 
equal to n – k = 45, so n – 5 = 45 gives n = 50. Dividing 
these observations equally between the 5 groups yields n1 
= n2 = n3 = n4 = n5 = 10.
 
b.  Each group size must be larger than 21. 
Self-Review Test
 1. a 
 2. b 
 3. c 
 4. a
  5. a 
 6. a 
 7. b 
 8. a
 10. a. Reject H0 since 4.46 > 3.10.
 
 
 Conclude that the population variance is not different 
from 4200 square hours.
11.39 
Reject H0 since 94.26 > 7.378.
 
Conclude that the current distribution of opinions is different 
from the 2014 distribution. 
11.41 
Reject H0 since 15.920 > 11.345.
 
Conclude that the proportions of all allergic persons are not 
the same over the four seasons.
11.43 
 Reject H0 since 66.04 > 11.345.
 
Conclude that the proportion of Americans who support 
legalizing marijuana differs across age groups. 
11.45 
Do not reject H0 since 10.181 < 16.812.
 
Conclude that the percentages of people with different opinions 
are similar for all four regions.
11.47 
a. 1.846 to 4.899
 
b.  2.887 to 5.767
11.49 
Do not reject H0 since 15.429 < 21.666.
 
Conclude that the population variance is not greater than 4.2. 
11.51 
a. Do not reject H0 since 29.920 < 33.924.
 
 
 Conclude that the population variance is not greater than 
0.025 square millimeter, and the machine does not need 
an adjustment.
 
b. 0.0203 to 0.0681 
11.53 
a. 1840.696429
 
b. 28.37 to 87.32
 
c. Reject H0 since 17.180 > 16.013.
 
 
 Conclude that the population variance is different from 
750 square dollars.
11.55 
a.  From the normal distribution table, area to the right of 
z = 1.64 is 1 − 0.9495 = 0.0505. p-value = 2(0.0505) = 
0.1010
 
b.  p-value = 0.1000
 
c.  z2 = (1.64)2 = 2.6896 is approximately equal to χ2 = 
2.713. The p-values are the same (the difference is due to 
rounding), which is always true since the tests in parts a 
and b are equivalent.
11.57 
 Reject H0 since 215.568 > 16.919.
 
Conclude that a normal distribution is not an appropriate 
model for these data.
Self-Review Test
 1. b 
 2. a 
 3. c
 4. a 
 5. b 
 6. b
 7. c 
 8. b 
 9. a
 10. Reject H0 since 32.672 > 11.345.
 
 Conclude that the current distribution of opinions is different 
from the 2014 distribution.
 11. Reject H0 since 31.187 > 11.345.
 
 Conclude that educational level and ever being divorced are 
dependent.
 12. Reject H0 since 82.450 > 9.488.
 
 Conclude that the percentages of people who play the lottery often, 
sometimes, and never are not the same for each income group.
 13. a.  0.486 to 1.154
www.ebook3000.com

AN18
Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises and Self-Review Tests
 
 Thus, 45% of the total squared errors (SST) is explained 
by the regression model.
13.35 
Let x = total payroll (in millions of dollars) and y = percent-
age of games won.
 
a. σe = 7.6014
 
b. ρ2 = 0.0718
13.37 
a. 6.01 to 6.63
 
b.  Reject H0 since 59.792 > 2.145.
Conclude that B is  positive. 
 
c.  Reject H0 since 59.792 > 2.977.
Conclude that B is different from zero.
 
d. Reject H0 since 17.219 > 2.624.
 
Conclude that B is different from 4.50.
13.39 
a. –2.81 to –2.59 
 
b. Reject H0 since –54.77 < –2.33.
 
Conclude that B is negative.
 
c. Reject H0 since –54.81 < –2.58.
 
Conclude that B is different from zero.
 
d. Reject H0 since –29.44 < –1.96.
 
Conclude that B is less than –1.25.
13.41 
a. 1.3917 to 8.8821
 
b. Do not reject H0 since 0.668 < 3.106.
 
Conclude that B is not different from 4.
13.43 
a. –0.1320 to –0.0120
 
b. Reject H0 since –3.770 < –2.447.
 
Conclude that B is different from zero.
13.45 
The linear correlation coefficient measures the strength of 
the linear association between two variables. Its value always 
lies in the range –1 to 1.
13.49 
a
13.51 
The linear correlation coefficient r measures only linear rela-
tionships. Thus, r may be zero and the variables might still 
have a nonlinear relationship.
13.53 
a. Positive 
b. Positive
 
c. Positive 
d. Negative
 
e. Zero
13.55 
ρ = 0.2089
13.57 
a.  We expect the ages and prices of cars to be negatively 
related because, on average, the older a car is, the less 
prospective buyers are willing to pay.
 
b. r = −0.9858
 
c. Reject H0 since –14.3654 < –2.447.
 
Conclude that ρ is negative.
13.59 
a. r = 0.6731
 
b.  Reject H0 since 3.0189 > 2.718.
Conclude that ρ is positive.
13.61 
ρ = 0.1181
It does not make sense to make a confidence interval and to 
test a hypothesis here because the data is from a population.
13.63 
a. SSxx = 6394.9
 
SSyy = 1718.9
 
SSxy = 3136.1
 
b. yˆ = –22.5355 + 0.4904x
 
  
 Conclude that the mean prices for all four pizza parlors are 
not the same.
 
 b. By rejecting H0, we may have committed a Type I error.
Chapter 13
13.15 
a.  The y–intercept is 100. The slope is 5.  There is a positive 
relationship between x and y.
 
b.  The y–intercept is 400. The slope is –4. There is a nega-
tive relationship between x and y.
13.17 
yˆ = 214 – 30x
13.19 
a.  $292.2 million
 
b.  The average profits for each of the three years would be 
different due to variables not included in the model and 
random variation.
 
c. The relationship is nonexact.
13.21 
Let x = sugar (in grams) and y = calories.
 
a., d.
 
 
 The scatter diagram exhibts a linear relationship between 
sugar and calorie count.
 
b. yˆ = 89.48425 + 5.1369x
 
e. 171.6749
 
f. 
356.6043
13.23 
Let x = total payroll (in millions of dollars) and y = percent-
age of games won.
 
a. μy| x = 44.0083 + 0.044x
 
b.  The regression line obtained in part a is the population 
regression line because the data are given for all National 
League baseball teams. The values of the y–intercept and 
slope obtained above are those of A and B.
 
c.  The value of A = 44.0083 represents the percentage of 
games won by a team with a total payroll of zero dollars. 
The value of B = 0.044 means that, on average, the per-
centage of games won increases by 0.044 for every 
$1 million increase in payroll of a National League base-
ball team.
13.25 
For a simple linear regression model, df = n – 2.
13.27 
SST is the sum of squared differences between the actual y 
values and y, SST = ∑(y – y)2. SSR is the portion of SST that 
is explained by the use of the regression model.
13.29 
σε = 7.0756
ρ2 = 0.044
13.31 
Let x = fat (in grams) and y = calories.
 
a. SSyy = 11,550
 
SSxx = 23.9688
 
SSxy = 353.75
 
b. b = 14.76
 
se = 32.477
 
c. SST = SSyy = 11,550, SSE = ∑e2 = 6329.074
 
SSR = SST – SSE = 11,550 – 6329.074 = 5220.926
 
d. r2 = 0.45
13.33 
Let x = sugar (in grams) and y = calories.
 
a. se = 31.2410
 
b. r2 = 0.45

Answers to Selected Odd-Numbered Exercises and Self-Review Tests
AN19
 
d.  The value of r = 0.9692 indicates that the two variables 
have a very strong positive correlation.The value of r2 = 
0.9394 means that approximately 94% of the total squared 
errors (SST) is explained by the regression model.
 
e. se = 1.0945
 
f. 
0.5363 to 1.4426
 
g. Reject H0 since 8.805 > 2.571.
 
Conclude that B is positive.
 
h. Reject H0 since 8.805 > 2.571.
 
 Conclude that ρ is positive. The conclusion is the same 
as that of part g (reject H0).
13.75 
a.  We expect B to be positive. 
 
b.  yˆ = 7.8304 + 0.5039x
 
 
 The sign of b = 0.5039 is positive, which is consistent 
with what we expected.
 
c.  The value of a = 7.8304 represents the number of units 
(in hundreds) sold if there are no promotions. The value 
of b = 0.5039 means that the sales are expected to 
increase by about 50 units per day for each additional 
promotion.
 
d.  The value of r = 0.8861 indicates that the two variables 
have a strong positive correlation. The value of r2 = 0.7853 
means that approximately 78% of the total squared errors 
(SST) is explained by the regression model.
 
e.  We expect sales of about 2547 units in a day with 35 
 promotions.
 
f. 
se = 3.3527
 
g. 0.1073 to 0.9004
 
h. Reject H0 since 4.2759 > 3.365.
 
Conclude that B is positive.
 
i. 
Reject H0 since 4.2759 > 3.365.
 
Conclude that ρ is different from zero. 
13.77 
The 99% confidence interval for μy|8 is 4.3293 to 7.6677
 
The 99% prediction interval for yp for x = 8 is 1.2804 to 
10.7166
13.79 
The 98% confidence interval for μy|2400 is 333.0400 to 366.2242
 
The 98% prediction interval for yp for x = 2400 is 295.2639 
to 404.0003
13.83 
a. Reject H0 since 7.1257 > 1.833.
 
Conclude that ρ is positive.
 
b.  Utilizing r = 0.9216, we would conclude that there is a 
strong, positive linear association between the two vari-
ables. 
Self-Review Test
  1. d 
 2. a 
 3. b 
 4. a
 5. b 
 6. b 
 7. True 
 8. True
 9. a 
10. b
 
d.  r2 = 0.8947
 
 
 The value of r = 0.95 indicates that the two variables 
have a very strong positive linear correlation. The value 
of r2 = 0.89 means that 89% of the total squared errors 
(SST) is explained by the regression model.
 
e. se = 4.7557
 
f. 
0.2909 to 0.6899
 
g.  Reject H0 since 8.246 > 2.896.
Conclude that B is  positive.
 
h.  Reject H0 since 8.246 > 3.355.
Conclude that ρ is different from zero.
13.65 
a. SSxx =  3.3647
 
SSyy = 788
 
SSxy = 49.4
 
b. yˆ = 2.8562 + 14.6819x
 
d.  The value of r = 0.9594 indicates that the two variables 
have a very strong positive linear correlation. The value 
of r2 = 0.9204 means that approximately 92% of the total 
squared errors (SST) is explained by the regression 
model.
 
e. se = 3.5417
 
f. 
9.718 to 19.646
 
g.  Reject H0 since 7.6043 > 4.032.
Conclude that B is different from zero.
 
h.  Reject H0 since 7.6043 > 3.365.
Conclude that ρ is  positive.
13.67 
a.  The 99% confidence interval for μy|15 is 13.8708 to 
16.6292 
 
 
 The 99% prediction interval for yp for x = 15 is 11.7648 
to 18.7352
 
b.  The 99% confidence interval for μy|12 is 62.3590 to 
67.7210
 
 
 The 99% prediction interval for yp for x = 12 is 56.3623 
to 73.7177
13.69 
The 90% confidence interval for μy|10 is $4611.38 to $5374.78
 
The 90% prediction interval for yp for x = 10 is: $3808.78 
to $6177.38
13.71 
The 99% confidence interval for μy|8.5 is 54.5013 to 56.0353
The 99% prediction interval for yp for x = 8.5 is 53.2831 to 
57.2534
13.73 
a.  As the age of a machine increases, the number of break-
downs is expected to increase. Hence, we expect a posi-
tive relationship between these two variables. Conse-
quently, B is expected to be positive. 
 
b.  yˆ = −1.9172 + 0.9895x
 
 
 The sign of b = 0.9895 is positive, which is consistent 
with what we expected.
 
c.  The value of a = –1.9175 represents the number of 
breakdowns per month for a new machine (age = 0). The 
value of b = 0.9895 means that the average number of 
breakdowns per month increases by about .9895 for 
every one year increase in the age of such a machine.
www.ebook3000.com


A
Addition rule
defined, 158
formula, 159
for mutually exclusive events, 159–161
for mutually nonexclusive events, 157–159
Alternative hypothesis. See also Null hypothesis
critical-value approach (left-tailed test), 362
critical-value approach (population proportion), 
379, 381
critical-value approach (right-tailed test), 372
critical-value approach (two-tailed test), 360, 371
defined, 347, 348
difference between two population means 
(σ1 and σ2 known), 401, 413
difference between two population means 
(σ1 and σ2 unknown but equal), 406, 408
difference between two population proportions, 
428, 430
goodness-of-fit test, 454, 456
greater than (>) sign, 353
left-tailed test, 352, 362, 370
linear correlation coefficient, 531, 537
mean of paired difference for population, 421, 423
one-way ANOVA, 490, 492
p-value approach (left-tailed test), 370
p-value approach (one-tailed test), 358
p-value approach (population proportion), 376, 378
p-value approach (two-tailed test), 357, 368
regression analysis, 536
right-tailed test, 353, 372
slope, 526
test of homogeneity, 466
test of independence, 462, 463
testing null hypothesis against, 483
two-tailed test, 351, 360, 368, 371
Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
defined, 483–484, 486
degrees of freedom, 494
F distribution, 484–486
mean airline delay times, 496
mean square between samples (MSB), 487, 489
mean square within samples (MSW), 487, 489
one-way, 486–494
sample size and, 494
treatments, 488
ANOVA. See Analysis of variance
Anscombe, F. J., 544
Applied statistics, 2
Arithmetic mean. See Mean
Arrangements. See Permutations
Average. See Mean
Axes, truncating, 57
B
Bar graph
creating (Excel), 75
creating (Minitab), 72–73
defined, 40–41
illustrated, 40
pictograms versus, 67
for relative frequency and percentage distributions, 41
single-valued classes, 54
with truncation, 57
without truncation, 57
Baseball, statistics in, 213–214
Basic formulas
variance and standard deviation (grouped data), 
121–122
variance and standard deviation (ungrouped data), 
91, 120–121
Basic outcome. See Outcomes
Batting average, 213–214
Bell-shaped distribution
area under, 105
defined, 105
normal curve, 240
Bernoulli trials. See Trials
Between-samples sum of squares (SSB), 488
Biases
defined, 14
gender, 475
nonresponse, 15
response, 15
sample mean and, 302
selection, 14–15
voluntary response, 15–16
Bimodal data sets, 84
Binomial experiments
conditions of, 193, 194
defined, 193
repetition of, 193
trials, 193
verifying conditions of, 194–195
Binomial formula
calculating probability with, 197
total number of successes, 196
total number of trials, 196
using, 196, 258
Binomial parameters, 196
Binomial probability distribution
calculating (Excel), 223
calculating (Minitab), 220–221
calculating (TI-84), 218
constructing, 197–198
defined, 193, 195
histogram for, 198
mean of, 201–202
normal approximation to, 257–261
parameters of, 196
Poisson distribution as approximation to, 209
preparing (Excel), 224
preparing (Minitab), 221–222
preparing (TI-84), 218–219
standard deviation of discrete random variable, 
201–202
I1
INDEX
www.ebook3000.com

I2
Index 
example of, 133
illustrated, 132
Conditional probability
calculating, 154
calculating (two-way table), 142, 143–144
defined, 142
Conditions
binomial experiment, 194–195
difference between two population means, 404
Poisson probability distribution, 206–207
probability distribution, 183–184
treatment, 19
Confidence coefficients, 314, 315
Confidence interval formula
margin of error in, 316
z in, 316, 317
Confidence intervals
conclusions based on, 337
constructing for large samples, 332–333
constructing with t distribution, 327–329
defined, 314
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 known), 399–400
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 unknown and unequal), 412–413
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 unknown but equal), 405
difference between two population proportions, 
426–427
finding for large samples, 332
illustrated, 318
mean of paired difference for population, 
418–420
population mean, 315–316, 317–318
population proportion, 331
population standard deviation, 469
population variance, 469–471
regression model, 540–541
slope, 524–525
slope (Excel), 552
slope (Minitab), 551
slope (TI-84), 549
width of, 320–321, 329
Confidence levels
defined, 314
value, 315
width of confidence interval and, 321
z value in, 317, 320
Confounded effects, 19
Consistent estimators, 282, 297, 302
Contingency tables. See also Two-way tables
defined, 459
expected frequencies, 460
observed frequencies, 460
test of independence, 459–464
2 × 2, 459, 463–464
2 × 3, 462–463
Continuity correction factor, 258
Continuous probability distribution
characteristics of, 229
defined, 228
probability calculation for intervals, 230
Continuous random variables
converting discrete random variables into, 258
defined, 181, 228
examples of, 181
normal distribution, 232–234
Chance variables. See Random variables
Chebyshev’s theorem
applying, 104–105
areas under a distribution curve with, 104
defined, 103
illustrated, 103
percentage of values within three standard 
deviations of the mean for, 104
percentage of values within two standard 
deviations of the mean for, 104
using, 192
Chi-square distribution
defined, 448, 449
degrees of freedom, 449
nonnegative values assumption, 449
table, reading, 449–451
Chi-square tests
goodness-of-fit test, 451–459
population variance, 469–474
test of homogeneity, 465–467
test of independence, 459–464
Class width
in constructing frequency distribution 
tables, 45
finding, 44
Classes
defined, 43
lower limit, 43, 45
midpoints, 44
number of, 45
single-valued, 52–54
upper limit, 43
writing, with less-than method, 51–52
Classical probability rule, 135–136
Clinical trials, 433
Cluster sampling, 17
Clusters, 17
Coefficient of determination
calculating, 522
defined, 521, 522
formula, 521
Coefficient of variation, 95
Coefficient of x, 504
Coin toss simulation
Excel, 177
Minitab, 138, 175
TI-84, 174
Column creation from existing columns
Excel, 34
Minitab, 32
Combinations
defined, 164
finding, 166
formula, 165
notation, 164
number of, 164–165
total number of elements and, 164, 166
Combined mean, 89
Complementary events
calculating probability of, 148
defined, 147
illustrated, 147, 148
outcomes, 147–148
Composite events. See Compound events
Compound events
calculating probability of, 136
defined, 132
Binomial random variables, 195
Binomial table
defined, 198
reading probability from, 199
using, 198–200
Boundaries, 52
Box-and-whisker plot
constructing, 113–115
creating (Excel), 127
creating (Minitab), 126
creating (TI-84), 125
defined, 113
five-number summary values, 113
lower inner fence, 113
lower outer fence, 113, 114
upper inner fence, 113
upper outer fence, 114
using, 114–115
whiskers, 114
C
Case studies
All State Lottery, 189
Americans’ Effort to Lose Weight Still Trail 
Desires, 334
Americans’ Life Outlook, 2014, 4
Annual Salaries of Registered Nurses, 2014, 319
Are People on Wall Street Honest and Moral? 457
Are Upper-Income People Paying Their Fair 
Share in Federal Taxes? 382
Average Student Loan Debt for the 
Class of 2013, 364
Car Insurance Premiums per Year in 50 States, 49
Distribution of Time Taken to Run a Road Race, 
231–232
Do You Worry About Your Weight? 143
Does Spread Mean the Same as Variability and 
Dispersion? 106
Education Level and 2014 Median Weekly 
Earnings, 83
Global Birth and Death Rates, 210
Hours Worked in a Typical Week by Full-Time 
U.S. Workers, 50
How Many Cups of Coffee Do You Drink a 
Day? 53
Ideological Composition of the U.S. Public, 
2014, 40
Millennials’ Views on Their Level of 
Day-to-Day Banking Knowledge, 41
Probability of Winning a Mega Millions Lottery 
Jackpot, 166
Regression of Weights on Heights for 
NFL Players, 512–513
2013 Average Starting Salaries for Selected 
Majors, 81
2014 Lobbying Spending by Selected 
Companies, 3
Case-control study, 432–433
Categorical variables. See Qualitative variables
Causality, regression and, 527
Census
defined, 11
reasons for using sample survey versus, 12
Central limit theorem
defined, 286
for sample proportion, 297, 301
sampling distribution of x and, 289

Index
I3
overview, 411
p-value approach, 414–415
two-tailed test, 413–414
Difference between two population means (σ1 and 
σ2 unknown but equal)
conditions, 404
confidence interval, 405
estimating (Excel), 442–443
estimating (Minitab), 439
estimating (TI-84), 437
hypothesis testing, 406–409
hypothesis testing (Excel), 443
hypothesis testing (Minitab), 440
hypothesis testing (TI-84), 437–438
interval estimation, 404–406
pooled standard deviation, 404
p-value approach, 407, 409
right-tailed test, 408–409
sample size and, 409
two-tailed test, 406–407
Difference between two population 
proportions
confidence interval, 426–427
estimating (Excel), 445–446
estimating (Minitab), 441
estimating (TI-84), 438
hypothesis testing, 427–431
hypothesis testing (Excel), 446
hypothesis testing (Minitab), 441–442
hypothesis testing (TI-84), 439
interval estimation, 426–427
mean, 426
overview, 425
pooled sample proportion, 428
p-value approach, 429, 431
right-tailed test, 428–429
sampling distribution, 426
standard deviation, 426
test statistic z, 428, 429, 430–431
two-tailed test, 430–431
Difference between two sample means
estimator of standard deviation of, 404
mean, 397–399
sampling distribution, 397–399
standard deviation, 397–399
test statistic t, 406
test statistic z, 401
Discrete random variables
converting into continuous random variables, 
258
defined, 180
examples of, 180–181
finding probability of events for, 
184–185
mean of, 187–188
probability distribution of, 182–187, 191
standard deviation of, 188–192
variance of, 190
Discrete variables, 7
Dispersion, 89
Dotplots
creating, 65
creating (Minitab), 74
illustrated, 65
outliers, 64–65
use of, 64
Double-blind experiments, 20
examples of, 6
finding the percentile for, 111
multimodal, 84
unimodal, 84
Decision making examples, 18
Degrees of freedom
analysis of variance (ANOVA), 494
characteristics of, 484
chi-square distribution, 449
curves, 484
defined, 325
difference between two population means 
(σ1 and σ2 unknown and unequal), 411
F distribution, 484
goodness-of-fit test, 453
mean of paired difference for population, 
420
number of, 325
paired samples, 417
regression model, 541
simple linear regression, 518
table, reading, 485
test of independence, 460
of two samples taken together, 404
Deming, W. Edwards, 263
Dependent events
defined, 146
illustrated, 146
multiplication rule for, 152–154
observations about, 147
Dependent samples
defined, 397
illustrated, 397–398
Dependent variables, 503
Descriptive statistics
defined, 3
use of, 36
Designed experiments, 19–20
Deterministic model, 505
Deviation of the x value, 91
Die toss simulation
Excel, 177
Minitab, 175
TI-84, 174
Difference between two population means 
(σ1 and σ2 known) 
confidence interval, 399–400
estimating (TI-84), 437
hypothesis testing, 400–402
hypothesis testing (Excel), 442
hypothesis testing (TI-84), 437
inferences about, 397–402
interval estimation, 399–400
p-value approach, 402
two-tailed test, 401–402
Difference between two population means 
(σ1 and σ2 unknown and unequal)
confidence interval, 412–413
degrees of freedom, 411
estimating (Excel), 444
estimating (Minitab), 440
estimating (TI-84), 438
hypothesis testing, 413–415
hypothesis testing (Excel), 444–445
hypothesis testing (Minitab), 440
hypothesis testing (TI-84), 438
interval estimation, 412–413
possible values of, 227
probability distribution curve, 228
probability distributions, 227, 228–241
single value probability, 230
standard normal distribution, 234–241
Continuous variables
defined, 7
examples of, 7–8
Control groups, 20
Controlled experiments, 19
Convenience samples, 13
Correction for continuity
defined, 258
making, 259
Correlation coefficient
defined, 502
linear, 528–532
square of, 530
Counting rule
applying (2 steps), 162–163
applying (3 steps), 162
applying (16 steps), 163
defined, 162
Critical point, 348
Critical value, 348
Critical-value approach
defined, 353
hypothesis tests about population mean 
(population standard deviation known), 
359– 365
hypothesis tests about population mean (population 
standard deviation not known), 371–374
hypothesis tests about population proportion, 
379–381
left-tailed test, 362–363
left-tailed test (population proportion), 380–381
right-tailed test (population standard deviation 
not known), 372–373
steps to perform, 360
test statistic, 359
two-tailed test, 360–362
two-tailed test (population proportion), 379–380
two-tailed test (population standard deviation 
not known), 371–372
Cross-section data, 9
Cross-tabulation, 459
Cumulative binomial probability calculation
Excel, 223–224
Minitab, 221, 222
TI-84, 218
Cumulative frequency distribution
defined, 54
example, 54–55
table, 54
Cumulative hypergeometric probability 
calculation, 224
Cumulative percentages, calculating, 55
Cumulative Poisson probability calculation
Excel, 225
Minitab, 223
TI-84, 219–220
Cumulative relative frequency, 55
D
Data sets
bimodal, 84
defined, 3, 6
www.ebook3000.com

I4
Index 
hypothesis testing, difference between two 
population means (σ1 and σ2 unknown but 
equal), 443
hypothesis testing, difference between two 
population proportions, 446
hypothesis testing, mean of paired difference for 
population, 445
independence/homogeneity test, 482
left-tail probability calculation, 273
new columns from existing columns, 34
one-way ANOVA test, 500
Poisson probability calculation, 225
population mean estimation (σ known), 
343–344
population mean estimation (σ not known), 344
population proportion estimation, 344
probability between two values, 273
regression equation, finding, 551–552
right-tail probability calculation, 273
sampling distribution of the sample proportion 
approximation, 309
sampling distribution of x approximation, 
308–309
selecting random samples, 34–35
simulating tosses of a coin, 177
simulating tosses of a die, 177
sum of values in a column, 34
summary statistics calculation, 126–127
10! calculation, 177
20P3 calculation, 177
Expected frequencies
contingency tables, 460
defined, 452, 453
test of independence, 460–461
writing, 461
Expected value, 187, 188
Experiments
binomial, 193, 194–195
defined, 130
examples of, 130
Law of Large Numbers and, 138
multinomial, 451–452
Explanatory variables, 503
Exponential distribution
defined, 262
memoryless property, 263
Extrapolation, 515
Extreme outlier, 114
Extreme values
defined, 64, 65, 80
detection of, 64–65
effect on mean, 80
F
F distribution
defined, 484
degrees of freedom, 484
F value, 485
Factorials
defined, 163
of difference between two numbers, evaluating, 
163
evaluating, 163
symbol, 163
of zero, evaluating, 164
Failures, 193
False positive, 385
Minitab, 343
TI-84, 341–342
Estimators
consistent, 282, 297, 302
defined, 281, 297, 313
standard deviation of difference between two 
sample means, 404
of standard deviation of sample proportion, 
331
unbiased, 281, 297
Events
complementary, 147–148
compound, 131, 132–133
defined, 131
dependent, 146, 147, 152–154
impossible (null), 134
independent, 145, 146–147, 150–151
intersection of, 150
mutually exclusive, 144–145, 154–155, 
159–161
mutually nonexclusive, 144–145, 157–159
rare, 134
simple, 131–132
sure (certain), 134
union of, 156–157
Excel
binomial probability calculation, 223
binomial probability distribution 
preparation, 224
confidence interval for slope, constructing, 552
creating a box-and-whisker plot, 127
creating bar graph, 75
creating frequency histogram, 75
creating pie chart, 75
cumulative binomial probability 
calculation, 223–224
cumulative hypergeometric probability 
calculation, 224
cumulative Poisson probability calculation, 225
data analysis add-in, 35
determining z when probability is known, 273
entering and saving data, 33–34
estimating difference between two population 
means (σ1 and σ2 unknown and unequal), 444
estimating difference between two population 
means (σ1 and σ2 unknown but equal), 
442–443
estimating difference between two population 
proportions, 445–446
estimating mean of paired difference for 
population, 445
5C3 calculation, 177
generating random numbers, 176–177
goodness-of-fit test, 481
hypergeometric probability calculation, 224
hypothesis test about population mean 
(σ known), 392
hypothesis test about population mean 
(σ unknown), 393
hypothesis test about population 
proportion, 393–394
hypothesis testing about slope or correlation, 552
hypothesis testing, difference between two 
population means (σ1 and σ2 known), 442
hypothesis testing, difference between two 
population means (σ1 and σ2 unknown and 
unequal), 444–445
E
Educated guesses, 2
Elementary events. See Simple events
Elements
defined, 3, 5
total number of, combinations and, 164, 166
Empirical rule
applying, 106–107
defined, 105
illustrated, 106
Entering and saving data
Excel, 33–34
Minitab, 31–32
TI-84, 29
Epsilon (epsilon), 544
Equally likely outcomes, 135
Equation of a regression model, 505
Equation of linear relationship, 504
Error sum of squares (SSE), 508, 521
Errors
nonresponse, 15
nonsampling, 14–16, 278–280
random, 508
response, 15
sampling, 13–14, 278–280, 294
selection, 14–15
standard deviation of, 518–519
Type I and Type II, 349–350, 385
types of, 14
voluntary response, 15–16
Estimate of p, 333
Estimated regression line, 536
Estimated regression model, 506
Estimated value of y, 506
Estimated values of A and B, 506
Estimates
defined, 313
interval, 313–314
maximum error of, 314
most conservative, 333
point, 313, 314, 317–318, 332, 469
of standard deviation of difference of 
two sample means, 411
Estimation
defined, 312
interval, 314
procedure, 313
true population mean, 312
true population proportion, 312
Estimation of population mean
population standard deviation known, 315–323
population standard deviation 
known (Excel), 343–344
population standard deviation 
known (Minitab), 342
population standard deviation known (TI-84), 341
population standard deviation not 
known, 324–330
population standard deviation not known 
(Excel), 344
population standard deviation not 
known (Minitab), 342–343
population standard deviation not known 
(TI-84), 341
Estimation of population proportion
Excel, 344
large samples, 331–335

Index
I5
Hypothesis tests
critical-value approach, 353
defined, 346
formulation or specification, 384
introduction to, 347–354
left-tailed. See left-tailed test
linear correlation coefficient, 530–532
one-tailed test, 350, 356, 358–359
population variance, 471–474
positive test result, 384
possible outcomes, 350
power of the test, 350
as powerful and dangerous tool, 384
procedures for making, 353
p-value approach, 353
right-tailed. See right-tailed test
significance level, 349, 359
slope, 525–527
slope or correlation (Excel), 552
slope or correlation (Minitab), 551
slope or correlation (TI-84), 549
specificity, 385
t distribution, 373–374
tails of, 350–353
test statistic, 359
two-tailed. See two-tailed test
Type I error, 349
Type II error, 349
Hypothesis tests about population mean 
(σ known)
cases, 354–355
chart summary, 355
critical-value approach, 359– 365
Excel, 392
Minitab, 390–391
p-value approach, 355–359
TI-84, 389
Hypothesis tests about population mean 
(σ unknown)
cases, 367
chart summary, 367
critical-value approach, 371–374
Excel, 393
Minitab, 391
p-value approach, 368–371
test statistic, 368
TI-84, 390
Hypothesis tests about population 
proportion
critical-value approach, 379–381
Excel, 393–394
large samples, 375–381
Minitab, 391–392
overview, 375–376
p-value approach, 376–380
test statistic, 376
TI-84, 390
I
Impossible (null) events, 134
Independent events
defined, 145
illustrated, 146–147
joint probability of, 151
multiplication rule for, 150–151
observations about, 147
Independent samples, 397
rejection region, 454, 456
sample size and, 453
test statistic value calculation, 454–455, 
456
TI-84, 479
Gosset, W. S., 324
Graphs. See also specific types of graphs
axes truncation, 57
grouped data, 48–51
importance in statistics, 77
manipulating, 57
qualitative data, 40–42
Grouped data
basic formulas for variance and standard 
deviation, 121–122
defined, 44, 45, 78
graphing, 48–51
histograms, 48–49
mean for, 97–99
pie chart for, 73
polygons, 49–50
population mean calculation for, 97–98
population variance calculation for, 100–101
sample mean calculation for, 99
sample variance calculation for, 101–102
standard deviation calculation for, 100–102
standard deviation for, 99–102
variance for, 99–102
Grouped stem-and-leaf display, 62–63
H
Histograms
binomial probability distribution, 198, 200
defined, 48
of heavy tails, 267
of normal, 266
of outliers, 268
for probability distributions, 183, 200, 201
shapes of, 55–56
skewed, 56
of skewed left, 267
of skewed right, 267
symmetric, 55–56
tails, 267
uniform, 56
How to Lie with Statistics (Huff), 67
Hypergeometric probability distribution
calculating (Excel), 224
calculating (Minitab), 222
calculating (TI-84), 219
defined, 203, 204
example, 203–204
formula, 204–205
probability calculation with, 204–205
probability of successes, 204
Hypothesis testing
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 known), 400–402
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 unknown and unequal), 413–415
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 unknown but equal), 
406–409
difference between two population proportions, 
427–431
mean of paired difference for population, 
420–424
Final outcome. See Outcomes
Finding area to right of negative value, 239
Finite population correction factor, 281, 297
First quartile
in box-and-whisker plot, 113
defined, 108
5C3 calculation
Excel, 177
Minitab, 175–176
TI-84, 174
Formulation, 384
Frequencies
defined, 43
expected, 452, 453, 460–461
joint, 457
observed, 452, 453, 460
Frequency curves
defined, 50
illustrated, 51
mean, median and mode for, 87
skewed-to-the-left, 56
skewed-to-the-right, 56
symmetric, 56
Frequency distribution tables
class width and, 45
constructing, 45–47
cumulative, 54
defined, 43
illustrated, 39, 45
number of classes and, 45
starting point, 45
Frequency distributions
constructing with less-than method, 51–52
cumulative, 54–55
defined, 37–38
Pareto chart for, 42
for qualitative data, 38–39
for quantitative data, 43–45
relative, 39–40
sample mean, 277
of sample proportion, 296
Frequency histograms
creating (Excel), 75
creating (Minitab), 73–74
creating (TI-84), 71–72
defined, 48
illustrated, 49
Frequency polygons
defined, 49
illustrated, 50
G
Gender bias, 475
Geometric mean, 89
Goodness-of-fit test. See also Chi-square tests
alternative hypothesis, 454, 456
conducting (equal portions for all categories), 
453–455
conducting (results fit given distribution), 
455–458
defined, 452
degrees of freedom, 453
Excel, 481–482
Minitab, 480
multinomial experiment and, 451–452
nonrejection region, 454, 456
null hypothesis, 454, 456
www.ebook3000.com

I6
Index 
Matched samples. See Paired samples
Maximum error of the estimate, 314
Mean. See also Measures of center
area between two points on different sides of, 
244, 248
area to between point on right and, 244
of binomial distribution, 201–202
calculating for ungrouped data, 78
combined, 89
defined, 78, 115
difference between two population proportions, 
426
difference between two sample means, 397–399
finding area to left of x less than, 251
geometric, 89
for grouped data, 97–99
limited use of, 115
normal distribution, 233, 234
normally distributed population, 285–286
outlier effect on, 80
Poisson probability distribution, 212
population, 79, 97–98
population not normally distributed, 287–288
probability between two points to left of mean, 
249–250
probability between two points to right of mean, 
250
probability that x is less than value to right of, 
248–249
relationships with median and mode, 88
sample, 79, 99
of sample proportion, 296, 299
of sampling distribution of x, 281, 291
for skewed-to-the-left histogram, 87
for skewed-to-the-right histogram, 87
slope, 524
standard normal distribution, 234
for symmetric histogram and frequency curve, 
87
trimmed, 85
weighted, 86–87
z value for, 242
Mean and standard deviation of the 
sample mean
defined, 281
finding, 282–283
finite population correction factor, 281
Mean of discrete random variable
calculating and interpreting, 187–188
computing, 191
defined, 187
expected value, 187, 188
Mean of paired difference for population
confidence interval, 418–420
degrees of freedom, 420
estimating (Excel), 445
estimating (Minitab), 440–441
estimating (TI-84), 438
hypothesis testing, 420–424
hypothesis testing (Excel), 445
hypothesis testing (Minitab), 441
hypothesis testing (TI-84), 438
inferences about, 418
interval estimation, 418–420
left-tailed test, 420–422
p-value approach, 422, 424
two-tailed test, 422–424
Law of Large Numbers
defined, 138
example of, 138–139
Least squares method, 507
Least squares regression line
defined, 508
error of prediction, 510
estimating, 509–510
random error, 507, 508
Leaves, 61. See also Stem-and-leaf display
Left-tail probability calculation
Excel, 273
Minitab, 271
TI-84, 269–270
Left-tailed test. See also Hypothesis tests
critical-value approach, 362–363
critical-value approach (population proportion), 
380–381
decisions, 352
defined, 350–351
illustrated, 352
mean of paired difference for population, 
420–422
null and alternative hypotheses, 352
p-value approach (population standard deviation 
not known), 368–369
Less-than method
constructing frequency distribution using, 
51–52
defined, 51
lower and upper boundaries, 52
for writing classes, 51–52
Linear correlation
calculating, 530
defined, 528, 529
Excel, 552
hypothesis testing, 530–532
illustrated, 528, 529
Minitab, 551
no, 528
outliers and, 544–545
perfect negative, 528
perfect positive, 528
p-value approach, 530–532
simple, 529
strong negative, 529
strong positive, 529
test statistic, 530, 531, 538
TI-84, 549–550
value of, 528
weak negative, 529
weak positive, 529
Linear regression model, 503
Lower boundary, 52
Lower inner fence, 113
Lower limit, interval estimation, 314
Lower outer fence, 114
M
Margin of error
in confidence interval formula, 316
defined, 314, 331
sample size and, 321–322
Marginal probabilities
calculation of, 141
defined, 141
of two events, 159, 161
Independent variables, 503
Inductive reasoning. See Inferential statistics
Inferences
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 known), 397–402
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 unknown and unequal), 411–415
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 unknown but equal), 404–409
difference between two population proportions, 
425–431
mean of paired difference for population, 418
mean of paired samples, 416–424
population variance, 469–474
slope B, 524–527
Inferential statistics. See also Hypothesis tests
defined, 3, 311
true population mean, 312
true population proportion, 312
Interpretation of a, 511
Interpretation of b, 511
Interquartile range (IRQ)
calculating, 108
defined, 108
finding, 108–110
Intersection of events, 150
Interval estimation
defined, 313, 314
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 known), 399–400
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 unknown and unequal), 412–413
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 unknown but equal), 404–406
difference between two population proportions, 
426–427
lower limit, 314
mean of paired difference for population, 
418–420
population variance, 469–471
slope, 524–525
upper limit, 314
IRQ. See Interquartile range
J
Joint frequencies, 457
Joint probability
defined, 150
of mutually exclusive events, 154–155
of three independent events, 151
of two events, 153–154
of two events (two-way table), 152
of two independent events, 151
Judgment samples, 13
K
Kth percentile, 100, 101
L
Large samples
constructing confidence interval for, 332–333
estimation of population proportion 
for, 331–335
finding confidence interval for, 332
hypothesis tests about a population 
proportion, 375–381
point estimate for, 332

Index
I7
for skewed-to-the-right histogram, 87
for symmetric histogram and frequency curve, 
87
MSB (mean square between samples), 487, 489
MSW (mean square within samples), 487, 489
Multimodal data sets, 84
Multinomial experiments
characteristics of, 452
defined, 451
expected frequencies, 452
observed frequencies, 452
Multiple regression, 503
Multiplication rule
defined, 152
for dependent events, 152–154
for independent events, 150–151
Mutually exclusive events
addition rule for, 159–161
defined, 144
illustrated, 144–145
joint probability of, 154–155
observations about, 147
probability of union of, 160–161
probability of union of (two-way table), 160
Mutually nonexclusive events
addition rule for, 157–159
example of, 144–145
illustrated, 145
N
Named lists, creating (TI-84), 30
Negative linear relationship, 511
Nonlinear regression model, 503
Nonrandom samples
defined, 12
example, 12–13
Nonrejection region. See also Rejection region
defined, 348
determining (population proportion), 379–380, 
381
determining, hypothesis tests about population 
mean (σ known), 360–361, 363
determining, hypothesis tests about population 
mean (σ unknown), 371–372, 373
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 known), 401–402, 414
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 unknown but equal), 406–407, 408
difference between two population proportions, 
429, 430
goodness-of-fit test, 454, 456
illustrated, 348
linear correlation coefficient, 531, 538
mean of paired difference for population, 
421–422, 423, 424
one-way ANOVA, 491, 492
population variance, 472, 473
regression analysis, 536–537
slope, 526
test of homogeneity, 466
test of independence, 462, 464
Nonresistant measures, 91
Nonresistant summary measures
defined, 83
standard deviation as, 94
variance as, 94
Nonresponse error or bias, 15
determining z when probability is 
known, 272
entering and saving data, 31–32
estimating difference between two population 
means (σ1 and σ2 unknown and unequal), 440
estimating difference between two population 
means (σ1 and σ2 unknown but equal), 439
estimating difference between two population 
proportions, 441
estimating mean of paired difference 
for population, 440–441
5C3 calculation, 175–176
generating random numbers, 175
goodness-of-fit test, 480
hypergeometric probability 
distribution, 222
hypothesis test about population mean 
(σ known), 390–391
hypothesis test about population mean 
(σ unknown), 391
hypothesis test about population 
proportion, 391–392
hypothesis test about population 
variance, 481
hypothesis testing about slope or 
correlation, 551
hypothesis testing, difference between two 
population means (σ1 and σ2 unknown and 
unequal), 440
hypothesis testing, difference between two 
population means (σ1 and σ2 unknown but 
equal), 440
hypothesis testing, difference between two 
population proportions, 441–442
hypothesis testing, mean of paired difference for 
population, 441
independence/homogeneity test, 480–481
left-tail probability calculation, 271
new columns from existing columns, 32
one-way ANOVA test, 499–500
Poisson probability calculation, 223
population mean estimation 
(σ known), 342
population mean estimation (σ not known), 
342–343
population proportion estimation, 343
prediction interval for slope, 551
probability between two values, 271
regression equation, finding, 550
right-tail probability calculation, 271–272
sampling distribution of the sample proportion 
approximation, 307–308
sampling distribution of x 
approximation, 307
selecting random samples, 33
simulating tosses of a coin, 175
simulating tosses of a die, 175
sum of values in a column, 32–33
summary statistics calculation, 125–126
10! calculation, 175
20P3 calculation, 176
Mode. See also Measures of center
calculating for ungrouped data, 84–85
defined, 84
finding for qualitative data, 85
relationships with mean and median, 88
for skewed-to-the-left histogram, 87
Mean of paired difference for sample
defined, 417–418
sampling distribution, 418
standard deviation, 417–418
test statistic t, 420, 422, 423
values, calculating, 419
Mean square between samples (MSB), 487, 489
Mean square within samples (MSW), 487, 489
Measurements, 6
Measures of center
defined, 78
limited use of, 115
mean, 78–80
median, 81–83
mode, 84–85
relationships among, 87
summary, 87
trimmed mean, 85
weighted mean, 86–87
Measures of dispersion
coefficient of variation, 95
defined, 90
overview, 89–90
population parameters, 96
range, 90–91
standard deviation, 91–95
for ungrouped data, 89–97
variance, 91–95
Measures of position
defined, 108
quartiles and interquartile range, 108–110
Median. See also Measures of center
in box-and-whisker plot, 113
calculating (even number of data values), 
82–83
calculating (odd number of data values), 81–82
calculation steps, 81
defined, 81
relationships with mean and mode, 88
for skewed-to-the-left histogram, 87
for skewed-to-the-right histogram, 87
for symmetric histogram and frequency curve, 
87
for ungrouped data, 81–83
Medical studies, 432–433
Members, 5
Memoryless property, 263
Meta-analysis, 433
Mild outlier, 114
Minitab
binomial probability calculation, 220–221
binomial probability distribution 
preparation, 221–222
in coin toss simulation, 138
confidence interval for slope, constructing, 551
creating a box-and-whisker plot, 126
creating bar graph, 72–73
creating dotplot, 74
creating frequency histogram, 73–74
creating pie chart, 73
creating stem-and-leaf display, 74
cumulative binomial probability 
calculation, 221
cumulative hypergeometric probability 
calculation, 222
cumulative Poisson probability 
calculation, 223
www.ebook3000.com

I8
Index 
analysis, 486
assumptions, 486–487
defined, 486
Excel, 500
mean square between samples (MSB), 487, 489
mean square within samples (MSW), 487, 489
Minitab, 499–500
nonrejection region, 491, 492
null hypothesis, 490, 492
performing (all samples not the same size), 
491–494
performing (all samples same size), 490–491
rejection region, 487, 491, 492
as right-tailed, 487
sample size and, 494
between-samples sum of squares (SSB), 488
within-samples sum of squares (SSW), 488
test statistic F, 487–490, 491, 492–493
TI-84, 499
total sum of squares (SST), 488
treatments, 488
Operations with lists (TI-84), 30
Outcomes
complementary events, 147–148
counting rule in finding, 162
defined, 130
equally likely, 135
examples of, 130
simple and compound events and, 
132–133
success, 193
total, finding, 162
trial, 193, 194
Outliers
box-and-whisker plot detection of, 113
correlation and, 544–545
defined, 64, 65, 80
detection of, 64–65
effect on mean, 80
extreme, 114
histogram of, 268
mild, 114
nonresistant, 83
probability plot of, 268
resistant, 83
P
Paired difference for two samples
defined, 417
mean, 417–418
sampling distribution, 418
standard deviation, 417–418
Paired samples
defined, 416, 417
degrees of freedom, 417
examples of, 416–417
sample size and, 417
Parameters
binomial, 196
defined, 96, 275
normal distribution, 234
Poisson, 207
population, 96, 275
randomness and, 277
Pareto chart
defined, 41
illustrated, 42
p-value approach (population proportion), 376, 
378
p-value approach (two-tailed test), 356, 357, 368
regression analysis, 536
rejecting, 362
right-tailed test, 353, 372
signs, 353
slope, 526
statistical example, 347
test of homogeneity, 466
test of independence, 462, 463
testing against alternative hypothesis, 483
two-tailed test, 351, 360, 368, 371
Number of combinations
defined, 164
finding, 165
formula, 165
for selecting zero items, 167
Number of permutations, 167–168
Numbers line, 65
Numerical descriptive measures
center, 78–89
dispersion, 89–97
mean, 97–99
overview, 77
position, 108–115
standard deviation, 99–102, 103–105
variance, 99–102
Numerical precision, 384
O
Observational studies
defined, 19, 20
example of, 19, 20
variables are related, 21
Observational units, 5
Observations
defined, 3, 6
even number of, 81
number in population, 47
number in sample, 47
odd number of, 81
Observed frequencies
contingency tables, 460
defined, 452, 453
test of homogeneity, 465
Observed or actual value of y, 507
Observed value of z, 356, 361, 376
Occurrences. See also Poisson probability 
distribution
average number of, 207
defined, 206
number of, 206
as random, 206
Odds
converting into probabilities, 169
creation for sports betting, 169
probability and, 168–169
One-tailed test
critical value of z, 359
defined, 350
with normal distribution, p-value approach, 
358–359
p-value for, 356
One-way ANOVA. See also Analysis of variance 
(ANOVA)
alternative hypothesis, 490, 492
Nonsampling errors
defined, 14, 278
example, 280
illustrated, 279
occurrence of, 278–279
sources of, 278
Normal approximation to binomial distribution
computing required probability with, 259
defined, 257
using, x assumes a value in an interval, 260–261
using, x equals a specific value, 258–259
using, x is greater than or equal to value, 261
Normal curve. See Normal distribution
Normal distribution
applications of, 247–252
area between two points on different sides of 
mean, 248
area to left of x less than mean, 251
areas of, 234
bell-shaped curve, 240
characteristics of, 233
defined, 233
equation, 234
finding an x value for, 254
importance of, 232
mean, 234
parameters of, 234
probability between two points left 
of mean, 249–250
probability between two points right 
of mean, 250
probability of sample mean in an interval, 
290–291
probability x is less than value right 
of mean, 248–249
standard, 234–241
standard deviation, 234
standardizing, 242–247
symmetric about the mean, 233
tails of, 233–234
total area under, 233
using, 248–250
Normal quantile plots, 265–268
Not significantly different, 363, 365
Null hypothesis. See also Alternative hypothesis
critical-value approach (left-tailed test), 362
critical-value approach (population proportion), 
379, 381
critical-value approach (right-tailed test), 372
critical-value approach (two-tailed test), 360, 
371
defined, 347, 348
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 known), 401, 413
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 unknown but equal), 406, 408
difference between two population proportions, 
428, 430
goodness-of-fit test, 454, 456
left-tailed test, 352, 362, 370
linear correlation coefficient, 531, 537
mean of paired difference for population, 421, 
423
one-way ANOVA, 490, 492
population variance, 472, 473
p-value approach (left-tailed test), 370
p-value approach (one-tailed test), 358

Index
I9
Population variance
calculating for grouped data, 100–101
calculating for ungrouped data, 94
confidence interval, 469–471
hypothesis tests, 471–474
hypothesis tests (Minitab), 481
inferences about, 469–474
interval estimation, 469–471
nonrejection region, 472, 473
null hypothesis, 472, 473
point estimate, 469
rejection region, 472, 473
right-tailed test, 471–472
test statistic, 471, 472, 473
two-tailed test, 472–473
Populations
defined, 3, 10–18
illustrated, 11
mean of paired difference for, 418–424
normally distributed, 284–286
not normally distributed, 286–288
number of observations in, 47
samples versus, 10–18
target, 10
Positive linear relationship, 511
Positive test result, 384
Power of the test, 350
Predicted value of y, 507
Prediction interval
defined, 542
Minitab, 551
Preliminary samples, 333
Primary units, 17
Probability
approximating by relative frequency, 137, 138
calculating, of complementary events, 148
calculating, of compound event, 136
calculating, of simple event, 135–136
calculating, to left of value of x, 245
calculating, to right of value of x, 245
calculating, with binomial formula, 197
calculating, with Poisson formula, 208–209
classical, 135–136
classical probability rule to find, 135
conceptual approaches to, 135–139
conditional, 142, 154
defined, 3, 129, 133–134
of events for discrete random variable, 184–185
finding with binomial table, 198–200
first property of, 134
joint, 150–154
left-tail (Excel), 273
left-tail (Minitab), 271
left-tail (TI-84), 269–270
marginal, 141, 159, 161
odds and, 168–169
range, 134
relative frequency concept of, 136
required, computing, 259
right-tail (Excel), 273
right-tail (Minitab), 271–272
right-tail (TI-84), 270
of sample mean in an interval (n ≥ 30), 
291–292
of sample mean in an interval (normal 
population), 290–291
sample proportion is an interval, 299–300
Polygons
defined, 49, 50
frequency, 49
Pooled sample proportion, 428
Pooled standard deviation of two samples, 404
Population distribution
normal, 284–286
not normal, 286–288
sampling distribution of x and, 284, 287
Population mean
calculating for grouped data, 97–98
calculating for ungrouped data, 79
confidence interval for, 315–316
confidence interval for, using 
t distribution, 327–329
constructing 95% confidence interval for, 327–328
constructing 99% confidence interval 
for, 328–329
estimation of (population standard deviation 
known), 315–323
estimation of (population standard deviation 
known, Excel), 343–344
estimation of (population standard deviation 
known, Minitab), 342
estimation of (population standard deviation not 
known), 324–330
estimation of (population standard deviation not 
known, Excel), 344
estimation of (population standard deviation not 
known, Minitab), 342–343
estimation of (σ known, TI-84), 341
estimation of (σ not known, TI-84), 341
hypothesis tests (σ known), 354–367
hypothesis tests, σ known (Excel), 392
hypothesis tests, σ known (Minitab), 390–391
hypothesis tests, σ known (TI-84), 389
hypothesis tests (σ unknown), 367–375
hypothesis tests, σ unknown (Excel), 393
hypothesis tests, σ unknown (Minitab), 391
hypothesis tests, σ unknown (TI-84), 390
sample mean as consistent estimator, 302
sample size in estimation of, 321–322
true, 312
Population parameters, 96, 275. See also 
Parameters
Population probability distribution, 276
Population proportion
calculating, 294
confidence interval, 331
defined, 294
error of estimation for, 334
estimation (Excel), 344
estimation (Minitab), 343
estimation (TI-84), 341–342
finding point estimate for, 332
hypothesis tests (Excel), 393–394
hypothesis tests (large samples), 375–381
hypothesis tests (Minitab), 391–392
hypothesis tests (TI-84), 390
sample size determination, 333–335
true population proportion, 312
Population regression line, 506, 540
Population standard deviation
confidence interval, 469
hypothesis tests about population mean, 
354–367
population mean estimation and, 315–323
Percentage distribution
bar graph for, 41
constructing, 47
defined, 39
example, 39
pie chart for, 42
qualitative data, 41
quantitative data, 47–48
Percentage histograms
defined, 48
illustrated, 49
Percentage polygons, 49
Percentile rank
defined, 111
finding for data value, 111–112
Percentiles
calculating, 110–111
defined, 110
finding for a data set, 111
illustrated, 110
kth, 110, 111
Perfect negative linear correlation, 528
Perfect positive linear correlation, 528
Permutations
concept of, 167
defined, 167
notation, 167
number of, 167–168
Pictograms, 67
Pie charts
creating (Excel), 75
creating (Minitab), 73
defined, 41
for grouped data, 73
illustrated, 42
for ungrouped data, 73
Placebo effect, 21
Point estimates
defined, 313
finding for population mean, 317–318
finding for population proportion, 332
margin of error, 314
population variance, 469
Poisson parameter, 207
Poisson probabilities table
defined, 209
using, 209–212
Poisson probability distribution
calculating (Excel), 225
calculating (Minitab), 223
calculating (TI-84), 219
calculating probabilities with, 208–209
conditions to apply, 206–207
constructing, 211–212
defined, 206
as email model, 262
examples qualifying for application of, 
207
formula, 207
interval equality, 208
mean of, 212
occurrences, 206
parameter of, 207
standard deviation of, 212
using, 207–208
using as approximation to binomial 
distribution, 209
www.ebook3000.com

I10
Index 
selecting (Excel), 34–35
selecting (Minitab), 33
selecting (TI-84), 30–31
Random sampling
cluster sampling, 17
simple, 16
stratified, 16–17
systematic, 16
techniques, 16–17
Random variables
binomial, 195
continuous, 181, 227, 228–241
defined, 180
discrete, 180–181, 182–193
sample mean as, 278
Randomization, 19
Range
calculating for ungrouped data, 90–91
defined, 90
event probability, 134
as nonresistant measure, 91
for p-value, 368
Rare events, 134
Raw data, 37
Rectangular histogram, 56
Regression analysis, 533–538
Regression line
causality and, 527
estimated, 536
finding, 535
least squares, 507–510
population, 506, 540
random errors and, 508
sample, 540
Regression model
assumptions of, 513–514
cautions in using, 514–515
confidence interval, 540–541
defined, 503
degrees of freedom, 541
deterministic, 505
equation of, 505
estimated, 506
for estimating mean value of y, 539–541
Excel, 551–552
extrapolation and, 515
interpretation of a and b, 510–511
least squares regression line, 507–510
Minitab, 550
notes on use of, 515
population, 539
for predicting particular value of y, 541–543
prediction interval, 542
random error term, 505, 506
TI-84, 548–549
use of, 502, 539
using, 539–543
Regression of y on x, 506
Regression sum of squares (SSR), 521
Rejection region. See also Nonrejection region
defined, 348
determining (population proportion), 379–380, 
381
determining, hypothesis tests about population 
mean (σ known), 360–361, 363
determining, hypothesis tests about population 
mean (σ unknown), 371–372, 373
difference between two population proportions, 
429, 431
hypothesis tests about population mean 
(population standard deviation known), 
355–359
hypothesis tests about population mean 
(population standard deviation not known), 
368–371
hypothesis tests about population proportion, 
376–380
left-tailed test (population standard deviation 
not known), 369–371
mean of paired difference for population, 422, 424
null hypothesis, 356
for one-tailed test with normal distribution, 
358–359
regression analysis, 537, 538
right-tailed test (population proportion), 377–379
slope, 526–527
steps, 357
two-tailed test (population proportion), 376–377
two-tailed test (population standard deviation 
not known), 368–369
two-tailed test with normal distribution, 357–358
Q
Qualitative data
defined, 8
finding mode for, 85
frequency distributions, 37–39
graphical presentation of, 40–42
raw data, 37
relative frequency and percentage distributions, 
39–40
Qualitative variables, 8
Quantitative data
defined, 7–8
dotplots, 64–66
frequency distribution table construction, 45–47
frequency distributions, 43–45
percentage distribution, 47–48
relative frequency distribution, 47–48
with stem-and-leaf displays, 60–64
Quantitative variables
continuous, 7–8
defined, 7
discrete, 7
Quartiles
defined, 108
finding, 108–110
finding for odd number of data values, 110
first quartile, 108, 113
illustrated, 108
second quartile, 108
third quartile, 108, 113
Quota samples, 13
R
Random error term, 505, 506
Random number generation
Excel, 176–177
Minitab, 175
TI-84, 174
Random samples
defined, 12
example, 12
as representative samples, 13
Probability (continued)
sample proportion is less than a certain value, 301
second property of, 134
subjective, 139
of successes, 196, 200–201
between two points left of mean, 249–250
between two points right of mean, 250
between two values (Excel), 273
between two values (Minitab), 271
between two values (TI-84), 270
of union of two events, 159
of union of two events (two-way table), 
158–159
of union of two mutually exclusive events, 
160–161
of union of two mutually exclusive events 
(two-way table), 160
x is less than value to right of mean, 248–249
Probability density function, 228
Probability distribution
binomial, 193–203
characteristics of, 183
conditions, 183
conditions, verifying, 184
constructing, 185–186
continuous, 228–241
defined, 182
of discrete random variable, 182–187
histogram for, 183, 200, 201
hypergeometric, 203–205
normal, 232–234
Poisson, 206–213
population, 276, 290–292
writing, 182–183
writing, of discrete random variable, 191
Probability distribution curve
area under, 229
of continuous random variable, 228
total area under, 229
Probability models, use of, 168
Probability theory, 129
Proportion
concept of, 293
population. See population proportion
sample. See sample proportion
sampling error, 294
Pseudo polls, 13
P-value
calculating, 355
defined, 355
left-tailed test, calculating, 370
one-tailed test, calculating, 359
one-tailed test, illustrated, 356
population proportion, calculating, 377, 378
range for, 368
right-tailed test, 356
test of independence, 475
two-tailed test, calculating, 357–358, 368–369
two-tailed test, illustrated, 356
P-value approach
defined, 353, 355
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 known), 402
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 unknown and unequal), 414–415
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 unknown but equal), 407, 409

Index
I11
Sampling distribution of the sample proportion
applications of, 299–302
approximating (Excel), 309
approximating (Minitab), 307–308
approximating (TI-84), 306
defined, 295
illustrated, 295–296
for large sample, 331
shape of, 297–298
Sampling distribution of x
applications of, 289–292
approximating (Excel), 308–309
approximating (Minitab), 307
approximating (TI-84), 305–306
central limit theorem and, 289
defined, 276
mean of, 281, 291
observations of, 282
population distribution and, 284, 287
population has normal distribution, 284–286
population not normally distributed, 287–288
shape of, 283–289
spread of, 282
standard deviation of, 282, 291
Sampling distributions
defined, 275, 277
difference between two population proportions, 
426
difference between two sample means, 397–399
mean of paired difference for sample, 418
from normally distributed population, 284–286
from population not normally distributed, 
286–288
of sample variance, 469
of slope b, 524
Sampling error
defined, 13–14, 278, 294
example, 280
illustrated, 279
occurrence of, 14, 278
proportion, 294
Sampling frame, 14
Scatter diagram, 506–507
Scatterplots, 506–507, 544–545
Second quartile, 108
Selection error or bias, 14–15
Short-cut formulas
defined, 91
variance and standard deviation (grouped data), 
99–100
variance and standard deviation (ungrouped 
data), 92
Significance level
defined, 314, 349
determining value of, 359
of the test, 349
Significantly different, 363, 365
Simple events. See also Events
calculating probability of, 135–136
defined, 131
example of, 132, 133
illustrated, 132
sum of probabilities of, 134
Simple linear regression
assumptions of, 513–514
cautions in using, 514–515
degrees of freedom, 518
population mean difference, 279–280
probability in an interval (n ≥ 30), 291–292
probability in an interval (normal population), 
290–291
sampling distribution of, 276–278
standard deviation of, 318
z value calculation for, 356
Sample proportion
central limit theorem, 297, 301
defined, 294, 331
frequency distribution of, 296
mean of, 296, 299
pooled, 428
probability, is an interval, 299–300
probability, less than a certain value, 301
sampling distribution of, 295–296, 331
sampling distribution of, applications of, 
299–302
sampling distribution of, shape of, 297–298
standard deviation of, 297, 299
z value for, 300
Sample regression line, 540
Sample size
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 unknown but equal) and, 409
for estimation of the mean, 321–322
for estimation of the population proportion, 
333–335
goodness-of-fit test and, 453
one-way ANOVA and, 494
paired samples and, 417
predetermined margin of error, 321–322
t distribution and, 329
width of confidence interval and, 321
Sample spaces, 130
Sample statistics. See Statistics
Sample surveys
defined, 11
reasons for using, 12
Sample variance
calculating for grouped data, 101–102
sampling distribution of, 469
value of, 469
Samples
convenience, 13
defined, 3, 11
dependent, 397–399
illustrated, 11
independent, 397–399
judgment, 13
nonrandom, 12–13
number of observations in, 47
paired, 416–425
pooled standard deviation of, 404
populations versus, 10–18
preliminary, 333
quota, 13
random, 12–13
representative, 11
variance between, 487
variance within, 487
Sampling
cluster, 17
quota, 13
random, 16–17
with replacement, 12
without replacement, 12
difference between two population means 
(σ1 and σ2 known), 401–402, 414
difference between two population means 
(σ1 and σ2 unknown but equal), 406–407, 408
difference between two population proportions, 
429, 430
goodness-of-fit test, 454, 456
illustrated, 348
linear correlation coefficient, 531, 538
mean of paired difference for population, 
421–422, 423, 424
one-way ANOVA, 487, 491, 492
population variance, 472, 473
regression analysis, 536–537
size of, 349
slope, 526
test of homogeneity, 466
test of independence, 462, 464
Relative frequencies
as approximation of probability, 137
cumulative, 55
defined, 39
sum of, 40
Relative frequency concept of probability, 
136–139
Relative frequency densities, 228
Relative frequency distribution
bar graph for, 41
constructing, 47
defined, 39
example, 39
qualitative data, 41
quantitative data, 47–48
Relative frequency histograms, 48
Relative frequency polygons, 49
Representative samples
defined, 11
sample representation, 25
Resistant summary measures, 83
Response error or bias, 15
Right-tail probability calculation
Excel, 273
Minitab, 271–272
TI-84, 270
Right-tailed test. See also Hypothesis tests
critical-value approach, 372–373
decisions, 352
defined, 350, 351
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 unknown but equal), 408–409
difference between two population proportions, 
428–429
illustrated, 353
null and alternative hypotheses, 353
population variance, 471–472
p-value approach (population proportion), 
377–379
S
Sample mean
bias and, 302
calculating for grouped data, 99
calculating for ungrouped data, 79
defined, 276
difference, 397–398
as estimator, 281
frequency distribution of, 277
www.ebook3000.com

I12
Index 
finding area in left tail, 247
probability to the left of value of x, 245
probability to the right of value of x, 245
Statistically not significantly different, 363
Statistically significantly different, 363
Statistics
applied, 2
defined, 2, 96, 275
descriptive, 3, 36
examples, 2
health-related studies and, 432–433
inferential, 3–4, 311
randomness and, 277
summary, calculating (TI-84), 124–125
summary, creating (Excel), 126–127
summary, creating (Minitab), 125–126
theoretical, 2
types of, 2–4
as unbiased estimator, 281
Stem-and-leaf display
advantage of, 61
condensing, 62
creating (Minitab), 74
defined, 60
grouped, 62–63
illustrated, 62, 63
leaf ranking, 61
leaves, 61
in presentation of quantitative data, 60–64
procedure for constructing, 60–61
with split stems, 63
stems, 61, 63
for three- and four-digit numbers, 62
Stems. See also Stem-and-leaf display
defined, 61
no leaves, 63
split, 63
Strata, 17
Stratified random sample, 16–17
Strong negative linear correlation, 529
Strong positive linear correlation, 529
Student’s t distribution. See T distribution
Sturge’s formula, 45
Subjective probability, 139
Successes
defined, 193
probability of, 196, 200–201
total number of, 196
Sum of values in a column
calculating (Excel), 34
calculating (Minitab), 32–33
Summary statistics
calculating (Excel), 126–127
calculating (Minitab), 125–126
calculating (TI-84), 124–125
Summation notation
defined, 22
examples of, 22–24
two variables, 23
on variable, 23
Sure (certain) events, 134
Symmetric frequency curves, 56
Symmetric histograms
defined, 55
illustrated, 56
mean, median and mode for, 87
Systematic random sampling, 16
difference between two population 
proportions, 426
difference between two sample means, 
397–399, 411
for grouped data, 99–102
interpretation of, 192
mean of paired difference for sample, 
417–418
as nonresistant summary measure, 94
normal distribution, 234
normally distributed population, 285–286
obtaining, 91
of Poisson probability distribution, 212
pooled sample, 404
population, 315–323
population not normally distributed, 
287–288
of sample mean, 318
of sample proportion, 297, 299, 331
of sampling distribution of x, 282, 291
short-cut formula (grouped data), 99–100
short-cut formula (ungrouped data), 91–92
slope, 524
standard normal distribution, 234
use of, 103–107
values as never negative, 93
Standard deviation of discrete random variable
calculating, 190–191
defined, 188
interpretation of, 192
Standard deviation of errors
calculation example, 519
calculation of, 518–519
defined, 518
degrees of freedom and, 518
Standard normal distribution
area under, 235, 236, 237
converting to z value, 242–243
curve illustration, 235
defined, 234
finding area between a negative z and 
z = 0, 236–237
finding area between two positive values of z, 
238–239
finding area between z = 0 and value of z, 240
finding area in the right and left tails, 
237–238
finding area left of z, 241
finding area to left of a positive z value, 
235–236
finding area to right of a negative value 
of z, 239
mean, 234
standard deviation, 234
t distribution and, 325
z values, 235
Standardizing a normal distribution
converting x values to z values, 242–243
defined, 242
finding area between mean and point 
to right, 244
finding area between two points on different 
sides of, 244
finding area between two x values (different 
sides of mean), 246–247
finding area between two x values 
(less than mean), 246
Simple linear regression (continued)
deterministic model, 505
estimated regression model, 506
extrapolation and, 515
interpretation of a and b, 510–511
least squares regression line, 507–510
model, 505–506
notes on use of, 515
overview, 503–505
random error terms, 505, 506
scatter diagram, 506–507
Simple random sampling
defined, 16
sample selection, 16
uses and misuses, 25
Simple regression, 503
Single-valued classes
bar graph, 54
constructing frequency distribution using, 
53–54
defined, 52
Skewed histograms, 56
Skewed-to-the-left histogram
defined, 56
frequency curve, 56
illustrated, 56
mean, median and mode for, 87
Skewed-to-the-right histogram
defined, 56
frequency curve, 56
illustrated, 56
mean, median and mode for, 87
Slope
confidence interval, 524–525
defined, 504
Excel, 552
hypothesis testing, 525–527
illustrated, 505
inferences about, 524–527
interval estimation, 524–525
mean, 524
Minitab, 551
p-value approach, 526–527
sampling distribution, 524
standard deviation, 524
test statistic, 525, 526
TI-84, 549–550
true value of, 506
Specification, 384
Specificity of a test, 385
Split stems, 63
Spread, 89, 106
SSB (between-samples sum of squares), 
488
SSE (error sum of squares), 508, 521
SSR (regression sum of squares), 521
SST (total sum of squares), 488, 519–520, 
522
SSW (within-samples sum of squares), 488
Standard deviation
basic formulas (grouped data), 121–122
basic formulas (ungrouped data), 91, 
120–121
of binomial distribution, 201–202
calculating for grouped data, 100–102
calculating for ungrouped data, 92–93
defined, 91

Index
I13
hypothesis testing, difference between two 
population means (σ1 and σ2 unknown and 
unequal), 438
hypothesis testing, difference between two 
population means (σ1 and σ2 unknown but 
equal), 437–438
hypothesis testing, difference between two 
population proportions, 439
hypothesis testing, mean of paired difference for 
population, 438
independence/homogeneity test, 479–480
left-tail probability calculation, 269–270
one-way ANOVA test, 499
operations with lists, 30
Poisson probability calculation, 219
population mean estimation (σ known), 341
population mean estimation (σ not 
known), 341
population proportion estimation, 341–342
probability between two values, 270
regression equation, finding, 548–549
right-tail probability calculation, 270
sampling distribution of the sample proportion 
approximation, 306
sampling distribution of x approximation, 
305–306
selecting random samples, 30–31
simulating tosses of a coin, 174
simulating tosses of a die, 174
summary statistics calculation, 124–125
10! calculation, 174
20P3 calculation, 174
Time-series data
defined, 9
example of, 10
Total outcomes, finding, 162
Total sum of squares (SST), 488, 519–520, 
522
Treatment groups, 20
Treatments
ANOVA, 488
defined, 19
Tree diagrams
defined, 130
drawing, 131
illustrated examples, 130, 131
Trials. See also Binomial experiments
defined, 193
failure, 193
as independent, 193
n identical, 193
outcomes, 193, 194
success, 193
total number of, 196
Trimmed mean, 85
True population mean, 312
True population proportion, 312
Truncating axes, 57
20P3 calculation
Excel, 177
Minitab, 176
TI-84, 174
Two events
joint probability, 153–154
joint probability (two-way table), 152
marginal probability of, 159, 161
union of, 156–157
test statistic, 460, 462–463, 464
TI-84, 479–480
Test statistic
computed value of, 361
defined, 359, 368, 376
difference between two population proportions, 
428, 429, 430–431
difference between two sample means, 401, 
402, 406, 407, 409, 414
goodness-of-fit test, 454–455, 456
hypothesis tests about population mean 
(σ known), 359, 361, 363
hypothesis tests about population mean 
(σ unknown), 368, 372, 373
hypothesis tests about population proportion, 
376, 380, 381
linear correlation coefficient, 530, 531, 538
mean of paired difference for sample, 420, 422, 
423
one-way ANOVA, 487–490, 491, 492–493
population variance, 471, 472, 473
regression analysis, 537
slope, 525, 526
for t, 368
test of homogeneity, 466–467
test of independence, 460, 462–463, 464
Theoretical statistics, 2
Third quartile
in box-and-whisker plot, 113
defined, 108
TI-84
binomial probability calculation, 218
binomial probability distribution 
preparation, 218–219
confidence interval for slope, constructing, 549
creating a box-and-whisker plot, 125
creating frequency histogram, 71–72
creating named list, 30
cumulative binomial probability calculation, 218
cumulative Poisson probability 
calculation, 219–220
determining z when probability is 
known, 270
entering and editing data, 29
estimating difference between two population 
means (σ1 and σ2 known), 437
estimating difference between two population 
means (σ1 and σ2 unknown and unequal), 438
estimating difference between two population 
means (σ1 and σ2 unknown but equal), 437
estimating difference between two population 
proportions, 438
estimating mean of paired difference 
for population, 438
5C3 calculation, 174
generating random numbers, 174
goodness-of-fit test, 479
hypergeometric probability calculation, 219
hypothesis test about population mean 
(σ known), 389
hypothesis test about population mean 
(σ unknown), 390
hypothesis test about population proportion, 390
hypothesis testing about slope or correlation, 
549–550
hypothesis testing, difference between two 
population means (σ1 and σ2 known), 437
T
T distribution
confidence interval for population mean using, 
327–329
curve shape, 325
defined, 324, 325
degrees of freedom and, 325
large sample size and, 329
left tail, 325
right tail, 325
standard normal distribution and, 325
symmetric, 326
t value, 327
table, 326, 327, 329
in tests of hypothesis, 373–374
Tails
finding area in, 237–238
heavy, histogram of, 267
heavy, probability plot, 267
left, calculating probability (Excel), 273
left, calculating probability (Minitab), 271
left, calculating probability (TI-84), 269–270
left, finding area in, 247
left, t distribution, 325
of normal distribution curve, 233–234
right, calculating probability (Excel), 273
right, calculating probability (Minitab), 
271–272
right, calculating probability (TI-84), 270
right, t distribution, 325
Tails of the test. See also Hypothesis tests
defined, 350–351
left-tailed. See left-tailed test
one-tailed, 352, 356, 358–359
right-tailed. See right-tailed test
two-tailed. See two-tailed test
Target population, 10
10! calculation
Excel, 177
Minitab, 175
TI-84, 174
Test of homogeneity. See also Chi-square tests
alternative hypothesis, 466
defined, 465
Excel, 482
Minitab, 480–481
nonrejection region, 466
null hypothesis, 466
observed frequencies, 465
performing, 465–467
rejection region, 466
test statistic, 466
TI-84, 479–480
Test of independence. See also 
Chi-square tests
alternative hypothesis, 462, 463
defined, 459
degrees of freedom, 460
Excel, 482
expected frequencies, 460–461
making (2 × 2 table), 463–464
making (2 × 3 table), 462–463
Minitab, 480–481
nonrejection region, 464, 466–467
null hypothesis, 462, 463
p-value, 475
rejection region, 462, 464
www.ebook3000.com

I14
Index 
Whiskers, 114
Width of confidence interval
confidence level and, 321
decreasing, 320, 329
defined, 320
sample size and, 321
Within-samples sum of squares (SSW), 488
X
x values
calculating probability to the left of, 245
calculating probability to the right of, 245
converting to z value, 242–243
finding area between (different sides 
of mean), 246–247
finding area between (less than mean), 246
finding area left of, that is less than mean, 
251
finding for normal distribution, 254
finding when area in left tail is known, 
254–255
finding when area in right tail is known, 
255–256
z value for, 243
Y
y-intercept
defined, 504
illustrated, 505
true value of, 506
Z
z values
calculating for sample mean, 356
converting x value to, 242–243
defined, 235
determining when probability is 
known (Excel), 273
determining when probability is known 
(Minitab), 270
determining when probability is 
known (TI-84), 270
finding area between, 236–237
finding area between two positive, 238–239
finding area left of, 241
finding area left of positive, 235–236
finding when area in left tail is 
known, 254
finding when area in right tail is known, 253
finding when area to left of z is known, 
252–253
for mean, 242
observed, 356, 361, 376
sample proportion, 300
for x value, 243
range calculation for, 90–91
standard deviation calculation for, 92–93
variance calculation for, 92–93
Uniform histograms, 56
Unimodal data sets, 84
Union of events
defined, 156
illustrated, 157
probability of, 159
probability of (two-way table), 158–159
Upper boundary, 52
Upper inner fence, 113
Upper limit, interval estimation, 314
Upper outer fence, 114
V
Variability, 116
Variables
continuous, 7–8
defined, 6
dependent, 503
discrete, 7
examples of, 6
explanatory, 503
independent, 503
missing or omitted, 506
qualitative, 8
quantitative, 7–8
random, 180–181
types of, 7–9
Variance
basic formulas (grouped data), 121–122
basic formulas (ungrouped data), 91, 120–121
calculating, 92–93
calculation steps, 93
defined, 91
of discrete random variables, 190
for grouped data, 99–102
measurement units of, 94
as nonresistant summary measure, 94
population, 100–101, 469–474
sample, 101–102
within samples, 487
between samples, 487
short-cut formula (grouped data), 99–100
short-cut formula (ungrouped data), 91–92
values as never negative, 93
Variation, 89
Voluntary response error or bias, 15–16
W
Weak negative linear correlation, 529
Weak positive linear correlation, 529
Weighted mean
calculating for ungrouped data, 86–87
defined, 86
Two-tailed test. See also Hypothesis tests
critical-value approach (population proportion), 
379–380
critical-value approach (σ known), 360–362
critical-value approach (σ not known), 
371–372
defined, 350–351
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 known), 401–402
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 unknown and unequal), 413–414
difference between two population means (σ1 
and σ2 unknown but equal), 406–407
difference between two population proportions, 
430–431
illustrated, 351
mean of paired difference for population, 
422–424
with normal distribution, p-value approach, 
357–358
null and alternative hypotheses, 351
population variance, 472–473
p-value approach (population proportion), 
376–377
p-value approach (σ known), 357–358
p-value approach (σ not known), 368–369
p-value for, 356
Two-way tables
conditional probability, 142, 143–144
defined, 141
illustrated, 141
joint probability of two events, 152
probability of union of two events, 158–159
probability of union of two mutually exclusive 
events, 160
two dependent events, 146
Type I error
defined, 349
as false positive, 385
Type II error, 350
Typical values, 78
U
Unbiased estimators, 281, 297
Uncertainty, evaluation of, 129
Unemployment rate, 337
Ungrouped data
basic formulas for variance and standard 
deviation, 91, 120–121
defined, 37, 78
mean calculation for, 78
measures of dispersion for, 89–97
median calculation for, 81–83
mode calculation for, 84–85
pie chart for, 73
population variance calculation for, 94

Chapter 2 • Organizing and Graphing Data
• Relative frequency of a class = f∕∑f
• Percentage of a class = (Relative frequency) × 100%
• Class midpoint or mark = (Upper limit + Lower limit)∕2
• Class width = Upper boundary − Lower boundary
• Cumulative relative frequency
=
Cumulative frequency
Total observations in the data set
• Cumulative percentage
= (Cumulative relative frequency) × 100%
Chapter 3 • Numerical Descriptive Measures
• Mean for ungrouped data:  μ = ∑x∕N  and  x = ∑x∕n
•  Mean for grouped data:  μ = ∑mf∕N  and  x = ∑mf∕n 
where m is the midpoint and f is the frequency of a class
•  Weighted Mean for ungrouped data = ∑xw∕∑w
•  k% Trimmed Mean =  Mean of the values after dropping 
k% of the values from each end of 
the ranked data
•  Median for ungrouped data
= Value of the middle term in a ranked data set
• Range = Largest value − Smallest value
• Variance for ungrouped data:
σ 2 =
∑x2 −(
(∑x)2
N
)
N
 and s2 =
∑x2 −(
(∑x)2
n
)
n −1
  where σ2 is the population variance and s2 is the sample  variance
• Standard deviation for ungrouped data:
σ = R
∑x2 −(
(∑x)2
N
)
N
 and s = R
∑x2 −(
(∑x)2
n
)
n −1
 where σ and s are the population and sample standard devia-
tions, respectively
• Coefficient of variation = σ
μ × 100% or s
x × 100%
• Variance for grouped data:
σ 2 =
∑m2f −(
(∑mf)2
N
)
N
 and s2 =
∑m2f −(
(∑mf)2
n
)
n −1
• Standard deviation for grouped data:
σ = R
∑m2f −(
(∑mf)2
N
)
N
  and  s = R
∑m2f −(
(∑mf)2
n
)
n −1
• Chebyshev’s theorem:
 For any number k greater than 1, at least (1 − 1∕k2) of the 
 values for any distribution lie within k standard deviations 
of the mean.
• Empirical rule:
 For a specific bell-shaped distribution, about 68% of the 
observations fall in the interval (μ − σ) to (μ + σ), about 
95% fall in the interval (μ − 2σ) to (μ + 2σ), and about 
99.7% fall in the interval (μ − 3σ) to (μ + 3σ).
• Q1 =  First quartile given by the value of the middle term 
among the (ranked) observations that are less than the 
median
 Q2 =  Second quartile given by the value of the middle term 
in a ranked data set
 Q3 =  Third quartile given by the value of the middle term 
among the (ranked) observations that are greater than 
the median
• Interquartile range:  IQR = Q3 − Q1
• The kth percentile:
Pk = Value of the (
k n
100)th term in a ranked data set
• Percentile rank of xi
=
Number of values less than xi
Total number of values in the data set × 100
Chapter 4 • Probability
• Classical probability rule for a simple event:
P(Ei) =
1
Total number of outcomes
• Classical probability rule for a compound event:
P(A) = Number of outcomes in A
Total number of outcomes
• Relative frequency as an approximation of probability:
P(A) = f
n
• Conditional probability of an event:
P(A∣B) = P(A and B)
P(B)  and P(B∣A) = P(A and B)
P(A)
• Condition for independence of events:
P(A) = P(A∣B) and∕or P(B) = P(B∣A)
• For complementary events: P(A) + P(A) = 1
• Multiplication rule for dependent events:
P(A and B) = P(A) P(B∣A)
• Multiplication rule for independent events:
P(A and B) = P(A) P(B)
KEY FORMULAS
Prem S. Mann • Introductory Statistics, Ninth Edition
www.ebook3000.com

• Population proportion: p = X∕N
• Sample proportion: pˆ = x∕n
• Mean of pˆ: μpˆ = p
• Standard deviation of pˆ when n∕N ≤.05: σpˆ = √pq∕n
• z value for pˆ: z = pˆ −p
σpˆ
Chapter 8 • Estimation of the Mean and Proportion
• Point estimate of μ = x
•  Confidence interval for μ using the normal distribution 
when σ is known:
x ± zσ x  where  σ x = σ∕√n
•  Confidence interval for μ using the t distribution when σ is 
not known:
x ± ts x  where s x = s∕√n
• Margin of error of the estimate for μ:
E = zσx or t sx
• Determining sample size for estimating μ:  
n = z 2σ2∕E2
• Confidence interval for p for a large sample:
pˆ ± z spˆ  where spˆ = √pˆqˆ∕n
• Margin of error of the estimate for p:
E = z spˆ  where spˆ = √pˆqˆ∕n
• Determining sample size for estimating p: 
n = z 2pq∕E2
Chapter 9 • Hypothesis Tests about the Mean 
and Proportion
•  Test statistic z for a test of hypothesis about μ using the 
normal distribution when σ is known:
z = x −μ
σ x  where σ x =
σ
√n
•  Test statistic for a test of hypothesis about μ using the t dis-
tribution when σ is not known:
t = x −μ
s x  where s x =
s
√n
•  Test statistic for a test of hypothesis about p for a large 
 sample:
z = pˆ −p
σpˆ  where σpˆ = A
pq
n
• Joint probability of two mutually exclusive events:
P(A and B) = 0
• Addition rule for mutually nonexclusive events:
P(A or B) = P(A) + P(B) −P(A and B)
• Addition rule for mutually exclusive events:
P(A or B) = P(A) + P(B)
• n factorial:  n! =  n(n − 1)(n − 2) . . . 3 · 2 · 1
• Number of combinations of n items selected x at a time:
nCx =
n!
x!(n −x)!
• Number of permutations of n items selected x at a time:
n Px =
n!
(n −x)!
Chapter 5 • Discrete Random Variables and Their 
Probability Distributions
• Mean of a discrete random variable x:  μ = ∑xP(x)
• Standard deviation of a discrete random variable x:
σ = √∑x 2P(x) −μ2
• Binomial probability formula:  P(x) = nCx  px q n−x
• Mean and standard deviation of the binomial distribution:
μ = np and σ = √npq
• Hypergeometric probability formula:
P(x) =
r Cx N−r Cn−x
N Cn
• Poisson probability formula:  P(x) = λx e−λ
x!
•  Mean, variance, and standard deviation of the Poisson prob-
ability distribution:
μ = λ, σ2 = λ, and σ = √λ
Chapter 6 • Continuous Random Variables 
and the Normal Distribution
• z value for an x value:  z = x −μ
σ
• Value of x when μ, σ, and z are known:  x = μ + zσ
Chapter 7 • Sampling Distributions
• Mean of x : μx = μ
• Standard deviation of x when n∕N ≤.05:  σx = σ∕√n
• z value for x : z = x −μ
σx

• For two paired or matched samples:
  Sample mean for paired differences: d = ∑d∕n
  Sample standard deviation for paired differences:
sd = R
∑d 2 −(∑d)2
n
n −1
   Mean and standard deviation of the sampling distribution 
of d
μd = μd and s d = sd
 ∕√n
  Confidence interval for μd using the t distribution:
d ± ts d where s d = sd ∕√n
   Test statistic for a test of hypothesis about μd using the t 
 distribution:
t = d −μd
s d
•  For two large and independent samples, confidence interval 
for p1 − p2:
(pˆ1 −pˆ2) ± z spˆ1−pˆ2  where  spˆ1−pˆ2 = B
pˆ1qˆ1
n1
+ pˆ2qˆ2
n2
•  For two large and independent samples, for a test of 
 hypothesis about p1 − p2 with H0: p1 − p2 = 0:
  Pooled sample proportion:
p = x1 + x2
n1 + n2 or n1pˆ1 + n2pˆ2
n1 + n2
   Estimate of the standard deviation of pˆ1 −pˆ2:
spˆ1−pˆ2 = Bp q (
1
n1
+ 1
n2)
  Test statistic:  z = ( pˆ1 −pˆ2) −( p1 −p2)
spˆ1−pˆ2
Chapter 11 • Chi-Square Tests
• Expected frequency for a category for a goodness-of-fit 
test:
E = np
• Degrees of freedom for a goodness-of-fit test:
df = k − 1  where k is the number of categories
•  Expected frequency for a cell for an independence or homo-
geneity test:
E = (Row total)(Column total)
Sample size
•  Degrees of freedom for a test of independence or 
 homogeneity:
df = (R −1)(C −1)
  where R and C are the total number of rows and columns, 
 respectively, in the contingency table
Chapter 10 • Estimation and Hypothesis Testing: 
Two Populations
• Mean of the sampling distribution of x1 −x2:
μx1−x2 = μ1 −μ2
•  Confidence interval for μ1 − μ2 for two independent 
 samples using the normal distribution when σ1 and σ2 are 
known:
( x1 −x2) ± zσ x1−x2  where  σ x1−x2 = B
σ2
1
n1
+ σ2
2
n2
•  Test statistic for a test of hypothesis about μ1 − μ2 for two  
independent samples using the normal distribution when σ1 
and σ2 are known:
z = ( x1 −x2) −(μ1 −μ2)
σ x1−x2
•  For two independent samples taken from two populations 
with equal but unknown standard deviations:
  Pooled standard deviation:
sp = B
(n1 −1)s2
1 + (n2 −1)s2
2
n1 + n2 −2
   Estimate of the standard deviation of x1 −x2:
s x1−x2 = sp A
1
n1
+ 1
n2
   Confidence interval for μ1 − μ2 using the t distribution:
(  x1 −x2) ± ts x1−x2
  Test statistic using the t distribution:  
t = (  x1 −x2) −(μ1 −μ2)
s x1−x2
•  For two independent samples selected from two popula-
tions with unequal and unknown standard deviations:
Degrees of freedom: df =
(
s2
1
n1
+ s2
2
n2)
2
(
s2
1
n1)
2
n1 −1 +
(
s2
2
n2)
2
n2 −1
Estimate of the standard deviation of x1 −x2:
sx1−x2 = B
s2
1
n1
+ s2
2
n2
Confidence interval for μ1 − μ2 using the t distribution:
(  x1 −x2) ± tsx1−x2
  Test statistic using the t distribution:
t = (  x1 −x2) −(μ1 −μ2)
s x1−x2
www.ebook3000.com

• Sum of squares of xy, xx, and yy:
 SSxy = ∑xy −(∑x)(∑y)
n
 SSxx = ∑x2 −(∑x)2
n  and SSyy = ∑y2 −(∑y)2
n
• Least squares estimates of A and B:
b = SSxy  SSxx and a = y −bx
• Standard deviation of the sample errors:
se = B
SSyy −b SSxy
n −2
• Error sum of squares:  SSE = ∑e2 = ∑(y −yˆ)2
• Total sum of squares: SST = ∑y2 −(∑y)2
n
• Regression sum of squares:  SSR = SST − SSE
• Coefficient of determination:  r 2 = b SSxy ∕SSyy
• Confidence interval for B:
b ± tsb where sb = se∕√SSxx
• Test statistic for a test of hypothesis about B:  t = b −B
sb
• Linear correlation coefficient: r =
SSxy
√SSxx SSyy
• Test statistic for a test of hypothesis about ρ:
t = r A
n −2
1 −r 2
• Confidence interval for μy|x:
yˆ ± t syˆm where syˆm = se B
1
n + (x0 −x )2
SSxx
• Prediction interval for yp:
yˆ ± t syˆp where syˆp = se B1 + 1
n + (x0 −x )2
SSxx
Chapter 14 • Multiple Regression
Formulas for Chapter 14 along with the chapter are on the 
Web site for the text.
Chapter 15 • Nonparametric Methods
Formulas for Chapter 15 along with the chapter are on the 
Web site for the text.
•  Test statistic for a goodness-of-fit test and a test of inde-
pendence or homogeneity:
χ 2 = ∑(O −E)2
E
• Confidence interval for the population variance σ2:
(n −1)s 2
χ 2
α∕2  to (n −1)s 2
χ 2
1− α∕2
• Test statistic for a test of hypothesis about σ2:
χ2 = (n −1)s2
σ2
Chapter 12 • Analysis of Variance
Let:
 
k =  the number of different samples 
(or treatments)
 
ni = the size of sample i
 
Ti = the sum of the values in sample i
 
n = the number of values in all samples
     = n1 + n2 + n3 + . . .
 
Σx = the sum of the values in all samples
     = T1 + T2 + T3 + . . .
 
 Σx2 = the sum of the squares of values in all samples
• For the F distribution:
 
Degrees of freedom for the numerator = k − 1
 
Degrees of freedom for the denominator = n − k
• Between-samples sum of squares:
SSB = (
T 2
1
n1
+ T 2
2
n2
+ T 2
3
n3
+ . . .) −(∑x)2
n
• Within-samples sum of squares:
SSW = ∑x2 −(
T 2
1
n1
+ T 2
2
n2
+ T 2
3
n3
+ . . .)
• Total sum of squares:
SST = SSB + SSW = ∑x2 −(∑x)2
n
• Variance between samples:  MSB = SSB∕(k −1)
• Variance within samples:  MSW = SSW∕(n −k)
• Test statistic for a one-way ANOVA test:
F = MSB∕MSW
Chapter 13 • Simple Linear Regression
• Simple linear regression model: y = A + Bx + ϵ
• Estimated simple linear regression model: yˆ = a + bx

 Table IV Standard Normal Distribution Table
The entries in the table on this page give 
the cumulative area under the standard 
normal curve to the left of z with the 
values of z equal to 0 or negative.
   z 
.00 
.01 
.02 
.03 
.04 
.05 
.06 
.07 
.08 
.09
−3.4 
.0003 
.0003 
.0003 
.0003 
.0003 
.0003 
.0003 
.0003 
.0003 
.0002
−3.3 
.0005 
.0005 
.0005 
.0004 
.0004 
.0004 
.0004 
.0004 
.0004 
.0003
−3.2 
.0007 
.0007 
.0006 
.0006 
.0006 
.0006 
.0006 
.0005 
.0005 
.0005
−3.1 
.0010 
.0009 
.0009 
.0009 
.0008 
.0008 
.0008 
.0008 
.0007 
.0007
−3.0 
.0013 
.0013 
.0013 
.0012 
.0012 
.0011 
.0011 
.0011 
.0010 
.0010
−2.9 
.0019 
.0018 
.0018 
.0017 
.0016 
.0016 
.0015 
.0015 
.0014 
.0014
−2.8 
.0026 
.0025 
.0024 
.0023 
.0023 
.0022 
.0021 
.0021 
.0020 
.0019
−2.7 
.0035 
.0034 
.0033 
.0032 
.0031 
.0030 
.0029 
.0028 
.0027 
.0026
−2.6 
.0047 
.0045 
.0044 
.0043 
.0041 
.0040 
.0039 
.0038 
.0037 
.0036
−2.5 
.0062 
.0060 
.0059 
.0057 
.0055 
.0054 
.0052 
.0051 
.0049 
.0048
−2.4 
.0082 
.0080 
.0078 
.0075 
.0073 
.0071 
.0069 
.0068 
.0066 
.0064
−2.3 
.0107 
.0104 
.0102 
.0099 
.0096 
.0094 
.0091 
.0089 
.0087 
.0084
−2.2 
.0139 
.0136 
.0132 
.0129 
.0125 
.0122 
.0119 
.0116 
.0113 
.0110
−2.1 
.0179 
.0174 
.0170 
.0166 
.0162 
.0158 
.0154 
.0150 
.0146 
.0143
−2.0 
.0228 
.0222 
.0217 
.0212 
.0207 
.0202 
.0197 
.0192 
.0188 
.0183
−1.9 
.0287 
.0281 
.0274 
.0268 
.0262 
.0256 
.0250 
.0244 
.0239 
.0233
−1.8 
.0359 
.0351 
.0344 
.0336 
.0329 
.0322 
.0314 
.0307 
.0301 
.0294
−1.7 
.0446 
.0436 
.0427 
.0418 
.0409 
.0401 
.0392 
.0384 
.0375 
.0367
−1.6 
.0548 
.0537 
.0526 
.0516 
.0505 
.0495 
.0485 
.0475 
.0465 
.0455
−1.5 
.0668 
.0655 
.0643 
.0630 
.0618 
.0606 
.0594 
.0582 
.0571 
.0559
−1.4 
.0808 
.0793 
.0778 
.0764 
.0749 
.0735 
.0721 
.0708 
.0694 
.0681
−1.3 
.0968 
.0951 
.0934 
.0918 
.0901 
.0885 
.0869 
.0853 
.0838 
.0823
−1.2 
.1151 
.1131 
.1112 
.1093 
.1075 
.1056 
.1038 
.1020 
.1003 
.0985
−1.1 
.1357 
.1335 
.1314 
.1292 
.1271 
.1251 
.1230 
.1210 
.1190 
.1170
−1.0 
.1587 
.1562 
.1539 
.1515 
.1492 
.1469 
.1446 
.1423 
.1401 
.1379
−0.9 
.1841 
.1814 
.1788 
.1762 
.1736 
.1711 
.1685 
.1660 
.1635 
.1611
−0.8 
.2119 
.2090 
.2061 
.2033 
.2005 
.1977 
.1949 
.1922 
.1894 
.1867
−0.7 
.2420 
.2389 
.2358 
.2327 
.2296 
.2266 
.2236 
.2206 
.2177 
.2148
−0.6 
.2743 
.2709 
.2676 
.2643 
.2611 
.2578 
.2546 
.2514 
.2483 
.2451
−0.5 
.3085 
.3050 
.3015 
.2981 
.2946 
.2912 
.2877 
.2843 
.2810 
.2776
−0.4 
.3446 
.3409 
.3372 
.3336 
.3300 
.3264 
.3228 
.3192 
.3156 
.3121
−0.3 
.3821 
.3783 
.3745 
.3707 
.3669 
.3632 
.3594 
.3557 
.3520 
.3483
−0.2 
.4207 
.4168 
.4129 
.4090 
.4052 
.4013 
.3974 
.3936 
.3897 
.3859
−0.1 
.4602 
.4562 
.4522 
.4483 
.4443 
.4404 
.4364 
.4325 
.4286 
.4247
−0.0 
.5000 
.4960 
.4920 
.4880 
.4840 
.4801 
.4761 
.4721 
.4681 
.4641
z
z
0
www.ebook3000.com

0.0 
.5000 
.5040 
.5080 
.5120 
.5160 
.5199 
.5239 
.5279 
.5319 
.5359
0.1 
.5398 
.5438 
.5478 
.5517 
.5557 
.5596 
.5636 
.5675 
.5714 
.5753
0.2 
.5793 
.5832 
.5871 
.5910 
.5948 
.5987 
.6026 
.6064 
.6103 
.6141
0.3 
.6179 
.6217 
.6255 
.6293 
.6331 
.6368 
.6406 
.6443 
.6480 
.6517
0.4 
.6554 
.6591 
.6628 
.6664 
.6700 
.6736 
.6772 
.6808 
.6844 
.6879
0.5 
.6915 
.6950 
.6985 
.7019 
.7054 
.7088 
.7123 
.7157 
.7190 
.7224
0.6 
.7257 
.7291 
.7324 
.7357 
.7389 
.7422 
.7454 
.7486 
.7517 
.7549
0.7 
.7580 
.7611 
.7642 
.7673 
.7704 
.7734 
.7764 
.7794 
.7823 
.7852
0.8 
.7881 
.7910 
.7939 
.7967 
.7995 
.8023 
.8051 
.8078 
.8106 
.8133
0.9 
.8159 
.8186 
.8212 
.8238 
.8264 
.8289 
.8315 
.8340 
.8365 
.8389
1.0 
.8413 
.8438 
.8461 
.8485 
.8508 
.8531 
.8554 
.8577 
.8599 
.8621
1.1 
.8643 
.8665 
.8686 
.8708 
.8729 
.8749 
.8770 
.8790 
.8810 
.8830
1.2 
.8849 
.8869 
.8888 
.8907 
.8925 
.8944 
.8962 
.8980 
.8997 
.9015
1.3 
.9032 
.9049 
.9066 
.9082 
.9099 
.9115 
.9131 
.9147 
.9162 
.9177
1.4 
.9192 
.9207 
.9222 
.9236 
.9251 
.9265 
.9279 
.9292 
.9306 
.9319
1.5 
.9332 
.9345 
.9357 
.9370 
.9382 
.9394 
.9406 
.9418 
.9429 
.9441
1.6 
.9452 
.9463 
.9474 
.9484 
.9495 
.9505 
.9515 
.9525 
.9535 
.9545
1.7 
.9554 
.9564 
.9573 
.9582 
.9591 
.9599 
.9608 
.9616 
.9625 
.9633
1.8 
.9641 
.9649 
.9656 
.9664 
.9671 
.9678 
.9686 
.9693 
.9699 
.9706
1.9 
.9713 
.9719 
.9726 
.9732 
.9738 
.9744 
.9750 
.9756 
.9761 
.9767
2.0 
.9772 
.9778 
.9783 
.9788 
.9793 
.9798 
.9803 
.9808 
.9812 
.9817
2.1 
.9821 
.9826 
.9830 
.9834 
.9838 
.9842 
.9846 
.9850 
.9854 
.9857
2.2 
.9861 
.9864 
.9868 
.9871 
.9875 
.9878 
.9881 
.9884 
.9887 
.9890
2.3 
.9893 
.9896 
.9898 
.9901 
.9904 
.9906 
.9909 
.9911 
.9913 
.9916
2.4 
.9918 
.9920 
.9922 
.9925 
.9927 
.9929 
.9931 
.9932 
.9934 
.9936
2.5 
.9938 
.9940 
.9941 
.9943 
.9945 
.9946 
.9948 
.9949 
.9951 
.9952
2.6 
.9953 
.9955 
.9956 
.9957 
.9959 
.9960 
.9961 
.9962 
.9963 
.9964
2.7 
.9965 
.9966 
.9967 
.9968 
.9969 
.9970 
.9971 
.9972 
.9973 
.9974
2.8 
.9974 
.9975 
.9976 
.9977 
.9977 
.9978 
.9979 
.9979 
.9980 
.9981
2.9 
.9981 
.9982 
.9982 
.9983 
.9984 
.9984 
.9985 
.9985 
.9986 
.9986
3.0 
.9987 
.9987 
.9987 
.9988 
.9988 
.9989 
.9989 
.9989 
.9990 
.9990
3.1 
.9990 
.9991 
.9991 
.9991 
.9992 
.9992 
.9992 
.9992 
.9993 
.9993
3.2 
.9993 
.9993 
.9994 
.9994 
.9994 
.9994 
.9994 
.9995 
.9995 
.9995
3.3 
.9995 
.9995 
.9995 
.9996 
.9996 
.9996 
.9996 
.9996 
.9996 
.9997
3.4 
.9997 
.9997 
.9997 
.9997 
.9997 
.9997 
.9997 
.9997 
.9997 
.9998
 Table IV Standard Normal Distribution Table (continued)
The entries in the table on this page give 
the cumulative area under the standard 
normal curve to the left of z with the 
values of z equal to 0 or positive.
 z 
.00 
.01 
.02 
.03 
.04 
.05 
.06 
.07 
.08 
.09
z
z
0
This is Table IV of Appendix B.

 Table V  The t Distribution Table
The entries in this table give the critical values 
of t for the specified number of degrees 
of freedom and areas in the right tail.
 
Area in the Right Tail Under the t Distribution Curve
df 
.10 
.05 
.025 
.01 
.005 
.001
 1 
3.078 
6.314 
12.706 
31.821 
63.657 
318.309
 2 
1.886 
2.920 
4.303 
6.965 
9.925 
22.327
 3 
1.638 
2.353 
3.182 
4.541 
5.841 
10.215
 4 
1.533 
2.132 
2.776 
3.747 
4.604 
7.173
 5 
1.476 
2.015 
2.571 
3.365 
4.032 
5.893
 6 
1.440 
1.943 
2.447 
3.143 
3.707 
5.208
 7 
1.415 
1.895 
2.365 
2.998 
3.499 
4.785
 8 
1.397 
1.860 
2.306 
2.896 
3.355 
4.501
 9 
1.383 
1.833 
2.262 
2.821 
3.250 
4.297
10 
1.372 
1.812 
2.228 
2.764 
3.169 
4.144
11 
1.363 
1.796 
2.201 
2.718 
3.106 
4.025
12 
1.356 
1.782 
2.179 
2.681 
3.055 
3.930
13 
1.350 
1.771 
2.160 
2.650 
3.012 
3.852
14 
1.345 
1.761 
2.145 
2.624 
2.977 
3.787
15 
1.341 
1.753 
2.131 
2.602 
2.947 
3.733
16 
1.337 
1.746 
2.120 
2.583 
2.921 
3.686
17 
1.333 
1.740 
2.110 
2.567 
2.898 
3.646
18 
1.330 
1.734 
2.101 
2.552 
2.878 
3.610
19 
1.328 
1.729 
2.093 
2.539 
2.861 
3.579
20 
1.325 
1.725 
2.086 
2.528 
2.845 
3.552
21 
1.323 
1.721 
2.080 
2.518 
2.831 
3.527
22 
1.321 
1.717 
2.074 
2.508 
2.819 
3.505
23 
1.319 
1.714 
2.069 
2.500 
2.807 
3.485
24 
1.318 
1.711 
2.064 
2.492 
2.797 
3.467
25 
1.316 
1.708 
2.060 
2.485 
2.787 
3.450
26 
1.315 
1.706 
2.056 
2.479 
2.779 
3.435
27 
1.314 
1.703 
2.052 
2.473 
2.771 
3.421
28 
1.313 
1.701 
2.048 
2.467 
2.763 
3.408
29 
1.311 
1.699 
2.045 
2.462 
2.756 
3.396
30 
1.310 
1.697 
2.042 
2.457 
2.750 
3.385
31 
1.309 
1.696 
2.040 
2.453 
2.744 
3.375
32 
1.309 
1.694 
2.037 
2.449 
2.738 
3.365
33 
1.308 
1.692 
2.035 
2.445 
2.733 
3.356
34 
1.307 
1.691 
2.032 
2.441 
2.728 
3.348
35 
1.306 
1.690 
2.030 
2.438 
2.724 
3.340
t
0
www.ebook3000.com

 Table V  The t Distribution Table (continued)
 
Area in the Right Tail Under the t Distribution Curve
df 
.10 
.05 
.025 
.01 
.005 
.001
36 
1.306 
1.688 
2.028 
2.434 
2.719 
3.333
37 
1.305 
1.687 
2.026 
2.431 
2.715 
3.326
38 
1.304 
1.686 
2.024 
2.429 
2.712 
3.319
39 
1.304 
1.685 
2.023 
2.426 
2.708 
3.313
40 
1.303 
1.684 
2.021 
2.423 
2.704 
3.307
41 
1.303 
1.683 
2.020 
2.421 
2.701 
3.301
42 
1.302 
1.682 
2.018 
2.418 
2.698 
3.296
43 
1.302 
1.681 
2.017 
2.416 
2.695 
3.291
44 
1.301 
1.680 
2.015 
2.414 
2.692 
3.286
45 
1.301 
1.679 
2.014 
2.412 
2.690 
3.281
46 
1.300 
1.679 
2.013 
2.410 
2.687 
3.277
47 
1.300 
1.678 
2.012 
2.408 
2.685 
3.273
48 
1.299 
1.677 
2.011 
2.407 
2.682 
3.269
49 
1.299 
1.677 
2.010 
2.405 
2.680 
3.265
50 
1.299 
1.676 
2.009 
2.403 
2.678 
3.261
51 
1.298 
1.675 
2.008 
2.402 
2.676 
3.258
52 
1.298 
1.675 
2.007 
2.400 
2.674 
3.255
53 
1.298 
1.674 
2.006 
2.399 
2.672 
3.251
54 
1.297 
1.674 
2.005 
2.397 
2.670 
3.248
55 
1.297 
1.673 
2.004 
2.396 
2.668 
3.245
56 
1.297 
1.673 
2.003 
2.395 
2.667 
3.242
57 
1.297 
1.672 
2.002 
2.394 
2.665 
3.239
58 
1.296 
1.672 
2.002 
2.392 
2.663 
3.237
59 
1.296 
1.671 
2.001 
2.391 
2.662 
3.234
60 
1.296 
1.671 
2.000 
2.390 
2.660 
3.232
61 
1.296 
1.670 
2.000 
2.389 
2.659 
3.229
62 
1.295 
1.670 
1.999 
2.388 
2.657 
3.227
63 
1.295 
1.669 
1.998 
2.387 
2.656 
3.225
64 
1.295 
1.669 
1.998 
2.386 
2.655 
3.223
65 
1.295 
1.669 
1.997 
2.385 
2.654 
3.220
66 
1.295 
1.668 
1.997 
2.384 
2.652 
3.218
67 
1.294 
1.668 
1.996 
2.383 
2.651 
3.216
68 
1.294 
1.668 
1.995 
2.382 
2.650 
3.214
69 
1.294 
1.667 
1.995 
2.382 
2.649 
3.213
70 
1.294 
1.667 
1.994 
2.381 
2.648 
3.211
71 
1.294 
1.667 
1.994 
2.380 
2.647 
3.209
72 
1.293 
1.666 
1.993 
2.379 
2.646 
3.207
73 
1.293 
1.666 
1.993 
2.379 
2.645 
3.206
74 
1.293 
1.666 
1.993 
2.378 
2.644 
3.204
75 
1.293 
1.665 
1.992 
2.377 
2.643 
3.202
∞ 
1.282 
1.645 
1.960 
2.326 
2.576 
3.090
This is Table V of Appendix B.

WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.
www.ebook3000.com

